www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Google SketchUp Cookbook
Practical Recipes and Essential Techniques
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

Google SketchUp Cookbook
Practical Recipes and Essential Techniques
Bonnie Roskes
Beijing ·  Cambridge ·  Farnham ·  Köln ·  Sebastopol ·  Taipei ·  Tokyo
www.allitebooks.com

Google SketchUp Cookbook
by Bonnie Roskes
Copyright © 2009 Bonnie Roskes. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use. Online editions are also available for 
most titles (safari.oreilly.com). For more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department: 800-998-9938 or 
corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Steve Weiss
Developmental Editor: Linda Laflamme
Production Editors: Michele Filshie and  
       Rachel Monaghan
Copyeditor: Sharon Wilkey
Proofreader: Nancy Reinhardt
Indexer: Julie Hawks
Technical Editors: Susan Sorger and Bill Eberle
Cover Designer: Karen Montgomery
Interior Designer: Ron Bilodeau
Illustrator: Robert Romano
Printing History: 
March 2009: First Edition.
Nutshell Handbook, the Nutshell Handbook logo, and the O’Reilly logo are registered trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
The Cookbook series designations, Google SketchUp Cookbook, the image of a golden pheasant, and related trade dress are 
trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where 
those designations appear in this book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc. was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been 
printed in caps or initial caps. 
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the publisher and author assume no responsibility 
for errors or omissions, or for damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
This book uses Repkover,™ a durable and flexible lay-flat binding.
ISBN: 978-0-596-15511-7
[C]
www.allitebooks.com

	
Preface.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xi
1. 	 Making Multiple Copies.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1.1  Copying in Linear Arrays	
2
1.2  Creating Linear Internal Arrays	
8
1.3  Building a Nonorthogonal Linear Array	
13
1.4  Copying in Circular Arrays 	
15
1.5  Creating Circular Internal Arrays	
22
2. 	 Following Paths with Follow Me. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
2.1  Extruding a Follow Me Face to Cut Volume Along a Path	
26
2.2  Using Follow Me to Add Volume Along a Path	
30
2.3  Keeping Original Objects Intact During Follow Me	
33
2.4  Using Follow Me When Faces and Paths Are Not Adjacent	
38
2.5  Creating Objects in the Round	
41
2.6  Creating Spheres	
45
2.7  Using a Follow Me Path in 3D	
48
3. 	 Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
3.1  Trimming an Object	
54
3.2  Cutting All Intersected Objects	
57
3.3  Using Groups or Components to Create Cutting Objects	
59
3.4  Intersecting with Groups and Components, Without Exploding	
64
3.5  Intersecting with Both Intact and Exploded Components	
68
3.6  Intersecting Only Selected Objects	
70
3.7  Intersecting Within a Group or Component	
72
3.8  Using Intersect to Trim Components with Themselves	
73
Contents
www.allitebooks.com

vi 
| ﻿
Contents﻿
4. 	 Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
4.1  Creating Temporary Faces for Follow Me	
80
4.2  Rounding Corners	
84
4.3  Creating Lathed Shapes	
89
4.4  Roofing with a Uniform Slope	
92
4.5  Creating “Dummy” Follow Me Paths	
94
4.6  Extending Follow Me Paths	
99
4.7  Using Intersect to Create a 3D Follow Me Path	
102
5. 	 Roofs: Constraints and Inferences.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 107
5.1  Creating an Overhanging Roof	
108
5.2  Creating Dormers	
112
5.3  Working with Roof Intersections	
122
5.4  Creating Overhangs with Autofold	
128
6. 	 Groups: Protect and Defend.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133
6.1  Ungluing Faces	
135
6.2  Unsticking Edges	
137
6.3  Protecting from Edits	
141
6.4  Cutting and Slicing	
144
6.5  Two-Sided Coloring	
148
6.6  Locking a Group	
151
7. 	 Components: Efficiency in Repetition. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153
7.1  Creating a Component	
154
7.2  Using the Components Window	
155
7.3  Inserting a Component	
157
7.4  Editing or Exploding a Component	
158
7.5  Renaming a Component	
159
7.6  Saving a Component in Its Own File	
160
7.7  Accessing Local Components	
161
7.8  Painting Components	
163
7.9  Repeating Objects with Different Sizes	
165
7.10  Aligning and Gluing	
167
7.11  Using Components for Symmetric Models	
170
7.12  Placing Windows in 3D Walls 	
172
7.13  Reloading Components	
179
7.14  Replacing Components	
182
7.15  Working with the Outliner	
185
www.allitebooks.com

﻿Contents﻿ 
| 
vii
8. 	 Painting, Materials, and Textures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 193
8.1  Finding Materials and Images	
193
8.2  Getting Images into Your Model	
195
8.3  Creating Material Collections	
198
8.4  Painting Multiple Faces	
200
8.5  Changing Material Size and Color	
202
8.6  Copying a Material	
204
8.7  Using Translucent Materials	
205
8.8  Painting Edges by Material	
208
8.9  Positioning Textures: Fixed Pins	
210
8.10  Positioning Texture on Round Faces	
215
8.11  Creating and Editing a Unique Texture	
217
8.12  Using Alpha-Transparent Images	
218
9. 	 Modeling with Digital Photos.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 223
9.1  Positioning Textures with Free Pins	
224
9.2  Editing a Photo	
227
9.3  Adding Faces to Patch an Image 	
229
9.4  Using Images to Make Face Camera Components	
232
9.5  Using Free Pins and a Single Image to Paint a 3D Object	
234
9.6  Using Photo Match to Model a 3D Object	
238
9.7  Using Photo Match to Paint an Existing Model	
243
10. 	Modeling with Exact Dimensions. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 247
10.1  Working with Lines	
248
10.2  Working with Rectangles	
250
10.3  Working with Circles and Polygons	
251
10.4  Working with Arcs	
252
10.5  Importing Graphics	
253
10.6  Using the Tape Measure for Construction Lines and Points	
254
10.7  Measuring and Marking Angles	
256
10.8  Finding the Area of Faces	
257
10.9  Creating a Grid	
258
10.10  Measuring Lengths and Resizing	
260
10.11  Resizing Models with Groups and Components	
263
10.12  Resizing Parts of Your Model	
265
10.13  Resizing a Model in Multiple Directions	
268
www.allitebooks.com

viii 
| ﻿
Contents﻿
11. 	Presentation: Showing off Your Model.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
11.1  Working with Layers	
271
11.2  Working with Scenes	
273
11.3  Working with Shadows	
275
11.4  Sectioning Your Model	
276
11.5  Using Layers and Scenes to Control Displayed Objects	
277
11.6  Using Layers, Scenes, and Groups for Different Design Scenarios	
280
11.7  Studying Shadow Movements	
283
11.8  Walking Through Your Model	
284
11.9  Creating Animated Sections	
287
11.10  Creating Staged Sectioning Animation	
292
12. 	Displaying Your Model.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 297
12.1  Hiding and Softening Edges	
297
12.2  Changing the Style	
299
12.3  Creating a New Style	
301
12.4  Saving Styles 	
302
12.5  Saving a Style As a Template	
303
12.6  Mixing Styles	
305
12.7  Adding a Watermark	
307
12.8  Creating a Sketchy Edge Style	
311
12.9  Using Styles in a Presentation	
313
13. 	3D Warehouse and Google Earth.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 317
13.1  Finding Models in the 3D Warehouse	
318
13.2  Refining Your 3D Warehouse Search	
320
13.3  Uploading Models to the 3D Warehouse	
323
13.4  Creating Collections in the 3D Warehouse	
325
13.5  Controlling Model or Collection Privacy	
327
13.6  Adding Models or Collections to Your Collections	
328
13.7  Taking Credit for Your Model	
329
13.8  Manually Georeferencing Your Model	
330
13.9  Georeferencing Your Model by Using Google Earth	
331
13.10  Getting Your Models into the 3D Buildings Layer	
335
13.11  Creating a Placemark in Google Earth	
336
13.12  Relocating a Georeferenced Model	
338
13.13  Downloading Buildings That Appear in Google Earth	
340
www.allitebooks.com

﻿Contents﻿ 
| 
ix
14. 	Dynamic Components.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 343
14.1  Finding Dynamic Components	
344
14.2  Interacting with Dynamic Components	
345
14.3  Investigating Dynamic Component Options	
347
14.4  Scaling Dynamic Components	
349
14.5  Modifying and Replacing Dynamic Components	
351
14.6  Sizing by the Reference Point	
353
Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 355


If you’re reading this book, you know a bit about Google SketchUp and probably have used it 
to create some great models. You love SketchUp’s price (free, or about $500 for the Pro version) 
and you certainly love SketchUp’s intuitive user interface. Dig beneath SketchUp’s deceptively 
simple surface, however, and you can unearth techniques that enable you to create stunning 
models and presentations that you thought only pricey modeling applications could produce. 
This book will teach you how to tap into that power. Through illustrated, step-by-step tutorials, 
the Google SketchUp Cookbook will show you features of SketchUp you should use (but haven’t 
yet), or always wanted to try, or didn’t even know existed. 
This book will teach you all about groups, components, model intersection, materials and textures, 
presentation, animation, and styles. You will learn how to find your way around Google’s vast model 
repository (the 3D Warehouse), and see how SketchUp models integrate seamlessly with Google 
Earth. You’ll also learn about SketchUp 7’s exciting new feature: dynamic components. 
By the time you complete the Google SketchUp Cookbook, you will be able to create models you 
never thought you could and share them with the world (if you choose). 
Who This Book Is For
This book is for intermediate and advanced users of SketchUp who want to go beyond the basic uses 
of drawing and editing tools. You should have a good working knowledge of SketchUp’s 2D draw-
ing tools (Line, Rectangle, Circle, and so on) as well as editing tools (Move, Push/Pull, Rotate, and 
so on). It also doesn’t hurt if you already know how to use Intersect and Follow Me, how to create a 
group or component, and how to paint a face with colors or materials, although the basics of those 
topics are reviewed in this book. If you’ve never used texture positioning, Photo Match, scenes, lay-
ers, or styles before, don’t worry; you’ll learn all about those topics and many more in this book.
Who This Book Is Not For
If you haven’t used SketchUp before or have used it only for simple models, you might want to 
practice the basics before continuing with this book. The SketchUp website has lots of online 
videos and self-paced tutorials to get everyone up and running rather quickly (go to http://
sketchup.google.com/training). Another helpful resource that’s appropriate for users of all levels 
is O’Reilly’s Google SketchUp: The Missing Manual by Chris Grover.
After you understand all of the geometry creation and editing tools, can make a group and compo-
nent, and can paint faces by using different textures, then you’ll be ready to jump into this book.
	
Preface

xii 
| 
Preface
How This Book Is Organized
The techniques in this book are grouped by topic. Here’s a preview:
Chapter 1, “Making Multiple Copies,” covers the various ways you can make linear or 
rotated arrays of objects.
Chapter 2, “Following Paths with Follow Me,” describes how to use the Follow Me tool to 
extrude faces along paths, in order to remove volume from or add it to your model. You’ll 
also learn what happens when Follow Me is used within the context of a group or compo-
nent, how to use round paths to make round objects, and how to construct 3D paths.
Chapter 3, “Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming,” describes how to generate inter-
section edges that enable you to cut and trim objects against one another. You’ll also learn 
how to take advantage of groups and components while intersecting, and how to control 
exactly where intersection edges are generated.
Chapter 4, “Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques,” is dedicated to the most ef-
ficient and sophisticated ways of working with both tools, because the Intersect and Follow 
Me tools are used so often in tandem.
Chapter 5, “Roofs: Constraints and Inferences,” uses mostly roofing examples to dem-
onstrate the various ways you can constrain objects to other objects, constrain objects to 
specific directions, and use Autofold to force objects to move a specific way.
Chapter 6, “Groups: Protect and Defend,” covers all the reasons to use groups, including 
protecting objects from changes, preventing stickiness with other objects, creating intersec-
tion slices, and two-sided painting.
Chapter 7, “Components: Efficiency in Repetition,” describes how to create, import, 
replace, and reload components, as well as set alignment and gluing properties, because a 
true SketchUp expert must also be an expert in components. Special attention is given to 
the common problem of using window components to cut through 3D walls, as well as to 
the Outliner.
Chapter 8, “Painting, Materials, and Textures,” explains how to find and import materi-
als, as well as how to edit and position textured images, and to use translucent and alpha-
transparent materials.
Chapter 9, “Modeling with Digital Photos,” describes how to paint faces by using digital 
images, in order to produce photorealistic models with low file sizes. You’ll learn how to 
position images in 2D and 3D, make minor changes to an image, and build 3D models 
from a single image by using texture positioning and Photo Match.

Preface 
| 
xiii
Chapter 10, “Modeling with Exact Dimensions,” covers all of the ways you can enter and 
calculate exact dimensions while using drawing and editing tools. You’ll also learn about 
resizing entire models, and resizing models that include groups and components.
Chapter 11, “Presentation: Showing off Your Model,” demonstrates how to combine 
layers, scenes, shadows, section planes, and walk-through tools to explore multiple design 
scenarios, and to create impressive presentations and animations of your model.
Chapter 12, “Displaying Your Model,” covers all aspects of how your model looks, includ-
ing edge display, templates, and styles. You’ll learn how to build your own custom edge 
style and how to include different styles in your model presentation.
Chapter 13, “3D Warehouse and Google Earth,” describes how to navigate Google’s 3D 
Warehouse to find exactly the model or collection you want, how to place your own models 
and collections in the 3D Warehouse, how to georeference your model, and how to place 
models in Google Earth.
Chapter 14, “Dynamic Components,” discusses what makes a component dynamic, dem-
onstrates what dynamic components can do, and explains how to find dynamic compo-
nents in the 3D Warehouse.
How to Get the Models Used in This Book
You may be tempted to jump right into Chapter 1 and get started, but read this important sec-
tion first! Without these details about downloading this book’s model files, you won’t get very 
far.
Although some examples in this book start from scratch, most start with a specific model 
you’ll need to download. All of these starter models, and many of the completed ones, reside in 
Google’s 3D Warehouse, in collections created specifically for the Google SketchUp Cookbook.
There are a few different ways to find and download models in the 3D Warehouse, either from 
within SketchUp or from your Internet browser. These methods are all detailed in Recipe 13.1, 
but this section explains how to find models by using your Internet browser. Downloading this 
way ensures that you will open each model in a new SketchUp window. This will prevent any 
problems relating to the following two issues:
Many of these models have scenes, which are tabs at the top of the SketchUp window. 
• 
Click a tab, and you go to the associated saved view. Some models have only two scenes 
for the start and end cases, others have numerous scenes in which each step is explained, 
and still others have scenes used for animation. (You’ll learn all about scenes in Chapter 
11.) If a model with scenes is downloaded directly into your SketchUp model, as opposed 
to opening it in a new SketchUp window, its scenes will not appear.
When you 
• 
import a model directly into a SketchUp model, the imported model is brought 
in as a component. Before you can do anything with this imported component, you have 
to explode it. This is not very difficult, but it is “cleaner” to start with an unexploded model 
that has no objects from other files in it.

xiv 
| 
Preface
Within the Cookbook collection, there is a separate 
collection for each chapter (Figure P-3). Find the collec-
tion for the chapter you are reading, and click its name 
or thumbnail to open the collection. Keep in mind that 
only 12 items are listed at a time in the 3D Warehouse. 
So if you don’t see the model or collection you want, use 
the scroll arrows at the bottom of the web page.
Figure P-4 shows the models inside Chapter 1’s collec-
tion. If you want to download a model straightaway, 
without seeing its description, click Download to 
Google SketchUp 7. You can either save the model or 
open it in SketchUp. If you already have a SketchUp 
model open, clicking Open will open a new SketchUp 
window; you will not close the existing model.
Figure P-3
Figure P-4
To enter the 3D Warehouse, point your browser to 
http://sketchup.google.com/3dwarehouse. The opening 
page has a search field at the top, in which you can enter 
cookbook. Because you are searching for a collection, 
and not an individual model, select the Collections 
radio button (Figure P-1).
Figure P-1
At the time of this writing, there is only one cookbook 
collection, whose full name is Google SketchUp Cook-
book (Figure P-2). Click this link, or click the collec-
tion’s thumbnail.
Figure P-2

Preface 
| 
xv
You do not have to page through these collections each time you want to find a model; you can 
search for a model name directly. In the Search field of the main page of the 3D Warehouse, 
make sure Models is selected instead of Collections, and enter the model name in the Search 
field. If you get too many models in your search results, you can add roskes to whittle down the 
search to ones I’ve uploaded. For example, you’ll need a model called Dresser in Chapter 7. En-
tering dresser will result in hundreds of models, but entering dresser roskes should turn up just 
one model. (Good thing I have an unusual last name.) You could also enter cookbook dresser 
and get to the same model.
Conventions Used in This Book
The following typographical conventions are used in this book:
Menu options
Menu options are shown using the → character, such as File→Open.
Italic
Indicates new terms, emphasis, and text that should be typed literally by the user.
How to Use This Book
This isn’t a book to take to bed (or the bathroom). It is meant to sit next to your keyboard while 
you have SketchUp up and running. SketchUp is the kind of application you can learn only by 
doing, so work through the steps of each example, checking the accompanying illustrations to 
compare your results to mine.
The chapters proceed in a logical, progressive order, but if you are already familiar with the 
concepts of a particular chapter or recipe, you won’t get lost if you skip around. Some recipes 
refer to concepts in other recipes, so you may find yourself flipping pages back and forth.
If you want to see a larger view of a 3D Warehouse 
model, or read its description or check its reviews, click 
the model’s name or thumbnail. Figure P-5 shows the 
3D Warehouse page for the Circular Internal Array 
model in Chapter 1’s collection. (It’s not rated yet, but 
feel free to give all of my models five stars.) Any model 
for this book that has scenes comes with a warning in 
its description about how to download it. (This warning 
is not relevant when using the 3D Warehouse in your 
Internet browser.)
Figure P-5

xvi 
| 
Preface
O’Reilly Cookbooks
Looking for the right ingredients to solve a problem? Look no further than O’Reilly Cook-
books. Each Cookbook contains hundreds of recipes, and includes hundreds of techniques you 
can use to solve specific problems.
The recipes you’ll find in an O’Reilly Cookbook follow a simple formula:
Problem
Each Problem addressed in an O’Reilly Cookbook is clearly stated, specific, and practical.
Solution
The Solution is easy to understand and implement.
Discussion 
The Discussion clarifies and explains the context of the Problem and the Solution.
To learn more about the O’Reilly Cookbook series, or to find other Cookbooks that are up your 
alley, visit the website at http://cookbooks.oreilly.com.
How to Contact Us
Please address comments and questions concerning this book to the publisher:
O’Reilly Media, Inc. 
1005 Gravenstein Highway North
Sebastopol, CA 95472
800-998-9938 (in the United States or Canada)
707-829-0515 (international or local)
707-829-0104 (fax)
We have a web page for this book, where we list errata, examples, and any additional informa-
tion. You can access this page at http://oreilly.com/catalog/9780596155117.
Safari® Books Online
When you see a Safari® Books Online icon on the cover of your favorite 
technology book, that means the book is available online through the O’Reilly 
Network Safari Bookshelf.
Safari offers a solution that’s better than e-books. It’s a virtual library that lets you easily 
search thousands of top tech books, cut and paste code samples, download chapters, and find 
quick answers when you need the most accurate, current information. Try it for free at http://
my.safaribooksonline.com.
Acknowledgments
I am honored to be part of the O’Reilly author community, and I’d like to thank Steve, Linda, 
Michele, Sharon, and Dennis from the O’Reilly team; their support made this book project so 
much fun. Susan Sorger and Bil Eberle are eagle-eyed with their technical editing, and Bryce 
Stout from Google never failed to quickly answer my technical questions. Finally, thanks to 
Sandy and the kids, who put up with my late nights working.

As you probably know, the Move tool is used 
to move objects, and the Rotate tool is used to 
rotate objects. For both tools, when you press the 
Ctrl/Option key, you will make copies. For linear 
copies, you can adjust the spacing and number of 
copies, and for rotated copies, you can adjust the 
angle between copies and the number of copies. 
For both kinds of copying, you can make these 
adjustments as many times as needed while the 
tool is still active. Keep in mind, however, that 
after you start a new Move or Rotate action, or 
activate a new tool, you can no longer adjust the 
spacing, angles, and so on.
This chapter covers the various ways you can make 
linear and rotated copies by using the Move and Ro-
tate tools. If you’ve done any basic work with Sketch-
Up, you might already be familiar with the concepts 
in this chapter. Keep reading, however. Even some 
experienced users don’t know all there is about how 
to copy, which is a fundamental and important con-
cept. (Plus it never hurts to review some basics.)
Chapter 1
	
Making Multiple Copies

2 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Copying in Linear Arrays
1.1  
Problem
You want to copy an object in a linear pattern (rows and columns).
Solution
Use the Move tool to make one copy and then adjust the number of copies and spacing between 
copies.
Discussion
To make copies, activate the Move tool and press the Ctrl key (Option on the Mac). SketchUp is 
very flexible in how you can set the spacing and number of copies: After the first copy is made, 
you can enter the number of copies you want and set the spacing between them. Until you 
activate a new tool or start a new Move operation, you can continue to adjust both the spacing 
and numbers. 
Most often, you need to make several copies of something in the horizontal (red or green) or vertical 
(blue) direction. In this example, you will practice this scenario by placing rows of windows along a 
wall. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see other examples of linear arrays: placing desks in a class-
room, creating a neighborhood of identical houses, and arranging keys in a musical keyboard.
Start with a building like the one shown in Figure 
1.	
1-1, which has one small window at the lower-left 
corner of the front face. You can create your model 
from scratch, or download my Linear Array model 
from the 3D Warehouse. Because the window will 
be copied, it should be a component. Why a com-
ponent? A component is easy to select and will keep 
the file size small.
Note
Aside from the reasons already mentioned, components are 
an extremely powerful feature of SketchUp, and you should 
take advantage of them wherever you can. Components are 
covered in detail in Chapter 7.
Figure 1-1
www.allitebooks.com

Copying in Linear Arrays 
| 
3
Want to Create this Model Yourself?
Draw a rectangle and use Push/Pull to pull it up. 
1.	
Erase a side wall so that you can see inside (right-
2.	
click on the face and choose Erase).
Paint the front and back faces, if you want.
3.	
In the lower-left corner of the front wall, draw the 
4.	
basic window shape by using a rectangle and an 
arc, erasing the dividing line between them. Make 
it small enough so that several rows and columns 
of windows can fit in the wall.
Use Offset to make the window frame.
5.	
To pull out the window frame, activate Push/Pull 
6.	
and press Ctrl (Option on the Mac) and pull out the 
frame face. (Ctrl/Option ensures that you will leave 
a flat face on the back of the frame, and not make 
a hollow shell.)
Select the entire window, including all edges and 
7.	
faces, taking care not to select any edges or faces 
of the building itself. Right-click on a selected face 
and choose Make Component. 
Assign a component name, and be sure to select 
8.	
“Replace selection with component.”
Activate Move and press the Ctrl/Option key. (You 
2.	
need to only tap the key; you don’t have to keep 
it pressed.) You should see a + sign on the cursor 
symbol. 
Note
When you use the Ctrl/Option key to make a copy, you can 
tap the key either before or after clicking move points. You 
can also tap Ctrl/Option repeatedly to toggle copying on and 
off.
Move the cursor over the window, which becomes 
3.	
highlighted in a bounding box (Figure 1-2). Click 
anywhere on the window, but do not click on one of 
the red + signs, as these will switch you from Move 
to Rotate mode.
The second point places the copy. Move the mouse 
4.	
directly to the right, in the green or red axis direc-
tion, as shown in Figure 1-3. (Whether the direc-
tion is green or red depends on how you oriented 
your model.) While you’re moving the mouse, look 
at the Length box, which indicates the distance 
between copies.
Note
The length is indicated in the units of your model, which are 
set in the template you chose when you opened the file. If 
you want to change the units, open the Model Info window 
(Window→Model Info) to the Units page.
Figure 1-2
Figure 1-3

4 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Click to place the copy. After the copy is placed, 
5.	
the window glass cuts the wall, and you can see 
through it. 
Making an external linear array in SketchUp is easy: 
6.	
Type the number of copies you want, followed by 
an x, and then press Enter. Type 3x and press Enter, 
for a total of four windows (Figure 1-4).
Note
Do not click in the Length field; just type and press Enter. If 
you click to enter the Length field, SketchUp will think you are 
ending the current action. 
As long as you don’t start another Move operation 
or activate another tool, you can change your mind 
about numbers and spacing. For example, entering 
6x yields seven windows, which is too many (Figure 
1-5).
Enter 
7.	
5x to produce six copies (Figure 1-6). This is 
better, but the spacing isn’t quite right. The win-
dows should be closer together.
Figure 1-4
Figure 1-5
Figure 1-6
To make the windows 8 feet apart, type 
8.	
8’ and press 
Enter. (If your units are Architectural, you need to 
include the apostrophe for the foot symbol.) As you 
can see in Figure 1-7, this looks too crowded.
Figure 1-7
Try 8’ 6” (Architectural format for 8 feet and 6 
9.	
inches). You can enter this dimension most easily as 
8.5’. This still looks too crowded (Figure 1-8).
Figure 1-8

Copying in Linear Arrays 
| 
5
Keep trying out new numbers until your spacing 
10.	
looks right. As shown in Figure 1-9, I settled on 
spacing of 9’ 4”, which can be entered like this: 9’4. 
(The inch symbol is not needed because that is the 
default unit.)
Figure 1-9
Entering Numbers
SketchUp is flexible in how you can enter numbers for 
lengths. If your units are Architectural, the default unit is 
inches. So for 7’ 4” you could enter 88 (for 88 inches), 7.33’, or 
7’4. If you want precision to fractions of an inch, you can en-
ter 5’8 7/16. If your units are Imperial (feet or inches), you can 
still enter values with metric units, such as 440cm, 4400m, or 
4.4m. (Conversely, you can enter Imperial units in a metric 
unit model.) If you want to stick with Architectural units but 
have your default unit be feet, switch your units to Decimal 
and Feet (Figure 1-10).
Figure 1-10
Activate Move and press Ctrl/Option. Click any-
12.	
where for the first move point—on a face, edge, or 
in blank space. Then click the second move point 
straight above the first move point, in the blue 
direction (Figure 1-12). 
SketchUp moves the selected objects by the distance 
and direction between the two move points.
Figure 1-12
When your row of windows looks right, you can 
11.	
copy the entire row. The Move tool will actively 
select only one object at a time, so when you want 
to copy multiple objects, you must first preselect the 
objects. Activate Select and select all of the windows 
in the row, as shown in Figure 1-11. (Holding the 
Shift key enables you to select multiple objects.)
Figure 1-11

6 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Enter 
13.	
2x (or whatever number works for you) and 
adjust the spacing to fill the wall with windows 
(Figure 1-13).
Figure 1-13
Now you can copy all of these windows to the back 
14.	
of the building. Select them all, activate Move with 
Ctrl/Option, and for the first move point, click the 
midpoint shown in Figure 1-14. This midpoint is 
used so that the position of the windows relative 
to the front wall will be the same for the windows 
copied to the back wall.
Figure 1-14
Orbit to face the back wall, and click the same mid-
15.	
point on this wall. The finished building is shown 
in Figure 1-15.
Figure 1-15

Copying in Linear Arrays 
| 
7
Other Uses
There are endless possibilities for external linear array 
copies, but here are just a few:
Figure 1-16 shows repeated chair-and-desk components 
that fill a classroom.
Figure 1-16
Figure 1-17 shows houses copied to make a neighbor-
hood. (To copy the houses from one side of the street to 
the other, you can turn them to face the right way with 
the Flip option on the pop-up menu.)
Note
To make a neighborhood with houses of different colors, see 
Recipe 7.8.
Figure 1-17
Figure 1-18 shows a set of piano keys copied to make 
a keyboard. The buttons at the top are also copied 
components.
Figure 1-18

8 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Creating Linear Internal Arrays
1.2  
Problem
You want to place your first and last copies, and space additional objects between them. 
Solution
Use construction lines for exact placement, and use the “forward slash” format for the number 
of copies.
Discussion
In this scenario, you know where the first and last objects are located, and want to space objects 
evenly between them. The format for placing a specific number of copies between two objects 
is to enter the desired number of copies, followed by the / (forward slash) symbol. (The forward 
slash symbol denotes division.) For example, if you make a copy of an object 20 feet away, and 
then type 4/ and press Enter, you will have five objects (four copies plus one original), with four 
equal spaces of 5 feet each in between copies.
To help you align your copies, you can use construction lines, which are temporary guide lines that can 
easily be erased or hidden when you’re finished with them. Construction lines are created with the Tape 
Measure tool. 
In this example, you’ll use construction lines to place the first and last windows in a row, and then use 
the forward slash format to place more windows in between. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how 
an internal array can be used to space pickets of a fence.
Start with a model like the one shown in Figure 1-19, 
1.	
which has one window in the middle of the front 
wall. You can create your model from scratch, or 
download my Internal Linear Array model from the 
3D Warehouse. The window should be a component.
Note
If you want to create this model from scratch, see the sidebar 
“Want to Create This Model Yourself?” in Recipe 1.1.
Figure 1-19

Creating Linear Internal Arrays 
| 
9
In addition to measuring, the 
2.	
Tape Measure tool 
can be used for creating construction lines. Activate 
Tape Measure. You should see a + sign attached to 
your cursor, but if not, press the Ctrl/Option key 
(otherwise, you will only be taking a measurement). 
Click anywhere on the lower edge of the wall (don’t 
click on an endpoint), and move the cursor straight 
up, creating an offset construction line as shown in 
Figure 1-20. The offset distance appears next to the 
cursor.
Figure 1-20
To make the offset exact, type the offset distance 
3.	
and press Enter. For this example, type 4’ for 4 feet 
(Figure 1-21).
Note
You can use the Tape Measure to resize an entire model, 
group, or component. This is shown in Recipes 10.10, 10.11, 
and 10.12.
Figure 1-21
Create construction lines at the same offset dis-
4.	
tance from the other three edges of this wall (Figure 
1-22).
Note
When you need to create angled construction lines, use the 
Protractor tool (not to be confused with the Rotate tool).
Figure 1-22
You can now move the window into place. Select 
5.	
it, activate Move, and for the first move point, click 
the window’s lower-left corner, where the back of 
the window meets the wall (Figure 1-23).
Figure 1-23

10 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Place this corner at the intersection point of the 
6.	
bottom and left construction lines, as shown in 
Figure 1-24 (make sure you see the Intersection 
inference, which is a snap point).
Figure 1-24
To place a copy on the other side, click the first 
7.	
move point on the lower-right back corner of the 
window (Figure 1-25).
Figure 1-25
Press Ctrl/Option, and click the second move point 
8.	
at the intersection of the right and bottom construc-
tion lines (Figure 1-26).
Figure 1-26
Type 
9.	
3/ and press Enter (don’t forget the forward 
slash symbol after the number). This gives you four 
windows (three copies plus the original), with three 
equal spaces in between (Figure 1-27).
You can still change your mind; in Figure 1-28, for 
example, I switched to five copied windows (5/).
Figure 1-27
Figure 1-28

Creating Linear Internal Arrays 
| 
11
To make additional evenly spaced rows, select all of 
10.	
the windows, and for the first move point, click any 
one of the windows at its top point (Figure 1-29).
Figure 1-29
Start to move the copy up vertically (blue direc-
11.	
tion), and press and hold the Shift key to lock in the 
blue direction. With Shift pressed, click anywhere 
on the top construction line (Figure 1-30).
You could also tap (but not hold) the up arrow 
key to lock the blue direction, which saves you 
from having to keep Shift pressed. How you lock 
directions is a personal preference. Locking direc-
tions and other constraints are covered in depth in 
Chapter 5.
Enter 
12.	
2/ to get three rows, and you’re finished.
To erase the construction lines, you can use 
13.	
the Eraser tool and click each one, or choose 
Edit→Delete Guides. (You can also hide construc-
tion lines by choosing View→Hide Guides.) The 
completed model is shown in Figure 1-31.
Figure 1-30
Figure 1-31

12 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Other Uses
An internal linear array can be used to space pickets 
of a fence. Figure 1-32 shows a fence in which the first 
picket is copied to the end of the fence.
Figure 1-32
In Figure 1-33, the 4/ spacing creates four copies of the 
picket.
Figure 1-33
In Figure 1-34, the 7/ spacing creates seven copies, pro-
ducing a denser fence.
Figure 1-34
www.allitebooks.com

Building a Nonorthogonal Linear Array 
| 
13
Building a Nonorthogonal Linear Array
1.3  
Problem
You want to make linear copies along a slope, in a nonorthogonal direction.
Solution
When defining the move points, use reference geometry that defines the move direction.
Discussion
In the previous recipes, the copies have followed the red, green, or blue directions. When you 
want to move in another direction, first be sure that you have objects in your model that define 
the direction you want to use. In this example, the model has an edge that defines the move 
direction, and both move points will be clicked along this edge.
Start with a building like the one shown in Figure 
1.	
1-35, with a sloped top and one window in the 
top-left corner of the front wall. You can create your 
model from scratch, or download my Sloped Linear 
Array model from the 3D Warehouse. The window 
should be a component.
Note
If you want to create this model from scratch, see the sidebar 
“Want to Create This Model Yourself?” in Recipe 1.1. To slope 
the roof, select one of the top side edges and move it straight 
up.
Figure 1-35
Select the window and activate Move. Press Ctrl/
2.	
Option. For the move distance and direction, click 
two points along the sloped edge, as shown in Fig-
ure 1-36. (If your window jumps to the wrong face, 
wiggle the mouse to tweak it into place.) 
Figure 1-36

14 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Using the method demonstrated in Recipe 1.1, 
3.	
enter the number of copies you want (say, 4x) and 
adjust the spacing to get a line of sloped windows 
(Figure 1-37). The spacing is the distance measured 
along the diagonal edge.
Figure 1-37
You can change your mind and use an internal ar-
4.	
ray as shown in Recipe 1.2. Just enter the distance 
between the first and last windows. The distance 
in this example is 50 feet. You will still have the 
same number of windows as before, but they will 
be spaced so that only two appear on the building 
(Figure 1-38). You may have to zoom out to see the 
rest of the windows.
Figure 1-38
Enter 
5.	
6/, or whatever number works for you, to get 
your internal array of windows (Figure 1-39). All 
of the copies now appear between the first and last 
windows.
Figure 1-39

Copying in Circular Arrays  
| 
15
Copying in Circular Arrays 
1.4  
Problem
You want to make copies of an object in a circular pattern.
Solution
Use the Rotate tool to make copies, adjusting the number of copies and the angle between 
copies.
Discussion
To make copies with the Rotate tool, you must first preselect the objects to be copied. Then 
activate the Rotate tool and press the Ctrl key (Option on the Mac). You can enter the angle 
between copies before or after you place the copy. After the first copy is made, you can enter the 
number of copies you want. Until you activate a new tool or start a new Rotate operation, you 
can continue to adjust both the angle and numbers.
This example is an octagonal-shaped building, in which windows and doors will be copied in a circular 
pattern, to fit on the walls.
In “Other Uses,” you’ll see how rotated copies can be used to make a jewel-studded bracelet, a dining 
room set, a Ferris wheel, and a circular group of columns.
Start with an octagon-shaped building as shown in 
1.	
Figure 1-40, with a sloped octagonal roof. You can 
create your model from scratch, or download my 
Circular Array model from the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
To create the base, activate Polygon and enter 
1.	
8 to set 
the number of sides. Draw the polygon on the flat (red-
green) plane.
Paint the octagon the color you want for the vertical 
2.	
walls.
Pull the octagon up.
3.	
Paint the top face a different color.
4.	
Activate Push/Pull again, and press Ctrl/Option so that 
5.	
new faces will be created. Pull the top face up.
Select the top face and use Scale to shrink it. While 
6.	
scaling, press Ctrl/Option to scale about the center.
To create one of the roof windows, use the Offset tool 
2.	
to make a triangle inside one of the roof faces. Trim 
any extra edges, and paint the window with glass. 
Figure 1-40

16 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Select this new window face (Figure 1-41).
3.	
Figure 1-41
Activate Rotate. The first click places the center 
4.	
of rotation, which should be the center of the top 
octagonal face. Before you can find this point, you 
need to remind SketchUp of that inference point, 
so hover over one of the corner points of the top 
octagon (Figure 1-42).
Figure 1-42
Having found the circumference of the octagon, 
5.	
SketchUp can now find its center point. Move the 
cursor to the center and click the center point, as 
shown in Figure 1-43.
Note
SketchUp always keeps the last five defined points in its 
immediate memory buffer. If you are looking for an object 
created more than five clicks ago, you need to move that 
object up into the buffer. Hovering over a point or edge does 
just this.
Figure 1-43

Copying in Circular Arrays  
| 
17
The next two clicks define the rotation angle. The 
6.	
first click defines the angle’s baseline, and the sec-
ond click defines the rotation angle relative to the 
baseline. Press Ctrl/Option to make a copy (look for 
the + sign on the cursor), and click any corner of 
any octagon (top, middle, or bottom of the build-
ing), as shown in Figure 1-44.
Figure 1-44
Click an adjacent octagon corner, and the Angle 
7.	
field informs you that the angle is 45 degrees (Fig-
ure 1-45).
In this example, 45 degrees is the correct angle 
(360 / 8 = 45). If you wanted to try out a differ-
ent angle, you would just type it and press Enter. 
(You can also simply enter an angle value instead of 
clicking the second rotation point.)
Figure 1-45
Enter 
8.	
7x, and you have eight total windows (Figure 
1-46).
Figure 1-46

18 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Now you’ll make alternating windows and doors on 
9.	
the vertical faces. Activate Offset again, and place 
your cursor inside one of the faces, as shown in 
Figure 1-47 (don’t click yet). 
Figure 1-47
While the face is highlighted, double-click on it. 
10.	
This offsets the face by the same offset distance you 
used to make the triangular roof window (Figure 
1-48).
Figure 1-48
Make the same offset on an adjacent face (Figure 
11.	
1-49).
Figure 1-49

Copying in Circular Arrays  
| 
19
One offset rectangle will become a door, and the 
12.	
other will become a window. To make the door, 
move the bottom edge straight down to meet the 
ground. The door faces will eventually be erased, 
but it’s hard to copy what isn’t there, so leave the 
door face there for now. To make the window, move 
the bottom edge up and paint the face. The window 
and door are shown in Figure 1-50.
Figure 1-50
Select both of these faces (Figure 1-51).
13.	
Figure 1-51
Activate Rotate and click the same center point 
14.	
as before, at the center of the top octagon (Figure 
1-52).
Figure 1-52
Because you are copying both faces at once, the 
15.	
rotation will be double what it was previously. Click 
two corner points that are 90 degrees apart (Figure 
1-53).
Figure 1-53

20 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Enter 
16.	
3x, and every face should have either a win-
dow or a door (Figure 1-54).
Figure 1-54
To remove the door face, use the Eraser tool on the 
17.	
edge shown in Figure 1-55. 
Repeat this step for the other three doors.
18.	
Figure 1-55
If any window faces aren’t painted correctly, fix 
19.	
them with the Paint tool. Figure 1-56 shows the 
building viewed from below.
Figure 1-56

Copying in Circular Arrays  
| 
21
Other Uses
Here are a few examples of where rotated copies are 
used.
You can copy emeralds around a ring or bracelet (Figure 
1-57).
Figure 1-57
You can arrange chairs around a circular table (Figure 
1-58).
Figure 1-58
You can arrange pairs of columns in an open, circu-
lar pattern (Figure 1-59), perhaps for a hotel lobby or 
ballroom.
Figure 1-59
Finally, you can create supports and seats for a Ferris 
wheel (Figure 1-60).
Figure 1-60

22 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Creating Circular Internal Arrays
1.5  
Problem
You want to place your first and last rotated copies, and space additional objects between them. 
Solution
Use the Rotate tool to make the last copy, and specify the number of internal copies in between 
using the forward slash format.
Discussion
In this scenario, you know where the first and last objects are located, and want to space objects 
evenly between them. The format for placing a specific number of copies between two rotate-
copied objects is to enter the desired number of copies, followed by the / (forward slash) sym-
bol, which denotes division. For example, if you make a copy of an object 90 degrees away, and 
then type 3/ and press Enter, you will have four objects (three copies plus one original), with 
three equal spaces of 30 degrees between copies.
In this example, you’ll place a ring of planters around the model you created in Recipe 1.4. In the 
“Other Uses” section, you’ll see how a circular internal array can be used to place chairs around a 
lecture podium.
Start with the model you completed in Recipe 1.4. 
1.	
Instead of making an actual planter with a plant 
in it, or taking the trouble to find a component for 
it, use a simplified cylinder instead. Somewhere 
outside the building, draw a circle and pull it up to 
represent a planter (Figure 1-61). Because it will 
be copied, make this cylinder a component. (If you 
don’t have this model, you can download my Circu-
lar Internal Array model from the 3D Warehouse.)
Figure 1-61
Select the planter, activate Rotate, and place the 
2.	
center of rotation at the center of the building (Fig-
ure 1-62).
Figure 1-62
www.allitebooks.com

Creating Circular Internal Arrays 
| 
23
Create a copy 360 degrees away. This is a full turn 
3.	
around the circle, which means the copy is placed 
exactly on top of the original (Figure 1-63).
Figure 1-63
Enter 
4.	
12/ (use the slash symbol) to get a total of 13 
planters evenly spaced around the circle, as shown 
in Figure 1-64. (The last planter shares the same 
space as the first copy, so it appears that you have 
12 planters.)
Figure 1-64
To get more planters, enter 
5.	
24/ (Figure 1-65).
Figure 1-65
You can adjust the total rotation angle as well. Enter 
6.	
180 to set 25 planters spaced within a 180-degree 
angle. This time there is no overlap between the 
first and last planters, so you can see all 25 planters 
(Figure 1-66).
Component Placeholders
When creating large object arrays, use the file-size-saving 
technique of component place-holding. Say the actual 
planter you need is very complex or contains a 3D tree with 
a great many faces and edges. Keeping 25 of these in your 
model would slow things down considerably, because each 
time you orbit to a new view, SketchUp has to redraw every 
edge and every face. To keep things small and smooth, use a 
simple object, such as a cylinder, as a temporary placeholder. 
Then when you’re ready to switch, you can easily select all 
components and reload them as the “real thing.” This tech-
nique is shown in Recipe 7.13.
Figure 1-66

24 
| 
Chapter 1: Making Multiple Copies
Other Uses
A circular internal array can be used to place chairs in a 
circular pattern around a lecture podium.
Figure 1-67 shows the first and last chair in the room. 
Their location is determined by the maximum viewing 
angle from the chair to the lecture podium.
For four copies of the chair, use 4/ spacing (Figure 
1-68).
The 8/ spacing shown Figure 1-69 can be used for a 
more crowded lecture.
Figure 1-67
Figure 1-68
Figure 1-69

Before using Follow Me, you need to have these 
two things in your model:
A Follow Me face, which will be extruded 
• 
along the path. This must be a single face 
(not divided by edges) and must be 2D.
A Follow Me path, which the Follow Me face 
• 
will follow. The path must be continuous and 
can be 2D or 3D.
Follow Me is available on the Tools menu and as 
an icon on the Large Tool Set toolbar (Figure 2-1).
Figure 2-1
Note
To display the Large Tool Set toolbar, choose 
View→Toolbars→Large Tool Set (Windows) or 
View→Tool Palettes→Large Tool Set (Mac).
The Follow Me tool is used to extrude a 2D face along 
a 2D or 3D path. In other design applications, this 
is sometimes called sweeping or driving. Follow Me 
is an incredibly useful tool for making such archi-
tectural details as moldings, parapets, railings, and 
fences, as well as circular objects such as cups, vases, 
and spheres. (It’s also quite fun to watch Follow Me 
in action.)
The basics of Follow Me are pretty easy to un-
derstand, but there are some little-known tricks 
you can use to make your designing easier. In this 
chapter, you’ll learn the best ways to use Fol-
low Me, how to set up Follow Me paths relative 
to Follow Me faces, and how to take advantage 
of groups and components in order to prevent 
changes to other objects. You’ll also learn how 
you can use a circular path to lathe all sorts of 
round objects, and how to create 3D Follow Me 
paths.
Chapter 2
	
Following Paths with Follow Me

26 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Extruding a Follow Me Face to Cut Volume Along a Path
2.1  
Problem
You want to extrude a face along a path that will cut volume along the path.
Solution
Choose one of the three best methods to use Follow Me: preselect a face as a path, use the Alt/
Cmd key to define a path around a face, or preselect edges of a path.
Discussion
The three methods for using Follow Me are the following: 
Preselect a face as a path.
• 
Use the Alt/Cmd key to define a path around a face.
• 
Preselect edges of a path.
• 
These can all be demonstrated by using a model of a building with a face drawn on one wall. 
Start with a building like the one shown in Figure 2-2, 
which has at least one curved wall. You can create your 
model from scratch, or download my Paths and Faces 
model from the 3D Warehouse. The top face is a single 
face; it has no dividing edges. There is an arc face drawn 
on one wall, located along a vertical corner. This face, 
indicated in Figure 2-2, is the Follow Me face, which 
you will extrude all around the building. 
Note
A Follow Me face is sometimes also called a shape profile. The 
only requirements for a face to be used as a Follow Me face 
is that it be planar (not curved or folded) and it must a single 
face, not divided with internal edges.
Figure 2-2

Extruding a Follow Me Face to Cut Volume Along a Path 
| 
27
Method 1: Use a Face As the Follow Me Path
Method 1 is a fast way to use Follow Me when the path 
forms a closed loop all the way around a single face.
The path will go around the entire building, so se-
1.	
lect the top face (Figure 2-3). The edges surround-
ing this face compose the Follow Me path.
With the top face selected, activate Follow Me. 
2.	
Figure 2-3
Click the Follow Me face (Figure 2-4).
3.	
Figure 2-4
The Follow Me face goes around the Follow Me 
path, removing volume all around the building, as 
shown in Figure 2-5.
Figure 2-5

28 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Method 2: Use the Alt or Cmd Key
This method produces the same results as Method 1, 
but you don’t have to select the path face in advance.
Choose Undo to return to the intact building with 
1.	
the Follow Me face.
With nothing selected in advance, activate Follow 
2.	
Me.
Click the arc face (Figure 2-6).
3.	
Figure 2-6
Move the cursor to the top face of the building 
4.	
(don’t click yet), and press and hold the Alt key 
(Cmd on the Mac). You’ll see preview edges of the 
completed extrusion all around the building, as 
shown in Figure 2-7.
Figure 2-7
Click the top face, and the same volume is removed 
5.	
(Figure 2-8).
Figure 2-8
Method 3: Select the Path Edges
This is the method you use when you have an open path 
(not a closed loop) or if there is no single face you can 
click for the path.
Choose Undo again to undo the Follow Me.
1.	
Select the three edges shown in Figure 2-9.
2.	
Figure 2-9

Extruding a Follow Me Face to Cut Volume Along a Path 
| 
29
Activate Follow Me and click the arc face. The vol-
3.	
ume is removed only along the predefined path, as 
shown in Figure 2-10.
Figure 2-10
Faces and Open Paths
For a closed Follow Me path, the orientation and location of 
the Follow Me face aren’t important. But orientation and lo-
cation are important when using an open path. Be sure that 
the Follow Me face meets one endpoint of the path (or is 
directly above or below it), and has a different orientation at 
that endpoint. Otherwise, you’ll get some strange results, or 
the tool won’t work at all.
In Figure 2-11, Follow Me won’t work, because the face and 
the path are in the same plane.
Follow Me won’t work in Figure 2-12 either; the face is too far 
from the path.
Figure 2-11
Figure 2-12
Manual Path
There is another way to use Follow Me that I didn’t show 
here. You can activate Follow Me, click the Follow Me face, 
and manually move the face along the path. I don’t like using 
this method, because it’s sometimes hard to get the face to 
follow the exact path you want. And if you’re using a closed 
face, you can end up with a tiny segment at the end of the 
path, making the path hard to close. Feel free to try this 
method, but you’ll probably find that preselecting the path 
is a better way to go.

30 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Using Follow Me to Add Volume Along a Path
2.2  
Problem
You want to add volume to an object along a path.
Solution
Draw the Follow Me face projecting outward from the path.
Discussion
In the previous example, the Follow Me face was “inside” the path, drawn within a face of the 
building, so volume was removed. If the Follow Me face is “outside” the path, and projecting 
outward from the object, volume will be added. This generally means adding a Follow Me face 
to the model, rather than placing it within an existing face. 
You’ll see two examples of how to do this. First, you’ll add a mantel to the top of a fireplace by 
adding a larger face from which the Follow Me face will be cut. The second example will add a 
base to the bottom of a column. In this case, you’ll create a Follow Me face within an existing 
face, and then move it into place so that it’s outside the Follow Me path.
Example 1: Fireplace Mantel
In this example, you will add a face adjacent to a fire-
place on which to draw the mantel section. Then you’ll 
use Follow Me to create the mantel.
Draw a basic model of a fireplace. (The model 
1.	
shown in Figure 2-13 is a simple box with a pushed-
in rectangle on the front face.) 
Add a small vertical rectangle along the top-back 
2.	
corner (Figure 2-13). If you can’t get the rectangle 
oriented correctly, try switching to Front view, or 
use the Line tool instead. The Follow Me face will 
be drawn on this rectangle.
Why not just draw the Follow Me face from the 
top-back corner? You could try this, but it’s rather 
difficult to orient lines correctly when they don’t 
follow the red, green, or blue direction. It’s much 
easier to draw lines and arcs on an existing face.
Figure 2-13

Using Follow Me to Add Volume Along a Path 
| 
31
Draw the mantel cross-section for the Follow Me 
3.	
face. Be careful when you draw lines on this face: 
If you don’t see the On Face inference, you might 
be drawing lines in the wrong plane. Then use the 
Eraser tool to trim away the rest of the rectangle. 
If you want to paint the mantel face, it’s the color 
of the back side of the face that will be used for the 
completed mantel. The finished mantel Follow Me 
face is shown in Figure 2-14.
Note
It’s not always easy to know which side of a face will have its 
color used during a Follow Me or Push/Pull action. My rule is 
simply to paint both sides of a face to cover all bases.
Preselect the Follow Me path by selecting the front 
4.	
and side edges of the fireplace. Then activate Fol-
low Me and click the mantel face. The faces of the 
completed mantel shape are correct, but the top 
face of the fireplace is cut, and the mantel is hollow 
(Figure 2-15).
Figure 2-14
Figure 2-15
Add some lines and erase any extra lines, to fix the 
5.	
mantel top (Figure 2-16).
Note
Recipe 2.3 shows how to use groups to prevent the original 
object from being broken by Follow Me, as happened to the 
fireplace in this example when you extruded the mantel sec-
tion around it.
Figure 2-16
Example 2: Column Base
In this example, you’ll use an existing face to draw the 
Follow Me face. Then you’ll move that face so that it’s 
outside the Follow Me path.
Use the 
1.	
Polygon tool (Draw→Polygon) to draw a 
hexagon on the flat (red-green) plane, with corners 
that are not in the red or green direction, as shown 
in Figure 2-17. (The Polygon tool is also available 
on the Large Tool Set toolbar.)
Figure 2-17

32 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Note
The default number of sides for a Polygon tool is six (even 
though the Polygon icon is a triangle). If you have changed 
this value previously, here’s how to change it back: Activate 
Polygon, type 6, and press Enter. You can also change the 
number of sides of a polygon you are in the middle of creat-
ing, or have just finished creating: Just type 6s and press Enter.
Pull up the hexagon face to make the column. 
2.	
For the Follow Me face, you could add a vertical 
3.	
rectangle next to this column, as you did for the 
fireplace, but this is not so easy when none of the 
vertical faces is in a standard plane. So instead, 
draw the Follow Me face right on one of the vertical 
faces (Figure 2-18).
This face is “inside” the Follow Me path, so it must 
4.	
be moved to the outside of the column. But because 
the face is attached to an edge of the column, you 
can’t move it without changing the column itself. So 
make a copy of it (Figure 2-19).
Note
If you drew the Follow Me face entirely within the vertical 
face, not attached to any edges, you could move it and not 
copy it.
Erase the original Follow Me face and use the top 
5.	
of the column as the Follow Me path. The column 
base is shown in Figure 2-20.
Figure 2-18
Figure 2-19
Figure 2-20
Look at the underside; as you can see in Figure 
6.	
2-21, the column and base are a hollow shell. This 
is like what happened to the fireplace, which had its 
top face cut. You can trace any edge of the bottom 
hexagon to add a bottom face.
In both of these examples, the original objects (fire-
place and column) were changed after Follow Me. The 
next recipe shows you how to use groups to keep these 
objects intact.
Figure 2-21
www.allitebooks.com

Keeping Original Objects Intact During Follow Me 
| 
33
Keeping Original Objects Intact During Follow Me
2.3  
Problem
You want to use Follow Me but keep your original object intact.
Solution
Make your Follow Me face a group or component.
Discussion
As you saw in Recipes 2.1 and 2.2, if the Follow Me face is attached to an object’s edge, either 
inside or outside the Follow Me path, using Follow Me breaks faces of the original object. For 
another example, consider the model of a blue box with the magenta Follow Me face in the 
corner (Figure 2-22). 
Figure 2-22
When you select the yellow-green top face as the Follow 
Me path, the result is shown in Figure 2-23; the side and 
top walls are broken.
Among the many reasons to use groups and compo-
nents, the main benefit is to prevent objects within 
the group or component from affecting other objects. 
When a Follow Me face is made into a group or compo-
nent, the other objects in your model will remain intact 
after Follow Me.
Use a group if you want to use Follow Me just once, 
which is the most common scenario. Use a component 
if you want to use Follow Me simultaneously on more 
than one copy of a Follow Me face.
In the main example, you’ll use this technique to create 
a molding around a ceiling. In the “Other Uses” section, 
you’ll see how to apply this technique to the fireplace 
and column models from Recipe 2.2. You’ll also see how 
to use components to make a tower with repeating rows 
of windows.
Make a box with a Follow Me face in a top corner. 
1.	
This face will be made into a group. But if you 
select just the face, and not its edges, Make Group 
won’t appear in the pop-up menu. However, you 
can choose Edit→Make Group from the main menu. 
Figure 2-23

34 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
To define the Follow
2.	
 Me path, select the top face of 
the box, as shown in Figure 2-25.
Activate Follow Me.
3.	
Figure 2-25
Another way to make this face a group (which I 
prefer) is to activate the Select tool, and double-
click the Follow Me face. This selects both the face 
and its edges, and then Make Group will appear 
in the pop-up menu. Figure 2-24 shows the model 
with the grouped Follow Me face.
Figure 2-24
Right-click on the Follow Me face (now a group), 
4.	
and choose Edit Group from the pop-up menu 
(Figure 2-26).
Figure 2-26
Click the Follow Me face (Figure 2-27).
5.	
Figure 2-27

Keeping Original Objects Intact During Follow Me 
| 
35
The face goes around the path, still within the 
group (Figure 2-28).
Figure 2-28
To close the group, right-click anywhere in blank 
6.	
space and choose Close Group. Or you can activate 
Select and click anywhere outside the group. 
The Follow Me operation is finished, and the 
original walls are intact, as shown in Figure 2-29. 
Because the original walls have zero thickness, the 
new Follow Me faces share space with the original 
faces, which is why the molding looks a little messy.
Figure 2-29
Hide or erase the floor and some walls, and look up 
7.	
into the room. In Figure 2-30, you can see the intact 
walls and ceiling, and the Follow Me faces creating 
a molding.
Figure 2-30
Other Uses
Here are three more examples of how you can apply the 
group/component technique with Follow Me.
Fireplace mantel
Create the same model of a fireplace and mantel cross-
section from “Example 1: Fireplace Mantel” in Recipe 
2.2. Make the mantel cross-section a group (Figure 2-31).
Figure 2-31

36 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
When you use the group technique (select the path, 
activate Follow Me, edit the group, click the mantel 
section), Figure 2-32 shows the result. The top of the 
fireplace is intact, and the mantel appears solid.
Figure 2-32
Column base
Create the same model of a column and base cross-
section from “Example 2: Column Base” in Recipe 2.2. 
Make the base section into a group (Figure 2-33).
Figure 2-33
When you use the group technique, the column remains 
whole and the base is solid, as shown in Figure 2-34.
Figure 2-34
Tower with repeating window rows
This example uses components instead of groups. Com-
ponents are great to use if they will repeat, because if 
you edit one, all others get the same changes.
Start with a building like the one in Figure 2-35, and 
draw one window face within a vertical wall. Make this 
face a component. (A component is made the same way 
as a group, with the added step of assigning it a name. 
Also, make sure that “Replace selection with compo-
nent” is selected.)
Figure 2-35

Keeping Original Objects Intact During Follow Me 
| 
37
Make a few copies of this component along the vertical 
wall (Figure 2-36).
Figure 2-36
Use the group technique, right-clicking on any window 
component and choosing Edit Component. When one 
window is extruded around the building, all others are 
too, as shown in Figure 2-37.
Figure 2-37
To cut faces from the building so that you can see the 
window, you need to explode, or ungroup the compo-
nents. To do this, select everything, right-click on any 
selected object, and choose Explode from the pop-up 
menu, shown in Figure 2-38. (You could also start by 
just selecting each component, but it is not so easy to 
select components that are inside other objects.)
Figure 2-38
Now you can erase the faces and edges that cover the 
windows. The finished building is shown in Figure 
2-39.
Figure 2-39

38 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Using Follow Me When Faces and Paths Are Not Adjacent
2.4  
Problem
You want to use Follow Me on a path that’s not adjacent to the Follow Me face.
Solution
In some cases, a nonadjacent path will give you the results you want. But if not, you can create a 
new path by offsetting the original one and making the necessary changes.
Discussion
When a Follow Me path is not adjacent to the 
Follow Me face, an offset of the path is used. 
The offset path can sometimes give you the Fol-
low Me results you want, such as for the model 
in Figure 2-40. In this example, the building 
footprint is selected as the Follow Me path, and 
the blue face is the Follow Me face.
Figure 2-40
Figure 2-41 shows the Follow Me result: the face is ex-
truded around a path offset from the building footprint, 
and the resulting fence is what you would expect.
But sometimes the results are not what you want, par-
ticularly when parts of the path are curved. In cases like 
these, you can use the Offset tool to create the new path 
manually, and trim and erase as needed to get the path 
you want.
The following example demonstrates this technique on 
a building with round edges. In “Other Uses,” you’ll use 
the same technique to create decorative trim around a 
group of windows.
Start with a building like the one in Figure 2-42, 
1.	
with at least one round wall and with no dividing 
edges on the top face. Add a Follow Me face next to, 
but not touching, the building. You can create your 
model from scratch, or download my Nonadjacent 
Path model from the 3D Warehouse. 
Figure 2-41
Figure 2-42

Using Follow Me When Faces and Paths Are Not Adjacent 
| 
39
Use the top face as the Follow Me path and extrude 
2.	
the Follow Me face around. The result is shown in 
Figure 2-43: the offset path is not smooth.
Choose Undo.
3.	
Figure 2-43
To see how the offset path is created, activate 
4.	
Offset. You’ll create the offset from the bottom of 
the building, which should also be a single face 
(no dividing edges). When you click this face, click 
somewhere on the edge closest to the Follow Me 
face (Figure 2-44).
Figure 2-44
End the offset at the closest point on the Follow Me 
5.	
face (Figure 2-45).
Now you can see why the previous Follow Me 
operation had such a messy result; there are sharp 
corners between the straight and round edges.
Figure 2-45
To correct the
6.	
 offset shape, add some straight lines 
to eliminate the sharp corners, and erase extra 
edges so that there is a single face (Figure 2-46).
Figure 2-46

40 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Use the new offset face for the Follow Me path, and 
7.	
try Follow Me again. This time, the results look 
great (Figure 2-47).
Figure 2-47
Other Uses
The offset path technique can also be used to create 
decorative trim around a set of windows.
On one wall of a building, draw a shape for one win-
dow. Create one offset for the window frame and then 
a slightly larger offset for the decorative trim. Copy 
all three faces a few times, so that the trim offset faces 
overlap (Figure 2-48).
Figure 2-48
Clean up the overlapping segments of the trim offset 
edges, so that you have one, clean border for the trim. 
Figure 2-49 shows the window frames in red, and the 
single border surrounding all three frames.
Figure 2-49
Figure 2-50 shows the result after placing an actual win-
dow in each window frame and using the outer border 
as the Follow Me path for a round Follow Me face.
If you try this example and your Follow Me operation 
causes any faces of the building to disappear, use the 
group technique described in Recipe 2.3. 
Figure 2-50

Creating Objects in the Round 
| 
41
Creating Objects in the Round
2.5  
Problem
You want to create round, or lathed, objects.
Solution
Use a circle for the Follow Me path.
Discussion
When you extrude a face around a circle, you create a lathed object. In other design applica-
tions, this action is sometimes called revolving. The circular Follow Me path is basically a tem-
porary object, which you can remove after the round object is created. 
This example shows how to use the circle-path technique to create a cup. In “Other Uses,” you’ll 
see how to use different Follow Me faces to create vases, how to adjust the location of the Fol-
low Me circle to make a ring, and how to modify the circular path to create interesting objects 
that aren’t purely round.
To start the cup, you need to make the face that will 
1.	
be extruded along the circle. This is actually half 
of the cup’s cross-section. In Front view, make a 
rectangle with an arc cutout at one corner (Figure 
2-51).
Figure 2-51
Select edges 1, 2, and 3, and use Offset to make the 
2.	
inner curves, as shown in Figure 2-52.
Figure 2-52

42 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Use the 
3.	
Eraser tool to remove the rest of the rect-
angle, and paint your half-section (Figure 2-53).
Figure 2-53
Activate Circle. Because the circle needs to be flat 
4.	
(red-green plane), keep the cursor away from other 
objects, so that the preview circle stays blue (Figure 
2-54). Press and hold Shift to lock this orientation.
Figure 2-54
With Shift pressed, hover over the corner shown 
5.	
in Figure 2-55, but don’t click. You want to use this 
point as a placement inference.
Figure 2-55
Follow Me sometimes breaks faces (unless the 
6.	
Follow Me face is a group or component), but this 
won’t happen if the path and face are not touching. 
So move the mouse straight down from the infer-
ence point, and click to place the center of the circle 
below the Follow Me face (Figure 2-56).
Make the circle any size.
7.	
Figure 2-56
www.allitebooks.com

Creating Objects in the Round 
| 
43
Select the circle (you can select either the face or 
8.	
edge), activate Follow Me, and click the half-section 
face. The face is extruded around the circle to make 
the cup (Figure 2-57).
Erase the Follow Me circle, and you’re finished.
9.	
Figure 2-57
Other Uses
When you vary the Follow Me face, adjust the location 
of the Follow Me circle, or even change the Follow Me 
circle itself, you can make some wonderful models. 
Here are a few examples.
When the face made of tangent arcs in Figure 2-58 is 
extruded around a circle, the result is the smooth vase 
in Figure 2-59. This vase is painted with translucent 
glass.
Figure 2-59
Figure 2-58
The face with arcs sticking out shown in Figure 2-60 
(which has to be a single face) produces the bumpy vase 
shown in Figure 2-61 when extruded along a circle. 
The bumpy bits can be painted after the Follow Me is 
complete.
Figure 2-61
Figure 2-60
The Follow Me face in Figure 2-62, when extruded 
around a circle that’s placed far away, will produce the 
ring in Figure 2-63.
Figure 2-62
Figure 2-63

44 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
If you extrude a vertical circle (Figure 2-64) around a 
far-off horizontal circle, you will get a torus, or a donut 
shape (Figure 2-65).
Figure 2-64
Figure 2-65
If you change the Follow Me circle to an oval, you can 
make something that looks like an oval-shaped trash 
bin. (Use the Scale tool to change a circle to an oval.) 
Figure 2-66 shows the Follow Me face that will be 
extruded along the oval, and Figure 2-67 shows the 
resulting trash bin.
Figure 2-66
Figure 2-67
Lastly, Figure 2-68 shows a Follow Me path with a 
cloudlike shape. The result, shown in Figure 2-69, is an 
interesting model—perhaps a candy dish.
Figure 2-68
Figure 2-69

Creating Spheres 
| 
45
Creating Spheres
2.6  
Problem
You want to create a sphere.
Solution
Use Follow Me on two concentric, perpendicular circles.
Discussion
When the Follow Me path and face are concentric circles, one perpendicular to the other, you 
will get a sphere. 
Start with a circle in the red-green plane (Figure 
1.	
2-70). This will be the Follow Me path.
Figure 2-70
The next circle, which will be the Follow Me face, 
2.	
must be vertical. So move the mouse up until the 
preview circle is either red or green (Figure 2-71), 
and press and hold Shift to lock the orientation.
Figure 2-71
Place the center of the new circle at the center of the 
3.	
first circle (Figure 2-72).
Figure 2-72

46 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Make the new circle smaller than the first one (Fig-
4.	
ure 2-73).
Figure 2-73
Select the larger circle as the path, and use Follow 
5.	
Me on the smaller circle. The resulting sphere is 
shown in Figure 2-74.
Figure 2-74
Erase the larger circle, leaving only the sphere (Fig-
6.	
ure 2-75).
Note
You could have selected the smaller circle as the path, but 
then the smaller circle would have ended up inside the 
sphere, and therefore would have been harder to erase. (But 
you wouldn’t see it.) Or you could have made both circles the 
same size.
Figure 2-75
You can use the same technique to make a half-sphere.
Make the same two circles as before, and use Line 
1.	
to divide the vertical circle in half (Figure 2-76).
Figure 2-76

Creating Spheres 
| 
47
Remove the lower half (Figure 2-77).
2.	
Figure 2-77
Select the circle, and use Follow Me on the half-
3.	
circle. This produces the half-sphere shown in 
Figure 2-78.
Figure 2-78
Look at the bottom. As you can see in Figure 2-79, 
4.	
the dome is hollow.
Figure 2-79
Remove the larger circle. Then you can easily cover 
5.	
the hole by tracing any edge of the bottom circle. 
The final half-sphere is shown in Figure 2-80.
Figure 2-80

48 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Using a Follow Me Path in 3D
2.7  
Problem
You want to extrude a Follow Me face along a 3D path, but the path is difficult to draw.
Solution
Create reference objects first, group these objects, and then draw the path by using inference 
points that are inside the group.
Discussion
Without reference geometry, creating a 3D path from scratch can be difficult. If you instead 
create a grouped set of reference geometry, the process becomes much easier because of the 
following:
You can use points or edges of the reference group for drawing the 3D path, and the new 
• 
geometry you create will not stick to the group. 
When the path is complete and you no longer need the reference geometry, you can easily 
• 
erase the group.
The first example shows how to make a 3D path for a bike handlebar. The second example uses 
the same technique to make a spiral, which can be rotate-copied to make into a rope coil.
Example 1: Bike Handlebar
In this example, you will create a curvy, 3D path that 
will be used to extrude a hexagon, resulting in a bike 
handlebar.
The first step is to make the reference geometry. 
1.	
Start with a simple box. Use Push/Pull with the 
Ctrl/Option key to pull out another, smaller box 
from the side, as in Figure 2-81.
Figure 2-81
Using Push/Pull with Ctrl/Option again, double-
2.	
click the other side of the box to pull out an identi-
cal box (Figure 2-82).
Figure 2-82

Using a Follow Me Path in 3D 
| 
49
Push in the two side boxes by the same distance 
3.	
(Figure 2-83).
Figure 2-83
Make these three boxes into a group (select them 
4.	
all, right-click on any face, and choose Make Group 
from the pop-up menu). The resulting group is sur-
rounded by a bounding box (Figure 2-84).
Figure 2-84
Now you can start making the 3D path. Activate 
5.	
Line and click the two endpoints of the line indicat-
ed in Figure 2-85. Because the boxes are grouped, 
the line does not stick to it and remains a separate 
object.
Figure 2-85
Next, make an arc tangent to the line you created 
6.	
in the previous step, ending at the smaller box, as 
shown in Figure 2-86. (The preview color of a tan-
gent arc is cyan.)
Figure 2-86
Add a vertical arc on the side of the smaller box 
7.	
(Figure 2-87).
Figure 2-87

50 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Draw the same two arcs on the other side (Figure 
8.	
2-88). These five objects complete the 3D Follow 
Me path.
Figure 2-88
The reference geometry is needed for one more 
9.	
step: drawing the vertical Follow Me face at one 
end of the path. The face shown in Figure 2-89 is a 
hexagon, but you could draw a circle or rectangle. 
You could also draw this face without the reference 
group, but it’s easier to draw geometry against an 
existing face than to draw it in empty space.
Figure 2-89
Erase the group, and you’re left with the Follow Me 
10.	
face and path (Figure 2-90).
Figure 2-90
Select the entire path, activate Follow Me, and 
11.	
click the face. The result is the handlebar shown in 
Figure 2-91.
Figure 2-91

Using a Follow Me Path in 3D 
| 
51
Example 2: Rope Coil
This example shows how to make a spiral, which can 
then be rotate-copied to make a rope coil.
Start in Front view and use the 
1.	
Polygon tool 
(Draw→Polygon) to make a 12-sided polygon. 
Place the center at the origin. (If your axes are 
not displayed, you can turn them on by choosing 
View→Axes.)
Activate 
2.	
Push/Pull and pull the polygon out by a 
long distance. Then press Ctrl/Option and pull it 
out again by a short distance, as shown in Figure 
2-92. One of the longer segments will be used to 
start the spiral, and the short segments will be cop-
ied to form the basis of the spiral path.
Copy the short section 11 times, for a total of 12 
3.	
short sections. Because the polygon has 12 sides, 
you need 12 sets of faces to make one revolution of 
the spiral path.
This set of polygon faces forms the reference geom-
4.	
etry, so make it into a group (Figure 2-93).
Now you can start drawing the spiral path. First, 
5.	
trace over any of the longer segments (Figure 2-94).
Figure 2-92
Figure 2-93
Figure 2-94
Perpendicular Follow Me Paths
The reason for starting the spiral path with a long, hori-
zontal segment is that the Follow Me circle can easily 
be drawn perpendicular to the start of the path. With-
out this horizontal segment, you would be drawing the 
circle at the end of a diagonal line, and it would be dif-
ficult (though not impossible) to draw a Follow Me circle 
perpendicular to the path. 
Follow Me will work on a face that is not perpendicular 
to the starting segment of the path, but the face will be 
distorted and the beginning of the extrusion will be cut 
off at an angle perpendicular to the starting segment.
The degree of distortion is dependent on various factors 
including the degree of tilt and how many planes it is 
tilting in. In some cases, the distortion may be small and 
not readily visible, but it will be there.  
If the precise size and shape of your Follow Me face is 
important, you need to keep the Follow Me face perpen-
dicular to the start of the Follow Me path. For a diagonal 
path, like the one used in this example for the spiral, this 
means you would need a Follow Me face that is not in a 
standard plane. The technique shown in this example, of 
drawing an extra path segment oriented in the desired 
axis direction, is a good solution to this problem.

52 
| 
Chapter 2: Following Paths with Follow Me
Now draw the 12 short segments for the spiral. 
6.	
Starting from the end of the long segment you just 
traced, draw diagonals, one by one, in the small 
faces (Figure 2-95).
When you complete the last spiral segment, you 
have completed one revolution of the spiral.
Figure 2-95
Orbit back to the beginning of the first, long seg-
7.	
ment you traced. Using the starting end of this 
segment as the center point, draw a vertical circle as 
your Follow Me face, as shown in Figure 2-96.
Erase the reference group. 
8.	
Figure 2-96
For a longer spiral, copy all of the diagonal spiral 
9.	
segments (not the horizontal segment) a few times, 
as shown in Figure 2-97.
Figure 2-97
Extrude the Follow Me circle along the spiral path 
10.	
(Figure 2-98).
The long horizontal segment at the beginning is not 
11.	
needed, so erase it. (You could also use Push/Pull 
on the starting face, which would keep the starting 
face vertical.) 
To smooth the spiral, select the entire thing, right-
12.	
click on any selected face, and choose Soften/
Smooth Edges. Adjust the sliders until the face is 
smooth, as shown in Figure 2-99.
Figure 2-98
Figure 2-99
To complete the rope, make rotated copies of it. 
13.	
This is easiest to do in Front view, placing the 
protractor at the model origin. (You can set the 
protractor in the desired orientation, hold Shift to 
lock the orientation, and then click the origin to 
place it.) The resulting rope coil shown in Figure 
2-100 shows two copies (three total spirals), each 
separated by 120 degrees.
Figure 2-100
www.allitebooks.com

When you use Intersect, you can quickly get an 
entire set of accurate intersection edges, without 
changing your view or using your mouse to create 
dozens of edges.
Note
New to version 7 is the Break Edges function, which 
automatically breaks edges where they’re intersected 
by other edges. This is relevant when drawing in 2D; 
for example, if you draw two overlapping circles, each 
circle’s edge will be broken where it meets the other 
circle. Prior to version 7, you had to use the Intersect 
tool to break these edges, but now the Intersect tool 
is not necessary for breaking edges in 2D drawing. If 
you want to preserve edges of a face and ensure that 
the edges are not broken by other edges, make the 
face a group. 
Available on the Edit menu, as well as on the local 
menu, Intersect has three suboptions: 
• Intersect with Model. Considers the entire 
model in the calculation. 
• Intersect Selected. Considers only selected 
objects in the calculation.
• Intersect with Context. Available when 
editing a group or component, this enables 
you to disregard geometry outside the group 
or component when calculating intersection 
edges.
This chapter demonstrates how to use the Inter-
sect tool and its options. You will practice cutting 
just one object, as well as cutting all objects 
involved in an intersection. You’ll also learn how 
to take advantage of groups and components to 
make trimming and cutting much easier.
When you want to use objects to trim or cut other 
objects, you use the Intersect tool. This tool calculates 
where two or more objects intersect or overlap one an-
other, and draws edges along these intersections. These 
intersection edges define the area or volume to cut.
Along with the Follow Me tool, the Intersect tool 
was introduced back in version 5 to much fanfare. 
Prior to Intersect, users had to manually trace 
intersection edges. For example, if you needed to 
cut a roof to accommodate a chimney, you would 
use the Line tool to trace edges between intersec-
tion points (Figure 3-1).
Figure 3-1
The problem with manual tracing is that, as in 
the preceding example, you sometimes have to 
orbit all the way around to find all the edges to 
draw. Missing or forgetting edges, such as the 
ones along the bottom of the roof, is easy too. Not 
to mention, for complex models, manual tracing 
can be quite tedious, particularly when you use 
round objects: “round” objects in SketchUp are 
actually composed of short linear segments, so 
you have to draw intersection edges along each 
small segment.
Chapter 3
	
Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming

54 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Trimming an Object
3.1  
Problem
You need to use one object to trim another object.
Solution
Use Intersect with Model to get quick and accurate intersection edges, which define the area to 
be trimmed.
Discussion
Whether you’re cutting a roof to accommodate a chimney, cutting holes in a floor, trimming 
rails, or designing a deck, Intersect with Model makes the job easy by quickly defining the areas 
that need to be cut. Although this example focuses on cutting a roof to accommodate a chim-
ney, you can easily adapt the technique to the other situations described in the “Other Uses” 
section.
Start with an L-shaped house and roof like the 
1.	
model shown in Figure 3-2. You can create your 
model from scratch or download my Chimney 
House model from the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
Start with an 
1.	
L-shaped box.
Make the roof by offsetting
2.	
 the top face outward and 
pulling both roof faces up by the same distance.
Erase the extra lines on the top face. 
3.	
Draw the ridge lines on top of the roof, starting from 
4.	
the midpoints of both ends of the L face.
Select both ridge lines and use Move to move them 
5.	
straight up.
Draw the chimney footprint in the corner indicated 
2.	
in Figure 3-3.
Pull up the chimney so that it passes through the 
3.	
roof. 
To cut the roof around the chimney, you need 
4.	
to know where it meets the roof. Select the 
entire model and right-click on any of the se-
lected faces. From the pop-up menu, choose 
Intersect→Intersect with Model. (You could also 
choose Edit→Intersect→Intersect with Model from 
the main menu; I prefer using the pop-up menu, 
because it’s faster than going up to the main menu.)
Figure 3-2
Figure 3-3

Trimming an Object 
| 
55
Note
When using the Select tool, you can triple-click on any face to 
select all of the edges and faces that are contiguous to that 
face.
This creates edges all around the chimney, where it 
meets the roof (Figure 3-4).
To better see these edges, hide the chimney. To do 
5.	
this, you can select all of the vertical chimney faces, 
right-click one of the selected faces, and choose 
Hide from the pop-up menu. (You can also choose 
Edit→Hide from the main menu.) 
Figure 3-4
Erase the extra roof edges to make space for the 
6.	
chimney (Figure 3-5).
Figure 3-5
To replace the chimney, choose 
7.	
Edit→Unhide→All 
or Unhide→Last. You can see that the roof is cleanly 
cut and that no faces are hidden inside the chimney 
(Figure 3-6).
Figure 3-6

56 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Other Uses
Intersect with Model can be used for a wide range of 
designs. Here are a few examples.
Cutting a floor for columns
Figure 3-7 shows a floor plate with holes for columns. 
It was created by intersecting columns with the floor, 
then trimming away the columns and erasing the faces 
covering the holes.
To see how this was done, download my Plate with 
Holes model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-7
Trimming rails to meet a curved face
Rails are a common element in many designs. You can 
use Intersect with Model to trim a set of rails to meet a 
curved face, and the resulting model can be used for a 
headboard and footboard for a bed (Figure 3-8), or sup-
ports for a bridge (Figure 3-9). 
To see how this was done, download my Trimmed Rails 
model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-8
Figure 3-9
Designing a deck
Intersect with Model can help you quickly make a deck 
design. Figure 3-10 shows a deck of irregular shape, 
whose planks were trimmed using the Intersect tool.
To see how this was done, download my Irregular Deck 
Shape model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-10

Cutting All Intersected Objects 
| 
57
Cutting All Intersected Objects
3.2  
Problem
You want to cut more than one intersected object.
Solution
Use Intersect with Model and decide which edges need to be cut.
Discussion
In the previous recipe, you cut only one object: the roof. The cutting object itself (the chimney) 
was not cut. What if all intersected objects need to be trimmed? This can occur when creating 
intersecting passageways, when engraving, or when cutting a skylight into a roof. This example 
demonstrates how to create a passageway between two intersecting arch sections. Engraving 
and skylight scenarios will be shown in the “Other Uses” section.
Start with a model like the one in Figure 3-11, with 
1.	
two arch forms that meet at their midpoints, at a 
90-degree angle. You can create your model from 
scratch, or download my Intersecting Arches model 
from the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
Create the basic arch shape in Front view and pull it 
1.	
back to get the first arch passageway.
Make a 90-degree rotated copy of the arch shape, ap-
2.	
proximately at the center of the original shape. Press 
Shift to lock the protractor in the red-green plane be-
fore moving the protractor to the arch. 
Use a different color for the round part of the copy.
3.	
Select everything, right-click on any selected object, 
2.	
and choose Intersect→Intersect with Model from 
the pop-up menu. Intersection edges are created on 
the inside and outside faces of both arches (Figure 
3-12).
Figure 3-11
Figure 3-12

58 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
To easily cut through the first passageway, orbit to 
3.	
a view like the one in Figure 3-13 and use a right-
to-left selection window within the passageway to 
select all faces in and behind the selection window, 
going straight back. Then press the Delete key to 
erase the selected faces, and you can see straight 
through. Do the same for the passageway in the 
other direction.
Figure 3-13
Orbit so that you are looking up at the ceiling. 
4.	
Erase all of the edges within areas of the same color 
(Figure 3-14).
Figure 3-14
Other Uses
Here are two more examples in which both intersected 
objects are trimmed.
Engraving
Figure 3-15 shows a box that has a flower shape en-
graved into the front. The engraving was done by inter-
secting a 3D flower-shaped cutting object with the front 
of the box, and trimming faces and edges.
To see how this was done, download my Engraving 
model from the 3D Warehouse.
Skylight
Figure 3-16 shows a domed skylight that was cut into 
a sloped roof. The original skylight shape was a sphere 
and the sphere and the roof were used to trim each 
other.
To see how this was done, download my Domed Sky-
light model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-15
Figure 3-16

Using Groups or Components to Create Cutting Objects 
| 
59
Using Groups or Components to Create Cutting Objects
3.3  
Problem
You want to use an object to cut holes, but you can’t get the cutting object through what you 
want to cut.
Solution
Make your cutting object into a group or component, move it where you want, and then run 
Intersect with Model. 
Discussion
One great advantage of groups and components is that they can be used for cutting. Ungrouped 
objects can be limited in movement according to the objects to which they are attached. 
Because groups don’t “stick” to other objects, they can be moved anywhere. For cutting and 
trimming purposes, components work the same way as groups. And because an entire group or 
component can be selected with one click, you can easily define what you want to intersect. 
To demonstrate these advantages, the first example uses groups to cut identical passageways 
through each side of a hexagonal gazebo. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how groups can 
help create a keypad with a cover plate, and help engrave text.
Want to Create this Model Yourself?
Leave the axes displayed. If they are not already 
1.	
displayed, turn them on by choosing View→Axes 
from the main menu. 
Use the 
2.	
Polygon tool to make a hexagon flat on 
the ground. Center it at the origin and draw one 
corner in the green direction. This makes the foot-
print of the building.
Use 
3.	
Push/Pull to pull it up, and then use the tool 
again with Ctrl/Option to pull up the top of the 
hexagon again. (This creates a new set of faces, 
rather than just stretching the top.)
Use Scale to shrink the top face of the roof. Be sure 
4.	
to press the Ctrl/Option key, which scales about 
the center.
On one of the vertical faces perpendicular to the 
5.	
red axis, draw the peaked doorway shape. The 
shape must be centered on the face, so use Off-
set and move the horizontal offset lines as needed. 
The peak point should be directly above the mid-
point of the face.
Use Push/Pull with the Ctrl/Option key to pull out 
6.	
the peaked shape. This will be the cutting object. 
(If you don’t use the Ctrl/Option key, the bottom 
hexagon face will extend into the bottom of the 
cutting shape, and then the face would need to 
be broken.) Make it rather long, which will make 
trimming easier later.

60 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Start with a hexagonal gazebo with a sloped roof 
1.	
and add to one face a long cutting shape for the pas-
sageway (Figure 3-17). You can create your model 
from scratch, or download my Gazebo model from 
the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-17
If you try to move the cutout object through the 
2.	
gazebo, you’ll find that it won’t go—the object is 
“glued” to the face on which it was drawn. To get 
rid of this stickiness, make the cutting object a 
group (Figure 3-18): Select its front and side faces 
with a right-to-left selection window, right-click on 
one of the selected faces, and choose Make Group.
A group becomes “enclosed” as a single unit. This 
unit is protected from being changed, unless you 
open it for editing. It can be selected as one unit 
and does not stick to any other object.
Move the group along the red axis so that it pokes 
3.	
all the way through the gazebo, as shown in Figure 
3-19. 
Make two rotated copies of the group, using the 
4.	
center of the top face for the protractor, with 60 
degrees between copies. You should now have three 
groups. 
Note
Making rotated copies is discussed in Recipe 1.4.
Because this cutting object is repeated, you might 
be wondering why it is a group and not a compo-
nent. You certainly could use a component instead, 
but a group is quicker to create. (A component 
requires that you enter a name and specify a few 
parameters.) Because all three groups will eventu-
ally be exploded (ungrouped), however, it doesn’t 
really matter whether they start out as groups or 
components.
Paint each group. You do not have to edit a group 
5.	
in order to paint it; just pick the color and click the 
group (Figure 3-20).
Figure 3-18
Figure 3-19
Figure 3-20

Using Groups or Components to Create Cutting Objects 
| 
61
Painting Groups and Components
When you pick a color and click a group or component, you 
paint all faces of the group that have the default color. If any 
faces are already painted, either from before the group was 
created or when the group was edited, applying a global 
color to the whole group won’t affect those faces. 
Painting a group like this has two advantages: It’s quick (one 
click), and both front and back faces get painted. This is help-
ful when using a group or component for cutting, because 
you can easily identify its faces after the cutting is complete.
All of this is shown in detail, in Recipe 6.5.
Select everything, right-click on any 
6.	
selected object, 
and choose Intersect→Intersect with Model. You 
now have edges along each vertical face (Figure 
3-21).
Erase the groups, and your intersection edges re-
7.	
main, as shown in Figure 3-22.
Erase the peak face within each vertical face, and 
8.	
you have just holes and edges (Figure 3-23). Those 
edges are the where the cutout groups intersected 
each other.
This looks nice, but there are no passageways. To 
make the passageways, you need to keep a portion 
of each cutting group, which will provide the neces-
sary faces within the gazebo.
Choose Undo to bring back the three groups, and 
9.	
be sure to keep the intersection edges.
Because you need to keep portions of each group, 
10.	
the groups need to be exploded, or ungrouped. Se-
lect all three groups, right-click on one of them, and 
choose Explode from the pop-up menu.
You can’t erase each group with one click anymore, 
11.	
but you can remove the parts that stick out. (Do 
this in Top view, using several right-to-left selection 
windows. This is easy when the faces protrude far 
enough from the gazebo.) 
Erase one of the front peak faces, and this time 
12.	
you can see portions of the cutting groups running 
through the building (Figure 3-24).
Figure 3-21
Figure 3-22
Figure 3-23
Figure 3-24

62 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Remove all of the faces inside the passageway so 
13.	
that you have a smooth, peaked opening straight 
through (Figure 3-25).
Figure 3-25
Remove faces inside the other two passageways. Af-
14.	
ter some cleanup (you might have to trace edges to 
re-create some of the faces), the underside should 
look like Figure 3-26.
Figure 3-26
If you have some time, try this variation. Instead of a 
simple peaked opening, use something more complex. 
You can download my Complex Gazebo model from 
the 3D Warehouse (Figure 3-27), or make your own 
opening. The opening should be symmetric and cen-
tered horizontally within the face, so that the midpoints 
of all cutouts will meet at the center.
Figure 3-27
After following the same steps as before, the underside 
looks really impressive (Figure 3-28)!
Figure 3-28

Using Groups or Components to Create Cutting Objects 
| 
63
Other Uses
Here are two more examples of using groups or compo-
nents with Intersect with Model. 
Keypad and cover
Figure 3-29 shows a model of a keypad with a matching 
cover. The model starts with the keypad box and one 
button, which is made into a group. An exploded copy 
of the button group is used to make one button hole, 
and the hole is copied to make room for more buttons. 
Each hole is filled a button, and the entire keypad is 
made into a group. To make the cover, start with a face 
drawn on the top of the keypad group, intersect it to 
make the holes, and then give it some thickness.
To see how this was done, download my Keypad and 
Cover model from the 3D Warehouse.
Text engraving
This example is similar to “Engraving” from Recipe 
3.2, except that the 3D text is automatically created as 
a component. The interaction is the basically the same, 
with the added step of ungluing the text from the face 
on which it is created.
Create a box and use the 3D Text tool to write some-
thing on it (Figure 3-30). If the text is the wrong size, 
use the Scale tool to change it.
3D Text automatically produces a component. And 
when a text component is placed directly on a face, it 
becomes “glued” to that face. This means the text can be 
moved only within the plane of the face and therefore 
cannot be pushed inside the box. To change this, right-
click on the text and choose Unglue from the pop-up 
menu. Now you can move the text slightly into the box.
Explode the text component and then intersect it. Trim 
the letters beyond the front of the box and then erase fac-
es on the front of the box to uncover each letter (Figure 
3-31). For letters that have internal shapes, such as the B 
and the O in Figure 3-31, you’ll have to trace one edge of 
each shape before the outer shape can be removed.
Figure 3-29
Figure 3-30
Figure 3-31

64 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Intersecting with Groups and Components, Without Exploding
3.4  
Problem
You want to leave your cutting object intact and still get intersection edges, rather than explod-
ing all groups and components after intersecting them.
Solution
Use Intersect with Model while a group or component is open for editing, to get intersection 
edges on it.
Discussion
There are several reasons to keep a group or component intact after intersecting it, including 
the following:
You can continue to select it as one object. 
• 
The group or component will not stick to other objects. 
• 
You can easily repeat objects. 
• 
By using Intersect with Model within a group or component while it is open for editing, you 
can keep it intact after it is intersected and trimmed.
The best way to show this technique is with window components, because after you edit one 
window, all other windows update accordingly. (If you had to explode a window component, 
you would have to manually repeat the trimming for all other windows.) In the following exam-
ple, you’ll create rectangular windows along a curved wall, which would be hard to do without 
the Intersect tool. You’ll use the window component to trim the building, and the building to 
trim the window component, without having to explode the component.
Make the Building and Window-Cutting 
Components
This section contains some helpful information about 
how to make cutting shapes. If you want to skip ahead 
to “Trim the Building, Trim the Windows,” you can 
download my Wavy Windows model from the 3D 
Warehouse.
In Top view, start with a footprint like the one in 
1.	
Figure 3-32. Make the walls overly thick so that the 
window frame will be overly deep (and easy to see).
Pull up the building so that three large windows can 
2.	
fit top-to-bottom.
Figure 3-32

Intersecting with Groups and Components, Without Exploding 
| 
65
Now make the shape for the window. In Front view, 
3.	
make a rectangle like the one in Figure 3-33. Keep it 
above the building for two reasons: to prevent faces 
from sticking and to avoid having to draw a rect-
angle on a curved face. This rectangle will become 
the base shape for the window component.
Figure 3-33
Pull out the rectangle so that it extends over the 
4.	
curved wall. In Top view, the window shape should 
look like in Figure 3-34: covering the front, curved 
wall, but not the back wall.
Note
To see a true parallel view, without the distortion you get in the 
default Perspective view, choose Camera→Parallel Projection. 
Make the window box into a component.
5.	
Paint the component and place three of them along 
6.	
the curved wall (Figure 3-35).
Figure 3-34
Figure 3-35
Trim the Building, Trim the Windows
Select everything and choose Intersect→Intersect 
1.	
with Model to get the intersection edges on the 
building (Figure 3-36).
These edges appear only on the building, not on 
the components. To get intersection edges on the 
windows themselves, the component must be open 
for editing first.
Figure 3-36

66 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Open any of the windows for editing. Opening a 
2.	
component is like opening a group: You can acti-
vate Select and double-click the component, or you 
can right-click on the component and choose Edit 
Component.
The other components and the building are still vis-
3.	
ible, though faded in the background. It will be dif-
ficult to see intersection edges on this component 
while all the other objects are in view. So open the 
Model Info window (choose Window→Model Info) 
to the Components page. Select my Hide checkbox-
es for both similar components and the rest of the 
model. Now only the window cutout box is visible. 
Select the whole box and run Intersect with Model. 
4.	
This creates the intersection edges where the box 
meets the building, even though the building is cur-
rently hidden (Figure 3-37).
Trim the box so that you’re left with just the frame 
5.	
(Figure 3-38).
Figure 3-37
Figure 3-38
Close the component (right-click outside the 
6.	
component and choose Close Component). The 
building and the other window frames return to 
the view. Because each component is identical, each 
window is now a trimmed frame (Figure 3-39).
The intersection edges were previously created on 
7.	
the curved wall of the building. So erase the three 
faces covering the fronts of the windows. Then 
erase the two lower back window faces but leave the 
top one. 
Figure 3-39
This top face will become the window glass, but 
8.	
first it should be removed from the building and 
made part of the window component. So select 
the face (do not select its edges) at the back of the 
window (Figure 3-40).
Cut
9.	
 this face (Ctrl+X / Cmd-X).
Figure 3-40

Intersecting with Groups and Components, Without Exploding 
| 
67
Open the top window component, and choose 
10.	
Edit→Paste in Place to replace the face in the exact 
spot from where it was removed. Paint both sides of 
this face with glass (Figure 3-41).
Figure 3-41
Close the component. Each window now has its 
11.	
own glass face, as shown in Figure 3-42.
Figure 3-42
What if you want the glass to sit in the middle of 
12.	
the frame, not all the way against the back? Open 
the component and copy the glass face to the 
midpoint of the frame, as indicated in Figure 3-43. 
(If you just move the glass instead of copy it, you’ll 
move the limits of the frame, too.)
Figure 3-43
Erase the original glass in the back, and you’re fin-
13.	
ished (Figure 3-44).
Figure 3-44

68 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Intersecting with Both Intact and Exploded Components
3.5  
Problem
You need to use an exploded component for trimming but also need to keep the component 
intact.
Solution
Place components where they need to go but keep one component aside. You can edit an 
in-place component to get its intersection edges, and those edges also appear on the set-aside 
component. After you explode and trim the in-place components, you can replace them with 
the component you set aside.
Discussion
This technique enables you to use exploded components to trim another object, while keeping 
an extra component on hand to replace what was exploded. To better understand how it works, 
you’ll create a cabinet with handles. Each handle is the same component. The in-place handles 
are used to place intersection edges on the handle you set aside. Then you trim and explode the 
in-place handles to make the holes within the cabinet face. Finally, you’ll copy the intact handle 
component into each hole.
There are three reasons to keep the handles as components:
Using components keeps file size low.
• 
The handle component could be saved as its own file and could be manufactured as is, 
• 
with no intersection edges.
Keeping the handle as a component makes it easy to modify or easy to replace with anoth-
• 
er component. (Substituting components is discussed in Recipes 7.13 and 7.14.) However, 
if the new handle has a different shape, it will affect the shape of the holes.
Start with a cabinet that has one handle component 
1.	
off to the side and the rest of the handle compo-
nents protruding slightly into the cabinet front. You 
can create your model from scratch, or download 
my Cabinet model from the 3D Warehouse (Figure 
3-45).
Note
The handle in this model was created using Follow Me, ex-
truding the face along an arc path.
Figure 3-45

Intersecting with Both Intact and Exploded Components 
| 
69
Open one of the cabinet handles for editing (not the 
2.	
handle off to the side). Run Intersect with Model 
on it to create intersection edges where the handle 
meets the cabinet. 
Because Intersect affects all components, the inter-
section edges also appear on the handle off to the 
side (Figure 3-46). These edges will come in handy 
later, when we replace the handles in the cabinet 
holes.
Figure 3-46
Explode and intersect the handles in the cabinet but 
3.	
leave intact the component off to the side (Figure 
3-47).
Figure 3-47
Trim to get the holes for the handles (Figure 3-48). 
4.	
If this model were to actually be built, the cabinet 
itself would be complete, including the holes that 
would need to be drilled in the front faces.
Figure 3-48
Now that the holes are made, you can replace 
5.	
the handles (Figure 3-49). This is easy to do now 
because the handle component has edges where it 
meets the holes. 
Note
This might not be a perfect real-world example because a real 
cabinet handle would be attached with screws. But you get 
the idea of how the technique is used.
Figure 3-49

70 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Intersecting Only Selected Objects
3.6  
Problem
You need intersection edges only on selected objects.
Solution
Select what you want to intersect, and choose Intersect→Intersect Selected.
Discussion
While Intersect with Model takes the entire model into consideration when intersecting, In-
tersect Selected limits which intersection edges are drawn. This has two advantages: you don’t 
get stuck erasing edges you don’t need, and you get faster results. Intersect with Model can be 
a heavy operation, particularly if you have curved objects with many segments. Limiting the 
intersection edges to get only what you need can save you some CPU time.
To understand how Intersect Selected works, you’ll cut 
windows in a building that has external and internal 
walls, as shown in Figure 3-50. You want the windows 
cut only in the external walls. The grouped cylinders are 
the cutting object. If you right-click on the group, the 
only Intersect option is Intersect with Model.
If you run Intersect with Model and then hide the 
group, you would see intersection edges on all walls, 
internal and external (Figure 3-51). 
To cut windows only on the outside walls, you can first 
select what you want to intersect and then use Intersect 
Selected.
Start with a model that has interior and exterior 
1.	
walls with different colors or materials, and add a 
grouped cutting shape, as shown in Figure 3-52. 
You can create your model from scratch, or down-
load my Intersect Selected model from the 3D 
Warehouse.
First, you need to select
2.	
 what you’re going to inter-
sect. To select all of the external walls, you could 
click both front and back faces (four total faces), 
but there’s an easier way: Right-click on any exter-
nal face and choose Select→All with Same Material. 
All external faces are selected (including some you 
don’t need, but they don’t intersect with anything). 
Figure 3-50
Figure 3-51
Figure 3-52

Intersecting Only Selected Objects 
| 
71
To add the cutout group to the selection, select it 
3.	
while pressing Shift. Then right-click on any select-
ed object and choose Intersect→Intersect Selected.
Hide the group (right-click on it and choose Hide), 
4.	
and you have intersection edges only on the exter-
nal walls (Figure 3-53).
Figure 3-53
Remove the circular faces from the four walls where 
5.	
they appear. Because the cutout group is gone, there 
are no window frames, just holes within a shell 
(Figure 3-54).
Figure 3-54
To complete the window frames, you need to keep 
6.	
portions of the cutout group. Bring the group back 
by choosing Edit→Unhide→All. Then right-click on 
the group and choose Explode. 
The edges on the walls automatically cut the ex-
ploded cylinders, so you can easily trim the cylin-
ders, as shown in Figure 3-55.
Figure 3-55

72 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Intersecting Within a Group or Component
3.7  
Problem
You need to get intersection edges within a group or component, without intersecting with the 
rest of the model.
Solution
Edit the group or component, and use Intersect with Context.
Discussion 
If a group or component intersects objects outside itself, these objects will be included in the 
calculation when you use Intersect with Model. If you want to keep intersection edges only 
within the group or component, use Intersect with Context. 
A simple doorknob example demonstrates this. The 
knob and handle shown in Figure 3-56 is a group.
If you open the group for editing and choose 
Intersect→Intersect with Model, you will get edges 
where the knob meets the door (blue arrow in Figure 
3-57) and edges where the knob handles meet the 
cylinder (red arrow). So the cylinder is intersected with 
objects both inside and outside the group.
If you want only edges within the group, use Intersect 
with Context.
Start with the model shown in Figure 3-56 of a door, 
1.	
with a knob made of a cylinder and two pulled-up 
hexagons. The cylinders protrude slightly into the 
hexagons, and the entire knob is a group. You can 
create your model from scratch, or download my In-
tersect with Context model from the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
In the flat plane, draw a pulled-up hexagon and a cylin-
1.	
der for the knob and handle, respectively. 
Move the cylinder into the knob so that it’s protrud-
2.	
ing inside just a bit. To avoid stickiness, first move the 
cylinder straight up in Front view and then position it 
exactly over the handle while in Top view. Then back in 
Front view, move the cylinder straight down.
Copy another handle to the other end of the cylinder 
3.	
and make the entire knob into a group.
Make a thin box to represent the door, and use Move 
4.	
and Rotate as needed to place the knob in the door.
Figure 3-56
Figure 3-57

Using Intersect to Trim Components with Themselves 
| 
73
The advantage of Intersect with Context in this example 
is that the cylinder remains whole, without edges along 
its length. If you create a larger hole in the door to 
accommodate the knob, you can see that the cylinder 
itself has no intersection edges (Figure 3-59).
Figure 3-59
Open the group for editing and hide the rest of the 
2.	
model. (To hide the model, open the Model Info 
window to the Components page and select the 
Hide checkboxes.) Right-click on the cylinder and 
choose Intersect→Intersect with Context. Edges 
are created within the group only, where the knobs 
meet the cylinder (Figure 3-58).
Close the group.
3.	
Figure 3-58
Using Intersect to Trim Components with Themselves
3.8  
Problem
You have a series of overlapping components, and you want to trim them relative to one 
another.
Solution
Open one component for editing and use Intersect with Model to get edges where the compo-
nent meets neighboring components. Then trim the edited component, which updates all other 
components.
Discussion 
In the chapter’s previous recipes, you’ve seen how groups and components can intersect other 
objects. Here you’ll investigate what happens when components intersect with themselves. This 
technique is useful when you have overlapping linear copies or rotated copies of a component 
that need to be trimmed to fit exactly with their neighbors. Components can remain intact (not 
exploded), which keeps your file size low and allows for easy editing of each component. 

74 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
In the main example, you’ll start with a simple cylinder 
component, make overlapping linear copies of it, and 
intersect it a few different ways to result in a log cabin. 
In “Other Uses,” you’ll see how the same technique can 
be used on rotated copies to transform a ring of cube 
components into a bracelet.
Flatten the Logs
In this example, you’ll start with cylinder components 
and intersect them with each other so that they can be 
flattened and therefore easy to stack.
Start with a circle in Front view. Add a construc-
1.	
tion point by right-clicking on the circle edge 
and choosing Point at Center (Figure 3-60). This 
construction point will make it easier to move log 
components into place later.
Pull the circle into a cylinder and make the whole 
2.	
thing into a component. Then paint it (Figure 
3-61).
Note
You can download my Log Cabin model from 
the 3D Warehouse, which contains scenes that 
show the steps for this example.
Figure 3-60
Figure 3-61
Stack three cylinder components, evenly spaced, so 
3.	
that they overlap, as shown in Figure 3-62.
Figure 3-62
Check the Components page of the Model Info 
4.	
window to ensure that components are hidden 
while editing. Open the middle component for 
editing. Right-click on the cylinder face and choose 
Intersect→Intersect with Model. This creates two 
edges on the top and two on the bottom, where the 
middle log meets the top and bottom ones (Figure 
3-63).
Figure 3-63

Using Intersect to Trim Components with Themselves 
| 
75
Draw lines on the front face to connect the intersec-
5.	
tion edges, and use Push/Pull to shave off the top 
and bottom. Close the component, and you now 
have flattened logs (Figure 3-64).
Note
You could also flatten the logs without using Intersect with 
Model. While editing the middle log, if the other logs are vis-
ible, you could use intersection points to add edges manually. 
But while the other logs are visible, it’s harder to see where to 
shave off the top and bottom. How you do this is just a matter 
of preference.
Figure 3-64
Make the Notches
The logs must be notched at each end so they can stack. 
Here’s how to do it.
First you need to rotate and move the top log so 
1.	
that is sits between the bottom two, in order to get 
the necessary intersection edges. Rotate the top log 
90 degrees, using the midpoint of the top edge as 
the center of rotation (Figure 3-65).
Figure 3-65
Move this rotated log down midway between the 
2.	
other two, as shown in Figure 3-66. This is where 
the construction point comes in handy; you can use 
it as the first move point.
Figure 3-66
When real logs are stacked to make a cabin, they 
3.	
extend past the notch. So each log needs to pro-
trude past where they all currently meet. Change 
the Components page of the Model Info window so 
that other components are now visible while edit-
ing. Edit any log and extend its front so that all logs 
overlap (Figure 3-67). 
Close the component.
4.	
Figure 3-67

76 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
When creating the notches, you’ll need surfaces 
5.	
from the neighboring logs to form the notch faces 
at the intersections of the log you are working on. 
So the components must be exploded. Select all 
three components, right-click on one of them, and 
choose Explode from the pop-up menu. 
With all three logs still selected, run Intersect with 
6.	
Model. This gives you some (but not all) of the 
edges you need to make the notch. You still need 
the edges in the middle half of the log.
Erase the top and bottom logs, leaving only the one 
7.	
in the middle (Figure 3-68).
To make the following steps easier, paint this top 
8.	
face (mine is blue, as you can see in Figure 3-69).
The notch has to be created so that half of the top 
half, and half of the bottom half, are removed. (In 
other words, the top and bottom quarters will be 
removed.) Therefore, the log has to be divided 
vertically into four sections. An easy way to do this 
is to copy the painted face from top to bottom and 
create three faces in between. 
Select the painted face and copy it straight down to 
9.	
the bottom, as shown in Figure 3-70. (You can press 
Shift to lock in the blue direction, and click any-
where on the bottom of the log. Or you can tap the 
up arrow and then click the bottom of the log.)
Enter 
10.	
4/ to create the four spaces between copies. 
You can check in X-Ray or Wireframe mode to 
make sure that three copied faces are inside the log.
Remove the top painted face. You should see the 
11.	
first copy of it inside the log (Figure 3-71).
Move the side edges of this face outward so that the 
12.	
face extends past the sides of the log (Figure 3-72).
Figure 3-68
Figure 3-69
Figure 3-70
Figure 3-71
Figure 3-72

Using Intersect to Trim Components with Themselves 
| 
77
Do the same on the bottom of the log: remove the 
13.	
lowest face and extend the sides of the next copy. 
(Yours won’t be painted, but I painted mine to make 
it easier to see, Figure 3-73.)
Figure 3-73
Select both of these extended faces and run Inter-
14.	
sect with Model. Trim the faces, and you’re left with 
some new intersection edges, indicated in Figure 
3-74.
Figure 3-74
Trim the top and bottom quarters of the notch, 
15.	
until you’re left with the faces shown in Figure 3-75. 
When erasing the edges along the sides of the log, 
work in X-Ray mode so you easily see the internal 
edges to erase. (You could also use the Eraser with 
the Ctrl or Option key, which smoothes the edges 
but doesn’t erase them.)
Figure 3-75
To make the log notched on both of its ends, rotate-
16.	
copy the half-log you’ve made and erase the divid-
ing line (Figure 3-76).
Erase the construction point; it is no longer needed, 
17.	
because it was placed there only to help move the 
logs.
Make the entire log back into a component.
18.	
Figure 3-76
Put It All Together
Now that you have a log component, it can be copied 
and stacked to complete the cabin.
Make a stack of logs and rotate-copy the stack 90 
1.	
degrees. Use similar points on the notches to move 
the logs into place (Figure 3-77).
Figure 3-77

78 
| 
Chapter 3: Intersection Edges: Cutting and Trimming
Copy both stacks to the other notches (Figure 
2.	
3-78).
Figure 3-78
To cut a door in one wall, make a grouped cutout 
3.	
shape (Figure 3-79).
Figure 3-79
Explode all of the log components cut by the group 
4.	
and explode the group as well. (Again, this is be-
cause the logs will need to “borrow” surfaces from 
the cutting shape.) Intersect and trim. Done (Figure 
3-80)!
Figure 3-80
Other Uses
The log cabin used cylinder components copied in a 
linear pattern. Figures 3-81 and 3-82 show two models 
of bracelets, in which the initial component for each is a 
cube copied in a rotated pattern. The boxes are trimmed 
against one another, and rounded for a smoother look.
To see how this was done, download my Beaded Brace-
lets model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 3-81
Figure 3-82

Quickly create a complex roof with a uniform 
• 
slope
Create “dummy” Follow Me paths when the 
• 
existing path is not easy to select
Extend Follow Me paths to make intersecting 
• 
and trimming easy
Use Intersect to create a 3D Follow Me path
• 
Note
Before using these tools together, it is important 
that you understand how to use them individually. 
If you haven’t already, read Chapters 2 and 3 before 
continuing. 
The Follow Me and Intersect tools are used together 
frequently to create complex 3D objects. Follow Me 
is used to create individual objects by extruding a 
face along a path, and the Intersect tool is then used 
to get edges where the Follow Me objects meet them-
selves or other objects. After these intersection edges 
are created, trimming is easy.
This chapter offers some advanced techniques 
for using them in tandem as well as separately. 
Specifically, you’ll learn to do the following:  
Create temporary faces for a Follow Me face
• 
Make round corners 
• 
Create lathed shapes
• 
Chapter 4
	
Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques

80 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Creating Temporary Faces for Follow Me
4.1  
Problem 
You want to round a sharp corner, but the model contains no face on which you can easily draw 
a Follow Me face.
Solution 
Create a temporary face on which to draw the Follow Me face.
Discussion
Consider the box in Figure 4-1, which has a 
Follow Me face (shown in dark brown) drawn 
on one face.
Figure 4-1
If you use the top face as the Follow Me path, the Follow 
Me face is extruded around the top of the box, remov-
ing volume (Figure 4-2). This example is simple because 
it was clear where to draw the Follow Me face.
But if you are starting with a box with rounded vertical 
corners like the box in Figure 4-3, you have no face on 
which to draw the Follow Me face.
The solution is to create a temporary face on which to 
draw the Follow Me face. After the Follow Me is com-
plete, you can easily remove the temporary face. 
In this recipe’s first example, you’ll start with the model 
shown in Figure 4-3 and use Follow Me to make a 
jewelry box with a rounded top. Adding a notch in the 
box will give you a temporary face for the Follow Me 
face; you can fill in the notch after the top is rounded. 
The second example starts with a round object and ends 
with a round casserole dish with a rounded lid. You’ll 
get there by creating a temporary face from one of the 
object’s straight segments. 
Figure 4-2
Figure 4-3

Creating Temporary Faces for Follow Me 
| 
81
Example 1: Jewelry Box
In this example, you will round the top edge of a box 
that has rounded vertical corners.
Start with a box with rounded corners like the box 
1.	
in Figure 4-3. You can create your model from 
scratch, or download my Jewelry Box model from 
the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
There are two ways to create a box like this.
One method is to draw the basic rectangle in Top view, and 
draw arcs in each corner. When the arc preview is magenta, 
you know it is equidistant from the corner along both edges. 
Trim the corners to make a rounded rectangle and then pull 
it up.
Alternately, you can draw a rectangle and pull it up. Then 
draw arcs in each corner of the top face, and use Push/Pull to 
push each arc face down to the bottom of the box.
Draw a rectangle on the top or front face and push 
2.	
the rectangle inward, making a small notch (Figure 
4-4).
Draw the Follow Me face on one of the vertical 
3.	
faces of the notch (Figure 4-5).
Select the Follow Me path. To do so, you could click 
4.	
each individual edge, but an easier way is to double-
click the top face and then Shift-click to unselect 
the top face plus all four edges that compose the 
notch. Then use Follow Me to extrude the face 
around the remaining selected edges (Figure 4-6).
Figure 4-4
Figure 4-5
Figure 4-6
To close the notch, pull one of the side faces of the 
5.	
notch to the other side of the notch. Then erase the 
extra lines (Figure 4-7).
Figure 4-7

82 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Example 2: Casserole Dish
This example also relies on a temporary face for the Fol-
low Me face. Because the main object is round, however, 
you need to take advantage of hidden geometry in order 
to create temporary objects.
Start with an oval and pull it up. You can create 
1.	
your model from scratch, or download my Casse-
role Dish model from the 3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
Draw a circle in the flat (red-green) plane. 
1.	
Select the circle and activate Scale.
2.	
Drag one of the side handles to create an oval.
3.	
Pull the oval up.
4.	
To be able to draw or edit anything on a round face, 
2.	
you need to see the flat segments that compose the 
face. Choose View→Hidden Geometry to see the 
dashed lines that indicate where the hidden edges 
are (Figure 4-8).
Note
If you work with round objects often or hide objects often, it’s 
helpful to create a keyboard shortcut for the View→Hidden 
Geometry toggle. I prefer the Function keys (F1, F2, and so 
forth) for all display commands, which also include Wireframe, 
X-Ray, and so on. Setting up shortcuts can be done via the 
Preferences window.
Use Push/Pull with the Ctrl/Option key to pull out 
3.	
one of the segments (Figure 4-9). One of the verti-
cal faces created by this operation will be used to 
create one of the Follow Me faces.
Erase the top face of the oval cylinder and use 
4.	
Push/Pull with Ctrl/Option again to pull out the 
inside face of this new box. Extend it almost to the 
other side (Figure 4-10). One of these vertical faces 
will be used to create another Follow Me face.
Figure 4-8
Figure 4-9
Figure 4-10

Creating Temporary Faces for Follow Me 
| 
83
Erase all new faces except for one vertical face on 
5.	
the inside and one vertical face on the outside. 
Draw a small half-circle face on the outside vertical 
face (shown in Figure 4-11 in yellow) and a tall arc 
(shown in orange) on the inside vertical face. The 
orange face will be used to create the lid, and the 
yellow face will be used to create the lip around the 
bottom of the lid. Trim the rest of the temporary 
vertical faces. If you paint your new faces, be sure 
to paint both the front and back face, to ensure that 
the colors will show even if the Follow Me opera-
tion reverses the faces. 
Hide the hidden edge indicators by toggling the 
6.	
View→Hidden Geometry command.
Select the bottom face of the cylinder so that its 
7.	
boundary edges will be used as the Follow Me path, 
and extrude the half-circle outside the cylinder. 
Then use the same path to extrude the larger arc 
face (Figure 4-12).
Figure 4-11
Figure 4-12
Select everything and use Intersect→Intersect with 
8.	
Model to get edges where the lid intersects itself. 
Then you can erase all faces above the lid and any 
extra edges on the lid to get the final dish (Figure 
4-13).
Figure 4-13

84 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Rounding Corners
4.2  
Problem 
You want to extrude a rounding face around a path with corners, and you want the corners 
rounded rather than mitered (sharp).
Solution 
Use Push/Pull instead of Follow Me, and create separate objects to fill in the rounded corners.
Discussion
Consider a model of a box with a Follow Me 
face (shown in yellow in Figure 4-14) along one 
edge. 
If you use Follow Me to extrude the face 
around the top of the box, the corners are 
sharp, or mitered (Figure 4-15).
If you want these corners to be rounded, you 
need to use Push/Pull instead of Follow Me 
to create the straight sections. Then for the 
rounded parts, use Follow Me with a circular 
path.
The first example demonstrates how to use 
this technique to create round corners on the 
rectangular table shown in Figure 4-15. In the 
second example, you’ll create similar rounded 
corners on a hexagonal table, taking advantage 
of groups to keep existing objects intact after 
using Follow Me.
Example 1: Rectangular Table
In this example, you will create round corners on a rect-
angular table with sharp corners.
Start with a model of a table top. Along one edge, 
1.	
add a rounding face (shown in Figure 4-14 in yel-
low) that will be pulled around the table top. You 
can create your model from scratch, or download 
my Table Top model from the 3D Warehouse.
Use Push/Pull to pull the rounding face along one 
2.	
edge (Figure 4-16).
Figure 4-14
Figure 4-15
Figure 4-16

Rounding Corners 
| 
85
For the next edge, you need to copy the rounding 
3.	
face so that is perpendicular to the edge. Select 
the front face of the Push/Pull operation you just 
completed and activate Rotate. Place the protractor 
at the corner of the table, keeping it oriented to the 
table top (the protractor’s preview color should be 
blue). Press Ctrl/Option for copying and make a 
90-degree copy (Figure 4-17).
Pull this copied face along the next edge.
4.	
Figure 4-17
Repeat steps 2 through 4 for the remaining two 
5.	
edges of the table (Figure 4-18).
Figure 4-18
At each corner, you need a rounded version of the 
6.	
rounding face. Therefore, you need to draw a Follow 
Me circle. This circle must be located away from the 
table so that it won’t break the table’s geometry. Ac-
tivate Circle and orient it to the table top (again, the 
preview color should be blue). Since the circle will be 
located above this corner, move the mouse directly 
up, watching for the blue inference line (Figure 4-19).
Make the circle any size you want and be sure to 
7.	
align it to the red or green axis.
To make it easier to copy the round object to other 
8.	
corners later, paint the rounding face a different 
color (shown in Figure 4-20 in cyan). Because it’s 
hard to know which side of the rounding face will 
appear after Follow Me, you should paint the back 
face too. The easiest way to do this is to right-click 
on the painted face and choose Reverse Face. (This 
switches the back and front faces.) Paint the re-
versed face the same color you just used for the first 
side. Now this face is painted on both sides.
Use the Follow Me circle as the path for the newly 
9.	
painted Follow Me face, to create the rounded ob-
ject in the corner (Figure 4-21).
You no longer need the Follow Me circle, so erase it. 
10.	
Figure 4-19
Figure 4-20
Figure 4-21

86 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Only a quarter of this round object is showing; the 
11.	
rest of it is within the box. But the whole object 
needs to be copied to each corner. Right-click on 
the round corner and choose Select→All with Same 
Material, which selects the entire object. Then copy 
the round object to each corner (Figure 4-22).
Figure 4-22
The table top looks fine from the top, but it’s always 
12.	
a good idea to keep your object count low by eras-
ing unnecessary faces and edges. Orbit to see the 
underside. Because the profile edges at each corner 
cut the rounding faces, no Intersect operation is 
needed. Erase faces and edges so that the round 
borders and corners form an empty shell (Figure 
4-23).
To replace the bottom face, trace any edge along the 
13.	
bottom.
Figure 4-23
Example 2: Hexagonal Table
This example uses the same Follow Me technique to 
make rounded corners. To prevent the rounded corner 
objects from breaking the rest of the table, you will use 
the grouping technique within Follow Me, which is 
described in Recipe 2.3. 
Start with a hexagon-shaped box and place a point 
1.	
at the center (right-click on the top hexagon edge 
and choose Point at Center). This point makes it 
easier to copy objects later.
Draw a rounding face on one vertical face (Figure 
2.	
4-24).
Copy the rounding face 90 degrees from the vertical 
3.	
face, erase the original, and pull the face along one 
edge. 
Note
You can download my Hexagon Table model 
from the 3D Warehouse, which contains 
scenes that show the steps for this example.
Figure 4-24

Rounding Corners 
| 
87
Rotate-copy the pulled faces along each side of the 
4.	
hexagon (Figure 4-25).
It you were to make a round object for the corner 
now, using the technique from “Example 1: Rect-
angular Table,” the top face of the table would be 
broken by the top face of the Follow Me object. To 
protect the existing faces of the table, you need to 
use a group. 
Figure 4-25
Activate Select and double-click one of the vertical 
5.	
end faces of the pulled rounding faces. This selects 
both the face and its surrounding edges. Right-click 
on the face and choose Make Group. The face will 
then appear with bold edges and surrounded by a 
bounding box (Figure 4-26).
Figure 4-26
The next step is to draw the Follow Me circle, and it 
6.	
is important that the circle have the correct number 
of sides. Because this model is based on a hexagon, 
the number of circle sides should be divisible by 
six. This ensures that the segments of the circle, 
and therefore the segments of the resulting round 
corner, will align with the edges of the Push/Pull 
faces. Activate Circle and make sure the number of 
sides is a multiple of six (24 is a good number). As 
you did for the rectangular table, place the center 
directly above the corner of the table (Figure 4-27). 
Do not click yet to complete the circle.
Note
You can set the number of sides of a circle by entering the 
number before you place the circle’s center point. After you 
place the center, you can still change the number of sides by 
typing 24s either before or right after clicking the point along 
the radius.
To establish the radius of the circle, click on any 
7.	
point along the top edge of the group. This ensures 
that a circle segment will start just above the group, 
so the round Follow Me object will align perfectly 
with the Push/Pull objects (Figure 4-28).
Figure 4-27
Figure 4-28

88 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Use the Edit Group method to make the round 
8.	
object: Select the circle as the path, activate Follow 
Me, edit the group, and click the face (Figure 4-29).
While the group is still open for editing, run Inter-
9.	
sect with Model on the whole group. This creates 
edges where the group meets the rest of the table. 
If there are any edges that aren’t created but should 
be, trace them manually. This is easiest to do with 
the rest of the model displayed, which can be set in 
the Components page of the Model Info window. 
Be sure to check that all edges are drawn, including 
those on the top and bottom faces of the rounding 
object.
While the component is still open, open the Com-
10.	
ponents page of the Model Info window to hide the 
rest of the model, and trim away the extra portions 
of the group (Figure 4-30).
If you have curved faces with small edges along 
11.	
them, use the Eraser with the Ctrl/Option key 
pressed to smooth the edges.
Figure 4-29
Figure 4-30
Close the group and rotate-copy it to the other five 
12.	
corners (Figure 4-31).
For the final cleanup, select all six groups, right-
13.	
click on one of them, and choose Explode. Then 
you can erase the extra edges on the top and bottom 
of the table (Figure 4-32).
To hide remaining edges along the rounded bor-
14.	
der, you can select the entire table, right-click, and 
choose Soften→Smooth Edges from the pop-up 
menu. Adjust the sliders to smooth the faces.
Note
Another way to create the same table involves offsetting the 
table top, rounding the sharp corners of this new offset face, 
and using Follow Me to extrude the rounding face along the 
new edges. You can download my Hexagon Table Alternative 
model from the 3D Warehouse, which contains scenes that 
show the steps for this method.
Figure 4-31
Figure 4-32

Creating Lathed Shapes 
| 
89
Creating Lathed Shapes
4.3  
Problem 
You want to create a lathed table leg and place it below a rounded box.
Solution 
Use Follow Me around a circle to make the lathed shape and Intersect to create the rounded 
box.
Discussion 
Lathed shapes are a common design element in woodworking and furniture design, and a table 
leg is perhaps the most common lathed shape. Two steps need to be completed for this model:
Create the rounded box to house the leg, which is modeled by using Intersect.
• 
Create the lathed shape itself, which is done by extruding a face around a Follow Me 
• 
circle.
In this recipe, you’ll create the box first and then work your way down to complete the leg.
Start with a square and pull it up.
1.	
Note
You can download my Table Legs model from the 3D Ware-
house, which contains scenes that show the steps for this 
recipe.
Because the rest of the table leg will be created rela-
2.	
tive to the center of this box, you need to mark the 
center with a construction line. Activate Tape Mea-
sure and start the construction line on the bottom 
of the box, where the red and green directions meet 
from adjacent midpoints (Figure 4-33).
Draw the construction line straight down. 
3.	
Draw a vertical circle centered on the construction 
4.	
line endpoint (Figure 4-34). 
Figure 4-33
Figure 4-34

90 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Because the box corners are to be rounded evenly, 
5.	
the rounding must be based on a sphere whose 
extents meet the box corners. So draw a horizon-
tal circle, perpendicular to and concentric with 
the large circle. The number of sides should be a 
multiple of four, because the circle has to align with 
the four corners of the box. To establish the radius, 
click on a corner of the box above the circle (Figure 
4-35).
Figure 4-35
To create the sphere, select the larger circle as the 
6.	
Follow Me path and use Follow Me on the smaller 
circle (Figure 4-36).
Move the sphere straight up into the middle of the 
7.	
box.
Figure 4-36
Leave the sphere selected. The next step is to 
8.	
move the sphere back down so that the rounding 
of the corners will start from the base of the box. 
In order to see how to move the sphere, choose 
View→Hidden Geometry from the main menu, 
which displays the dashed lines indicating hidden 
edges (Figure 4-37).
Figure 4-37

Creating Lathed Shapes 
| 
91
Move the sphere straight down so that the lowest 
9.	
point on any of the protruding sides meets the mid-
point of a lower edge (Figure 4-38). This establishes 
the corners of the box that need to be trimmed.
Turn off the display of hidden edge indicators by 
10.	
choosing View→Hidden Geometry again. Run 
Intersect with Model, and trim both the box and 
sphere (Figure 4-39). Check the model in X-Ray or 
Wireframe view to erase all extra edges.
Figure 4-38
Figure 4-39
To make the lathed shape, draw a vertical rectangle 
11.	
below the box, sharing an edge with the construc-
tion line. On this rectangle, draw a section for the 
leg, like the one shown in Figure 4-40 in yellow. For 
the Follow Me circle, draw a horizontal circle at the 
bottom of the rectangle, centered on the construc-
tion line. 
Use Follow Me to extrude the leg section around 
12.	
the circle. Then erase the circle and trim the rect-
angle, as shown in Figure 4-41.
Make the leg a component and make three more 
13.	
copies to support a table. 
Figure 4-40
Figure 4-41
For the table top, draw a rectangle on top of the set 
14.	
of four legs. Offset the rectangle outward and pull it 
up. To make the table top more interesting, you can 
also extrude a Follow Me face around the table top 
(Figure 4-42).
Figure 4-42

92 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Roofing with a Uniform Slope
4.4  
Problem
You want to make a uniformly sloped roof atop a building.
Solution
Draw the roof section, use Follow Me to extrude the section along the building edges, and use 
Intersect to trim the roof.
Discussion
Roofs can be a difficult part of building design, but by combining Follow Me and Intersect, you 
can quickly make a complex-looking roof. There are three basic steps:
Draw a face to represent the roof section with the correct slope.
• 
Use Follow Me to extrude the face around the building.
• 
Use Intersect with Model to get edges where the roof faces meet themselves, and trim the 
• 
extra edges.
Use this technique when you want the same roof slope all around the building. To demonstrate, 
this recipe uses the technique on a simple roof with a known slope. In the “Other Uses” section, 
you’ll see more complex roofs created using the same technique.
Note
Other roofing solutions are discussed in Chapter 5.
Start with an L-shaped building.
1.	
To start the roof section, draw a short horizontal 
2.	
line from the top corner of one of the front faces 
(Figure 4-43).
Figure 4-43
The 
3.	
Protractor tool (Tools→Protractor) is used to 
create an angled construction line at a known angle 
from an existing edge. Activate Protractor and click 
points 1 and 2 in Figure 4-44 to set the baseline for 
the construction line along the top of the building. 
Then move the mouse up and click point 3 to create 
the construction line at a 45-degree angle. (You can 
look for this angle in the Angle field, or type 45 and 
press Enter.)
Figure 4-44

Roofing with a Uniform Slope 
| 
93
Note
Even though the field at the bottom of the window is labeled 
Angle, you can also enter a roof pitch in the rise-run format. 
For example, an 8/12 slope is entered as 8:12.
Use the construction line to create the triangular 
4.	
roof face as shown in Figure 4-45. The face should 
extend past the midpoint of the front face, so that 
the profile will not fall short of the center of the 
widest part of the building.
Figure 4-45
Select the top face of the building as the Follow Me 
5.	
path. Then use Follow Me to extrude the roof face 
around the building (Figure 4-46).
Figure 4-46
Select the entire roof and run Intersect with Model 
6.	
to get the edges where the roof intersects itself. 
Then trim away the extra edges (Figure 4-47).
Even when the roof looks “clean,” you should check 
7.	
your model in X-Ray or Wireframe mode to erase 
any extra edges inside the roof.
Figure 4-47
Other Uses
This section contains two examples of more complex 
roofs, created using the same Follow Me and Intersect 
technique. The first example is an overhanging roof, 
and the second uses curved faces on both the building 
and roof.
Overhanging roof
Figure 4-48 shows a house with a thick, overhanging 
roof. The roof is based on a 2D Follow Me face, which 
is extruded around the top face of the building. The 
resulting roof faces are intersected and trimmed.
Figure 4-48

94 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
To see how it’s done, download my Overhanging Roof 
model from the 3D Warehouse.
Curved faces on the roof and building
Figure 4-49 shows a building with curved faces, and 
a roof section that also has curves. The easiest way to 
create a roof section like this is to first create a vertical 
face on which to draw the roof section. After running 
Follow Me and Intersect with Model, the trimming of 
extra edges can take a while. But the results are worth 
the effort.
To see how it’s done, download my Curvy Roof model 
from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 4-49
Creating “Dummy” Follow Me Paths
4.5  
Problem
You want to intersect two sets of faces created by Follow Me, but you’re having trouble defining 
and selecting paths.
Solution 
Copy the edges needed for the path so that the path can easily be selected away from the rest 
of the model. Alternatively, move the Follow Me faces away from each other so that their paths 
can easily be identified and the resulting faces won’t interfere with each other.
Discussion
The problem discussed in this section deals with different Follow Me faces that are extruded 
around edges of the same shape. In these cases, you might have difficulty selecting a path in ad-
vance, particularly if edges are broken by other operations. The solution is to copy a set of edges 
elsewhere so that they can be easily selected. Another problem encountered in the same model 
is that two sets of Follow Me faces within the same closed shape can interfere with one another. 
The solution here is to temporarily move one of the faces away, run Follow Me on it, and then 
move it back into place. After all faces are in place, they can be intersected and trimmed.
The main example that will demonstrate these techniques is a skate park, in which two Follow 
Me faces create the skate ramp and the spectator seating. In “Other Uses,” you will see the same 
technique applied to a picture frame.

Creating “Dummy” Follow Me Paths 
| 
95
Start with a box and remove the top. Paint the 
1.	
four sides with a material from the Fencing mate-
rial category (Figure 4-50). Many of these fencing 
materials have alpha transparency, which means the 
white background of each image is interpreted by 
SketchUp as transparent. 
Note
You can download my Skate Park model from the 3D Ware-
house, which contains scenes that show the steps for this 
recipe.
Make a copy of the bottom of the box, straight up 
2.	
or down. The edges around this face will be the 
“dummy” paths.
Select the original box (not including the copied 
3.	
face) and make it a group (Figure 4-51). This is so 
that the fence faces won’t be broken when objects 
are added inside the box.
Figure 4-50
Figure 4-51
Using the faces of the box group to draw on, draw 
4.	
two identical rectangles in opposite corners on 
which to make the Follow Me faces. On one face, 
draw an arc section for the skate ramps (shown in 
Figure 4-52 in beige) and on the other, draw a sec-
tion for steps (shown in green).
Trim the extra edges from these faces.
5.	
Figure 4-52
Because the fence box is a group, you can’t select 
6.	
edges within it to define a Follow Me path. So 
you’ll use the edges of the face you copied from the 
bottom of the box. Select the two edges of the face 
shown in Figure 4-53.
Figure 4-53

96 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
With this path defined, run Follow Me on the arc 
7.	
face. Here you can see the second problem: the 
Follow Me faces interfere with one another. The arc 
faces were not completed, and the face with the steps 
has disappeared (Figure 4-54).
Undo the Follow Me.
8.	
Figure 4-54
Move one of the Follow Me faces to a location di-
9.	
rectly above the box. I chose to move the section for 
the steps, as shown in Figure 4-55.
Figure 4-55
Use the two edges indicated in Figure 4-56 as the 
10.	
Follow Me path for the arc face.
Figure 4-56

Creating “Dummy” Follow Me Paths 
| 
97
Use the other two edges as the Follow Me path for 
11.	
the steps (Figure 4-57).
Figure 4-57
Move the steps back down inside the fence (Figure 
12.	
4-58).
Note
If you don’t want to bother moving up and down, you could 
have made the arc and step sections into groups. Then you 
could use the Edit Group method within Follow Me, without 
having to move anything. But you would have to Explode 
both groups before intersecting. 
You could also make just one of the sections a group.
Figure 4-58
Hide the fence group and run Intersect with Model 
13.	
on the arcs and steps. Then trim away all the extras. 
Check in X-Ray or Wireframe mode to be sure all 
extra edges are erased (Figure 4-59). 
Bring the hidden group back.
14.	
Figure 4-59

98 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
The hard part is finished, but you can make this 
15.	
model a little more usable. There’s no way to get in 
or out of this park, so an entrance is needed. First, 
move the ramps and steps out of the group and add 
a cutting shape inside the group (Figure 4-60).
Figure 4-60
Move the ramps and steps back inside, intersect 
16.	
them, and trim away the entrance. To cut a hole in 
the fence, edit the fence group and add a tall rect-
angle for an opening. Then erase the opening face. 
Figure 4-61 shows the result. 
Figure 4-61
Other Uses
You can use the same technique to create an interest-
ing picture frame. In this example, you would copy the 
inside face of the frame for the dummy paths, and you 
would move one of the Follow Me faces above or below 
the model. After Follow Me is complete for both faces, 
move everything back into place, intersect, and trim 
(Figure 4-62).
Note
Using graphics in your model is covered in Chapter 9.
Figure 4-62

Extending Follow Me Paths 
| 
99
Extending Follow Me Paths
4.6  
Problem 
You want to trim two sets of Follow Me objects, but you want to be sure there will be enough of 
an overlap for trimming purposes.
Solution
Extend the Follow Me paths past where they need to be.
Discussion
Using extended Follow Me paths results in Follow Me objects that extend past the faces they are 
supposed to intersect. This ensures that all faces and edges of the Follow Me objects are long 
enough to intersect, and it makes trimming after intersection easy.
The main example uses the extended path technique to create a hot tub with curved walls and 
steps leading down into the tub. The paths for both the tub steps and the curved walls extend 
past the final limits of the tub, so that extra faces are easy to trim.
In the “Other Uses” section, the same technique will be applied to window frames.
Start with a box with two rounded corners and no 
1.	
top face (Figure 4-63).
Note
You can download my Hot Tub model from the 3D Ware-
house, which contains scenes that show the steps for this 
recipe.
Figure 4-63
In Top view, draw an arc on the ground plane, 
2.	
which extends past both sides of the box (Figure 
4-64). This path will be used to create the steps that 
lead down into the tub.
Figure 4-64

100 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Copy one of the side faces of the box to the end of 
3.	
the arc. On this face, draw a cross-section for steps 
(Figure 4-65).
Figure 4-65
Using all three segments of the arc as the Follow Me 
4.	
path, and the step section as the Follow Me face, 
create the steps (Figure 4-66).
Figure 4-66
On the back of the box, make a face like the one 
5.	
indicated in Figure 4-67, using tangent arcs.
Figure 4-67
The Follow Me path for this face is another extend-
6.	
ed path, going past the back of the tub steps, so the 
curved walls will be easy to trim behind the steps. 
Select all of the top edges of the box as the Follow 
Me path (not including the edge along the back 
face) and run Follow Me on this face. This creates 
the curvy walls of the hot tub. If you have extra ver-
tical faces around the tub, erase them (Figure 4-68).
Figure 4-68
Run Intersect with Model on the entire model, and 
7.	
trim the walls and steps that extend past each other 
(Figure 4-69). Because the paths for these objects 
were extended, trimming is easy.
Figure 4-69

Extending Follow Me Paths 
| 
101
The last step is to fill the tub with water. The easiest 
8.	
way to make a face to represent the water level is to 
make a simple box next to the hot tub, at the height 
you want for the water. Remove all but the top face 
of this box, and move edges until they intersect the 
tub (Figure 4-70).
Figure 4-70
Intersect and trim. You can paint this face with a 
9.	
translucent water material from the Water category 
(Figure 4-71).
Figure 4-71
Other Uses
The extended path technique can be applied to window 
frames. This section shows two examples of such win-
dows: a stained-glass window that you might see in an 
old church and a more modern three-paned window.
Stained-glass window
Figure 4-72 shows windows whose frames have two 
parts, created using two separate Follow Me faces. The 
Follow Me paths are extended past one another, and 
each Follow Me face is a group. After both Follow Me 
face groups are extruded along their paths, they are 
exploded, intersected, and trimmed. After the window 
is made into a component that cuts walls, it can be 
inserted into walls.
To see how it’s done, download my Stained Glass Win-
dow model from the 3D Warehouse.
Three-paned window
Figure 4-73 shows a window with three panes. The 
window frame is created using Follow Me on the frame 
face. The muntins separating the panes are created 
with a simple Push/Pull, starting and ending past the 
window frame. Intersect and trim, make the window a 
component, and insert.
To see how it’s done, download my Three Paned Win-
dow model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 4-72
Figure 4-73

102 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Using Intersect to Create a 3D Follow Me Path
4.7  
Problem 
You want to use Follow Me along a 3D path, but it is difficult to draw the path.
Solution 
Use the Intersect tool to create the path.
Discussion
Recipe 2.7 demonstrated how to use grouped reference geometry to create a 3D Follow Me 
path. This recipe presents another technique for creating a 3D path, in which intersection edges 
between two objects create the Follow Me path. This technique is helpful in cases where refer-
ence geometry is not easy to draw, but you do know the basic 3D parameters of the path.
In this recipe, you will model a pair of glasses. The frame around each lens proceeds along a 3D 
path, which is the intersection of a partial sphere and the frame shape. In the “Other Uses” sec-
tion, the same technique is used to create a window frame around a curved window.
Create the Lens
This section demonstrates how to intersect two objects 
to produce the 3D Follow Me path. You’ll create one 
lens for the glasses, whose border edges form the 3D 
path. 
In Top view, use Arc and Line to make a face (Fig-
1.	
ure 4-74).
Make a vertical circle centered at the line’s midpoint 
2.	
(Figure 4-75).
Figure 4-74
Figure 4-75
Use the large circle as the Follow Me path for the 
3.	
lens face. After you run Follow Me on the lens face, 
you will have a partial sphere. Erase the circle. What 
remains is the curved glass from which the lens will 
be cut (Figure 4-76).
Figure 4-76

Using Intersect to Create a 3D Follow Me Path 
| 
103
To give the lens glass some thickness, make a copy 
4.	
of it slightly in front or behind (Figure 4-77).
Paint the lens glass with a translucent material.
5.	
Figure 4-77
In Front view, in some blank space next to the lens, 
6.	
draw a shape for the lens frame (Figure 4-78). My 
frame is a simple oval (created by using the Scale 
tool on a circle), but you could use a rectangle with 
rounded corners, a star, or whatever shape you 
want.
Figure 4-78
Pull out the lens shape and move it into the lens 
7.	
glass (Figure 4-79).
Figure 4-79
Intersect and trim (Figure 4-80).
8.	
Figure 4-80

104 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Make the Lens Frame
The border around the front of the lens will be used 
as the 3D path, and this path will be used to create the 
frame.
On one side of the lens, draw a shape to use as the 
1.	
Follow Me face for the frame (Figure 4-81). My 
Follow Me face is a rectangle, but you could try a 
curved shape. 
To prevent the Follow Me frame from breaking the 
2.	
lens, make the Follow Me face a group.
You know that when a face is 2D, you can select
3.	
 it 
to define its boundary as the Follow Me path. But 
when the path is 3D, you need to select the Follow 
Me edges, and not the face. To select the edges bor-
dering this face, double-click the front face of the 
lens and then Shift-click to unselect the face. This 
leaves only the edges selected.
Run Follow Me on the frame shape group. To 
4.	
remove the little edges throughout the frame, select 
everything inside the group, right-click, and choose 
Soften→Smooth Edges. Adjust the sliders until the 
edges disappear (Figure 4-82).
Close the frame group.
5.	
To make the second lens and frame, copy the 
6.	
framed lens next to the original and leave the copy 
selected. 
To ensure that the pair of glasses is symmetric, 
7.	
activate Scale, which will be used to turn the copy 
inside-out. Click the drag handle in the direction 
you want to scale (Figure 4-83).
Figure 4-81
Figure 4-82
Figure 4-83
For the scale value, enter 
8.	
–1. Then move the copy 
so that the spacing between the lenses looks correct 
(Figure 4-84).
Note
Another way to mirror an object is to right-click on it and 
choose Flip Along with the relevant axis direction.
Figure 4-84

Using Intersect to Create a 3D Follow Me Path 
| 
105
To make the nosepiece, add an arc between the 
9.	
frames, plus a small Follow Me face (Figure 4-85). 
Because the frames are grouped, these new objects 
don’t stick to them.
 
Figure 4-85
Finish the nosepiece and make the ear pieces 
10.	
the same way: Use Follow Me and  then make an 
inside-out copy. The completed pair of glasses is 
shown in Figure 4-86.
Figure 4-86
Other Uses
This technique can be used to add a frame to a curved 
window. 
The method to create the window itself is described in 
Recipe 3.4. In the example in Figure 4-87, the window 
glass is along the front of the window, not the back or 
middle. This makes it easier to define the path for the 
frame. The window itself is a component.
Figure 4-87
Edit the window component and add a shape for the 
frame (shown in Figure 4-88 in yellow). Make the frame 
shape a group.
Figure 4-88

106 
| 
Chapter 4: Advanced Intersect and Follow Me Techniques
Extrude the frame around the border of the glass and 
smooth the edges. Run Intersect with Model on the 
frame, to get the edges where the frame meets the walls 
of the building (Figure 4-89).
Figure 4-89
Trim the frame, close the frame group, close the win-
dow component, and you have a window with a curved 
frame (Figure 4-90).
Figure 4-90

To master SketchUp, understanding constraints 
is a must. You know the basics: a red preview 
line means a line will be drawn parallel to the red 
axis, and so on. You may even be an old hand at 
Shift-locking, aware that pressing and holding 
Shift while a preview line is red keeps the line 
in the red direction. But have you used double 
constraints or tried using the arrow keys? In this 
chapter, you’ll learn about these and many more 
powerful ways constraints can help you work 
more accurately and effectively.
Most of the recipes involve roofs, which can pose 
vexing problems in building design but benefit 
from well-applied constraints. Even if you’re not 
an architect, keep reading. The techniques pre-
sented are great for a wide variety of projects, be-
cause learning how to use SketchUp’s constraints 
is simply essential to efficient design.
Inferences in SketchUp are those colored dots and 
dashed lines, and helpful text boxes, that appear 
while drawing, such as On Red Axis, On Face, Mid-
point, and so forth. You can use inferences to ensure 
that you are drawing lines in the correct direction 
(red, green, or blue), starting a line at the right place 
(on an edge, endpoint, or midpoint), or drawing an 
object on a face. In addition to those basic uses, infer-
ences also can be used to constrain objects, either to 
another object or to a direction. Constraining means 
you are forcing an object to have a certain geometric 
characteristic, such as a direction or start point.
Chapter 5
	
Roofs: Constraints and Inferences

108 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Creating an Overhanging Roof
5.1  
Problem
You want to create an overhanging roof on a simple, rectangular house.
Solution
Use Push/Pull to create the overhanging parts of the roof, and use inferences and Shift-locking 
to fill the resulting gap.
Discussion 
One quick and easy solution for adding an overhanging roof to a simple, rectangular building is 
to create both the roof thickness and overhang by using Push/Pull. Unfortunately, the method 
also results in an unwanted gap at the ridgeline. This recipe demonstrates two ways to fix that 
gap. The first approach is to fill in the gap with constrained lines, forming a new face that can 
be pulled along the entire ridge. The second option is to move the top edges of the roof while 
locking constraints.
Note
For more suggestions on working with overhanging roofs, see 
Recipe 4.4, which presents a solution for creating a uniform 
overhanging roof on a building with several sections, or 
Recipe 5.4, which demonstrates using Autofold and a planar 
constraint for creating overhangs.
Start with a house like the one in Figure 5-1. (Make 
1.	
a simple box with a line between midpoints along 
the top face. Then use Move to move this line 
straight up.)
Figure 5-1
To give the roof some thickness, use Push/Pull with 
2.	
Ctrl/Option to pull out one roof face. Press Ctrl/
Option again and double-click the other roof face 
to pull it out the same amount (Figure 5-2).
Figure 5-2

Creating an Overhanging Roof 
| 
109
Use Push/Pull again to pull down both bottom faces 
3.	
(Figure 5-3). 
Notice the gap at the top of the roof. You can fix it 
in a couple of ways. 
Figure 5-3
The first method of closing the gap is to add lines. 
4.	
Start a line at the point indicated in Figure 5-4.
Figure 5-4
With your cursor, hover on the edge indicated in 
5.	
Figure 5-5. You should see the On Edge inference.
Figure 5-5
Hover the cursor over the valley point indicated in 
6.	
Figure 5-6; look for the Endpoint inference.
Figure 5-6

110 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
You have just “reminded” SketchUp of the geome-
7.	
try of that edge and point, so SketchUp can produce 
inferences from them. Move the cursor straight up 
from the valley point, keeping the dotted blue infer-
ence line. Stop when you also see a magenta pre-
view line starting from the endpoint of the angled 
edge you hovered over (Figure 5-7). This means 
that the point you are about to click is the endpoint 
of the extension of that edge, and is also directly 
above the valley point. This is a double constraint.
Figure 5-7
Click this point. Then complete the small diamond-
8.	
shaped face by connecting another line to the op-
posite corner of the gap. Pull this small face to the 
other side of the house (Figure 5-8). 
If you were to continue with this method, you 
9.	
would erase the extra lines. Instead, choose Undo 
until the gap is back, and move on to the second 
method.
Figure 5-8
Select the edge indicated in Figure 5-9. This edge 
10.	
will be moved into place by using another double 
constraint.
Figure 5-9
Activate Move. For the first move point, click the 
11.	
corner point indicated in Figure 5-10.
Figure 5-10

Creating an Overhanging Roof 
| 
111
Hover over the lower edge of the same side of the 
12.	
roof, indicated in Figure 5-11.
Figure 5-11
Move the cursor slightly out from the edge, until 
13.	
you see the Parallel to Edge inference (Figure 5-12).
Figure 5-12
Press Shift to lock the magenta inference, and 
14.	
click anywhere on the opposite sloped roof face. 
This moves the edge so that both constraints are 
satisfied—the new edge is still parallel to the edge 
below, and it lies on the extension of the opposite 
roof face (Figure 5-13).
Repeat steps 10 through 14 to move the other gap 
15.	
edge the same way, and erase extra lines. 
You’ll use this model again in Recipe 5.2’s “Example 2: 
Coplanar Dormer.” You can either save your model now 
or download a fresh model later, if you prefer.
Figure 5-13

112 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Creating Dormers
5.2  
Problem
You want to place a dormer in a roof.
Solution
Use inferences and locking constraints to create dormers.
Discussion
Dormers, which are vertical windows cut into a roof, present interesting design challenges. 
How do you project the side edges of a dormer to reach the slope of the roof, or how do you 
keep the dormer face coplanar with the rest of the house? Inferences and constraints make this 
easy. You can constrain points to edges, faces, or axis directions, and the Shift key enables you 
to use double constraints (for example, constraining a point to both the red direction and to a 
specific face). Arrow keys can also be used to lock the red, green, and blue directions. 
This recipe demonstrates the advantages of inference locking and constraints by using three 
types of dormers, which get progressively more complex. The first dormer is a simple box cut 
into a straight roof. The second is created on an overhanging roof, constrained to the side of the 
house below the roof. The third has a peaked shape, and points on its front face are constrained 
to existing objects (windows) on the house.
Example 1: Simple Dormer
The first example is a simple review of the basics of 
locking a direction. You will create a dormer from a 
rectangle drawn in a roof. With the help of direction 
locking, you’ll position the dormer and place a copy in 
relation to other model elements (existing windows).
Start with a model like the one in Figure 5-14. You 
1.	
can create your model from scratch, or download 
my Simple Dormer model from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 5-14
Draw a rectangle in the roof. For the side of the 
2.	
dormer, start a line at the lower corner (where 
indicated in Figure 5-15). Move your cursor (don’t 
click yet) straight up or down, in the blue direction. 
Press and hold Shift to lock this direction. The blue 
preview line turns bold to indicate that its direction 
is locked.
Figure 5-15

Creating Dormers 
| 
113
With Shift still pressed, hover over any point along 
3.	
the back edge of the dormer rectangle. This sets the 
height of the dormer wall to match the height of the 
back edge of the rectangle. The inference should 
read Constrained on Line from Point (Figure 5-16).
Figure 5-16
Click to finish the line and then add the horizontal 
4.	
edge to complete the triangle (Figure 5-17). This is 
the side of the dormer.
Use Push/Pull to complete the dormer.
5.	
Figure 5-17
To change the flat roof into a sloped one, use Move 
6.	
to slightly push down the front edge (Figure 5-18).
Figure 5-18
Hide the top face of the dormer and cut a hole in 
7.	
the roof below the dormer (Figure 5-19).
Unhide the top of the dormer and add a glass win-
8.	
dow to the dormer front.
Figure 5-19

114 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
The next step is to move the dormer directly above 
9.	
one of the windows already on the house, which 
will require direction locking. Select the whole dor-
mer and activate Move. Click the dormer’s lower-
left front corner and start to move the dormer in 
the green direction (or red, depending on how you 
made your house). Press and hold Shift to lock the 
direction. Then click any point along the left edge 
of the window below. This aligns the left side of the 
dormer with the left side of the window below it 
(Figure 5-20).
Figure 5-20
To make the dormer the correct width, select all of 
10.	
the vertical edges on the right side (use a left-to-
right selection window and check your selection 
in Wireframe mode). Move the selected edges by 
any point on the right edge, Shift-lock the green (or 
red) direction, and click any point on the right edge 
of the window below the dormer (Figure 5-21).
Figure 5-21
Copy the entire dormer to the right, so that it sits 
11.	
above the other window (Figure 5-22). For the 
move points, use similar reference points on the 
windows below.
Figure 5-22
Example 2: Coplanar Dormer
The dormer in this example is cut into an overhanging 
roof. The front face of the dormer will lie in the same 
plane as the side wall of the house. For this design, you 
need a constraint that locks two faces.
Start with a model like the one shown in Figure 
1.	
5-23. You can reuse your model from Recipe 5.1, 
or you can download my Coplanar Dormer model 
from the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 5-23

Creating Dormers 
| 
115
The front face of the dormer will lie in the same 
2.	
plane as the side of the house. Activate Line (don’t 
click yet) and hover over the side face (Figure 5-24). 
Press and hold Shift.
Figure 5-24
Move the cursor up to the roof face. The black 
3.	
point at the end of the dashed black inference line 
follows the cursor, and the dark blue point lets you 
know where the line will meet the roof face. This is 
a double constraint: Constrained on Plane Intersect 
Plane. Click where you want to start the dormer 
(Figure 5-25).
Figure 5-25
Draw the four lines for the dormer face (Figure 
4.	
5-26). Make sure to draw the vertical lines in the 
blue direction.
Figure 5-26
For the side face, start a line at the lower-left 
5.	
dormer corner and hover over the side edge of the 
roof to inference the slope of that edge. Draw a line 
parallel to that edge (Figure 5-27).
Figure 5-27

116 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
For the next line, Shift-lock the green (or red) 
6.	
direction and click the lower-right corner (Figure 
5-28).
Figure 5-28
Add two more lines to complete the two sides (Fig-
7.	
ure 5-29).
Figure 5-29
The roof of the dormer should have some thickness. 
8.	
Use Push/Pull with Ctrl/Option to pull the roof up. 
Then pull out the three exposed sides of the roof 
(Figure 5-30).
Figure 5-30
One way to fill the gap between the dormer roof 
9.	
and the main roof is to add lines. Start a line at the 
back corner (shown by the yellow arrow in Figure 
5-31) and hover over the top side edge (blue arrow).
Figure 5-31

Creating Dormers 
| 
117
Press and hold Shift to lock the line to the direc-
10.	
tion of the side edge, and click the main roof face 
(Figure 5-32).
Complete the triangle to fill the gap on the side. 
11.	
Then pull the triangle to the other side of the 
dormer. 
Figure 5-32
If you want to make sure your dormer is coplanar 
12.	
with the house side, orbit to the view shown in 
Figure 5-33. The two faces should line up.
Figure 5-33
Example 3: Peaked Dormer
The last dormer is a bit more complicated, because its 
main shape is peaked rather than a straight rectangle. 
This dormer will start directly above one of the existing 
windows. This example also uses the arrow keys, which 
provide another way to both find and lock the red, 
green, and blue directions. 
Draw the peaked dormer face
In this phase, you’ll use constraints to draw the front 
face of the peaked dormer.
Start with a house like the one in Figure 5-34. The 
1.	
windows have frames that protrude slightly from 
the side wall of the house. You can create this model 
from scratch, or download my Peaked Dormer 
model from the 3D Warehouse. 
The front of the dormer will be coplanar with the 
2.	
front of the blue window frame. Activate Line and 
hover over the corner point indicated in Figure 
5-35. Then start to move up or down in the blue 
direction.
Figure 5-34
Figure 5-35

118 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Press and hold Shift, and hover on the roof face. 
3.	
The red point indicates where the line would start 
(Figure 5-36), but don’t click. There is another 
way to obtain the same point by using arrow keys 
instead of Shift.
You should still be using the Line tool. Hover again 
4.	
over the same point on the window frame shown 
previously in Figure 5-35. 
Tap the up arrow or down arrow on your keyboard 
5.	
(you don’t have to keep it pressed). This is similar 
to using Shift to lock the blue direction, with the 
added bonus that the arrow will also “find” the blue 
direction for you. Then click anywhere on the roof 
face to start the first dormer line. 
Note
Tapping the arrow key again will toggle off the direction 
constraint.
Figure 5-36
To complete the line, tap the left arrow to lock the 
6.	
green direction, and click anywhere on the right 
edge of the blue window frame (Figure 5-37).
Note
The left arrow key locks the green direction, and right arrow 
locks the red direction (think R locks R). Although the up or 
down arrow key locking blue is obvious enough, I don’t use 
the other arrows very often because it’s hard to tell which one 
I need when the axes are not displayed. I tend to Shift-lock 
red and green instead, but of course, it’s a matter of prefer-
ence. The arrow keys do have the added benefit of finding 
the direction for you, which is especially useful when using 
Autofold (described in Recipe 5.4).
Figure 5-37
Complete the peaked dormer face. Make sure the 
7.	
peak is centered and that it is lower than the top of 
the main roof (Figure 5-38).
Figure 5-38

Creating Dormers 
| 
119
Complete the dormer
There are two ways to complete the dormer: by us-
ing Intersect with Model or by using constraints. To 
use Intersect with Model, you would pull the dormer 
face straight back through the roof, run Intersect with 
Model on it, and use intersection edges to trim the back 
faces away. You would then have to hide one of the 
house or roof faces to see where to cut the dormer into 
the roof, make the cut, and then unhide the face. For an 
example of using one object to trim another object, see 
Recipe 3.1.
This example details a different method: using con-
straints. There are a few more steps involved than when 
using Intersect, but you will save the steps of hiding and 
cutting the roof face. When you understand both meth-
ods, you can decide for yourself which you prefer.
While still using the Line tool, click the peak point, 
1.	
tap the right arrow key to lock the red direction, 
and click the roof face (Figure 5-39).
You can Shift-lock a constraint even when a line 
2.	
starts out in the opposite direction. Start the next 
line where indicated in Figure 5-40, and move the 
cursor away from the house in the red direction. 
Press and hold Shift.
Click the roof face, and the line snaps back in the 
3.	
correct direction (Figure 5-41).
Figure 5-39
Figure 5-40
Figure 5-41
Add two more lines to complete the two faces on 
4.	
one side of the dormer (Figure 5-42).
Figure 5-42

120 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
You could use the same method to complete the 
5.	
other side of the dormer, but if the dormer has all 
its sides, you’d need to hide a face in order to cut 
the hole in the roof. The bottom face of the dormer 
should be completed so that the roof hole can be 
cut first; then the remaining sides of the dormer 
can be created. Start the line at the back of the peak 
and hover over the corner indicated in Figure 5-43.
Figure 5-43
Move in the red direction then hold Shift while 
6.	
clicking the roof face (Figure 5-44). This is another 
way to use a double constraint.
Figure 5-44
Complete the edges for the hole in the roof and 
7.	
erase the hole face (Figure 5-45).
Figure 5-45
Then complete the dormer sides (Figure 5-46).
8.	
Figure 5-46

Creating Dormers 
| 
121
Create finishing touches
Now you can add a window in the dormer and make 
copies of it.
The first step is to add a frame to the dormer face, 
1.	
to match the frames of the windows below it. Ac-
tivate Offset and click the dormer face on its right 
edge (indicated by the red arrow in Figure 5-47). 
Then complete the offset by clicking on the inner-
right edge of the window below (yellow arrow). 
This makes the dormer frame the same thickness as 
the window frame. 
Figure 5-47
For the glass, start the Push/Pull on the inner 
2.	
dormer face and end it by clicking the glass below 
(Figure 5-48).
As you should always do when something in 
3.	
your model will repeat, make the entire dormer a 
­component.
Figure 5-48
Copy the dormer, constraining it to the green direc-
4.	
tion by using either the left arrow key or the Shift-
locking method (Figure 5-49).
Figure 5-49
To copy both dormers to the other side, copy them 
5.	
in the red direction into some blank space (Figure 
5-50).
There are a few ways to flip objects, but I prefer 
6.	
using the Scale tool. A scale value of –1 makes an 
“inside-out” copy.
Note
Using Scale to flip components is a great way to create sym-
metric objects. This will be shown in Recipe 7.11.
Figure 5-50

122 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
To move the copied dormers back to the roof, move 
7.	
them by a peak point, lock the red direction, and 
click the roof face (Figure 5-51).
Figure 5-51
Use Intersect with Model to cut roof holes, and 
8.	
your four dormers are complete (Figure 5-52).
Figure 5-52
Working with Roof Intersections
5.3  
Problem 
You have roofs of different heights or slopes on various parts of a building, and you want to 
resolve the ridge and valley lines where the roofs meet.
Solution
Create new edges at the intersections by using double constraints.
Discussion 
When you have roof faces of different slopes and heights, start resolving their intersections by 
thinking about the existing edges and faces that the new edges must meet. It is also important 
to understand which face will meet new ridge lines. By knowing which ridge line is higher, you 
can figure out where roof volume needs to be added and where it needs to be removed. After 
you establish this, you can apply double constraints to define the new edges.
Using double constraints to resolve intersecting roofs will be shown by two examples. In the 
first example, one roof meets roofs of different heights on either side, in the middle of the other 
roofs (not at corners). In the second example, roofs of different heights meet at corners. 

Working with Roof Intersections 
| 
123
Example 1: End-Middle Intersections
In this example, you must contend with three roofs of 
alternating directions, each with a different height and 
slope. The middle roof meets the outer roofs in the 
middle, not at their corners. Edges are needed at each 
end of the middle roof, to resolve the roof to its neigh-
boring faces.
Download my 
1.	
Roof End Middle model (shown in 
Figure 5-53) from the 3D Warehouse. The green 
roof in the middle is perpendicular to the roofs on 
either side and meets the other roofs in the middle 
(not at corners).
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
In Top
1.	
 view, draw three rectangles for the footprint. 
The outer rectangles should have longer vertical edg-
es, and the middle one should have longer horizontal 
edges.
Rotate all three rectangles slightly. This removes the 
2.	
ability to use red and green directions (just to make 
this a little harder). 
Pull up the yellow rectangle higher than the green, 
3.	
and the green higher than the purple.
Add ridge lines across each top, and move them up so 
4.	
that the purple peak is the highest, followed by green, 
followed by yellow.
Resolve the green-purple intersection first. Start 
2.	
a line at the closest ridge point of the green roof, 
indicated in Figure 5-54. Then hover over the green 
ridge line. 
Press and hold Shift to lock the direction of this 
3.	
edge. Then click the closest purple roof face. This 
extends the green ridge line until it meets the 
purple roof.
The next line will continue from the previous line 
4.	
you created. Hover over the edge indicated in Fig-
ure 5-55.
Hold Shift and click the same purple face. This ex-
5.	
tends the edge you hovered over, to meet the purple 
roof.
Add two more lines to complete the extension of 
6.	
the roof face and the wall face (Figure 5-56).
Figure 5-53
Figure 5-54
Figure 5-55
Figure 5-56

124 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Add the same edges on the other side of the green 
7.	
roof and erase extra lines. The intersection of the 
green and purple roofs is shown in Figure 5-57.
Figure 5-57
Now the green-yellow intersection will be resolved. 
8.	
Because the green ridge is higher than the yellow 
ridge, the far yellow face will need to have material 
added to it. Start a line as before, from the green 
ridge endpoint indicated in Figure 5-58, and then 
hover over the green ridge.
Figure 5-58
Shift-lock this line to the far yellow face. Depending 
9.	
on your roof slopes, the line might end somewhere 
past the current ridge line or instead end some-
where within the line (as in this example, shown in 
Figure 5-59).
Figure 5-59
Start a new line at this new endpoint. Then hover 
10.	
over either green roof face and hold Shift. Con-
strain this line to end on the yellow ridge line by 
clicking the yellow ridge line (Figure 5-60).
Figure 5-60

Working with Roof Intersections 
| 
125
Draw the same line for the other side of the green 
11.	
roof. This creates the triangle that needs to be added 
to the far yellow face (Figure 5-61). If your triangle 
cuts into the green faces, trim the extra faces.
Figure 5-61
Complete the intersection by adding the line indi-
12.	
cated in Figure 5-62, on both sides.
Figure 5-62
Erase extra lines. The completed resolved roofs are 
13.	
shown in Figure 5-63.
Figure 5-63
Example 2: Corner Intersections
This example shows the slightly more complex scenario 
of fixing roofs when they meet at corners.
Download my 
1.	
Roof Corners model shown in Fig-
ure 5-64 from the 3D Warehouse. This building has 
three sections that meet at the corners. None of the 
edges is along the red or green axis, and each sec-
tion has its own peak face to use for the roof. The 
green peak is the highest, followed by the red, and 
the yellow peak is the lowest. 
Figure 5-64

126 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Pull the green and yellow roof faces back, along 
2.	
their side walls (Figure 5-65).
Use Push/Pull with the Ctrl/Option key to extend 
3.	
the red roof in both directions, beyond the outer 
sides of the green and yellow roofs. 
Figure 5-65
Select everything, right-click on a selected face, and 
4.	
choose Intersect→Intersect with Model. This creates 
intersection edges on all roof faces (Figure 5-66).
The first corner to resolve is the red-green corner. 
5.	
Figure 5-66
Because the red roof is lower than the green one, 
you need to add material to the back red face. Start 
a line at point 1 in Figure 5-67, hover over edge 2 
and hold Shift, and constrain the endpoint of the 
line to face 3. 
Figure 5-67
From this new endpoint, draw two lines that meet 
6.	
the red ridge line, as indicated in Figure 5-68.
Figure 5-68

Working with Roof Intersections 
| 
127
Trim edges to clean up the green roof (Figure 5-69).
7.	
Figure 5-69
To finish resolving this corner, orbit around to the 
8.	
back and add the line indicated in Figure 5-70.
Figure 5-70
Now you can trim the rest of the red faces. While 
9.	
you’re here, also trim the portions of the yellow 
faces that stick out from the back red face (Figure 
5-71).
Figure 5-71
Now for the other corner. Start a line at point 1 in 
10.	
Figure 5-72, hover over edge 2 and hold Shift, and 
constrain the endpoint of the line to face 3.
Figure 5-72

128 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Add the line indicated in Figure 5-73.
11.	
Figure 5-73
Trim to resolve the corner (Figure 5-74), and you’re 
12.	
finished.
Figure 5-74
Creating Overhangs with Autofold
5.4  
Problem
You want to create overhanging faces by using an existing face as a plane constraint.
Solution
Use Push/Pull to make horizontal overhangs and then use Autofold with a planar constraint to 
move the overhang faces into place.
Discussion
Sometimes when you try to move objects in certain ways—such as when you try to move ob-
jects within a face out of the plane of that face—SketchUp doesn’t allow it. At these times, turn 
to the Move tool’s Autofold feature. With it you can “force” edges and faces to move in a way 
that SketchUp wouldn’t otherwise permit.
This recipe examines two cases in which Autofold is useful: to create a peaked point, and to 
move overhanging faces to be constrained to an existing plane.
In this recipe, you’ll veer away from roofs to design a beach umbrella. You’ll create the umbrella 
flaps horizontally and then move them down using Autofold. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll 
see how the same technique can be applied to an overhanging roof (you can’t stray too far from 
roofs in this chapter).

Creating Overhangs with Autofold 
| 
129
Note
For a stepped, detailed model of this example, download my 
Umbrella model from the 3D Warehouse.
Start with an octagon and pull it up (Figure 5-75).
1.	
Figure 5-75
The next step is to establish the center point of the 
2.	
top octagon and pull it up, to create the top um-
brella point and define the slope off the umbrella 
flaps. You could draw separate lines from the center 
to each of the eight corners, but Autofold provides 
an easier way. Create just the two lines shown in 
Figure 5-76.
Activate Move, click the midpoint of the longer line, 
3.	
and try to move the point up. Without Autofold, 
you can move this point only within the red-green 
plane.
Figure 5-76
There are two ways to implement Autofold. Either 
4.	
press the Alt/Cmd key while moving or just tap the 
up arrow key. Now you can move the center point 
straight up. SketchUp breaks faces and adds edges 
where necessary, to accommodate the moved point 
(Figure 5-77).
Figure 5-77
On one of the vertical faces, draw a thin rectangle at 
5.	
the top and pull it out (Figure 5-78).
Figure 5-78

130 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Select the front face of this rectangle, indicated 
6.	
in Figure 5-79. Activate Move and click any point 
along the top edge of this face.
Figure 5-79
Use the Move tool, with the up arrow or the Alt/
7.	
Cmd key to activate Autofold, and move the face 
straight down. Click the triangular face above it, 
constraining the move point to that face (Figure 
5-80).
Figure 5-80
Erase the vertical walls (Figure 5-81).
8.	
Figure 5-81
To cut a round shape into the flap, draw the hori-
9.	
zontal arc face indicated in Figure 5-82.
Figure 5-82

Creating Overhangs with Autofold 
| 
131
Pull the arc down to create a vertical half-cylinder. 
10.	
Then select everything, right-click on a selected 
face, and choose Intersect→Intersect with Model. 
This produces intersection edges where the flap 
meets the half-cylinder (Figure 5-83).
Figure 5-83
Trim the faces to get a new, round flap (Figure 
11.	
5-84).
Figure 5-84
To give the triangular parts of the umbrella roof 
12.	
the same thickness as the round flap, copy the eight 
triangular faces straight down to meet the bottom 
of the round flap (Figure 5-85).
Figure 5-85
Rotate-copy the round flap around seven times and 
13.	
erase extra edges (Figure 5-86).
Also erase the edges on the underside of the um-
14.	
brella roof.
Figure 5-86
Finally, to make the pole, create a circle at the 
15.	
center point of the original octagon and pull it up 
(Figure 5-87).
Figure 5-87

132 
| 
Chapter 5: Roofs: Constraints and Inferences
Other Uses
You can use the same Autofold-constraint technique to 
make a uniformly sloped, overhanging roof.
Start with a basic house form and draw a face at the top 
for the roof cross-section (Figure 5-88).
Figure 5-88
Use the Follow Me and Intersect technique to create the 
roof (Figure 5-89). This technique is detailed in Recipe 
4.4. 
Figure 5-89
Start the new overhang faces by copying all of the lower 
roof edges straight down (Figure 5-90).
Figure 5-90
Pull out each of these new faces by the same distance 
(Figure 5-91).
Figure 5-91
To make the overhangs, select all of the new vertical 
faces, and move them down with Autofold, constrain-
ing them to one of the existing sloped roof faces (Figure 
5-92).
Figure 5-92
You will have to do some cleanup on the roof and house 
faces, possibly adding some edges or running Intersect 
with Model to break faces that need to be erased. You 
will also have to fix the roof corners, both on top and on 
the underside. In the end, you’re rewarded with a nice 
overhanging roof (Figure 5-93).
Figure 5-93

Groups are SketchUp’s way of “sealing off” geometry, 
protecting one or more objects from affecting other 
objects and from being affected by other objects. A 
grouped set of objects also has the advantage of being 
selected as one object with one click, eliminating the 
need for dragging selection windows.
Many users are not clear on when to create a 
group and when to create a component. Geomet-
rically, the two types of objects behave the same 
way: they are selectable as a single object, they 
are “sealed” from other objects, and they can be 
changed only when open for editing. As a general 
rule, these objects should be made into a group 
rather than a component:
Objects that need to be kept separate from 
• 
other objects
Objects that will be used only once (will not 
• 
be copied)
Objects that will eventually be exploded 
• 
(such as objects used only for cutting or 
trimming)
Note
Components are covered at length in Chapter 7, in 
which their advantages and many uses are discussed.
Chapter 6
	
Groups: Protect and Defend
Creating a Group
To create a group, you first select the objects to 
include in the group. You can then either choose 
Edit→Make Group from the main menu, or right-
click on one of the selected objects and choose 
Make Group from the pop-up menu.
A group usually consists of more than one object. 
But you can still make a group from a single 
object. If only one face or edge is selected, Make 
Group will not appear in the pop-up menu, but 
you can still choose Edit→Make Group from the 
main menu. If you want to make a single face into 
a group, you can activate Select and double-click 
the face. This selects both the face and its edges, 
which means more than one object is selected, 
and Make Group appears in the pop-up menu.
After a set of objects is grouped, the objects are 
“sealed” inside and protected from other objects. 
This means that nothing will stick to or change 
the group, and the group will not stick to or 
change any of the surrounding geometry. 
Note
Unlike a component, a group is created without a 
name. If you are working on a complex model with 
numerous groups, however, naming the groups 
can be helpful and make the groups easier to locate 
later. To assign a name to a group after it is created, 
right-click on the group and choose Entity Info. The 
Entity Info window has a field in which you can assign 
a name. You can also assign group names in the Out-
liner, which is described in Recipe 7.15. The Outliner 
can then be used to locate a specific group in your 
model.

134 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Editing a Group
To make any changes to the group, the group 
must be open for editing. There are three ways to 
open a group:
Right-click on a group and choose Edit 
• 
Group.
Activate Select and double-click on the 
• 
group.
Select the group and choose 
• 
Edit→Group→Edit Group from the main 
menu.
During editing, the contents of the group ap-
pear within a dotted-line bounding box. Only 
the group contents are available for editing; the 
rest of the model cannot be touched and appears 
faded in the background. If you prefer to hide the 
rest of the model during group editing, open the 
Model Info window to the Components page and 
select the second Hide checkbox (Figure 6-1).
Figure 6-1
When the editing is complete, there are three 
ways to close the group:
Right-click outside the group and choose 
• 
Close Group.
Activate Select and click anywhere outside 
• 
the group.
Choose Edit→Close Group→Component 
• 
from the main menu.
Exploding a Group
When you no longer need a group to remain a 
group, you can ungroup it. This is also called ex-
ploding. To explode a group, right-click on it and 
choose Explode. If multiple groups are selected 
and you choose Explode from the pop-up menu, 
all selected groups will be exploded.
If you have nested groups, which are groups with-
in other groups, exploding works on only one 
level at a time. For instance, consider a car group 
in which each tire is its own group. If you explode 
the car, the tire groups remain intact. You would 
then have to explode the tire groups separately.
Note
If you work frequently with groups and components, 
you should get to know the Outliner. The Outliner is a 
great way to organize complex models, enabling you 
to easily find components and groups, as well as edit, 
lock, and rename them. The Outliner is the focus of 
Recipe 7.15.

Ungluing Faces 
| 
135
Ungluing Faces
6.1  
Problem
You create a new object that shares a face with an existing object. When you try to move the 
new object, the object cannot move away from the plane of the shared face.
Solution
Make the new object a group and unglue the group from the wall.
Discussion 
When you place an object along the face of another object, the two objects are “glued” together 
at their shared face and cannot be separated. Making either object into a group will protect the 
object from this stickiness. 
Consider the house model in Figure 6-2, which has a 
small shed connected to one wall. The goal is to move 
the shed from its current wall to the red brick wall, 
which is in a different plane.
If you select the whole shed and try to move it, you’ll 
see that it is glued to the current wall. You can move the 
shed off the wall itself, but it still remains glued to the 
wall’s plane, as shown in Figure 6-3.
The main example demonstrates how to use a group to 
unglue this shed from the house. In the “Other Uses” 
section, you’ll see how to use groups to separate con-
nected plates.
Start with a house and shed model like the one in 
1.	
Figure 6-2. You can create your model from scratch, 
or download my House with Shed model from the 
3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
Start with an L-shaped footprint and pull it up.
1.	
Draw the two ridge lines on the top, starting from the 
2.	
midpoint of each building section.
Select both ridge lines and move them up.
3.	
For the shed, draw a rectangle on the ground next to 
4.	
one wall and pull it up. 
To slope the shed roof, use the Move tool to push 
5.	
down one edge.
Figure 6-2
Figure 6-3

136 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Use a left-to-right selection window to select the 
2.	
entire shed and make it a group.
Select the shed (which you can now do with one 
3.	
click) and move it. Because the shed originally 
shared a wall with the house, it is still “glued” to 
that wall even after being made into a group. So 
when you move the shed, it cannot leave the plane 
of the wall (Figure 6-4).
To break the link between the group and the wall, 
4.	
right-click on the group and choose Unglue. 
The Unglue option is available only for groups and 
components, so the only way to unglue the shed 
from the wall is to make it a group or component.
Now you can move the shed to the red wall, which 
5.	
sits on a different plane (Figure 6-5).
Note
An alternate way to place the shed on the red wall, without 
having to group it, is to simply copy it. Then you would only 
need to erase the original.
Figure 6-4
Figure 6-5
Other Uses
Another case in which you would use a group is shown 
in Figure 6-6: two plates that need to be separated by a 
set distance. The two plates are initially side by side.
Figure 6-6
If neither plate is a group and you place one atop the 
other (Figure 6-7), you will be able to move the plates 
only against one another (Figure 6-8). Because the faces 
are glued together, you cannot raise one plate above the 
other.
Figure 6-7
Figure 6-8

Unsticking Edges 
| 
137
The solution in this case is to start with side-by-side 
plates in which one plate is a group. In Figure 6-9, the 
yellow plate is a group.
Now when you place one plate atop the other (Figure 
6-10), you can move the top plate above the bottom one 
(Figure 6-11).
Figure 6-9
Figure 6-10
Figure 6-11
Unsticking Edges
6.2  
Problem
You create an object that shares edges with an existing object. When you try to move the new 
object, the shared edges move also.
Solution
Make the new object a group.
Discussion 
In Recipe 6.1, you saw that objects that share a face become glued together at the shared face. In 
this recipe, the objects share edges. The situation is similar: The objects are stuck together at the 
common edges. When one object is moved, the edges remain stuck, which distorts the object 
not being moved.
This example demonstrates how to prevent stacks of 
books from sticking to a bookcase. Consider the model 
shown in Figure 6-12; no objects are grouped. The goal 
is to place the books on the shelves and to move the 
books within the shelves without affecting the bookcase 
itself.
Figure 6-12

138 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
In Figure 6-13, each stack is placed so that the lower-left 
corner meets the front-left corner of the shelf. So each 
stack shares two edges with the bookcase itself.
Figure 6-13
If you try to move the vertical stack on the bottom shelf, 
the corner of the shelf moves with the books (Figure 
6-14).
Figure 6-14
Similarly, if you move the stack on the top shelf, the 
corner of that shelf moves (Figure 6-15).
Figure 6-15

Unsticking Edges 
| 
139
Because the books themselves are not grouped, other 
books will stick to them. In Figure 6-16, the second 
vertical stack is moved next to the stack currently on 
the bottom shelf, so that the adjacent orange and pink 
books share a face. 
Figure 6-16
If you try to move the new stack so that the large cyan 
book aligns with the front of the shelf, the face and 
common edges shared with the orange book move, too 
(Figure 6-17). 
The solution to this problem is to make each stack of 
books into a group. In addition to preventing stickiness, 
each book stack will be easy to select, using one click 
instead of selection windows that can select more or less 
than you need. (You could make the bookcase itself into 
a group, too, but that won’t solve the problem of books 
sticking to each other.)
Download my 
1.	
Bookcase model (shown previously 
in Figure 6-12) from the 3D Warehouse. 
Make each stack of books into its own group (Fig-
2.	
ure 6-18).
Figure 6-17
Figure 6-18
Move one of the vertical stacks to the front-left 
3.	
corner of the bottom shelf (Figure 6-19).
Figure 6-19

140 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Move the stack a bit to the right (Figure 6-20), and 
4.	
the bookcase remains unchanged.
Figure 6-20
Place the other vertical stack so that the adjacent 
5.	
orange and pink books share a face (Figure 6-21).
Figure 6-21
This new stack protrudes into the back of the book-
6.	
case, so it needs to be moved a bit forward. Move 
it so that the cyan book aligns with the front of the 
bookcase. As shown in Figure 6-22, the two stacks 
remain separate; the pink book does not remain 
stuck to the orange book. 
You could also move the stacks apart; they are not 
glued at their common plane.
Figure 6-22

Protecting from Edits 
| 
141
Place the horizontal stack on the top shelf; align it 
7.	
at the front corner of the shelf (Figure 6-23).
Figure 6-23
Move the stack up (perhaps to make room for more 
8.	
books). The bookcase remains unchanged (Figure 
6-24).
Figure 6-24
Protecting from Edits
6.3  
Problem
You have a floor and walls for a room, but when you create new objects in the room, the walls 
and floor are changed.
Solution
Protect the room by making it a group. You can still use the faces and edges in the room group 
as a basis for new objects.
Discussion 
Objects inside a group cannot be changed (unless the group is open for editing). You can still 
inference faces, edges, and points of grouped geometry when creating new objects, so you can 
draw objects outside or around grouped walls and floors. But any objects created outside the 
group will not affect anything inside the group.

142 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Consider the room shown in Figure 6-25, which has 
two walls and the floor displayed. The goal is to add a 
bureau in the corner where the rectangle is drawn on 
the floor, and to add a clock to the wall where the circle 
is drawn.
Figure 6-25
If the room is not grouped, there are three problems you 
could encounter:
When you pull out these shapes, the objects that 
• 
are created have the same material as the face from 
which they were pulled (Figure 6-26). Obviously, 
you could change the materials, but that takes some 
extra steps.
Figure 6-26
The 
• 
Push/Pull operations affect the back faces of 
the walls and floor (Figure 6-27). You could keep 
the walls and floor whole by using the Ctrl/Option 
key with Push/Pull, but the wall and floor faces 
would still be divided by the original clock and 
bureau edges.
Figure 6-27
If you select and move the bureau, the walls and 
• 
floor become distorted (Figure 6-28), because two 
edges of the bureau are shared with the walls and 
floor, and they remain stuck together while moving. 
(You should recognize this problem from Recipes 
6.1 and 6.2.)
Figure 6-28

Protecting from Edits 
| 
143
You can solve all three problems by grouping the room.
Start with a box and remove two sides and the top. 
1.	
Paint the walls and floor.
2.	
Make the room into a group.
3.	
Draw a circle on the wall for a clock, and draw a 
4.	
rectangle on the corner of the floor for the bureau 
(Figure 6-29). Even though the referenced faces 
and edges are inside a group, you can use them as 
a basis for the new objects. The edges of these new 
shapes are bold, which means they are not inte-
grated into the walls and floor, and the new faces 
are created in the default face color.
Note
The circle and rectangle faces can appear to have distorted, or 
shimmering, materials when you orbit around the model. This 
is due to SketchUp’s face confusion or Z-fighting. These faces 
occupy the same exact planes as other faces, so SketchUp 
doesn’t know which material to assign. This is why it looks like 
both materials are visible when you orbit around. After you 
give either new face some thickness, the material distortion 
disappears.
Pull the faces out. As shown in Figure 6-30, the new 
5.	
objects have the default color, and if you orbit to the 
back, you’ll see that the backs of the walls and floor 
are not affected.
Move the bureau to another part of the room, and 
6.	
the walls and floor remain intact (Figure 6-31).
Figure 6-29
Figure 6-30
Figure 6-31

144 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Cutting and Slicing
6.4  
Problem
You want to make slices of a model in order to create floor plans, stripes, or other types of 
patterns.
Solution
Make grouped faces to use as the slicing objects, and use the Intersect tool to create the slices.
Discussion 
If you read Chapter 3, you’re familiar with the Intersect tool and with various ways that groups 
and components can be used as cutting tools. This recipe focuses on using copied groups to 
slice objects at set intervals.
The main example demonstrates using slicing groups to create floor plans for a tower. In the 
“Other Uses” section, you’ll see how slicing groups can produce linear and rotational stripes.
Start with a tower model like the one in Figure 
1.	
6-32. You can create your model from scratch, or 
download my Tower Floor Plans model from the 
3D Warehouse.
Want to Create This Model Yourself?
Create two identical, rectangular towers that have the 
1.	
same height.
To make the top, horizontal portion, draw a rectangle 
2.	
at the top of one of the towers and pull it to meet the 
other tower. 
Erase extra edges.
3.	
To slope the sides, move the top-right and bottom-left 
4.	
edges.
To make the first slicing group, switch to Top view 
2.	
and draw a rectangle in blank space, large enough 
to contain the entire tower. 
The reason for drawing it in blank space is so that 
the rectangle won’t affect the bottom of the tower. 
If the rectangle touches any part of the tower, it will 
create edges on the tower.
Make the rectangle into a group (Figure 6-33).
3.	
Figure 6-32
Figure 6-33

Cutting and Slicing 
| 
145
Move the grouped rectangle so that it encompasses 
4.	
the bottom of the tower (Figure 6-34).
Figure 6-34
Make several vertical copies of the group, from 
5.	
bottom to top (Figure 6-35). Erase the groups at the 
very bottom and the very top.
To create edges where the groups meet the tower, 
you could use the Intersect tool on the tower itself, 
which would give you edges for each floor. But 
these edges would be visible from the outside of the 
tower and would break up the tower walls. To keep 
the building exterior clean, with no edges along the 
walls, you need to edit the groups instead.
To create one of the floors, open any of the slicing 
6.	
groups for editing.
Editing these groups is easier when the 
7.	
rest of 
model is hidden while editing. So open the Model 
Info window (Window→Model Info) to the Compo-
nents page, and select the Hide checkbox for Rest of 
Model.
Right-click on the rectangle and choose 
8.	
Intersect→Intersect with Model.
As you can see in Figure 6-36, the result is edges 
on the face where the group meets the walls of the 
tower.
Because these edges are along the tower walls, they 
9.	
would be visible from outside the tower. To create 
the floor so that its edges cannot be seen from the 
outside, use the Offset tool to offset the new faces 
slightly inward (Figure 6-37). After you complete 
one offset, you can double-click subsequent offset 
faces to offset them by the same distance.
Figure 6-35
Figure 6-36
Figure 6-37

146 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Erase everything in the group except for the offset 
10.	
faces (Figure 6-38).
Figure 6-38
Close the group. As shown in Figure 6-39, you can 
11.	
see the floor inside the tower by switching to X-Ray 
view.
For each remaining group, edit and intersect it, and 
12.	
then offset the edges to create the floors. Figure 
6-40 shows the results in X-Ray view.
The advantage to using groups in the tower is that they 
enable you to easily create one offset floor at a time, 
without having the rest of the model in view. You could 
get the same results without using grouped rectangles, 
but it would be much harder to create the offsets and 
erase the edges along the walls. If the building were 
uniform, with each floor identical, you could have used 
components for the slicing planes instead of groups.
Figure 6-39
Figure 6-40
Other Uses
You can use slicing groups to create stripes as well. The 
advantage to using groups in these cases is that they are 
easy to erase when they are no longer needed. 
Striped bowl
The bowl shown in Figure 6-41 was created by using the 
Follow Me tool to extrude a tall, oval shape around a 
wavy path.
Note
For details on using Follow Me to create round objects, see 
Recipe 2.5.
Figure 6-41

Cutting and Slicing 
| 
147
Create the slicing groups (again, be sure to create the 
initial rectangle away from the bowl, group it, and 
then move it into place). Make several copies along the 
height of the bowl (Figure 6-42).
Figure 6-42
In this example, you do not need to intersect each indi-
vidual group. Instead, right-click on the bowl itself and 
choose Intersect→Intersect with Model. This produces 
the edges along the bowl, at which point the groups 
are no longer needed. You can erase each group with 
a simple click; erasing would be much more difficult 
if groups were not used. Figure 6-43 shows the results 
after painting the stripes.
Figure 6-43
Beach ball
In Recipe 2.6, you can see how to use two circles and 
the Follow Me tool to make a sphere. In this example, 
after the sphere is created, the larger of the two circles is 
then made into a group and rotate-copied all around the 
sphere (Figure 6-44). To make copying easier, it is help-
ful to add a center point to one of the circles and switch 
to Wireframe view when copying.
Figure 6-44
Run Intersect on the sphere and erase each group to 
produce the beach ball shown in Figure 6-45. 
Figure 6-45

148 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
Two-Sided Coloring
6.5  
Problem
You want to paint both sides of a set of faces.
Solution
Make the faces into a group. When you paint a group, that material or color is applied to all 
sides of all faces that are not already assigned a material.
Discussion 
When you paint a face, only the side you click gets the material. (The exception to this is when 
you paint with a translucent material, which is applied to both sides of a face.) Even when you 
use the Shift or Ctrl/Option key to paint multiple faces, either all front faces or all back faces are 
painted, but not both sides. This is by design; “real-world” faces indeed have two sides. But in 
some cases, you might want to paint both sides of a face, and you can use groups for this.
Note
Using the Shift and Ctrl/Option keys to paint multiple faces is 
discussed in Recipe 8.4.
The main example shows how to paint both faces of 
walls of a house. In “Other Uses,” you’ll see how two-
sided painting helps while making cut-throughs.
Consider the model of a house with a painted roof 
shown in Figure 6-46. All faces other than the tops of 
the roof have the default front and back colors.
Figure 6-46
If a wood material is activated, and is applied to any 
front face while the Shift key is pressed, all front faces 
are painted with wood (Figure 6-47). The back faces 
still have the default back color.
Note
If you want to paint both sides of a set of faces without using 
groups, you can use the Reverse Faces option. Select the faces 
to paint, and paint all of the sides that are showing. Leave 
the faces selected, right-click on one of them, and choose 
Reverse Faces. This switches the front and back sides of the 
face, so you can apply the same material to the sides that are 
now showing.
Figure 6-47

Two-Sided Coloring 
| 
149
To paint the back faces to look like Figure 6-48, you 
must Shift-click one of the inner walls.
If you want to paint both sides of faces at once, the solu-
tion is to make a group that includes the faces you want 
to paint.
Create a house like the one in Figure 6-46, whose 
1.	
walls have the default colors and a painted roof. Cut 
holes for windows so you can see the inside walls. 
Make the entire house a group.
2.	
Activate a material and click the group. (Do not 
3.	
open the group for editing; simply click the group 
while it is closed.) As shown in Figure 6-48, both 
sides of the default-painted walls get the new mate-
rial. The only faces not painted are those at the top 
of the roof, because they already had an assigned 
material. (The underside of the roof faces do get the 
new material, assuming you didn’t paint those faces 
before you made the group.)
Other Uses
Recipe 3.3 demonstrated how to use groups or com-
ponents to cut through objects. The basic steps are as 
follows: 
Group the cutting object.
• 
Move the cutting group into place.
• 
Use the Intersect tool to get intersection edges.
• 
Explode the group.
• 
Trim extra edges.
• 
If you want the cut faces of the trimmed object to have 
the same color as the cutting object itself, both sides of 
the cutting object’s faces should be painted. (You could 
just paint the back faces, but that’s rather difficult when 
an object is closed.)
Consider a sphere like the one in Figure 6-49 that needs 
a rectangular hole cut through it. The cutting object is a 
long box that will pass through the sphere when moved 
into place. The box is not a group (yet).
To paint the entire box, pick a color (green, in this case), 
press and hold Shift, and click any face of the box. As 
you can see in Figure 6-50, the outside faces become 
green. But the inside faces of the box are not painted. 
After painting, move the cutting object into place.
Figure 6-48
Figure 6-49
Figure 6-50

150 
| 
Chapter 6: Groups: Protect and Defend
The result after Intersect and trimming is shown in 
Figure 6-51. The cutout walls have the default color, be-
cause the inside faces of the cutting box had the default 
color. 
Figure 6-51
Go back to the beginning. If the cutout face color is to 
match the color of the cutting object, the cutting object 
should be a group. Then paint the group (Figure 6-52).
Figure 6-52
Figure 6-53 shows the result after you move the group 
into place, intersect, explode, and trim: the cutout walls 
have the cutout color. This is because both front and 
back faces of the cutting object were painted as a group.
Figure 6-53

Locking a Group 
| 
151
Locking a Group
6.6  
Problem
You want to prevent a group from being moved, erased, or edited.
Solution
Lock the group.
Discussion 
If there is a portion of your model that you know will not change, or you want to prevent ob-
jects from accidental changes or deletion, the solution is to make these objects into a group (or 
a component) and lock it. Lock (and Unlock) are available on a group’s pop-up menu, as well as 
on the pop-up menu of a group in the Outliner. 
Figure 6-54 shows a piece of terrain upon which a 
model is to be built. For this example, you know that 
no parts of the terrain, including the stream, hills, and 
trees, will change, and you want to make sure these 
objects will not inadvertently be moved or edited by you 
or anyone else who works on the file.
Figure 6-54
The solution is to make all of these objects into a locked 
group. Create the group and then right-click on the 
group and choose Lock. The bounding box and edges of 
a locked group are displayed in red (Figure 6-55).
Figure 6-55
If you open the Outliner (Window→Outliner), the 
group’s symbol has a lock symbol, as indicated in Figure 
6-56.
Note
When you use the Get Current View tool to import terrain 
from Google Earth into SketchUp, the terrain is imported into 
SketchUp as a locked group. This is to prevent the terrain from 
being moved or edited. For more information, see Recipe 13.9.
Figure 6-56


An essential feature of SketchUp, components can 
greatly increase your modeling efficiency as well as 
keep your file size as trim as possible. Components 
are geometrically similar to groups in that they are 
“sealed” and protected from other geometry and are 
selectable as a single object. Because components of-
fer additional features, however, you can do much 
more with components than with groups.
If you’re unsure about when to use a component 
versus a group, the general rule is that groups are 
mainly used for keeping objects separate from 
other objects, and they generally do not repeat. 
Components are the better choice for the follow-
ing objects:
• Objects that will be repeated at least once in 
the model
• Objects that will be saved into their own file
Objects that have 
• 
specific alignment or inser-
tion properties
Objects that will 
• 
cut faces, such as windows 
and doors
• 2D objects that are to always face the camera
Chapter 7
	
Components: Efficiency in Repetition
The best-known feature of components is that 
they can be used for repeated objects; if you edit 
one, all copies of that component change as well. 
Components can also cut faces, align to specific 
faces, and always face the camera. Using repeated 
components, rather than copying faces and 
edges, can greatly decrease your file size, because 
SketchUp has to recognize only one set of geo-
metric objects, and needs only location and size 
information for each component instance. 
This chapter delves into the many uses and fea-
tures of components, which no serious SketchUp 
modeler can live without.

154 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Creating a Component
7.1  
Problem
You want to combine several objects into a component.
Solution
Use the Create Component window.
Discussion
To create a component from objects in the model, first select the objects to include in the com-
ponent. You can then do one of the following:
Choose Edit→
• 
Make Component from the main menu.
Right-click on one of the selected objects and choose Make Component from the pop-up 
• 
menu.
Click the Make Component icon.
• 
This opens the Create Component window.
Note
Although a component usually consists of more 
than one object, you can make a component 
from a single object. If only one face or edge is 
selected, Make Component does not appear 
in the pop-up menu, but you can choose 
Edit→Make Component from the main menu, 
or use the Make Component icon. If you want 
to make a single face into a component, you 
can activate Select and double-click the face. 
Because this selects both the face and its edges 
(more than one object is selected), Make Com-
ponent appears in the pop-up menu.
In the Create Component window (Figure 7-1), you can 
assign a name for the component or accept the default 
name. The description is optional.
Here is a quick description of the other options in the 
Create Component window:
• Alignment options are used for objects that are 
meant to align to all or specific faces (Recipe 7.10).
The “
• 
Cut opening” checkbox is selected for objects 
such as windows, which cut the faces within which 
they are inserted (Recipe 7.12). 
Use “
• 
Always face camera” for 2D “cutout” compo-
nents such as people, animals, trees, and shrubs, 
which always face the camera no matter the model 
orientation, giving the illusion of 3D volume (see 
Recipe 9.4). The “Shadows face sun” option is 
relevant for these types of components as well, to 
correct “skinny” shadows when the component’s 
edges are along the sun’s orientation.
• Set Component Axes is used to define the compo-
nent’s insertion point and orientation.
If the “
• 
Replace selection with component” checkbox 
is selected, the selected objects will be replaced with 
the new component. Always look at this option 
when creating a component, because this option is 
not always selected by default.
Figure 7-1

Using the Components Window 
| 
155
Using the Components Window
7.2  
Problem
You want to find, view, and insert components.
Solution
Use the Components window.
Discussion
From the Components window (choose Window→Components), you can view and manipulate 
the components in your model, as well as find external models to use as components.
SketchUp comes with a few components installed, 
which you can access through the Components window 
(Figure 7-2). Users of the free version see only a Com-
ponents Sampler folder in the window, and Pro users 
also have a folder with training examples for dynamic 
components (Chapter 14). The models in these fold-
ers are stored on your hard drive, where SketchUp is 
installed. (If you don’t see these folders in the Compo-
nents window, click the Select tab, click the arrow next 
to the house icon, and choose Components from the 
resulting drop-down menu.)
Note
The Components Sampler folder contains many dynamic 
components, which are identifiable by the green and white 
icon in the thumbnail. Free users can insert and interact with 
dynamic components, just not create their own. This folder 
also contains some “regular” (nondynamic) components. 
This chapter focuses only on “regular” components; dynamic 
components are described in Chapter 14.
Additional sampler components by Google are stored in 
the 3D Warehouse. To access them, make sure the Select 
tab is active and then click the arrow next to the house 
icon to open the drop-down menu (Figure 7-3). Choos-
ing one of the links—Architecture, Landscape, Con-
struction, or People—takes you directly to the selected 
collections on the 3D Warehouse website. To insert a 
3D Warehouse model directly into your model, click 
its thumbnail and click again in the model. Clicking 
on a model’s name or a collection’s name will open that 
component’s page in the 3D Warehouse, where there are 
options to open or save the model.
Figure 7-2
Figure 7-3

156 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Note
For more details on finding models in the 3D Warehouse, see 
Recipe 13.1.
When you insert a component into your model, Sketch-
Up automatically includes it in your In Model folder. To 
open this folder, click the Select tab’s house icon (Figure 
7-4).
To view or edit component properties, highlight the 
component in the In Model folder and click the Edit 
tab. (You can also right-click on a component thumb-
nail in the Components window and choose Properties 
from the pop-up menu to open the Edit tab.) From the 
Edit tab, you can change any of the properties (align-
ment, openings, and so on) that were set when the 
component was originally created.
The Statistics tab shows how many edges, faces, im-
ages, and the like are included in the component. 
This is a great way to see how complex, and therefore 
resource-heavy, a component is. The Statistics tab also 
lists Component Instances, which refers to the number 
of nested components within the selected component, 
not the number of components found in the model. The 
number of component instances in the model is listed at 
the bottom of the Statistics list (in Windows), or can be 
found in a component’s Entity Info window.
Figure 7-4
Note
If you delete all instances of a component 
from your model, the component will still ap-
pear in the In Model folder. This is intentional, 
with the thought that you might change your 
mind and want to use the component after all. 
There is a Purge Unused option that will clean 
out your Components window of unused 
components. Purging components can greatly 
speed up a heavy model.

Inserting a Component 
| 
157
Inserting a Component
7.3  
Problem
You want to insert a SketchUp model into your model as a component.
Solution
Use the Components window, or drag and drop from your file browser, or choose File→Import 
from the main menu.
Discussion
Components that you do not create yourself from scratch within your current model come 
from external SketchUp files. There are a few ways to insert models from outside your file:
As discussed in Recipe 7.2, you can find models in the 
• 
Components Sampler folder and in 
sampler collections in the 3D Warehouse. To insert one of these models, click the model 
thumbnail in the Components window, and click again to place the component in your 
model.
If the SketchUp model you want to use as a component is on your hard drive, you can im-
• 
port it. From the main SketchUp menu, choose File→Import. In the Import window, make 
sure you are searching for SketchUp files (as opposed to graphic files), and browse to the 
file you want to insert as a component.
If the model file is on your hard drive, you can also use your computer’s file browser to in-
• 
sert the model. Simply click and drag the filename and drop it directly into the SketchUp 
window.

158 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Editing or Exploding a Component
7.4  
Problem
You need to make changes to a component, or explode it so that it is no longer a component.
Solution
To change a component, you open it for editing, make changes, and close the component. To 
explode a component, right-click on it and choose Explode. 
Discussion
Editing and exploding a component is done the same way as for groups, which is covered in 
Chapter 6. The difference with components is that when you edit one, all identical components 
automatically get the same changes.
Exploding a single component, however, does not affect other components. If you want to ex-
plode more than one component, select them in advance. When you choose Explode from the 
pop-up menu, all selected components will be exploded.
Note
If you work with layers, keep in mind this strange behavior of exploded components: If the original objects composing 
the component are on Layer0 (SketchUp’s default layer), and the component is on a different layer, the original objects 
will take on the new layer after the component is exploded. This does not happen if the original objects are on layers 
other than Layer0. 

Renaming a Component 
| 
159
Renaming a Component
7.5  
Problem
You want to rename a component.
Solution
Use the Definition Name field of the Components window or the Entity Info window.
Discussion 
When you insert a component from the 3D Warehouse or import a SketchUp model as a 
component, SketchUp inserts the component by using a name identical to the filename of the 
inserted model. You might want to change this name. You might also want to change the name 
of a component you created yourself, even though you assigned it a name upon creation. There 
are two ways to change a component’s name: directly in the Components window or in the 
Entity Info window.
Figure 7-5 shows a room with three components: a sofa, 
coffee table, and bookcase. When you examine these in 
the Components window’s In Model folder (opened by 
clicking the house icon as indicated in Figure 7-6), you 
see that their names (listed in bold next to each com-
ponent thumbnail) were taken from the original model 
files and are a bit awkward.
Note
Component names appear in Detail view but not in Thumb-
nails view. The view can be set by clicking the View Options 
icon, located to the left of the house icon in the Components 
window.
Figure 7-5
Figure 7-6

160 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
One way to rename a component is directly in the 
Components window. Select a component, such as the 
bookcase, and enter a new name in the top field (Figure 
7-7). Keep in mind that if you select a component to 
rename this way, SketchUp thinks you want to insert the 
component, and attaches an instance of the component 
to your cursor when you move back to the model. You 
can end this insertion mode by pressing the Esc key.
Figure 7-7
The second way to rename a component is to use the 
Entity Info window. If this window is not already open, 
right-click on the component to rename, and choose 
Entity Info from the pop-up menu. If the Entity Info 
window is already open, just select the component you 
want to rename. Rename the component by entering the 
new name in the Definition Name field (Figure 7-8).
Figure 7-8
Saving a Component in Its Own File
7.6  
Problem
You have objects in your model that you want to use in another model.
Solution
Make the objects into a component, and use the Save As option in the pop-up menu.
Discussion 
If you want your entire model (which has not been made into one component) to be used later 
as a component, the solution is simply to save the file. When you are ready to import the model 
into a new file, you then choose File→Import, and find the saved model. It will be inserted as a 
component, surrounded by a bounding box. 
But what if you want to save only selected objects of the model for later use as a component? 

Accessing Local Components 
| 
161
Figure 7-9 shows a model of a room containing a sofa, 
bookcase, and coffee table. For this example, assume 
that all of these objects were built from scratch within 
SketchUp, not imported as components from external 
files. The goal is to save the coffee table into its own file, 
so that it can be imported into other models. Make the 
coffee table into a component (Recipe 7.1); right-click 
on the component, either in the model itself or in the 
Components window; and choose Save As from the 
pop-up menu. The default filename is the name you 
assigned to the component when it was created; you can 
change it if you want. After the file is saved, it can be 
imported as a component in future files.
What you are saving into their own file are the objects 
inside the component and not an instance of the com-
ponent. The component’s axes become the model axes 
for the saved objects.
Keep in mind that many models in the 3D Warehouse 
were not saved this way; they were first made into com-
ponents within their original file and then uploaded 
to the 3D Warehouse. A component like this will have 
a double bounding box when you insert it into your 
model. Some 3D Warehouse models also have issues 
with axes and insertion properties, which are explained 
in Recipe 7.10.
Figure 7-9
Accessing Local Components
7.7  
Problem
You have folders of SketchUp model files on your hard drive and want to be able to access these 
folders from the Components window.
Solution
Add the folders to your Components window’s Favorites.
Discussion 
Google makes storing your models and collections easy in the 3D Warehouse, by providing 
unlimited space and access, as well as providing security and privacy options. But some users 
prefer to keep their component models local, stored either on their hard drive or on an internal 
company network. 

162 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Note
For details on storing your own models and collections in the 
3D Warehouse, see Recipes 13.3 through 13.7.
The first step is to organize your models on your hard 
drive. Figure 7-10 shows the folder My SketchUp Com-
ponents with three subfolders for Appliances, Cabin-
etry, and Furniture. The Furniture folder itself has three 
subfolders. These folders contain SketchUp models.
Figure 7-10
To open My SketchUp Components from the Com-
ponents window, click the Details arrow indicated in 
Figure 7-11. From the pop-up menu that opens, choose 
“Open or create a local collection.” Browse to My 
SketchUp Components and click OK. This folder is now 
displayed in the Components window, and you can see 
its subfolders (Figure 7-12). 
To be able to access this folder without having to browse 
for the folder each time, click the Details arrow again 
and choose “Add to favorites.” My SketchUp Com-
ponents will now appear in the drop-down menu of 
component folders.
To remove a folder from Favorites, open the folder and 
use the “Remove from favorites” option from the De-
tails arrow pop-up menu.
Figure 7-11
Figure 7-12

Painting Components 
| 
163
Painting Components
7.8  
Problem
You want to paint components different materials or colors.
Solution
Use the default material for faces you want to paint. When you apply paint to a closed compo-
nent (a component not open for editing), all faces that have the default color will get the new 
material.
Discussion 
If repeating objects are identical except for their colors, there is no need to model each object 
separately. The efficient solution is to make one component in which you leave the default 
material for those faces you plan to paint later. Faces that already have a material assigned will 
keep that material when the component is painted; only faces with the default material will be 
painted when this technique is used. Because the face is painted from “without,” not during 
component editing, the paint applies only to the individual component you are painting.
In the main example, you will create several identical houses that have different materials for 
the walls, but the same materials for the roofs, doors, and windows. In the “Other Uses” section, 
you’ll see how this technique can be applied to make colored racecars, and different gemstones 
in identical settings.
Create a simple house with one window and one 
1.	
door (Figure 7-13). Paint the roof, door, and win-
dow, but leave the walls in the default color.
Make the entire house into a component (Recipe 
2.	
7.1).
Make several copies of the house component.
3.	
To paint each house, simply activate a material and 
4.	
click the house component. All inside and outside 
walls are painted, but the front faces of the roof, 
door, and window keep the materials they were 
originally assigned (Figure 7-14).
To change the colors on the door, roof, or window, 
you would need to edit the component (Recipe 7.4). 
Note
Painting a component or group this way is a great way to 
quickly paint both sides of a set of faces. For details, see 
Recipe 6.5.
Figure 7-13
Figure 7-14

164 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Other Uses
Here are some other examples in which you can paint 
components different materials. 
The race car component shown in Figure 7-15 has a 
painted windshield and tires, and the car body has the 
default material. If you paint the cars different colors, 
the car bodies will have the new colors, but the tires and 
windshield colors will not change.
Figure 7-15
Figure 7-16 shows a chain of gemstone-setting compo-
nents in which the setting is painted gold, but the stone 
is left in the default color. Painting each component a 
different color makes for an interesting bracelet.
Figure 7-16

Repeating Objects with Different Sizes 
| 
165
Repeating Objects with Different Sizes
7.9  
Problem
You want to use repeating objects that differ only in scale.
Solution
Use one component to represent all of the similar objects, and use different scale values so that 
they appear at different sizes.
Discussion 
If repeating objects are identical except in scale, it is inefficient to model each object separately. 
Besides the additional work, the high number of repeated objects will cause your file size to bal-
loon. The solution is to use one component for all of the similar objects, and use the Scale tool 
to resize them from “without.” With this technique, SketchUp needs to store the geometric data 
only for the original component. For each instance of the component, SketchUp needs to know 
only location and scale data, which are much less resource-heavy than geometric data.
The main example uses one book component to make stacks of different-sized books in a book-
case. In “Other Uses,” you’ll see how this technique can be applied to tree components to make 
a random-looking landscape.
Start with a model of a book (Figure 7-17). You 
1.	
can create your model from scratch or download 
my Books model from the 3D Warehouse. In this 
model, the faces representing the pages are painted 
gray, and the faces for the covers and spine are left 
with the default color. This will make it easier to 
color the books later.
Make the book into a component (Recipe 7.1).
2.	
Figure 7-17
Make several copies of the book component. To 
3.	
change the size of a book, select it (do not open 
the component for editing) and activate the Scale 
tool. Use the drag handles to make the book taller, 
shorter, thicker, and so on (Figure 7-18).
Figure 7-18

166 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
You can use these books to fill a bookcase, as shown in 
Figure 7-19. Not only can you use the Scale tool to make 
the books various sizes, but you can also use the Rotate 
tool to place books at various angles, like the ones on 
top of the bookcase. Because the book covers were left 
the default color, you can paint each book separately, 
using the technique shown in Recipe 7.8. The pages of 
all books remain gray because they were already painted 
and do not have the default material.
Figure 7-19
Other Uses
This scaling technique is particularly useful in land-
scaping. Figure 7-20 shows a model in which three tree 
components are used at different scales, producing a 
random-looking landscape.
Figure 7-20
2D Trees Versus 3D Trees
Tree and other landscaping components generally come in 
two flavors: 2D Face Me components and “normal” 3D com-
ponents. The trees pictured in Figure 7-20 are 2D, which are 
much smaller in file size and always face the camera. (Face 
Me components trick the eye into thinking they are 3D, but 
they are actually like cardboard cutouts.) However, 2D com-
ponents have issues with shadows, and these components 
can look a bit less realistic than the resource-heavy 3D trees 
(though you can use digital images to make realistic-looking 
2D trees, as described in Recipe 9.4).
In addition to trees and other landscaping components, 2D 
Face Me components can be used to represent people, street 
lamps, trash bins, and basically anything that does not need 
to change shape when it spins around.
If you prefer using 3D tree or other landscaping compo-
nents, you can edit the component and hide its edges. This 
will make display regeneration faster, despite the potentially 
heavy model size.

Aligning and Gluing 
| 
167
Aligning and Gluing
7.10  
Problem
You want to use Model A as a component in Model B, but when you import Model A into 
Model B, the component does not align properly or has an incorrect insertion point.
Solution
Determine where you want Model A’s insertion point to be, and align this point with Model A’s 
origin. Also, save Model A with the proper alignment properties, set in the Model Info window.
Discussion 
Alignment issues are common when you use models downloaded from the 3D Warehouse, be-
cause many of the uploaded models there were saved without alignment properties or a proper 
insertion point.
For example, consider the dresser handle model shown 
in Figure 7-21, created away from the model origin and 
oriented vertically. When this handle is placed in the 
dresser model shown in Figure 7-22, it remains verti-
cal and the insertion point is rather far from where you 
actually want to place the handle. 
A model that is to be used as a component should be 
placed so that the origin is located at the model’s inser-
tion point: the point you will use to drag the component 
into the next model and snap to a specific placement 
point. In addition, before saving, set the proper align-
ment properties in the File page of the Model Info 
window. 
The main example demonstrates how to create a dresser 
handle so that it can be imported correctly into a dress-
er model. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how the 
same technique can be applied to a framed picture and 
to a window.
Figure 7-21
Figure 7-22

168 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Create a model of a dresser handle, similar to the 
1.	
one shown in Figure 7-23. Orient it so that it is ver-
tical (start the model in the red-green plane), and 
place the handle so that the origin coincides with 
the center of the lowest face. This is the point by 
which the handle will be dragged and placed into 
the dresser model. Pay attention to the dimensions 
while creating the handle, so that it is approximate-
ly the right size. (The diameter of the handle base 
should be about 4 inches.)
You do not have to make the handle into a com-
ponent. When imported or inserted from the 
Components window, the entire handle model 
will automatically be inserted into the dresser as a 
component.
Open the Model Info window (Window→Model 
2.	
Info) to the File page. At the bottom of this window, 
set the “Glue to” option to Any. This means that the 
current contents of the red-green plane will align 
to any face of the dresser model. (You could also 
set the alignment to only vertical faces, if you know 
that your dresser front will be vertical.)
Save this model.
3.	
In a new file, create a model of a dresser (Figure 
4.	
7-24) or download my Dresser model from the 3D 
Warehouse. If you create your own dresser, pay 
attention to its dimensions so that the size will be 
correct relative to the size of the handle.
Use the 
5.	
Tape Measure tool to place construction 
lines marking the centers of the handles for the top 
drawer, as shown in Figure 7-25. This is where you 
would drill holes on an actual dresser.
From the main menu, choose File→Import, and 
6.	
make sure the file type is set to look for SketchUp 
models. Import the handle model. Place its inser-
tion point at the intersection of the construction 
lines, as shown in Figure 7-26. Because the handle 
is set to align to any face, it aligns correctly with the 
front of the dresser.
Figure 7-23
Figure 7-24
Figure 7-25
Figure 7-26

Aligning and Gluing 
| 
169
To complete the dresser, find the handle in the In 
7.	
Model folder and place a handle at the other side 
of the top drawer. Place two more on the bottom 
drawer, as shown in Figure 7-27. Then erase or hide 
the construction lines.
Figure 7-27
Other Uses
In this section, you’ll see how to apply the insertion and 
alignment technique to a framed picture placed on a 
wall, and to a window placed in a roof.
Framed Picture
The model shown in Figure 7-28 is a framed picture 
that will be imported into another model, as a picture 
on a wall. The origin coincides with the lower-left back 
corner of the frame. Before saving, set the “Glue to” 
property to Any or Vertical faces.
Figure 7-29 shows the model with the walls. Note that 
the insertion point is at the lower-left back corner of the 
frame, and the picture aligns to the vertical face of the 
wall.
Figure 7-28
Figure 7-29
Window
The model shown in Figure 7-30 is an octagonal win-
dow. The origin coincides with the lower-back midpoint 
of the window frame. For windows, you generally want 
the component to cut the face onto which it is imported, 
which will be set in the Model Info window. The red-
green plane defines where this cutting will occur: the 
boundary of the frame that lies in the red-green plane is 
the cutting boundary.
Figure 7-30

170 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
The alignment is set to Any face, so that the window 
can be imported into a sloped face. Also, “Cut opening” 
is checked in the Model Info window (Figure 7-31), so 
that the window will cut the face on which it is posi-
tioned. The model with the imported windows is shown 
in Figure 7-32. The windows align to the sloped face 
and cut the face of the roof.
Figure 7-31
Figure 7-32
Using Components for Symmetric Models
7.11  
Problem
You are creating a symmetric model and want to save time and keep the file size low.
Solution
Decrease your file size and make editing easier by using two mirrored components.
Discussion 
With this efficient technique, you create half of the model and make it a component. The 
second half of the model is a mirrored copy of the component, joined to the original. If needed, 
you can hide edges where the two components meet. Editing a symmetric model is easy, be-
cause you have to edit only half of the model, and file size is reduced because you are creating 
only half of the geometry.
The main example demonstrates modeling half of a house. In “Other Uses,” you will see how 
this technique can be applied to symmetric furniture such as a sofa or table.

Using Components for Symmetric Models 
| 
171
Start with a model of half of a house (Figure 7-33). 
1.	
You can create your model from scratch or down-
load my Symmetry House model from the 3D 
Warehouse.
Make the half-building a component (Recipe 7.1), 
2.	
and make one copy of the component.
Figure 7-33
Keep the copied component selected and activate 
3.	
the Scale tool. Turn the copy inside out by dragging 
a center-side handle through the component, stop-
ping when the Scale value is –1 (Figure 7-34).
Figure 7-34
Attach the mirrored half to the original half. The 
4.	
two halves appear to be separate objects because of 
the edges between the components (Figure 7-35).
Figure 7-35
These edges can be hidden. Open either component 
5.	
for editing, select the edges that meet the other 
half, and hide them. (Hide is available from the 
pop-up menu or the Edit menu.) After closing the 
component, you can no longer tell that the model is 
comprised of two components (Figure 7-36).
Figure 7-36
Edit either component, and add some windows 
6.	
and an arch-shaped door along the common edge. 
The result is a perfectly symmetric house (Figure 
7-37), with a file size much smaller than if you had 
modeled the entire house. And if you need to make 
changes, you need to edit only one of the halves.
Figure 7-37

172 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Other Uses
The symmetric component technique is great for furni-
ture design, because most furniture is symmetric. This 
section shows a symmetric sofa and a table.
Sofa
The sofa in Figure 7-38 comprises two halves that are 
mirrored and joined together. Edges between halves are 
hidden.
Table
Figure 7-39 shows a model of an antique table with dou-
ble symmetry, composed of four quarter-components. 
Edges are hidden where the component is joined to other 
components.
Figure 7-38
Figure 7-39
Placing Windows in 3D Walls 
7.12  
Problem
You want to place window components in thick (3D) walls, but a component can cut only one 
face.
Solution
Use nested components, which can be inserted and exploded, enabling you to cut through the 
wall.
Discussion 
SketchUp components can cut only one face. This is fine for the model shown in Figure 7-40, 
which consists of 2D, flat walls. When you import a window into a flat wall, the wall is auto-
matically cut. The trouble starts when the walls have thickness, as in Figure 7-41. When you 
insert a window into the front face of a wall, it cuts only that face. The back face of the wall 
remains uncut. So all you can see through this window is the back face of the wall; you cannot 
see inside the building.

Placing Windows in 3D Walls  
| 
173
There are two ways you can solve this problem, depend-
ing on whether you know the thickness of the wall. 
Example 1 shows how to build a nested window com-
ponent to cut walls of unknown thickness. Example 2 
demonstrates a similar technique for cutting walls of 
known thickness.
Figure 7-40
Figure 7-41
Example 1: Window in Walls of Unknown 
Thickness
This example consists of four main tasks: creating a face 
to represent the cutting boundary, building a nested 
window component, placing the component in the wall, 
and exploding the component so that the hole in the 
wall can be made.
Download my 
1.	
Irregular Window model from the 
3D Warehouse (Figure 7-42). If the window is not 
already a component (if you downloaded it from 
the 3D Warehouse in your Internet browser and not 
via the Components window), make it a component 
now. The alignment and cutting do not have to be 
set yet, because this component will become part of 
a nested component.
Figure 7-42

174 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Orbit to a view like the one shown in Figure 7-43, 
2.	
in which you can see the two parts of the frame. 
The green part will sit in front of the wall, and the 
brown part will be set into the wall. The thickness 
of the brown frame is about 5.5 inches, so the wall 
thickness should be more than 5.5 inches.
Figure 7-43
Orbit to view the back of the window. The cutting 
3.	
face will cover the exterior boundary of the brown 
frame, along the face shared by the brown and 
green frames. This is the plane where the window 
will meet the front face of the wall. Start a rectangle 
at the corner where the green and brown frames 
meet (Figure 7-44).
Figure 7-44
Complete the rectangle along the cutting plane, ex-
4.	
tending past the edges of the window (Figure 7-45).
Right-click on the rectangle and choose 
5.	
Intersect→Intersect with Model. This creates edges 
where the cutting face meets the edges of the win-
dow component. 
Figure 7-45
To make it easier to complete the cutting face, hide 
6.	
the window component (right-click on the window 
and choose Hide). Your cutting face should look 
like Figure 7-46, with several extra edges. The in-
nermost face, indicated by the arrows, is where the 
cutting face meets the interior edges of the brown 
frame. This face is not needed, so erase its edges.
Figure 7-46

Placing Windows in 3D Walls  
| 
175
The innermost face you have now, indicated by the 
7.	
arrows in Figure 7-47, is the boundary you want for 
the cutting face, because this is where the cutting 
face meets the exterior edges of the brown frame. 
Erase everything except for the edges of this face.
Note
You could have created the same cutting face by simply trac-
ing the outside edges of the brown frame. For this example, 
there are only seven edges around the cutting face, but if the 
window had round edges, tracing each edge would require a 
good bit of work.
Unhide the window component by choosing 
8.	
Edit→Unhide→All from the main menu.
Select both the window and the cutting face and 
9.	
make a new component. Set it to glue to any face. 
To define the correct insertion point, click Set 
Component Axes.
Define the component origin at the bottom corner 
10.	
of the green frame, because this is where the win-
dow will meet the wall. Keep the component’s red 
and green axes in their current directions (Figure 
7-48).
In blank space, create a box and offset the top face 
11.	
so that the walls are thicker than 5.5 inches. Push 
down the center of the box to create the 3D walls 
(Figure 7-49). (You could also create a rectangle 
and offset it, and then pull up the resulting border 
face.)
From the In Model folder of the Components 
12.	
window, insert a few windows into the walls. The 
cutting faces align with the front faces of the walls.
Explode each window and push the cutting face 
13.	
from the front face of the wall to the back face of 
the wall. You can use Push/Pull on the cutting face 
even though it appears behind the window face. 
You can now see through the walls, into the room 
(Figure 7-50).
Figure 7-47
Figure 7-48
Figure 7-49
Figure 7-50

176 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Orbit to view the back of the windows. Because the 
14.	
walls are thicker than the 5.5-inch brown window 
frame, the frame ends in the middle of the wall 
(Figure 7-51). 
If you had made walls thinner than the 5.5-inch 
window frame, the frame would protrude slightly 
into the room.
Figure 7-51
After you understand this technique, you can apply it to 
any window. Most of the windows in the 3D Warehouse 
are based on rectangles (Figure 7-52), so all you need to 
do is add a simple rectangle for the cutting face (Figure 
7-53), no intersection required.
Figure 7-52
Figure 7-53
Combine the window and the cutting face into one 
nested component, set the component axes along the 
cutting face (in this case, along the top of the window), 
and insert some into a wall. Explode each window and 
push in each cutting face, and you can see into the 
house (Figure 7-54).
Figure 7-54

Placing Windows in 3D Walls  
| 
177
Example 2: Window in Walls of Known 
Thickness
If the thickness of the walls is known, you can employ 
a neat trick. You can create a component that consists 
of two cutting components, one for each of the front 
and back walls. When you explode this component, the 
nested components inside it are no longer nested, and 
are “free” to cut the faces. No face pushing is required.
Start in Top view and create the basic window 
1.	
shape. The window shape shown in Figure 7-55 is a 
complex arch shape, but you can use any shape you 
like.
Pull up this face the same distance as the thickness 
2.	
of the wall, such as 6 inches.
The window glass will align with the front face of 
3.	
the wall, not the back face. So orbit to the bottom of 
the window and erase the back face (Figure 7-56).
The component that will cut the back face of the 
4.	
wall consists of the side faces of the current model. 
Select all faces created so far, press Shift, and click 
the top face to deselect it. This leaves only the side 
faces selected.
Make a component from these selected faces; set 
5.	
to align to any face and to cut openings. The origin 
for this component should be at the bottom of the 
faces, because this is where the component will 
meet the back face of the wall (Figure 7-57).
Now you can create the component that will cut the 
6.	
front face of the wall. Use Offset to make the frame 
and pull it up so that the frame will extend in front 
of the wall. Paint the window face with a translu-
cent material (Figure 7-58).
Figure 7-55
Figure 7-56
Figure 7-57
Figure 7-58
Select all faces and leave the back component un-
7.	
selected. Make a new component from these faces, 
with the axes oriented as shown in Figure 7-59. 
This component should also be set to cut openings.
Figure 7-59

178 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Select both cutting components and make a new 
8.	
component. Set the origin for this component at the 
bottom of the frame, where the window will meet 
the front face of the wall. Keep the red and green 
axes in their current directions (Figure 7-60).
In blank space, make a box to represent the build-
9.	
ing. Use the Offset tool to offset the top face inward 
by the same distance as the thickness of the win-
dow, such as 6 inches.
From the In Model folder of the Components win-
10.	
dow, insert some windows in the walls. The cutting 
face aligns exactly with the front faces of the walls 
(Figure 7-61).
Figure 7-60
Figure 7-61
Explode all of the window components. This re-
11.	
duces each window to its two nested components, 
which are both set to cut faces. Therefore, the front 
and back faces are simultaneously cut (Figure 7-62).
Figure 7-62
Orbit to view the back of the windows. The window 
12.	
frames fit exactly within the thickness of the walls 
(Figure 7-63).
Figure 7-63

Reloading Components 
| 
179
Reloading Components
7.13  
Problem
You want to replace a component with another component, which is a model from another file.
Solution
Use the Reload option, which switches out existing components for components external to the 
current model; all of the components are swapped at once.
Discussion 
Say you have designed a building with 50 identical window components, and your client de-
cides that another window would work better. The Reload option enables you to replace all of 
the original windows with new ones. Reloading is particularly useful for landscaping compo-
nents, for example, when you want to switch one type of shrub for another.
This technique is also helpful for solving a common problem in SketchUp: Models with numer-
ous, heavy components may run slowly when you orbit, pan, and so on, because SketchUp has 
to regenerate each edge of each component with every new view. You can use temporary place-
holder components in place of the real ones, and use the Reload option to swap them out when 
your entire design is complete and ready to show.
Consider Figure 7-64’s model: the 3D plant used to line 
the walkway is an imported component that is copied 
repeatedly. Because of the high number of edges and 
faces of the components, the model may move quite 
slowly when you change the view. (Of course, this also 
depends on your processor speed.)
One sure way to keep your model moving quickly is to 
use “light” component placeholders, made of simple ge-
ometry. When you finalize your design, you can replace 
these placeholders with the more complex, realistic 3D 
models. The main example demonstrates how to reload 
landscape components, and the “Other Uses” section 
uses the same technique to place desks in a classroom.
Download my 
1.	
Hosta model (Figure 7-65) from the 
3D Warehouse and save it to your hard drive. Each 
hosta leaf is the same component at different scales, 
so the size of this model file is not too large. The 
edges of the leaves themselves are hidden, which 
means SketchUp has fewer edges to regenerate 
when the view is changed. However, there are still 
edges visible along the stems.
Figure 7-64
Figure 7-65

180 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Large Components and Model Speed
Aside from using placeholder components, there are a few other things you can try to make your heavy, component-
laden model run a bit faster: 
Switch the view from 
• 
Shaded with Textures to Shad-
ed (View→Face Style→Shaded). In this mode, all tex-
tures are displayed in their base color instead of using 
graphic images. Faces displayed this way are quicker 
to regenerate when the view is changed.
Display the 
• 
model without edges, either using Shad-
ed mode or Shaded with Textures mode. (Removing 
edges from the display is done in the Styles window, 
on the Edge page of the Edit tab.) This prevents 
SketchUp from having to regenerate edges, but re-
generating faces might still cause the model to move 
slowly. (Not to mention that not everyone likes the 
edge-free look.)
Hide 
• 
edges within the component. To do this, open 
the component for editing and switch to Wireframe 
view. This leaves only edges displayed. Select all of 
the edges and hide them by using the pop-up menu 
or by choosing Edit→Hide. Switch back to Shaded or 
Shaded with Textures, and only the component faces 
will be visible.
Download my 
2.	
Landscaped Walkway model from the 
3D Warehouse. As you can see in Figure 7-66, the 
landscaped walkway currently includes stick-figure 
components as placeholders for each hosta plant.
To replace the placeholders with the “real thing,” 
3.	
right-click on any placeholder component and 
choose Reload from the pop-up menu. (The Reload 
option is also available when you right-click on the 
placeholder component in the In Model folder of 
the Components window.)
Browse to where you saved the hosta model and 
4.	
reload it. Each placeholder is replaced with a 3D 
hosta model (Figure 7-67). Because your model 
may run slowly now, this technique is best em-
ployed at the last moment when all placeholders for 
all components are in place, and you have settled on 
the final viewing angle.
Replacing All Versus Replacing Some
The Reload option replaces all components with the new 
one. But what if you want to replace only some of the com-
ponents, leaving the rest as they are? The solution for this 
is to select the components you want to reload and make 
them unique (right-click on any selected component and 
choose Make Unique from the pop-up menu). Now you can 
use Reload on one of the unique components. Note that dy-
namic components cannot be made unique.
Figure 7-66
Figure 7-67

Reloading Components 
| 
181
Bringing Back the Placeholders
After you have reloaded a placeholder component, thereby 
replacing it with a new component, the original placeholder 
is no longer available; it no longer appears in the In Model 
folder of the Components window. This means that you 
won’t to be able to switch back to the placeholder unless 
you create a new stick-figure component from scratch.
The solution to this problem is to keep a copy of the place-
holder component off to the side in the model, and make 
it a unique component (right-click on it and choose Make 
Unique from the pop-up menu). When you reload to replace 
the placeholders with 3D components, you’ll still have a copy 
of the placeholder in the model.
Then to switch the 3D components back to the stick figures, 
you would not use the Reload option, because Reload is 
used for external model files. You are replacing the 3D com-
ponents for the stick-figure component already in the model, 
so you would use the Replace Selected option, described in 
Recipe 7.14.
Other Uses
The desk model shown in Figure 7-68 has a high 
number of edges and faces, particularly in the basket 
below the chair. Importing many of these into a class-
room model might cause the classroom to move slowly. 
Instead, when you create the classroom, use simple box 
components as placeholders for the desks (Figure 7-69).
When you use Reload, the orientation of the new com-
ponents might not be correct (Figure 7-70). You could 
solve this problem by rotating the model in the original 
desk file, saving the file, and using Reload again in the 
classroom. Or you could edit one of the reloaded com-
ponents in the classroom and rotate it.
Figure 7-68
Figure 7-69
Figure 7-70

182 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Replacing Components
7.14  
Problem
You want to replace one or more components in your model with another component in your 
model.
Solution
Use the Replace Selected option in the Components window.
Discussion 
Recipe 7.13 discussed the technique for swapping components with models external to the file. 
This recipe demonstrates how to replace components with other components that are already in 
your model.
Download my 
1.	
Flower House model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 7-71). This model, displayed 
without edges, contains 10 of the same window 
components, each with a flower box.
The flower boxes are to be removed from all of the 
2.	
first-floor windows. Right-click on any of the first-
floor windows and choose Make Unique from the 
pop-up menu.
Figure 7-71
This component is now different from the other 
3.	
nine windows. Open it for editing and erase the 
flower box. (The flower box is itself a component, 
so it can be erased with one click.) Also, push in 
the windowsill so that the frame is a simple offset 
(Figure 7-72).
Close the edited component.
4.	
Select the four remaining original windows on the 
5.	
first floor.
Figure 7-72

Replacing Components 
| 
183
Open the In Model folder of the Components 
6.	
window, where you should see three components: 
the flower box, the original window with the flower 
box, and Window#1 (the edited unique compo-
nent). Right-click on this new component and 
choose Replace Selected (Figure 7-73).
Figure 7-73
The four selected components are now replaced 
with the new component (Figure 7-74).
Note
Another way to get the same result is to select all of the first-
floor windows and make them unique. Then you could edit 
any one of them, and the changes would be applied to all of 
them.
Figure 7-74
If you want to switch the new windows back to the 
7.	
original ones, you could select each new window 
and use the same Replace Selected technique. To 
select all of the new windows at once, right-click on 
the new component in the Components window 
and choose Select Instances from the pop-up menu. 
All of the new windows are selected (Figure 7-75).
Figure 7-75
To replace all of these with the original component, 
8.	
right-click on the original window component 
in the Components window and choose Replace 
Selected. Now all of the windows are the original 
components with the flower boxes, as shown in 
Figure 7-76.
Figure 7-76

184 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Other Uses
You can use the Replace Selected technique to make a 
random-looking garden. Start with an orderly garden 
with rows of each plant component and randomly select 
some plants to change (Figure 7-77).
Figure 7-77
In the Components window, right-click on a random 
plant and choose Replace Selected. This replaces the 
randomly selected plants with the new plant (Figure 
7-78).
Figure 7-78
Continue replacing plants with other plants until the 
garden looks random. For an even more random look, 
use the Scale tool to make identical components differ-
ent sizes, using the technique described in Recipe 7.9 
(Figure 7-79).
When using different scale values, keep in mind that 
the scale values will still be in effect if you replace the 
components.
Figure 7-79

Working with the Outliner 
| 
185
Working with the Outliner
7.15  
Problem
You have a complex model with many components or groups, or nested components or groups, 
and you want a way to keep track of them.
Solution
Use the Outliner.
Discussion 
The Outliner lists all your model’s components and groups in a hierarchical form that shows 
nesting levels. It indicates whether components are selected, open for editing, hidden, or 
locked. It also provides a search field to locate groups or components by name, which is help-
ful when your model is too large to see everything, or when you are trying to locate a hidden 
component or group.
There are two examples in this recipe: The first provides an overview of how the Outliner 
works and how you can use it to organize groups and components. The second demonstrates 
using the Outliner to create a staircase with nested components.
Example 1: Organizing with the Outliner
This example uses a nested component composed of 
a table component with two barstool components to 
show how the Outliner works, and how you can re-
name components to better organize your model. In the 
“Other Uses” section, you’ll see how the Outliner helps 
organize a townhouse development consisting of both 
components and groups.
In the search field of the Components window, 
1.	
enter tall table 2 bar stools. Click the thumbnail 
shown in Figure 7-80 and bring the component into 
your model. (If you see more than one model in the 
search results, click the model made by Google.)
Open the Outliner (Window→Outliner). When all 
2.	
of the items are expanded, the Outliner lists one 
main component (Tall glass table with 2 bar stools) 
and three nested components, one for the table 
and two for the chairs. The item at the top of the 
list, Untitled, is the name of the model file (Figure 
7-81).
Figure 7-80
Figure 7-81

186 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
In the Outliner, click Component#1, which is the 
3.	
table component. The table is selected in the model, 
which means that the “parent” component in which 
it is nested must be opened for editing (Figure 
7-82). 
The names Component#1 and Component#2 are 
4.	
not very informative, so they should be changed. 
As detailed in Recipe 7.5, you can rename a com-
ponent in the Components window or in the Entity 
Info window. You can open the Entity Info window 
directly from the Outliner: ight-click on Compo-
nent#1 and choose Entity Info from the pop-up 
menu.
Note
The same pop-up menu appears whether you right-click on 
the component itself in the model or on the component 
name in the Outliner.
In the 
5.	
Definition Name field of the Entity Info 
window, enter something more informative, such 
as Table. The new name appears in the Outliner 
(Figure 7-83). The Outliner items are listed alpha-
betically, so the listed order has changed.
Rename the other components 
6.	
Chair. (You have 
to rename only one of them; the others will update 
automatically.)
Each chair component consists of two identical 
7.	
nested components. Rename these Half Chair (Fig-
ure 7-84).
Note
The technique of using half of a component to model a sym-
metric object is described in Recipe 7.11.
The two halves of the chair have the same compo-
8.	
nent name, but you can use the Outliner to dif-
ferentiate between them. Right-click on one of the 
half-chair components and choose Rename. Enter 
a new name, such as Right Half. The new name 
appears without angle brackets, while the original 
component name is listed afterward, inside angle 
brackets (Figure 7-85). This is a great way to dif-
ferentiate between identical components.
Figure 7-82
Figure 7-83
Figure 7-84
Figure 7-85

Working with the Outliner 
| 
187
Note
If you open the Entity Info window for the renamed compo-
nent, you will see the new name in the Name field. The name 
of the component itself is listed next to Definition Name.
Rename the other half-chair component (Figure 
9.	
7-86).
Figure 7-86
Expand the other chair component, and you’ll see 
10.	
that it has the same new names for the half-chair 
components nested in it (Figure 7-87). Because 
you renamed components nested within a “parent” 
component, each instance of the parent component 
has the same renamed nested components.
Figure 7-87
To differentiate between the two chair components, 
11.	
change their descriptive names, such as Chair 1 and 
Chair 2 (Figure 7-88). 
This is a simple example, but imagine a much more 
complex model with multiple rooms each loaded with 
furniture components. If each furniture component 
has a unique descriptive name and you need to locate a 
specific sofa in a specific living room, you could enter 
the unique name in the Filter field at the top of the 
Outliner. The Outliner will then display only items that 
have the specified name.
The Outliner can also inform you of components and 
groups that are hidden (they are grayed out) and locked 
objects (the item symbol has a lock added to it).
Figure 7-88

188 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Other Uses
Another example in which the Outliner can help 
organize a complex model is the townhouse develop-
ment shown in Figure 7-89. Each set of three houses 
is a group, as shown in Figure 7-90. The symbol for a 
group is a solid square, whereas the component symbol 
is a group of four small squares. Each group is given the 
default descriptive name Group.
Figure 7-89
Figure 7-90
Groups are given the generic descriptive name Group 
because, unlike components, they are not assigned a 
name when created. However, you can assign a descrip-
tive name to a group: use either the Definition Name 
field in the group’s Entity Info window, or the Rename 
option in the Outliner. Figure 7-91 shows the renamed 
groups.
Figure 7-91
To differentiate between each townhouse, use the Re-
name option. Figure 7-92 shows each component with a 
street address.
Figure 7-92

Working with the Outliner 
| 
189
Example 2: Using the Outliner to Create 
Nested Components
In this example, you will create a staircase with the help 
of the Outliner. This staircase will consist of nested 
components. In the “Other Uses” section, you will see 
how to apply this technique to beam connectors in a 
construction model.
Create a simple box to represent one of the stair 
1.	
treads and make the box into a component named 
Tread. The tread component is listed in the Out-
liner (Figure 7-93).
Make a few copies of the tread, positioned so that 
2.	
the front of each tread extends forward, over the 
back of the tread below (Figure 7-94). This is easiest 
to do in Side view.
Figure 7-93
Figure 7-94
Create a vertical support between any two treads. 
3.	
The support shown in Figure 7-95 is a simple 
cylinder. Make the support a component named 
Support.
Figure 7-95
The Outliner now lists several tread components 
and one support component (Figure 7-96).
Figure 7-96

190 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Copy the support component to the other side of 
4.	
the tread (Figure 7-97).
Figure 7-97
The next step is to nest the support components 
5.	
into the tread component above them. First you 
must be able to identify in the Outliner which tread 
is above the supports. Select the tread above the 
supports (Figure 7-98).
The selected tread is highlighted in the Outliner.
Figure 7-98
Remember which tread was highlighted in the Out-
6.	
liner. Then, within the Outliner, select both support 
components (press the Ctrl/Option key when you 
want to select multiple items) and drag them just 
below the tread that was highlighted (Figure 7-99).
Note
If you have many treads, making it difficult to remember 
which one was highlighted, you could use the Rename op-
tion to give the tread a unique name.
Figure 7-99

Working with the Outliner 
| 
191
This nests the supports within the tread; the change 
is applied to each tread component (Figure 7-100).
Figure 7-100
The Outliner lists two supports inside each tread 
(Figure 7-101).
Note
You could nest the support components without using 
the Outliner: select the supports and cut them (Edit→Cut). 
Then open for editing the tread component into which the 
supports will be nested, and choose Edit→Paste in Place. This 
technique is shown in Recipe 3.4. 
Figure 7-101
To add a rail to the staircase, open the bottom tread 
7.	
component for editing, and use the Line tool to cre-
ate a Follow Me path. Figure 7-102 shows a vertical 
path starting just above the support, connected to a 
diagonal path that meets the vertical path from the 
tread above. 
Figure 7-102
The Follow Me face for the rail is a small circle, 
8.	
extruded along the two Follow Me lines. When the 
rail is completed, make it a component, and close 
the tread component (Figure 7-103).
The Outliner shows one rail component inside each 
tread component.
Figure 7-103

192 
| 
Chapter 7: Components: Efficiency in Repetition
Use the Outliner to move the two connectors from their 
first-level position to a position underneath the joist to 
which they are attached. The connectors are now nested 
below all of the joists, and each joist has two connectors 
(Figure 7-107).
Figure 7-107
What if you want the rail to appear only at the top 
9.	
of the staircase, and not on each tread? In Figure 
7-104, the top tread is the last one listed in the Out-
liner list. Within the Outliner, drag the rail from 
this tread and move it just under the filename.
Figure 7-104
This makes the rail a first-level component (no lon-
ger nested), and it appears only above the top tread 
(Figure 7-105). To replace the rail inside each tread, 
you would move it from its first-level position back 
into the tread from which you moved it.
Figure 7-105
Other Uses
The Outliner can also be used to nest connector com-
ponents into each beam of a construction model. Figure 
7-106 shows three joist components, which are attached 
to a single beam component. There are two connector 
components connecting each side of the leftmost joist 
to the beam.
Figure 7-106

At first glance, materials seem a simple feature of 
SketchUp: Click the Paint Bucket icon, choose a ma-
terial from the resulting window, and click a face to 
apply your choice—even a second-grader can do it. 
But SketchUp materials have capabilities far beyond 
simply applying paint to faces. For instance, there are 
Chapter 8
	
Painting, Materials, and Textures
shortcuts to painting multiple faces at a time, you 
can edit a material’s size and color, and you can make 
changes to a material on just one specific face. In this 
chapter, you will learn about the more complex as-
pects of materials, such as editing, positioning, trans-
lucency, and alpha transparency.
Finding Materials and Images
8.1  
Problem
You want to find materials or images to use in your models.
Solution
Look in the Materials (or Colors) window for local materials, and then search on the SketchUp 
website or in the 3D Warehouse for additional materials.
Discussion
The Materials window (called Colors on the 
Mac) houses the folders of materials cur-
rently on your system. To access it, choose 
Tools→Paint Bucket, or click the Paint Bucket 
icon, or choose Window→Materials. Within 
the Materials window, you can find all colors 
and materials used in a particular model in the 
In Model folder (the Colors In Model folder 
on the Mac). To open this folder, you can use 
the drop-down menu or click the house icon 
(Figure 8-1). Windows permits you to edit 
materials found in the In Model folder only; no 
matter what your system, it is the best practice 
to edit only materials in In Model and not the 
“source” materials found in the other folders.
Figure 8-1

194 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
As you can see in the Materials window, SketchUp 
comes with a few folders of sample materials, such 
as Bricks and Cladding, Roofing, and so on. For an 
expanded version of the folders you already have (more 
bricks, more roofing materials, and so on), the free 
Materials Bonus Pack is available from the SketchUp 
website. Click the Download link and then the link for 
Bonus Packs. When you download and install this pack, 
the materials are placed automatically into the correct 
folders. 
Note
You can also try searching the Web for materials. Specific im-
ages of items such as bathroom tile, cabinet faces, or custom 
doors may be found on manufacturer websites.
The 3D Warehouse offers numerous models that contain 
collections of materials, but be aware that although some 
are high quality, others are not. Here are some keywords 
you can try when searching the 3D Warehouse:
Texture pack, material pack
• 
Texture collection, material collection
• 
Fabric textures, fabric materials (or metal, or con-
• 
crete, or wood, and so on)
Seamless
• 
Names of manufacturers of paint, lumber, coun-
• 
tertops, cabinets, and so on, to find their collection 
palettes
A 3D Warehouse model with a collection of materi-
als usually looks something like Figure 8-2. After you 
download the file and open it in SketchUp, all of the 
materials appear in the In Model folder of the Materials 
window. If you want to save these materials as collec-
tions that can be accessed in other files, see Recipe 8.3. 
Note
Be warned: Materials remain in the In Model 
folder even if they are no longer used in your 
model, and carrying extra materials in your 
model will increase your file size and can af-
fect performance, resulting in slow refresh of 
materials, faces, and edges. Windows users can 
remove extra materials by clicking the Details 
arrow on the Materials window (next to the 
drop-down field) and choosing Purge Unused. 
On the Mac, Purge Unused is available in the 
List drop-down menu. Components behave 
the same way, in that unused ones must be 
purged manually. If you purge your materials 
but still have some materials in your In Model 
list that you are not using, they are probably 
used by components that have not yet been 
purged. So purge components first and then 
materials.
Figure 8-2

Getting Images into Your Model 
| 
195
Getting Images into Your Model
8.2  
Problem
You want to use an image file as a material in your model.
Solution
Create a new material by using the Materials window, or import the image file as either a tex-
ture or an image.
Discussion
If you want to use a material or image that isn’t available in the Materials window, all you need 
is the image file you want to use. The method you use to get it into your model depends on 
what you plan to do.
Method 1: Create a New Material
When you create a new texture, you bring a material 
into the Materials window without automatically using 
it in your model. This is a good method if you are load-
ing a group of materials you plan to paint with later or 
plan to save as a collection.
In Windows, click the Create Material icon shown in 
Figure 8-3 to create a new material. If a material is 
already active in the Materials window, the new mate-
rial will be based on the active one, which is helpful for 
making a copy of a material (Recipe 8.6). If the default 
material is currently selected, the new material will be a 
blank slate. In either case, the Create Material window 
opens, in which you can assign the material a name and 
either pick a color or choose an image. To use an image, 
select Use Texture Image and browse to the image file. 
If you want your image to have a specific scale, you can 
enter a length and height. Click OK, and the new mate-
rial appears in the In Model folder.
On the Mac, click the Color drop-down menu and 
choose New Texture (Figure 8-4). Browse to find the 
image file and then import it. Assign a name and 
dimensions, or accept the defaults. Once imported, the 
new material appears in Colors In Model.
Figure 8-3
Figure 8-4

196 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Method 2: Import a Material As a Texture
If you want to use the material immediately to paint 
a face, import the image as a texture: From the main 
menu, choose File→Import, and make sure you are 
searching for image file types (as opposed to 3D mod-
els). Find the file you want to import, and select “Use as 
texture” (Figure 8-5).
The image is attached to your cursor, and you can ap-
ply it to a face. Click two corner points of the image to 
bring it in at the size you want (Figure 8-6). The Height 
or Width field at the bottom of the SketchUp window 
will tell you the dimension of the image. The image 
automatically tiles to fill the face (Figure 8-7). Once 
in use, the material appears in the In Model folder. In 
Windows, the thumbnail has a small white arrow in the 
corner to show that the material is being used.
Note
If you want to bring the image in at its defined size, double-
click on the face to place the image. To place it by its center 
point, hold the Ctrl/Option key. To size it with a different 
aspect ratio, hold the Shift key.
Figure 8-5
Figure 8-6
Figure 8-7
Sometimes the tiling needs adjusting. Consider a pic-
ture frame with an empty face where the painting will 
go. When you import an image that is smaller than the 
face on which it is painted, it tiles (Figure 8-8). To fix 
the painting, move the sides of the frame (Figure 8-9).
Figure 8-8
Figure 8-9

Getting Images into Your Model 
| 
197
Method 3: Import a Material As an Image
If you want to import the material on its own face 
(rather than for painting an existing face), import it 
as an image. The material will not actually be a usable 
SketchUp material until you explode the image.
Note
Importing as an image is used mainly for digital photos, rather 
than for tiling materials. Using digital photos in your model is 
covered in Chapter 9.
From the main menu, choose File→Import, and make 
sure you are searching for image file types. Find the 
image you want to import and select “Use as image” 
(Figure 8-10).
One example of where you might want to import an 
image is for painting a rug onto a floor. (Make the floor 
and walls a group, so that the rug will not stick to the 
floor.) Click two corner points to define the image 
size, as shown in Figure 8-11. The Height or Width at 
the bottom of the SketchUp window will tell you the 
dimension of the image.
Note
If you want to bring the image in at its defined size, double-
click on the face to place the image. To place it by its center 
point, hold the Ctrl/Option key. To size it with a different 
aspect ratio, hold the Shift key.
The image is not exactly a face; it is more like a group. 
It cannot be edited, positioned, or used on any other 
face. (You can, however, use the Scale, Rotate, and Move 
tools on an image.) To convert the image into a face, 
right-click on it and choose Explode. Now the face acts 
like a normal SketchUp face, and the material appears 
in the In Model folder.
Because the rug face is now on the same plane as the 
floor, SketchUp will have some confusion about which 
material should be displayed (Figure 8-12). This is 
sometimes called Z-fighting, which results in a shim-
mering effect that shows both materials when you orbit 
around.
To fix this, pull up the rug face very slightly so Sketch-
Up will have no doubt about which face is on top 
(Figure 8-13).
Figure 8-10
Figure 8-11
Figure 8-12
Figure 8-13

198 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Note
Another example of importing a material as an image is 
described in Recipe 9.4, in which a photo of a tree is imported 
so that it is standing next to a house.
In some cases, you don’t need to explode an image. If 
you don’t plan on changing the face or using the mate-
rial elsewhere, you can leave the image as is, such as a 
map on which you will show houses of a planned devel-
opment project (Figure 8-14).
Figure 8-14
Creating Material Collections
8.3  
Problem
You have materials in your model that you want to easily access in future models.
Solution
Save the materials as a new collection (Windows) or folder (Mac).
Discussion
Creating a collection or folder of materials in your model is the best way to be able to provide 
future access to the materials you have compiled. This is useful if you have created your own 
set of custom materials, or want to save collections of downloaded materials found in the 3D 
Warehouse or via a web search. 
Create a Material Collection in Windows
In Windows, a collection is a group of materials. A 
collection is basically a folder; you can open it as you 
would any of the folders in the Materials window. First, 
gather in your model the materials you want to save as a 
collection. Then click the arrow icon indicated in Figure 
8-15 and choose “Save collection as” from the pop-up 
menu.
Figure 8-15

Creating Material Collections 
| 
199
Browse to and select an existing folder or create a new 
one. In Figure 8-16, Veneers is the name of the collec-
tion and is listed as the current folder.
If you want this collection accessible in future files, click 
on the arrow icon again and choose “Add collection to 
favorites.” After the collection is part of your favorites, 
it will always be listed in the folder drop-down menu, 
at least until you remove the collection from your 
favorites.
Figure 8-16
There is also a very nice drag-and-drop feature that 
enables you to easily place materials into folders. To add 
the second folder pane, click the icon indicated in Fig-
ure 8-17. In the second pane, open the folder you want, 
and you can drag materials from one folder to the other.
Figure 8-17
Create a Material Folder on the Mac
On the Mac, you can save the materials in your model 
to their own folder. This folder will be available in 
future files and can be opened as you would open any 
of the folders in the Colors window. First gather in 
your model the materials you want to save as a folder. 
Then click the List drop-down, and choose New (Figure 
8-18). Assign a new name for the folder. This name then 
appears as the current folder.
Figure 8-18
If you have a few materials you want to access often, you 
can save them so that they are always displayed in the 
Colors window. Simply drag a material’s thumbnail into 
one of the empty spots in the color well, indicated in 
Figure 8-19.
Figure 8-19

200 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Painting Multiple Faces
8.4  
Problem
You want to paint more than one face at a time.
Solution
You can preselect faces, or use the Shift and Ctrl/Option keys while painting.
Discussion
If you want to paint several faces with the same material, clicking each face one at a time can be 
tedious. To avoid this, you can either select faces in advance or take advantage of the Shift and 
Ctrl/Option keys.
Download my 
1.	
Painting Multiple Faces model from 
the 3D Warehouse (Figure 8-20). 
Figure 8-20
To change the material of the six front stone faces, 
2.	
select them in advance. Pick a new material and 
click any selected face. They are all painted at once 
(Figure 8-21).
Choose Undo to restore the stone faces.
3.	
Figure 8-21
If you want to replace all of the stone faces with 
4.	
another material, first pick the new material. Then 
press and hold the Shift key and click any stone 
face. All of the stone faces in the model are replaced 
with the new material (Figure 8-22).
Note
You can also replace one material for another by preselecting 
all faces of a specific material. There are two ways to do this: 
right-click on the face in the model and choose Select→All 
with same material, or right-click on the material in the In 
Model folder of the Materials window and choose Select 
(Windows only). After all of the faces are selected, you can 
pick a new material and click any selected face.
Figure 8-22

Painting Multiple Faces 
| 
201
The Ctrl key (Option key on the Mac) can also 
5.	
be used to paint multiple faces. The difference is 
that Shift replaces all faces of a specific material, 
and Ctrl/Option replaces all contiguous faces of a 
specific material. To see what this means, pick a 
new material, press Ctrl/Option, and click the face 
indicated in Figure 8-23. This paints all faces within 
the same “stripe.” The faces separated by the green 
stripes, and the faces on the other building, remain 
unchanged.
Choose Undo to return to the original stone faces. 
6.	
If you want to replace all stone faces in one build-
7.	
ing but not the other, you can use a group. Groups 
isolate objects from material changes produced by 
using the Shift or Ctrl/Option keys. Make a group 
of one building (select the entire building, right-
click on it, and choose Make Group from the pop-
up menu).
Open the group for editing (activate Select and 
8.	
double-click the group). Pick a new material and 
use the Shift key to replace all of the stone faces 
(Figure 8-24).
Close the group (activate Select and click outside 
9.	
the group). The other building remains unchanged 
(Figure 8-25).
Note
You could also paint the ungrouped building, which will not 
affect any faces within the group.
Figure 8-23
Figure 8-24
Figure 8-25

202 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Changing Material Size and Color
8.5  
Problem
You want to change the size and scale of a material.
Solution
Find the material in the In Model folder of the Materials window, and edit the material size and 
color parameters.
Discussion
If you paint faces with a tiling material such as brick or stone, you may want to make the stones 
or bricks appear larger or smaller, stretched or squashed, or you might want to change the 
material’s base color. To make these changes, find the material in the In Model folder, select the 
material, and edit it to have a new size or color. You can also save your edited material by right-
clicking and choosing Save As.
Note
This recipe demonstrates how to make simple adjustments to 
a material’s size and color. If you want to change size, angle, 
skew, and placement, you need to position the texture. This is 
explained in Recipe 8.9. 
Download my 
1.	
Edit Textures model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 8-26). 
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window, 
2.	
to see the two included materials.
Note
This example has only two materials, but if your model has 
many materials, it might be difficult to find the thumbnail for 
the material you want to edit. To find this material, hold the 
Alt key while the Paint tool is active (Cmd key on the Mac), 
and click a face in the model that has the material you want 
to edit. The thumbnail will then be highlighted in the In 
Model folder. 
Double-click the brick material, which opens the 
3.	
editing parameters. The name of the image file is 
listed here (Figure 8-27).
To make the bricks appear larger, type a greater size 
4.	
in either the Width or the Height field and press 
Enter. 
Figure 8-26
Figure 8-27

Changing Material Size and Color 
| 
203
Note
The units in this field depend on the units of your model, 
which you can set in the Units page of the Model Info win-
dow. Remember to include measurement symbols if neces-
sary, such as the apostrophe symbol for feet.
The bricks are now larger and easier to see (Figure 
8-28).
Figure 8-28
When you change the material size, the default is to 
5.	
maintain the aspect ratio (the width changes by the 
same ratio as the height). If you want a new aspect 
ratio, click the lock icon (Figure 8-29) to “break” 
the connection between the two fields.
Now you can enter different values. Enter a higher 
6.	
value for Height, and the bricks become taller, 
almost square (Figure 8-30).
You can also change the base color of the material. 
7.	
Choose one of the color picker methods (Figure 
8-31 shows RGB, or red, green, and blue) and set 
a new color. On the Mac, the color pickers (color 
wheel, color sliders, etc.) are available via icons at 
the top of the Edit Material window.
The bricks shown in Figure 8-32 are now green.
In Windows, when you are finished editing a mate-
8.	
rial, click the Select tab. On the Mac, click Close at 
the bottom of the Edit Material window.
It is important to note that the edits you make this way 
affect only the In Model material. The original material, 
whether from the SketchUp library or imported from 
an image, remains unchanged.
You can save your new material if you’ll want to use it in 
other models. Here’s how:
In Windows, right-click the new material’s thumb-
• 
nail in the Select tab, and choose either Save As 
to add it to a material library, or choose “Export 
texture image” to save it as an image file. 
On the Mac, edit the material you want to save 
• 
and click the Edit Texture Image icon. This opens 
the image file in an external graphics editor, from 
which you can save the image file to your hard 
drive.
Figure 8-29
Figure 8-30
Figure 8-31
Figure 8-32

204 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Copying a Material
8.6  
Problem
You want to make a copy of an existing material, which will have a different color or size.
Solution
In Windows, create a new material based on the one you want to copy. On the Mac, use the 
Duplicate option.
Discussion
This technique is helpful if you want to create a different version of a material already in use, 
such as a different-color wood or larger bricks. You can make a copy of the existing material, 
edit the copy’s size or colors, and use the new material in your model.
Download my 
1.	
Painting Multiple Faces model from 
the 3D Warehouse (Figure 8-33). The goal is to cre-
ate a copy of the stone material and then apply this 
new material to some of the faces in the model.
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window, 
2.	
which has two materials. Select the material you 
want to change—the stone, in this case.
In Windows, click the Create Material icon indi-
3.	
cated in Figure 8-34.
On the Mac, right-click on the stone thumbnail and 
choose Duplicate. Enter a new name for the copy.
In Windows, you will see the Create Material win-
4.	
dow. Enter a new name (Figure 8-35), and edit the 
size or color (or both). When finished, click OK.
On the Mac, double-click the thumbnail of the new 
material, and make the changes in the Edit Material 
window. Click Close when finished.
Figure 8-33
Figure 8-34
Figure 8-35
Find the new material in the In Model folder and 
5.	
use that material to paint some of the faces (Figure 
8-36).
Figure 8-36

Using Translucent Materials 
| 
205
Using Translucent Materials
8.7  
Problem
You want to make a material translucent.
Solution
Edit the material and adjust the Opacity slider.
Discussion
Translucent materials are generally based on solid colors and used to represent glass. But you 
can make any material translucent, even when based on a tiled image. (An example of this is a 
glass-block wall for a shower; you can see the blocks and also see inside the shower.) 
When you paint a default-colored face with a translucent material, both sides of the faces are 
automatically painted, unlike with opaque materials. However, you can override this by paint-
ing one side either before or after the translucent material has been applied.
The main example demonstrates how to make any solid color or image-based material trans-
parent. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how transparent materials can be used to model a 
glass sculpture and a stained-glass window, and how you can use the double-sidedness of faces 
to make a one-way window.
Download my 
1.	
Translucent Materials model from 
the 3D warehouse (Figure 8-37). The two windows 
are painted solid yellow, and the skylight is painted 
with a stone material.
Figure 8-37
Orbit to see the inside view of the windows and 
2.	
skylight (Figure 8-38). All faces are painted with the 
default material.
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window 
3.	
and double-click the solid yellow thumbnail to edit 
it. 
Figure 8-38

206 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Drag the Opacity slider to the left (Figure 8-39). 
4.	
The material thumbnail at the top of the window 
splits diagonally, with the original color at the top 
and the translucent version at the bottom. While 
you’re moving the slider, watch the yellow windows 
of the house to see their translucency vary (Figure 
8-40). 
Figure 8-39
The next step is to make the skylight translucent. 
5.	
In Windows, stay in the Edit tab, make sure the 
Paint tool is still active, press the Alt key (the cur-
sor should be an eyedropper), and click the stone 
material in the skylight. On the Mac, click Close to 
finish editing the yellow color, then double-click the 
stone material to edit it.
Figure 8-40
Adjust the Opacity slider for the stone material. 
6.	
Now you can see through the skylight, while still 
seeing a faint version of the stone pattern (Figure 
8-41).
Figure 8-41
Orbit again to see the back faces of the windows. 
7.	
They are translucent on this side as well (Figure 
8-42). This is because these faces originally had the 
default color. If you had already painted the back 
faces with a material or if you paint these faces now, 
the back faces will get that new material, whether 
translucent or not. The front faces will still be 
translucent.
Figure 8-42

Using Translucent Materials 
| 
207
Other Uses
Here are some other examples of translucent materials.
Figure 8-43 shows two stained-glass windows. Each 
is painted with an image whose material was made 
translucent.
Figure 8-43
Figure 8-44 shows a glass-and-metal sculpture, in which 
the green bits of the sculpture are translucent. Shadows 
are turned on to demonstrate a point: with a high Opac-
ity value, the translucent faces will cast shadows. 
Figure 8-44
When the Opacity dips below 70 percent, translucent 
faces will not cast shadows (Figure 8-45).
Figure 8-45
You can take advantage of SketchUp’s double-sided faces 
to make a one-way window. In the interrogation room 
shown in Figure 8-46, the dividing window is painted 
translucent blue, so that the police and witnesses can 
view the suspect.
Figure 8-46

208 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
If the other side of the window face has the default 
material, it will become translucent, too (Figure 
8-47)—which means the suspect can view his witnesses.
Figure 8-47
This is easily fixed: paint this side of the window with 
an opaque material (Figure 8-48). Now the suspect can’t 
see out, but police and witnesses can still see in.
Figure 8-48
Painting Edges by Material
8.8  
Problem
You want edges of a face to have the same material as the face.
Solution
Paint the edges and change the edge color to “By material.”
Discussion
One way to achieve a more photorealistic look is to display edges in the same material as the 
faces they surround. Because edges can be common to multiple faces, SketchUp does not know 
which face material to match. Therefore, you have to paint edges just like faces. To display 
edges in the assigned materials, change the edge color to “By material” in the Styles window.

Painting Edges by Material 
| 
209
Start with a simple house with no faces painted 
1.	
(Figure 8-49).
Figure 8-49
Open the Styles window (Window→Styles) to the 
2.	
Edit tab, and click the Edge icon to open the Edge 
page. Change the edge color to “By material” (Fig-
ure 8-50).
Figure 8-50
Select the vertical faces of the house, plus all the 
3.	
edges of these faces except for those along the roof 
(Figure 8-51). The easiest way to do this is to hold 
Shift and double-click each face, which selects the 
faces and all edges, and then press Shift and click 
the edges along the roof to unselect them.
Figure 8-51
Pick a material and click any selected face or edge. 
4.	
All selected faces and edges get the new material 
(Figure 8-52).
Zoom in closely to see the material applied to the 
5.	
edge. The edges do not actually show the brick im-
age, but rather get the material’s base color.
Note
Another way to get a photorealistic look is to turn off edges 
altogether. To do so, uncheck the Display Edges and Profiles 
checkboxes in the Edge page of the Styles window. The look 
is similar to edges by material, but without the base-color 
outline.
Figure 8-52

210 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Positioning Textures: Fixed Pins
8.9  
Problem
You want to adjust a material’s location, angle, size, or skew. 
Solution
Use texture positioning in Fixed Pins mode.
Discussion
If you need to make general adjustments to a material, such as overall size, aspect ratio, or color, 
you can simply edit the material (Recipe 8.5). If you need more specific adjustments, such as 
the starting location, angle, or skew, however, you can position the texture by using Fixed Pins 
mode.
The main example demonstrates how to adjust a tile backsplash so that tiles start and end in 
specific corners. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how fixed pins can be used to position 
bricks along a wall and make wallpaper with diagonal stripes.
Download my 
1.	
Backsplash model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 8-53). The tile backsplash will 
be placed in the gray and white faces between the 
counter and cabinets. 
Figure 8-53
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window 
2.	
and click the blue-and-gray tile material. Paint the 
two white faces with this tile (Figure 8-54).
Figure 8-54

Positioning Textures: Fixed Pins 
| 
211
To start positioning, right-click on the back-
3.	
splash wall next to the refrigerator and choose 
Texture→Position. Fixed pins are the red, blue, 
green, and yellow pins shown in Figure 8-55. These 
pins appear at the location on the face where you 
clicked to apply its material. (If you see four yellow 
pins, these are free pins. Right-click and choose 
Fixed Pins.) Each of the fixed pins has a purpose: 
red for moving, green for scaling and rotating, blue 
for shearing, and yellow for distorting.
Note
Free Pins mode, with four yellow pins, is used to fit an image 
to a face. This mode is described in Recipe 9.1.
You can move the tiles by clicking and dragging 
4.	
anywhere on the material, but the pins enable you 
to make more specific adjustments. To move the 
material so that a gray tile starts in the corner, click 
the red pin, keep the mouse button pressed, and 
drag this pin to the corner shown in Figure 8-56.
Figure 8-55
Figure 8-56
The green pin is used for adjusting both the scale 
5.	
and the angle. Drag the green pin straight to the 
left, maintaining the horizontal angle. This makes 
the entire material smaller (Figure 8-57).
Figure 8-57
The next step is to eliminate any partial tiles that 
6.	
appear on the right side of this face, close to the 
refrigerator. In addition to dragging pins, you can 
also place them in new locations. To “lift” the green 
pin, simply click it; do not keep the mouse button 
pressed. The green pin then becomes attached to 
your cursor. Click to “drop” the green pin at a point 
between two tiles (Figure 8-58).
Figure 8-58

212 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Drag the green pin until it meets the edge close 
7.	
to the refrigerator (Figure 8-59). Now there is a 
neat row of whole tiles (no partial ones) along the 
backsplash.
Figure 8-59
Now look at one column of tiles. Your scale might 
8.	
be different, but Figure 8-60 shows about four tiles 
spaced between the counter and cabinet.
Figure 8-60
To get eight tiles instead of four, the image has to 
9.	
be sheared, or scaled in the vertical direction. To 
do this, lift the blue pin and place it just above the 
eighth tile in the column (Figure 8-61).
Figure 8-61
Drag the blue pin to the bottom of the cabinet 
10.	
(Figure 8-62). Now the tiles have half their original 
height.
Note
The yellow pin was not demonstrated here, but it is used for 
distorting the material: making the material appear to grow 
larger or smaller from right to left, or top to bottom.
Figure 8-62

Positioning Textures: Fixed Pins 
| 
213
To end the positioning, right-click on the back-
11.	
splash and choose Done. 
The face you positioned has the new scale, size, and 
location, but the other backsplash face, around the 
window, has the original material (Figure 8-63).
To apply the positioned material to the other back-
12.	
splash, you first need to “sample” the new material. 
In Windows, click the eyedropper icon in the Mate-
rials window. On the Mac, press the Cmd key while 
the Paint tool is active (this also works in Windows 
if you press the Alt key).
The cursor should be an eyedropper symbol. 
13.	
Click the positioned backsplash and then click the 
original one. Now both backsplash faces have the 
positioned material (Figure 8-64).
Note
Positioning a texture does not change its definition in the In 
Model folder of the Materials window. If you apply the tile 
material to another face, it will appear at the original size.
Figure 8-63
Figure 8-64
Other Uses
Here are some other examples of positioning a material. 
Figure 8-65 shows a house with the brick material 
applied to the walls, and Figure 8-66 shows the same 
walls after positioning. The red pin was used to start the 
diagonal bricks at the lower corner, the green pin was 
used to shrink the scale, and the blue pin was used to 
stretch the bricks so that there are three rows of diago-
nal bricks.
Figure 8-65
Figure 8-66

214 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
With fixed pins, redecorating is easy. Start with a room 
with vertical-striped wallpaper (Figure 8-67) and then 
use the green pin to rotate the material (Figure 8-68). 
Apply the positioned material to the other wall, and you 
have a whole new look (Figure 8-69).
Note
When using the green pin to rotate, you cannot specify a 
rotation angle. You can mark the angle in advance, however, 
by using the Protractor tool to create an angled construction 
line.
Figure 8-67
Figure 8-68
Figure 8-69

Positioning Texture on Round Faces 
| 
215
Positioning Texture on Round Faces
8.10  
Problem
You want to position a material on a round face.
Solution
Show hidden edges, position the material on one segment, and then sample and apply this 
material to the rest of the face.
Discussion
Painting a material on a round face is easy: click the face, and the material wraps. Materials 
cannot be positioned on round faces, however, so if you want to make adjustments, you need to 
identify one segment and position the material on it. After the positioning is complete on that 
segment, you can sample the positioned material and apply it to the rest of the round face.
Download my 
1.	
Barber Pole model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 8-70). A material with horizon-
tal stripes is applied to the cylinder.
If you right-click on the cylinder, Texture is not on 
2.	
the pop-up menu. To position this material, you 
need to position it on one of the planar segments 
that compose the cylinder. To see these segments, 
display hidden edges (View→Hidden Geometry). 
The hidden edges are shown in dashed lines.
Figure 8-70
Right-click on one of the segments and choose 
3.	
Texture→Position. In Fixed Pins mode, drag the 
green pin to both rotate the stripes and make them 
larger (Figure 8-71).
Figure 8-71

216 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Right-click on the material and choose Done. Now 
4.	
the cylinder has the positioned material on one of 
its segments (Figure 8-72).
To apply the positioned material to the other seg-
5.	
ments, you first need to sample the new material. In 
Windows, click the eyedropper icon in the Materi-
als window. On the Mac, press the Cmd key while 
the Paint tool is active (which also works in Win-
dows if you press the Alt key). Click the segment 
with the positioned material.
Choose View→Hidden Geometry again to turn off 
6.	
hidden edges. (You can also do this before sampling 
the positioned material.)
Click anywhere on the cylinder, and the new po-
7.	
sitioned material is applied to the whole cylinder 
(Figure 8-73).
Keep in mind that the positioned texture will be-
8.	
come distorted if the size of the cylinder changes. 
To see what this means, make sure nothing is select-
ed, activate Move, and click on the cylinder when 
you see a dashed vertical edge appear (Figure 8-74). 
You will probably have to move your mouse around 
the cylinder to get this vertical edge to appear.
Drag this edge so that the cylinder radius increases 
9.	
or decreases. The material becomes distorted; 
within each segment, the material remains the 
same, but materials no longer align at the segments’ 
edges (Figure 8-75).
Figure 8-72
Figure 8-73
Figure 8-74
Figure 8-75
To fix this, just sample the material on any segment; 
10.	
you do not have to display hidden edges. Then click 
anywhere on the rest of the cylinder (Figure 8-76).
Figure 8-76

Creating and Editing a Unique Texture 
| 
217
Creating and Editing a Unique Texture
8.11  
Problem
You want to make changes to the material of a specific face.
Solution
Make a unique texture for that face and then edit the material.
Discussion
This technique is useful when you have more than one face with a specific material and you 
want to edit the material of only one of the faces. You make a unique texture for the face you 
want to change and then edit just that material.
The advantage to making a unique texture is that you can add detail to a particular face without 
changing all faces with the same material, and still keep the geometry simple. For example, you 
could edit a stone material to have different-colored stones, which would be difficult to achieve 
by adding extra geometry; you would need different materials for each new face.
In this example, you will use your graphics editor to add a sign and paint some of the bricks of 
just one building in a row of identical buildings. 
Download my 
1.	
Coffee Shop model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 8-77). This is a row of shops. 
You will edit the material of the middle shop.
Figure 8-77
Right-click on the middle brick façade and choose 
2.	
Make Unique Texture from the pop-up menu. This 
adds a new material to the In Model folder of the 
Materials window, which has the exact shape of the 
face from which it was taken (Figure 8-78). The 
name of the new material is derived from the name 
of the original material, and you can change it if 
you want.
To edit this material, right-click either on the 
3.	
thumbnail in the Materials window (in Windows 
only) or on the material itself in the model. Choose 
Edit Texture Image from the pop-up menu.
Figure 8-78

218 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
The new material appears in your default graph-
4.	
ics editor. Make some changes to the image. Figure 
8-79 shows added text and some painted bricks.
Figure 8-79
Save the edited image and return to SketchUp. The 
5.	
middle façade now has the sign and painted bricks 
(Figure 8-80). Those yellow bricks would have 
taken more work to create within SketchUp and 
would have increased the file size.
Note
The thumbnail for the new material in the Materials window 
will reflect the changes you make in the graphics editor.
Figure 8-80
Using Alpha-Transparent Images
8.12  
Problem
You want to paint with a material that has a transparent background.
Solution
Use an alpha-transparent image, position it to fit what you’re painting, and hide edges if 
necessary.

Using Alpha-Transparent Images 
| 
219
Note
You can use alpha-transparent images to create 2D Face Cam-
era components, which are simple 2D cutouts that always 
face the same direction wherever you orbit, giving the look 
and feel of a 3D object. For more information and for a discus-
sion of a problem with alpha images related to shadows, see 
Recipe 9.4.
The Fencing folder of the Materials window has a few 
materials with transparent backgrounds. To find more, 
you can search the 3D Warehouse for alpha images or 
its variations. The 3D Warehouse also has numerous 
models of alpha-transparent trees and plants.
In the main example, you will create a railing around 
a balcony by using an alpha-transparent image. In the 
“Other Uses” section, you’ll see how a single alpha im-
age can be used to simplify an Eiffel Tower model, and 
how to use an alpha image to make a ring of trees.
Download my Balcony House model from the 3D 
1.	
Warehouse (Figure 8-81).
The railing will be painted onto three vertical walls 
2.	
above the first floor. To make these walls, activate 
Push/Pull, press the Ctrl/Option key, and then pull 
up the first floor (Figure 8-82).
Erase the top face of this new box, which leaves just 
3.	
the three vertical walls (Figure 8-83).
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window 
4.	
and click the iron fence material. The background 
color of this image is defined to be transparent.
Figure 8-81
Figure 8-82
Figure 8-83
Discussion
Images with alpha transparency have transparent backgrounds. Most graphics editors enable 
you to define a certain color as transparent. The .png file format is best for supporting this type 
of image. Alpha-transparent images are most commonly used for landscaping entourage (trees 
and plants), for images of people, and for objects such as fences and railings.
Alpha-transparent images can be used to paint faces just like any other image, and the transpar-
ent parts of the image will be transparent in SketchUp. Edges around alpha-transparent faces 
may appear to be hovering in space, but you can easily hide edges.
The greatest advantage of alpha-transparent images is that they enable you to reduce your file 
size by using graphics instead of geometry. A 3D tree has a much higher number of edges and 
faces than a 2D face painted with an alpha-transparent tree. A fence with repeated posts and 
pickets is much more complex than a 2D face painted with an alpha-transparent fence image.

220 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
Paint one of the railing faces with the iron fence. 
5.	
You can see through the face, but the fence is the 
wrong size (Figure 8-84).
Use texture positioning in Fixed Pins mode, drag-
6.	
ging the red pin to change the starting location, and 
dragging the green pin to change the scale, so that 
the image fits the face (Recipe 8.9). Right-click and 
choose Done when finished.
Figure 8-84
Sample the edited material (press the Alt key in 
7.	
Windows or Cmd on the Mac while the Paint tool is 
active, and click the positioned texture). Then paint 
the other two faces (Figure 8-85). Just like when 
you paint with translucent materials (Recipe 8.7), 
alpha-transparent images are applied to both sides 
of a face. (But you could override this by painting 
one side with a different material.)
Figure 8-85
To make the railing look more realistic, hide its 
8.	
vertical edges and top horizontal edges (select these 
edges, right-click on one of them, and choose Hide 
from the pop-up menu). Figure 8-86 shows the 
completed railing.
Figure 8-86

Using Alpha-Transparent Images 
| 
221
Other Uses
For a great example of how using an alpha-transparent 
image can reduce your file size, download Google’s 
Eiffel Tower model from the 3D Warehouse (Figure 
8-87). It looks complex, but it’s actually a simple model 
painted with an alpha image. This model can be found 
in my 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter.
Figure 8-87
You can find the image in the In Model folder of the 
Materials window (Figure 8-88). This image was ap-
plied to all four sides, using material positioning in Free 
Pins mode to adjust the image to fit each face. Free Pins 
mode is described in Recipe 9.1.
Figure 8-88
To see the unpainted model, switch from Shaded with 
Textures mode to Shaded mode (Figure 8-89).
Figure 8-89

222 
| 
Chapter 8: Painting, Materials, and Textures
You can also use a single alpha image of a tree to make 
a ring of trees. Figure 8-90 shows four vertical faces 
painted with a tiling tree image.
When the edges of the faces are hidden, it looks like a 
group of trees.
Figure 8-90
You can use Push/Pull on the faces to make a larger or 
smaller ring of trees (Figure 8-91).
Figure 8-91

Continuing the discussion of painting and materials 
from Chapter 8, this chapter focuses on using digital 
photos to paint faces in your model, adding photo-
realism and saving modeling time.
Using photos to paint faces can reduce the num-
ber of geometric elements you need to create. 
For example, you can take the time and effort to 
model geometrically accurate windows on the 
side of a building, or can you simply paint the 
face with a photo of the side of that building. (If 
you don’t have an actual photo, a rendering works 
well, too.) 
In addition to saving modeling time, using 
photos this way can greatly reduce file size. For 
this reason, Google encourages 3D Warehouse 
contributors to use digital photos on their models 
whenever possible. Many of the models in the 
3D Warehouse are photorealistic, as are many 3D 
buildings in Google Earth. Some of these models 
represent extremely complex structures but are 
modeled in simple geometry painted with photos. 
To see some examples, open Google Earth with 
the 3D Buildings layer turned on, and explore any 
large city. Many buildings are plain gray, but a 
large number are painted. (For more information, 
see Chapter 13.)
Chapter 9
	
Modeling with Digital Photos
This chapter covers all you need to know about 
painting with digital photos, including how to:
Fit a 
• 
photo to a face
Use photos to make 2D components that 
• 
look 3D
Edit an imported photo
• 
Use photos to create 3D models
• 
Use Photo Match
• 
Note
For the basics of where to find materials and images 
and how to get them into your model, see Recipes 8.1 
and 8.2.

224 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Positioning Textures with Free Pins
9.1  
Problem
You want to fit a material to a face.
Solution
Use texture positioning in Free Pins mode.
Discussion
Free Pins mode is used to adjust a material so that it fits perfectly within a face. It is most com-
monly used to fit images, such as pictures of windows, doors, façades, or furniture. Free-pin 
positioning is essentially distorting an image by pulling its corners, to constrain the image to a 
face.
Note
The other positioning mode is Fixed Pins, which is used to 
adjust the location, scale, and skew of a tiling material. Fixed 
Pins mode is demonstrated in Recipe 8.9. 
The main example demonstrates how to fit an image of 
a door to a face. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see 
how fixed pins can fit images to the façade of a building 
or to faces of a bureau. 
Download my 
1.	
Custom Door model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 9-1). A picture of a custom 
garage door will be painted on the white face.
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window, 
2.	
which contains the photo of the door. Paint the 
door photo onto the face (Figure 9-2). 
The scale and location are not correct, and the 
lower edge of the door in the photo is not horizon-
tal. You will need to adjust the photo to fit within 
the door face.
Figure 9-1
Figure 9-2

Positioning Textures with Free Pins 
| 
225
Right-click on the door and choose 
3.	
Texture→Position. If you see four multicolored pins 
(fixed pins), right-click again and choose Fixed Pins 
to deselect it. Free pins are all yellow and appear in 
each corner of one of the tiled images (Figure 9-3).
Figure 9-3
Free pins are free because they can be picked up 
4.	
and placed anywhere and then dragged into an ex-
act position. To “lift” a pin, just click it. Then click 
again to “drop” it where you want it on the image. 
To place a pin accurately, you usually need to zoom 
in very closely to find the correct points on the 
photo. Using the Zoom window tool and the Previ-
ous View tool can speed this process up immensely. 
In Figure 9-4, one pin was placed at each corner 
of the rectangular part of the door, because these 
points are easy to find. (It would be harder to place 
a pin at the top of the arch.)
Note
When you lift and drop pins, look for dotted blue helper lines 
that indicate when a pin is horizontal or vertical from another 
pin.
Drag each pin to a corner of the door face in the 
5.	
model (Figure 9-5).
Note
Some users prefer to place all of the pins first and then drag 
all of them into place. Others prefer to place a pin and drag 
it, and then repeat for subsequent pins. Both methods work 
fine; it’s a matter of preference.
If you need to tweak the image for a better fit, move 
6.	
and drag pins as needed. When the photo looks 
correct, right-click on the door and choose Done. 
The rectangular part of the door looks good, but 
the top of the photo is cut off (Figure 9-6).
Figure 9-4
Figure 9-5
Figure 9-6

226 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Use the Move tool to move the top edge of the door 
7.	
up, passing the top of the door in the photo (Figure 
9-7).
Figure 9-7
Use the 
8.	
Arc tool to trace the top of the door in the 
photo. Then use the Eraser to trim the rest of the 
door face. This results in a single door face with the 
correct photo (Figure 9-8).
Figure 9-8
For a more realistic garage door, use Push/Pull to 
9.	
push in the door slightly. The sides of the opening 
will have the same material as the door, so repaint 
them with the blue bricks (Figure 9-9).
Figure 9-9

Editing a Photo 
| 
227
Other Uses
Free-pin positioning can be used for a multitude of 
models. For example, Figure 9-10 began as a simple box 
model, and then each face was painted with a photo of 
a building façade. Compare the file size of this painted 
box (about 2.5MB because the graphic files themselves 
are large) with the 5MB size of an actual geometric 
model including all of those windows, doors, and orna-
mentation. Using graphics of smaller file size can keep 
your file size quite low.
Figure 9-11 is a beautiful model of a Japanese bureau. 
Each face is painted with a photo taken of a real piece of 
furniture.
Figure 9-10
Figure 9-11
Editing a Photo
9.2  
Problem
You want to make changes to a photo used in your model.
Solution
Use the Edit Texture Image option and make the changes in your graphics editor. The image 
will be updated in SketchUp automatically.
Discussion
If a material image in your model needs to be changed, you certainly could alter the original 
graphic file. But what if your changes are minor? Or what if the changes apply only to the cur-
rent model? What if you want the image unaltered for other models? SketchUp provides a quick 
fix: the Edit Texture Image option exports the image to your default graphics editor, in which 
you can make your edits. Save the edited image, and the change appears in SketchUp automati-
cally. The original image is untouched; the changes apply only to the image within the current 
SketchUp file.
In the main example, you’ll see how to fix an image on a billboard. In the “Other Uses” section, 
you’ll see how to make a change to a tiling stone image.

228 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Note
Another method of touching up an image is described in 
Recipe 9.3. With this method, you don’t edit the image itself; 
you add new faces to “patch” the image.
Download my 
1.	
Graffiti model from the 3D Ware-
house (Figure 9-12). The antigraffiti billboard has 
been defaced with, well, graffiti. Also, the bottom of 
the photo has some green leaves sticking out.
Right-click on the billboard face and choose 
2.	
Texture→Edit Texture Image. (In Windows, this 
option is also available when you click on the image 
thumbnail in the In Model folder of the Materials 
window. On the Mac, when you edit a material, 
there is an icon for Edit Texture Image at the bot-
tom of the Edit Material window.)
The original photo used to make the billboard 
opens in your default graphics editor. (You can set 
the default editor in the Applications page of the 
Preferences window.)
Make the necessary changes to the photo. Figure 
3.	
9-13 shows the word Fun removed, and the green-
ery at the bottom trimmed above the billboard’s 
frame.
Figure 9-12
Figure 9-13
Save and close the photo you edited and return to 
4.	
SketchUp. The billboard now shows the improved 
photo (Figure 9-14).
The image in the In Model folder is updated as well, 
but choosing Undo will bring back the original, 
unchanged image. The changes have not affected 
the source graphic file, only the graphic internal to 
the current SketchUp model.
Figure 9-14

Adding Faces to Patch an Image  
| 
229
Other Uses
You can also edit a tiled image. Figure 9-15 shows two 
buildings with stone material. Edit Texture Image is 
used to add a blue and red stone. After you’ve saved the 
image and returned to SketchUp, the tiled image has 
been updated on all stone faces (Figure 9-16).
Figure 9-15
Figure 9-16
Adding Faces to Patch an Image 
9.3  
Problem
You want to patch over parts of an image in your model.
Solution
Draw a face over the area you want to patch, and position the texture within the new face.
Discussion
With the patching method, you do not edit the image you want to change; instead you add faces 
over the parts you want to patch, and position the materials within those faces. In the main 
example, you will see how to add faces to patch over some old windows, so that new windows 
can be inserted. The “Other Uses” section demonstrates how this technique can be applied to 
remove a logo from a truck.
Download my 
1.	
New Windows model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 9-17). This is a renovation sce-
nario, in which the windows on the wall indicated 
by the arrow will be removed and replaced with 
new windows.
Figure 9-17

230 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Draw a rectangle around the first window, as shown 
2.	
in Figure 9-18.
Figure 9-18
Position the material in this rectangle, using either 
3.	
Fixed or Free Pins. In either mode, click and drag 
the material itself (don’t drag a pin) slightly to the 
left or right, so that the face contains only plain 
bricks, keeping mortar lines aligned (Figure 9-19).
Figure 9-19
Right-click on the positioned material and choose 
4.	
Done. Now the material looks seamless, and the 
window is removed, but you can still see the edges 
of the new face (Figure 9-20).
Figure 9-20
If you erase these edges, the window in the photo 
5.	
will return. So hide the edges instead. You can se-
lect the four edges, right-click on one of them, and 
choose Hide from the pop-up menu, or you can use 
the Eraser with the Ctrl/Option key pressed and 
click all four edges. Now you can’t tell there used to 
be a window there (Figure 9-21).
Figure 9-21

Adding Faces to Patch an Image  
| 
231
Repeat this patching technique for the remaining 
6.	
windows on the wall (Figure 9-22).
Insert new windows on this wall. The windows 
7.	
shown in Figure 9-23 are available in the In Model 
folder of this model’s Components window. This 
demonstrates one of the problems you can encoun-
ter when using faces to patch an image: the wall is 
no longer a single face, and the windows do not cut 
the wall properly.
To fix the broken wall, first display the dashed lines 
8.	
indicating hidden edges (View→Hidden Geometry). 
The dashed lines indicate the patching faces you 
added.
Select the wall and all new windows, right-click on 
9.	
any selected face, and choose Intersect→Intersect 
Selected from the pop-up menu. This creates 
intersection edges on all faces where they meet the 
windows. Then you can erase the edges that fall 
within the new windows (Figure 9-24).
The patching method is a great quick fix for minor 
touch-ups, especially if you prefer not to edit your 
graphics. But if the patched face might be changed 
afterward, such as getting new windows, editing the im-
age in advance (Recipe 9.2) might prove less work than 
repairing a patched face.
Figure 9-22
Figure 9-23
Figure 9-24
Other Uses
You can also use the patching method to remove a logo 
from a truck. In Figure 9-25, the blank space above the 
logo is narrow. So create a face around the entire logo 
and divide it in half, so that each half can be positioned 
with a new strip of “blank” truck.
Figure 9-25
Position the material in each narrow rectangle to cover 
the logo. Then hide the edges around each new rect-
angle (Figure 9-26).
Figure 9-26

232 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Using Images to Make Face Camera Components
9.4  
Problem
You want to use a 2D image to represent a 3D object.
Solution
Paint the image on a face. Trace a border around the image, trim away the rest of the face, and 
hide the remaining edges. Then make this face into a Face Camera component.
Discussion
Certain types of objects in your model can be represented by 2D images that give the “feel” of 
a 3D object, because they always face you no mater how you orbit the model. Good candidates 
are such objects as people, trees, plants, street lamps, trash bins—objects that look basically the 
same as you orbit around them (Figure 9-27). 
In this example, you will create a Face Camera compo-
nent of a tree. The tree image is an alpha-transparent 
image, which means its background is transparent 
(Recipe 8.12).
Note
Face Camera components are also sometimes called Face 
Me components. If you are searching the 3D Warehouse for 
models like these, try both terms in your search.
Figure 9-27
Download my 
1.	
Face Camera Tree model from the 
3D Warehouse (Figure 9-28). The alpha-transparent 
tree is painted on a vertical face next to the house. 
Note that the shadow of the tree is a rectangle; 
SketchUp’s shadows do not recognize transparent 
images.
Figure 9-28
Orbit to a view like the one in Figure 9-29. The tree 
2.	
looks like a cardboard cutout at this angle. Plus you 
can see the face’s edges.
Figure 9-29

Using Images to Make Face Camera Components 
| 
233
To get more accurate 
3.	
shadows, you need to trim the 
face to approximate the shape of the tree. Use the 
Line or Arc tool to trace around the tree (Figure 
9-30). Accuracy is not important for shadows, be-
cause nobody notices the level of detail in a shadow, 
only its general shape. When tracing, be sure to 
look for the On Face inference. Otherwise, you may 
be drawing lines out of the plane of the face.
Note
Because this image has a transparent background, you don’t 
have to trace around it exactly; the transparent background 
means that extra space around the leaves won’t be noticed. If 
you were trimming around an image with a visible back-
ground, you would want to trace the border more accurately, 
so that no background would show. If black edges are hard to 
see against the image, you can change the edge color in the 
Styles window (Edit tab, Edge page).
Use the Eraser tool to trim the corners of the rect-
4.	
angular face, so that only the tree shape remains 
(Figure 9-31). The shadow now looks tree-shaped.
The next step is to hide the edges around the tree. 
5.	
Activate Select and double-click the tree, which 
selects both the face and its edges. Then press and 
hold the Shift key to deselect the face, leaving only 
the edges selected. Right-click on an edge and 
choose Hide from the pop-up menu. The tree looks 
quite natural (Figure 9-32).
Now the tree can be made into a component. Acti-
6.	
vate the Select tool and double-click the tree, which 
selects both the face and its hidden edges. Right-
click on the tree and choose Make Component.
In the Create Component window, select 
7.	
Always 
Face Camera, make sure Replace Selection with 
Component is selected, but leave Shadows Face Sun 
off to ensure that the shadows appear properly. 
Now you can insert more trees, which cast proper 
8.	
shadows and always face you when you orbit 
around. Using various scales for the trees produces 
a nice, random look (Figure 9-33).
Note
For details on how to use the Scale tool to make random-
looking components, see Recipe 7.9.
Figure 9-30
Figure 9-31
Figure 9-32
Figure 9-33

234 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Using Free Pins and a Single Image to Paint a 3D Object
9.5  
Problem
You want to use a 2D image to paint an unpainted 3D object.
Solution
Paint the image onto one face, and use free-pin positioning to fit the image to the face. Then 
paint the remaining face based on the material of the first face.
Discussion
Recipe 9.1 demonstrates how to fit an image to a face. Based on that technique, you can create a 
photorealistic model by painting each face of the model with the appropriate photo. This means 
that, ideally, you should have one photo for each face (or at least one photo for each elevation 
and plan view), and your unpainted model should have accurate dimensions. But what if you 
have only one photo to work with? 
If that one photo shows at least two faces of an object, you can use it to paint all faces that ap-
pear in the photo. With this technique, you first paint and position the image to one face of the 
unpainted model. If necessary, add or remove geometry to accommodate the picture. Then you 
can use that positioned material as a basis for painting the remaining faces that are shown in 
the photo.
Two examples are used to demonstrate this technique. In Example 1, you will paint a barn, and 
in Example 2, a truck.
Example 1: Barn with Free-Pin Positioning
In this example, you start with an unpainted box. After 
painting and positioning the front face, you will com-
plete the model geometry. Then you will paint the rest 
of the faces based on the material of the front face.
Download my 
1.	
Barn model from the 3D Warehouse. 
It is an unpainted box in the approximate shape of 
a barn. 
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window. 
2.	
This folder contains the image with which the barn 
will be painted. The photo shows three faces: the 
front, side, and roof of the barn. Paint the image 
onto the front face of the barn (Figure 9-34).
Note
This technique requires an unpainted model 
to start. If you want to create your model 
from scratch based on a photo, use Photo 
Match as described in Recipe 9.6. You can also 
use Photo Match on an unpainted model as 
explained in Recipe 9.7.
Figure 9-34

Using Free Pins and a Single Image to Paint a 3D Object 
| 
235
Position this material by using free pins, placing 
3.	
one pin at each corner of the rectangular part of the 
barn’s front and dragging the pin to the corner of 
the model face (Figure 9-35).
Tweak the image if needed. Then right-click on the 
4.	
image and choose Done. The front face of the box is 
now painted with part of the front face of the barn 
(Figure 9-36).
To accommodate the rest of the front face, pull up 
5.	
the top of the box until it reaches the top of the roof 
in the photo. Trace the outline of the roof on the 
front face (there are four edges). Then push back 
the corners of the front face, to complete the roof 
faces (Figure 9-37).
When tracing the roof, ideally the top of the roof 
in the photo would meet the midpoint of the top 
edge, and the roof itself would be perfectly sym-
metric. But it’s hard to achieve that sort of accuracy 
with photos. You can base your tracing entirely on 
the photo and get slightly inaccurate geometry, or 
you can create accurate geometry and use free pins 
to tweak the photo so that it fits better. It’s nearly 
impossible to get perfect results, but you can get 
pretty close. (If accuracy is important, it’s ideal to 
start with a dimensionally accurate model on which 
to paint. Fitting the model to a photo works, too, 
but usually requires more steps and tweaking.)
Figure 9-35
Figure 9-36
Figure 9-37
Sample the material on the front face (press Alt in 
6.	
Windows or Cmd on the Mac while using the Paint 
tool, and click the front face). Then click the side 
face (Figure 9-38). This material is already correctly 
positioned along the edge shared with the front 
face, but the other two corners of the image need to 
be positioned.
Figure 9-38

236 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Use free-pin positioning on this face and drag into 
7.	
place the two pins shown in Figure 9-39.
Figure 9-39
Paint the two roof faces the same way: sample the 
8.	
material either on the side or front and click the 
roof face (Figure 9-40). If you paint the lower roof 
face first, you will have to adjust only one pin per 
face.
Figure 9-40
To paint the other side of the barn, sample the 
9.	
painted side and then click the unpainted side. The 
resulting material is a mirror image of the original. 
Paint the roof faces on this side by sampling the 
side face below them. The finished barn is shown in 
Figure 9-41.
Figure 9-41
Example 2: Truck with Free-Pin Positioning
In this example, you start with an unpainted model of 
a truck and use a photo to paint the side and front. You 
will modify geometry at the front and bottom of the 
model to accommodate the whole photo.
Download my 
1.	
Truck model from the 3D Ware-
house. It is an unpainted box in the approximate 
shape of a truck. 
Paint the side of the truck with the image in the 
2.	
In Model folder of the Materials window (Figure 
9-42).
Figure 9-42

Using Free Pins and a Single Image to Paint a 3D Object 
| 
237
Use free pins to fit the rectangular part of truck to 
3.	
the side face.
Pull out the front of the box so that you can see the 
4.	
entire side of the truck in the photo, and pull down 
the bottom so that you can see the tires (Figure 
9-43).
The next step is to trace edges around the tires 
5.	
and along the side, but if your default edge color 
is black, the tracing edges will be difficult to see 
against the image. To change the edge color, open 
the Styles window to the Edit tab and Edge page, 
and set a contrasting color for edges.
Use lines and arcs to trace around the side of the 
6.	
truck, including the tires. (You could also use the 
Circle tool for the tires.) The half-circles for the 
tires should be separate faces. Push back the extra 
faces (Figure 9-44).
Figure 9-43
Figure 9-44
To model the tires, use Push/Pull with the Ctrl/Op-
7.	
tion key on the half-circle faces. (The Ctrl/Option 
key creates a new face; without Ctrl/Option, you 
will just push the tires into the truck.) This creates 
the edges on the other side of the tire (Figure 9-45). 
Figure 9-45
Repeat this Push/Pull operation for the other tires. 
8.	
Then trim the bottom of the truck to leave only the 
tires. Figure 9-46 shows the tires and truck bottom 
painted black.
Figure 9-46

238 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
To paint the front of the truck, sample the material 
9.	
on the side and click the front face (Figure 9-47).
Figure 9-47
Adjust this face by using free pins, and paint the re-
10.	
maining faces by using the same technique. Figure 
9-48 shows the completed truck with edges turned 
off.
Figure 9-48
Using Photo Match to Model a 3D Object
9.6  
Problem
You want to use a 2D image to model a 3D object from scratch.
Solution
Import the photo as a matched photo. Use points on the photo to set the origin and axes for the 
model. Then draw your model based on the photo. 
Discussion
Starting with a blank file (no existing geometry) and a photo that shows at least two faces of 
your model, you can use Photo Match to achieve the same results as you accomplished with 
Recipe 9.5’s free-pin positioning technique. With Photo Match, you set the model’s origin and 
axes based on data in the photo. After these are established, you can trace your model based on 
the photo, and then project textures from the photo onto faces in the model.

Using Photo Match to Model a 3D Object 
| 
239
Photo Match is great for a quick, preliminary design, for 
which you have a photo but no accurate measurements 
or dimensions. It is not extremely accurate, however. If 
you are creating a serious photorealistic model, the ideal 
solution is to start with a geometrically accurate model 
for which each face (or elevation and plan views) has its 
own photo. In this recipe you’ll re-create the barn and 
truck from the free-pin positioning examples, so you 
can compare the results.
Example 1: Barn with Photo Match
In this example, you will open the barn model used in 
Recipe 9.5’s “Example 1: Barn with Free-Pin Position-
ing,” and save its barn image to your hard drive. That 
image will be used to model the barn in a new file.
Download my 
1.	
Barn model from the 3D Warehouse. 
It contains one image in the In Model folder of the 
Materials window. 
In Windows, right-click on this image and choose 
2.	
Export Texture Image from the pop-up menu. Save 
the image to your hard drive. On the Mac, edit the 
texture and click the Edit Texture Image icon. This 
opens the image in an external editor, from which 
you can save it to your hard drive.
Start a new SketchUp file and then choose 
3.	
File→Import from the main menu. Make sure you 
are looking for graphic file types and browse to the 
barn photo you saved. Import it as a new matched 
photo (Figure 9-49).
Figure 9-50 shows the photo of the barn with two 
red and green axis bars, a blue axis to set the verti-
cal direction, and a yellow origin point.
The origin should be placed at the corner nearest to 
4.	
the camera, on the ground. Click and drag the yel-
low origin point and place it on the ground where 
the front and side faces meet (Figure 9-51).
The red and green axis bars are used to define the 
5.	
red and green axes of the model. Use lines and 
points in the photo to place and orient these bars. 
To maximize accuracy, it’s good practice to place 
the bars as far apart as possible, and to use the lon-
gest possible distance along each bar. Figure 9-52 
shows the red bars along the top and bottom of the 
side, and the green bars at the top and bottom of 
the front.
Figure 9-49
Figure 9-50
Figure 9-51
Figure 9-52

240 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Check to see that the blue axis is vertical. When the 
6.	
axes look right, right-click on the image and choose 
Done.
There is now a scene tab at the top of your Sketch-
Up window (Figure 9-53). If you orbit out of the 
current view, you will lose the barn picture. To get 
the picture back, you can click this tab.
The axes of your model are now aligned to the 
7.	
photo. Use the Line tool to trace over the rectangu-
lar part of the front of the barn, keeping the edges 
in the respective axis directions (Figure 9-54). 
Figure 9-53
Figure 9-54
Push this face back to the back of the barn (Figure 
8.	
9-55).
To pull the box up to add the roof, you first need 
9.	
to orbit out of the current view, which means the 
photo will disappear. Because you can no longer 
see the photo, push the top up by a large distance, 
higher than you know it needs to be.
Click the scene tab to return to the view that has the 
10.	
photo. The model covers the picture, so switch to 
X-Ray mode so that you can see the photo through 
the model.
Trace the roof lines on the front face (Figure 9-56).
11.	
Figure 9-55
Figure 9-56

Using Photo Match to Model a 3D Object 
| 
241
Push back the top of the box to complete the roof 
12.	
(Figure 9-57) and then switch back to Shaded with 
Textures mode.
Note
Here’s another way you could complete the roof: starting 
from the initial box, orbit away from the photo and start the 
Push/Pull operation. Then return to the photo and complete 
the Push/Pull. Then you would trace the roof edges and push 
back faces as described in the preceding steps.
To paint all of the visible faces, click Project Texture 
13.	
from Photo, found in the Sketch Over window. (You 
can also paint an individual face by right-clicking it 
and choosing Project Photo.)
The photo is projected on these faces, with more 
or less the correct positioning (Figure 9-58). If any 
faces need adjustment, you can position their mate-
rial by using free pins.
Orbit out of the current view. The photo disappears, 
14.	
but the barn faces remain painted (Figure 9-59).
Example 2: Truck with Photo Match
In this example, you will open the truck model used in 
Recipe 9.5’s “Example 2: Truck with Free-Pin Position-
ing,” and save its image to your hard drive. That image 
will be used to model the truck in a new file.
Download my 
1.	
Truck model from the 3D Ware-
house. It contains one image in the In Model folder 
of the Materials window. 
Save the image to your hard drive as you did in step 
2.	
2 of Example 1. 
Import the truck image as a matched photo, and set 
3.	
the axes and origin (see steps 3 and 4 of Example 
1 for tips). Figure 9-60 shows the origin set at the 
lower corner of the side of the truck, which is actu-
ally in the middle of the side face. It was placed here 
so that the blue axis could be checked relative to the 
top of the truck.
Note
You could also move the origin so that the side of the truck 
starts at the origin. As long as the red and green axes are set 
correctly, the origin can be anywhere, and the model geom-
etry can be adjusted accordingly.
Figure 9-57
Figure 9-58
Figure 9-59
Figure 9-60

242 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Trace the side of the truck, and push the face back 
4.	
to the edge of the truck in the photo (Figure 9-61). 
The resulting box will be too large, but you’ll adjust 
it later.
Figure 9-61
Right-click on the side face and choose Project 
5.	
Photo from the pop-up menu. This paints the 
photo on the portion of the side face you modeled 
so far (Figure 9-62).
Figure 9-62
Following the same method outlined in Recipe 9.5’s 
6.	
Example 2, pull the box to make more space where 
needed (front and bottom). Change the edge color, 
trace around the side of the truck, and then push 
back the extra faces (Figure 9-63).
Figure 9-63
To paint the rest of the truck, click the scene tab to 
7.	
return to the view with the photo. Select the faces 
that need correct photos, right-click on one of 
them, and choose Project Photo. Or you can click 
Project Textures from Photo on the Sketch Over 
window, which paints all visible faces at once. (You 
can overwrite the existing material or not, because 
the material for that face has not changed.) The 
front faces are now painted, but the model is too 
wide (Figure 9-64).
Figure 9-64

Using Photo Match to Paint an Existing Model 
| 
243
Orbit to a new view and push in the wide side to 
8.	
accommodate the photo (Figure 9-65).
Figure 9-65
Using Photo Match to Paint an Existing Model
9.7  
Problem
You want to paint an existing model by using Photo Match.
Solution
Import a photo as a matched photo and set the axes and origin. Then scale the model to match 
the photo. If a second photo is available, orbit to the view in that photo, import the photo and 
set its axes, and size the model.
Discussion
In addition to creating models from scratch (Recipe 9.6), Photo Match can be used to paint 
existing models, producing similar results to free-pin positioning (Recipe 9.5). Photo Match 
is great for quick, preliminary designs, for which you have a photo or two plus a geometrically 
accurate model. Photo Match is not extremely accurate, however. If you are creating a seri-
ous photorealistic model, the ideal solution is to start with a geometrically accurate model for 
which each face (or elevation and plan views) has its own photo. But because accurate data is 
not always available, Photo Match is a great “quick fix” solution.
Download my 
1.	
White House model from the 3D 
Warehouse. This is a geometrically accurate model 
of a house. Orbit to the view shown in Figure 9-66.
Note
This example uses an unpainted model, but you can also use 
Photo Match to paint over a model’s current materials.
Figure 9-66

244 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Open the In Model folder of the Materials window, 
2.	
which contains two photos of the house. Save both 
of these images to your hard drive. (In Windows, 
right-click on each image and choose Export Tex-
ture Image. On the Mac, edit the texture and then 
click the Edit Texture Image icon. This opens the 
image in an external editor, from which you can 
save the image.)
Import WhiteHouse1.jpg as a matched photo (Fig-
3.	
ure 9-67). 
It is easier to adjust the axis bars and origin when 
4.	
the model is out of the way. In the Match Photo 
window, deselect Model. The model is now hidden.
Adjust the red and green axis bars, and place the 
5.	
origin in the nearest corner (Figure 9-68).
Figure 9-67
Figure 9-68
Select the Model option in the Match Photo win-
6.	
dow to bring back the model. The model is now 
located at the correct corner (the origin) but is still 
the wrong size (Figure 9-69).
Figure 9-69

Using Photo Match to Paint an Existing Model 
| 
245
To adjust the model’s scale to fit the photo, click 
7.	
and drag along any of the three axes on the photo 
(Figure 9-70).
When the positioning is complete, right-click on 
8.	
the image and choose Done.
Figure 9-70
In the Sketch Over window, click Project Textures 
9.	
from Photo, which paints the visible faces. When 
you orbit out of the view, the photo disappears, but 
the faces should be painted more or less correctly 
(Figure 9-71).
Note
For minor adjustments to the photos, you can position the 
texture and tweak the free pins.
The second photo is of a different view of the 
10.	
house. Before you import this photo, it is important 
to orbit so that you are looking at approximately the 
same view as the second photo (Figure 9-72).
Note
The origin you use for the first Photo Match photo will be 
used for the entire model. So for subsequent Photo Match 
photos, you must be able to see the origin in your model. This 
means you cannot use a front view and a back view, because 
you won’t be able to see the origin from both views.
Import WhiteHouse2.jpg. This creates another 
11.	
scene tab, and there is a new set of axis bars to 
adjust.
Keep the origin in place, hide the model, and adjust 
12.	
the axis bars. Then bring the model back and scale 
it to match the photo (Figure 9-73).
Figure 9-71
Figure 9-72
Figure 9-73

246 
| 
Chapter 9: Modeling with Digital Photos
Project the textures. If you overwrite the exist-
13.	
ing material on the side of the house, you will get 
a nicer view of the flowering bush in the corner 
(Figure 9-74).
Figure 9-74

When SketchUp was first introduced, the idea 
behind it was that you could produce great-looking 
computer models representing your rough sketches, 
rather than scratch out your designs on the back of 
a napkin. Whereas most conventional CAD applica-
tions require you to know the exact sizes of all your 
model’s objects, in SketchUp you can design “by 
eye.”
What many SketchUp users don’t take advan-
tage of, however, is that the application also 
enables you to create entire models using exact 
dimensions, despite its deceptively simple tool 
set, meaning you can use SketchUp as a start-to-
finish design tool. (SketchUp Pro provides even 
more sophistication with LayOut, an application 
that enables you to produce fully annotated and 
dimensioned drawings of your SketchUp model.) 
In addition, if you’re handed a model that was 
created without regard to scale or dimension, 
SketchUp enables you to easily resize the entire 
model or only selected objects within it. 
All of SketchUp’s editing and drawing tools can be 
used with exact dimensions. You can enter a di-
mension’s value before or after the tool’s operation 
is complete, and you can enter new dimensions, re-
peatedly if necessary, to change the results after the 
operation is complete. After you start a new object 
or activate a new tool, you can no longer enter new 
dimensions for the existing object.
Dimensions appear in the Measurements field, 
located by default below the SketchUp window. 
The name of this field changes depending on the 
active tool (Length for line, Radius for circle, and 
so forth). To enter or change a dimension, just type 
the number, append a unit if necessary, and press 
Enter. There is no need to place your cursor in this 
field. In Windows, you can place the ­Measurements 
Chapter 10
	
Modeling with Exact Dimensions
field anywhere on your screen by choosing 
View→Toolbars→Measurements. This displays the 
Measurements toolbar, which can be dragged or 
docked anywhere on your screen. On the Mac, 
you can add the Measurements field to your main 
toolbar by choosing View→Customize Toolbar and 
dragging the Measurements field to the toolbar.
Note
When you enter a value for a dimension or distance, 
SketchUp assumes the number is in the base dimen-
sions of the model, which can be set in the Units page 
of the Model Info window. No matter which units you 
set for your model, you can enter dimensions in any 
other unit, as long as you append the correct unit 
symbol, such as mm for millimeters or “ for inches.
For an example of using exact dimensions with 
editing tools, consider the Push/Pull tool. To do 
an exact pull, you can click the face you want 
to pull, move the mouse, type the distance you 
want to pull, and press Enter. Alternately, you can 
click the face to pull, click again to end the Push/
Pull, and then immediately enter the distance 
you want. After the Push/Pull is complete, you 
can enter a new value to update the pull distance, 
as many times as you want, until you start a new 
operation. The other editing tools (Move, Scale, 
and Offset) can also take exact dimensions either 
before or after the operation is complete.
Some drawing objects (lines, circles, polygons, 
and arcs) can have their dimensions changed at 
any time via the Entity Info window. To open the 
Entity Info window, choose Window→Entity Info 
from the main menu, or right-click on an object 
and choose Entity Info from the pop-up menu. 
The information in Entity Info will reflect prop-
erties of the object or objects currently selected.

248 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Working with Lines
10.1  
Problem
You need to enter exact dimensions for a line.
Solution 
Use the Length field or the Entity Info window.
Discussion
To set the exact length of a line, click the start point and move the cursor toward the endpoint. 
The length is indicated in the Length field (Figure 10-1).
You can type the length you want and press Enter, either 
before or after you click the endpoint of the line. Nega-
tive numbers can be entered.
Figure 10-1
If you want to end the line at a specific coordinate, use 
the square bracket format. Start the line, and enter the 
coordinates in <red,green,blue> format (Figure 10-2) 
either before or after clicking the endpoint. If you are 
working in 2D on any standard plane, you still need to 
enter a value for all three directions, even if a value is 
zero. Figure 10-3 shows a line drawn in the red-green 
plane that starts at the origin and ends at the coordinate 
shown in Figure 10-2, entered using the square bracket 
format.
Figure 10-2
Figure 10-3

Working with Lines 
| 
249
If you want the line to end at a distance relative to the 
start point, use the angle bracket format. Start the line, 
and enter the distances from the start point in the 
<red,green,blue> format (Figure 10-4) either before 
or after clicking the endpoint. Again, you still need to 
enter all three values, even if one is zero. Figure 10-5 
shows a line that is 1500mm in the red direction and 
900mm in the green direction from the start point, us-
ing the distances entered in Figure 10-4.
You can use more than one dimension method to create 
a line. For example, if you want to draw a line with a 2:1 
slope and a length of 30mm, you would click the start 
point and enter <2,1,0> either before or after clicking 
the endpoint. This establishes the slope of the line. Then 
you would immediately enter 30mm to set the correct 
length.
The Entity Info window will tell you a line’s length (Fig-
ure 10-6). If the line has one endpoint free (not attached 
to another line or object), you can edit the Length field, 
which updates the line. If the line has no free endpoints, 
the Length field still informs you of the line’s length, 
but the field is grayed out and cannot be edited (Figure 
10-7). 
If you select multiple edges, their total length appears in 
the Entity Info window, which is handy for calculating 
perimeters. If you select edges of arcs or circles, the total 
number of edges listed in Entity Info will include all of 
the arc or circle segments.
For an easy way to select all of the edges around a face, 
activate Select and double-click the face. This selects 
the face and its surrounding edges. Then press Shift and 
click the face again to deselect it, leaving only the edges 
selected.
Figure 10-4
Figure 10-5
Figure 10-6
Figure 10-7

250 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Working with Rectangles
10.2  
Problem
You need to enter exact dimensions for a rectangle.
Solution 
Use the Dimensions field.
Discussion
To set the exact dimensions of a rectangle, click one corner point and move the cursor toward 
the other corner. The width and height are indicated in the Dimensions field (Figure 10-8).
You can type the dimensions you want and press Enter, 
either before or after you click the second corner. Be 
sure to separate the width and height by a comma. You 
don’t need to include a space after the comma.
Figure 10-8
If you want to change only the height, enter new dimen-
sions and leave the width blank. This means you enter a 
comma and the height (Figure 10-9).
Conversely, if you want to change just the width, leave 
the height blank, entering the width and then a comma.
Note
Rectangles are oriented to the face on which they are drawn 
or to one of the standard planes if drawn in blank space. If 
you want to create a rectangle with a different orientation, 
you can change your axes via the Axes tool (Tools→Axes). To 
reset your axes, right-click on any displayed axis (do not click 
on an object) and choose Reset. You can toggle your axis 
display via View→Axes.
Figure 10-9

Working with Circles and Polygons 
| 
251
Working with Circles and Polygons
10.3  
Problem
You need to enter an exact radius for a circle or polygon.
Solution 
Use the Radius field or the Entity Info window.
Discussion
To set the exact radius of a circle or polygon, click the center point and move the cursor out 
toward the circumference point. The radius is indicated in the Radius field (Figure 10-10).You 
can type the radius you want and press Enter, either before or after you click the circumference 
point of the circle or polygon.
Note
You can also change the number of segments of a circle or 
polygon. Before you click the center point, enter the number 
of sides. After the center point is established, you can still 
change the number of sides by entering the number of sides 
followed by an s, either before or after clicking the circumfer-
ence point. This applies to arcs as well.
The Entity Info window tells you the object’s radius as 
well as its number of segments (Figure 10-11). It also 
tells you whether the object is a circle or a polygon, 
which can be useful if you don’t know or remember 
how it was created. As long as the circle or polygon is 
intact (has not been exploded), you can change both the 
radius and number of segments by editing these fields.
Figure 10-10
Figure 10-11

252 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Using the Entity Info window to change a circle works 
in 3D as well. For the top edge of the cylinder shown in 
Figure 10-12, you can edit the radius but not the num-
ber of segments. If you edit a radius this way, the center 
point remains the same and the circumference updates 
(Figure 10-13).
Figure 10-12
Figure 10-13
Working with Arcs
10.4  
Problem
You need to enter an exact chord length or bulge for an arc.
Solution 
Use the Length and Bulge fields or the Entity Info window.
Discussion
When creating an arc, the first two points you 
click establish the chord length, for which you 
can set an exact length as you would when cre-
ating a line. After the chord is set, you can set 
the arc’s bulge, the perpendicular distance from 
the midpoint of the chord to the midpoint of 
the arc. This distance is indicated in the Bulge 
field (Figure 10-14). You can type the bulge you 
want and press Enter, either before or after you 
click the circumference point of the arc.
As for a circle and polygon, you can use the Entity Info 
window to change an arc’s radius. If the arc is 2D and 
intact (not exploded), you can change both the radius 
and number of segments. If the arc is an edge of a 3D 
object, you can change only the radius (Figure 10-15).
Figure 10-14
Figure 10-15

Importing Graphics 
| 
253
Importing Graphics
10.5  
Problem
You need to add a graphic file with exact dimensions to your model, to use as a material or 
image.
Solution 
Import the image and then use the Dimensions field for sizing. 
Discussion
To import a graphic into your model, choose File→Import, find the graphic you want to use, 
and then select the Use as Image checkbox (if you plan the graphic to be used as an image) or 
the “Use as texture” checkbox (if you want to paint a face with it). Figure 10-16 shows a graphic 
that is imported as an image. Before you click to place the lower-left corner, the Dimensions 
field indicates the width and height of the graphic file.
After you click the lower-left corner, you can size the 
graphic either by its width or height. If the cursor is 
anywhere along the top edge, the value that appears in 
the Measurements field is the height (Figure 10-17). If 
the cursor is anywhere along the right edge, the value 
that appears is the width (Figure 10-18).
Figure 10-16
Figure 10-17
Figure 10-18

254 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Decide which value you want to set, make sure that 
value appears in the Measurements field, and enter the 
value. Figure 10-19 shows the graphic with a width of 
1000mm.
Figure 10-19
This also applies when you are importing a graphic as 
a texture. If you know the exact width of your material, 
such as the tiles shown in Figure 10-20, enter it when 
the Width field is displayed.
Figure 10-20
Using the Tape Measure for Construction Lines and Points
10.6  
Problem
You need to create construction lines (temporary lines offset from existing edges) or construc-
tion points.
Solution 
Use the Tape Measure tool.
Discussion
In addition to measuring, the Tape Measure tool can be used to make offset construction lines 
(sometimes also called guide lines). This is useful if you want to space objects at a set distance 
from other objects, or establish a line to which an object should be moved. 

Using the Tape Measure for Construction Lines and Points 
| 
255
To make an offset construction line using an exact 
distance:
Ensure that the + sign appears next to the Tape 
1.	
Measure cursor. Tapping Ctrl/Option toggles this 
on and off. 
Click the edge to which you want the construction 
2.	
line to be parallel (Figure 10-21). Do not click an 
endpoint.
Figure 10-21
Move the mouse away from the edge, and the offset 
3.	
distance appears next to the cursor and in the 
Length field (Figure 10-22). Type the distance you 
want and press Enter, either before or after clicking 
to create the construction line.
Figure 10-22
To make a construction point using an exact distance:
Ensure that the + sign appears next to the Tape 
1.	
Measure cursor. Tapping Ctrl/Option toggles this 
on and off. 
Click the corner point from where you will measure 
2.	
the distance to the construction point (Figure 10-23).
Figure 10-23
For the distance to the construction point, use any 
3.	
of the methods you would use for creating a line 
with exact dimensions (explained in Recipe 10.1). 
Figure 10-24 shows a relative length of 7 feet in the 
red direction and 3 feet in the green, entered in the 
<red,green,blue> format.
Note
You can also use the Tape Measure to measure and resize 
objects, which is described in Recipe 10.10.
Figure 10-24

256 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Measuring and Marking Angles
10.7  
Problem
You need to measure an angle or create an angled construction line to mark an angle.
Solution 
Use the Protractor tool.
Discussion
The Protractor tool can be used to measure angles and to create angled construction lines, such 
as for roofs. 
To measure an angle: 
Position the protractor in the plane or face you 
1.	
want. If you want to orient the protractor to a 
standard plane or to another face, set the orienta-
tion you want and hold the Shift key to lock the 
orientation. After you click to place the center of 
the protractor, you can release the Shift key.
Click the corner whose angle you want to measure 
2.	
(point 1 in Figure 10-25). Then click anywhere on 
one edge that defines the angle (point 2), and hover 
over a point along the other angle edge (point 3). 
The angle is listed in the Angle field.
To create an angled construction line:
Position the protractor in the correct orientation, 
1.	
and click two points to set the baseline for the angle 
(Figure 10-26). 
Move the mouse in the general direction you want 
2.	
for the line, type the angle you want, and press 
Enter (Figure 10-27). You can set the angle either 
before or after you click to create the construction 
line. Entering a negative angle places the construc-
tion line in the opposite direction from where you 
moved the cursor.
Note
If you don’t want to enter angle values manually, you can 
define snap values for the protractor. Open the Model Info 
window to the Units page and set the snap value under 
Angle Units. You can also enter an angle in rise:run format 
(such as 1:4)—for example, when defining a roof pitch.
Figure 10-25
Figure 10-26
Figure 10-27

Finding the Area of Faces 
| 
257
Finding the Area of Faces
10.8  
Problem
You want to calculate the area of one or more faces.
Solution 
Use the Entity Info window or the Area option.
Discussion
Area calculation can be important if you need take-off quantities for painting or surface finish-
ing. Calculating the area of a simple rectangular face is not a problem if you know the length 
and width, but what if you have irregularly-shaped faces or need to calculate the total area of 
multiple faces? You can use the Entity Info window or the Area option in the pop-up menu.
Consider the model shown in Figure 10-28, a house with multiple materials. Right-click on a 
face whose area you want to calculate, and choose Area from the resulting pop-up menu.
SketchUp offers three methods for calculating area: 
Choose Selection to calculate the area of the selected 
face or faces, Layer to calculate the area of all faces 
on the layer of the selected face, or Material to calcu-
late the area of all faces with the same material as the 
selected face. If you select faces with different materials 
and then right-click on any selected face and choose 
Area→Material, the calculated area includes all faces of 
all selected materials. This applies to faces on multiple 
layers as well. No matter which type of calculation you 
choose, SketchUp displays the resulting area in a pop-
up window (Figure 10-29).
Note
Keep in mind that SketchUp faces are double-sided. If a face 
is painted with the same material on both sides, and you 
calculate area by material, the area of both faces is included. 
The exception to this rule involves translucent materials. If you 
paint window glass on a face, and that glass is automatically 
applied to the other side, the area calculation includes only 
one side of the face.
You also can calculate area by using the Entity Info 
window. Select the face or faces whose area you want 
to calculate; the Entity Info window then tells you how 
many faces are selected, as well as their total area (Fig-
ure 10-30).
Figure 10-28
Figure 10-29
Figure 10-30

258 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
If you want to use Entity Info to calculate the area of 
all faces with a specific material, you can select these 
faces in advance by using the pop-up menu option 
Select→All with Same Material. If you want to select 
faces with multiple materials (for example, all brick 
faces and all stone faces), select at least one face of each 
material. Right-click on either selected face and choose 
Select→All with Same Material, which will select all 
faces that have the selected materials.
Windows users can use the Materials window to calcu-
late the area of all faces with a specific material. Find 
the material in the In Model folder, right-click on its 
thumbnail, and choose Area from the pop-up menu 
(Figure 10-31).
Figure 10-31
Creating a Grid
10.9  
Problem
You want to use a grid to snap to points of set intervals.
Solution 
Create arrays of construction lines at set intervals or create a sandbox surface.
Discussion
Although most conventional CAD programs have grids you can turn on and off, SketchUp 
does not. This is by design; SketchUp was never intended to be a “true” CAD program. You can 
make your own grid, however, by creating and copying a construction line or by setting up a 
sandbox.
Start with a horizontal line (or a line in the direc-
1.	
tion you want for your grid), and use the Tape 
Measure tool to create an offset construction line 
(Figure 10-32).
Make a copy of the construction line at a set inter-
2.	
val (1 foot, 10mm, whatever you need). 
Type 
3.	
100x and press Enter, or use whatever number 
you want, to create a set of construction lines sepa-
rated by the distance you set for the first copy. 
Figure 10-32

Creating a Grid 
| 
259
Select and rotate-copy all of the construction lines 
4.	
90 degrees (Figure 10-33).
Although you won’t have rulers to let you know exactly 
where you are in the grid, you can look at the Length 
field to see how long your lines are. You can snap to a 
grid point when you see the Intersection inference.
Figure 10-33
Another way to create a grid is to create a flat sandbox 
surface. Choose Draw→Sandbox→From Scratch. Set 
your grid spacing and click two points to define one 
side of the grid (Figure 10-34).
Figure 10-34
Then move your mouse in the perpendicular direction 
to define the other side of the grid (Figure 10-35).
The resulting grid is a group, which means that you can 
draw objects on it without the objects sticking to the 
grid.
Figure 10-35

260 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Measuring Lengths and Resizing
10.10  
Problem
You want to check a distance between two points. If this distance is too large or small, you want 
to resize your model.
Solution 
Use the Tape Measure tool to measure a length between two points. To change this length, enter 
a new distance, which updates the size of the entire model uniformly.
Discussion
Picture this: you start a design without paying attention to scale and then realize later that your 
dimensions are off. Or maybe you receive or download a model that wasn’t designed particular-
ly carefully as far as numbers go. You can use the Tape Measure to measure a distance between 
any two points, and if the length is too large or small, you will want to resize the model. Right 
after measuring, entering a new length will resize the entire model to accommodate this new 
length.
Using Scale for Exact Sizing
It is possible to use the Scale tool for resizing, though it’s 
a bit more difficult to get exact measurements with Scale 
than it is with Tape Measure. Scale values are ratios of a 
new length to a current length. So Scale is great if you 
want to change your model size by a scale factor, that is, 
make your entire model one-half or three times as big.
You can use the Scale tool for an exact resize, if you know 
the exact ratio of a desired length to a current length. 
You can apply this type of ratio in one, two, or three di-
rections, depending on whether you drag a center, side, 
or corner handle. The Measurements field will indicate 
whether you are doing an overall (three-direction) scale, 
or a scale in one or two directions. Two-direction scale 
values must be separated by a comma. Pressing Shift 
enables you to toggle on and off the aspect ratio while 
scaling.
You can also enter exact measurements when using Scale, 
if you append a unit to the dimension you enter. For exam-
ple, if the entire model is to be 10 feet tall, you would click 
the top-center drag handle to move in the blue direction, 
and then enter 10’. The aspect ratio is lost, however, when 
you scale this way. If you know the overall model length in 
all three directions, you can enter the red, green, and blue 
measurements, separated by commas. Using Scale with 
exact dimensions requires you to know overall measure-
ments of the entire model, not particular lengths between 
two points within the model.
Using measurements in inches while using Scale poses 
an interesting problem. The inch unit is entered as a 
quotation mark, which requires the Shift key. But if you 
press Shift while typing a value before the scale is com-
plete, SketchUp assumes you’re entering the number as a 
scale ratio. So if you want to scale to an exact inch value, 
complete an arbitrary scale first, and enter the dimension 
afterward with the quote symbol.

Measuring Lengths and Resizing 
| 
261
If you want to set an exact length and apply the factor 
between the old and new lengths to the entire model, 
use the Tape Measure tool.
Consider the model shown in Figure 10-36, which is of 
a dollhouse but was designed at the scale of a full-sized 
house.
If you know just one of the actual dimensions for the 
actual model, you can resize the entire model to match. 
Activate the Tape Measure tool and make sure the 
1.	
+ sign is not attached to the cursor. If it is there, the 
operation will result in an unwanted construction 
line. (Don’t worry too much; you can always erase 
it.) Tap Ctrl/Option to toggle the + off and on.
In Figure 10-37, the known dimension is along the 
2.	
lower edge, along the front of the house. Click one 
endpoint and hover over the other endpoint. The 
measured length appears next to the cursor and 
also appears in the Length field. (If you needed to 
measure only this edge, you’d be finished, with no 
need to click anything else.)
Because this measurement is too large for a doll-
3.	
house, the length needs to be resized. Click this 
endpoint, then enter the actual length you want for 
this edge. In the example, the front of the house 
should be 3 feet wide, so I entered 36 for 36 inches, 
using architectural units (Figure 10-38).
When you are asked whether you want to resize 
4.	
the model, click Yes. The entire model shrinks to 
accommodate the new dimension. When you resize 
this way, you may have to use the Zoom Extents tool 
to get the larger or smaller model back into view.
Note
If there are components in the model that were imported 
from external files (components not created within the 
current SketchUp file), they will not be resized. Recipe 10.11 
explains how to handle a situation like this.
Here’s another example in which you would want to re-
size a model: you have a graphic of a floor plan (Figure 
10-39) and want to use it as a basis for your model. This 
could occur if you’re renovating an old house for which 
there are scanned blueprints but no CAD drawings you 
can import.
Figure 10-36
Figure 10-37
Figure 10-38
Figure 10-39

262 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Import the graphic as an image. 
1.	
Use the Tape Measure tool to click two points at the 
2.	
extents of one of the existing dimensions (Figure 
10-40), preferably the longest dimension so as to 
minimize scaling errors.
Figure 10-40
Enter the dimension listed on the graphic and resize 
3.	
the model. You can measure another dimension 
on the plan to check that the resizing was correct 
(Figure 10-41). It might not be exact, but you can 
get pretty close.
After your model is to scale, you can trace internal and 
external walls right on the image (Figure 10-42). Figure 
10-43 illustrates how the walls look when pulled up to 
the correct height. Notice that in X-Ray mode, you can 
still see the graphic below.
Figure 10-41
Figure 10-42
Figure 10-43

Resizing Models with Groups and Components 
| 
263
Resizing Models with Groups and Components
10.11  
Problem
You want to resize your model, but some of its components will not resize.
Solution 
Change the scale of the component in its original file, or resize it within the current file while 
editing the component.
Discussion
When you resize a model by using the Tape Measure tool, internal components (components 
that you create within the model) will resize, as will groups. Any components in the model that 
were imported from external files, such as models from the 3D Warehouse, will not resize. This 
is by design; if a manufacturer’s window is 3 feet high, the window should keep its size even if 
objects around it change their size. 
This example demonstrates how internal components, 
external components, and groups work while resizing 
with the Tape Measure tool.
Note
If you use the Scale tool to resize, external 
components will resize. But this does not 
change the definition of the component; if 
you were to insert another component from 
the In Model folder, the new component 
would have the original size.
Download my 
1.	
Bedroom model from the 3D Ware-
house (Figure 10-44). The walls and floor com-
pose a group, and the bed is a component that was 
imported from an external file. The entire room has 
a very small scale.
Make the dresser into a component. 
2.	
You now have four types of objects: ungrouped (the 
painting on the wall), grouped (the walls and floor), 
internal component (the dresser), and external 
component (the bed).
Activate the Tape Measure tool, tap Ctrl/Option 
3.	
to toggle off Construction Line mode, and click 
the two endpoints of the edge indicated in Figure 
10-45. The length of this edge is 975mm; the entire 
room is scaled too small.
Enter 
4.	
4000mm to resize the edge. You will see a 
warning message alerting you that external compo-
nents will not be resized. Click Yes to resize every-
thing else.
Figure 10-44
Figure 10-45

264 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Use the 
5.	
Zoom Extents tool if your model disappears 
from view. The painting, room group, and dresser 
component are now larger, but the bed component 
has not changed (Figure 10-46).
There are three ways to resize this component. You 
could open the component in its original model 
file, resize it, save the file, and then reload it in the 
bedroom model (explained in Recipe 7.13). A sec-
ond option is to use the Scale tool on the compo-
nent, which is a bit complicated, as explained in the 
“Using Scale for Exact Sizing” sidebar earlier in this 
chapter. The third option, shown in the next steps, 
is to resize the component while editing it.
Open the bed component for editing. Activate Tape 
6.	
Measure and click two endpoints along the length 
of the mattress. The measured length is about 
510mm (Figure 10-47).
Figure 10-46
Figure 10-47
Enter the desired length of 
7.	
1900mm and confirm 
that you want to resize the component. You might 
have to move your resized bed into place within the 
room. The entire bed resizes, except for the pil-
lows. The pillows are nested components within the 
bed component, so they retain their original size 
(Figure 10-48).
Figure 10-48
To resize the pillows, open either one of them for 
8.	
editing and use Tape Measure to make them both 
about 550mm long (Figure 10-49). Move them into 
place if necessary.
Figure 10-49

Resizing Parts of Your Model 
| 
265
Now you know how to handle a problem you’ll encoun-
ter frequently if you download models from the 3D 
Warehouse. Many models there are uploaded with inac-
curate dimensions and need to be resized within your 
model. For example, you could find a wall clock that 
is larger than the bed (Figure 10-50). If the clock is a 
model you’ll use in other models, it’s worthwhile to save 
the model file to your hard drive and change the scale 
in that file. But if you are using the clock in only the 
current file, you can use the Scale tool, or edit the clock 
component and resize it by using the Tape Measure 
(Figure 10-51).
Figure 10-50
Figure 10-51
Resizing Parts of Your Model
10.12  
Problem
You want to resize only certain objects within your model but not the entire model.
Solution 
Make the objects you want to resize into a group, and use the Tape Measure tool while editing 
the group. (If the resized objects will be used repeatedly, make them into a component instead 
of a group.)
Discussion
In Recipe 10.11, you started with a model that had external components that needed to be re-
sized separately. In this recipe, you start with a file that has no external components. The parts 
that you want to resize will be made into their own group, and resized while the group is edited 
without affecting the rest of the model. 
In this recipe, you will start with a model of a desk that has several objects, one of which needs 
to be resized. In the “Other Uses” section, you’ll see how separating objects into groups can be 
useful in making mosaic tiles.

266 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Download my 
1.	
Office Desk model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 10-52). The desk itself is an 
internal component (actually two mirrored half-
components). The computer is a group, the vase is a 
group, but the clock is ungrouped. The clock is far 
too large and needs to be resized.
Make the entire clock into a group.
2.	
Figure 10-52
Edit the group and activate the Tape Measure. Click 
3.	
the two endpoints of the edge indicated in Figure 
10-53 and resize this edge to 6 inches. Confirm that 
you want to resize the group to make the clock a 
more reasonable size (Figure 10-54).
Figure 10-53
Figure 10-54

Resizing Parts of Your Model 
| 
267
Other Uses
Separating objects into groups or components is a use-
ful way to size tiles to make mosaics. Use the Polygon 
tool to make a flat hexagon, diamond, and triangle 
(Figure 10-55). For these tiles to be placed into a mosaic 
pattern, all edges of all shapes must be the same length, 
but you cannot specify edge length when creating a 
polygon.
Because the tiles will repeat, make each shape into its 
own component rather than a group. Then open one 
component for editing, and use the Tape Measure tool 
to set a specific length for one edge (Figure 10-56). 
Remember the length you set for the edge. Open the 
other components for editing, and resize them by using 
the same edge length as you used for the first shape 
(Figure 10-57). If you want to use Push/Pull to give 
the tiles some thickness, do this after the 2D shape is 
resized. Otherwise, the resizing will also change the 
tile thickness.
Figure 10-55
Figure 10-56
Figure 10-57
When all of the groups are edited and resized, their edge 
lengths will be the same, and you can arrange them in a 
mosaic pattern (Figure 10-58).
Figure 10-58

268 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
Resizing a Model in Multiple Directions
10.13  
Problem
You want to resize a model by different factors in more than one direction.
Solution 
Use the Tape Measure to resize based on a measurement in one direction. To make subsequent 
changes in scale in other directions, use construction lines to aid in resizing.
Discussion
Sometimes after you resize a model, you still want to change its scale in a particular direction. 
The trouble is that the Tape Measure tool resizes the entire model by the same factor in all di-
rections. For example, say you used the Tape Measure to resize the picnic table in Figure 10-59, 
but decided it was still too narrow. If you use Tape Measure to resize the table for the correct 
width, the height and depth will also increase. The solution is to use a construction line to set 
the limits for the second resize, and edit the geometry to meet the construction line.
Figure 10-59
Download my 
1.	
Picnic Table model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 10-59).
Use the Tape Measure tool to resize the height of 
2.	
the table. There are no points on the model that you 
can click to get this exact height, so click a point on 
the top of the table, press the up arrow or down ar-
row key, and click a point at the bottom of the table. 
This measures the vertical distance between the 
top of the table and the ground. The current height 
measures about 4 inches, a tad low for a real table 
(Figure 10-60).
Enter 
3.	
27” to resize the entire table.
Figure 10-60

Resizing a Model in Multiple Directions 
| 
269
Use Tape Measure again to measure the width of 
4.	
one of the benches. It is about 4.5 feet (Figure 10-
61), but the desired width is 6 feet.
Figure 10-61
If you enter 6 feet, the new table width will be 
5.	
correct, but the height will also increase, because 
resizing is uniform in all directions. So create a con-
struction line that defines the 6-foot width. While 
Tape Measure is still active, make sure the + sign is 
displayed next to the cursor, and click anywhere on 
a left edge (not an endpoint) of the bench (Figure 
10-62).
Figure 10-62
Place the construction line 6 feet to the right of this 
6.	
edge (Figure 10-63). You can enter 6’ or 72”, either 
before or after you click to place the construction 
line. 
Figure 10-63
Each slat of this table is the same component. So 
7.	
open any one of them for editing, and use Push/
Pull on the end you want to stretch. End the Push/
Pull by clicking anywhere on the construction line 
(Figure 10-64).
Figure 10-64

270 
| 
Chapter 10: Modeling with Exact Dimensions
The only object left to fix is the table support on 
8.	
the side you just lengthened. You could move it into 
place, but it’s not clear where it should go because 
it is set back from the edges of the slats. The easiest 
way to fix this support is to erase it and start over, 
so remove it (Figure 10-65).
Figure 10-65
The new support will be a rotated copy of the origi-
9.	
nal one. To establish the center of rotation, draw a 
temporary line halfway down the width of the table 
(Figure 10-66).
Figure 10-66
Select the table support and make a rotated copy 
10.	
of it 180 degrees away, using the center point of 
the temporary line as the center of rotation (Figure 
10-67).
Note
Another way to fix the location of the support would be to 
move it before lengthening the slats. You would first select 
the support you want to move, and for the two move points, 
you would click an endpoint of one slat, move the mouse in 
the correct direction (or use the left arrow key), and click the 
construction line. Then you would use Push/Pull to lengthen 
the slats.
Another way to lengthen the table, after resizing the 
table to the correct height, would be to use the Scale 
tool. You would draw the same 6-foot construction line 
from the side of the table, select the entire table, and ac-
tivate Scale. Then you would drag the center handle in 
the green direction until you meet the construction line 
(Figure 10-68). The results are slightly different using 
Scale, however, because the two supports would thicken 
a bit after the Scale operation.
Yet another way to widen the table using Scale would 
be to click the center drag handle in the green direction 
and type 6’ either before or after completing the scale.
Figure 10-67
Figure 10-68

You’ve worked hard on your model, and now you 
want to show it to a boss, a client, a friend, or the 
whole world (if you upload it to the 3D Warehouse). 
It’s easy enough to hand over your .skp file and walk 
away, but if you really want to knock their socks off 
and show them exactly what you want them to see, 
it’s important to understand SketchUp’s model pre-
sentation tools: layers, scenes, shadows, and section-
ing. (Styles are also important, and they are covered 
in Chapter 12.)
Although some of these tools are not used ex-
clusively for presentation, each can play a role in 
showing your model in exciting and interesting 
ways. When you understand each of these tools 
and learn ways to combine them, you’ll become 
an expert at communicating your designs.
Chapter 11
	
Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Note
The tools and techniques described in this chapter 
are available in the Free and Pro versions of SketchUp. 
SketchUp Pro users also have the benefit of the 
LayOut program, which is an application for present-
ing 3D models in a 2D format. LayOut has advanced 
features for view presentation and annotations such 
as dimensions and callouts. If you are not a Pro user, 
read about LayOut on SketchUp’s website, and you 
may be convinced to become one.
Working with Layers
11.1  
Problem
You want to control the visibility of certain objects in your model.
Solution
Use layers.
Discussion
Layers in SketchUp are used to control visibility of objects. For example, if you are designing 
a series of buildings, you can place each building on its own layer, and display only the build-
ings you need to see at any given time. For large models, placing objects on invisible layers can 
greatly increase the model’s performance in SketchUp. For example, if you attempt to orbit 
around a model with lots of details, such as fully furnished rooms, SketchUp might need some 
time to redraw each object. If you don’t need to see the furniture all of the time, place the furni-
ture on invisible layers; the rest of the model will move much faster.

272 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
To create a new layer, choose Window→Layers to open 
the Layers window (Figure 11-1). Click the + icon (Add 
on the Mac) and assign a layer name. To hide, or blank, 
a layer, which hides all of the layer’s contents, deselect 
the layer’s Visible checkbox.
By default, Layer0 is the active layer, which means all 
new objects are created on that layer. To make another 
layer active and subsequently place all newly created 
objects on that layer, select the layer’s radio button. 
(However, the best practice is to create all objects on 
Layer0 and move objects to different layers as needed.)
You can also display the Layers toolbar. In Windows, 
choose View→Toolbars→Layers; on the Mac, drag the 
Layers toolbar from the View→Customize Toolbar 
menu. If nothing in the model is selected, you can make 
a layer active by choosing it in the toolbar shown in 
Figure 11-2.
There are two ways to place an object on a layer. First, 
select the objects you want to place. If the Layers toolbar 
is displayed, you can choose the layer from its drop-
down menu. Or you can open the Entity Info window 
(Window→Entity Info) and choose the layer from its 
Layer menu (Figure 11-3). Unlike in other CAD ap-
plications, in SketchUp an object can be placed on only 
one layer.
When layers are combined with scenes, you can save 
views that include only the objects you want to see, as 
you’ll learn in Recipe 11.5.
It is important to note that you cannot draw objects 
directly on top of objects hidden on other layers. For 
example, if you create a box at a specific spot and place 
that box on a hidden layer, you cannot then draw 
another box of the same dimensions in the same spot. 
However, if the objects on the hidden layer are made 
into a group or component, you can place new objects 
in the same spot. This is shown in Recipe 11.6.
Figure 11-1
Figure 11-2
Figure 11-3
Note
The layer of a group or component can be 
different from the layers of the objects that 
compose it. So you can hide part of a group 
by blanking that object’s layer, or hide the 
entire group by blanking the group’s layer. In 
theory, this bends the “one layer per object” 
rule, because an object can exist both on its 
own layer and to the layer of its group. For an 
example of this, download my Layers Groups 
Components model from the 3D Warehouse 
and hide the various layers. Each object in the 
room resides on its own layer, as well as the 
layer of the room group.

Working with Scenes 
| 
273
Working with Scenes
11.2  
Problem
You want to save the settings of the current model’s display.
Solution
Create a scene.
Discussion
Creating scenes is how you save properties of the current model display. The most common 
use for a scene is to save the camera location (current view). This can be particularly helpful 
in large models when you need to repeatedly return to a hard-to-find spot. You can also use a 
scene to save the current style, shadow setting, visible layers, and more, which enables you to 
explore various design scenarios, animate sectioning, study moving shadows, and change the 
displayed style, to name only a few possibilities.
To save a scene, make sure the model is displayed 
with the properties you want to save (camera location, 
visible layers, and so on). Open the Scenes window 
(Windows→Scenes) and make sure only the properties 
you want to save are selected. Click the + icon and then 
assign a scene name. Figure 11-4 shows a model with 
four scenes. Scenes are listed in the order in which they 
are created, but you can rearrange the order via the ar-
row icons at the top-right corner of the Scenes window.
By default, a scene is saved with all of the properties 
selected. For any properties that are not selected, the 
scene will take on those properties from the scene that 
precedes it. For example, if you deselect Camera Loca-
tion, the current scene will have the same camera loca-
tion as the previous scene. (Previous does not necessar-
ily mean the previous scene in the scenes list; it means 
any scene that was displayed before the current one.)
After each scene is created, it appears on a tab above the 
SketchUp drawing window (Figure 11-5). Click a tab 
to display the scene. Each scene tab has a pop-up menu 
that enables you to move, add, delete, or animate scenes.
Figure 11-4
Figure 11-5

274 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
If you want to change or update a scene, first display that 
scene by double-clicking the scene name in the Scenes 
window or by clicking the scene tab. Make the change 
you want (orbit to a different view, change the proper-
ties to save, an so on) and click the Update icon in the 
Scenes window. (This is the icon with the two curved 
arrows.)
After you have two or more scenes, you can play an 
animation of the scenes. (If you want to omit a scene 
from the animation, you can set this property in the 
Scenes window.) To watch the animation, choose 
View→Animation→Play from the main menu, or choose 
Play Animation from any scene tab’s pop-up menu.
To control the speed and smoothness of your anima-
tion, open the Animation page of the Model Info win-
dow (Figure 11-6). If scene transitions are enabled, the 
model will orbit smoothly from one scene to the next. 
You can adjust the time this transition takes, as well as 
the scene delay, which is the amount of time each scene 
is displayed.
To export your animation, choose File→Export→ 
­Animation. There are several file formats to choose 
from, and you can click the Options button to see spe-
cific settings for your selected format.
Figure 11-6
Note
This point is made elsewhere in this book but 
it bears repeating: If you want to download a 
model with scenes from the 3D Warehouse, 
do not download it directly into the cur-
rent SketchUp file, or the scenes will not 
appear. Open the model in a new instance 
of SketchUp or save the model to your hard 
drive. Similarly, if you use File→Import to im-
port a model with scenes as a component, the 
scenes will not appear.

Working with Shadows 
| 
275
Working with Shadows
11.3  
Problem 
You want to cast shadows on your model.
Solution
Use Windows→Shadows to access the Shadow Settings window.
Discussion
Despite SketchUp’s cartoonish rendering, its shadow calculations are extremely accurate. To 
cast shadows on your model, choose Window→Shadows to open the Shadow Settings window 
(Figure 11-7). Here you can control whether shadows are displayed, the time of day and year, 
the lightness of illuminated faces (Light slider) and the lightness of shadows (Dark slider), and 
which types of objects will receive or cast shadows.
You can also display the Shadows toolbar: In Windows, 
choose View→Toolbars→Shadows; on the Mac, drag the 
Shadows toolbar from the View→Customize Toolbar 
menu. The toolbar is a smaller version of the Shadow 
Settings window (Figure 11-8), enabling you to toggle 
shadow display and set the times.
Naturally, the shadows cast depend on the location of 
your model. Model location is discussed in depth in 
Recipes 13.8 and 13.9, but basically there are two ways 
to define where your model is located. If you are work-
ing with Google Earth, you can use Get Current View to 
import a Google Earth snapshot and terrain into your 
SketchUp model, thereby setting the model’s location 
internally. Otherwise, you can manually set the location 
in the Location page of the Model Info window. If your 
particular area is not listed on that page, you can enter 
your own latitude and longitude coordinates.
You can combine shadows with scenes to create an 
animation of shadows passing over your model. This 
technique is described in Recipe 11.7.
Figure 11-7
Figure 11-8
Note
For large models, shadow display can slow 
down your model. Turning shadows off is a 
good way to maximize performance.

276 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Sectioning Your Model
11.4  
Problem
You need to show a cross-section of your model.
Solution
Use the Section Plane tool.
Discussion
The Section Plane tool (Tools→Section Plane) enables you to slice through your model to see 
what’s inside. This is great for architectural designs (viewing floor plans), mechanical designs 
(viewing the inside of a machine), cabinet designs, mold making, and more.
Figure 11-9 shows a car with a section plane through 
the center.
When the section plane is active, half of the car behind 
the plane is hidden, and you can see inside (Figure 11-
10).
To place a section plane, align the plane either to an 
existing face or to one of the standard planes. You can 
use the Shift key to lock the orientation of a section 
plane before you place it. Section planes can be erased, 
hidden, moved, copied, and rotated like other SketchUp 
objects. A section plane is infinite, so it can be placed 
anywhere and still slice through the entire model. Mov-
ing or copying a section plane always results in an offset 
(parallel) plane.
The pop-up menu for a section plane contains options 
to reverse the cut, activate the cut, and align the cur-
rent view to the section plane. The option Create Group 
from Slice produces a group of objects where the model 
meets the section plane. For Pro users, this slice group 
can be exported into AutoCAD format by choosing 
File→Export→Section Slice.
The View menu contains options for displaying sec-
tion planes and section cuts. Turning off section cuts 
deactivates all section planes; the model appears intact, 
but you can still see the location of each plane. Only one 
section plane can be active at a time.
The Section Plane tool is available on the Large Tool Set 
toolbar. Windows users can also display the Sectioning 
toolbar (Windows: Choose View→Toolbars→Sections).
Figure 11-9
Figure 11-10

Using Layers and Scenes to Control Displayed Objects 
| 
277
When you combine sections with scenes, you can cre-
ate animated views of your model being sectioned, a 
great presentation technique that is described in Recipe 
11.9. You can also use section planes within groups and 
components to create section animation in stages—an 
incredibly cool presentation technique that is shown in 
Recipe 11.10. (This technique also bends the “one sec-
tion plane active at a time” rule.)
Using Layers and Scenes to Control Displayed Objects
11.5  
Problem
You want to be able to turn on and off the display of objects in your model.
Solution
Place objects on separate layers and then control which layers are visible.
Discussion
You can control object visibility by creating layers and placing objects on them. When layers are 
made invisible, all objects on those layers are hidden. When you combine layers with scenes, 
you can create saved views with objects hidden or displayed, which can be a great way to pres-
ent various elements of your model. To demonstrate, the main example shows how to use layers 
to produce various presentation views of a house. The “Other Uses” section shows how you can 
place text on different layers, to highlight specific features of a playhouse.
Download my 
1.	
Furnished Cottage model from the 
3D Warehouse. It is a one-story house with fur-
nished rooms (Figure 11-11).
Create a scene for this initial view (Recipe 11.2). 
2.	
Make sure all of the properties at the bottom of the 
Scenes window are selected. You can assign a scene 
name or accept the default, Scene 1. This is the first 
view your client would see in your presentation. 
For the remaining scenes in the presentation, you 
3.	
want to show the rooms from above, with and with-
out furniture. So the roof and furniture each need 
their own layer, in order to control their visibility. 
Create two new layers (Recipe 11.1), one for the 
roof and one for the furniture. Deselect the Visible 
checkbox for each layer, so that when you place an 
object on a layer, it automatically disappears from 
view (Figure 11-12).
Figure 11-11
Figure 11-12

278 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
The next task is to place the roof and furniture 
objects on their appropriate layers. You can do this 
in the Layers toolbar or the Entity Info window, so 
make sure one of these is displayed.
To select all of the roof faces, right-click on one of 
4.	
them and choose Select→All with same material. 
Place these faces on the roof layer. These faces dis-
appear from view because they were placed on an 
invisible layer. What remains are some roof edges 
and ceiling faces (Figure 11-13).
Add all of the roof edges and ceiling faces to the 
5.	
roof layer. (Do this in stages, because it is difficult 
to select all of the necessary objects at one time.) 
You can now see into all of the furnished rooms 
(Figure 11-14).
Select the pieces of furniture and place them on 
6.	
their own layer.
Figure 11-13
Figure 11-14
Now you are ready to create the next scene in 
7.	
the presentation. Switch to Top view and choose 
Camera→Parallel Projection, so that you have a true 
projection view (Figure 11-15), without the distor-
tion you would see in Perspective view. 
Create a new scene for this view of empty rooms 
8.	
and no roof.
Figure 11-15
For the third scene, turn the Furniture layer back 
9.	
on by selecting its Visible checkbox. Switch back to 
Perspective view and then orbit to the view shown 
in Figure 11-16.
Figure 11-16

Using Layers and Scenes to Control Displayed Objects 
| 
279
Create a third scene for this view.
10.	
The three scene tabs are now at the top of your 
SketchUp window (Figure 11-17), and you can click 
each one to see the roof and furniture appear and 
disappear. You can also view the animation of these 
scenes.
Other Uses
If your presentation includes text, labels, or dimensions, 
you can use layers to control which annotations are 
displayed in a particular scene. 
For an example, download my Play House model from 
the 3D Warehouse (Figure 11-18). If you turn on the 
visibility of each layer, you can see all of the labels 
marking various features of the playhouse. Using lots of 
labels can make your model rather cluttered.
Figure 11-17
Figure 11-18
A better approach is to display these labels one at a time 
by using layers and scenes. In this model, each label 
has its own layer, as shown in Figure 11-19. Each of the 
model’s scenes (Figure 11-20) captures a different view 
with a single label; all other label layers are blanked. 
Click through the scenes or play the animation to see 
how this model presents the various features of the 
playhouse.
Figure 11-19
Figure 11-20

280 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Using Layers, Scenes, and Groups for Different Design Scenarios
11.6  
Problem
You want to try out different design ideas on a model, without being locked into specific cam-
era views.
Solution
Place each design element as a group on its own layer and then create scenes to display each 
element. When creating the scenes, do not save the camera location.
Discussion
A typical scenario to illustrate this technique is a kitchen design for which you would like to 
try out different types of flooring. Each floor is placed on its own layer, and scenes are used to 
control which floor is visible.
When you create a scene, the default setting is to save 
the camera location, so that every time you click the 
scene tab, you return to the saved view. However, for 
this design scenario, you don’t want to keep returning 
to the same view; you want to orbit to a view and stay in 
it, while trying out the different floors. In other words, 
you want to try out the floors when looking from above, 
when looking directly at the walls, and so on. The solu-
tion for this is to save each scene without its camera 
location, which means that the current view will not be 
saved with the scene.
Download my 
1.	
Kitchen Floor model from the 3D 
Warehouse (Figure 11-21). The current floor has 
beige tiles, and you want to see how a different floor 
would look.
Figure 11-21
Create two new layers (Recipe 11.1), one for each 
2.	
floor, as shown in Figure 11-22.
Because the two floors will lie on the same plane, 
3.	
each must be made into a group so that they won’t 
interfere with one another. (Without groups, you 
could not have two separate faces occupying the 
same spot.) Start by making the current floor a 
group: Activate Select and double-click the floor to 
select both its face and the edges around it, right-
click on the floor, and choose Make Group.
Figure 11-22

Using Layers, Scenes, and Groups for Different Design Scenarios 
| 
281
Place this floor group on one of the floor layers. 
4.	
Clear the Visible checkbox for this layer, which 
removes the entire floor from view (Figure 11-23).
Figure 11-23
Use the Rectangle tool to make a new floor in the 
5.	
same spot as the original floor. Apply a different 
material to this floor (Figure 11-24).
Make the new floor into a group and then place it 
6.	
on the other layer.
Create a scene for the floor currently displayed. 
7.	
When you create the scene, deselect the Camera 
Location property in the Scenes window, so that 
you don’t return to the current view every time you 
click the scene tab.
Hide the current floor’s layer, display the other 
8.	
layer, and create a new scene. The Camera Location 
property should still be deselected.
Now both floors are ready for you to examine. 
9.	
Because the camera view was not saved in either 
scene, you can orbit to any view, such as the plan 
view shown in Figure 11-25. Click the scene tabs to 
switch between floors (Figure 11-26).
Try out a few more views and see how each floor looks.
Figure 11-24
Figure 11-25
Figure 11-26

282 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Other Uses
Another scenario for which this technique can be 
applied is landscaping. Download my Landscaping 
Options model from the 3D Warehouse (Figure 11-27). 
This landscaping model has three scene tabs, each of 
which shows a different landscape design. Orbit to any 
view and click each tab to see the landscaping change.
Another great use for this technique is to simulate mov-
ing or rotating objects. Download my Windmills model 
from the 3D Warehouse (Figure 11-28).
This model has eight scenes, representing increments of 
degrees that the blades are rotating. There are eight in-
crements of 15 degrees for a total of 120 degrees, which 
is the angle between pairs of adjacent white blades or 
red blades.
There are also eight layers for the blades. If you display 
all layers, you’ll see that there are eight copies of each set 
of blades (Figure 11-29). Each scene displays one set of 
blades, and the scenes proceed in rotational order. Play 
the animation to see the blades spin. In the Animations 
page of the Model Info window, you can see that there 
is no scene delay and a very short scene transition time 
(0.1 second). You can increase these values to slow the 
spinning. And because the scenes were not saved with 
camera properties, you can play the animation while in 
any view.
Figure 11-27
Figure 11-28
Figure 11-29

Studying Shadow Movements 
| 
283
To see a model that has scenes for shadows, download 
my Shadow Study model from the 3D Warehouse (Fig-
ure 11-30). 
Figure 11-30
Studying Shadow Movements
11.7  
Problem
You want to see how shadows move over a model during the course of a day, at various times of 
year.
Solution
Create a scene for each shadow’s start and end time. When you click the start scene and then 
the end scene, the shadow will move as the scene transitions.
Discussion
The procedure to create a shadow study is simple: Set the shadow for the particular time of day 
and year (Recipe 11.3) and then create a scene. Adjust the shadows to another part of the day 
and then create a second scene. 
This model has four scenes for morning and evening in 
summer and winter. Camera Location is not selected, 
so you can orbit to any view you want and check out the 
shadows without losing the view (Figure 11-31).
Click scenes to see how shadows move over the pool 
from a summer morning to a summer evening. Or see 
how shadows from the trees move over the house in the 
winter.
The model’s location is Washington, D.C., but if you 
want to examine shadows in a more interesting part of 
the world (at least with respect to shadows), change the 
location to Svalbard, Norway. You’ll have to enter the 
coordinates yourself: 78N, 20E. This town is close to the 
North Pole, so there is no sun in winter and no darkness 
in summer.
Figure 11-31

284 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Walking Through Your Model
11.8  
Problem
You want “real-world” views of your model.
Solution
Use the Position Camera, Look Around, and Walk tools.
Discussion
Often when presenting your model, you’ll want to show exactly how one aspect of the model 
will look when a viewer is standing in a particular spot, at a particular height, looking in a 
particular direction. You can do just that with SketchUp’s three walk-through tools: Position 
Camera, Look Around, and Walk. 
Use Walk to simulate walking or running along your model. After you walk to where you 
want to stop and take a look, use the Look Around tool to turn your head or look up or down. 
For a view from a specific vantage point, use Position Camera. These tools are all available 
on the Camera menu, on the large tool set, and (for Windows users) on their own toolbar 
(View→Toolbars→Walkthrough).
The walk-through tools take a bit of practice. But after you get the hang of using them, you’ll 
have no trouble producing informative animations of what can be found in your model.
Consider the model shown in Figure 11-32, which 
represents part of a three-story apartment building, 
located opposite a set of townhouses. (The townhouses 
are represented by an image stretched onto a wide face; 
think of the apartment residents looking across the 
street at a huge billboard rather than the actual houses 
of their neighbors.)
Imagine that a potential resident of the second-story 
apartment is curious about what sort of views he would 
see from his living room and balcony. By placing the 
SketchUp camera in strategic spots, you can simulate 
what can be seen in the actual apartment and then save 
scenes of these strategic views—a great marketing tool 
to show potential tenants.
Download my 
1.	
Apartment Balcony model from 
the 3D Warehouse. Click the “Looking down on 
balcony” scene.
Figure 11-32

Walking Through Your Model 
| 
285
The first task is to place a camera that simulates a 
2.	
person standing on the balcony. Activate the Posi-
tion Camera tool (Camera→Position Camera). Look 
at the Height Offset field, which should reflect a 
typical eye height (5’ 6”, in this case). If your field 
shows a different value, enter 5.5’ to set the cor-
rect height. Then click on the floor of the balcony, 
where indicated in Figure 11-33.
Figure 11-33
The camera is now 5’ 6” above the floor, looking 
straight into the apartment (Figure 11-34). The 
cursor is a pair of eyes, indicating that the Look 
Around tool is now active.
Figure 11-34
To use Look Around, keep the left mouse but-
3.	
ton pressed and move the cursor. Moving up or 
down simulates looking up or down. Moving left 
or right simulates turning your head or spinning 
slowly in the same spot. Move directly to the right 
to turn halfway around, so that you are facing the 
townhouses across the street (Figure 11-35). This 
simulates what you would see when standing on the 
balcony.
Continue looking around until you are facing inside 
4.	
the apartment again.
The next view to examine is the view from inside 
5.	
the apartment. To simulate walking into the apart-
ment, activate the Walk tool (Camera→Walk). The 
cursor is now a pair of feet (Figure 11-36).
Figure 11-35
Figure 11-36

286 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Walk straight forward by keeping the left mouse 
6.	
button pressed and moving the mouse straight 
up. Moving the mouse higher will make you walk 
faster, so move up only slightly for now. You will 
get stuck almost immediately because you will run 
into the door (ouch). The cursor turns into a stick-
figure person (Figure 11-37).
Break the collision detection by pressing the Alt key 
7.	
(Cmd on the Mac) and proceed into the apartment. 
While in the Walk tool, you can temporarily switch 
to the Look Around tool by holding the middle 
mouse button. By combining Walk and Look 
Around, you can peruse the entire space, viewing 
exactly what you would see from any vantage point.
Combining Walk and Look Around takes some 
practice, and you may find yourself backing out of 
the building altogether and ending up outside. It is 
helpful to save a scene at the point where you start 
walking, in case you get completely lost and want 
to easily get back to a familiar point. After you get 
used to these tools, you’ll find that walking around 
is a powerful observation tool.
Figure 11-37
Note
While in the Walk tool, you can hold the Ctrl/
Option key if you’re in a hurry; this makes 
you run instead of walk. (Although running 
is convenient in a large space, it won’t do 
much good in this small apartment.) You can 
also hold the Shift key to move straight up or 
down, simulating an elevator effect. If you try 
this while inside the second-floor apartment, 
you can examine the vacant apartments on 
the first and third floors.
Walk to a point somewhere near the coffee table 
8.	
and look down at the couch (Figure 11-38).
Figure 11-38
The next view to examine is what you will see while 
9.	
sitting on the couch. Activate Position Camera 
again and enter a height of 2’. This is approximately 
how far your eyes are above the seat of a couch 
while seated. Click the seat of the couch to place the 
camera there (Figure 11-39).
Figure 11-39

Creating Animated Sections 
| 
287
Look around from this vantage point. You can 
10.	
see the room’s furnishings (Figure 11-40) and the 
view outside the balcony (Figure 11-41). From the 
couch, you can see the underside of the third-floor 
balcony.
For purposes of a presentation, you would create a 
scene at each view of interest, making sure to save the 
camera location for each scene.
The 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter includes 
several other models that have animated presentations, 
both interior and exterior. The models Hacienda and 
Concept House each contain many scenes that guide 
you through nicely designed and furnished houses. 
Hameenlinna Castle contains scenes that include fog, 
so it appears that the castle is slowly appearing out of 
the fog (quite creepy). And Animated Mansion contains 
some nice illusion effects.
In some cases with these models, when the camera 
transitions from one scene to the next, it seems to pass 
through walls and floors. This is because SketchUp goes 
straight from one scene to the next without regard for 
objects that might be in the way. To avoid these “vio-
lent” transitions, you can simply add a scene or two in 
between, to guide the camera along a detour.
Figure 11-40
Figure 11-41
Creating Animated Sections
11.9  
Problem
You want to animate the sectioning of your model.
Solution
Create section planes at the start and end of where you want sections cut. Save the start and end 
of each section as a scene.
Discussion
The Section Plane tool is a great way to peer inside your model, and when you add scenes into 
the mix, you can animate sections, making for a very cool presentation tool. Before creating 
each scene, activate the section for that scene. When you transition from a scene where the 
section starts to a scene when the section ends, the animation will appear to move the section 
plane from the start to the end location.

288 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
In this recipe, you will create animated sectioning from 
the front to the back of a house, and then from top to 
bottom. Finally, you will use diagonal section planes for 
an animation from one corner of the house to the other.
Download my Furnished Cottage model from the 
1.	
3D Warehouse (Figure 11-42).
Figure 11-42
The first sectioning animation will slice the house 
2.	
from front to back. This requires two section 
planes: one at the front and one at the back. Acti-
vate the Section Plane tool (Tools→Section Plane) 
and click the long, narrow vertical face at the bot-
tom of the roof (Figure 11-43).
Figure 11-43
This plane cuts a section along the face on which it 
was placed, so the narrow vertical face of the roof is 
no longer visible (Figure 11-44).
Figure 11-44
Select the section plane and move it just slightly 
3.	
away from the house (Figure 11-45), so that the 
entire roof is visible.
Figure 11-45

Creating Animated Sections 
| 
289
With the section plane still selected, the next task 
4.	
is to copy near the back of the house. For the first 
move point, click anywhere on the section plane. 
(Because section planes are infinite, it does not 
matter where you click on it.) For the second move 
point, click where indicated in Figure 11-46.
Figure 11-46
This creates two parallel section planes, one at the 
front of the house and one toward the back (Figure 
11-47).
Figure 11-47
Orbit so you are facing the front of the house, 
5.	
which is the view you want to see during the front-
to-back sectioning. The first scene will use the sec-
tion plane in front of the house, so that the initial 
view of the house will be whole (not sectioned). To 
make this section plane active, right-click on it and 
choose Active Cut (Figure 11-48).
Create a scene of this view. In the Scenes window, 
6.	
make sure that all options are checked. The Active 
Section Planes option ensures that the sectioning 
will appear in the scene, and Camera Location en-
sures that the scene will record the current view.
For the second scene, activate the section plane 
7.	
at the back of the house. You should see only one 
small chunk of the back of the house; the rest of the 
house is in front of the section plane (Figure 11-49). 
Save this view as the second scene.
8.	
Figure 11-48
Figure 11-49

290 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
The next task is to create the two section planes for 
9.	
the top-to-bottom animation. You need the entire 
house to be displayed again, so turn off the display 
of section cuts (View→Section Cuts). Then select 
and hide the two existing section planes, to clear 
the display.
The next section plane will be horizontal and sit at 
10.	
the very top of the house. The roof faces are sloped, 
so none of those faces can be used to align the sec-
tion plane. Activate Section Plane, place the cursor 
in blank space on the ground (Figure 11-50), and 
hold the Shift key to lock this horizontal orientation.
With Shift pressed, click the top of the roof to place 
11.	
the section plane there. Then move the plane up 
slightly so that the roof remains unsectioned (Fig-
ure 11-51).
Copy this section plane approximately halfway 
12.	
down the wall (Figure 11-52).
Figure 11-50
Figure 11-51
Figure 11-52
As before, orbit to the view you want to see for a 
13.	
top-to-bottom sectioning (Figure 11-53).
Activate the top section plane and create the third 
14.	
scene. Then activate the bottom plane and create 
the fourth scene.
Turn off section cuts and then hide the two section 
15.	
planes.
Figure 11-53

Creating Animated Sections 
| 
291
The next two section planes will be diagonal. Create 
16.	
the first plane by clicking the side or front of the 
house (Figure 11-54). This plane will be rotated 
into place.
Figure 11-54
Select and rotate the section plane, and then move 
17.	
it away from the house so that no part of the house 
is sectioned. Create a copy toward the other corner, 
leaving a small part of the house behind the section 
plane (Figure 11-55).
Figure 11-55
Orbit to a view as shown in Figure 11-56 and create 
18.	
the fifth and sixth scenes.
Click the start and end scene for each pair of sec-
19.	
tion planes. Assuming your scene transitions are 
enabled, you will see the planes invisibly slicing 
through the house. The transition between pairs of 
scenes (back to top, bottom to corner) are especially 
fun to watch.
You can download my Furnished Cottage Animated 
model from the 3D Warehouse, which contains the six 
scenes created in this recipe.
Note
The 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter also includes 
a model called Concept House. This model has dozens of 
scenes, some of which use section planes. Play the animation; 
it is a great walkthrough of an interesting model.
Figure 11-56

292 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Creating Staged Sectioning Animation
11.10  
Problem
You want to animate sectioning of your model in stages, showing only certain sections appear-
ing at a time.
Solution
Separate each design element into groups or components, and place section planes in the group 
or component while editing it. 
Discussion
This technique takes a bit of planning and organization, but the results are well worth the ef-
fort. The most important tasks, and the ones that require the most work, are to figure out the 
order in which you want design elements to appear, and to separate each design element into 
groups or components. Although layer display is not needed for scene creation, it is extremely 
helpful to place each element on its own layer, because by turning layers and off, you can verify 
that each element is grouped correctly.
After groups and components are established, the section planes are placed within the group or 
component while it is open for editing. The easiest way to set up the animation is in the “reverse” 
direction: Start by animating the last design element you want to appear and then work back-
ward. As you create scenes for each element, you are displaying less and less of the model, until 
you are left with the first scene you want to display.
Although the preceding explanation sounds quite com-
plicated, this technique is not so difficult. Work through 
the following example, and you’ll get the hang of it.
Download my 
1.	
Castle model from the 3D Ware-
house (Figure 11-57).
Take a few minutes to look through the layers of 
2.	
this model. The Towers layer contains four identical 
components, and the remaining layers each contain 
a single group. Turn on one layer at a time to see 
the design element that resides on that layer. 
The animation will be created in reverse order. So 
the first element to be animated will be the outer 
walls, then the towers, then the steps, then the pal-
ace, and finally the plaza. The last scene (which will 
actually become the animation’s opening scene) is 
the plot of grass. This makes a total of six scenes.
Figure 11-57

Creating Staged Sectioning Animation 
| 
293
Open the Outer Walls group for editing. (This 
3.	
model is set to hide everything but the group or 
component being edited, which is helpful when 
placing section planes. This setting is found in the 
Components page of the Model Info window.) Place 
a horizontal section plane just above and just below 
the walls, making sure each plane extends a bit past 
the top and bottom of the walls (Figure 11-58).
Figure 11-58
Activate the top section plane, in which the walls 
4.	
are still visible, and create the first scene. Because 
the scenes are created in reverse order, this will 
actually become the last of six scenes; I named the 
scene Scene 6 (Figure 11-59). 
Note
In this example, I save each scene without its Camera Loca-
tion, so that the animation can be viewed from any angle. If 
you do save your camera location, which can also produce 
great results, make sure you are facing the walls the way you 
want them to appear in the scene. Also keep in mind that the 
rest of the model will appear in the animation, so leave room 
in your view for the towers.
Activate the bottom section plane, which hides the 
5.	
entire wall group (Figure 11-60). Save this as Scene 5.
Figure 11-59
Figure 11-60
Close the group, and the rest of the model returns 
6.	
to the view. You can still see the wall group’s section 
planes, the lower of which is still active. Because 
this section plane is active, the outer walls remain 
hidden (Figure 11-61).
Figure 11-61

294 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
The next design element to animate is the four tow-
7.	
ers. Each one is an identical component, so open 
any one of them for editing (Figure 11-62).
For this and the remaining design elements, only 
one section plane is required. Because the previous 
group (comprising the outer walls) is already hid-
den, you need only to place a section plane at the 
bottom of the tower component, which will simu-
late the tower disappearing from top to bottom. 
(When played in reverse order, of course, the tower 
will grow from bottom to top.)
Figure 11-62
Place a section plane at the top of the tower, and 
8.	
move it down past the bottom, so that no part of 
the tower is visible (Figure 11-63). Save this as 
Scene 4.
Figure 11-63
Close the tower component, and now the first two 
9.	
design elements (the outer walls and towers) are 
both hidden (Figure 11-64).
Figure 11-64

Creating Staged Sectioning Animation 
| 
295
The next element is the steps. Place a vertical sec-
10.	
tion plane at the side wall (Figure 11-65). The steps 
are still visible because the plane is facing the wrong 
way.
Figure 11-65
Right-click on the section plane and choose Re-
11.	
verse. Then move the plane away from the wall 
slightly, so that the group disappears completely 
(Figure 11-66). Save this as Scene 3.
Figure 11-66
Close the wall group and open the palace group 
12.	
(Figure 11-67).
Place a downward-facing section plane below the 
13.	
bottom of the palace, so that the palace is complete-
ly hidden, and save Scene 2.
Figure 11-67
For the last scene, open the plaza group. Spice 
14.	
things up by using a diagonal section plane (Figure 
11-68).
Move the plane past the opposite corner so that the 
15.	
plaza disappears, and save Scene 1.
Figure 11-68

296 
| 
Chapter 11: Presentation: Showing off Your Model
Close the plaza group, and all that is visible is the 
16.	
plot of grass upon which the castle will be built, as 
shown in Figure 11-69. To hide the section planes 
that are cluttering the view, choose View→Section 
Planes.
Figure 11-69
That’s it! If you play the animation as is, the tower 
17.	
will “decompose,” with each element disappearing 
one by one, until just the grass remains. If you want 
to grow your castle instead, move the scenes into 
the correct order, using the up and down arrow 
icons at the top-right corner of the Scenes window 
(Figure 11-70).
You can download my Castle Staged Animation model 
from the 3D Warehouse, which contains the six scenes 
created in this recipe.
Note
The 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter also includes a 
model called Animated Garage. This model has eight scenes 
that show stages of creating a garage, and these scenes have 
saved camera locations. Also in this collection is Animated 
Car, which contains scenes for building a car.
Figure 11-70

You know the basics of changing the way your model 
is displayed: You routinely change the face display 
from Shaded to Hidden Line to X-Ray, as well as turn 
off edges and profiles when appropriate. You may 
not know that you can control even more display 
aspects, such as default face colors, backgrounds, 
watermarks, and edge styles. Showing your model in 
a variety of styles enables you to tailor your model 
display to your personal taste. And, if you work for a 
company, you can establish your own standard styles 
for presenting designs to clients and colleagues.
Chapter 12
	
Displaying Your Model
In this chapter, you will learn how to change, cre-
ate, and save your own styles, combine features of 
various styles to create new styles, produce attrac-
tive watermarks, use sketchy edges, and use styles 
as part of an animation. 
Hiding and Softening Edges
12.1  
Problem
You want to remove some edges from the model display.
Solution
Use the Eraser tool or the Soften/Smooth Edges window to hide or soften edges.
Discussion
Hiding all edges in your model is easy (deselect Display Edges and Profiles in the Edge page of 
the Styles window); but what if you want to remove the display of only certain edges in your 
model? There are two ways to “blank” selected edges: hiding and softening. Hiding edges simply 
removes them from the display, while softening smoothes the corner where the edge was, result-
ing in a single face.
Consider a polygon pulled into a cylinder-like shape. To hide its vertical edges, you can use the 
Hide tool (available on an edge’s pop-up menu or on the Edit menu), or you can use the Eraser 
tool while holding the Shift key. In either case, when the vertical edges are hidden, you can still 
see the facets between faces, and each vertical face remains a single face (Figure 12-1). Also 
note that when the vertical edges are hidden, there are no vertical profile edges to mark the 
limits of the cylinder.

298 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
To soften these edges, use the Eraser while holding the 
Ctrl key (Option on the Mac). Softening the vertical 
edges results in a smooth vertical face. As you can see in 
Figure 12-2, the facets are not visible, and the face can 
be selected as a single face. When edges are softened, 
there are still profile edges on either side of the vertical 
faces.
Note
If edges are softened within a planar face, the face can be 
selected as a single face. SketchUp does not consider it geo-
metrically to be a single planar face, however; you cannot use 
Push/Pull on it or select it as a path for Follow Me.
Figure 12-1
Figure 12-2
To locate edges that are hidden or softened, you can 
display indicators that mark where they are. Choose 
View→Hidden Geometry from the main menu. The 
dotted line on the left side of Figure 12-3 indicates a 
hidden edge, and the dashed line on the right side indi-
cates a softened edge.
To unhide or unsoften an edge, right-click the edge and 
choose the relevant option from the pop-up menu, or 
use the Eraser with both Shift and Ctrl pressed (Shift 
and Option on the Mac).
Another way to soften edges is via the Soften/Smooth 
Edges option. For example, consider a Sandbox surface. 
(A sandbox is created as a group, so to soften its edges, 
you need to edit the group or explode it.) To soften the 
edges between each square, select the entire surface, 
right-click on it, and choose Soften/Smooth Edges. (You 
can also open this window via the Window menu.) As 
the slider value increases, more edges are smoothed. 
When Smooth Normals is not selected, the surface 
looks faceted. And when Soften Coplanar is not select-
ed, there are still edges between faces on the same plane 
(such as the flat part of the surface in Figure 12-4).
Figure 12-3
Figure 12-4

Changing the Style 
| 
299
Selecting “Smooth normals” removes the faceting, and 
“Soften coplanar” removes edges from faces in the same 
plane (Figure 12-5).
Figure 12-5
Softening edges is essential for organic shapes, such as 
a car body. Figure 12-6 shows the triangulation needed 
to make such surfaces; edges separate each of the small 
triangles that compose the surfaces.
Figure 12-6
Softening these edges produces sleek-looking surfaces 
(Figure 12-7).
After edges are smoothed, you can use View→Hidden 
Geometry to see where they are.
Figure 12-7
Changing the Style
12.2  
Problem
You want to change how model elements (faces, edges, and such) are displayed.
Solution
Use the Styles window to set the display properties you want. 
Discussion
Your model’s style controls the display of nearly all model elements: face color, axis display, 
edge thickness, background colors, and so on. SketchUp comes with several sample styles to 
choose from, and you can create and save your own styles as well.

300 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
The model shown in Figure 12-8 was created by using 
the Simple template, which is one of the default tem-
plates you can choose when you open SketchUp. Except 
for the painted door and window frames, all faces have 
the default color: The front faces are showing on the 
sides of the house, and the back faces are showing on 
the roof. There is a blue sky and green ground, and the 
axes are displayed.
The Styles window (Window→Styles) for this model 
lists the current style name and description at the top of 
the window. From here, you also can access folders with 
several other sample styles (Figure 12-9).
To make changes to the style, click the Edit tab. This tab 
contains five pages of categories you can change: Edge, 
Face, Background, Watermark, and Modeling settings. 
Figure 12-10 shows the Face page, on which you can 
change the default front and back colors for faces, and 
control how faces are displayed (Shaded, X-Ray, and so 
on).
Note
Many of the style-changing options are also available on the 
View menu, such as hiding the axes, changing the face or 
edge style, and displaying hidden geometry. 
You can also change the style name by editing the name 
field at the top of the Styles window. 
When any change is made to a style, such as the new 
face colors shown in Figure 12-11, the style thumbnail 
in the Styles window will feature a double-arrow symbol 
indicating the style has changed but has not yet been 
saved.
To update the style, click the thumbnail or click the 
Update icon near the top-right corner of the Styles win-
dow. The double-arrow symbol will disappear from the 
thumbnail. Note that this does not change the original 
definition of the style; it changes the style in the current 
file only. You can find the updated style in the In Model 
folder of the Styles window. If you open the style folder 
that houses the original style, you’ll see that version has 
not changed. If you click the thumbnail of the original, 
unchanged style to apply it to your model, the original 
style will then appear in the In Model folder, in addition 
to the style you changed and updated.
Figure 12-8
Figure 12-9
Figure 12-10
Figure 12-11

Creating a New Style 
| 
301
Creating a New Style
12.3  
Problem
You want to create a new style for your model.
Solution
Create a new style based on an existing style.
Discussion
Suppose you want to create a new style that won’t overwrite the one currently in use. The solu-
tion is to create a new style based on an existing one.
Consider a model with one style in its In Model folder. 
To create a new style, click the Create a New Style icon, 
indicated in Figure 12-12.
Figure 12-12
This creates an identical style whose name is the same 
as the original, with a 1 appended to it. This new style 
becomes the active style. Use the Edit tab to set the new 
parameters for the new style and update it. Figure 12-13 
shows a copy of the Earth Modeling style, renamed as 
“Earth Modeling at Night,” which has darker sky and 
ground colors. 
Figure 12-13

302 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
Saving Styles 
12.4  
Problem
You have one or more styles that you want to be able to use in other files.
Solution
Create a new collection and add to it the styles you want to save.
Discussion
Saving styles works in the same way as saving materials and components: You create a collec-
tion and then save it as a favorite for future use. 
When you have the styles you want in the In Model 
folder, click the Details arrow, indicated in Figure 12-14. 
Figure 12-14
Choose to save the collection; you’ll have to browse to 
the location where you want the collection saved. The 
collection name appears as the folder name (Figure 
12-15). If you want the collection to be easily accessible 
in future files, click the Details arrow again and choose 
Add Collection to Favorites. (Mac users can choose to 
add a collection to their favorites at the time the collec-
tion is created.)
Figure 12-15
You can easily add and remove styles from this, and 
any other, collection. Click the Secondary Pane icon 
indicated in Figure 12-16, which opens a second styles 
folder below the top one. You can now move styles back 
and forth by dragging and dropping. 
Figure 12-16

Saving a Style As a Template 
| 
303
Saving a Style As a Template
12.5  
Problem
You want a certain style to be the active style when you open a SketchUp file.
Solution
Make the desired style active and save the SketchUp file as a template.
Discussion
If you have a style that you want to be active whenever you open SketchUp, activate the style 
and save the SketchUp file as a template. Everything in that file, including all objects, in-model 
materials, components, layers, and styles, will also be included in the template.
For example, consider a model in which the style shown 
in Figure 12-17 is active. In addition to yellow and 
orange faces and thin edges, the Modeling page is set to 
highlight selected objects in magenta.
Figure 12-17
This file itself contains one person component stand-
ing on the origin (shown in Figure 12-18 as selected, 
and therefore in a magenta bounding box). The camera 
angle is showing a front view.
Figure 12-18

304 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
To save this file as a template, choose File→Save as Tem-
plate from the main menu. Enter a name and a descrip-
tion; SketchUp assigns it a filename automatically based 
on the name (though you can change it). There is also 
an option to save this template as the default (Figure 
12-19). The next time you open SketchUp, the template 
will be available (Figure 12-20). If you open a file using 
this template, it will contain the same component and 
camera view as the file you saved.
While in SketchUp, there are two ways to choose 
a new template. You can open the Welcome to 
SketchUp window via the Help menu, or choose 
Window→Preferences (SketchUp→Preferences on the 
Mac) and open the Template page. Choosing a new 
template will not affect the current model; the template 
will take effect when you open a new file.
As you’ve seen, any SketchUp file can be made into a 
template. So if your company has a standard template, 
make sure that everyone has a copy of the SketchUp file 
to be used as the template and that everyone saves the 
file by using File→Save as Template.
Everything Goes into Your Template
When you save a file as a template, be aware that any objects 
in your model are saved as part of the template, so you might 
not want to leave any extra edges or faces lying around. Also 
be sure that your In Model folders contain exactly what you 
want to save. Any unpurged components, materials, and 
styles will be saved as part of the template. This can be use-
ful, for example, if you want to save a template with colors 
or styles that you want to access easily. It can also be use-
ful to save a template that has ready-made layers. On the 
other hand, you could accidentally leave in some unpurged 
components or materials that could bog down your file. Take 
stock and then save.
Figure 12-19
Figure 12-20

Mixing Styles 
| 
305
Mixing Styles
12.6  
Problem
You want to create a style that takes certain properties from other styles.
Solution
Create a mixed style by using the Mix tab of the Styles window.
Discussion
Each page of the Styles window’s Edit tab (Face, Edge, and so on) has a set of related properties. 
When you mix styles to produce a new style, you are assigning to the new style sets of proper-
ties from various existing styles.
The following steps demonstrate how to mix a new style 
by using properties of other styles.
Download my 
1.	
Mixing Styles model from the 3D 
Warehouse. It is a basic house with the Simple style 
active (Figure 12-21).
The In Model tab of the Styles window shows four 
2.	
styles, whose properties will be used for the new 
style. To avoid overwriting the active style, create a 
new style based on the Simple style (Recipe 12.3). 
SketchUp names the new active style Simple Style 1.
Click the Mix tab, which is next to the Edit tab. The 
3.	
top pane shows a list of property categories, and the 
bottom pane shows the current styles folder. Open 
the In Model folder in the bottom pane.
The first properties to change will affect edges. 
4.	
Click the Marker Loose style in the bottom pane 
(Figure 12-22); its edge properties will be used for 
the new style.
Figure 12-21
Figure 12-22

306 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
Windows users: click Edge Settings in the top pane 
5.	
(Figure 12-23) or drag the Marker Loose thumbnail 
onto Edge settings. On the Mac, drag the Marker 
Loose thumbnail onto Edge settings.
Figure 12-23
This style now has the sketchy edge properties 
from Marker Loose, but no other properties have 
changed (Figure 12-24).
Figure 12-24
The next properties to update are for faces. Click the 
6.	
Google Colors style and apply it to Face Settings. 
This changes the front and back face colors of the 
style (Figure 12-25).
Figure 12-25
Background settings will remain as they are. For 
7.	
watermark settings, use the style Scribble on Ma-
sonite. This will overlay a texture onto the entire 
SketchUp window, as shown in Figure 12-26.
Figure 12-26
Return to the Select tab. Assign a new name and 
8.	
description for this style, and update it. You should 
now have five styles in the In Model folder: the four 
you started with and the new mixed one (Figure 
12-27).
Figure 12-27

Adding a Watermark 
| 
307
Adding a Watermark
12.7  
Problem
You want to add a watermark to a style, either as a background image or a positioned image.
Solution
Add background or overlay images to your style via the Watermark page of the Styles window.
Discussion
There are two main types of watermarks: images that fill the entire SketchUp window and 
images that are in specific positions. You can add either type of watermark as a background 
(behind the model) or an overlay (above the model).
Download my 
1.	
Watermark Style model from the 3D 
Warehouse. It has a beige canvas overlay that fades 
toward the edges of the SketchUp window (Figure 
12-28).
The easiest way to understand how this watermark 
was created is to deconstruct and reconstruct one. 
The style contains the watermark images, so you 
can export them and use them to build the water-
mark from scratch.
Click the Edit tab and open the Watermark page. 
2.	
For each of the three images (Gradient Mask, Can-
vas, and Beige Underlay), right-click on the thumb-
nail and choose Export Watermark Image. Save 
them to a folder you will remember.
To remove the watermark, highlight each image 
3.	
and click the minus-sign icon indicated in Figure 
12-29. 
Figure 12-28
Figure 12-29

308 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
The watermark is now gone (Figure 12-30).
Figure 12-30
To rebuild the watermark, click the + icon and 
4.	
import the Canvas image. This should be an overlay 
(Figure 12-31) so that the canvas texture can be 
seen on the faces of the model. Otherwise, the tex-
ture will appear in the background only. Click Next.
Figure 12-31
The next window is used to set the texture’s blend. 
5.	
Set the Blend slider between Model and Image so 
that the model faces will be clearly visible but the 
canvas texture can also be seen (Figure 12-32). 
Click Next.
Figure 12-32
The last window is used to position the watermark 
6.	
image. This image should be tiled, and the scale 
should be increased so that the texture will be clear 
(Figure 12-33). Click Finish.
Figure 12-33

Adding a Watermark 
| 
309
The Canvas image appears on the Watermark page. 
It is located above Model Space, which indicates 
that it is an overlay rather than a background (Fig-
ure 12-34). The canvas texture can be seen on the 
model itself (Figure 12-35).
Figure 12-34
Figure 12-35
For the next image, import the beige underlay. 
7.	
Make this one a background (Figure 12-36), be-
cause as an overlay the beige color would darken 
the faces of the model. As a background, the beige 
color will be visible only on the canvas in the 
background. 
Figure 12-36
Adjust the blend and set the positioning. Now the 
8.	
canvas looks beige, but the faces of the house are 
still bright (Figure 12-37).
Figure 12-37

310 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
Finally, import the gradient image as an overlay, 
9.	
so it will affect the entire window. On the window 
shown in Figure 12-38, select the Create Mask 
checkbox. This means that brighter areas of the im-
age are read as transparent, and darker areas of the 
image will use the style’s background color. 
Figure 12-38
The gradient image should be stretched across the 
10.	
screen. Deselect the Lock Aspect Ratio checkbox so 
that the image can adjust slightly to fit the screen 
(Figure 12-39).
The resulting watermark is the faded canvas look 
shown earlier in Figure 12-28. The Watermark page 
should show the gradient and canvas images above 
the model space, with the beige underlay below the 
model space. To edit any of the images, you can 
click the Edit Watermark Settings icon, which is 
next to the minus-sign icon.
Another common use for watermarks is logos and 
stamps. For an example of this, download my Water-
mark Logo model from the 3D Warehouse. It is a simple 
model with an overlaid logo (bottom right of Figure 
12-40) and Approved stamp (top left).
Figure 12-39
Figure 12-40
Both of these watermark images are .png files with 
transparent backgrounds, and both are overlays; each 
always appears above the model. You can use the Water-
mark page to change an overlay to a background (and 
vice versa). For this example, highlight the Approved 
image and click the down arrow indicated in Figure 
12-41.
Figure 12-41

Creating a Sketchy Edge Style 
| 
311
Now the Approved stamp is below the model, as you 
can see in Figure 12-42.
Figure 12-42
Creating a Sketchy Edge Style
12.8  
Problem
You want to customize your style with edges other than straight lines. 
Solution
Create a sketchy style, either manually or via the Style Builder (Pro users only).
Discussion
Sketchy edges are a great way to give your model a customized look. To see what they look like, 
open the Sketchy Edges style folder and try out some of the samples. 
A sketchy style’s Edge page has different settings than 
you’d see for normal, uniform edges (Figure 12-43).
The unique settings here are Depth cue (closer edges are 
thicker), Halo (the blank space surrounding each edge), 
and Level of Detail (the distance at which the smallest 
edges will not appear). The Stroke field shows a sample 
prototype graphic for an edge. 
Figure 12-43

312 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
Sketchy edges are in essence a compilation of graphics 
of various lengths. A sketchy style typically contains 
several prototype edges for each length. To see what this 
means, look at Figure 12-44, which is a house drawn in 
the Twigs style. This style has three prototype edges for 
lengths varying from short (32 pixels) to long (512 pix-
els). Look specifically at the six horizontal lines drawn 
within the roof; each prototype appears twice, but the 
overall look is random (if you don’t look too hard).
If you were to zoom in or out, the prototypes used for 
those six lines would be replaced with the prototypes 
assigned to longer or shorter lengths. This way, no 
prototype has to be stretched or squashed too much to 
fit the edge length, and all edges will appear to have the 
same approximate thickness.
Style files are located in the Styles folder of your Sketch-
Up installation. Each file has a .style extension, which is 
equivalent to a .zip extension. To see how a style is set 
up, copy one of these files and change the copy’s exten-
sion to .zip, and then open or extract the compressed 
file.
Each style contains a folder called ref, which contains 
the graphics that represent each edge prototype. The 
Twigs style has 15 graphics in its ref folder (Figure 12-45), 
three graphics for each of the five lengths (32, 64, 128, 
256, and 512 pixels).
The file document.xml contains the meat of the style: its 
name, description, edge settings such as thickness and 
halo, and most important, the names of the graphics files 
in the ref folder. The file documentProperties.xml also 
contains a style name—this is the name that appears in 
the Styles list, and as the style’s tooltip name.
If you’re looking to build your own sketchy edge style, 
start with scanned or drawn prototypes for your edges, 
a few for each of the lengths. Darker colors in these 
prototype graphics represent the edges themselves, and 
lighter areas will be read as transparent. Gray areas of 
the graphic will produce blurry or faded edges, which 
can be a nice effect. Prototype graphics are usually gray-
scale, but you can use color, keeping in mind that only 
light and dark will be read.
Figure 12-44
Figure 12-45

Using Styles in a Presentation 
| 
313
The easiest way to create a new style using your edge 
prototypes is to copy an existing style. Rename the style 
file, change the .style extension to .zip, and extract the 
files and folder. Replace the graphics in the ref folder and 
modify the document.xml and documentProperties.xml 
files. (You don’t have to be a programmer to do this; just 
open the .xml file in a text editor and change the edges 
settings and graphic names.) Zip it all back up when you 
are finished, and change the .zip extension back to .style. 
To use this style in SketchUp, click the Details arrow in 
the Styles window and open a collection, which is the 
folder where your new style file is saved. (If your style is 
saved in one of SketchUp’s provided style folders, it will 
automatically appear with the other styles in the folder.)
Pro users don’t have to go through this rigmarole; they 
can use the Style Builder application (Figure 12-46). 
This is an application external to SketchUp, located in 
the same folder in which SketchUp Pro is installed.
In Style Builder, you load the prototype graphics in the 
left pane by using options on the Strokes menu. In the 
top-right pane, set the lengths you want to include and 
the number of strokes for each length. To populate each 
stroke, simply drag the prototype graphic from the left 
pane and drop it into the correct slot in the top-right 
pane. Empty slots will be interpreted as blank edges. 
The bottom-right pane shows a preview of the style; you 
can use the default model or change the model by using 
the Preview menu.
Figure 12-46
Using Styles in a Presentation
12.9  
Problem
You want to show different styles in your model, without having to choose them from the Styles 
window.
Solution
Save the style as part of a scene. 
Discussion
Chapter 11 showed numerous ways to save aspects of the model in a scene, so that you can 
return to a particular display with a simple click. With two or more scenes, you can create an 
animation—an impressive way to show off your model. Among other properties, the active 
style can be saved in a scene, which adds to the many ways you can wow your clients (or teach-
ers or family or friends).

314 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
This recipe shows how to use styles as part of an ani-
mation that showcases a house in a variety of camera 
angles and styles.
Download my 
1.	
Styles Presentation model from the 
3D Warehouse (Figure 12-47). This house will look 
familiar if you read Chapter 11. (If you haven’t, you 
should read it now; for this recipe, you need to be 
familiar with the concepts in that chapter, including 
section planes.) 
The In Model folder of the Styles window contains 
three styles; the active one is the Simple style.
Create the first scene from this initial view and 
2.	
include all scene properties.
Switch to Front view and activate the 
3.	
Pencil Edges 
style (Figure 12-48). Save this as the second scene.
The third scene will be a floor plan view of the 
4.	
rooms, so a section plane is needed. Place a hori-
zontal section plane right below the roof (Figure 
12-49).
Figure 12-49
Figure 12-47
Figure 12-48

Using Styles in a Presentation 
| 
315
Switch to Top view and choose Camera→
5.	
Parallel 
Projection. Activate the Architectural style (Figure 
12-50). This scene is to have more of a blueprint 
feel, so the style needs some changes.
Edit this style and change the color on the Edge 
6.	
page to white. Also deselect Display Profiles. While 
you are making these changes, do not update the 
style; you will save it later as a new style.
On the Face page, switch to 
7.	
Hidden Line mode (or 
you can choose View→Face Style→Hidden Line).
On the Background page, remove the sky and 
8.	
change the background color to dark blue.
Finally, on the Modeling page, change the Section 
9.	
Cuts color to match the edge color (white). Reduce 
the section cut width, and deselect Section Planes 
so that the section plane will not be visible (Figure 
12-51).
Figure 12-50
Figure 12-51
Your model now looks like Figure 12-52.
Figure 12-52

316 
| 
Chapter 12: Displaying Your Model
Save this as the third scene. When you see the 
10.	
Scenes and Styles warning, save the current style as 
a new style, so that the original Architectural style 
will not be changed.
For the last scene, activate the Architectural style 
11.	
again. Return to Perspective view and then orbit to 
a view like the one in Figure 12-53. Hide the section 
plane, and turn off edges and profiles. On the Mod-
eling page, lower the section cut width.
Save this as the fourth and last scene. This time you 
12.	
can update the style, because the original Architec-
tural style will not be used again.
The scenes are all created, but there is one more 
13.	
task. Click Scene 1, and the section plane returns 
(Figure 12-54). This is because the Simple style is 
set to display section planes. 
Figure 12-54
Edit the style to hide section planes and update 
14.	
the style. The same change is needed for the Pencil 
Edges style in Scene 2.
Now the animation is ready to play. Note how the 
style transitions smoothly from one scene to the 
next—a very nice effect.
For a completed model with these four animation 
scenes, download my Styles Presentation Animated 
model from the 3D Warehouse and see how your ver-
sion compares.
Figure 12-53

The potential for seamless integration between 
SketchUp models and Google Earth is what prompt-
ed Google a few years back to buy @Last Software, 
the original creators of SketchUp. Google wanted a 
simple, intuitive content engine to produce the mod-
els that would populate Google Earth, and SketchUp 
fit the bill. By creating the 3D Warehouse, Google 
then made it easy to share your work with the world. 
Google Earth and the 3D Warehouse often work in 
tandem: You can georeference a SketchUp model 
by importing location data from Google Earth, and 
place that same model in the 3D Warehouse for all 
(or for specific people) to see.
This chapter takes a closer look at these two 
resources. Recipes 13.1 through 13.7 cover the 
various ways you can use the 3D Warehouse, how 
you can place your own models and collections 
there, and how to control the privacy of your 
work. Recipes 13.8 through 13.13 move on to 
Google Earth, teaching you how to georeference 
a model, place a model in Google Earth, remove 
or replace location data, and download specific 
models found in Google Earth.
Before getting started, you should be familiar 
with the Google Tools icons (Figure 13-1) in the 
Getting Started toolbar, which runs by default 
horizontally above the SketchUp window. (Mac 
users can display these tools via View→Tool 
Palettes→Google.) From left to right, the tools are 
as follows:
Chapter 13
	
3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Figure 13-1
Get Current View
• 
. Imports into SketchUp a 
snapshot of the view plus a model of the ter-
rain currently displayed in Google Earth.
Toggle Terrain
• 
. Toggles between the snap-
shot (flat) view from Google Earth and the 
terrain (3D) view from Google Earth.
Place Model
• 
. Places everything currently 
visible in your SketchUp model into Google 
Earth.
Get Models
• 
. Opens the 3D Warehouse for a 
model search.
Share Model
• 
. Enables you to upload the cur-
rent model to the 3D Warehouse.
You’ll be using these five tools throughout this 
chapter. 

318 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Finding Models in the 3D Warehouse
13.1  
Problem
You want to find and download a model in the 3D Warehouse.
Solution
Search the 3D Warehouse from your Components window, use Get Models, or open the 3D 
Warehouse from your Internet browser (http://sketchup.google.com/3dwarehouse).
Discussion
You can access models in the 3D Warehouse via three routes. From within your SketchUp file, 
you can search the 3D Warehouse directly in the Components window or you can use Get 
Models. You can also search the 3D Warehouse outside of SketchUp, by opening the 3D Ware-
house in your Internet browser.
Note
You do not need to be signed in to Google or to even have 
a Google account to search and download models from the 
3D Warehouse. However, you will need to be signed in if you 
want to upload your models (Recipe 13.3).
Method 1: Use the Components Window
The Components window is the most convenient way 
to search for 3D Warehouse models: Simply enter the 
search keywords in the search field at the top (Figure 
13-2), and SketchUp displays thumbnails of the models 
it finds. The Components window displays up to 12 
models at a time, so if you don’t see what you want at 
first, use the scroll arrows at the bottom of the window 
to keep looking.
To insert a model directly into the SketchUp file, click 
the model’s thumbnail and click again to place it in your 
model. SketchUp inserts the model as a component 
with a bounding box around it and adds it to the In 
Model folder of the Components window.
If you want more information about the model before 
you download it, such as a larger view, descriptions, or 
reviews, click the model name to open the model’s 3D 
Warehouse page, shown in Figure 13-3. (If the name 
doesn’t appear as a link in the Components window, 
click the View Options icon to the left of the house icon 
and then choose Details.) 
Figure 13-2
Figure 13-3

Finding Models in the 3D Warehouse 
| 
319
If you click the Download Model button on this page, 
you will be asked whether you want the model loaded 
directly into your SketchUp model. If you click Yes, 
SketchUp imports the model as a component. If you 
click No, you can either open the model in a new in-
stance of SketchUp (Windows only) or save the model 
to your hard drive.
Method 2: Use the Get Models Option
Another way to find 3D Warehouse models from within 
SketchUp is to click the Get Models icon, or choose 
File→3D Warehouse→Get Models. This opens a 3D 
Warehouse search page, in which you can enter your 
search keywords. In the search results (Figure 13-4) you 
can click Download Model, or click the model name or 
thumbnail to open its larger, descriptive page (which 
also has a Download Model option). 
When you use Get Models, the download options are 
identical to using the Components window: you can 
import the model directly into your SketchUp file, and 
if you choose not to import directly, the options are to 
open the model in a new instance of SketchUp (Win-
dows only) or save it to your hard drive.
Method 3: Open the 3D Warehouse in Your 
Internet Browser
If SketchUp is not open, or if you prefer to find mod-
els independently of SketchUp, you can open the 3D 
Warehouse from your Internet browser. The URL is 
http://sketchup.google.com/3dwarehouse. The interac-
tion is the same as when you use the Get Models icon: 
there is a search field at the top of the web page, and each 
model thumbnail has a download link. You cannot place 
a model directly in an open SketchUp file, but you can 
open the model in a new instance of SketchUp (Windows 
only), or you can save the model to your hard drive.
An advantage to using an Internet browser is that you 
can search directly for collections, in addition to mod-
els. Figure 13-5 shows a collection search that will yield 
collections of 3D people.
Note
You can also search for collections by using the Components 
window or Get Models, but this is an advanced search feature 
(see Recipe 13.2). 
Note
If you want to download all of the compo-
nents that appear in the Components window, 
click the Details arrow to the right of the 
search field, and choose to open or create a lo-
cal collection. This saves all currently displayed 
models, up to 12 at a time, to your hard drive.
Figure 13-4
Figure 13-5
Issues with 3D Warehouse 
Models
Keep in mind that many 3D Warehouse mod-
els have an incorrect scale, which can be fixed 
by using the technique from Recipe 10.11. 
These models may also have incorrect align-
ment and insertion properties, which can be 
fixed by using the technique from Recipe 
7.10.
If you use the Components window or Get 
Models to import a model with scenes direct-
ly into your SketchUp file, the scenes will not 
appear. To preserve the scenes, you need to 
either save the model to your hard drive and 
open it in SketchUp, or open the model in a 
new instance of SketchUp.

320 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Refining Your 3D Warehouse Search
13.2  
Problem
You want to refine your model search in the 3D Warehouse by adding search criteria.
Solution
Use the Advanced Search option, or enter search operator syntax in the 3D Warehouse Search 
field.
Discussion
If you enter a generic word such as tree or house in the 3D Warehouse Search field, you will 
turn up far too many results to comb through. The Advanced Search web page and search 
operator syntax enable you to whittle down your search results to meet specific criteria, such as 
location, author, descriptive terms, and so on. You can also use an advanced search to look for 
collections instead of models.
The Advanced Search link appears on the initial 3D 
Warehouse page, next to the Search field (Figure 13-6). 
You can access this page when using Get Models or 
when searching the 3D Warehouse from within your 
Internet browser. 
Figure 13-7 shows the advanced search options avail-
able when you click the Advanced Search link. In this 
example, the search will turn up all models that have 
the word house in the title, beach in the description, and 
are located. (Located models, also called georeferenced 
models, are saved and uploaded with a specific location, 
as explained in Recipes 13.8 and 13.9.)
Note
As you know, the quality of 3D Warehouse models can vary 
greatly. If you want to search only for well-crafted models, you 
can specify the author, search for ratings of at least four or five 
stars, or search for models located on the 3D Buildings layer of 
Google Earth.
Figure 13-6
Figure 13-7

Refining Your 3D Warehouse Search 
| 
321
Figure 13-8 shows the models found by the search for 
located beach houses. There are two things to note on 
this page: the model links and the Search field syntax. 
Note that some models have a link for View in Google 
Earth instead of Download Model. This means that those 
models were uploaded as .kmz files, which is native to 
Google Earth. Opening a .kmz file will take you directly 
to the model at its specified location in Google Earth. 
(You can still download these models as SketchUp files; 
the Download Model button on the model’s description 
page has options for downloading in different formats.)
The syntax in the Search field is title:house 
description:beach is:model is:geo. Here’s a breakdown of 
what these terms mean:
title:house
• 
. The word house appears in the model title.
description:beach
• 
. The word beach appears in the 
model description.
is:model
• 
. The search is for a model, not a collection.
is: geo
• 
. The model is georeferenced.
Here are some other common search operators:
author:smith
• 
. The name smith will appear some-
where in the author’s name.
author:“john smith”
• 
. The model author’s exact 
name is John Smith.
tag:tea tag:house
• 
. The search will be for models 
that are tagged with the term tea or house.
tag:“tea house”
• 
. The exact term tea house appears 
in the model’s tags.
is:best-of-geo
• 
. The model has been accepted into 
the Best of Warehouse collection and appears in 
Google Earth.
is:dynamic
• 
. The model is a dynamic component 
(described in Chapter 14).
near:Denver
• 
. The model is in the vicinity of Denver.
If you learn the syntax for the search operators you 
need, you can simply enter the necessary syntax in the 
Search field and not bother with the lengthy Advanced 
Search page. A list of all search operators can be found 
in the SketchUp Help Center. From SketchUp choose 
Help→Help Center. Search for the phrase advanced search 
operators. From the resulting web pages, open “How do I 
use Advanced Search in the 3D Warehouse?”
Figure 13-8

322 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
If you are using the search field in the Components 
window, the Advanced Search link is not available. But 
you can (and should) use search operator syntax in the 
search field. Figure 13-9 shows models that meet two 
search criteria. First, they are located at or near 1600 
Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, the address of 
the White House. (In the Advanced Search window, 
you would enter this address in the “Find items that are 
near this address” field. A zip code can also be entered 
in this field.) Second, these models are all best-of-geo, 
which means they were accepted onto the 3D Buildings 
layer of Google Earth. (In the Advanced Search win-
dow, this is equivalent to selecting the checkbox labeled 
“Show only models that are in the 3D Buildings layer of 
Google Earth.”)
The advantage of using search operator syntax in the 
Components window search is that all resulting mod-
els appear right in the Components window, and you 
can click them one at a time to import them into your 
SketchUp file. When you search by using Get Models 
or your Internet browser, you can download or import 
models only one at a time.
For example, if you want to place all buildings of a col-
lege campus in your SketchUp model, you could search 
in the Components window with operator syntax for 
title (name of the college) or location (street address or 
zip code). After clicking a model thumbnail to import 
the first building, you would click thumbnails for the 
subsequent buildings you want to import, preserving 
their location each time. Figure 13-10 shows a mono-
chrome view of how these imported models might look, 
each imported with its slice of terrain from Google 
Earth, and placed at the correct location.
Figure 13-10
Figure 13-9
Note
When using the near syntax, you can include 
the within syntax to find models within a 
certain radius. For example, you can use 
near:94116 within:5000 to get models within 5 
km of zip code 94116.

Uploading Models to the 3D Warehouse 
| 
323
Uploading Models to the 3D Warehouse
13.3  
Problem
You want to upload your model to the 3D Warehouse.
Solution
Use Share Model.
Discussion
The 3D Warehouse enables you to share your model with the world. All you need is a Google 
account, which is free and easy to set up.
Figure 13-11 shows a model of a banana tree that is 
to be uploaded to the 3D Warehouse. Note that it is 
located at the origin, which is good practice: The origin 
location will be the model’s grab point—the point by 
which it is grabbed and inserted into another model. 
The model should also be at the correct scale before 
uploading.
Click the Share Model icon, or choose File→3D 
1.	
Warehouse→Share Model. 
If you are not already signed in to your Google ac-
2.	
count, or if you don’t have a Google account, the Sign 
In window will appear. Either enter your Google 
username and password in this window, or click Cre-
ate an Account Now to create a Google account. 
Note
When you are signed in to your Google account, the G icon 
at the lower-left corner of the SketchUp window will be bold. 
Clicking this icon will also open the Sign In window, or it will 
open the Sign Out window if you are already signed in.
When you are signed in, the Upload page appears 
3.	
(Figure 13-12). Enter a model name and a descrip-
tion (these are mandatory). If you want, you can 
also enter tags: These are keywords people can use 
to find your model. For the banana tree model, tags 
could include landscaping or tropical. If the model is 
georeferenced (saved with a specific location), you 
will also see the Google Earth Ready option, which 
is described in Recipe 13.10. If you click the + sign 
next to “Additional content,” you will see additional 
options for adding a logo, adjusting privacy settings 
(Recipe 13.5), and so on.
Figure 13-11
Note
A word about hidden objects: objects hidden 
using Edit→Hide will be included with your 
uploaded model, and will not appear when 
the model is downloaded or inserted. But you 
can use Edit→Unhide to display them. You can 
also place objects on hidden layers; layers are 
preserved when uploading..
Figure 13-12

324 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
If your model has materials or components that are 
not in use, you will be asked whether you want to 
purge them. Purging is not mandatory, but it’s good 
practice to upload a model with a file size as small 
as possible.
When the model has completed its upload process, 
it will appear on its new 3D Warehouse page (Fig-
ure 13-13). There are links here to edit, share, or 
remove the model from the 3D Warehouse. If you 
have collections in your account (Recipe 13.4), you 
can use the “Add this model to a collection” link to 
place it inside a collection.
Note
Use the Edit link to edit a model if you want to change 3D 
Warehouse information such as title, description, or privacy 
settings after the model has been uploaded. If you want to 
change the model itself, go back to SketchUp and edit the 
model you originally uploaded, then re-upload by using Share 
Model. All of the 3D Warehouse information should be saved 
with the file, so you shouldn’t have to reenter it.
Save your model, so that all of its 3D Warehouse 
4.	
data will also be saved.
As long as you are signed in, all models you have up-
loaded will appear when you click the My Models link, 
either in the Components window (Figure 13-14), or 
at the top-right corner of the opening page of the 3D 
Warehouse.
Figure 13-13
Figure 13-14

Creating Collections in the 3D Warehouse 
| 
325
Creating Collections in the 3D Warehouse
13.4  
Problem
You want to place your own collections of models in the 3D Warehouse.
Solution
Go to My Collections and create a new collection.
Discussion
Because the 3D Warehouse has unlimited storage space and can be accessed from anywhere, it 
is the perfect place to store collections of models. These could be collections of entire projects 
you are working on, collections of “entourage” people or plants used to populate models, collec-
tions of furniture models used for interior decorating, collections of windows and doors used 
for renovation projects, and so on. Models in your collections can be models you have uploaded 
yourself (Recipe 13.3) or models found elsewhere in the 3D Warehouse. (You can even create 
your own collection that includes the collections of models used in this book.)
Open the 3D Warehouse, either via Get Models or 
1.	
with your Internet browser. If you are not signed 
in or don’t have a Google account, click the Sign In 
link at the top-right corner of the 3D Warehouse 
Web page. Either enter your username and pass-
word, or click the link to create a new account.
Note
You can also sign in to your Google account by clicking the G 
icon at the lower-left corner of the SketchUp window.
After you are signed in, click the My Collections 
2.	
link (Figure 13-15).
Click the Create link (Figure 13-16).
3.	
Each collection must have a name and description 
4.	
(Figure 13-17). This example is a general landscap-
ing collection that will contain other collections for 
trees and shrubs, so Other Collections is selected 
under Collection Will Contain.
Note
When creating collections, it’s a good idea to set up a 
hierarchy of collections within collections. A logical collec-
tion structure makes it easy to locate models later. Keep in 
mind that a collection can contain either other collections or 
models, but not both.
Figure 13-15
Figure 13-16
Figure 13-17

326 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Farther down on the collection creation page is 
Sharing Settings (Figure 13-18). The default setting 
is Publicly-viewable, which means anyone can find 
your collections. If you want to control who can 
find your collection, see Recipe 13.5.
There are also optional fields for adding a logo, 
5.	
URL, and so on. After filling in all the required 
fields, and any optional fields you want, click Save 
Changes. Your collection then appears on its new 
3D Warehouse page. There are links here to edit, 
share, or remove the collection.
Because the collection in this example was set to 
6.	
contain other collections, there is an option for cre-
ating a child collection (Figure 13-19), which means 
a collection within this collection. Click this link to 
create a child collection.
This child collection will be for flowering shrubs 
7.	
and is set to contain models (Figure 13-20).
When a collection is set to contain models, you 
will see the Google Earth Ready option shown in 
Figure 13-21. Select this checkbox only if you plan 
to georeference all models in this collection and 
have them considered for acceptance into the 3D 
Buildings layer of Google Earth (see Recipe 13-10). 
For collections such as landscaping or furniture, 
this option is irrelevant.
Figure 13-18
Figure 13-19
Figure 13-20
Figure 13-21
You can also create a child collection without us-
8.	
ing the “Create a child collection” option. Figure 
13-22 shows a new collection for fruit trees, using 
the Create option. This collection is set to contain 
models.
Figure 13-22
After this new collection is created, click the op-
9.	
tion “Add this collection to another collection” 
(Figure 13-23). All of your collections will appear 
in the drop-down menu. In this example, the fruit 
tree collection is added to the general landscaping 
collection.
Figure 13-23

Controlling Model or Collection Privacy 
| 
327
As long as you are signed in to your Google account, 
all of your collections will appear when you click the 
My Collections link, either in the Components window 
(Figure 13-24) or at the top-right corner of the opening 
page of the 3D Warehouse.
Figure 13-24
Controlling Model or Collection Privacy
13.5  
Problem
You want to control who can find your models and collections, or invite collaborators to work 
on your models.
Solution
Change the Share settings.
Discussion
Say you are working on a project for a design company and want your 3D Warehouse models 
available only to certain coworkers. Or say you are uploading models for a class project and 
want your work visible only to the instructor. By default, all models and collections are viewable 
by anyone, but the Share options in the 3D Warehouse enable you to control who can find your 
models and who (if anyone) can make changes to it.
When you upload a model (Recipe 13.3) or create a 
collection (Recipe 13.4), you can access the Share op-
tions by clicking the + sign next to “Additional content” 
(Figure 13-25).
Figure 13-25

328 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
To limit who has access to your model, first deselect the 
checkbox labeled “Allow anyone to view this model and 
see it in search results” (Figure 13-26).
After the uploading begins, you will see the page with 
privacy settings (Figure 13-27). For existing models 
and collections, you can access this page by clicking the 
Share link.
You can toggle public viewing and editing on and off, 
and invite people to access your models as either col-
laborators (who can make edits) or viewers (who cannot 
make edits). Click “as collaborators” (or “as viewers” as 
the case may be) under “Invite people,” and then enter 
the email addresses of your coworkers. You can also 
choose to send them invitations to your model. Figure 
13-27 shows two colleagues added as collaborators; the 
entered addresses are the addresses the colleagues use 
to access the 3D Warehouse. (If your collaborators or 
viewers use Gmail or Google Mail email addresses for 
the 3D Warehouse, you need to enter only their user-
names and not their full email addresses.) After your 
collaborators or viewers are established, click Done at 
the top-right corner of the page.
Figure 13-26
Figure 13-27
Adding Models or Collections to Your Collections
13.6  
Problem
You want to add models or other collections to a collection.
Solution
Use the “Add this model to a collection” or “Add this collection to another collection” link.
Discussion
To add a model to a collection, you need to have already created the collection (Recipe 13.4), 
the collection must be set to contain models (as opposed to other collections), and you need to 
be signed in to your Google account. If you are not signed in, click the G icon at the lower-left 
corner of the SketchUp window.
To add your own model to a collection, upload it to the 3D Warehouse (Recipe 13.3). After you 
upload, the “Add this model to a collection” link appears, and all of your available collections 
are listed in the drop-down menu. 

Taking Credit for Your Model 
| 
329
You can also search the 3D Warehouse for models to 
add to your collections. On the page for any model, the 
“Add this model to a collection” link appears under the 
model picture. Figure 13-28 shows a 3D Warehouse 
model of an orange tree that has been added to a fruit 
tree collection.
Note
When you add someone else’s model to your collection, be 
aware that the model’s owner may at some point remove the 
model from the 3D Warehouse, thereby removing it from your 
collection as well.
If you have created a collection that is set to contain other 
collections, you can add collections to it. When searching 
via Get Models, a component search is available in the 
Advanced Search options, or you can enter this syntax 
in the search field: is:collection. Find the collection you 
want to add, such as the collection for this book (Figure 
13-29), and the link below the collection’s thumbnail will 
read “Add this collection to another collection.”
Figure 13-28
Figure 13-29
Taking Credit for Your Model
13.7  
Problem
You want your name attached to your models in the 3D Warehouse.
Solution
Use the Credits option.
Discussion
Until version 7, your models in the 3D Warehouse would appear under your username, but 
after someone downloaded one of your models and used it in their own model, your model was 
no longer “your own.” Version 7 makes it possible to keep your name with your model after it 
has been downloaded.
To claim credit, click the person icon to the left of the G 
icon at the lower-left corner of the SketchUp window, or 
choose Window→Model Info and open the Credits page 
(Figure 13-30). If you have any components already in 
your model downloaded from the 3D Warehouse, their 
authors will appear on this page. To claim credit for the 
entire model, click the Claim Credit button.
The nickname associated with your Google account will 
then appear under the model credits. 
Figure 13-30

330 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Manually Georeferencing Your Model
13.8  
Problem
You want to manually assign a location to your model.
Solution
Set the location in the Model Info window.
Discussion
A SketchUp model can have three georeferencing states, as indicated by the lightbulb icon at 
the lower-left corner of the SketchUp window.
No location
• 
. This option is for models such as furniture, electronics, and so on. 
Manual location
• 
. The location is set in the Model Info window, as discussed in this 
recipe.
Location from Google Earth
• 
. Data from Google Earth is imported into the SketchUp 
model, thereby setting the model location (Recipe 13.9).
To manually georeference a model, open the Model 
Info window by clicking the lightbulb icon at the 
lower-left corner of the SketchUp window or by choos-
ing Window→Model Info. On the Location page of the 
Model Info window (Figure 13-31), make sure that the 
“Use georeferencing” checkbox is selected, and then use 
the Geographic Location list to choose the city in which 
you want your model set. To set a more specific loca-
tion, click the Set Custom Location button and then en-
ter latitude and longitude coordinates. When a model is 
georeferenced by using the Location page, the lightbulb 
icon turns bold. 
Using the Location page to manually set the model’s lo-
cation is fine for a general placement, as you might need 
for a shadow study. But if you need a more accurate 
placement, relative to existing landmarks or streets, use 
the Get Current View method described in Recipe 13.9.
Figure 13-31

Georeferencing Your Model by Using Google Earth 
| 
331
Georeferencing Your Model by Using Google Earth
13.9  
Problem
You want to place your model in an exact spot on Google Earth.
Solution
Use Get Current View to bring a Google Earth snapshot and terrain into SketchUp, and locate 
your model based on the Google Earth data. Then use the Place Model option to place the 
model in Google Earth.
Discussion
The seamless integration between SketchUp and Google Earth makes it easy (and rather fun) 
to place models directly in Google Earth. After your model is placed in Google Earth, you can 
save it in either SketchUp’s or Google Earth’s native formats. If your model is accurately placed 
and well modeled, it could be accepted into the 3D Buildings layer of Google Earth (Recipe 
13.10).
When modeling for Google Earth, you can start with either the model or the data from Google 
Earth. If you start with the model, you then import the Google Earth snapshot and terrain 
faces, and move or rotate the model into place relative to the Google Earth faces. If you start 
with the Google Earth faces, you would build the model on top of them. 
Of course, you don’t have to create a model from scratch; you can download one from the 3D 
Warehouse. The following example demonstrates how to place a downloaded model on a cliff 
top, both in SketchUp and in Google Earth. 
Note
If you don’t have Google Earth, you can download it for free 
from http://earth.google.com/. (You also can purchase ver-
sions with more features, but these features are not necessary 
for working with SketchUp.) 
In Google Earth, enter the latitude and longitude 
1.	
coordinates 34.088136 -19.057294 in the Fly To 
field, to the left of the Earth window (Figure 13-32).
This flies you to a cliff above Point Mugu, Califor-
2.	
nia—a rather isolated spot and the perfect location 
for a castle overlooking the sea. Make sure Google 
Earth’s terrain layer is displayed. (Layers are listed 
in the lower part of the window, to the left of the 
Google Earth window.) Use the tilt, pan, and zoom 
controls to get to the view shown in Figure 13-33.
Figure 13-32
Figure 13-33

332 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Note
The Fly To field can also take an exact address; a city, state, 
or country name; a zip code; a landmark; or coordinates in 
degrees, minutes, and seconds.
When importing data from 
3.	
Google Earth into 
SketchUp, it’s best to display a plan view in Google 
Earth, at an appropriate scale for placing your 
model. Get to a view as shown in Figure 13-34, 
close enough to see some shrubs and rocks. 
Figure 13-34
In SketchUp, click the Get Current View icon, or 
4.	
choose Tools→Google Earth→Get Current View. 
The snapshot and terrain based on what’s visible in 
Google Earth are imported into SketchUp (Figure 
13-35).
The two faces imported into SketchUp from Google 
Earth are a snapshot (flat) view and a terrain (3D) 
surface. To see both of these, open the Layers win-
dow and change the layer visibility. Each Google 
Earth face is a locked group; you cannot edit or 
move them. (Well, you can if you unlock them, but 
that’s strongly discouraged.) 
Take a look at the lightbulb icon at the lower-left 
5.	
corner of the SketchUp screen. After Google Earth 
terrain is imported, the icon changes to a bulb with 
a Google Earth background. If you open the Model 
Info window to the Location page, you’ll see the 
coordinates you entered in Google Earth.
When placing the SketchUp model onto the 
6.	
Google Earth faces, displaying only the snapshot 
view makes the process easier. Download my Cliff 
Castle model from the 3D Warehouse, inserting 
this model directly into the current SketchUp file 
(Figure 13-36). 
Figure 13-35
Note
When creating a SketchUp model for 
Google Earth, you may want to use one of 
SketchUp’s Google Earth modeling templates 
(Windows→Preferences→Template). These 
templates have no extra components to get 
in the way, and edges are displayed with no 
profiles.
Figure 13-36

Georeferencing Your Model by Using Google Earth 
| 
333
Note
If you prefer to create a model from scratch, you can, of 
course. If the Google Earth faces get in the way, hide their 
layers.
Now display the terrain view, either by adjusting 
7.	
the layer visibility or by clicking the Toggle Ter-
rain icon. Now you can see the cliff slope. Move the 
model so that its lower-back edge is against the cliff 
(Figure 13-37).
Hide the terrain, and build a huge support to hold 
8.	
up the castle (Figure 13-38).
Figure 13-37
Figure 13-38
To bring the castle model into Google Earth, click 
9.	
the Place Model icon or choose Tools→Google 
Earth→Place Model. The castle and its support are 
sitting pretty on the cliff in Google Earth (Figure 
13-39).
Figure 13-39
To make changes to the model, go back to Sketch-
10.	
Up. Figure 13-40 shows some landscaping, added 
materials, and a parapet wall around the grounds. 
You could also move the model to a new location.
Note
If you want to change the model’s scale by using the Tape 
Measure tool, be sure to scale the model within a group or 
component, as described in Recipe 10.11. Otherwise, you will 
be scaling not just the model, but the Google Earth faces as 
well.
Figure 13-40

334 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Click Place Model again, and you will be asked 
11.	
whether you want to reload the model. Click Yes. 
The changed model replaces the previous model in 
Google Earth.
The model and its location appear in Google Earth 
in the Places list, below Temporary Places (Figure 
13-41). If you move away from this location, you 
can double-click the placemark’s name to return 
to it. If you want to save this placemark in Google 
Earth, right-click on the name and choose Save to 
My Places. This means that you can return to the 
castle the next time you open Google Earth; the 
place is no longer temporary. Or you can right-
click and choose Save Place As, which enables you 
to save the model as a .kmz file. This is a Google 
Earth native format that saves both the model and 
location data. If you don’t plan to have this model 
accepted into the 3D Buildings layer of Google 
Earth (sadly, this one would be rejected), you could 
still send the .kmz file to a colleague or upload the 
.kmz file to the 3D Warehouse.
The 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter contains 
the georeferenced version of the castle. Open the 3D 
Warehouse through your Internet browser (not from 
within SketchUp) and find the model named Cliff 
Castle Georeferenced. The default download for this 
model is View in Google Earth, which means Google 
Earth will open the .kmz file. If you open the model’s 
3D Warehouse page and click the Download Model op-
tion, you can download either the .skp or .kmz format.
When you place a model into Google Earth by using 
Place Model, that model appears in your copy of Google 
Earth only; other Google Earth users cannot see it (un-
less they have your .kmz file). Buildings that appear in 
Google Earth’s 3D Buildings layer were uploaded to the 
3D Warehouse and placed into a queue for screening 
before acceptance (Recipe 13.10).
Figure 13-41
Note
You cannot upload .kmz files directly into 
the 3D Warehouse from either SketchUp or 
Google Earth, but you can do it “manually” 
from within the 3D Warehouse. When you 
open the 3D Warehouse from your Internet 
browser, the initial page has an Upload link at 
the top-right corner. Click this link, and you 
can upload either .skp or .kmz files.

Getting Your Models into the 3D Buildings Layer 
| 
335
Getting Your Models into the 3D Buildings Layer
13.10  
Problem
You want to have your model added to the 3D Buildings layer of Google Earth.
Solution
Create a well-crafted model in the correct location, and upload it to the 3D Warehouse so that 
it goes in the 3D Buildings acceptance queue.
Discussion
If you’re not familiar with how 3D buildings appear in Google Earth, make sure the 3D Build-
ings layer is turned on, Then fly to a major city and zoom in on its center. Some buildings are 
gray boxes, which means they are estimates of models based on surveying data; others have 
colors and textures, indicating that they were modeled in SketchUp and uploaded to the 3D 
Warehouse. Figure 13-42 shows some of the 3D buildings in St. Louis, Missouri.
SketchUp models that appear in Google Earth were ac-
cepted by judges who check for accuracy and location. 
If you want your model to be considered, here are some 
guidelines:
Models should be as simple as possible. Don’t in-
• 
clude any interior furniture, outside landscaping, or 
other extraneous detail.
Rather than model every feature on the façade of 
• 
a building, paint faces by using graphic images. 
Chapter 9 contains techniques for painting with 
digital photos.
Keep round objects minimal. Arcs and circles 
• 
are composed of small segments, and each seg-
ment counts as a separate edge. Rather than use a 
24-segmented arc or circle, you can usually get by 
with six or so segments, because the level of detail is 
not easily visible in Google Earth.
Correctly georeference your model by importing 
• 
data from Google Earth into SketchUp (Recipe 
13.9). 
When you upload your model to the 3D Warehouse 
(Recipe 13.3), give it an accurate name, description, 
and address (Figure 13-43). Keep the checkbox labeled 
“This 3D model is real, current, and correctly-located” 
selected. (This checkbox is selected by default; if you are 
modeling something you know is not accurate, or does 
not yet exist, make sure to deselect this box.)
Figure 13-42
Figure 13-43

336 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
When the model is uploaded, it is placed in the queue 
for checking. The estimated wait time is generally a few 
days. At the time of this writing, you are not notified by 
Google if your model is accepted, but you can see the 
model’s status on its 3D Warehouse page. 
Creating a Placemark in Google Earth
13.11  
Problem
You want to save a location and view it in Google Earth.
Solution
Create a placemark.
Discussion
Using the Search field in Google Earth can get you to a lot of places. You can enter a city name 
(Milan, Italy), exact address (1600 Pennsylvania Avenue), or landmark (Eiffel Tower). But what 
if you are working on a SketchUp project that is to be placed somewhere where there are no 
easy landmarks nearby, or you want to save a certain viewing angle? The solution is to create a 
placemark. This example shows you how to place a placemark with a specific location and view-
ing angle.
In Google Earth, fly to the approximate location 
1.	
you want to save. Figure 13-44 shows a plan view 
of part of the campus of Johns Hopkins University 
(my alma mater). You can get to this spot by enter-
ing johns hopkins homewood in the Fly To field and 
then zooming in. The 3D Buildings layer is turned 
on in this example.
Choose Add→Placemark. The pushpin is placed 
2.	
at the center of the view, but you can drag it to the 
spot you want (Figure 13-44).
Figure 13-44
In the 
3.	
New Placemark window (Figure 13-45), 
enter a placemark name. You can also see the 
exact latitude and longitude coordinates here, and 
change them if needed. Do not click OK yet. (If 
you do close the New Placemark window, you can 
right-click on the pushpin and choose Properties to 
reopen it.)
Figure 13-45

Creating a Placemark in Google Earth 
| 
337
Get to the exact view you want to save (Figure 
4.	
13-46).
Figure 13-46
On the View tab of the New Placemark window, 
5.	
click “Snapshot current view” (Figure 13-47). Then 
click OK.
Figure 13-47
The placemark with the location and its viewing 
angle is saved under My Places, as shown in Figure 
13-48. To return to this spot, just double-click the 
placemark name. To save the placemark as a .kmz 
file, right-click on it and choose Save Place As.
Figure 13-48

338 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Relocating a Georeferenced Model
13.12  
Problem
You want to place a georeferenced model in a new location.
Solution
Save the model to a new file without its location data, or download it from the 3D Warehouse 
without preserving its location.
Discussion
Say you have a georeferenced model of a beach house in Greece that you want to place in Spain 
instead. Before you can place the house in Spain, you must remove its location information. 
There are two ways to do this: saving only the model to a new file or downloading the model 
from the 3D Warehouse with new location data. 
Method  1: Save the Model Without 
Georeferencing
This method involves downloading the georeferenced 
model and saving it to your hard drive. It’s a good 
method to use if you’re not yet ready to place the model 
into another model.
Find a georeferenced model in the 3D Warehouse 
1.	
whose location you want to remove, and down-
load it into your current SketchUp file or to a new 
instance of SketchUp.  
If the model itself is not already a component, make 
2.	
it one. Then right-click on the component and 
choose Save As. This saves just the model, without 
any other objects or terrain faces, into its own file. 
Save the model to your hard drive.
Now the model is ready to import into a new file, 
3.	
and it can be placed anywhere.

Relocating a Georeferenced Model 
| 
339
Method 2: Download the Model with a New 
Location
In this example, a scaled-down model of the Eiffel Tow-
er will be placed on the front lawn of the White House 
in Washington, DC. This is a good method to use if you 
have a georeferenced SketchUp model open, into which 
the georeferenced model will be imported.
In Google Earth, fly to the White House (enter the 
1.	
phrase white house in the Fly To field) and zoom in 
to a plan view as shown in Figure 13-49.
In SketchUp, use Get Current View to bring the 
2.	
Google Earth faces into SketchUp.
Use the Components window or the Get Models 
3.	
option to find the Eiffel Tower. Download the one 
by Google (you can use the syntax Eiffel Tower 
author:google in the Search field).
In the pop-up message that appears, click Choose 
4.	
New Location.
Place the tower and its Google Earth faces in some 
5.	
blank space next to the White House land (Figure 
13-50).
This step is not necessary, but to clean up the 
6.	
tower model, you can remove its Google Earth 
faces. Open the tower component for editing. Use 
the Layers window to control the visibility of the 
Google Earth faces, and erase them both. (The ter-
rain face will have to be unlocked before it can be 
erased: Right-click on the face and choose Unlock.) 
The reason this step is not necessary is that the 
terrain that appears in SketchUp is not included in 
what’s placed in Google Earth. But it looks neater 
in the SketchUp model to remove unnecessary or 
irrelevant terrain.
Use Scale to shrink the tower, and move and rotate 
7.	
it into place (Figure 13-51).
Use Place Model to bring the tower into Google 
8.	
Earth. Turn on the 3D Buildings layer to see the 
new addition to the White House surroundings 
(Figure 13-52).
Figure 13-49
Figure 13-50
Figure 13-51
Figure 13-52

340 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
Downloading Buildings That Appear in Google Earth
13.13  
Problem
You want to download models that appear in the 3D Buildings layer of Google Earth.
Solution
Click the building in Google Earth to find the model’s name or other identifying features, and 
use that information in your 3D Warehouse search.
Discussion
In this recipe, you are proposing a new hotel for the main street (the Strip) in Las Vegas. You 
can see the site’s surrounding buildings in Google Earth, and want to download them into your 
SketchUp model so that you’ll have a reference for the new structure. Clicking a 3D building in 
Google Earth opens a page containing some information about the model. Athough you can’t 
download directly from Google Earth into SketchUp, you can get enough information from 
Google Earth to use in your 3D Warehouse search.
In Google Earth, fly to the Bellagio hotel (you can 
1.	
enter this name in the Fly To field). Make sure the 
3D Buildings layer is turned on, and get to a view as 
shown in Figure 13-53. The three hotels indicated 
by the arrows are the ones you want to download 
into SketchUp. The proposed new hotel will be 
placed in the middle of these three.
Figure 13-53
Click the hotel indicated in the lower-right corner 
2.	
of Figure 13-53. This opens an info page that de-
scribes the model, whose name is Aladdin Casino 
and Resort (Figure 13-54). If you click the model 
picture on this info page, your Internet browser will 
open the model’s 3D Warehouse page. 
Figure 13-54

Downloading Buildings That Appear in Google Earth 
| 
341
You can download the model from the browser, 
3.	
which will open a new SketchUp instance. Or you 
can search the 3D Warehouse from within Sketch-
Up, using the Components window or the Get 
Models option, and enter the name Aladdin Casino 
to find the correct model. To show only the specific 
model that appears in Google Earth, you can use an 
Advanced Search, or use this syntax in your search: 
aladdin casino is:best-of-geo.
Import the Aladdin model, and from within the 
4.	
same SketchUp file, search for the other two hotels: 
the Paris Las Vegas and the Bellagio. For each of 
these, choose to preserve their location, so that they 
will be imported in the correct position and loca-
tion. Some models include Google Earth faces, and 
some do not (Figure 13-55).
Some of the land between the hotels is missing, so it 
5.	
must be filled in by returning to Google Earth and 
taking a new snapshot. In Google Earth, get to a 
view as shown in Figure 13-56.
Figure 13-55
Figure 13-56
Return to SketchUp and use Get Current View to 
6.	
fill in the missing land (Figure 13-57).
Figure 13-57
On the Google Earth snapshot, create your new 
7.	
hotel model. The one shown in Figure 13-58 is an 
enormous, tacky arch with windows that spans over 
the Strip and nicely frames the Paris hotel’s mini 
Eiffel Tower. 
Figure 13-58

342 
| 
Chapter 13: 3D Warehouse and Google Earth
This is an important step before placing your new 
8.	
model into Google Earth: erase or hide the three 
other buildings (Figure 13-59). Everything that is 
visible in SketchUp, except for the Google Earth 
faces, is brought into Google Earth, and Google 
Earth already has the three existing hotels. If you 
don’t want to remove these models permanently, 
hiding is a good solution; it will keep the models 
out of Google Earth but they can easily be redis-
played in SketchUp.
In SketchUp, use Place Model to bring the new 
9.	
hotel into Google Earth (Figure 13-60).
The 3D Warehouse collection for this chapter contains 
the georeferenced version of this hotel. Open the 3D 
Warehouse through your Internet browser and find the 
model Vegas Arch. The default download for this model 
is View in Google Earth, which means Google Earth 
will open the .kmz file. If you open the model’s 3D 
Warehouse page and click the Download Model option, 
you can download either the .skp or .kmz format.
Figure 13-59
Figure 13-60

Dynamic components are the major new feature 
of SketchUp 7. In essence, a dynamic component is 
a component that has attributes: features that can 
be adjusted, toggled on and off, moved, replaced, 
resized, and so on. A simple dynamic component 
could be a box that you click to change its color or 
click to open and close the box top. A more com-
plex example would be a dining set in which you can 
adjust the number of chairs, choose various finishes 
and table tops, scale to adjust the length, and then 
see the calculated price for the current configuration. 
Another common type of dynamic component is one 
that self-copies when scaled, such as a fence that will 
adjust its number of pickets to accommodate the 
fence length.
Dynamic components are free and available for 
all SketchUp users to download. However, only 
users of the Pro version can create their own 
dynamic components and change attributes of 
existing ones. For this reason, and because creat-
ing dynamic components is a topic that requires 
an entire book of its own, this chapter covers only 
the basics of where to find dynamic components, 
and the various things you can do with them.
Note
If you are a Pro user interested in learning how to cre-
ate dynamic components, you can find online videos 
and self-paced tutorials on SketchUp’s website and via 
the Help Center (choose Help→Help Center).
Chapter 14
	
Dynamic Components
Before getting started, display the Dynamic 
Components toolbar (Figure 14-1). In Win-
dows, choose View→Toolbars→Dynamic 
Components. On the Mac, choose View→Tool 
Palettes→Dynamic Components.
Figure 14-1
From left to right, these tools are as follows:
• Interact. This tool is used on dynamic 
components that have attributes that can be 
changed with a mouse click. For instance, 
you can click to swing open a door, to change 
a material, or to move an object from one 
point to another.
• Component Options. For dynamic options 
that have descriptive attributes or user-
defined attributes, the Component Op-
tions window lists each available option or 
description. 
• Component Attributes. For Pro users only, 
this window enables you to add or change 
attributes of a dynamic component. 

344 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
Finding Dynamic Components
14.1  
Problem
You want to find and import dynamic components.
Solution
Find the dynamic components provided in the Google collections in the 3D Warehouse, or 
perform an advanced search for dynamic component models or collections.
Discussion
When looking for dynamic components in the 3D Warehouse, keep in mind that they work 
only when they are imported directly into your SketchUp model via either the Components 
window or Get Models. (Searching the 3D Warehouse is explained in Recipe 13.1.) If you open 
a dynamic component in a new SketchUp instance, it will open as its own model and won’t 
function as a component. 
Note
If you have a dynamic component on your hard drive, you can 
use File→Import to import it, as you would for a nondynamic 
component.
When searching for models and collections in the 3D 
Warehouse, those that are dynamic are identifiable by 
the green square-and-triangle icon shown to the right of 
the fence thumbnail in Figure 14-2.
The Google collections, such as Architecture, Landscap-
ing, and People, which can be opened directly from 
your Components window, contain both dynamic and 
nondynamic collections. For example, the Architecture 
collection contains a collection called DC Cabinets and 
another called DC Doors and Windows. 
When using Get Models, you can use the Advanced 
Search feature to find only dynamic models, or you can 
use the is:dynamic search operator syntax in the search 
field. For example, entering window is:dynamic will 
yield all models that have the word window in the title 
or description, and are dynamic (Figure 14-3).
Note
Advanced search and operator syntax are described in Recipe 
13.2.
If you want to find entire collections of dynamic com-
ponents, use the syntax dynamic is:collection. 
Figure 14-2
Figure 14-3

Interacting with Dynamic Components 
| 
345
Interacting with Dynamic Components
14.2  
Problem
You want to see how dynamic components interact.
Solution
Use the Interact tool.
Discussion
The Interact tool lets you activate dynamic attributes that are enabled by a mouse click. For 
dynamic components that have mouse-click attributes, clicking on certain parts of the dynamic 
component will cause something to happen: a change of material, movement, rotation, and so on.
Interact is available via the hand icon on the Dynamic 
Components toolbar (View→Toolbars→Dynamic Com-
ponents), or you can choose Tools→Interact.
For a simple example of Interact, find the DC People 
collection in the 3D Warehouse. You can access this col-
lection by clicking the Navigation arrow in the Compo-
nents window and opening the People collection and 
then the DC People collection. Or you could use the 
search syntax dc people is:collection (Figure 14-4).
Open DC People and import Sang into your model. 
(Sang might already be in your model; he’s the default 
component for some SketchUp templates.) 
With the Interact tool active, move your cursor over the 
various parts of Sang. When the cursor is over Sang’s 
hair, shirt, or pants, the cursor symbol’s pointer finger 
radiates little yellow lines, indicating that the cursor is 
on something you can interact with (Figure 14-5).
Click Sang’s shirt, pants, or hair to scroll through a pre-
set list of colors. The component attributes are defined 
so that Interact will scroll through just a few colors, but 
you can choose different colors. Open Sang’s Compo-
nent Options (right-click on Sang and choose Dynamic 
Components→Component Options) to see an interac-
tive window in which you can manually choose colors, 
either by name, RGB value, or hexadecimal value.
Figure 14-4
Figure 14-5

346 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
For another fun example of using Interact, import the 
Dynamic Art Frame by Google (search for art frame 
is:dynamic). Place two of these frames on walls, and 
while Interact is active, click each painting to scroll 
between three other works of “art.” The frame size au-
tomatically adjusts to meet the extents of the painting. 
In the Component Options window, you can also adjust 
the frame color and size (Figure 14-6).
Note
When you import more than one instance of a dynamic com-
ponent, copies of the component are listed in the In Model 
folder. If you import one dynamic component and use the 
Move tool to make copies of it, the In Model folder will reflect 
only one component. But as soon as you make changes to 
any of the copies, a new dynamic component will appear in 
the In Model folder. This is explained in Recipe 14.5. 
The Interact tool can also be used to animate. Figure 
14-7 shows a house with two dynamic awning windows 
and three dynamic double-hung windows. (To find dy-
namic windows, search for window is:dynamic.) Click-
ing on a double-hung window slides it open; clicking it 
again closes it. Clicking on an awning window rotates it 
open and shut. Dynamic doors work the same way. 
For an example of a dynamic component with several 
types of interactions, download Google’s dynamic deliv-
ery truck (search for truck is:dynamic). While Interact 
is active, you can click the front wheels to turn them, 
click the doors to open and close them, click the cab to 
scroll through various colors, and click the bed to scroll 
through various configurations (Figure 14-8).
Figure 14-6
Figure 14-7
Figure 14-8

Investigating Dynamic Component Options 
| 
347
Investigating Dynamic Component Options
14.3  
Problem
You want to see all of the possible changes you can make to a dynamic component.
Solution
Open the Component Options window to see what options are available.
Discussion
There are infinite possibilities for modifying dynamic components: using the Interact tool, 
changing component options, scaling, and more—all at once or in any combination. A well-
crafted dynamic component provides an explanation of all its possibilities in its description in 
the Component Options window. You can open this window by right-clicking on the compo-
nent and choosing Dynamic Components→Component Options. The Component Options 
window is akin to the Entity Info window; you can keep it open all the time if you want, and 
options will appear for whatever component is selected. 
For some examples of what component options can look like, open Google’s Dynamic Compo-
nent Catalogs collection (search for dynamic catalog is:collection). This catalog includes several 
collections by manufacturers such as Smart Furniture, Marvin Windows and Doors, and 
KitchenAid. Many more collections are expected to be added in the future.
Open the KitchenAid collection and import the under-
counter wine cellar into your model. Its Component 
Options are shown in Figure 14-9. This is one of the 
simplest types of dynamic components; it has nothing 
to change or interact with, but you can view its features 
and link to various web pages for more information.
Figure 14-9

348 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
Figure 14-10 shows the options for Smart Shelves by 
Smart Furniture. In addition to being able to link to the 
company’s online store, you can configure your shelves 
within SketchUp and see the resulting price.
Figure 14-10
Figure 14-11 shows the options for a Marvin window. 
The description informs you that you can use the Inter-
act tool to open the window. The window’s dimensions 
are grayed out, because they depend on the model num-
ber you select from a list. You can choose to include a 
grille or jamb extension. This is a great way to condense 
a large number of possible window configurations into 
a single component, as opposed to providing hundreds 
of nondynamic components representing each window 
model. And you can try out different configurations by 
simply changing options, rather than searching for dif-
ferent components to load.
Figure 14-11

Scaling Dynamic Components 
| 
349
Scaling Dynamic Components
14.4  
Problem
You want to change the size of a scalable dynamic component.
Solution
Select the component, activate Scale, and resize the component by using the available drag 
handles.
Discussion
When you scale a nondynamic component, all objects in the component are stretched or 
squashed by the same proportion. So if you want to widen a nondynamic couch, its arms and 
supports will widen as well. Dynamic components can be set to maintain dimensions of certain 
objects, such as the arms of a couch, and allow the size to change only for other objects, such as 
the couch cushions. A dynamic component can also be set to add or remove objects when the 
size gets too large or small. So a widened dynamic couch would take on extra cushions after 
the cushions exceed a set width. Finally, dynamic components can have certain scale handles 
hidden, limiting you to scale only in certain directions. So a dynamic couch can be scalable in 
width but can have scaling restricted in height or depth.
To see what this means, import Google’s wood high-
back bench (search for highback bench is:dynamic). Its 
Component Options window informs you that scaling 
is the only way to change this model; there are no other 
options or interactions. When the Scale tool is activated, 
you will see drag handles only in the width direction, 
not height or depth (Figure 14-12).
Figure 14-12
Drag one of the handles to make the bench wider. 
While you are dragging the mouse, all parts of the 
bench appear to grow wider, including the arms, legs, 
and slats (Figure 14-13).
Figure 14-13

350 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
As soon as you click to complete the scale, the bench 
regenerates. The arms, legs, and slats maintain their 
original sizes, and more slats are added to accommodate 
the new width (Figure 14-14).
For another example, draw a wall and insert Google’s 
dynamic scalable casement window. In its Component 
Options window, the width and height are grayed out, 
because the only way to set the window size is via the 
Scale tool, as stated in the description (Figure 14-15).
Drag handles are available only to change either the 
height or width; you cannot scale in both directions at 
once. To scale the window to a specific width or height, 
start dragging the mouse in the relevant scale direc-
tion, and then type the dimension you want, followed 
by the unit symbol, and press Enter. Grilles are added 
or removed as needed, to keep the window panes from 
exceeding a set dimension (Figure 14-16).
Note
At the time of this writing, you cannot use double-quotation 
marks while specifying a set length via the Scale tool. So if you 
are working in inches, enter the length in feet instead, using 
the single-quote foot symbol. For example, you can’t enter 
18” but you can enter 1.5’ or 1’6. Alternatively, you can create 
a “dummy” rectangle to represent the final window size, and 
scale the window to meet the edges of the rectangle.
When the window is resized, its new dimensions appear 
in the Component Options window.
For a final scaling example, import several copies of 
Google’s dynamic pine tree. You can scale this tree in 
the height direction only, and the groups of needle 
clusters will adjust accordingly (Figure 14-17). This is 
an example of a dynamic component that can be modi-
fied in several ways. Aside from scaling, you can change 
various tree features in the Component Options win-
dow and use the Interact tool to tweak the individual 
needle clusters.
Figure 14-14
Figure 14-15
Figure 14-16
Figure 14-17

Modifying and Replacing Dynamic Components 
| 
351
Modifying and Replacing Dynamic Components
14.5  
Problem
You have several copies of a dynamic component. You want to modify one of them and then 
replace the remaining dynamic components with the one you modified.
Solution
Modify one dynamic component, which automatically creates a new component. Then use 
Replace Selected in the Components window to replace all of the original components with the 
new one.
Discussion
When you have copies of a dynamic component, making changes to one of them is equivalent 
to using the Make Unique option on a nondynamic component. A new component is created, 
which can be seen in the In Model folder. In this example, involving lengthening dynamic fence 
components, you will see when and how new components are created as a result of modifying 
dynamic components. You will also see how to replace components with other components, 
and how to use the Component Options window to change multiple dynamic components at 
once.
Download my 
1.	
Dynamic Fenced Yard model from 
the 3D Warehouse (Figure 14-18). If you import 
this model directly into your SketchUp model, 
explode the model before continuing. 
The fence components around the yard are dynam-
ic, and one component is placed at each fence post 
location. These components are identical copies, so 
only one fence component appears in the In Model 
folder of the Components window. To fill in the 
missing rails and pickets, each fence component 
will be scaled to meet the next post.
Select one of the fence components and use its 
2.	
Component Options window to widen the picket 
spacing and offset the rails. Then open the modi-
fied component for editing, and paint the rails 
(Figure 14-19). 
The fence components started out as identical, but 
when you changed the options for one of them, a 
new fence component was created. The In Model 
folder will show a new component: Dynamic 
Fence#1. So when that modified component was 
opened for editing and you painted the rails, 
the changed materials did not affect any other 
­components.
Figure 14-18
Figure 14-19

352 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
Replacing all of the original fences with the new 
3.	
one, as shown in Figure 14-20, can be done entirely 
in the In Model folder of the Components window. 
Right-click on the thumbnail for the original fence 
component and choose Select Instances. Then 
right-click on the thumbnail for the modified fence 
and choose Replace Selected.
Figure 14-20
Use Scale on each fence to extend it to meet the 
4.	
next fence post (Figure 14-21). Now that each fence 
component has been modified, each one is a sepa-
rate component.
Note
To remove the overhanging rails and pickets on the last fence 
component, you could explode that last component and 
erase the rails and pickets. Or you could make it unique and 
edit it.
The picket spacing is set in the Component Options, 
but each fence component has a different length. So 
where does the difference in spacing appear? Look at 
the pickets on either side of a post; only the spacing 
here is not uniform (Figure 14-22). 
Even though each fence is a separate component, 
5.	
you can still change the options for all of them at 
once. Open the Component Options window, select 
all of the fences, and change one of the options, 
such as picket spacing. All of the fences will update.
Figure 14-21
Figure 14-22

Sizing by the Reference Point 
| 
353
Sizing by the Reference Point
14.6  
Problem
You want to import a dynamic component at the correct point in your model.
Solution
When you bring the component into your model, pay attention to the point by which you grab 
the component. This is the reference point, and changes in dimension are made relative to this 
point.
Discussion
The reference point is one of the most important aspects of a dynamic component, because 
changes in scale and location are done relative to this point. When you use the fields on the 
Component Options window to change dimensions, the component’s reference point will 
remain in place. For example, if you drag in a dynamic window by its lower-left corner and 
place that corner at point A, the window’s lower-left corner will remain at point A unless you 
manually move it. When you enter a new window height or width, the resizing will be relative 
to point A.
Note
The reference point can move when you use the Scale tool, 
depending on which scale handle you drag.
In this example, you will see how a component’s refer-
ence comes into play when resizing a room and its floor.
Import 
1.	
Google’s Angled Wall Room dynamic com-
ponent (search for angled room is:dynamic). Place 
the reference point at the origin of the SketchUp 
model (Figure 14-23).
In the room’s Component Options window, change 
2.	
the width to 126”, the length to 102”, the height to 8’, 
and make the base trim 12”. The resulting room in 
Figure 14-24 also shows some changed colors. The 
corner of the room at the origin remains in place, 
and the walls adjust accordingly.
Figure 14-23
Figure 14-24

354 
| 
Chapter 14: Dynamic Components
Import my 
3.	
Floating Floor component from this 
chapter’s 3D Warehouse collection. This is a tiled 
floor whose tiles will self-copy when the floor is 
resized. The tiles are to start at the corner farthest 
from the origin, so the floor’s reference point 
should be placed there. Click the bottom point of 
that corner (Figure 14-25). The tiles themselves are 
set to start 12” above the point by which they are 
placed (this is, after all, a floating floor). This is why 
the floor aligns with the top of the 12” base trim. 
(The floating distance is one of the options that can 
and will be changed.)
Scale the floor to meet the other corner of the room 
4.	
(Figure 14-26).
Use the Component Options to reduce the floor 
5.	
height to 3” (so the base molding will be visible), 
and change the tiles to 12”×18”. You can also change 
the floor material if you like. The resulting floor 
should look like Figure 14-27: the tiles extend past 
the corner at the origin. This is because the 12” x 
18” tiles don’t fit perfectly in a 126”×102” room.
To trim the tiles to fit the room, you would have to 
explode them, which means the floor will no longer 
be a component. So in the real world, this is a step 
best saved for the last minute, after you know that 
your room dimensions will not change.
If you want to trim the tiles, here is the procedure: 
Open the Component Options for the room itself and 
display wall A, the only wall not currently displayed. 
Then explode the floor, which reduces the floor to 
its individual tile components. With all of these tiles 
selected, explode them, too. (This also changes the scale 
of the material.) Next, right-click on the room compo-
nent and choose Intersect→Intersect with Model. With 
the intersection edges thus created, you can trim away 
the parts of the tiles that extend past the floor. Then you 
can hide walls again via the room’s Component Options 
(Figure 14-28).
If you then wanted to change the scale of the material, 
you would use the Fixed Pins method described in 
Recipe 8.9. After the position of the material in one tile 
is set, use the eyedropper to “sample” the material. Then 
right-click on any tile and choose Select→All with same 
material, and click any selected tile, which applies the 
new positioned texture to all of the tiles.
Figure 14-25
Figure 14-26
Figure 14-27
Figure 14-28

Always face camera (Create 
Component), 154
angles, measuring and marking, 
256
Animated Car model, 296
Animated Garage model, 296
Animated Mansion model, 287
animated sectioning, 287–291
staged, 292–296
animation, 274
Apartment Balcony model, 284
Architectural style, 316
Architectural units, 5
Architecture collection, 344
arcs, 252
Arc tool, 226
area, 257
Area option, 257
Autofold, creating overhangs, 
128–132
Axes tool, 250
B
Backsplash model, 210
Barber Pole model, 215
barn
painting with free-pin 
positioning, 234–236
using Photo Match to model, 
239–241
Barn model, 234, 239
beach ball, 147
Beaded Bracelets model, 78
Bedroom model, 263
bike handlebar, 48–50
Blend slider, 308
finding and downloading 
models, 319
importing model directly into 
SketchUp model, xiii
issues with models, 319
.kmz files, uploading, 334
materials collections, 194
models (see models)
My Collections, 325–327
refining search, 320–322
sampler components, 155
seeing larger model view, xv
Share settings, 327–328
syntax in Search field, 321
taking credit for model, 329
uploading models, 323–324
website, xiv
A
Active Cut, 289
Add Collection to Favorites, 302
adding volume to object along 
path, 30–32
Add this collection to another 
collection, 328–329
Add this model to a collection, 
328–329
aligning and gluing components, 
167–170
alignment options (Create 
Component), 154
alpha-transparent images, 
218–222
2D Face Camera components, 
219
Alt/Cmd key to define path, 28
Numbers
2D Face Camera components, 
219
2D images
representing 3D objects, 
232–233
using to model 3D objects, 
238–243
2D objects that always face 
camera, 153
2D trees versus 3D trees, 166
3D Buildings layer (Google 
Earth), 223, 335–336
downloading models, 340–342
3D Follow Me path, 102–106
3D objects
painting, 234
using 2D images to model, 
238–243
3D Text tool, 63
3D Warehouse
collections
adding models or collections 
to, 328–329
adding someone else’s model 
to, 329
child collection, 326
Google Earth Ready option, 
326
controlling privacy, 327–328
downloading model files, 
xiii–xv
downloading model with 
scenes, 274
dynamic components, 344
Edit link, 324

356 
| 
Index
Bookcase model, 139
books, preventing from sticking 
to bookcase, 137–141
bracelet, 21
Break Edges function, 53
Bricks and Cladding, 194
Bulge field, 252
C
Cabinet model, 68
candy dish, 44
Casserole Dish model, 82
Create This Model Yourself, 82
Castle model, 292
Castle Staged Animation model, 
296
chairs
around a circular table, 21
chair-and-desk components, 7
in circular pattern around 
podium, 24
child collection, 326
Chimney House model, 54
Create This Model Yourself, 54
circles, 251
Circular Array model, 15
Create This Model Yourself, 15
circular arrays, 15–21
Circular Internal Array model, 
xv, 22
circular internal arrays, 22–24
classroom, 7
Cliff Castle Georeferenced 
model, 334
Coffee Shop model, 217
collections
adding models or collections to, 
328–329
adding someone else’s model 
to, 329
child collection, 326
controlling privacy, 327–328
creating in 3D Warehouse, 
325–327
creating material collections, 
198–199
Mac, 199
Windows, 198
Google Earth Ready option, 326
coloring, two-sided, 148–150
Colors In Model, 195
Colors window, 193–194
creating material collections, 
199
column base, 31, 36
columns
cutting a floor for columns, 56
in an open, circular pattern, 21
Component Attributes window, 
343
Component Options window, 
343, 347, 349
component placeholders, 23
components
accessing local, 161–162
aligning and gluing, 167–170
best-known feature, 153
bringing back placeholder 
components, 181
creating, 154
creating nested, 189–192
deleting all instances, 156
dynamic (see dynamic 
components)
editing or exploding, 158
efficiency, 153–192
inserting, 157
inserting in model, 156
mirrored, 170–172
names, 159
Outliner (see Outliner)
painting, 163–164
performance, 180
reloading, 179–181
renaming, 159–160
replacing, 182–184
replacing all versus replacing 
some, 180
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263–265
sampler, 155
saving in own file, 160–161
scaling, 165–166
switching out, 179–181
symmetric models, 170–172
temporary placeholder 
components, 179
ungrouping, 37
versus objects, 153
windows in 3D walls, 172–178
known thickness, 177–178
unknown thickness, 173–176
(see also groups or components)
Components Sampler folder, 155, 
157
Components window, 155–156, 
344
Definition Name field, 159
Edit tab, 156
Favorites, 161–162
finding and downloading 
models, 318
In Model folder, 352
My SketchUp Components, 162
Purge Unused option, 156
renaming components, 159
Replace Selected option, 182
Select tab, 156
Statistics tab, 156
Concept House model, 287, 291
Constrained on Line from Point 
inference, 113
Constrained on Plane Intersect 
Plane, 115
constraints and inferences, 107, 
107–132
Autofold, creating overhangs, 
128–132
Constrained on Line from Point 
inference, 113
corner intersections, 125–128
dormers, 112–122
coplanar, 114–117
peaked, 117–122
simple, 112–114
double constraint, 110
Constrained on Plane 
Intersect Plane, 115
end-middle intersections, 
123–125
Endpoint inference, 109
On Edge inference, 109
Parallel to Edge inference, 111
roofs
intersections, 122–128
overhanging, 108–111
construction lines, 168
creating grids, 258–259
exact dimensions, 254–255
grids, 258
construction points, exact 
dimensions, 254–255

Index 
| 
357
is:dynamic search operator 
syntax, 344
Landscaping collection, 344
Marvin window, 348
modifying and replacing, 
351–352
options, 347–348
People collection, 344
reference point, 353–354
scaling, 349–350
Smart Shelves by Smart 
Furniture, 348
Dynamic Fenced Yard model, 
351
dynamic is:collection, 344
E
edges
hiding, 180, 297
locating edges that are hidden 
or softened, 298
painting by material, 208–209
removing from display, 297, 
297–299
sketchy style, 311–313
softening, 297
Edit Group, 134
Edit Textures model, 202
Eiffel Tower model, 221
end-middle intersections, 
123–125
Endpoint inference, 109
engraving, 58
text, 63
Engraving model, 58
entering numbers, 5
Entity Info window, 133
Definition Name field, 186
renaming components, 159
Eraser tool, 11, 42, 297–299
exact dimensions, 247–270
arcs, 252
calculating area of faces, 257
circles, 251
construction points, 254–255
creating grids, 258–259
importing images, 253
lines, 248–249
measuring and marking angles, 
256
copies, 1–24
circular arrays, 15–21
circular internal arrays, 22–24
Ctrl/Option key, 3
entire row, 5
linear arrays, 2–7
linear internal arrays, 8–12
linear (see linear copies)
nonorthogonal linear array, 
13–14
rotated (see rotated copies)
Coplanar Dormer model, 114
coplanar dormers, 114–117
corner intersections, 125–128
corners, rounded (see rounded 
corners)
Create a New Style icon, 301
Create Component window, 154
Always Face Camera, 233
Replace Selection with 
Component, 233
Shadows Face Sun, 233
Create Group from Slice, 276
Create Mask checkbox, 310
Create Material icon, 195
Create This Model Yourself
Casserole Dish model, 82
Chimney House model, 54
Circular Array model, 15
Gazebo model, 59
House with Shed model, 135
Intersect with Context model, 72
Jewelry Box model, 81
Linear Array model, 3
Roof End Middle model, 123
Tower Floor Plans model, 144
Credits option, 329
Ctrl/Option key, 3
curved faces on roof and 
building, 94
curved face, trimming rails to 
meet, 56
curved window, 105
Curvy Roof model, 94
Custom Door model, 224
Customize Toolbar, 247
Cut opening checkbox (Create 
Component), 154
cutting, 144–147
cutting a floor for columns, 56
D
DC Cabinets collection, 344
DC Doors and Windows, 344
deck, 56
decorative trim around windows, 
40
default layer, 158, 272
Definition Name field, 186
Delete Guides, 11
Depth cue setting, 311
Detail view and component 
names, 159
Dimensions field, 250
importing images, 253
distorted materials, 143
document.xml file, 312
Domed Skylight model, 58
donut shape, 44
doorknob, 72
dormers, 112–122
coplanar, 114–117
peaked, 117–122
simple, 112–114
double constraints, 110
Constrained on Plane Intersect 
Plane, 115
roof intersections, 122–128
double-quotation marks, 350
downloading model files, xiii–xv
Download Model, 319, 334
Dresser model, 168
driving (see Follow Me tool)
dynamic components, 343–354
Architecture collection, 344
Component Attributes window, 
343
Component Options window, 
343, 347, 349
Components window, 344
DC Cabinets collection, 344
DC Doors and Windows, 344
dynamic is:collection, 344
finding, 344
Floating Floor component, 354
Google collections, 344
Google’s Angled Wall Room, 
353
Google’s Dynamic Component 
Catalogs collection, 347
Interact tool, 343, 345–346

358 
| 
Index
importing data from, 332
.kmz files, 321
modeling templates, 332
placemarks, 336–337
placing model into, 334
Google Earth Ready option, 326
Google’s 3D Warehouse (see 3D 
Warehouse)
Google sampler components, 155
Google’s Angled Wall Room 
dynamic component, 353
Google’s Dynamic Component 
Catalogs collection, 347
Graffiti model, 228
grids, creating, 258–259
groups or components, 133–152
assigning names, 133
creating, 133
cutting and slicing, 144–147
cutting objects, 59–63
editing, 134
exploding (see exploding 
components)
hiding rest of model while 
editing, 145
intersecting with intact and 
exploded components, 
68–69
intersecting without exploding, 
64–67
locking, 151
nested, 134
Outliner, 188
painting, 61
protecting objects from edits, 
141–143
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263–265
scenarios, using layers, scenes, 
and groups, 280–282
trimming components with 
themselves, 73–78
two-sided coloring, 148–150
ungluing faces, 135–137
ungrouping (see exploding 
components)
unsticking edges, 137–141
guide lines (see construction 
lines)
dummy paths, 94–98
Edit Group method, 97
extending paths, 99–101
extruding face along a path 
that will cut volume along 
path, 26–29
keeping original object intact, 
33–37
lathed shapes, 89–91
manual paths, 29
open paths, 29
path that’s not adjacent to 
Follow Me face, 38–40
perpendicular paths, 51
preselect edges of path, 28
preselect face as path, 27
roofs with uniform slope, 92–94
round or lathed objects, 41–44
spheres, 45–47
temporary face, 80–83
framed picture, 169
Free Pins mode, 211, 230
painting 3D object, 234–238
texture positioning, 224–227
Furnished Cottage Animated 
model, 291
Furnished Cottage model, 277
G
garden, random-looking, 184
Gazebo model, 60
Create This Model Yourself, 59
georeferencing models, 317
manually, 330
placing in new location, 
338–339
using Google Earth, 331–334
Get Current View tool, 151
Get Models, 319, 344
glasses, 102–106
lens frame, 104–106
Google collections, 344
Google Earth, 317–342
3D Buildings layer, 223, 
335–336
downloading models, 340–342
downloading, 331
georeferencing models
manually, 330
using Google Earth, 331–334
exact dimensions (continued)
measuring lengths and resizing, 
260–262
polygons, 251
rectangles, 250
resizing model in multiple 
directions, 268–270
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263–265
resizing only parts of model, 
265–267
Explode, 61
exploding components, 37
extruding face along a path that 
will cut volume along 
path, 26–29
F
Face Camera components, 
232–233
Face Camera Tree model, 232
face confusion, 143
Face Me components, 232
faces
calculating area, 257
painting multiple faces, 200–201
Favorites, 161–162
fence, 12
Fencing folder of Materials 
window, 219
Ferris wheel, 21
fireplace mantel, 30, 35
Fixed Pins mode, 210–214, 230
Flip Along, 104
Floating Floor component, 354
floors
cutting a floor for columns, 56
protecting from edits, 141–143
Push/Pull, 142
scenarios, using layers, scenes, 
and groups, 280–282
Flower House model, 182
Follow Me tool, 25–52
3D Follow Me path, 102–106
3D paths, 48–52
adding volume to object along 
path, 30–32
Alt/Cmd key to define path, 28
before using, 25

Index 
| 
359
K
keeping original object intact, 
33–37
keyboard, 7
keypad and cover, 63
Keypad and Cover model, 63
kitchen, 280–282
Kitchen Floor model, 280
.kmz files, 321, 342
uploading, 334
L
landscape design, 282
Landscaped Walkway model, 180
Landscaping collection, 344
Landscaping Options model, 282
Large Tool Set toolbar, 25, 31
lathed objects, 41–44
lathed shapes, 89–91
Layer0, 158, 272
Layer (calculating area), 257
layers, 271–272
Clear the Visible checkbox, 281
default, 158, 272
scenarios, using layers, scenes, 
and groups, 280–282
toggling display of objects, 
277–279
Layers toolbar, 272
LayOut program, 271
length, 3
entering numbers, 5
Length field, 4, 252
lens, 102–106
lens frame, 104–106
Level of Detail setting, 311
Linear Array model, 2
Create This Model Yourself, 3
linear arrays, 2–7
linear copies, 1
linear internal arrays, 8–12
lines, exact dimensions, 248–249
Line tool, 53
Lock Aspect Ratio checkbox, 310
locking groups, 151
Log Cabin model, 74
logos, removing, 231
Look Around tool, 284–287
Imperial units, 5
Import, 344
importing data from Google 
Earth, 332
importing model directly into 
SketchUp model, xiii
Import window, 157
inferences, 107
(see also constraints and 
inferences)
In Model folder, 314, 352
Interact tool, 343, 345–346
Internal Linear Array model, 8
intersecting with intact and 
exploded components, 
68–69
intersecting without exploding, 
64–67
Intersection marker, 10
Intersect Selected model, 70
Intersect tool, 53–78
3D Follow Me path, 102–106
Break Edges function, 53
lathed shapes, 89–91
Intersect with Context, 53, 72–73
Intersect with Context model, 72
Create This Model Yourself, 72
Intersect with Model, 53
cutting all intersected objects, 
57–58
groups or components
cutting objects, 59–63
intersecting without 
exploding, 64–67
trimming components with 
themselves, 73–78
roofs, uniform slope, 92–94
trimming objects, 54–56
Irregular Window model, 173
is:dynamic search operator 
syntax, 344
J
Jewelry Box model, 81
Create This Model Yourself, 81
H
Hacienda model, 287
half-spheres, 46
Halo setting, 311
Hameenlinna Castle model, 287
handles, keeping as components, 
68
Help Center, 321, 343
hexagonal table, 86–106
Hexagon Table Alternative 
model, 88
Hidden Geometry, 82, 83
edges, 298
lathed shapes, 90–91
Hidden Line mode, 315
hidden objects, 323
Hide, 55
Hide Guides, 11
hiding edges, 297
hiding rest of model while 
editing, 145
Hosta model, 179
Hot Tub model, 99
houses, 7
House with Shed model, 135
Create This Model Yourself, 
135
I
images
2D images representing 3D 
objects, 232–233
alpha-transparent, 218–222
converting into face, 197
exact dimensions, 253
finding, 193–194
getting into model, 195–198
importing, Dimensions field, 
253
importing materials as, 197
painting 3D object, 234–238
painting barn with free-pin 
positioning, 234–236
painting truck with free-pin 
positioning, 236–238
patching, 229–231
(see also photos)

360 
| 
Index
Castle Staged Animation, 296
changing styles, 299–300
Chimney House, 54
Circular Array, 15
Circular Internal Array, xv, 22
Cliff Castle Georeferenced, 334
Coffee Shop, 217
Concept House, 287, 291
controlling privacy, 327–328
Coplanar Dormer, 114
creating new styles, 301
Curvy Roof, 94
Custom Door, 224
deleting all component 
instances, 156
displaying, 297–316
displaying without edges, 180
Domed Skylight, 58
downloading model with 
scenes, 274
Dresser, 168
Dynamic Fenced Yard, 351
Edit Textures, 202
Eiffel Tower, 221
Engraving, 58
exact dimensions, 247–270
arcs, 252
calculating area of faces, 257
circles, 251
construction lines, 254–255
construction points, 254–255
creating grids, 258–259
importing images, 253
lines, 248–249
measuring and marking 
angles, 256
measuring lengths and 
resizing, 260–262
polygons, 251
rectangles, 250
resizing model in multiple 
directions, 268–270
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263–265
resizing only parts of model, 
265–267
Face Camera Tree, 232
finding and downloading, 
318–319
3D Warehouse, 319
Components window, 318
Get Models, 319
rectangles, 250
resizing model in multiple 
directions, 268–270
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263–265
resizing only parts of model, 
265–267
mirrored components, 170–172
mirroring objects, 104
Mixing Styles model, 305
model files, downloading, xiii–xv
Model Info window, 3, 145
Animations page, 282
Claim Credit button, 329
modeling with photos, 223–246
2D images representing 3D 
objects, 232–233
editing photos, 227–229
painting 3D objects, 234
painting barn with free-pin 
positioning, 234–236
painting truck with free-pin 
positioning, 236–238
patching images, 229–231
texture positioning in Free Pins 
mode, 224–227
using Photo Match to 3D 
objects, 238–243
using Photo Match to paint 
existing model, 243–246
models
3D Buildings layer of Google 
Earth, 335–336
adding models or collections to, 
328–329
adding someone else’s model to 
your collection, 329
Animated Car, 296
Animated Garage, 296
Animated Mansion, 287
animated sectioning, 287–291
staged, 292–296
Apartment Balcony, 284
Backsplash, 210
Barber Pole, 215
Barn, 234, 239
Beaded Bracelets, 78
Bedroom, 263
Bookcase, 139
Cabinet, 68
Casserole Dish, 82
Castle, 292
M
Make Component, 154
Make Group, 33, 87, 133
Make Unique option, 351
manual paths, 29
Marvin window, 348
Material (calculating area), 257
materials
alpha-transparent images, 
218–222
changing size and color, 
202–203
copying, 204
creating collections, 198–199
Mac, 199
Windows, 198
creating new, 195
finding, 193–194
importing as image, 197
importing as texture, 196
painting edges by material, 
208–209
positioning on round face, 
215–216
removing, 194
saving new, 203
texture positioning in Fixed 
Pins mode, 210–214
translucent, 205–208
Materials Bonus Pack, 194
materials collections, 194
Materials window, 193–194
creating material collections, 
198
Fencing folder, 219
Measurements toolbar, 247
measuring
exact dimensions, 247–270
arcs, 252
calculating area of faces, 257
circles, 251
construction lines, 254–255
construction points, 254–255
creating grids, 258–259
importing images, 253
lines, 248–249
measuring and marking 
angles, 256
measuring lengths and 
resizing, 260–262
polygons, 251

Index 
| 
361
My Collections, 325–327
My SketchUp Components, 162
N
neighborhood, 7
nested groups, 134
New Placemark window, 336
New Texture, 195
New Windows model, 229
Nonadjacent Path model, 38
nonorthogonal linear array, 
13–14
O
objects
2D objects that always face 
camera, 153
combining several, 154
controlling visibility, 271
cut faces, such as windows and 
doors, 153
hidden, 323
repeated, 153
saved to own file, 153
saving as components, 160–161
scaling, 165–166
specific alignment or insertion 
properties, 153
toggling display of objects, 
277–279
versus components, 153
Office Desk model, 266
offset shape, correcting, 39
offset technique, 38–40
Offset tool, 38
On Edge inference, 109
one-way window, 207
Opacity slider, 205–208
open paths, 29
Outliner, 134, 185–192
creating nested components, 
189–192
group names, 133
groups, 188
locking groups, 151
organizing with, 185–188
ovals, 44
Overhanging Roof model, 94
Picnic Table, 268
placing model into Google 
Earth, 334
Play House, 279
removing edges from display, 
297–299
resizing model in multiple 
directions, 268–270
resizing only parts of, 265–267
Roof Corners, 125
Roof End Middle, 123
saving styles, 302
saving styles as templates, 
303–304
Section Plane tool, 276–277
seeing larger view, xv
seeing unpainted, 221
Shadow Study, 283
Simple Dormer, 112
Skate Park, 95
sketchy edge style, 311–313
Sloped Linear Array, 13
Stained Glass Window, 101
Styles Presentation, 314
symmetric, 170–172
Symmetry House, 171
Table Legs, 89
Table Top, 84
taking credit for, 329
Three Paned Window, 101
toggling display of objects, 
277–279
Tower Floor Plans, 144
Translucent Materials, 205
Trimmed Rails, 56
Truck, 236, 241
Umbrella, 129
uploading to 3D Warehouse, 
323–324
using styles in presentations, 
313–316
walking through, 284–287
Watermark Logo model, 310
watermarks, 307–311
Watermark Style, 307
Wavy Windows, 64
White House, 243
Windmills, 282
mosaics, 267
Move tool, 1
Autofold, creating overhangs, 
128–132
Flower House, 182
Furnished Cottage, 277
Furnished Cottage Animated, 
291
Gazebo, 60
georeferencing, 317
manually, 330
placing in new location, 
338–339
using Google Earth, 331–334
getting images into, 195–198
Google Earth modeling 
templates, 332
Graffiti, 228
Hacienda, 287
Hameenlinna Castle, 287
Hexagon Table Alternative, 88
Hosta, 179
Hot Tub, 99
House with Shed, 135
importing model directly into 
SketchUp model, xiii
inserting components, 156
Internal Linear Array, 8
Intersect Selected, 70
Intersect with Context, 72
Irregular Window, 173
issues with 3D Warehouse 
models, 319
Jewelry Box, 81
Keypad and Cover, 63
Kitchen Floor, 280
Landscaped Walkway, 180
Landscaping Options, 282
Linear Array, 2
locating edges that are hidden 
or softened, 298
Log Cabin, 74
mixing styles, 305–306
Mixing Styles model, 305
New Windows, 229
Nonadjacent Path, 38
Office Desk, 266
Overhanging Roof, 94
Painting Multiple Faces, 200, 
204
Paths and Faces, 26
Peaked Dormer, 117
performance, 180
photos (see modeling with 
photos)

362 
| 
Index
R
Radius field, 251
rails, trimming rails to meet, 56
random-looking garden, 184
rectangles, 250
ref, 312
reference point, 353–354
ref folder, 312
Reload option, 179
replacing all versus replacing 
some, 180
Replace Selected option, 182–184
Replace selection with 
component checkbox 
(Create Component), 154
Reverse Faces option, 148
revolving, 41–44
ring, 21
Roof Corners model, 125
Roof End Middle model, 123
Create This Model Yourself, 
123
Roofing, 194
roofs
constraints and inferences (see 
constraints and inferences)
corner intersections, 125–128
curved faces, 94
dormers, 112–122
coplanar, 114–117
peaked, 117–122
simple, 112–114
end-middle intersections, 
123–125
intersections, 122–128
overhanging, 93, 108–111
uniformly sloped, 132
uniform slope, 92–94
rope coil, 51
rotated copies, 1
Rotate tool, 1
circular internal arrays, 22
making copies with, 15
rounded corners, 84–88
hexagonal table, 86–106
rectangular table, 84–86
round faces, positioning textures, 
215–216
round objects, 41–44
pickets, 12
picket spacing, 352
Picnic Table model, 268
picture frame, 98
placeholder components
bringing back, 181
temporary, 179
placemarks (Google Earth), 
336–337
Place Model, 333
Play House model, 279
polygons, exact dimensions, 251
Polygon tool, 31, 51, 59
Position, 211
Position Camera tool, 284–287
Preferences, 304
preselect edges of path, 28
preselect face as path, 27
presentation, 271–296
animated sectioning, 287–291
staged, 292–296
animation, 274
layers, 271–272
default layer, 272
scenarios, using layers, scenes, 
and groups, 280–282
scenes, 273–274
saving, 273
Section Plane tool, 276–277, 
287–291
Active Cut, 289
Active Section Planes, 289
Camera Location, 289
Shadow Settings window, 275
toggling display of objects, 
277–279
walking through models, 
284–287
Previous View tool, 225
protecting objects from edits, 
141–143
Protractor tool, 9, 92
measuring and marking angles, 
256
Purge Unused, 194
Purge Unused option, 156
Push/Pull, 31, 48, 51, 52, 59
overhanging roofs, 108–111
rounding corners, 84–88
walls and floors, 142
P
Paint Bucket, 193
painting
edges by material, 208–209
groups and components, 61, 
163–164
multiple faces, 200–201
Painting Multiple Faces model, 
200, 204
Paint tool, 202
Parallel Projection, 65, 278, 315
Parallel to Edge inference, 111
paths
adding volume to object along 
path, 30–32
Alt/Cmd key to define path, 28
dummy, 94–98
extending, 99–101
manual, 29
open, 29
perpendicular, 51
preselect edges of path, 28
preselect face as path, 27
Paths and Faces model, 26
peaked dormer, 117–122
Peaked Dormer model, 117
Pencil Edges style, 314
People collection, 344
performance, 180
perpendicular paths, 51
Perspective view, 316
Photo Match, 234
modeling 3D objects, 238–243
painting existing model, 
243–246
photorealistic look, 208–209
photos
2D images representing 3D 
objects, 232–233
editing, 227–229
modeling with (see modeling 
with photos)
painting 3D object, 234–238
painting barn with free-pin 
positioning, 234–236
painting truck with free-pin 
positioning, 236–238
patching images, 229–231
(see also images)
piano keys, 7

Index 
| 
363
T
Table Legs model, 89
tables
lathed legs, 89–91
rounded corners, 84–86
hexagonal, 86–106
symmetry, 172
Table Top model, 84
Tape Measure tool, 9
construction lines
exact dimensions, 254–255
construction points
exact dimensions, 254–255
measuring lengths and resizing, 
260–262
placing construction lines, 168
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263
resizing only parts of model, 
265–267
templates, 303–304
temporary face, 80–83
temporary placeholder 
components, 179
text engraving, 63
text, toggling, 279
texture positioning
Free Pins mode, 224–227
textures
creating and editing unique, 
217–218
importing material as, 196
positioning in Fixed Pins mode, 
210–214
positioning on round face, 
215–216
three-paned window, 101
Three Paned Window model, 101
Thumbnails view
component names, 159
tiling, adjusting, 196
torus, 44
Tower Floor Plans model, 144
Create This Model Yourself, 144
tower with repeating window 
rows, 36
townhouse development, 188
tracing, problems with manual, 
53
translucent materials, 205–208
Skate Park model, 95
SketchUp Help Center, 321
Sketchy Edges style folder, 311
sketchy edge style, 311–313
Depth cue setting, 311
Halo setting, 311
Level of Detail setting, 311
Stroke field, 311
.skp files, 271, 334, 342
skylight, 58
slicing, 144–147
Sloped Linear Array model, 13
Smart Shelves by Smart 
Furniture, 348
Smooth Edges, 88
Smooth Normals, 298
sofa, 172
Soften Coplanar, 298
softening edges, 297
Soften/Smooth Edges window, 
297–299
spheres, 45–47
half-spheres, 46
staged sectioning, 292–296
stained-glass window, 101
Stained Glass Window model, 
101
staircase, 189–192
striped bowl, 146
Stroke field, 311
Style Builder, 311, 313
styles
Architectural style, 316
creating new, 301
mixing, 305–306
Pencil Edges style, 314
saving, 302
saving as templates, 303–304
sketchy edge style, 311–313
using in presentation, 313–316
watermarks, 307–311
Styles folder, 312
Styles Presentation model, 314
Styles window, 299–300
sweeping (see Follow Me tool)
symmetric models, 170–172
symmetric objects, 121
Symmetry House model, 171
S
sampler components, 155
Save as Template, 304
Scale tool
creating symmetric objects, 121
double-quotation marks, 350
exact sizing, 260
resizing models with groups 
and components, 263
scaling objects/components, 
165–166
scenarios, 280–282
scenes, 273–274
downloading model with, 274
saving, 273
scenarios, using layers, scenes, 
and groups, 280–282
toggling display of objects, 
277–279
Scenes window, 274
Camera Location property, 281
searching 3D Warehouse, 
320–322
Section Cuts, 290
Section Planes, 296
section planes, hiding, 296
Section Plane tool, 276–277, 
287–291
Active Cut, 289
Active Section Planes, 289
Camera Location, 289
Section Slice, 276
Select All with Same Material, 70
Selection (calculating area), 257
Set Component Axes (Create 
Component), 154
Shaded, 180
Shaded with Textures, 180
switching to Shaded mode, 221
shadows, accurate, 233
Shadow Settings window, 275
shadow study, 283
Shadow Study model, 283
shape profile, 26
Share Model, 323
Share settings, 327–328
Shift-locking, 107
shimmering materials, 143
Simple Dormer model, 112

364 
| 
Index
Watermark Style model, 307
Wavy Windows model, 64
White House model, 243
Windmills model, 282
windows
curved, 105
decorative trim around, 40
in 3D walls, 172–178
known thickness, 177–178
unknown thickness, 173–176
octagonal, 169
one-way, 207
stained-glass, 101
three-paned, 101
Wireframe view, 147
X
X-Ray mode, 262
X-Ray view, 146
Z
Z-fighting, 143, 197
Zoom Extents tool, 264
Zoom window tool, 225
ungrouping components, 37
ungrouping (see Explode)
ungrouping (see exploding 
components)
Unhide, 55
units, 3
Architectural, 5
Imperial, 5
unsticking edges, 137–141
Use Offset, 177
Use Texture Image, 195
W
Walkthrough, 284
Walk tool, 284–287
walls
protecting from edits, 141–143
Push/Pull, 142
Watermark Logo model, 310
watermarks, 307–311
Blend slider, 308
Create Mask checkbox, 310
Lock Aspect Ratio checkbox, 
310
Translucent Materials model, 205
trash bin, 44
trees
2D versus 3D, 166
ring of, 222
Trimmed Rails model, 56
trimming components with 
themselves, 73–78
trimming objects, 54–56
trimming rails to meet curved 
face, 56
truck
painting with free-pin 
positioning, 236–238
removing logo, 231
using Photo Match to model, 
241–243
Truck model, 236, 241
Twigs style, 312
two-sided coloring, 148–150
U
Umbrella model, 129
ungluing faces, 135–137

About the Author
Bonnie Roskes has been writing SketchUp books since 2002, and has a loyal customer base 
that loves her books. She frequently hears that her books are clearer and easier to understand 
than any other software book out there. She also has a great relationship with the SketchUp 
folks, who have been very supportive of her work. Bonnie has a degree in structural engineer-
ing and several years of experience in bridge design, so she approaches design from a practical 
standpoint, not a theoretical one.
Colophon
The animal on the cover of Google SketchUp Cookbook is a golden pheasant (Chrysolophus 
pictus). Native to mountainous forests of western China, this gamebird has been recorded in 
Chinese culture and art for centuries and is also known as the Chinese pheasant. Very little is 
known about the birds’ natural habitat, as the mountain slopes and ledges they occupy are often 
rocky and treacherous and therefore inaccessible to humans. 
Golden pheasants are striking birds. Males are more distinctive than females, and are character-
ized by a golden crest tipped with red, a bright red body, and a deep orange “cape,” which, when 
spread during the courtship display, creates a fanlike shape of alternating black and orange. Fe-
males, by contrast, have mottled brown plumage with accents of beige on the face, throat, and 
abdomen. The tail of the female accounts for about half of her total body length, whereas the 
male’s is proportionally longer, comprising about two-thirds of an average 40-inch body length. 
Both sexes have yellow tails and bills.
The golden pheasants’ diet consists mainly of grain, leaves, and invertebrates; they feed on the 
ground but roost in trees at night. Although the birds are able to fly, their flight is quite awk-
ward and they generally spend more time on the ground. 
Commonly found today in aviaries and zoos, golden pheasants were kept in captivity as early 
as 1740. They are claimed to be the first species of pheasant brought to North America, and 
there is evidence that George Washington kept them at Mount Vernon. They are hardy, breed 
readily, and are compatible with other bird species (though, interestingly, not with other kinds 
of pheasants), making them a great choice for the novice caretaker.
The cover image is from Dover’s Animals. The cover font is Adobe ITC Garamond; the text font 
is Adobe Minion Pro; and the heading font is Adobe Myriad Pro Condensed.


