Mike Barlow
Balancing Risk and Regulation
Governing 
the IoT


Mike Barlow
Governing the IoT
Balancing Risk and Regulation
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing
Boston
Farnham
Sebastopol
Tokyo
Beijing

978-1-491-93285-8
[LSI]
Governing the IoT
by Mike Barlow
Copyright © 2016 O’Reilly Media, Inc. All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North, Sebastopol, CA
95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional use.
Online editions are also available for most titles (http://safaribooksonline.com). For
more 
information, 
contact 
our 
corporate/institutional 
sales 
department:
800-998-9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Editor: Susan Conant
Production Editor: Nicholas Adams
Interior Designer: David Futato
Cover Designer: Randy Comer
February 2016:
 First Edition
Revision History for the First Edition
2016-02-16: First Release
 
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. Governing the
IoT, the cover image, and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
While the publisher and the author have used good faith efforts to ensure that the
information and instructions contained in this work are accurate, the publisher and
the author disclaim all responsibility for errors or omissions, including without limi‐
tation responsibility for damages resulting from the use of or reliance on this work.
Use of the information and instructions contained in this work is at your own risk. If
any code samples or other technology this work contains or describes is subject to
open source licenses or the intellectual property rights of others, it is your responsi‐
bility to ensure that your use thereof complies with such licenses and/or rights.

Table of Contents
Governing the Internet of Things. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
You’re Already Part of the IoT                                                               1
Looking for a Throat to Choke                                                              2
Wasteful Feuding: OT vs. IT                                                                  4
Five Broad Areas of Challenge                                                              5
Existing Frameworks Provide Guidance                                             8
Changing the Mindset                                                                          10
Focusing on People and Processes                                                      11
Waiting for the Other Shoe to Fall                                                      12
v


Governing the Internet of Things
Ice hockey can be a violent sport. While the players get the most
attention, the real stars of the game are the referees and linesmen.
The best games combine great playing and sharp-eyed officiating.
The rulebook is an essential part of ice hockey. Without rules, the
sport would quickly devolve into bloody mayhem and the various
organizations that depend on the sport’s popularity would rapidly
crumble.
Competition is healthy when there are rules. In the absence of
clearly-defined and universally accepted rules, however, anything
goes. Even the most dogmatic believers in free market economic
theory believe in rulebooks.
Soon, the Internet of Things will play a dominant role in the econo‐
mies of most countries. Unlike ice hockey, however, the IoT has no
rulebook. What’s preventing us from developing a cogent set of rules
for governing the IoT?
You’re Already Part of the IoT
Part of the problem stems from denial. Many organizations don’t
believe they are part of the IoT ecosystem, when in fact, they already
are. For organizations involved in fields such as healthcare, manu‐
facturing, housing, transportation, public safety, power generation,
and energy distribution, that kind of denial is troubling.
Here’s a scenario to consider: You’re responsible for operating the
elevators in a modern high-rise apartment building in downtown
Manhattan. You’re relatively sure the network connections between
your control devices and the elevators are secure, but you can’t be
1

absolutely certain because each elevator has thousands of parts and
subassemblies made by different vendors, and some of those parts
and subassemblies “phone home” intermittently to report on their
operation status. Like it or not, your elevators are part of the IoT.
“We’re finding that major pieces of industrial equipment, along with
industrial control systems and PLCs (programmable logic control‐
lers), have been exposed to the IoT through the organic growth of
networks within industrial environments,” says Paul Rogers, presi‐
dent and chief executive officer of Wurldtech, a GE subsidiary spe‐
cializing in security for the Industrial Internet. “In many cases,
industrial equipment is online and the enterprise isn’t aware of it.”
In other words, if you’ve got machines talking to controllers across
wireless networks, you’re part of the IoT whether you know it or
not. Free market diehards might describe the IoT as a loose-knit
confederacy of disparate systems operating under the guidance of
Adam Smith’s invisible hand. But here’s a more pithy comparison:
Today’s IoT is Dodge City before the US Marshalls arrived.
Instead of corralling a bunch of drunken cowboys with six-shooters,
we’re laying the groundwork for governing a nascent culture based
on billions of connected machines and devices, including planes,
trains, automobiles, homes, toys, and pacemakers.
Looking for a Throat to Choke
Since the IoT is a system of systems, it involves many players. There
is no single company, agency, or department to hold accountable.
“There’s no throat to choke when something goes wrong,” according
to a corporate attorney specializing in cyber law.
Moreover, the IoT is a truly global phenomenon. It doesn’t live in a
country or in a region. Like the Internet itself, the IoT is practically
everywhere and virtually borderless. From a legal perspective, that
creates a Pandora’s box of potentially difficult issues, since different
countries generally have different laws governing the use, owner‐
ship, transmission, and storage of data. A fully functioning IoT
would spawn a far-flung network encompassing millions of organi‐
zations and billions of individual users.
“The challenge is the sheer number of stakeholders involved,” says
Chris Moschovitis, an IT governance expert and chief executive offi‐
cer at tmg-emedia, an independent technology consulting company.
2 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

“The absence of frameworks, policies, standards, and common pro‐
cedures will lead to a Tower of Babel.”
Open source software is another area of contention. People who
work regularly with digital technology understand that open source
software has become pervasive. But most people—including many
lawyers, legislators, and business owners—don’t genuinely under‐
stand the difference between open source and proprietary software.
Some people assume that open source code is inherently less secure
than proprietary code, while others assume that proprietary code
offers a greater shield against liability. Both assumptions can be
argued. Many people believe that open source code is actually safer
because it’s reviewed by more developers than proprietary code.
Propriety code, as we all know, can be just as flawed as open source
code. The “which is safer” debate will undoubtedly continue for
years.
This much is certain: Before the IoT, it was relatively easy to keep
proprietary code separate from open source code. In an IoT econ‐
omy, however, that kind of separation would be fundamentally
impossible.
Today, issues around open source code and liability are usually
resolved by contract. Each contract, in effect, represents a custom ad
hoc solution. Bespoke contracts are fine if you’re not in a hurry and
you have lots of money to spend on lawyers. They’re not so helpful if
you’re a small company looking to form partnerships, close deals
quickly, and create fresh streams of revenue.
Additionally, the pervasive use of open source code across a global
IoT economy could throw a monkey wrench into the legal assump‐
tions underlying commonly held beliefs around intellectual property
licensing.
It seems clear that a poorly managed IoT could easily metastasize
into a destructive force benefitting a handful of companies or gov‐
ernments while draining resources from the rest of us.
On the other hand, a proper governance framework would “enable
the IoT to become a healthy, thriving ecosystem,” says Moschovitis.
“Through governance, we achieve value.”
Looking for a Throat to Choke 
| 
3

Wasteful Feuding: OT vs. IT
What is your favorite feud? There are plenty of famous feuds to
choose from: Hatfield vs. McCoy, Capulet vs. Montague, Darwin vs.
Huxley, Red Sox vs. Yankees. Here’s a feud you might not have heard
about: IT vs. OT.
While it doesn’t sound particularly dangerous or dramatic, the feud
between IT (information technology) and OT (operational technol‐
ogy) could derail efforts to create a practical governance framework
for the IoT.
The bone of contention is security. IT organizations have spent dec‐
ades developing complex layers of security to protect the informa‐
tion in their software systems. OT organizations tend to focus more
on safety than security, which makes sense when you consider that
OT is mainly responsible for machinery and hardware.
“On the OT side of the house, you have control systems that were
designed without security in mind, because most OT people did not
foresee their assets would be connected to the Internet,” says Rogers.
“Today, many of those assets are incredibly vulnerable to attack.”
Patching or updating an IT system to fix a potential security prob‐
lem is a common occurrence. Usually, such fixes are made in the
early hours of the morning, when usage is minimal. It’s much harder
to predict the best times for updating OT systems running in power
generation plants, wastewater management facilities, and lifesaving
medical equipment in the critical care units of hospitals.
“You can’t simply turn off a gas turbine,” says Rogers. “When you’re
refining oil or making medicinal chemicals, downtime costs mil‐
lions of dollars.”
It’s not uncommon to hear OT managers say they are reluctant to
install updates or patches. Some OT managers are openly skeptical
about the value of cyber security, noting the frequency of high-
profile data breaches.
While it’s easy to sympathize with each side’s view, it’s also clear the
feud between IT and OT will impede progress of the IoT, which
depends on the seamless interoperability of multiple systems to
deliver value.
4 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

“We need a viable overarching strategy for IT and OT,” says Rogers.
Should they merge? Rogers thinks that would be a good idea. “They
should be a singular entity,” he says. The alternative would be “a
strong muscle on one side and a weak noodle on the other.”
The tendency to equate cyber security risk with IT risk is also prob‐
lematic. “Conversations about the IoT should also include asset
management,” says Ben Smith, field chief technology officer at RSA,
the security division of EMC. “Asset management isn’t very sexy, but
within the context of the IoT, you need to know which assets are
connected to the network and how they are connected.”
Many devices connect with outside networks intermittently rather
than continuously. It’s also important to know when they are con‐
nected and what kinds of information they are exchanging.
Although denial of service (DoS) attacks are broadly associated with
web sites, they can be launched against any device connected to a
network. “Adversaries could hack into devices and render them
unavailable,” says Smith. In an IoT economy, unavailability would
quickly translate into lost revenue.
Five Broad Areas of Challenge
Mark Radcliffe is a partner at DLA Piper, a leader in the emerging
field of Internet law. His range of expertise covers strategic intellec‐
tual property, corporate partnering, software licensing, Internet
licensing, and cloud computing. Radcliffe has represented eBay,
NEC, Siemens, and other major technology firms.
From his perspective as an attorney, he sees the IoT creating legal
issues in at least five primary areas:
• Cyber security
• Privacy
• Software licensing
• Data use and ownership
• Regulation
Five Broad Areas of Challenge 
| 
5

Cyber Security—A Moving Target
The main problem with IoT cyber security is that it’s a moving tar‐
get. When a patch or fix is developed, it’s only a matter of time
before hackers find ways around it. “As a result, cyber security can
be a very fluid concept,” says Radcliffe. “Security that was adequate
in 2014 might not be adequate in 2016.”
In situations where IoT security is breached, who is liable? Is the
software maker liable if it doesn’t update its software? Who is liable
if the software maker updates its software, but the user doesn’t
download the update? What happens if the software maker updates
the software, but the user doesn’t know there’s an update?
“There are lots of potential situations where the answers will be dif‐
ferent depending on the actions of the parties involved. As a society,
we have to decide where we want to draw the lines,” says Radcliffe.
“Right now, cyber security is a murky area and the lines aren’t clear.”
Privacy—Differing Attitudes and Laws
Privacy is another complicated challenge. “Privacy is a very difficult
area, and not just because the United States and Europe have dra‐
matically different attitudes, but because privacy laws vary widely
across countries,” says Radcliffe. “The Europeans are very protective
of privacy, and the US is less protective. But even within the US,
there is a confusing mix of state and federal laws.”
For example, your video rental habits are protected by federal laws,
but it’s not clear to what extent the data generated by an implantable
cardiac monitor is protected. It’s also not clear whether you, your
physician, or the company that manufactured the monitor owns the
data that describes the quality and quantity of your heartbeats.
“A lot of those questions are up for grabs, and the existing legal
framework is not designed for real-time data,” says Radcliffe. “Lots
of this is handled contractually, so it’s important to read the fine
print.”
6 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

Software Licensing—It’s Complicated
Software licensing is emerging as a major issue since virtually every
IoT scenario imaginable requires software from multiple vendors.
“Very few companies would be able to develop and maintain a plat‐
form across the entire IoT infrastructure,” says Radcliffe. “There’s a
growing recognition that you don’t have to maintain the complete
stack for software, and that maintaining the stack can be expensive.
Most IoT projects are likely to be combinations of functionality—
mostly software, but also some hardware—from a variety of ven‐
dors.”
Essentially, that means everyone participating in the IoT probably
will be using someone else’s hardware and software in addition to
their own. In the IoT economy, there will be a handful of end-to-end
solutions and a broad assortment of mash-ups.
Data Use and Ownership—Who Controls What?
Data itself will present thorny dilemmas. Questions over who owns
data, where can it be sent, who is allowed to use it and how much if
it can be stored will send ripples of varying magnitude across the
IoT landscape.
As the IoT becomes a more dominant force in our lives, the data it
generates will become more valuable. Since the laws governing data
ownership are ambiguous, Radcliffe suggests focusing on usage.
“Ownership is not terribly useful, because the rights associated with
ownership are so unclear, so it makes more sense to look at who
controls the use of data. It probably should be the consumer, but
there are lots of different issues around data that will require differ‐
ent solutions,” Radcliffe says.
Autonomous driving, for instance, raises numerous questions about
data ownership and usage. If your driverless car is involved in an
accident, who is liable and who is allowed to review data relating to
the accident? Will the manufacturer of the car want to see the data
so it can lodge a suit against the developer who wrote the naviga‐
tional software? Will network providers be required to share data
with law enforcement agencies when autonomous vehicles collide?
There are many questions, and few answers.
Five Broad Areas of Challenge 
| 
7

Regulation—Balancing Safety, Responsibility, and
Innovation
Government regulation—or the lack of it—is another area of con‐
cern. Returning to the driverless car scenario, precisely who is
responsible in case of an accident—the owner of the car, the com‐
pany that made the car, or the company that wrote the software
guiding the car? “It will be difficult for national standards for liabil‐
ity to evolve in the U.S. because the states are very jealous of their
authority,” says Radcliffe. “Tort law is different from state to state.
You have peculiar laws in some states, such as New York, which
requires drivers to keep one hand on the steering wheel at all times.
Those laws don’t seem very meaningful in the context of autono‐
mous cars.”
At best, regulation is a balancing act. Too much regulation would
stifle competition, while too little would limit participation to a
handful of companies willing to accept inordinately high levels of
risk. Given the current political climate in the US, it seems unlikely
that Congress would enact a comprehensive body of regulations for
governing the IoT. But if Congress can’t get the job done, who will?
Existing Frameworks Provide Guidance
The good news is there are existing frameworks that can provide
guidance and templates for developing a workable rulebook for the
IoT.
“The goal is achieving a globally interoperable IoT,” says Chris
Greer, director of the Smart Grid and Cyber-Physical Systems Pro‐
gram Office, and national coordinator for Smart Grid Interoperabil‐
ity at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
“The IoT will operate in many different legal, social, and cultural
regimes. We need a cooperation framework that enables a wide vari‐
ety of approaches.”
Greer says it’s important to understand the inherently “divergent
nature” of the IoT and to develop frameworks that will drive it in the
opposite direction, towards convergence.
The IoT was born from commerce, not science. Its basic structure is
emerging haphazardly from a multiplicity of existing domains, such
as smart power grids, intelligent transportation, advanced manufac‐
8 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

turing, and various forms of telecommunications. Complicating
matters further, each of those domains tend to favor its own set of
technical standards and implementation architectures.
NIST is currently drafting or revising frameworks for cyber security,
big data, and privacy engineering. The Cyber-Physical Systems Pub‐
lic Working Group has drafted a framework that could provide tech‐
nical foundations for an IoT governance framework. “Those
frameworks could be useful tools for IoT designers, developers, and
users,” says Greer.
The Industrial Internet Consortium, a global public-private organi‐
zation with more than 200 members from 26 countries, has pub‐
lished a comprehensive, high-level reference architecture document
describing and defining the interconnected systems at the heart of
the IoT.
There are also functional governance frameworks that were devel‐
oped specifically for IT, such as Cobit 5.0 and The Open Group
Architecture Framework (TOGAF), which is widely used in Europe.
And there are commonly accepted procedure frameworks for IT,
such as the Information Technology Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
and ISO/IEC 2000, an international standard for IT service manage‐
ment. ISO also develops and publishes standards for related areas
such as quality management, environmental management, risk
management, energy management, and information security man‐
agement.
“The IoT needs a framework that is very flexible and accepted inter‐
nationally,” says Moschovitis. “Some people think the market will
eventually take care of it because vendors will act in their mutual
interests and work to resolve their differences. But contracts
between vendors are often ‘one-offs.’ Some companies might choose
one framework and some might choose another framework. Since
all of those frameworks need to be interoperable, having lots of
them makes no sense.”
Ideally, an IoT governance framework would create alliances among
parties with common interests, much as the North American Treaty
Organization (NATO), created in 1949, laid the foundation for deca‐
des of improved cooperation among European nations. “A frame‐
work like that would be a win-win proposition for all parties
involved,” says Moschovitis.
Existing Frameworks Provide Guidance 
| 
9

Changing the Mindset
Clearly, there is no shortage of models for an IoT governance frame‐
work and the case for developing a set of common standards is
strong. But in addition to the challenges listed earlier, fixed mindsets
and stubborn attitudes are obstacles.
Most people have a natural aversion to the idea of governance, since
it suggests scenarios with fewer freedoms and greater restrictions.
The recent debate over net neutrality also muddied the waters by
creating a false dichotomy between basic concepts of freedom and
free-market capitalism.
Greer suggests a gradual approach that would focus on identifying
areas of agreement and consensus; developing a credible infrastruc‐
ture for testing, research, and certification; and developing appro‐
priate business models that would drive convergence across a global
IoT economy.
Smart cities, he says, can serve as real-world test beds for the IoT.
“We have cities that are using IoT technologies to become more liva‐
ble and more sustainable,” says Greer. Achieving those goals will
require fully integrated horizontal solutions, promoting the conver‐
gence and interoperability that are necessary for an IoT that is both
socially responsive and economically healthy.
From a purely economic perspective, an IoT governance framework
would help reconcile natural differences between the supply side
(vendors) and the demand side (users). Finding an appropriate bal‐
ance between the needs of each side will require workable processes
for discussion, negotiation, and deal-making. As Greer suggests, the
future of the IoT will depend on the ability of multiple parties to dis‐
cover points of consensus and areas of mutual interest.
The notion of a global economic model based on collaboration and
sharing, rather than on pure competition, will doubtlessly strike
some people as overly utopian or naively socialistic. Perhaps it is too
idealistic to expect the IoT to usher in a new era of greater coopera‐
tion and worldwide harmony. But the IoT is intrinsically a platform
for connectivity and interoperability, which means we’ve already
crossed the frontier and there’s no going back.
10 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

Focusing on People and Processes
Now the challenge is figuring out how to live happily and produc‐
tively in the new world we’ve created. Solving the technology prob‐
lems will be relatively easy; creating new processes and helping
people adjust to life in the IoT era will be more difficult.
The widespread implementation of ERP (enterprise resource plan‐
ning) systems in the late 1990s and early 2000s taught executives not
to overlook the non-technical challenges of large-scale technology
transformations. Many ERP projects were delayed, downsized, or
outright scrapped when companies realized they hadn’t adequately
prepared their people and processes to manage the new technology.
The failures and successes of the ERP era also revealed the critical
importance of getting buy-in from all levels of the corporation.
Complex transformations always involve people, processes, and
technology. Enterprise-wide transformations invariably cross
departmental boundaries, creating disorder and ruffling feathers.
At their core, transformations are management problems. Trans‐
forming people, processes, and technology to function smoothly
and cooperatively in a global IoT economy will pose management
challenges of epic proportions. Large organizations won’t be able to
“just wing it” and hope that everyone gets on board. More likely
than not, change management specialists will be needed to guide
organizations and help them make the transition from the current
state to a future state that includes and embraces IoT governance.
“As an organization, you’ll need to create strategic alignment with
your senior leadership,” says Gillian Haley, a change management
expert. “That means taking a step back, going to the top of the
mountain, looking down at the landscape below and understanding
the context of your change.”
Similar to an ERP transformation, implementing an IoT governance
framework would require well-defined strategic goals. It would also
need a playbook and a roadmap to avoid the common mistake of
executives “inadvertently working at cross purposes and stepping on
each other’s toes,” says Haley.
In a modern corporation, transformational change ripples across
multiple divisions, units, and functional areas. A large organization
could have 15 to 30 change initiatives occurring simultaneously,
Focusing on People and Processes 
| 
11

each creating its own set of potentially disruptive shock waves.
Haley recommends creating heat maps to monitor how individual
changes impact various parts of the larger organization. In some
cases, it might be necessary to delay or reschedule initiatives.
Understanding the context of change as it occurs at both tactical and
strategic levels requires assembling stakeholders and talking through
thousands of details.
“You need to step back, get the right people in the room, agree on
key goals and develop processes for achieving those goals,” says
Haley. “We all have a bias for speed and concrete action. But you
have to slow down before you can speed up. You need that moun‐
taintop view to really see what’s going on.”
Waiting for the Other Shoe to Fall
The future of IoT governance is unclear. Some experts envision a
scenario in which the insurance industry rides to the rescue by
refusing to write policies for IoT firms that don’t meet minimum
standards or follow best practices. That scenario, however, would
depend on the emergence of common standards and practices.
Some nations will adopt top-down solutions, complete with
government-issued rules and regulations; others will pursue laissez-
faire or consensus-driven approaches. For the moment, potentially
sticky issues such as liability are dealt with through contract nego‐
tiation, which is a time-tested process that works for the parties
involved, but isn’t designed to provide global or universal solutions.
Governing the IoT won’t be easy. There are lots of moving parts and
an evolving cast of characters. The economic drivers aren’t clearly
understood or sharply defined. So far, there’s no Bill Gates or Mark
Zuckerberg of the IoT.
Despite the hurdles, there are good reasons for approaching IoT
governance proactively. Countries that take the lead in developing
rules and regulations would create economic advantages for them‐
selves and their citizens. Companies and organizations that provide
leadership would also gain advantages that could be parlayed into
economic gain.
Hopefully, it won’t take a catastrophe to spur a sense of urgency. It’s
always better to shut the stable door before the horses bolt.
12 
| 
Governing the Internet of Things

About the Author
Mike Barlow is an award-winning journalist, author, and communi‐
cations strategy consultant. Since launching his own firm, Cumulus
Partners, he has represented major organizations in numerous
industries.
Mike is author of Learning to Love Data Science (O’Reilly, 2015) and
coauthor of The Executive’s Guide to Enterprise Social Media Strategy
(Wiley, 2011) and Partnering with the CIO (Wiley, 2007). He is also
the writer of many articles, reports, and white papers on marketing
strategy, marketing automation, customer intelligence, collaborative
social networking, cloud computing, smart cities, and big data ana‐
lytics.
Over the course of a long career, Mike was a reporter and editor at
several respected suburban daily newspapers, including the Journal
News and the Stamford Advocate. His feature stories and columns
appeared regularly in the Los Angeles Times, Chicago Tribune, Miami
Herald, Newsday, and other major US dailies.

