The Origin and Early 
Evolutionary History 
ofSnakes
Camuridgu

The Origin and Early Evolutionary History 
of Snakes
Snakes comprise nearly 4,000 extant species found on all major continents except 
Antarctica. Morphologically and ecologically diverse, they include burrowing, arboreal, 
and marine forms, feeding on prey ranging from insects to large mammals. Snakes are 
strikingly different from their closest lizard relatives, and their origins and early diversifi­
cation have long challenged and enthused evolutionary biologists. The origin and early 
evolution of snakes is a broad, interdisciplinary topic for which experts in palaeontology, 
ecology, physiology, embryology, phylogenetics, and molecular biology have made import­
ant contributions. The last 25 years has seen a surge of interest, resulting partly from new 
fossil material, but also from new techniques in molecular and systematic biology. This 
volume summarizes and discusses the state of our knowledge, approaches, data, and 
ongoing debates. It provides reviews, syntheses, new data, and perspectives on a wide 
range of topics relevant to students and researchers in evolutionary biology, neontology, 
and palaeontology.
David J. Gower is a Merit Researcher in herpetology and Head of the Vertebrates Division in the 
Department of Life Sciences at the Natural History Museum, London. A collections-based 
organismal biologist with interests in a wide range of topics in natural history and evolutionary 
biology, he has taxon expertise in Triassic archosaurs and limbless, mostly fossorial, amphibians 
and reptiles.
Hussam Zaher is Full Professor and Curator of Herpetology and Vertebrate Palaeontology in the 
Museum of Zoology of the University of Sao Paulo. He is an evolutionary biologist focusing on the 
systematics, palaeontology, and comparative anatomy of reptiles, with an emphasis on the 
diversity and evolutionary history of snakes and other squamates.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

The Systematics Association Special
Volume Series
series editor
Gavi N Broad
Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum, London, UK
The Systematics Association promotes all aspects of systematic biology by organizing conferences and 
workshops on key themes in systematics, running annual lecture series, publishing books and a newsletter, 
and awarding grants in support of systematics research. Membership of the Association is open globally to 
professionals and amateurs with an interest in any branch of biology, including palaeobiology. Members are 
entitled to attend conferences at discounted rates, to apply for grants and to receive the newsletter and mailed 
information; they also receive a generous discount on the purchase of all volumes produced by the Association.
The first of the Systematics Association’s publications The New Systematics (1940) was a classic work 
edited by its then-president Sir Julian Huxley. Since then, more than 70 volumes have been published, 
often in rapidly expanding areas of science where a modern synthesis is required.
The Association encourages researchers to organize symposia that result in multi-authored volumes. In 
1997 the Association organized the first of its international Biennial Conferences. This and subsequent 
Biennial Conferences, which are designed to provide for systematists of all kinds, included themed symposia 
that resulted in further publications. The Association also publishes volumes that are not specifically linked 
to meetings, and encourages new publications (including textbooks) in a broad range of systematics topics.
More information about the Systematics Association and its publications can be found at our website: 
www.systass.org.
Previous Systematics Association publications are listed after the index for this volume.
Systematics Association Special Volumes published by Cambridge University Press:
78. Climate Change, Ecology, and Systematics (2011) 
Trevor R. Hodkinson, Michael B. Jones, Stephen 
Waldren and John A.N. Parnell
79. Biogeography of Microscopic Organisms: Is 
Everything Small Everywhere? (2011) 
Diego Fontaneto
80. Flowers on the Tree of Life (2011)
Livia Wanntorp and Louis Ronse DE Craene
81. Evolution of Plant-Pollinator Relationships (2011) 
Sebastien Patiny
82. Biotic Evolution and Environmental Change in 
Southeast Asia (2012)
David J. Gower, Kenneth G. Johnson, James E. 
Richardson, Brian R. Rosen, Lukas Ruber and 
Suzanne T. Williams
83. Early Events in Monocot Evolution (2013)
PAuL WiLKiN AND siMoN J. MAYo
84. Descriptive Taxonomy: The Foundation of 
Biodiversity Research (2014)
MARK F. WATsoN, cHRis LYAL AND coLiN PENDRY
85. Next Generation Systematics (2016)
PETER D. oLsoN, JosEPH HuGHEs AND JAMEs A. coTToN
86. The Future of Phylogenetic Systematics: The Legacy 
of Willi Hennig (2016)
DAViD WiLLiAMs, MicHAEL scHMiTT, AND QuENTiN 
Wheeler
87. Interactions in the Marine Benthos: Global Patterns 
and Processes (2019)
sTEPHEN J. HAWKiNs, KATRiN BoHN, LouisE B. FiRTH 
and Gray A. Williams
88. Cladistics: A Guide to Biological Classification 3rd 
edition (2020)
DAViD M. WiLLiAMs AND MALTE c. EBAcH
89. Cryptic Species: Morphological Stasis, 
Circumscription, and Hidden Diversity (2022) 
ALEXANDRE K. MoNRo AND siMoN J. MAYo
90. The Origin and Early Evolutionary History of Snakes 
(2022)
David J. Gower and Hussam Zaher
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Systematics Association Special Volume 90
The Origin and Early 
Evolutionary 
History of Snakes
David J. Gower
Natural History Museum, London
Hussam Zaher
University of Sao Paulo
THE
Systematics
ASSOCIATION
ЦЦ Cambridge
UNIVERSITY PRESS
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Cambridge
UNIVERSITY PRESS
University Printing House, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom
One Liberty Plaza, 20th Floor, New York, NY 10006, USA
477 Williamstown Road, Port Melbourne, VIC 3207, Australia
314-321, 3rd Floor, Plot 3, Splendor Forum, Jasola District Centre, New Delhi - 110025, India
103 Penang Road, #05-06/07, Visioncrest Commercial, Singapore 238467
Cambridge University Press is part of the University of Cambridge.
It furthers the University’s mission by disseminating knowledge in the pursuit of 
education, learning, and research at the highest international levels of excellence.
www.cambridge.org
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9781108837347
DOI: 10.1017/9781108938891
© The Systematics Association 2022
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception 
and to the provisions of relevant collective licensing agreements, 
no reproduction of any part may take place without the written 
permission of Cambridge University Press.
First published 2022
Printed in the United Kingdom by TJ Books Limited, Padstow Cornwall
A catalogue record for this publication is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Gower, David J., 1969- editor. | Zaher, Hussam, 1965- editor.
Title: The origin and early evolutionary history of snakes / edited by David J. Gower, Natural History Museum, 
London, Hussam Zaher, University of Sao Paulo.
Description: Cambridge, United Kingdom ; New York, NY : Cambridge University Press, 2022. |
Series: The Systematics Association special
volume series ; volume 90 | Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2022000042 (print) | LCCN 2022000043 (ebook) | ISBN 9781108837347 (hardback) |
ISBN 9781108940535 (paperback) | ISBN 9781108938891 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Snakes-Evolution. | Snakes.
Classification: LCC QL666.O6 O75 2022 (print) | LCC QL666.O6 (ebook) |
DDC 597.9613/8-dc23/eng/20220107
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022000042
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022000043
ISBN 978-1-108-83734-7 Hardback
Additional resources for this publication at www.cambridge.org/snakes.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy 
of URLs for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication 
and does not guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, 
accurate or appropriate.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

We dedicate our editorship of this book to the memory of Hussam’s son.
In memoriam, Gaёl Hingst-Zaher (16.03.2004-18.03.2020)
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contents
List of Contributors 
ix
Preface 
xi
1 Introduction 
1
Hussam Zaher and David J. Gower
Part I The Squamate and Snake Fossil Record
2 
The Origin and Early Diversification of Squamates 
7
Susan E. Evans
3 
The First 80 Million Years of Snake Evolution: The Mesozoic Fossil Record of Snakes
and Its Implications for Origin Hypotheses, Biogeography, and Mass Extinction 
26
Jason J. Head, Alexandra F. C. Howard, and Johannes Muller
4 
The Diversity and Distribution of Palaeogene Snakes: A Review with Comments on 
Vertebral Sufficiency 
55
KRIsTER T. sMITH AND GEoRGIos L. GEoRGALIs
5 
Miocene Snakes of Eurasia: A Review of the Evolution of Snake Communities 
85
Martin Ivanov
Part II Palaeontology and the Marine-Origin Hypothesis
6 
Sea-Serpentism 
113
olivier Rieppel
7 
Reassessing the Morphological Foundations of the Pythonomorph Hypothesis 
125
Michael J. Polcyn, Bruno G. Augusta, and Hussam Zaher
8 
A Review of Non-Mosasaurid (Dolichosaur and Aigialosaur) Mosasaurians and Their 
Relationships to Snakes 
157
Bruno G. Augusta, Hussam Zaher, Michael J. Polcyn, Anthony R. Fiorillo, 
and LouIs L. Jacobs
9 A Review of the Skull Anatomy and Phylogenetic Affinities of Marine
Pachyophiid Snakes 
180
Hussam Zaher, Bruno G. Augusta, Rivka Rabinovich, Michael J. Polcyn, 
and Paul Tafforeau
Part III Genomic Perspectives
10 Using Comparative Genomics to Resolve the Origin and Early Evolution of Snakes 209 
sARA RuANE AND JEFFREY w. sTREICHER
Published online by Cambridge University Press

viii contents
11 
The Evolution of Squamate Chitinase Genes (CHIAs) Supports an Insectivory-Carnivory 
Transition during the Early History of Snakes 
235
Christopher A. Emerling
12 
Origin and Early Diversification of the Enigmatic Squamate Venom Cocktail 
248
Vivek Suranse, Ashwin Iyer, Timothy N. W. Jackson, and Kartik Sunagar
Part IV Neurobiological Perspectives
13 
Using Adaptive Traits in the Ear to Estimate Ecology of Early Snakes 
271
Hongyu YI
14 
A Glimpse into the Evolution of the Ophidian Brain 
294
Agustin Scanferla
15 
Eyes, Vision, and the Origins and Early Evolution of Snakes 
316
David J. Gower, Einat Hauzman, Bruno F. Simoes, and Ryan K. Schott
Part V Anatomical and Functional Morphological Perspectives
16 
Diversity and Evolution of Squamate Hemipenes: An Overview with Particular 
Reference to the Origin and Early History of Snakes 
351
GiovANNA G. MoNTiNGELLi, DAviD J. GowER, AND HuSSAM zAHER
17 
The Evolution of Sperm-Storage Location in Squamata with Particular Reference 
to Snakes 
389
Henrique B. Braz and Selma M. Almeida-Santos
18 
An Overview of the Morphology of Oral Glands in Snakes 
410
LEoNARDo DE oLivEiRA AND HuSSAM zAHER
19 
Macrostomy, Macrophagy, and Snake Phylogeny 
437
DAviD cuNDALL AND FRANcES iRiSH
Index 
455
Systematics Association Special Volumes 
473
Colour plates can be found between pages 244 and 245.
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Contributors
Selma M. Almeida-Santos Laboratory of Ecology and Evolution, Instituto Butantan, Sao Paulo, SP, 
Brazil
Bruno G. Augusta Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, and ISEM at 
Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA
HENRiQuE B. BRAZ Laboratory of Ecology and Evolution, Instituto Butantan, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
DAViD CuNDALL Biological Sciences, Lehigh University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
CHRiSToPHER A. EMERLiNG Biology Department, Reedley College, CA, USA
SuSAN E. EVANS Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University College London, UK
ANTHoNY R. FioRiLLo ISEM at Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA, and Roy M. Huffington 
Department of Earth Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA
GEoRGioS L. GEoRGALiS Palaeontological Institute and Museum, University of Zurich, Zurich, 
Switzerland and Institute of Systematics and Evolution of Animals, Polish Academy of Sciences, 
Krakow, Poland
DAViD J. GoWER Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum, London, UK
EiNAT HAuZMAN Department of Experimental Psychology, Psychology Institute, University of Sao 
Paulo, SP, Brazil
JASoN J. HEAD Department of Zoology and University Museum of Zoology, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK
ALEXANDRA F. C. HoWARD Department of Zoology and University Museum of Zoology, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK
FRANCES iRiSH Biological Sciences, Moravian University, Bethlehem, PA, USA
MARTiN iVANoV Department of Geological Sciences, Faculty of Science, Masaryk University, Brno, 
Czech Republic
ASHWiN iYER Evolutionary Venomics Lab. Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
TiMoTHY N. W. JACKSoN Australian Venom Research Unit, Department of Pharmacology & 
Therapeutics, University of Melbourne, Australia
LouiS L. JACoBS ISEM at Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA, and Roy M. Huffington 
Department of Earth Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA
GioVANNA G. MoNTiNGELLi Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ipiranga, Sao Paulo, SP, 
Brazil
Published online by Cambridge University Press

x list of contributors
Johannes Muller Museum fur Naturkunde - Leibniz-Institut fur Evolutions- und Biodiversitatsforschung, 
Berlin, Germany
Leonardo de Oliveira Laboratorio de Toxinologia Aplicada, Instituto Butantan, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
MICHAEL J. PoLCYN ISEM at Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA, and Roy M. Huffington 
Department of Earth Sciences, Southern Methodist University, Dallas, TX, USA
RivKA RABiNoviCH National Natural History Collections, Institute of Earth Sciences, The Hebrew 
University of Jerusalem, Israel
oLiviER RiEPPEL Negaunee Integrative Research Center, The Field Museum, Chicago, IL, USA
sARA RuANE Life Sciences Section, Negaunee Integrative Research Center, Field Museum, Chicago, IL, 
USA
Agustin Scanferla CONICET, Fundacion de Historia Natural ‘Felix de Azara’, Ciudad Autonoma de 
Buenos Aires, Argentina
RYAN K. scHoTT Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada, and Department of 
Vertebrate Zoology, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, 
DC, USA
Bruno F. SimOes School of Biological and Marine Sciences, University of Plymouth, Drake Circus, 
Plymouth, UK
KRiSTER T. SMiTH Department of Messel Research and Mammalogy, Senckenberg Research Institute, 
Frankfurt am Main, Germany, and Faculty of Biological Sciences, Institute for Ecology, Diversity 
and Evolution, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
JEFFREY W. STREicHER Department of Life Sciences, The Natural History Museum, London, UK
KARTiK SuNAGAR Evolutionary Venomics Lab. Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of 
Science, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
vivEK SuRANSE Evolutionary Venomics Lab. Centre for Ecological Sciences, Indian Institute of Science, 
Bangalore, Karnataka, India
PAuL TAFFoREAu European Synchrotron Radiation Facility, Grenoble, France
HoNGYu Yi Key Laboratory of Vertebrate Evolution and Human Origins, Institute of Vertebrate 
Paleontology and Paleoanthropology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China, and CAS 
Center for Excellence in Life and Paleoenvironment, Beijing, China
Hussam Zaher Museu de Zoologia da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Ipiranga, Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
Published online by Cambridge University Press

Preface
This volume was prompted by a conference held at the Linnean Society of London in June 
2019: ‘A Contribution to the Origin and Early Evolution of Snakes’. The meeting covered the 
same subject matter and multidisciplinary approaches as this volume. Via 14 scientific talks 
and 3 posters, the approximately 40 attendees were exposed to review, synthesis, opinion, 
and new data from fields as diverse as geology, palaeobiology, anatomy, molecular genet­
ics, phylogenetics, and reproductive, feeding, sensory, and venom biology. This volume is 
not a conference proceedings in the usual sense but instead a collection of chapters 
inspired by topics covered by and themes running through the 2019 meeting. Some of 
the contributing authors included here were unable to attend the 2019 meeting but were 
subsequently invited to contribute because the editors were looking to compile a collection 
of works that covered a range of particularly relevant topics. The contributions vary from 
substantial syntheses or reviews, to more tightly focussed case studies that illustrate 
particular advances and/or approaches that will have a broader relevance.
Please note that manuscripts were peer reviewed, and accepted for publication between 
August 2020 and August 2021. The section mark (§) is used to refer to numbered sections 
cited in the text. Abstracts of chapters and files of supplementary material cited in the book 
are freely available on the Internet at www.cambridge.org/snakes.
We are very grateful to Leanne Melbourne (Linnean Society of London) for help in 
organizing the 2019 meeting. Funding for the meeting was provided by the United 
Kingdom’s Systematics Association and the Linnean Society of London. We encourage 
readers to support the activities of the Linnean Society (www.linnean.org) and 
Systematics Association (www.systass.org). Help and advice in producing the book was 
provided by several people, including Olivia Boult, Dominic Lewis, Jenny van der Meijden 
and colleagues (Cambridge University Press) and Gavin Broad (Editor-in-Chief, the 
Systematics Association). Mary Malin is thanked for expert copy editing. The editors are 
extremely grateful to the expert reviewers of each chapter, those anonymous as well as 
Salvador Bailon, Chris Bell, Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, Nicholas Casewell, V. Deepak, Massimo 
Delfino, Ron Douglas, Annelise Folie, Nick Fraser, Christopher Friesen, Timothy Jackson, 
Mareike Janiak, Catherine Klein, Francisca Leal, Daniel Madzia, Pedro Nunes, Giulia 
Pasquesi, Davide Pisani, Ana Prudente, Aleta Quinn, Martha Ramirez-Pinilla, Alan 
Savitzky, Anne Schulp, Kurt Schwenk, Abigail Tucker, Marton Venczel, and Giulia
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

xii preface
Zancolli. Finally, we thank the attendees of the 2019 meeting and all 33 contributing 
authors to the book, several of whom also peer reviewed other chapters.
Most of this book was compiled during the COVID-19 global pandemic, which presented 
multiple and varied extraordinary challenges to the contributors, reviewers, and their 
friends and families. We are extremely grateful for their hard work, forbearance and 
patience under these exceptional circumstances. And we thank health practitioners, those 
who developed, distributed, and administered vaccinations, and key workers for their 
myriad indirect contributions.
We each thank our loved ones for their support, friendship, and love over many years.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.001 Published online by Cambridge University Press

1
Introduction
Hussam Zaher and David J. Gower
1.1 Introduction
The last 25 years witnessed substantial advances in the knowledge of the evolutionary 
history of snakes. Detailed (re)investigations of key fossils, such as the legged snakes from 
the Upper Cretaceous, have helped to reinvigorate debates about snake origins. Along with 
palaeontological evidence, new genomic and evolutionary developmental (‘evo-devo’) 
studies have provided novel insights into the interrelationships of squamates and mechan­
isms underlying the serpentiform body. New methods and technologies have been applied 
to a wealth of new and existing data, with analyses addressing evolutionary issues related to 
topics such as body elongation, limblessness, fossoriality, and envenomation. However, 
large knowledge gaps remain for some key morphological complexes and taxa.
This book was prompted by our joint organization of a conference held at the Linnean 
Society of London in June 2019. Without the pretence of being comprehensive in terms of 
coverage of topics and of range of opinions (see § 1.3), this volume’s aims are to help fill 
some of the main knowledge gaps, to review, summarize, and synthesize recent advances 
and remaining debates, and to highlight fruitful avenues for future research. This is 
undertaken via contributions from a range of experts in squamate (especially snake) 
systematics, palaeontology, phylogeny, physiology, and comparative and functional 
anatomy and genomics.
1.2 Scope and Coverage
Other than this introduction, the volume comprises 18 chapters, written by 34 authors 
based in 13 countries, and covers a wide range of subjects, including temporal and spatial 
aspects of the fossil record, palaeobiology, phylogenetics, anatomy, sensory biology, 
ancestral-state estimation, the history of science, inference of function from form, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2 hussam zaher and david J . gower
genomics, venomics, feeding systems and diet, and reproductive biology. However, some 
important topics are not covered by this volume. For example, it includes almost no 
evolutionary developmental biology (‘evo-devo’) even though this is clearly of interest in 
terms of, for example, axial regionalization and loss of limbs (e.g., [1]). And there is very 
little coverage of recent applications (e.g., [2]) of 3D geometric morphometrics to cranial or 
vertebral evolution across the lizard-snake transition.
The volume is subdivided into five main parts. Part I comprises four contributions on the 
fossil record of snakes and their closest relatives among squamates. The first chapter of this 
section covers the possible origin of squamates in the Early Triassic (ca 250 million years 
ago (Ma)) to the earliest known unequivocal squamate fossils (Middle Jurassic: c. 174-163 
Ma) and the further diversification of Squamata into the Cretaceous. The other three 
chapters in this section focus on diversity and diversification early in snake history as 
inferred from the Cretaceous to Miocene fossil record. Part II addresses the controversial 
Marine-Origin Hypothesis of snakes from a palaeontological perspective. The first chapter 
provides an epistemological approach to the idea of a marine origin of snakes. The three 
other chapters reassess morphological evidence for the Marine Hypothesis. Part III exam­
ines the rapidly growing set of molecular genetic data available for understanding aspects of 
the origin and early history of snakes, applied to a diversity of questions about phylogenetic 
relationships, inferences of diet across the lizard-snake transition, and the origin and 
diversification of snake venoms. Part IV assesses what some sensory systems (ears, brains, 
eyes) can tell us about early snake history. The ear and brain chapters focus on comparative 
morphology and on drawing inferences about early events in snake evolutionary history by 
identifying correlates of soft tissue and ecology and behaviour from more readily fossilized 
hard tissues. The eye chapter provides an overview of the visual system of the ancestral 
snake that can be inferred from anatomy, physiology, and molecular genetic data for extant 
snakes. Part V comprises four contributions on comparative and functional morphology of 
primarily soft-tissue systems of mostly extant snakes. In addition to a new perspective on 
feeding systems and early snake history, three of the chapters (hemipenes, sperm storage, 
oral glands) offer reviews of topics that have been largely overlooked in terms of what they 
can tell us about the ancestral snake, and snake origins and early evolutionary history.
1.3 Debate, Disagreement, and Consensus
Some of the debates over the origin of snakes, at least in the past 25 years, have been 
somewhat fractious. Even where the debate has been less antagonistic, there remain some 
sharply divided opinions. Importantly, the reader should be aware that the combined 
authorship (and reviewership) of this book does not represent the full span of expert 
opinions currently in circulation (for example, for an overview of some opposing views 
concerning extant and fossil anatomical evidence for snake origins, see [3], and review of 
that work by [4]). Disagreements about the biology of snake origins have generally been 
more prominent and noisy for palaeontology than neontology, perhaps because the former 
typically involves greater overlap between more observers of the same, imperfectly
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INTRODUCTION 3
preserved specimens that are being interpreted within a less-constrained phylogenetic 
framework, but it is likely not difficult to find people who disagree with aspects of this 
volume’s neontological chapters also. This volume is a good place to find a way into the 
palaeontological and neontological debates. Careful readers will also note some disagree­
ments among the contributions in this volume. For example, the chapters by Head et al. 
(Chapter 3) and by Smith and Georgalis (Chapter 4) present different opinions on the extent 
to which vertebral morphology is useful for palaeobiological interpretations of snake 
evolution. And Yi (Chapter 13) and Scanferla (Chapter 14) disagree about the inferences 
on ecology that can be made from the inner ear morphology of the extinct stem snake 
Dinilysia patagonica.
The two of us also have some differing opinions and perspectives, explainable to some 
degree by our different trajectories. Although both were undergraduates in zoology, one of 
us (DJG) went on to do a PhD in archosaur palaeontology before choosing to largely move 
back into neontological herpetology, while the other (HZ) did a PhD in neontology and 
established a career in that field but became very interested in palaeontology and has 
worked substantially in that field. Despite our different experiences and perspectives, 
through co-editing this book we found ourselves sharing some views. For example, we 
agree that palaeontology will likely lead the way in further clarifying the closest relatives of 
crown snakes (and perhaps also of some of the major lineages therein), but we also believe 
that neontology, including molecular genetics, has a major role to play in advancing 
inferences of the natural history of the earliest snakes, and in clarifying some interrelation­
ships of the major extant lineages at the base of the snake crown. We both learned much 
about the origin and early evolutionary history of snakes from organizing the 2019 meeting 
and editing this volume. We have been reminded how unusual snakes are among 
squamates. Although obviously partly an artefact of the idiosyncrasies of extinction and 
survival, in so many ways snakes are an exceptionally disparate lineage of elongate, 
limbless squamates.
We both owe a debt of gratitude to many colleagues over many years, as well as to 
previous biologists neither of us met. Two particularly important, relevant and missed 
colleagues deserve special mention here. The title of the 2019 meeting associated with this 
book, A Contribution to the Origin and Early Evolution of Snakes, was devised in reference 
to the late Garth L. Underwood’s highly influential 1967 book A Contribution to the 
Classification of Snakes. This was chosen because we have long been fans of Garth’s 
inspiring science and writing, and both benefited from his insight, generosity, and wealth 
of knowledge during discussions with him about snakes. One of us (HZ) also benefited 
greatly from many discussions about snake evolution with the late Jean-Claude Rage, who 
made substantial contributions to snake palaeontology.
1.4 Concluding Remarks
Although snake origins encompasses several topics that have been much-debated over 
many years, we are struck by how much vitality remains in this area of science. This is partly 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4 hussam zaher and david J . gower
because of technological advances, especially in the generation and analysis of genetic data, 
and in imaging. However, it is also because of a large and diverse array of researchers 
recently approaching the subject, because of new fossil discoveries, and because there 
remains so much to be discovered about extant snakes - their anatomy, development, 
phylogenetic relationships, ways of life, and the genetics underpinning this diversity - 
information that can feed into inferences about extinct geno- and phenotypes and testing 
of hypotheses of events that occurred tens of millions of years ago.
This volume is replete with instances where making inferences about the most-recent 
common ancestor of major lineages of crown snakes is difficult because of the patchiness of 
comparative data for extant (especially non-caenophidian) snakes. We anticipate exciting 
years ahead, with rapid and substantial progress in more compellingly resolved phylogen­
etic relationships, discovery and documentation of fossils of stem and early crown snakes, 
analyses of greatly expanded genomic data, refined correlations between ossified structures 
and soft tissues and habits, and more complete and detailed surveys of extant snake 
anatomy and ecology. This joint volume will fulfil its objective if it helps to stimulate and 
contribute to future breakthroughs in this exciting chapter of vertebrate 
evolutionary history.
Acknowledgements
We thank Jeff Streicher and Jason Head for constructive critiques of an earlier draft. HZ is 
grateful to FAPESP for funding (grant 2018/11902-9) and Ana Bottallo Quadros for her 
support during organization of the 2019 conference and production of this book.
References
1. F. Leal and M. J. Cohn, Developmental, 
genetic and genomic insights into the 
evolutionary loss of limbs in snakes. The 
Journal of Genetics and Development, 56 
(2018), e23077.
2. F. O. Da Silva, A.- C. Fabre, Y. Savriama, et al., 
The ecological origins of snakes as revealed 
by skull evolution. Nature Communications, 9 
(2018), 376.
3. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2020).
4. D. Cundall, Review of M. W. Caldwell, The 
Origin of Snakes: Morphology and the Fossil 
Record. Herpetological Review, 51 (2020), 
364-368.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.002 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part I
The Squamate and Snake 
Fossil Record
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.003 Published online by Cambridge University Press

2
The Origin and Early Diversification 
of Squamates
Susan E. Evans
2.1 Introduction
Squamata, the group that encompasses snakes, lizards, and amphisbaenians, is the largest 
(>10,500 sp.) and most disparate group of modern reptiles. Extant squamates are distrib­
uted over all but the coldest parts of the world; range in size (snout-vent length, SVL) from 
millimetres to metres; and show a diversity of diets, shapes, locomotor patterns, and 
reproductive strategies. Snakes (Serpentes) account for roughly 35 per cent of all extant 
squamate species and their origin and relationships, which have long intrigued herpetolo­
gists, are the focus of this volume. This chapter aims to provide a foundation for subsequent 
chapters, by reviewing what is currently known of the early stages of squamate evolution 
and diversification.
Most researchers recognize eight extant major squamate clades (Fig. 2.1): Dibamidae; 
Gekkota; Scincoidea (=Scinciformata [1]), encompassing Xantusiidae, Scincidae, and 
Cordyliformes; Lacertoidea (=Laterata [1]), encompassing Lacertidae and Teiioidea; 
Amphisbaenia; Iguania; Anguimorpha; and Serpentes. Although Camp [2] considered 
Gekkota to be primitive squamates (part of his Ascalabota), the first comprehensive 
cladistic analysis [3], based on morphological characters, placed Iguania as the sister group 
of other squamates (Scleroglossa). Within Scleroglossa, Estes et al. [3] united Scincoidea + 
Lacertoidea in Scincomorpha, and Scincomorpha + Anguimorpha as Autarchoglossa. The 
position of three limb-reduced clades, Dibamidae, Amphisbaenia, and Serpentes, was 
unresolved within Scleroglossa. The topology of Estes et al. [3] remained the working 
hypothesis for most herpetologists until 2004 with the publication of phylogenies based 
on molecular data [4, 5]. The molecular trees placed Gekkota rather than Iguania as the 
sister group of other squamates (invalidating Scleroglossa), with Scincoidea, and then 
Lacertoidea (including Amphisbaenia) as successive outgroups to a Toxicofera that
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8 susan E. evans
Figure 2.1 Molecular time tree for Squamata, redrawn and simplified from Jones et al. [14], showing 
putative early representatives of major clades discussed in the text. (1) Eichstaettisaurus
SCINCOIDEA__________ I 
LACERTOIDEA 
I SERPENTESI 
ANGUIMORPHA 
I 
IGUANIA
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 9
encompassed Iguania, Anguimorpha, and Serpentes [1]. Although morphological data sets 
(e.g., [6]) tend to replicate the Estes et al. [3] tree, subsequent molecular and combined 
evidence analyses [7-13] agree with those of Townsend et al. [4] and Vidal and Hedges [5]. 
The molecular tree is therefore used as the phylogenetic framework herein (Fig. 2.1).
2.2 The Early Squamate Fossil Record
Within Lepidosauria, Squamata is the sister group of Rhynchocephalia. Rhynchocephalia is 
represented today only by the genus Sphenodon (New Zealand), but the group has a 
relatively good fossil record through much of the Mesozoic. The occurrence of a primitive 
rhynchocephalian in the Middle Triassic of Germany [14] provides a latest possible age for 
the division of the lepidosaurian stem, although that division, and thus the origin of 
Squamata, probably occurred in the Early Triassic [12, 14]. However, although there are 
many records of Triassic rhynchocephalians, there are currently no unequivocal records of 
Triassic squamates. Those described last century have all been re-assigned to other reptile 
groups or to the lepidosaurian stem [15, 16].
Tikiguana estesi, represented by a single jaw with an acrodont dentition collected from 
Upper Triassic deposits in India [17], was shown to be a modern intrusion [18]. More 
recently, Simoes et al. [19] placed three monotypic genera, Sophineta cracoviensis (Lower 
Triassic, Poland, [20]), Megachirella wachtleri (Upper Triassic, Italy [21]), and Marmoretta 
oxoniensis (Middle Jurassic, UK [22]) into Squamata. However, re-analyses, based on new 
data for Marmoretta [23], do not support a squamate attribution for either Marmoretta or 
Sophineta, and leave the position of Megachirella as equivocal.
Paikasisaurus indicus is based on two jaw fragments from the Lower-Middle Jurassic 
Kota Formation of India [24]. The designated holotype bears two teeth, neither of which is 
obviously pleurodont, whereas the referred specimen bears a single tooth with little 
resemblance to that of the holotype. Bharatagama rebbanensis, also from the Kota 
Formation, is represented by multiple jaws bearing both pleurodont and acrodont teeth 
[25]. It was described as a possible acrodont iguanian but could also be an aberrant 
rhynchocephalian [18, 26].
The earliest unequivocal squamates are from the Middle Jurassic (Bathonian) of the 
United Kingdom, Russia, Kyrgyzstan, and Morocco. One of the most productive Bathonian
Figure 2.1 (cont.) (Upper Jurassic, Germany); (2) Hoburogekko (Lower Cretaceous, Mongolia);
(3) Paramacellodidae and Saurillodon (Upper Jurassic, Portugal); (4) Asagaolacerta, Kuwajimalla, 
Polyglyphanodontia (Lower Cretaceous, Japan); (5) Purbicella (Lower Cretaceous, UK); (6) Kaganaias 
(Lower Cretaceous, Japan); (7) ‘Coniophis’ (Albian-Cenomanian, North America) and terrestrial + 
aquatic snakes (Albian-Cenomanian, Algeria); (8) Dalinghosaurus (Lower Cretaceous, China);
(9) Dorsetisaurus (Upper Jurassic to Lower Cretaceous, Pan-Laurasia); (10) ?Xenostius (Early 
Cretaceous, Mongolia); (11) Primaderma (Albian-Cenomanian, North America); (12) ?Hoyalacerta 
(Early Cretaceous, Spain). See Supplementary Figure 2.S1 for terminal taxon labels in full. (A black 
and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the 
plate section.)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10 susan E. evans
localities has been Kirtlington Quarry (UK, [27, 28]). In addition to the lepidosauromorph 
Marmoretta, Kirtlington yielded five named squamate genera: Balnealacerta, Bellairsia, cf. 
Saurillodon, Oxiella, and Parviraptor. Squamate bones were also reported from roughly 
contemporaneous deposits on the Isle of Skye, Scotland [23], and new fieldwork on Skye 
has yielded both isolated elements and associated material, including specimens referable 
to the Kirtlington genera Balnealacerta, Bellairsia, and Parviraptor [29]. These specimens 
both validate the original associations [27, 28], contra Caldwell et al. [30], and add new 
morphological data for phylogenetic analysis. Work on this material is in progress, but it 
highlights the clear morphological gap between lepidosaurian stem taxa, like Marmoretta, 
and squamates from the Middle Jurassic onward that show derived features including 
biradiate squamosals, loss of quadrate-pterygoid fixation, loss of quadratojugal, a synovial 
epipterygoid-pterygoid joint, and subdivision of the metotic fissure in the braincase.
Among other Middle Jurassic records, Changetisaurus estesi (Bathonian, Kyrgyzstan [31]) 
is a partial skeleton attributed to Squamata, but it requires re-study. Squamate remains are 
also recorded from the Bathonian Berezovsk Mine, western Siberia (a possible 
paramacellodid, two ‘scincomorphs’: [32]) and from similar aged deposits in Morocco 
(‘scincomorphs’, ‘Parviraptor-like’ taxon [33]). An osteoderm-covered lizard was briefly 
described from Callovian-Oxfordian age deposits at Shishougou (Junggar Valley, China 
[34]), but a detailed description and analysis has yet to be published. Roughly contempor­
aneous deposits at Daohugou, Chinese Inner Mongolia, have also yielded associated lizard 
skeletons, one of general proportions and the other with elongate limbs [35, 36], but both 
are immature and the preservation is poor. More recently, however, a complete lizard 
skeleton was recovered from Daohugou equivalent deposits at Guancaishan, Liaoning 
Province (Hongshanxi xiei, [37]).
Moving into the Upper Jurassic, squamate material is known from several additional 
Laurasian localities, notably: Portugal (Oxfordian, Guimarota [38]), Kazakhstan (Oxfordian- 
Kimmeridgian, Karabastau Formation [39]), North America (Kimmeridgian, Morrison 
Formation [40-42]), Germany (Tithonian, Solnhofen and neighbouring localities [26, 43-48] 
and France (Kimmeridgian, Cerin [49]). Unfortunately, the only contemporaneous 
Gondwanan record is a ‘paramacellodid’ osteoderm from the Tendaguru Formation of 
Tanzania [50], but this identification is unconfirmed.
The squamate fossil record improves substantially in the Early to Middle Cretaceous (i.e., 
Berriasian-Cenomanian), with specimens from Europe, Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and 
the Americas. Concurrent with this apparent global expansion, Early Cretaceous 
(Barremian) specimens include some of the first known occurrences of squamate gliding 
[51], body elongation with limb reduction [52], viviparity [53], herbivory [54], and specialist 
climbing [55, 56].
2.3 The First Records of Crown-Group Squamates
Most recent molecular divergence estimates date the first radiation of crown-group 
squamate lineages to the Early-Middle Jurassic [12-14], with further splitting of major 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 11
lineages in the Late Jurassic. As yet, however, none of the known Middle Jurassic taxa, and 
relatively few of those from the Late Jurassic, can be placed unequivocally into crown 
lineages (Fig. 2.1). There is some improvement in the Early Cretaceous, but many lizards 
from this period are phylogenetically problematic and behave as wild cards in analyses.
2.3.1 Gekkota
Given that gekkotans are now considered to be one of the first of the major branches to 
diverge from the ancestral crown squamate, they should be well represented in early 
squamate assemblages. Their apparent absence could be due to preservational or 
ecological constraints, or a failure of identification due to a lack of distinctive gekkotan 
characters in their early history. Several Late Jurassic and Early Cretaceous genera (notably 
Ardeosaurus, Bavarisaurus, Eichstaettisaurus, Palaeolacerta, Yabeinosaurus) were originally 
attributed to Gekkota (e.g., [44]), but a majority of these have been re-assigned. One 
exception is Eichstaettisaurus (Upper Jurassic, Germany [43]; Lower Cretaceous, Spain, 
Italy [57, 58]) which is frequently placed on the gekkotan stem (e.g., [6, 12, 59]), albeit with 
limited evidence. The first unequivocal stem gekkotan is Hoburogekko suchanovi (Aptian- 
Albian, Hoovor, Mongolia [60, 61]) although Norellius nyctisaurops (Aptian-Albian, 
Mongolia [62, 63]) has also been assigned to Gekkota (e.g., [12], but see [9]), based primarily 
on the combination of notochordal vertebrae and paired parietals. In recent years, 
Cretaceous amber has offered an important window into gekkotan history because it is 
able to preserve small, delicate skeletons, often with exquisite soft tissues (e.g., 
Cretaceogekko burmae [56]). The Albian-Cenomanian amber deposits of north-western 
Myanmar are particularly rich in gekkotans and stem gekkotans from a rarely sampled 
tropical forest ecosystem [64, 65].
2.3.2 Dibamidae
The phylogenetic position of this small, specialized, and biogeographically disparate clade 
(Dibamus, South East Asia, New Guinea, Philippines; Anelytropsis, Mexico) has long been 
problematic (e.g., [3, 66]). Molecular analyses have provided greater clarity but there 
remains uncertainty as to whether dibamids are sister to all other squamates including 
gekkotans [10, 11], to gekkotans alone [13], or to all squamates except gekkotans [12]. 
Unfortunately, the group has no Mesozoic record. The only putative fossil dibamid is 
Hoeckosaurus mongoliensis from the Oligocene of Mongolia [67].
2.3.3 Scincoidea
Estes et al. [3] grouped scincoids and lacertoids within Scincomorpha. Consequently, many 
fossil lizard remains are classified simply as ‘scincomorphs’, making them difficult to 
attribute to any clade. Scincoidea is probably represented by the Jurassic-Cretaceous 
Paramacellodidae [68] with their body covering of rectangular osteoderms, and possibly 
by short-jawed Jurassic-Cretaceous taxa like Saurillodon (Fig.2.1). Saurillodon 
(S. proraformis, S. henkeli) was first described from Guimarota (Oxfordian, Portugal) based 
on short robust dentaries with a few large conical teeth [38, 69], resembling the jaws of 
limb-reduced modern scincids and amphisbaenians. Similar jaws were reported from 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12 susan E. evans
Anoual (Lower Cretaceous, Morocco, Tarratosaurus anoualensis [70]) and from Kirtlington 
(Middle Jurassic, UK [28]). The Kirtlington specimens were referred to Saurillodon, and 
tentatively associated with unusual elongated vertebrae. If the association is correct, then 
this Middle Jurassic taxon would be of considerable interest as an early long-bodied, and 
presumably limb-reduced, squamate. Balnealacerta, also from Kirtlington [28] was attrib­
uted to Paramacellodidae based on similarities in jaw and tooth structure, as were dentaries 
from contemporaneous localities on Skye [23]. However, no osteoderms were recovered 
from among the many kilos of residue from Kirtlington sorted by the author, nor are they 
known from Skye (e.g., in association with the new material of Balnealacerta [29]), and 
therefore attribution of these Middle Jurassic remains to Paramacellodidae remains tenta­
tive. Nonetheless, paramacellodids (including osteoderms) are recorded from Upper 
Jurassic deposits including those from Guimarota (Oxfordian [38, 71]), Kazakhstan 
(Kimmeridgian, Sharovisaurus [39]), and the Morrison Formation, USA (Kimmeridgian 
[40, 41]), as well as from the Lower Cretaceous of the United Kingdom [72], China [73], 
Russia [74], Spain [75], Morocco [75], and North America [76]. Most recently, a partial lizard 
skeleton, Neokotus sanfranciscanus (Valanginian, Brazil), was described as a possible 
Gondwanan paramacellodid [77], but no osteoderms are associated with the skeleton and 
the attribution is based mainly on dental morphology.
Other than paramacellodids, the well-preserved Tepexisaurus tepexii (Albian, Mexico 
[78]) may also be a scincoid [6], but other attributions have less support. Talanda [48] 
argued that Ardeosaurus (Upper Jurassic, Germany) was a scincid, but this was based on an 
interpretation of cranial ornamentation as representing compound osteoderms. By con­
trast, Simoes et al. [47] recovered Ardeosaurus as a gekkotan, whereas other researchers 
(e.g., [12]) found Ardeosaurus to be a wild-card taxon in analyses. Finally, Calanguban 
alamoi is known from a poorly preserved skeleton from Brazil (Aptian-Albian, Crato 
Formation [79]). It was recovered within Cordyliformes in an analysis using the Conrad 
[59] matrix, but unresolved using Gauthier et al.’s [6] matrix. Neither analysis attempted to 
use a molecular constraint.
2.3.4 Lacertoidea
Lacertoidea encompasses lacertids, amphisbaenians, teiids and gymnophthalmids, and 
may be represented by Purbicella ragei from the Lower Cretaceous of England 
(Berriasian, Purbeck Limestone Group [80]). Meyasaurus spp. (Barremian, Spain) was 
proposed to lie on the teiioid stem by Evans and Barbadillo [81], but within anguimorphs 
by Richter [82] and Conrad [59]. Tijubina pontei (Aptian-Albian, Crato Formation, Brazil) 
was originally attributed to Teiidae [83], but subsequent researchers either failed to place it 
securely within the squamate crown [84, 85] or suggested that it and a second Brazilian 
species (Olindalacerta brasiliensis [86]) might be polyglyphanodonts [79]. Until recently, 
Polyglyphanodontia were classified as teiioids (e.g., [68, 87, 88]), a position also recovered 
by Pyron [12] using a combined morphological [59] and molecular matrix. However, 
Gauthier et al. [6] recovered polyglyphanodonts on the stem of ‘Scleroglossa’, whereas 
Pyron [12], combining the Gauthier et al. [6] matrix with a molecular dataset, found 
polyglyphanodonts to be the sister group of Iguania. The position of this large and 
important fossil group therefore remains problematic, but it is attributed to Teiioidea in
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 13
Figure 2.1. The earliest attributed polyglyphanodonts are Kuwajimalla kagaensis [54] and 
Asagaolacerta tricuspidens [89] from the Tetori Formation (Barremian-Aptian, Japan). An 
unnamed lizard specimen preserved in amber (Albian-Cenomanian, Myanmar) was also 
described as a crown lacertoid [64], but this attribution was based primarily on comparison 
with polyglyphanodonts.
Molecular divergence estimates (e.g., [12]) date the separation of stem amphisbaenians 
and lacertids to the Late Jurassic-Early Cretaceous, but the earliest unequivocal record of 
amphisbaenians is from the Palaeocene [90]. Hodzhakulia magna (Albian, Uzbekistan [91]; 
Mongolia [92]) and Sineoamphisbaena hexatabularis (Santonian-Campanian, China [93]) 
were originally classified as stem amphisbaenians, but Hodzhakulia is fragmentary (‘scin- 
comorph’ [92]) and Sineoamphisbaena may be related to polyglyphanodonts [12]. The 
limb-reduced Slavoia darevskii has also been proposed as a candidate stem amphisbaenian 
[94]. The type material is from the Campanian of Mongolia, but older ‘slavoiids’ were 
reported from the Albian Mongolian locality of Hoovor [95].
2.3.5 Anguimorpha
Parviraptorids (Middle Jurassic-Early Cretaceous, UK [27]) were originally attributed to 
Anguimorpha, based on jaw and tooth morphology. This attribution will be tested by 
new, in progress, analyses based on associated material from Skye (Middle Jurassic). The 
Middle Jurassic Changetisaurus (Bathonian, Kyrgyzstan) was also attributed to 
Anguimorpha [31], but this taxon needs re-examination. Currently, the earliest generally 
accepted anguimorph is Dorsetisaurus purbeckensis. As its name suggests, this taxon was 
first described from the Lower Cretaceous (Berriasian) Purbeck Limestone Group of 
England [72], but dorsetisaurs have subsequently been reported from the Upper Jurassic 
of Portugal (Guimarota, Oxfordian [38, 71] and the USA (Morrison Formation, 
Kimmeridgian [40], as well as the Early Cretaceous of Mongolia (Aptian-Albian, 
Paradorsetisaurus postumus [96] (Fig. 2.1). Additionally, a small lizard skeleton 
(Indrasaurus wangi [97] found as gut contents within an Early Cretaceous Chinese 
Microraptor has a dorsetisaur-like dentition and may be related to dorsetisaurs.
Further anguimorph taxa are recorded from the Lower Cretaceous of Mongolia (Aptian- 
Albian, Xenostius futilis, crown xenosaur [95]); Uzbekistan (Albian, xenosaur [98]); Thailand 
(Barremian, eggs with embryos [99]); China (Barremian, Dalinghosaurus longidigitus, stem 
shinisaur [100]); North America (Albian-Cenomanian, Primaderma, stem monstersaur 
[101, 102]); England (Wealden, indet. [103]); and Spain (Barremian-Aptian, Arcanosaurus 
ibericus, ‘varanoid’ [104]), although many of these records are based on isolated elements. 
The tiny attenuate Barlochersaurus winhtini from the mid-Cretaceous amber of Myanmar 
was also tentatively attributed to Anguimorpha [105], but a more mature specimen is 
needed to verify this because the skull is poorly preserved.
The relationships of mosasaurians, also frequently grouped within Anguimorpha, are 
discussed separately (§ 2.3.7).
2.3.6 Iguania
This major squamate clade, comprising both pleurodont and acrodont jawed taxa, is first 
recorded with certainty from the Late Cretaceous (e.g., Mongolia, North America [68]. Some 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14 susan E. evans
analyses (e.g., [59]) recovered Hoyalacerta sanzi, a short-limbed lizard from the Lower 
Cretaceous of Spain (Barremian, Las Hoyas [106]) on the iguanian stem but further 
specimens are needed to test this attribution. Conrad [59] also recovered the enigmatic 
Huehuecuetzpalli mixtecus (Albian, Mexico [107]) as a stem iguanian, although other 
researchers (e.g., [6, 107]) inferred that it lies on the squamate stem. Huehuecuetzpalli 
combines primitive characters (e.g., notochordal vertebrae, trunk intercentra, retained 
second distal tarsal) with derived ones (e.g., retracted nares, anterior parietal foramen). 
A stem-iguanian position was also recovered by Pyron [12], evaluating both the Conrad [59] 
and the Gauthier et al. [6] matrices using time calibration and combined evidence. Such 
major inconsistencies in tree position are, unfortunately, rather common for Jurassic-Early 
Cretaceous taxa.
Xianglong zhaoi, a gliding lizard from the Lower Cretaceous (Barremian) of China was 
described as an acrodontan [51], but this was based on the misinterpretation of the jagged 
broken edge of the crushed juvenile skull as an acrodont jaw (pers. obs.). Its affinities 
remain unknown. The Albian-Cenomanian amber of Myanmar has also yielded possible 
acrodontans [64], but this attribution is based on postcranial material and needs to be 
confirmed from well-preserved skulls. A stem chameleon described from the same deposits 
[64] is actually an albanerpetontid amphibian [108]. Jeddaherdan aleadonta, a partial 
dentary from the Cenomanian of Kem Kem, in Morocco, is possibly an early acrodontan 
[109], but Gueragama sudamerica (Turonian-Campanian, Brazil [79]) is a partial dentary 
with teeth like those of scincoids or teiids, and is unlikely to be an acrodontan as proposed.
2.3.7 Mosasauria
This group encompasses the Mosasauroidea (Late Cretaceous mosasaurs and aigialosaurs), 
and several smaller, long-necked, long-bodied taxa (‘dolichosaurs’) from the Early-Late 
Cretaceous. Mosasaurians are included briefly in this review chapter for completeness (see 
the relevant chapters in this volume for a more detailed discussion).
Generally considered close relatives of varanids and/or lanthanotids within 
Anguimorpha (e.g., [110, 111; Chapter 9]), several subsequent cladistic analyses distanced 
mosasaurians from varanids, albeit to varying degrees (e.g., [6, 112-114]). The proposal that 
mosasaurians were closely related to snakes (e.g., [113, 115, 116] and subsequent papers by 
the same authors and their collaborators) led Lee and Caldwell [117] to resurrect Cope’s 
[118] name Pythonomorpha for their mosasaurian + snake clade, and generated the 
associated, and more controversial, suggestion of a marine origin for snakes [117, 119] 
(see also Chapter 7).
There is general agreement as to the monophyly of Mosasauroidea, but not of 
Aigialosauridae ([113] versus [115, 120, 121; Chapter 8]). Both groups have their earliest 
representatives in the Cenomanian [122]. ‘Dolichosaurs’ are more problematic, mainly 
because their skulls are poorly known. Recent papers, often with overlapping groups of 
authors, disagree as to whether ‘dolichosaurs’ are monophyletic (e.g., [123; Chapter 9]) or 
paraphyletic (e.g., [122, 124]), how they are defined and diagnosed (contrast [125] with [123, 
124]), and whether they are closer to snakes (forming the Ophidiomorpha of [122, 125]) or 
to mosasauroids [123]. Most ‘dolichosaur’ genera were recovered from shallow marine 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 15
deposits associated with either the remnant Tethys seaway (Slovenia, Croatia, Kazakhstan, 
Lebanon, Palestine, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Spain) or the Western Interior 
Seaway (North America) [122]. However, the earliest accepted ‘dolichosaurs’ are from 
freshwater deposits: in Spain (Barremian, vertebrae originally identified as snake [126]), 
Japan (Barremian-Albian Kaganaias [52]); and Australia (Albian [127]). The enigmatic 
snake-like Tetrapodophis amplectus (Albian, Brazil [128]), also from a freshwater deposit, 
was recovered by Paparella et al. [123] on the stem of a Mosasauroidea + Dolichosauridae 
clade that is proposed to be the sister group of snakes (see also Chapter 8).
2.3.8 Pan-Serpentes
The morphological specializations of the snake skeleton and the lack of early fossil repre­
sentatives have hampered attempts to resolve the relationships of snakes to extant lizards. 
McDowell and Bogert [110] argued that snakes were related to anguimorphs, particularly 
varanids and/or lanthanotids, and several cladistic analyses (e.g., [115, 116, 123, 124, 129]) 
supported this (snake-mosasaurian relationships notwithstanding). However, convergence 
between snakes and other limbless squamates (e.g., amphisbaenians, dibamids, limbless 
scincids, and anguids) tends to confound analyses based solely on phenotypic data (e.g., [6, 
59, 116, 130]), leading to artificial groupings. Molecular and combined evidence analyses 
avoid this problem, and unite Serpentes, Anguimorpha, and Iguania within Toxicofera (e.g., 
[1]). Most analyses find Serpentes + [Iguania + Anguimorpha] (e.g., [1, 8, 10, 11, 13, 131]) 
but the sister-group relationship between Iguania and Anguimorpha is not strongly sup­
ported. Furthermore, this does not resolve the position of mosasaurians with respect to 
snakes, because their common placement within an extended Anguimorpha (e.g., [115, 
116, 123, 124, 132]) is incompatible with the molecular results. Pyron [12] ran combined 
evidence analyses using either the matrix of Conrad [59] or that of Gauthier et al. [6] for the 
morphological component. Predictably, he obtained very different results. His optimal tree 
for the Conrad matrix placed mosasaurians as sister to varanids (i.e., within Anguimorpha) 
and only distantly related to snakes, whereas the equivalent tree for the Gauthier et al. [6] 
matrix placed mosasaurians as the sister group of snakes, as did Reeder et al. [9] (see 
Augusta et al. and Zaher et al., this volume, for further discussion of snake and mosasaurian 
relationships).
The first unequivocal snake fossils are isolated vertebrae from the Lower Cretaceous of 
Algeria (Albian-Cenomanian [133, 134]), reportedly from both terrestrial (Lapparentophis 
sp.) and aquatic taxa [135], and isolated vertebrae referred to ‘Coniophis’ sp. from North 
America (terrestrial, Aptian-Cenomanian [136]). A much more extensive suite of snake 
fossils is recorded from the Cenomanian. This Cenomanian record is dominated (and 
biased) by aquatic taxa from the widespread shallow marine deposits of this period, notably 
the simoliophiids (or pachyophiids; see Zaher et al., this volume): Simoliophis spp. (France, 
Portugal, Egypt, Morocco, western Europe and North Africa [135, 137]), Pachyophis 
woodwardi (Bosnia-Herzegovina [138]), Pachyrhachis problematicus (Palestine [139-142]); 
Eupodophis descouensi (Lebanon [143]), and Haasiophis terrasanctus (Palestine [144]), as 
well as the enigmatic aquatic Lunaophis aquaticus (Venezuela [145]). The current 
Cenomanian record of terrestrial snakes is more limited, but this is likely to be a gross 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16 susan E. evans
underestimate considering the global distribution of these taxa: Pouitella pervetus (France 
[146]), Xiaophis myanmarensis (Myanmar [147]), Najash rionegrina (Argentina [148, 149]), 
Seismophis septentrionalis (Brazil [150]), and Norisophis begaa (Morocco [151]).
Snakes had clearly diversified, both ecologically and geographically, by the mid­
Cretaceous. This is consistent with molecular divergence estimates that place the separ­
ation of stem snakes from other toxicoferans during the Jurassic (e.g., [10, 12]). 
Nonetheless, there remains a significant gap in the fossil record. Filling this gap, Caldwell 
et al. [30] re-interpreted specimens referred to the Middle Jurassic-Early Cretaceous lizard 
Parviraptor [27] as stem snakes. Based only on jaw fragments, Caldwell et al. [30] named 
Eophis underwoodi (Middle Jurassic, UK, dentary symphysis), Diablophis gilmorei (Upper 
Jurassic, Morrison Formation, USA, maxilla), and Portugalophis lignites (Upper Jurassic, 
Portugal, maxilla). However, this revision excluded most of the non-dental elements 
originally attributed to Parviraptor [27], based on the claim that Parviraptor as originally 
described was a chimaera of several different lizard taxa. New associated parviraptorid 
material from the Middle Jurassic of Skye confirms the original attribution of elements, both 
the preserved association on the Lower Cretaceous holotype block and the inferred associ­
ation from Kirtlington (Middle Jurassic). These elements include paired frontals and 
parietals, the latter enclosing a parietal foramen, short palatines, and vertebrae that are 
notochordal and amphicoelous in immature individuals, becoming procoelous with matur­
ity [27]. Work on the new Skye material and other parviraptorids is ongoing but Parviraptor 
as originally diagnosed is not a chimaera, and phylogenetic analyses must therefore include 
all of the attributed skeletal elements, rather than selecting only those (maxillae, dentaries) 
consistent with a particular hypothesis. Preliminary analyses (work in progress) do not 
support the inclusion of parviraptorids within Pan-Serpentes, and the Middle Jurassic age 
of the first recorded parviraptorid should therefore not be used to date snake origins in 
molecular divergence estimates (e.g. [152]).
2.4 Discussion and Conclusion
Although the squamate stem probably extended back into the Early Triassic, morphologic­
ally diagnosable squamates are currently unknown prior to the Middle Jurassic of Eurasia 
and North Africa. Molecular divergence estimates predict that major squamate clades had 
arisen by this time but, as yet, none of the currently known Middle Jurassic squamates can 
be placed confidently into the crown. A few Late Jurassic taxa, notably the dorsetisaurs 
(Anguimorpha), the paramacellodids (Scincoidea), and perhaps Eichstaettisaurus 
(Gekkota), may lie on the stems of crown clades, but the first unequivocal snake fossils 
currently date from the mid Cretaceous. The near global distribution of both terrestrial 
(France, USA, Gondwana) and aquatic (mostly Tethyan) snakes by the Cenomanian pro­
vides strong evidence ofan earlier origin, but recent reports of Jurassic snake fossils [30] are 
based on misconception (see above). Given the close relationship between iguanians, 
anguimorphs and snakes, as strongly supported by molecular data, stem iguanians and 
stem anguimorphs have the potential to shed light on the expected morphology of the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 17
earliest stem snakes - given that stem toxicoferans presumably resembled one another 
morphologically until they diverged. Taxa like the dorsetisaurs, Huehuecuetzpalli, 
Hoyalacerta, and perhaps Parviraptor may therefore provide insights into early toxicoferan 
morphology, and may help to refine ideas on ancestral traits (e.g., [153]). Moreover, if 
mosasaurians (in total or in part) are genuinely the sister group of snakes (but see Augusta 
et al. and Zaher et al., this volume), then stem members of that clade also need to be 
identified, probably from terrestrial and/or freshwater deposits.
Further progress in unravelling the early history of squamates generally, and snakes in 
particular, will therefore require a combination of new fossil material; accurate (and 
objective) re-description of existing material using CT scan technology where possible; 
and a concerted effort to recover early squamate material from biogeographically and 
ecologically diverse deposits. Unfortunately, most Jurassic and Early Cretaceous squamate 
taxa are phylogenetically unstable when analysed in matrices combining living and extinct 
taxa. The topographic position of Mesozoic squamates is sensitive to analysis variables like 
data input (character choice and definition, ingroup and outgroup taxa sampled, incorpor­
ation of temporal data), and the use of ordering, weighting, or molecular constraints. 
Moreover, apomorphic skeletal features that characterize individuals of modern clades 
may be absent in early or stem representatives of those clades, further complicating their 
phylogenetic placement, especially when incomplete. Improving tree resolution is not 
simply a question of adding more phenotypic characters. We need to develop a greater 
understanding of those characters, and of the developmental and functional relationships 
between them.
Acknowledgements
My thanks to David Gower and Hussam Zaher for the invitation to participate in the 
symposium and this volume, and to the many colleagues around the world who have 
worked with me on fossil lepidosaurs. My particular thanks to Professor Roger Benson, 
University of Oxford, who is coordinating the research on the new material from the Middle 
Jurassic of Skye, and to Nick Fraser and an anonymous reviewer whose comments 
improved the manuscript. Bruno Navarro (University of Sao Paulo, Brazil) drafted Fig. 2.1.
References
1. N. Vidal and S. B. Hedges, The phylogeny 
of squamate reptiles (lizards, snakes, 
and amphisbaenians) inferred from 
nine nuclear protein-coding genes. 
Comptes Rendus Biologies, 328 (2005), 
1000-1008.
2. C. L. Camp, Classification of the lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 48 (1923), 289-481.
3. R. Estes, K. De Queiroz, and J. Gauthier, 
Phylogenetic relationships within 
Squamata. In R. Estes, and G. Pregill, eds., 
Essays Commemorating Charles L. Camp. 
Phylogenetic Relationships of the Lizard 
Families (Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1988), pp. 119-281.
4. T. M. Townsend, A. Larson, E. Louis, and 
J. R. Macey, Molecular phylogenetics of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18 susan E. evans
Squamata: the position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the 
root of the squamate tree. Systematic 
Biology, 53 (2004), 735-757.
5. N. Vidal and S. B. Hedges, Molecular 
evidence for a terrestrial origin of snakes. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 
series B: Biological Sciences, 271 (2004), 
suppl: S226-S229.
6. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. D. B. Behlke, Assembling 
the squamate tree of life: perspectives from 
the phenotype and the fossil record.
Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural 
History, 53 (2012), 3-308.
7. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Resolving the phylogeny of lizards 
and snakes (Squamata) with extensive 
sampling of genes and species. Biology 
Letters, 8 (2012), 1043-1046.
8. R. A. Pyron, F. T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens, 
A phylogeny and revised classification of 
Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards 
and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 93.
9. T. W. Reeder, T. M. Townsend, D.
G. Mulcahy, et al., Integrated analyses resolve 
conflicts over squamate reptile phylogeny 
and reveal unexpected placements for fossil 
taxa. PLoS ONE, 10 (2015), e0118199.
10. Y. Zheng and J. J. Wiens, Combining 
phylogenomic and supermatrix 
approaches, and a time-calibrated 
phylogeny for squamate reptiles (lizards 
and snakes) based on 52 genes and 4162 
species. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 94 (2016), 537-547.
11. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses of more than 
4000 nuclear loci resolve the origin of 
snakes among lizard families. Biology 
Letters, 13 (2017), 20170393.
12. R. A. Pyron, Novel approaches for 
phylogenetic inference from morphological 
data and total-evidence dating in squamate 
reptiles (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians). Systematic Biology, 66 
(2017), 38-56.
13. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
14. M. E. H. Jones, C. L. Anderson, C.
A. Hipsley, et al., Integration of molecules 
and new fossils supports a Triassic origin 
for Lepidosauria (lizards, snakes, and 
tuatara). BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 208.
15. S. E. Evans, At the feet of the dinosaurs: the 
origin, evolution and early diversification of 
squamate reptiles (Lepidosauria: 
Diapsida). Biological Reviews, 78 (2003), 
513-551.
16. S. E. Evans and M. E. H. Jones, The origins, 
early history and diversification of 
lepidosauromorph reptiles. In
S. Bandyopadhyay, ed., New Aspects of 
Mesozoic Biodiversity, Lecture Notes in 
Earth Sciences 132 (Berlin, Germany: 
Springer-Verlag, 2010), pp. 27-44.
17. P. M. Datta and S. Ray, Earliest lizard from 
the Late Triassic (Carnian) of India. Journal 
of Vertebrate Paleontology, 26 (2006), 
795-800.
18. M. N. Hutchinson, A. Skinner, and M.
S. Y. Lee, Tikiguana and the antiquity of 
squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes). 
Biology Letters, 8 (2012), 665-669.
19. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, M. Talanda, 
et al., The origin of squamates revealed by 
a Middle Triassic ‘lizard’ from the Italian 
Alps. Nature, 557 (2018), 706-709.
20. S. E. Evans and M. Borsuk-Bialynicka, 
A small lepidosauromorph reptile from the 
Early Triassic of Poland. Palaeontologica 
Polonica, 65 (2009), 179-202.
21. S. Renesto and R. Posenato, A new 
lepidosauromorph reptile from the Middle 
Triassic of the Dolomites (Northern Italy). 
Rivista Italiana di Paleontologia i 
Stratigrafia, 109 (2003), 463-474.
22. S. E. Evans, A new lizard-like reptile 
(Diapsida: Lepidosauromorpha) from the 
Middle Jurassic of Oxfordshire. Zoological
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 19
Journal of the Linnean Society, 103 (1991), 
391-412.
23. E. F. Griffiths, D. P. Ford, R. B. J. Benson, 
and S. E. Evans, New information on the 
Jurassic lepidosauromorph Marmoretta 
oxoniensis. Papers in Palaeontology, 7:4 
(2021), 2255-2278
24. P. Yadagiri, Lower Jurassic lower 
vertebrates from Kota Formation, Pranhita- 
Godavari valley, India. Journal of the 
Palaeontological Society of India, 31 (1986), 
89-96.
25. S. E. Evans, G. V. R. Prasad, and B. Manhas, 
Fossil lizards from the Jurassic Kota 
Formation of India. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 22 (2002), 299-312.
26. J. L. Conrad, A new lizard (Squamata) was 
the last meal of Compsognathus 
(Theropoda: Dinosauria) and is a holotype 
in a holotype. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 183 (2018), 584-634.
27. S. E. Evans, A new anguimorph lizard from 
the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous of 
England. Palaeontology, 37 (1994), 33-49.
28. S. E. Evans, Crown group lizards from the 
Middle Jurassic of Britain.
Palaeontographica, Abt.A 250 (1998), 
123-154.
29. E. Pancirioli, R. B. J. Benson, S. Walsh, 
et al., Diverse vertebrate assemblage of the 
Kilmaluag Formation (Bathonian, Middle 
Jurassic) of Skye, Scotland. Earth and 
Environmental Science Transactions of the 
Royal Society of Edinburgh, 111 (2020), 
135-56.
30. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Nydam, A. Palci, and 
S. Apesteguia, The oldest known snakes 
from the Middle Jurassic-Lower 
Cretaceous provide insights on snake 
evolution. Nature Communications, 6 
(2015), 5996.
31. P. V. Fedorov and L. A. Nessov, A lizard 
from the boundary of the Middle and Late 
Jurassic of north-east Fergana, Bulletin of 
St. Petersburg University, Geology and 
Geography, 3 (1992), 9-14 [In Russian].
32. A. Averianov, T. Martin, P. P. Skutschas, 
et al., Middle Jurassic vertebrate 
assemblages of Berezovsk coal mine in 
western Siberia, (Russia). Global Geology, 
19 (2016), 187-204.
33. H. Haddoumi, R. Allain, S. Meslouh, et al., 
Guelb el Ahmar (Bathonian, Anoual 
Syncline, eastern Morocco): first 
continental flora and fauna including 
mammals from the Middle Jurassic of 
Africa. Gondwana Research, 29 (2016), 
290-319.
34. J. L. Conrad, Y. Wang, X. Xu, R. A. Pyron, 
and J. Clark, Skeleton of a heavily armoured 
and long-legged Middle Jurassic lizard 
(Squamata, Reptilia). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology Supplement, Annual Meeting 
Abstracts, 73 (2013), 108.
35. S. E. Evans and Y. Wang, A juvenile lizard 
from the Late Jurassic/Early Cretaceous of 
China. Naturwissenschaften, 94 (2007), 
431-439.
36. S. E. Evans and Y. Wang, A long-limbed 
lizard from the Upper Jurassic/Lower 
Cretaceous of Daohugou, Inner Mongolia, 
China. Vertebrata Palasiatica, 47 (2009), 
21-34.
37. L. P. Dong, Y. Wang, L. Mou, G. Zhang, and 
S. E. Evans, A new Jurassic lizard from 
China. Geodiversitas, 41 (2019), 623-641.
38. J. Seiffert, Upper Jurassic lizards from 
Central Portugal. Memoria, Servigos 
Geologicos de Portugal, 22 (1973), 1-85.
39. M. K. Hecht and B. M. Hecht, A new 
lizard from Jurassic deposits of Middle 
Asia. Paleontological Journal, 18 (1984), 
133-136.
40. D. R. Prothero and R. Estes, Late Jurassic 
lizards from Como Bluff Wyoming, and 
their palaeobiogeographic significance. 
Nature, 286 (1980), 484-486.
41. S. E. Evans and D. C. Chure, 
Paramacellodid lizard skulls from the 
Jurassic Morrison Formation at Dinosaur 
National Monument, Utah. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 18 (1998), 99-114.
42. S. E. Evans and D. C. Chure, Morrison 
lizards: structure, relationships and 
biogeography. Modern Geology, 23 (1998), 
35-48.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

20 susan E. evans
43. M. Cocude-Michel, Les rhynchocephales et 
les Sauriens des Calcaires Lithographiques 
(Jurassique superieur) d’Europe 
Occidentale. Nouvelles Archives du 
Mus6um d'Histoire naturelle de Lyon, 7 
(1963), 1-187.
44. R. Hoffstetter, Les Sauria du Jurassic 
superieur et specialement les Gekkota de 
Baviere et de Mandchourie. 
Senckenbergiana Biologie, 45 (1964), 
281-322.
45. N. J. Mateer, Osteology of the Jurassic lizard 
Ardeosaurus brevipes (Meyer).
Palaeontology, 25 (1982), 461-9.
46. S. E. Evans, The Solnhofen (Jurassic: 
Tithonian) lizard genus Bavarisaurus: new 
skull material and a reinterpretation. Neues 
Jahrbuch fur Geologie und Palaontologie, 
Abhandlungen, 192 (1994), 37-52.
47. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Nydam, 
and P. Jiminez-Huidabro, Osteology, 
phylogeny, and functional morphology of 
two Jurassic lizard species and the early 
evolution of scansoriality in geckoes. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
180 (2017), 216-241.
48. M. Talanda, An exceptionally preserved 
Jurassic skink suggests lizard diversification 
preceded the fragmentation of Pangaea. 
Palaeontology, 61 (2018), 659-677.
49. S. E. Evans, A re-evaluation of the late 
Jurassic (Kimmeridgian) reptile 
Euposaurus (Reptilia: Lepidosauria) from 
Cerin, France. Geobios, 27 (1994), 621-631.
50. W. Zils, C. Werner, A. Moritz, and 
C. Saanane, Tendaguru, the most famous 
dinosaur locality of Africa. Review, survey 
and future prospects. Documenta naturae, 
Munich, 97 (1995), 1-41.
51. P. P. Li, K. Q. Gao, L. H. Hou, and X. Xu, 
A gliding lizard from the Early Cretaceous 
of China. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A., 104 
(2007), 5507-5509.
52. S. E. Evans, M. Manabe, M. Noro, S. Isaji, 
and M. Yamaguchi, A long-bodied lizard 
from the Lower Cretaceous of Japan. 
Palaeontology, 49(6) (2006), 1143-1165.
53. Y. Wang and S. E. Evans, A gravid lizard 
from the Early Cretaceous of China: 
insights into the history of squamate 
viviparity. Naturwissenschaften, 98 (2011), 
739-743.
54. S. E. Evans and M. Manabe, A herbivorous 
lizard from the Early Cretaceous of Japan. 
Palaeontology, 51 (2008), 487-498.
55. S. E. Evans and L. J. Barbadillo, An unusual 
lizard (Reptilia, Squamata) from the Early 
Cretaceous of Las Hoyas, Spain. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 124 (1998), 
235-266.
56. E. N. Arnold and G. Poinar, A 100 million 
year old gecko with sophisticated adhesive 
toepads preserved in amber from 
Myanmar. Zootaxa, 1847 (2008), 62-68.
57. S. E. Evans, A. Lacasa-Ruiz, and J. Erill Rey, 
A lizard from the Early Cretaceous 
(Berriasian-Hauterivian) of Montsec. Neues 
Jahrbuch fur Geologie und Palaontologie, 
Abhandlungen, 215 (1999), 1-15.
58. S. E. Evans, P. Raia, and C. Barbera, New 
lizards and rhynchocephalians from the 
Early Cretaceous of southern Italy. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 49 (3) (2004), 
393-408.
59. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematic of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
60. V. R. Alifanov, The oldest gecko (Lacertilia: 
Gekkonidae) from the Lower Cretaceous of 
Mongolia. Paleontological Journal, 23 
(1990), 128-131.
61. J. D. Daza, A. M. Bauer, and E. D. Snively, 
On the fossil record of Gekkota. Anatomical 
Record, 297 (2014), 433-462.
62. J. L. Conrad and M. A. Norell, High- 
resolution X-ray computed tomography of 
an early Cretaceous gekkonomorph 
(Squamata) from Oosh (Ovorkhangai: 
Mongolia). Historical Biology, 18 (2006), 
405-431.
63. J. L. Conrad and J. D. Daza, Naming and re­
diagnosing the Cretaceous gekkonomorph 
(Reptilia, Squamata) from Oosh 
(Ovorkhangai, Mongolia). Journal of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 21
Vertebrate Paleontology, 35 (2015), 
e980891.
64. J. D. Daza, E. L. Stanley, P. Wagner, 
A. Bauer, and D. A. Grimaldi, Mid­
Cretaceous amber fossils illuminate the 
past diversity of tropical lizards. Science 
Advances, 2 (2016), e1501080.
65. G. Fontanarrosa, J. D. Daza, and V. Abdala, 
Cretaceous fossil gecko hand reveals a 
strikingly modern scansorial morphology: 
qualitative and biometric analysis of an 
amber-preserved lizard hand. Cretaceous 
Research, 84 (2018), 120-133.
66. A. E. Greer, The relationships of the lizard 
genera Anelytropsis and Dibamus. Journal 
of Herpetology, 19 (1985), 116-156.
67. A. Cernansky, The first potential fossil 
record of a dibamid reptile (Squamata; 
Dibamidae): a new taxon from the early 
Oligocene of Central Mongolia. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 187 (2019), 
782-799.
68. R. Estes and Sauria, Amphisbaenia. 
Handbuch der Palaoherpetologie/ 
Encyclopedia of Paleontology, Part 10A 
(Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer, 1983).
69. R. Kosma, The dentitions of recent and 
fossil scincomorphan lizards (Lacertilia, 
Squamata). Systematics, functional 
morphology, palaeoecology. Unpublished 
PhD Thesis, University of Hannover (2004).
70. A. Broschinski and D. Sigogneau-Russell, 
Remarkable lizard remains from the lower 
Cretaceous of Anoual (Morocco). Annales 
de Pal6ontologie (Vert. - Invert.), 82 (1996), 
147-175.
71. A. Broschinski, The lizards from the 
Guimarota mine. In T. Martin and B. Krebs, 
eds., Guimarota. A Jurassic Ecosystem 
(Munich: Dr. Friedrich Pfeil, 2000), 
pp. 59-68.
72. R. Hoffstetter, Coup d’oeil sur les Sauriens 
(Lacertiliens) des couches de Purbeck 
(Jurassique Superieur d’Angleterre). 
Problemes Actuels de Paleontologie 
(Evolution des Vertebrates), Colloques 
Internationaux du Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, 163 (1967), 349-371.
73. J.-L. Li, A new lizard from the late Jurassic 
of Subei, Gansu. Vertebrata PalAsiatica, 23 
(1985), 13-18.
74. A. O. Averianov and P. P.Skutchas, 
Paramacellodid lizard (Squamata, 
Scincomorpha) from the Early Cretaceous 
of Transbaikalia. Russian Journal of 
Herpetology, 6 (1999), 115-117.
75. A. Richter, Lacertilia aus der Unteren 
Kreide von Una und Galve (Spanien) und 
Anoual (Marokko). Berliner 
geowissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, 14 
(1994), 1-147.
76. R. L. Nydam and R. L. Cifelli, Lizards from the 
Lower Cretaceous (Aptian-Albian) Antlers 
and Cloverley Formations. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 22 (2002), 286-298.
77. J. S. Bittencourt, T. R. Simoes, M.
W. Caldwell, and M. C. Langer, Discovery 
of the oldest South American fossil lizard 
illustrates the cosmopolitanism of early 
South American squamates.
Communications Biology, 3 (2020), 201.
78. V. H. Reynoso and G. Callison, A new 
scincomorph lizard from the Early 
Cretaceous of Puebla, Mexico. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 130 (2000), 
183-212.
79. T. R. Simoes, E. Wilner, M. W. Caldwell, 
L. C. Weinschutz, and A. W. A. Kellner, 
A stem-acrodontan lizard in the Cretaceous 
of Brazil revises early lizard evolution in 
Gondwana. Nature Communications, 6 
(2015), 9149.
80. S. E. Evans, M. E. H. Jones, and
R. Matsumoto, A new lizard skull from the 
Purbeck Limestone Group of England. 
Bulletin of the Geological Society of France, 
183 (2012), 517-524.
81. S. E. Evans and L. J. Barbadillo, Early 
Cretaceous lizards from las Hoyas, Spain. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
119 (1997), 23-49.
82. A. Richter, Der problematische Lacertilier 
Ilerdaesaurus (Reptilia: Squamata) aus der 
Unter-Kreide von Una und Galve. Berliner 
geowissenschaftliche Abhandlungen, 13 
(1994), 135-161.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

22 susan E. evans
83. F. C. Bonfim-Junior and R. B. Marques, Um 
novo lagarto do Cretaceo do Brasil 
(Lepidosauria, Squamata, Lacertilia - 
forma^ao Santana, Aptiano da Bacia do 
Araripe). Anuario do Instituto de 
Geociencias, 20 (1997), 233-240.
84. F. C. Bonfim-Junior and L. D. S. Avila, 
Phylogenetic position of Tijubina pontei 
Bonfim and Marques 1997 (Lepidosauria, 
Squamata), a basal lizard from the Santana 
Formation, Lower Cretaceous of Brazil. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 22 
(Supplement to 3) (2002), 37A-38A.
85. T. R. Simoes, Redescription of Tijubina 
pontei, and Early Cretaceous lizard 
(Reptilia; Squamata) from the Crato 
Formation of Brazil. Anais da Academia 
Brasileira de Ciencias, 84 (2012), 1.
86. S. E. Evans and Y. Yabumoto, A lizard from 
the Early Cretaceous Crato Formation, 
Araripe Basin, Brazil. Neues Jahrbuch fur 
Palaontologie und Geologie, Monatshefte 
1998 (1998), 349-364.
87. V. R. Alifanov, New lizards of the 
Macrocephalosauridae (Sauria) from the 
Upper Cretaceous of Mongolia, critical 
remarks on the systematics of the Teiidae 
(sensu Estes, 1983). Paleontological 
Journal, 27 (1993), 70-90.
88. R. L. Nydam, J. G. Eaton, and J. Sankey, 
New taxa of transversely-toothed lizards 
(Squamata; Scincomorpha) and new 
information on the evolutionary history of 
‘teiids’. Journal of Paleontology, 81 (2007), 
538-549.
89. S. E. Evans and R. Matsumoto, An 
assemblage of lizards from the Early 
Cretaceous of Japan. Palaeontologica 
Electronica, 18.2.36A (2015), 1-36.
90. R. M. Sullivan, A new middle Paleocene 
(Torrejonian) rhineurid amphisbaenian, 
Plesiorhineura tsentasi new genus, new 
species, from the San Juan Basin, New 
Mexico. Journal of Paleontology, 59 (1985), 
1481-1485.
91. L. A. Nessov, Rare bony fishes, terrestrial 
lizards and mammals from the lagoonal 
zone of the litoral lowlands of the
Cretaceous of the Kyzylkumy. Yearbook of 
the All-Union Palaeontological Society, 
Leningrad, 28 (1985), 199-219.
92. V. R. Alifanov, Lizards of the family 
Hodzhakuliidae (Scincomorpha) from the 
Lower Cretaceous of Mongolia.
Paleontological Journal, 50 (2016), 504-513.
93. X.-C. Wu, D. B. Brinkman, and A.
P. Russell, Sineoamphisbaena 
hexatabularis: an amphisbaenian 
(Diapsida: Squamata) from the Upper 
Cretaceous redbeds at Bayan Mandahu 
(Inner Mongolia, People’s Republic of 
China), and comments on the phylogenetic 
relationships of the Amphisbaenia.
Canadian Journal of Earth Sciences, 33 
(1996), 541-577.
94. M. Talanda, Cretaceous roots of the 
amphisbaenian lizards. Zoologica Scripta, 
45 (2015), 1-8.
95. V. R. Alifanov, Lizards of the families 
Eoxantidae, Ardeosauridae, Globauridae, 
and Paramacellodidae (Scincomorpha) 
from the Aptian-Albian of Mongolia. 
Paleontological Journal, 53 (2019), 74-88.
96. V. R. Alifanov, Lizards of the families 
Dorsetisauridae and Xenosauridae 
(Anguimorpha) from the Aptian-Albian of 
Mongolia. Paleontological Journal, 53 
(2019), 183-193.
97. J. M. O’Connor, X. Zheng, L. Dong, et al., 
Microraptor with ingested lizard suggests 
non-specialized digestive function. Current 
Biology, 29 (2019), 2423-2429.
98. K. Q. Gao and L. A. Nessov, Early 
Cretaceous squamates from the Kyzylkum 
Desert, Uzbekistan. Neues Jahrbuch fur 
Geologie und Palaontologie, Abhandlungen, 
207 (1998), 289-309.
99. V. Fernandez, E. Buffetaut, V. Suteethorn, 
et al., Evidence of egg diversity in 
squamate evolution from Cretaceous 
anguimorph embryos. PLoS ONE, 10 
(2015), e0128610.
100. S. E. Evans and Y. Wang, The Early 
Cretaceous lizard Dalinghosaurus from 
China. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica, 50 
(2005), 725-742.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 23
101. R. L. Cifelli and R. L. Nydam, Primitive, 
helodermatid-like platynotan from the 
Early Cretaceous of Utah. Herpetologica, 51 
(1995), 286-291.
102. R. L. Nydam, A new taxon of helodermatid- 
like lizard from the Albian-Cenomanian of 
Utah. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 20 
(2000), 285-294.
103. S. C. Sweetman and S. E. Evans, 
Lepidosaurs (lizards). In D. J. Batten, ed., 
Palaeontological Association Field Guide to 
Fossils, 14. English Wealden Fossils 
(London: The Palaeontological Association, 
2011), pp. 264-284.
104. A. Houssaye, J.-C. Rage, F. T. Fernandez- 
Baldor, et al., A new varanoid squamate 
from the Early Cretaceous (Barremian- 
Aptian) of Burgos, Spain. Cretaceous 
Research, 41 (2013), 127-135.
105. J. D. Daza, A. M. Bauer, E. L. Stanley, et al., An 
enigmatic miniaturized and attenuate whole 
lizard from the mid-Cretaceous amber of 
Myanmar. Breviora, 563 (2018), 1-18.
106. S. E. Evans and L. J. Barbadillo, A short- 
limbed lizard from the Lower Cretaceous of 
Spain. Special Papers in Palaeontology, 60 
(1999), 73-85.
107. V. H. Reynoso, Huehuecuetzpalli mixtecus 
gen. et sp. nov.: a basal squamate (Reptilia) 
from the early Cretaceous of Tepexi de 
Rodriguez, Central Mexico. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London, 
Biological Sciences, 353 (1998), 477-500.
108. R. Matsumoto and S. E. Evans, The first 
record of albanerpetontid amphibians 
(Amphibia, Albanerpetontidae) from East 
Asia. PLoS ONE, 13 (2018), e0189767.
109. S. Apesteguia, J. D. Daza, T. R. Simoes, and 
J.-C. Rage, The first iguanian lizard from 
the Mesozoic of Africa. Royal Society Open 
Science, 3 (2016), 160462.
110. S. B. McDowell and C. M. Bogert, The 
systematic position of Lanthanotus and the 
affinities of the anguinomorphan lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 105 (1954), 1-142.
111. R. L. Carroll and M. De Braga, 
Aigialosaurus: mid-Cretaceous varanoid 
lizards. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 
12 (1992), 66-86.
112. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Carroll, and H. Kaiser, 
The pectoral girdle and forelimb of 
Carsosaurus marchesetti (Aigialosauridae) 
with a preliminary phylogenetic analysis of 
mosasauroids and varanoids. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 15 (1995), 
516-531.
113. M. W. Caldwell, Squamate phylogeny and 
the relationships of snakes and 
mosasauroids. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 125 (1999), 115-147.
114. T. R. Simoes, O. Vernygora, I. Paparella, 
P. Jimenez-Huidobro, and M. W. Caldwell, 
Mosasauroid phylogeny under multiple 
phylogenetic methods provides new 
insights on the evolution of aquatic 
adaptations in the group. PLoS ONE 12 
(2017), e0176773.
115. M. S. Y. Lee, The phylogeny of varanoid 
lizards and the affinities of snakes.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, Biological Sciences, 352 (1997), 53-91.
116. M. S. Y. Lee, Convergent evolution and 
character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
towards a resolution of squamate 
phylogeny. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 65 (1998), 369-453.
117. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, 
Adriosaurus and the affinities of mosasaurs, 
dolichosaurs, and snakes. Journal of 
Paleontology, 74 (2000), 915-37.
118. E. D. Cope, On the reptilian orders, 
Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria. 
Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural 
History, 12 (1869), 250-66.
119. M. S. Y. Lee, Molecular evidence and 
marine snake origins. Biology Letters, 1 
(2005), 227-230.
120. M. W. Caldwell, On the aquatic squamate 
Dolichosaurus longicollis Owen, 1850 
(Cenomanian, Upper Cretaceous), and the 
evolution of elongate necks in squamates. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 20 
(2000), 720-735.
121. A. R. Dutchak, A review of the taxonomy 
and systematics of aigialosaurs.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

24 susan E. evans
Netherlands Journal of Geosciences, 84 
(2005), 221-229.
122. M. C. Mekarski, S. E. Pierce, and M.
W. Caldwell, Spatiotemporal distributions 
of non-ophidian ophidiomorphs, with 
implications for their origin, radiation, and 
extinction. Frontiers in Earth Science, 7 
(2019), article 24.
123. M. Paparella, A. Palci, U. Nicosia, and M. 
W. Caldwell, A new fossil marine lizard 
with soft tissues from the Late Cretaceous 
of southern Italy. Royal Society Open 
Science, 5 (2018), e172411.
124. S. E. Pierce and M. W. Caldwell, 
Redescription and phylogenetic position of 
the Adriatic (Upper Cretaceous; 
Cenomanian) dolichosaur Pontosaurus 
lesinensis (Kornhuber, 1873). Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 24 (2004), 
373-386.
125. A. Palci and M. W. Caldwell, Redescription 
of Acteosaurus tommasinii Von Meyer 
1860, and a discussion of evolutionary 
trends within the clade Ophiodiomorpha. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 
(2010), 94-108.
126. J.-C. Rage and A. Richter, A snake from the 
lower Cretaceous (Barremian) of Spain: the 
oldest known snake. Neues Jahrbuch fur 
Geologie und Palaontologie, Monatshefte, 
1995 (1995), 561-565.
127. J. D. Scanlon and S. A. Hocknull, 
A dolichosaurid lizard from the latest 
Albian (mid-Cretaceous) Winto Formation, 
Queensland, Australia. In M. J. Everhard, 
ed., Proceedings of the Second Mosasaur 
Meeting, Fort Hays Studies Special Issue, 3 
(2008), 131-136.
128. D. M. Martill, H. Tischlinger, and N.
R. Longrich, A four-legged snake form the 
Early Cretaceous of Gondwana. Science, 
349 (2015), 416-419.
129. M. S. Y. Lee, Squamate phylogeny, taxon 
sampling, and data congruence. 
Organisms, Diversity, and Evolution, 5 
(2005), 25-45.
130. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, and A. 
W. A. Kellner, A new Early Cretaceous 
lizard species from Brazil, and the 
phylogenetic position of the oldest known 
South American squamates. Journal of 
Systematic Palaeontology, 13 (2015), 
601-614.
131. D. G. Mulcahy, B. P. Noonan, T. Moss, 
et al., Estimating divergence dates and 
evaluating dating methods using 
phylogenomic and mitochondrial data in 
squamate reptiles. Molecular Phylogenetics 
and Evolution, 65 (2012), 974-991.
132. M. S. Y. Lee, Hidden support from 
unpromising data sets strongly unites 
snakes with anguimorph ‘lizards’. Journal 
of Evolutionary Biology, 22 (2009), 
1308-1316.
133. R. Hoffstetter, Un serpent terrestre dans le 
Cretace inferieur du Sahara. Bulletin de la 
Sociёtё Gёologique de France, 1 (1959), 
897-902.
134. G. Cuny, J. J. Jaeger, M. Mahboubi, and 
J.-C. Rage, Les plus anciens serpentes 
(Reptilia, Squamata) connus. Mise au point 
sur l’age geologiques des Serpents de la 
partie moyenne du Cretace. Comptes 
rendus des sёances de l'Acadёmie des 
Sciences Paris, Series 2, 311 (1990), 
1267-1272.
135. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, The 
Cenomanian: stage of hind-limbed snakes. 
Notebooks on Geology, (1) (2003), (CG2003 
A01 JCR-FE).
136. J. D. Gardner and R. L. Cifelli, A primitive 
snake from the Cretaceous of Utah. Special 
Papers in Palaeontology, 60 (1999), 87-100.
137. J.-C. Rage and D. B. Dutheil, Amphibians 
and squamates from the Cretaceous 
(Cenomanian) of Morocco. A preliminary 
study. Palaeontographica Abteilung A, 286 
(2008), 1-22.
138. M. S. Y. Lee, M. W. Caldwell, and J.
D. Scanlon, A second primitive marine 
snake: Pachyophis woodwoodi from the 
Cretaceous of Bosnia-Herzgovina. Journal 
of Zoology, 248 (1999), 509-520.
139. G. Haas, On a new snake-like reptile from 
the lower Cenomanian of Ein Jabrud, near 
Jerusalem. Bulletin du Musёum National 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ORIGIN AND EARLY DIVERSIFICATION OF SQUAMATES 25
d’Histoire Naturelle de Paris, 1 (1979), 
51-64.
140. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of the 
Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 705-709.
141. H. Zaher, The phylogenetic position of 
Pachyrachis within snakes (Squamata, 
Lepidosauria). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 18 (1998), 1-3.
142. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, The phylogenetic 
relationships of Pachyrachis problematicus 
and the evolution of limblessness in 
snakes (Lepidosauria, Squamata). Comptes 
Rendus de l’Academie de Sciences, Series 
IIA - Earth and Planetary Science, 329 
(1999), 831-837.
143. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, Un nouveau 
serpent bipede du Cenomanien (Cretace). 
Implications phyletiques. Comptes Rendus 
de l’Academie des Sciences, Series IIA - 
Earth and Planetary Science, 330 (2000), 
513-520.
144. E. Tchernov, O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, M.
J. Polcyn, and L. L. Jacobs, A fossil snake 
with limbs. Science, 287 (2000), 2010-2012.
145. A. Albino, J. D., Carillo-Briceno, and J.
M. Neenan, An enigmatic aquatic snake 
from the Cenomanian of northern South 
America. PeerJ, 4 (2016), DOI 10.7717/peerj 
.2027e2027.
146. J.-C. Rage, Un serpent primitif (Reptilia, 
Squamata) dans le Cenomanien (base du 
Cretace superieur). Comptes rendus de 
l’Academie des Sciences, Paris, 307 (1988), 
1027-1032.
147. L. Xing, M. W. Caldwell, R. Chen, et al., 
A mid-Cretaceous embryonic-to-neonate 
snake in amber from Myanmar. Science 
Advances, 4 (2018), eaat5042.
148. S. Apesteguia and H. Zaher, A Cretaceous 
terrestrial limbed snake with robust 
hindlimbs and sacrum, Nature, 440 (2006), 
1037-1040.
149. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, T.
R. Simoes, et al., New skulls and skeletons 
of the Cretaceous legged snake Najash, and 
the evolution of the modern snake body 
plan. Science Advances, 5 (2019), eaax5833.
150. A. S. Hsiou, A. M. Albino, M. A. Medeiros, 
and R. A. B. Santos, The oldest Brazilian 
snakes from the Cenomanian (early Late 
Cretaceous). Acta Palaeontologica 
Polonica, 59 (2013), 635-642.
151. C. G. Klein, N. R. Longrich, N. Ibrahim, 
S. Zouhri, and D. M. Martill, A new basal 
snake from the mid-Cretaceous of 
Morocco. Cretaceous Research, 72 (2017), 
134-141.
152. S. M. Harrington and T. W. Reeder, 
Phylogenetic inference and divergence 
dating of snakes using molecules, 
morphology and fossils: new insights into 
convergent evolution of feeding 
morphology and limb reduction. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 121(2017), 
379-394.
153. F. O. Da Silva, A.-C. Fabre, Y. Savriama, 
et al., The ecological origins of snakes as 
revealed by skull evolution. Nature 
Communications, 9 (2018), 376.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.004 Published online by Cambridge University Press

3
The First 80 Million Years of Snake Evolution
The Mesozoic Fossil Record of Snakes 
and Its Implications for Origin Hypotheses, 
Biogeography, and Mass Extinction
Jason J. Head, Alexandra F. C. Howard, and Johannes Muller
3.1 Introduction
With over 3,000 extant species, snakes are one of the great vertebrate radiations, and the 
origins and interrelationships of the clade have been long been intensely studied and 
debated (see [1] for historical overview). Hypotheses for the ecological contexts of the origin 
for snakes and their body form have historically been studied in the context of comparative 
anatomies of sensory systems and the fossil record, and include competing inferences of 
fossoriality based on visual and auditory apomorphies in extant taxa (e.g., [2-4]) and marine 
habits based on the early fossil record (e.g., [5]). These hypotheses have been revisited over 
the last 23 years based on new fossil discoveries and reinterpretation of anatomical data from 
fossil and extant taxa (e.g., [6-11]).
The interrelationships of snakes and their position within squamate phylogeny have also 
been intensely studied. Analyses of morphological data historically proposed a sister-taxon 
relationship between snakes and a clade of varanids and/or mosasauroids (e.g., [12-14]) or 
snake-like squamates variably including dibamids, amphisbaenians, and acontid and 
feyliniid skinks [15-19]. Analyses of molecular data recover a sister-taxon relationship 
between snakes and a clade comprising Anguimorpha+Iguania [20-23], which is similarly 
recovered in combined analyses [24].
Fossil evidence for snake origins and relationships has been primarily derived from 
comparatively well-preserved Late Cretaceous specimens (Fig. 3.1; [6-8, 25-27]). The 
geographic distributions, depositional environments, and morphology of these specimens
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 27
Figure 3.1 Well-preserved Cretaceous snake taxa. (A). Pachyrhachis problematicus (HUJ-PAL 3569, 
HUJ-PAL 3775); (B). Haasiophis terrasanctus (HUJ-PAL EJ 695); (C). Eupodophis descouensi (MSNM 
V 4014); (D). Pachyophis woodwardi (Cast, Oxford Museum of Natural History) (E). Dinilysia patagonica 
(MLP 26-410), skull in dorsal (top) and ventral (bottom) views; (F). Sanajeh indicus (GSI/GC/2901-2906). 
Image of Haasiophis courtesy of C. A. Brochu, all other images are by JJH. (A black and white version of 
this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section.).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

28 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
has been used to infer early biogeographic histories for snakes, ecological contexts of 
snake origins, and evolutionary relationships of snakes to extant and fossil squamates 
(e.g., [14, 28]).
Less attention has been paid to the potential explanatory power of the rest of the 
Mesozoic record, which consists primarily of isolated or associated vertebral remains, 
due, in part, to the relative dearth of anatomical data. Here we review and discuss the 
Mesozoic snake record in the contexts of both molecular and morphological phylogenies, 
focusing on the temporal and geographic distributions of under-examined taxa. We then 
discuss these records with respect to competing hypotheses of the origin of the snake body 
form, biogeographic histories of early snakes, and survival of Cretaceous snake clades into 
the Cenozoic. Because the fossil record consists primarily of precloacal vertebrae, we 
provide an overview of vertebral osteological correlates to the snake body form and their 
phylogenetic significance.
3.2 Vertebral Morphology and Its Necessity for Inferring 
the Evolution of Snakes
The vast majority of the fossil record of snakes consists of isolated precloacal vertebrae 
[29, 30] and systematic identification and inferences of the evolution of the snake body form 
require identifying osteological correlates to the musculoskeletal and circulatory compon­
ents of the elongate, limb-reduced precloacal body. Comparison of crown-snake vertebrae 
with those of generalized limbed squamates (Fig. 3.2) demonstrates an integrated set of 
changes relating to the transition from a body form in which the axial skeleton generates 
pulmonary ventilation and supports propulsive locomotion from the appendicular skeleton 
to a body form in which the axial skeleton both provides locomotion through direct contact 
with substrate and ventilates the lungs primarily via the dorsal ribs (e.g., [31, 32]). Although 
there is variability in the degree of development in these changes among extant snake 
clades, especially with respect to the repeated evolution of fossorial ecomorphologies [33], 
components of them are present across the snake crown, and the majority are present 
across Alethinophidia.
A primary component of the snake body form is the ventrolateral orientation of the ribs 
versus a more lateral position in limbed taxa. This is achieved by depressing the prezyga- 
pophyses and synapophyses relative to the centrum, reducing the angle of the prezygapo- 
physeal articular facet, separating the synapophyseal articular facets from the lateral margin 
of the centrum body via a distinct apophyseal trunk that forms the ventral extent of the 
prezygapophyses, and angling the synapophyseal facets so that the articulation of the 
costovertebral joint is dorsolaterally angled (Fig. 3.2B1).
Increased stabilization of costovertebral joints is achieved through separation of a uni- 
capitate, convex synapophyseal articular facet in limbed squamates to a bi-faceted surface 
consisting of a convex posterodorsal diapophysis and concave to flat anteroventral para­
pophysis (Fig. 3.2B1) (e.g., [33]) which stabilizes against medial rotation of the rib [32].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 29
Figure 3.2 Precloacal vertebral morphology in limbed squamates and crown-group snakes. (A), 
Heloderma suspectum; (B). Boa constrictor in (1) anterior, (2) posterior, (3) dorsal, (4) ventral, (5) left 
lateral views. Abbreviations: ap, accessory process of prezygapophyses; cn, condyle; ct, cotyle; di, 
diapophysis; hk, haemal keel; na, neural arch; pa, parapophysis; pn, posteromedian notch of neural 
arch; pr, prezygapophyses; zn, zygantrum; zs, zygosphene.
Increased stabilization of intervertebral joints is achieved through lateral elongation and 
lowered angles of zygapophyseal articulations, greater rounding of the cotyle-condyle 
articulation including increased development of the ventral margin of the cotyle, and 
through limiting torsion between adjacent elements by the articulation of a large, wide 
zygosphene with dorsolaterally angled articular facets at the dorsal margin of the anterior 
opening of the neural canal with a corresponding deep posterior zygantrum incised into the 
posterior neural arch of the preceding vertebra (Fig. 3.2B1, 3.2B2, and 3.2B5) [34].
Vertebral morphology corresponds to shifts in muscle size and position in the transition 
to the snake body form. Levator costae is a small hypaxial muscle in some limbed lizards 
that inserts on the posterior edge of the synapophysis anteriorly and the anterodorsal edge 
of the following rib, posteriorly and functions to lift the ribcage [35]. In extant snakes, this 
muscle is proportionally much larger and inserts anteriorly on the posteroventral surface of 
the expanded prezygapophyseal body and/or on the lateral prezygapophyseal accessory 
process (Fig. 3.2B2) [36-40]. The shifted position and increased size of levator costae in 
snakes is functionally related to elevating ribs during locomotion and respiration, as well as 
stabilizing ribs against compressional forces during substrate contact and against move­
ment of the skin in rectilinear locomotion [32]. Similarly, M. interarticulares superiores and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

30 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
inferiores are epaxial muscles that insert on the prezygapophyseal accessory process 
and likely serve as flexors [36-38]. Multifidus inserts anteriorly on the posterior edge of 
the neural spine and neural arch in limbed lizards, where it forms a fascicle of 
transversospinalis, which serves to dorsally flex and stabilize the vertebral column [36-41]. 
In snakes, the large zygantrum generally produces an arched, elevated dorsal margin of the 
posterior neural arch (Fig. 3.2B5) and is associated with the anterior positioning of the 
neural spine at the apex of a posteromedian notch that exposes the dorsal surface of the 
condyle in alethinophidians (Fig. 3.2B2). The incision of the posteromedian notch and the 
elevation of the arch provide a wider, longer surface for insertion of multifidus.
Osteological correlates to evolutionary changes in the architecture of the circulatory 
system in snakes consist of increased complexity of the ventral centrum associated with 
the development of the lymphatic system. In snakes, the lymphatic system of the axial 
skeleton consists of paired paravertebral vessels [42, 43] that extend along the ventral 
surface of the vertebral column and are medially anastomosed at each vertebral joint 
[43]. The paravertebral vessels are housed in shallow to deep impressions on the ventral 
centrum, walled medially by a haemal keel (Fig. 3.2B4) and laterally by the medial margins 
of the synapophyses and subcentral ridges that originate anteriorly at the posterior margin 
of the synapophyses. The haemal ridge is capped by a pronounced pleuropophyseal 
hypapophysis in anterior precloacal vertebrae. Posteriorly, the impressions become larger, 
forming subcentral paramedian lymphatic fossae [44]. The size, definition, and develop­
ment of the haemal keel and subcentral ridges vary among taxa. The distribution of these 
characters in the fossil record of snakes thus allows for both the reconstruction of character 
evolution in the snake body form and hypotheses of evolutionary relationships along the 
snake stem and within the crown.
Although vertebral morphology is a limited dataset from which systematic hypotheses 
can be based, especially with respect to lower-order diagnoses within diverse clades such as 
Colubroidea (e.g., [45]; Colubroidea as applied in this article is equivalent to Colubroides of 
Zaher et al. [46]), claims that precise systematic hypotheses based on single, or small 
samples of, vertebrae are indefensible (e.g., [28]; Chapter 4) require explicit demonstration. 
Intracolumnar, individual, and ontogenetic variation in vertebral morphology certainly 
limit and potentially confound systematic identification; however, numerous discrete ver­
tebral characters and character combinations diagnose snakes at all taxonomic levels [29, 
33, 45, 47-49], suggesting that the utility of isolated vertebrae requires assessment on a 
case-by-case basis instead of as a general statement.
3.3 The Mesozoic Fossil Record of Snakes
3.3.1 Jurassic and Early Cretaceous Records
A sister-taxon relationship between Serpentes and Anguimorpha or Anguimorpha+Iguania 
requires divergence of the snake total clade at no younger than late Jurassic based on the 
fossil record of taxa referred to Dorsetisaurus as an anguimorph (e.g., [50]); however, very 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 31
few pre-Late Cretaceous fossils have been referred to snakes. A single vertebra from the 
Barremian of Spain initially identified as a snake [51] was subsequently referred to a non­
snake squamate [52].
Parviraptorids, a clade of phylogenetically enigmatic squamates [18, 53, 54] represented 
by disarticulated but associated cranial and postcranial elements from the late Jurassic and 
Early Cretaceous of North America and Europe [50, 53] have been reinterpreted as stem 
snakes on the basis of cranial and postcranial morphologies [54]. Cranial characters 
comparable with snakes include elongation of the maxilla and reduction of the maxillary 
facial process, recurved teeth, and tooth implantation. Conversely, neurocranial, 
basicranial [50], and appendicular skeletal anatomies [54] including large limbs and a 
robust pelvic girdle, are consistent with a more generalized, limbed squamate body form. 
Multiple snake-like vertebral characters were reported for parviraptorids [54], but these are 
not apparent in any of the referred taxa [50, 53].
A partial squamate braincase from the Valanginian Kirkwood Formation of South Africa 
[55] has been reinterpreted as a stem snake (‘snake lizard’ p.28 in [28]) possibly referable to 
Madtsoiidae [28]. Characters uniting the specimen with Serpentes have not been demon­
strated, and the braincase retains a large, free-ending triangular prootic alar process as in 
the parviraptorid Diablophis gilmorei [50] and multiple squamate clades, as well as an 
anteriorly open sella turcica, elevated dorsum sellae, and neurovascular plumbing of the 
parabasisphenoid shared with most non-snake squamates [55-57]. These characters are 
consistent with a membranous anterior braincase and preclude presence of an enclosed 
bony braincase formed by ventral down-growths of the parietal to fully (or nearly) contact 
the prootic and parabasisphenoid, which is an apomorphy of extant snakes and Cretaceous 
taxa for which the skull is known (e.g., [3, 7, 11, 26, 58-61]). Morphology of the Kirkwood 
Formation specimen is potentially consistent with a phylogenetic position similar to 
that proposed for parviraptorids as basal-most divergences along the snake stem, but not 
with allocation to Madtsoiidae, because such a placement requires either homoplastic 
evolution of the enclosed bony braincase shared by Cenozoic madtsoiids and crown snakes 
(e.g., [10, 62]), or secondary loss and reversion to the unossified, membraneous anterolat­
eral braincase in most squamates [57].
Tetrapodophis amplectus was described as a stem snake on the basis of a nearly com­
plete, articulated skeleton of an elongate squamate with small fore- and hindlimbs pre­
served in laminated limestone referred to the Aptian Crato Formation of Brazil [63]. The 
specimen is extremely problematic regarding provenance and systematic interpretations. 
There is no history of its discovery or collection and referral to the Crato Formation is based 
solely on lithologic characters (fine-grained lamination and fish coprolites) common to 
shallow marine carbonate platforms. Thus, in the absence of additional evidence, the 
assigned spatiotemporal history can only be considered a tentative hypothesis. Described 
osteological synapomorphies uniting Tetrapodophis with snakes are either not visible on 
the specimen as figured (e.g., splenial intramandibular joint, fig. S2 of [63]), or were not 
tested in phylogenetic analysis of the specimen (p.8 of supplementary material of [63]). 
Preliminary re-examination of the specimen contradicted most initial anatomical interpret­
ations and concluded that Tetrapodophis is not a stem snake [28]. Unfortunately, the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

32 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
specimen is privately owned and unavailable for further examination. Thus, hypotheses 
surrounding Tetrapodophis cannot be tested and the taxon is not considered further.
3.3.2 Late Cretaceous Records: Cenomanian to Turonian
Definitive fossil snakes have been recovered from the earliest Late Cretaceous, primarily 
Cenomanian, of Africa, the Middle East, South America, North America, Europe, and South 
Asia (Fig. 3.3A; Supplementary Table 3.S1). The oldest records are referred here to 
Lapparentophis based on isolated vertebrae from El Kohol, Algeria, dated to latest Albian 
[64]. Early Late Cretaceous records constrained by precise radiometric dates include a 
record of ‘Coniophis’ based on two precloacal vertebrae from the Cedar Mountain 
Formation of Utah [65], dated to no younger than 98.39 ± 0.07 Ma [66], and Xiaophis 
myanmarensis, based on a partial precloacal skeleton, from the Angbamo amber mines 
dated to no younger than 98.8 ± 0.6 Ma [67], though the collection history, and thus 
verifiable provenance, of the specimen from commercial amber mines is undescribed. 
Cenomanian records from South America include the stem snakes Najash rionegrina based 
on multiple partial skeletons from the Candeleros Formation of Argentina [8], Seismophis 
septentrionalis based on two precloacal vertebrae from the Alcantara Formation of Brazil 
[68], and Lunaophis aquaticus based on multiple precloacal vertebrae from the La Luna 
Formation of Venezuela [69]. European Cenomanian records consist of Pouitella pervetus, 
known from a single precloacal vertebra, from the early to middle Cenomanian of Breze 
(Maine-et-Loire), France [70], and Simoliophis rochebrunei, known from numerous verte­
brae from early to middle Cenomanian shallow marine sediments of France, Portugal, and 
Spain ([71], summarized in [72, 73]).
The richest Cenomanian snake records come from Africa and the Middle East. African 
records consist of: Lapparentophis defrennei, based on a single precloacal vertebra, from In 
Akhamil, Algeria [74]; Lapparentophis ragei, based on two precloacal vertebrae and 
Norisophis begaa, based on three precloacal vertebrae, from the Ifezouane Formation in 
the Kem Kem beds of Morocco [75, 76]; Simoliophis cf. S. libycus, Madtsoiidae ‘gen. et sp. 
nov.’, ?Nigerophiidae indet., and Serpentes indet., based on multiple precloacal vertebrae 
from the Kem Kem beds [77]; Simoliophis, based on multiple precloacal and caudal 
vertebrae and recognized as a distinct species [76], from the Bahariya Formation of Egypt 
[78]; and Simoliophis libycus from the Mizdah Formation of Libya [79]. Shallow marine 
carbonate Lagerstatten of the Middle East and southern Europe preserve partial and 
complete skeletons of simoliophiid snakes consisting of Pachyrhachis problematicus based 
on two partial skeletons (Fig. 3.1A; [6, 80]) and Haasiophis terrasanctus, based on a 
complete skeleton (Fig. 3.1B; [7]) from the early to middle Cenomanian Bet-Meir 
Formation at ‘Ein Yabrud, Palestinian Territories, Eupodophis descouensi, based on two 
complete and two partial skeletons from the early Cenomanian of Al Nammoura, Lebanon 
(Fig. 3.1C; [25, 60]), as well as Pachyophis woodwardi, based on two partial skeletons 
(Fig. 3.1D; 5, 81], and Mesophis nopcsai, based on a single partial skeleton [82] from the 
late Cenomanian of East Bosnia-Herzegovina.
Turonian through Santonian records are much less dense. The North American record 
consists of vertebrae referred to Coniophis [83]. European records are limited to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 33
(A)
(B)
Figure 3.3 Spatial and temporal distribution of the Cretaceous fossil record of snakes. (A). Locations 
of snake localities binned at 10 Mya intervals. Palaeogeographic reconstructions based on www 
.deeptimemaps.com. Individual location points may represent multiple records. (B). Density of the 
published snake fossil record (Snc/Sqc, TSnc/TSqc) compared with numbers of squamate-bearing 
formations through the Cretaceous. Record and formation values are for data binned at age resolution 
and plotted at age Mya midpoints. Plots are for the entire squamate record (left) and only the 
terrestrial record (right). Abbreviations: SBF, squamate-bearing formations; Snc, snake collections; 
Sqc, squamate collections; SBTF, squamate-bearing terrestrial formations; TSnc, terrestrial snake 
collections; TSqc, terrestrial squamate collections.
Snc/Sqc 
TSnc/TSqc
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

34 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
youngest known record of Simoliophiidae, based on a single partial skeleton comparable to 
Simoliophis, and to Pachyophis from the Turonian-aged Dubovac quarry from Bosnia- 
Herzegovina [84]. African records are restricted to the In Beceten Formation of Niger [85] 
consisting of Madtsoia sp. ([86] after [87]). The maximum age of the In Beceten Formation 
is constrained by underlying Turonian limestones, whereas the minimum age is con­
strained by an upper Maastrichtian marine unit [88, 89]. Although precise locality infor­
mation is lacking for the In Beceten collections, they are estimated to be Coniacian to 
Santonian in age [89]. If this is accurate, it represents the oldest unambiguous occurrence of 
Madtsoiidae. Reports of Cenomanian madtsoiids [77] require confirmation, because they 
have not been documented in detail and occur in the same beds as non-madtsoiid stem 
taxa that possess similar vertebral character combinations as madtsoiids [75]. The South 
American record consists of occurrences of Dinilysia, including D. patagonica, represented 
by multiple partial skulls, skeletons, and vertebrae, from the Santonian Bajo de la Carpa 
Formation (Fig. 3.1E; [90-92]), and Dinilysia sp., represented by vertebrae from the 
Campanian Anacleto Formation, of Argentina [93].
3.3.3 Late Cretaceous Records: Campanian to Maastrichtian
Latest Cretaceous records consist of distributions across all continents except for Antarctica, 
Australia, and Asia (Fig. 3.3A, Supplementary Table 3.S2), and document diversification of 
Madtsoiidae and the first records of unambiguous crown snake clades. Madtsoiids are the 
most species-rich, and geographically widespread Cretaceous snake clade, including over a 
dozen named taxa with Campanian occurrences in Africa and Europe, Campanian- 
Maastrichtian occurrences in South America, and Maastrichtian occurrences in Europe, 
India, and Madagascar (Supplementary Table 3.S2). Late-surviving stem snakes include 
Sanajeh indicus, based on a partial skeleton from the Maastrichtian Lameta Formation of 
India (Fig. 3.1F; [26]), and Coniophis precedens, based on precloacal vertebrae with referred 
cranial elements [94, 95] from the Maastrichtian Lance and Hell Creek formations of North 
America. Vertebral morphology consistent with fossorial habits has been used to identify 
Coniophis, in addition to the C. precedens record, throughout the Late Cretaceous of North 
America, as well as the Campanian of Africa (e.g., [65, 83, 96, 97]). These records likely 
reflect homoplastic ecomorphology in stem and crown taxa, and not a transcontinental, 
long-lived monophyletic genus [98].
Nigerophiiidae and Palaeophiidae have first occurrences in the Campanian and 
Maastrichtian of Africa, Madagascar, and India [87, 96, 99, 100]. Specimens of ? 
Nigerophiidae were reported from the Cenomanian Kem Kem beds of Morocco [77]; 
however their taxonomic identity is poorly constrained. As noted [77], some referred 
materials are anatomically similar to elements identified as anterior precloacal vertebrae 
of Simoliophis by [78]. A Cenomanian nigerophiid record would represent an at least 15 
million-year range extension for the clade (Fig. 3.4).
Among extant snake clades, scolecophidians, comprising Typhlopoidea, Leptotyphlopidae, 
and Anomalepididae as either a clade (e.g., [19]) or a paraphyletic assemblage with respect to 
Alethinophidia [101], have not been previously recognized prior to the Palaeocene [49, 102, 
103], despite a history that must have extended into the Cretaceous based on first occurrences
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Jur.
Cretaceous
Paleog.
Late
Early
Late
Paleoc.
Tith.
Ber. Val. Hau.Bar. Aptian | Albian
Cen. Tu.Co.Sa. Cam.
Maa.
Dan.
Parviraptoridae
Anguimorpha/ 
Anguimorpha+Iguania
Lapparentophis чф
—■ Cedar Mountain “Coniophis” 
i
■ Seismophis septentrionalis <1
Pouitella pervetus
Norisophis begaa
Najash rionegrina
N. American “Coniophis" 
Dinilysia patagonica 
---------- Sanajeh indicus 
--------------Mllll^ Coniophis precedens 
вшршшш Boipeba tayasuensis 
----------------- j—Scolecophidia
Lunaophis aquaticus
*
Madtsoiidae
Nigerophiiidae
----- Palaeophiidae<(||
Aniliidae/Amerophidia
■■ Kaiparowits “Coniophis”
------------Constrictores
Caenophidia чф
Figure 3.4 Generalized, time-calibrated phylogeny of Cretaceous snakes. Thick black bars indicate known temporal ranges, thick grey lines 
indicate uncertainly in temporal ranges. Dashed line for Coniophis precedens indicates preliminary referral of Palaeocene Coniophis sp. specimens 
to the C. precedens lineage. Continent and landmass silhouettes indicate Cretaceous geographic distributions. Snake silhouette indicates possible 
and definitive phylogenetic origins of the snake body form. Consensus topology for Najash, Dinilysia, Madtsoiidae, Simoliophiidae, Scolecophidia, 
and alethinophidian taxa based on [11, 104, 139]. Positions of all other taxa based on vertebral characters are discussed in text.

36 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
of alethinophidians. Boipeba tayasuensis, based on a single precloacal vertebra from the 
Adamantina Formation, estimated to be between Coniacian and Maastrichtian in age, has 
been proposed to represent the first Cretaceous scolecophidian record, specifically as a stem 
typhlopoid [104].
Unambiguous crown-clade records include Australophis anilioides, represented by ten 
precloacal vertebrae, from the late Campanian-early Maastrichtian of Argentina [105]. 
Australophis represents the oldest known record of Aniliidae and Amerophidia based on 
discrete vertebral apomorphies [98]. Although ‘Boidae’ has been used to identify 
Cretaceous snake vertebrae as a form taxon (see [49]), the oldest record of Constrictores 
(Booidea+Pythonoidea, sensu [106]) is Titanoboa cerrejonensis, represented by multiple 
partial skeletons, from the middle Palaeocene Cerrejon Formation of Colombia [107]. An 
incomplete precloacal vertebra from the upper Campanian Kaiparowits Formation of Utah 
previously referred to Coniophis sp. [83] may represent a Cretaceous record of Constrictores 
or Macrostomata of [19], however. The specimen possesses prezygapophyses with small 
but distinct accessory processes and prezygapophyseal angles consistent with small-bodied 
booids. Additionally, the specimen possesses strongly asymmetrically sized subcentral 
foramina as in the pythonoid Xenopeltis among alethinophidians [33], and has a low 
anterior neural spine with a concave dorsal margin similar to Xenopeltis. Regardless of 
whether the specimen can be included in Constrictores or more inclusively Macrostomata, 
preserved morphology provides evidence for crown snakes in North America by at least 
76 Mya [108].
The late Maastrichtian Cerberophis rex from the Hell Creek Formation of Montana has 
been identified as alethinophidian [109] based on a precloacal vertebra displaying extensive 
osteoarthrosis [110] of the only preserved synapophysis that includes hypertrophic bone on 
the ventral prezygapophyses and interzygapophyseal ridge. In combination with incom­
plete preservation of the neural arch and a plesiomorphic ventral surface of the centrum 
relative to crown alethinophidians, pathologies of the specimen restrict a systematic 
assignment with respect to either crown or stem Serpentes. A second reported alethino- 
phidian, the ‘Lance snake’ was recognized based on an incomplete precloacal vertebra 
from the Lance Formation of Montana [109] and distinguished from the stem snake 
Coniophis precedens on the basis of differentiated (‘double-headed’: p.39 of supplementary 
material of [109]) synapophyses and a ‘large differentiated posterior condyle’ (p.39 of 
supplementary material of [109]). However, these characters are present in the type 
specimen of C. precedens (e.g., [28, 94, 95: fig. 1]), and so it is here referred to C. precedens 
(Supplementary Table 3.S2).
The oldest reported occurrence of Caenophidia, including Colubroidea, is from the Wadi 
Milk Formation of Sudan [96]. The Wadi Milk Formation at Wadi Abu Hashim includes the 
richest and taxonomically most diverse Cretaceous fossil snake assemblages, and its age 
estimation and faunal composition require additional consideration. The Formation was 
originally dated as Albian-Santonian, with vertebrate-bearing layers dated as Cenomanian, 
based on water-well palynological samples, macrofloral remains, and shark biostratigraphy 
[111-114]. Subsequent U-Pb dating of detrital zircons from the Wadi Milk Formation at 
Jebel el Gamman gives a maximum age of 79.2 (+/- 2.4) Mya [115], consistent with 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 37
radiometric, palynological, and vertebrate age estimates for the laterally equivalent Shendi 
Formation to the East [115-117] and with apparent interfingering of the Wadi Milk 
Formation with the Campanian-Maastrichtian Kababish Formation to the West [118]. The 
biostratigraphic utility of Wadi Milk Formation vertebrates is limited due to poor 
preservation and taxonomic ambiguity (e.g., [119]); however, presence and absence of 
indicator and index taxa additionally support at least a Campanian age. The Wadi Milk 
Formation lungfishes Protopterus nigeriensis and Lavocatodus humei ([96] after [120]) are 
known from the Coniacian to Campanian of Niger and Egypt and the Campanian of Egypt, 
respectively ([120, 121]; see also [122] for issues surrounding validity of Cenomanian 
L. humei). Simoliophis, which has been used as an index taxon for the African 
Cenomanian [123] based on its near-ubiquity in earliest Late Cretaceous snake faunas 
(e.g., [124]), is absent despite a rich and diverse fossil snake record [96]. Based on these 
radiometric, stratigraphic, and biostratigraphic data, the Wadi Milk Formation, and its 
constituent snake record, is best estimated as Campanian, no older than ~79.2 Mya.
Snake taxa identified from the Wadi Milk Formation consist of two lapparentophiid-grade 
stem snake morphologies, a madtsoiid, a possible palaeophiid, Coniophis dabiebus, the 
nigerophiid Nubianophis afaahus, caenophidians consisting of indeterminate colubroids 
and the russellophiid Krebsophis, and two indeterminate taxa [96]. Initial identifications 
provided support for a Cenomanian age of the Formation which in turn has been used as 
evidence for Cenomanian ages of other early Late Cretaceous snake-bearing formations 
(e.g., [76, 124]).
Reassessment of this record does not support some previous identifications, however. 
Recognition of lapparentophiids was based on a single precloacal vertebra and a single 
caudal vertebra [96]. Referral of the precloacal specimen was based on the absence of 
prezygapophyseal accessory processes, highly angled prezygapophyses, and the absence of 
parazygantral foramina. None of these characters are diagnostic for Lapparentophis indi­
vidually or in combination; the absences of prezygapophyseal accessory processes and 
parazygantral foramina are plesiomorphic for snakes, and the prezygapophyseal angles of 
the slightly distorted specimen are 17o and 26o, within the ranges seen in crown taxa (e.g., 
[98]), but much lower than in Lapparentophis species (~35o in L. defrennei, ~40o in L. ragei: 
fig. 2 of [76]). The specimen additionally lacks unique characters of Lapparentophis, 
including a comparatively massive, nearly circular cotylar-condylar articulation and 
upswept posterior neural arch (e.g., [74, 76]), and possesses derived characters absent in 
Lapparentophis, including a wide zygosphene with low angled articular facets, a deep, well- 
defined posteromedian notch of the neural arch, and a well-defined, wide haemal keel. 
Based on these characters, this specimen is more likely a derived stem snake. The caudal 
vertebra similarly lacks diagnostic features of Lapparentophis and was referred solely on 
plesiomorphies including a narrow zygosphene, lack of prezygapophyseal accessory pro­
cesses, and high-angled zygapophyses. As with the precloacal vertebra, there is no justifi­
cation for assigning the specimen to Lapparentophiidae, and its identity, beyond that of 
stem snake, remains unknown.
Madtsoiids from the Wadi Milk Formation are fragmentary but notable in including large 
specimens with centra up to 3 cm in length [96], comparable to centrum lengths of large­
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

38 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
bodied Campanian to Maastrichtian taxa with body lengths estimated to be 5-8 m (e.g., [87, 
125, 126]). There is no other definitive Cenomanian record of Madtsoiidae, and the early 
Late Cretaceous snake record is limited to taxa < 2 m total body length (e.g., [104, 127]).
Among caenophidians, The Wadi Milk Formation preserves the oldest and only Mesozoic 
record of Russellophiidae. Russellophiids were originally recognized as ‘pre-Colubride’ 
(p. 47 of [128]) caenophidians on the basis of vertebral proportions and characters includ­
ing a low zygosphenial centre [128], with revised apomorphies including an elongate 
centrum, small and circular cotylar-condylar articulation, and well-defined paramedian 
lymphatic grooves forming the haemal keel used to assign Russellophiidae to the caeno- 
phidian total clade [45]. Krebsophis thobanus from Wadi Milk differs from species of 
Russellophis in possessing a neural spine restricted to a small post at the apex of the 
posterior margin of the neural arch, but uniquely shares ventrolaterally angled prezygapo- 
physes, a compressed prezygapophyseal buttress, an anterior tubercle present ventral to 
prezygapophyseal articular facet, dome-like arching of the posterior neural arch, and a 
highly elongate, narrow centrum with Russellophis [96, 129, 130].
Six incomplete precloacal vertebrae from the Wadi Milk Formation were referred to 
Colubroidea incertae sedis based on gracile morphology, broad neural canal, zygosphene 
that is wider than the cotyle, and potentially a long, thin, tall neural spine [96]. The 
colubroid identity of those specimens has been considered tentative [131, 132], in part 
due to the inordinately early Cenomanian stage age previously established for the Wadi 
Milk Formation [131]. The revised age for Wadi Milk is more consistent with other first 
occurrences of crown snake clades and reduces an age discrepancy for the first occurrence 
of Colubroidea by ~ 20 million years.
3.4 Discussion
3.4.1 Systematics of Cretaceous Snakes and the Ecological Context 
of Snake Origins
A phylogenetic topology for inferring ecological and biogeographic origins of snakes based 
on the fossil record is hampered by missing data for most named taxa, and the main focus of 
Cretaceous snake phylogenetics has been the litigation of primary homologies in support of 
alternate phylogenetic hypotheses of relatively well-preserved taxa (e.g., [28] and references 
therein, [133]). Despite these limitations, several generalized interrelationships are recog­
nized that form a coarse topology. For example Najash and Dinilysia are recognized as 
being stemward of simoliophiids, which are stemward of crown Macrostomata, despite 
no resolution for the interrelationships of these taxa with respect to scolecophidians (e.g., 
[11, 26, 27]). A consensus framework based on recent phylogenetic analyses (Fig. 3.4) allows 
for preliminary hypotheses of relationships among taxa recognized by vertebral morphology.
Lapparentophis and a precloacal vertebra referred to Coniophis from the Cedar Mountain 
Formation of Utah are hypothesized to be sister taxa to all other Late Cretaceous snake taxa 
and the snake crown. Both retain plesiomorphic vertebral morphologies shared within 
limbed squamates, including prezygapophyses that extend dorsal to the neural canal, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 39
zygosphenial roof at an angle approaching or exceeding 30o, absence of pronounced 
prezygapophyseal base, and a small neural arch lacking a posteromedian notch 
(Fig. 3.1A; [33, 65]). Lapparentophis additionally retains a narrow zygosphene with high­
angled articular facets, and both taxa possess apomorphically large cotylar-condylar articu­
lar facets, possibly indicating monophyly.
The majority of Cenomanian snakes form a polytomy of stem taxa possessing lower­
angled prezygapophyses with greater development of the prezygapophyseal base. 
Seismophis possesses a morphology similar to Najash [68], and both share retention of 
only a shallow, poorly defined posteromedian notch with Pouitella and multiple specimens 
of North American ‘Coniophis’ throughout its Late Cretaceous record [65, 83]. Najash has 
been recognized variably as the sister taxon to all other known snake taxa (e.g., [8]); 
crownward of Dinilysia along the snake stem [11], the sister taxon to Dinilysia on the snake 
stem [134], potentially as the sister to Madtsoiidae [126], and as sister to all other alethino- 
phidians [135].
Dinilysia has similarly been considered a stem alethinophidian [26, 135], though most 
analyses recover it as a stem snake (e.g., [27, 28 and references therein]). Dinilysia shares 
greater lateral extension of the prezygapophyses and a more acute posteromedian notch 
with Norisophis and more derived snakes to the exclusion of the aforementioned taxa.
Maastrichtian stem snakes include late-surviving Sanajeh indicus and Coniophis 
precedens. Sanajeh was placed in Madtsoiidae within crown Alethinophidia based on 
characters including parazygantral foramina, absence of prezygapophyseal accessory pro­
cesses, and secondarily derived loss of a divided trigeminal foramen [26]. That hypothesis 
was based on multiple anatomical misidentifications by one of us (JJH), including misiden­
tifying a large, externally and posterodorsally displaced stapedial footplate as a supratem­
poral [11], because nobody is perfect. Subsequent analysis places the taxon on the snake 
stem, as sister to a large-bodied madtsoiid clade [126].
Coniophis precedens was erected on a single anterior precloacal vertebra [94]. An 
expanded hypodigm combining dissociated cranial and vertebral elements from multiple 
screenwash localities was used to place C. precedens as the most stemward snake based on 
unambiguous snake vertebral characters and tooth implantation morphology of maxillary 
and dentary elements [95]. The presence of interdental ridges forming shallow thecae that 
constitute tooth bases are consistent, though not exclusive to snakes [136]; however, cranial 
elements otherwise retain multiple squamate plesiomorphies (e.g., large nasal capsule 
fossae on the medial surface of the maxillary facial process) relative to parviraptorids [54], 
which conversely possess more plesiomorphic vertebral morphologies than C. precedens 
[50]. As a result, either (1) parviraptorids are not stem snakes but possess homoplastic 
cranial characters with snakes; (2) Coniophis precedens is not a stem snake but possesses 
homoplastic vertebral characters with snakes; or (3) the hypodigm of Coniophis is a 
chimaera composed of snake vertebrae and non-snake squamate cranial elements. Until 
associated skeletons of C. precedens are discovered, the taxon should be conservatively 
diagnosed by vertebral morphology, which is consistent with inclusion on the snake stem 
based on the absence of prezygapophyseal accessory processes and a shallow poster­
omedian notch. One specimen included in the hypodigm of C. precedens, YPM-PU 16845
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
[95], is not consistent with being a posterior precloacal element. Instead, its lower, more 
elongate shape and the size and lateral position of small paramedian lymphatic channels 
are more reminiscent of scolecophidians.
The composition of the snake crown with respect to several Cretaceous clades that are 
currently considered crownward of Dinilysia and Najash is unresolved. Lunaophis pos­
sesses an elongate, narrow centrum with prominent subcentral ridges and strongly differ­
entiated diapophyseal and parapophyseal articular facets of the synapophyses [69], 
suggesting phylogenetic positions either adjacent to, or within, the snake crown. Boipeba 
has been proposed to be nested with Scolecophidia as a stem typhlopoid [104], however the 
presence of a well-developed neural spine and a short, wide centrum are plesiomorphic 
with respect to crown scolecophidians, regardless of monophyly or paraphyly of constituent 
taxa. As a result, the taxon may be a stem scolecophidian or a proximal sister taxon to the 
snake crown.
Simoliophiids, united primarily by the presence and morphology of pachyostosis in mid­
trunk precloacal vertebrae and pachyosteosclerosis of ribs in some constituent species 
[137], have the most disparate phylogenetic hypotheses among Cretaceous taxa. 
Systematic placement ranges from a clade or grade of sister taxa to all other snakes (e.g., 
[6, 10, 138]), to a clade nested well within Alethinophidia as macrostomatans (e.g., [7, 19]). 
Combined molecular-morphological analysis places Simoliophiidae as sister to crown 
Alethinophidia [139], and recent Bayesian analysis of morphology places simoliophiids as 
sister to crown Serpentes [11].
Madtsoiidae has been inferred as nested within Alethinophidia [26, 134] or 
Macrostomata [140], or as a stem clade [126] either stem- or crownward of simoliophiids 
[10, 138]. Madtsoiidae monophyly is supported by the presence of parazygantral and 
paracotylar foramina, though the latter are not continuously distributed within referred 
taxa and occur also in the majority of alethinophidian clades [135]. Parazygantral foramina 
are additionally not uniquely apomorphic for madtsoiids, occurring variably in macrosto­
matans [138], as well as Seismophis, Norisophis, Dinilysia, and Najash, all which possess 
plesiomorphic vertebral and cranial morphologies with respect to madtsoiids and crown 
snakes (e.g., [27]). Although vertebral morphology is extremely similar among giant taxa 
(e.g., [125, 126, 141] and cranial elements indicate monophyly of Cenozoic Australian taxa 
[10, 142, 143], hypotheses of monophyly of all taxa referred to Madtsoiidae and/or hypoth­
eses that unite madtsoiids with stem taxa such as Dinilysia and Najash should be subjected 
to further scrutiny.
Though considered crown snakes [144] the interrelationships of palaeophiids and 
nigerophiids are poorly constrained. Palaeophiids possess the complete suite of vertebral 
apomorphies of Alethinophidia (though see [145]; contra [146]), whereas nigerophiids 
possess all but prezygapophyseal accessory processes.
Despite poor resolution for the majority of Cretaceous taxa, the generalized consensus 
phylogeny presented here provides a test for competing hypotheses for the ecological 
contexts of snake origins. The inference of Pachyrhachis as sister to all other snakes 
combined with a hypothesis of monophyly of snakes with mosasauroids provided support 
for marine origins of snakes [6, 28], which has been contested by alternative phylogenies 
(e.g., [7] and Chapter 9; see also [28] for discussion). Subsequent placement of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 41
simoliophiids either within the snake crown or high along the snake stem nests them 
deeply within an otherwise terrestrial clade, falsifying a marine origin hypothesis regardless 
of the relationships of snakes to mosasauroids. Inner ear and stapedial morphologies of the 
more stemward taxa Najash and Dinilysia, including relatively massive vestibular spaces 
and footplates, are consistent with those seen in extant fossorial snakes and other squa- 
mates ([127, 147]; Chapter 13; but see also Chapter 14). Multiple stem taxa, including 
Norisophis and species referred to ‘Coniophis’, possess vertebral morphologies consistent 
with fossoriality in extant squamates, especially reduction of the neural spine as a compon­
ent of shallowing the transverse section of the body. Thus both cranial and postcranial 
morphology of stem snakes indicates fossoriality as a locomotory habit across the snake 
stem. However, the poor resolution of interrelationships limits the ability to robustly 
reconstruct specific ecologies toward the point of origin of the snake body form.
3.4.2 Origin of the Snake Body Form
The complete and partial skeletons of simoliophiids, Najash, and Xiaophis constrain the 
evolution of the elongate, limbless, or limb-reduced snake body form to no younger than 
early Cenomanian, but the timing, tempo, and mode of body-form origin in snakes is poorly 
constrained between those records and the divergence of the total clade from short bodied, 
limbed sister taxa (Anguimorpha, Anguimorpha+Iguania, or Parviraptoridae) by the late 
Jurassic. The phylogenetic hypothesis provided here informs on the sequence of character 
acquisition in the evolution of the snake body form, both in vertebral morphology and its soft 
tissue correlates. The plesiomorphies retained by Lapparentophis as the possible sister to all 
other snakes may also indicate a shorter, limbed squamate-like body form. The high-angled, 
tall prezygapophyses suggest a lizard-like transverse aspect and the small zygosphene- 
zygantrum is additionally more similar to the condition in limbed squamates than other 
snakes [33]. Among more crownward stem snakes, vertebral morphologies of Seismophis 
and species of ‘Coniophis’ with lower-angled zygapophyses and larger, lower-angled zygo- 
sphene-zygantra, are similar to Najash, and indicate that the snake body form was present 
among all taxa within the polytomy (Fig. 3.4). The presence of a well-defined haemal keel and 
subcentral ridges defining channels for the paravertebral lymphatic system in Seismophis 
and Norisophis provide additional support for those taxa possessing a derived body form.
Several of the osteological correlates to muscle reorganization associated with specialized 
locomotory mode in extant snakes are absent in stem taxa. The absence of accessory 
processes or prezygapophyseal bases indicates insertions of levator costae and the 
M. interarticulares complex similar to the condition in limbed squamates, and the absence 
of a posteromedian notch suggests a smaller multifidus. With the exception of Boipeba and 
many scolecophidians, all Late Cretaceous snake taxa possess at minimum a slight differ­
entiation of the synapophyses into parapophyseal and diapophyseal facets. These character 
combinations suggest some capacity for stem snakes to brace the costovertebral joint 
against lateral compression based on joint morphology, but with less capacity for stabiliz­
ing, elevating, or flexing ribs via levator costae or M. interarticulares. Limited capacity to 
stabilize the costovertebral joint likely precluded rectilinear locomotion and would poten­
tially have restricted concertina locomotion [32]. Based on stem-snake vertebral morph­
ology, the full repertoire of locomotory regimes in extant snakes may be restricted to the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

42 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
crown, but stem taxa were still able to occupy fossorial, terrestrial, and aquatic habits while 
retaining plesiomorphic musculoskeletal morphologies.
As a preliminary test of whether the first occurrence of the snake body form in the fossil 
record approximates the timing of origin or is an artifact of insufficient sampling of Early 
Cretaceous records, we compared snake fossil density, standardized as the ratio of pub­
lished snake collections to the total published squamate collection record, with the number 
of squamate-bearing formations, binned at the age level for the Cretaceous (Fig. 3.3B, 
Supplementary Table 3.S3). We examined both the entire published fossil record and only 
terrestrial records separately, to account for preservation differences between marine and 
terrestrial depositional environments. We excluded parviraptorids because there is no 
anatomical evidence to support a snake body form in that clade.
Sampling potential for the squamate fossil record, proxied as the number of squamate- 
bearing formations, increases gradually from the Berriasian to Santonian for the total record, 
with elevated sea levels and the origin and initial diversifications of mosasauroids driving an 
increase in squamate-bearing marine formations from the Cenomanian (Fig. 3.3B). For the 
terrestrial record, the number of formations is generally consistent from the Barremian to the 
Cenomanian. A pronounced increase in formations from the Campanian in both marine and 
terrestrial records is commensurate with increasing availability of the sedimentary rock 
record (e.g., [148]). Some of the variation in formation number is due to differences in 
duration of age ranges, notably the short intervals of the Hauterivian, Coniacian, and 
Santonian, whereas the longer ages of the Aptian, Albian, Cenomanian, Campanian, and 
Maastrichtian allow for direct comparisons of the snake fossil record.
Comparing the density of snake collections through time with the number of squamate- 
bearing formations does not reveal correlation through the Early and early Late Cretaceous. 
As noted, fossil evidence of the snake body form achieves a transcontinental distribution by 
the early Cenomanian, but the number of squamate-bearing formations does not increase 
commensurately between the Barremian and Cenomanian for either the entire or only 
terrestrial records. Linear regression of the total number of squamate collections onto the 
total number of collections per age demonstrates a significant, positive relationship for both 
the total and only terrestrial records (R2 = 0.99, p <0.00; R2 = 0.96, p < 0.00), indicating that 
overall fossil record density is dependent upon sampling the rock record. However, the 
proportion of snakes in the squamate record is not dependent upon sampling (R2 = 0.11, 
p = 0.29; R2 = 0.03, p = 0.58). As a result, the absence of evidence for the snake body form 
from the Early Cretaceous cannot be explained prima facia as sampling artifact and is 
instead more consistent with a latest Early Cretaceous or early Late Cretaceous origin and 
subsequent rapid transcontinental distribution within a period of ~ 1-2 million years. This 
timing postdates much of Gondwanan continental fragmentation and greatly postdates 
fragmentation of Pangea. As a result, the geologically simultaneous occurrences of snake 
fossils in both terrestrial and marine depositional environments in Africa, South America, 
North America, and insular Asia, combined with the absence of any evidence for the snake 
body form in the Early Cretaceous or Jurassic, precludes vicariance as a biogeographic 
mode and instead suggests rapid dispersal soon after the evolution of the snake body form 
near the beginning of the Late Cretaceous.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 43
3.4.3 Cretaceous Biogeography and Snake Origins
Hypotheses for the biogeographic origins of snakes focus primarily on the Gondwanan 
landmass based on distributions of extant taxa as well as the comparatively rich Cretaceous 
records from South America and Africa (e.g., [11, 63, 67, 86]). Range evolution models 
based on extant taxa and a subset of the Cretaceous record have estimated a high likelihood 
for a Laurasian origin for the total clade and a Gondwanan origin for the snake crown [149]. 
That history is not necessarily inconsistent with reinterpretation of the fossil records 
discussed here; however, it justifiably does not account for the majority of Cretaceous taxa 
that have not been placed in a phylogenetic context.
Although there is no Mesozoic record from mainland Asia, the North American 
Cretaceous record samples the breadth of snake phylogeny, from among the most stem­
ward records to within the crown, if the interpretation of the ‘Coniophis’ record proposed 
here is accurate. That, combined with the near simultaneous occurrence of snake fossils 
across Gondwanan and Laurasian landmasses, raises the possibility of a biogeographic 
history distinct from that currently considered based on better-preserved, more phylogen- 
etically resolved Gondwanan records.
3.4.4 Survival across the K-Pg Extinction Event
Despite well-established patterns of mass extinction, faunal replacement, and recovery in 
terrestrial and marine ecosystems following the Chicxulub impactor event at the 
Cretaceous-Palaeogene boundary, the effects of the K-Pg event on the evolutionary histor­
ies of snakes remain poorly understood. Only a single study has documented patterns of 
known first and last occurrence in snakes, as components of a larger analysis of squamates, 
across the K-Pg boundary in a stratigraphically refined composite section based on multiple 
sedimentary basin records within the Western Interior of North America [109]. That study 
reported survivorship of Coniophis precedens across the K-Pg event, based on unverified 
elements from the Torrejonian of Montana [95, 150] (Fig. 3.4).
None of the diverse Cretaceous snake clades go extinct at or near the K-Pg event 
(Fig. 3.4). Madtsoiidae, the most species-rich Mesozoic clade, crosses the boundary, main­
tains the majority of its continental-scale geographic distribution through the Palaeogene 
(e.g., [96,125, 151-153]), and demonstrates survivorship across small and giant body sizes 
[125]. Palaeophiidae and Nigerophiidae, both aquatic and marine clades, have known first 
occurrences by the Maastrichtian and Campanian respectively, and both have records that 
extend into the Palaeogene, with palaeophiids diversifying into a near-global marine 
radiation by the Eocene (e.g., [30, 154]).
Among unambiguous crown taxa, the occurrence of Australophis in the Campanian of 
Argentina [105] representing Aniliidae and potentially Amerophidia, and Krebsophis, and 
potentially Colubroidea, representing Caenophidia in the Campanian of Sudan [96], constrain 
those clades as well as divergences of clades without recognized Mesozoic records to the Late 
Cretaceous. Thus the oldest recognized record of Constrictores is currently Titanoboa from the 
middle Palaeocene of Colombia [107], but the total clade is constrained to no younger than 
Campanian based on a sister-taxon relationship to Caenophidia. The ‘Coniophis’ specimen 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

44 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
from the Kaiparowits Formation may provide evidence for a Late Cretaceous record of 
Constrictores (Fig. 3.4). There is no unambiguous fossil record of Uropeltoidea, the clade of 
Old World pipe snakes and shield-tail snakes [98], but they are similarly constrained by either a 
sister-taxon relationship to Aniliidae [19] or by being nested within Constrictores as the sister 
taxon to the clade of pythonids, loxocemids, and xenopeltids [155].
The fossil record of scolecophidians is extremely limited, but monophyly of Alethinophidia 
relative to scolecophidians as either grade or clade, constrains them to Campanian as well. 
Stratigraphic resolution for Boipeba is limited to Upper Cretaceous, but well within the 
minimum divergence timing for scolecophidians required by the first occurrences of 
Alethinophidia. If Boipeba is nested within a monophyletic Scolecophidia [104], then all 
three primary subclades, Typhlopoidea, Leptotyphlopidae, and Anomalepididae, include 
species that survived the K-Pg extinction.
Ecological reorganization has been proposed as a mechanism underpinning the 
diversification and adaptive radiations of species-rich extant clades such as birds, mammals, 
fishes, and anurans following the catastrophic environmental changes caused by the K-Pg 
event [156-160]. There is some evidence for faunal change and diversification of extant snake 
clades following the Cretaceous, including widespread distribution of crown-group 
Constrictores by the middle Eocene (e.g., [107, 161, 162]), and dispersal of caenophidians 
ranging from South America to India by the early Eocene [129, 161]. The major radiations 
within hyper-diverse Colubroidea are younger, generally constrained to late Palaeogene to 
early Neogene based on fossil-calibrated molecular phylogenetic analyses and the fossil 
record (e.g., [48, 163, 164]). Some analyses have constrained the origins and divergences of 
the caenophidian and colubroid total clades to the early Palaeogene (e.g., [132, 134]), which 
would permit hypotheses of adaptive radiation following the K-Pg event comparable to 
hypotheses for mammals. However, those studies did not include the Wadi Milk 
Formation caenophidian records as a temporal calibration, and did not test the potential 
for the described colubroid specimens to constrain the origin of that clade prior to the K-Pg 
boundary. As a result, either the Wadi Milk Formation record requires re-evaluation, or 
molecular dating analyses [132] require more accurate fossil calibrations [45, 48].
Overall, there is little evidence that the K-Pg extinction event had a pronounced effect on 
the diversification of snakes from the Mesozoic into the Cenozoic. The absence of any 
extinction signal in phylogenetic structure or divergence-timing estimation, combined with 
the perseverance of taxa across terrestrial, marine, aquatic, and fossorial habits, and body 
sizes approaching 10 m (e.g., [87, 126, 153, 165]), suggests that snakes may have been 
unusual among vertebrates in crawling untroubled across one of the most pronounced 
mass extinction events in Earth history.
3.5 Conclusions
Although extremely incomplete, the Cretaceous fossil record of snakes demonstrates the 
origin and evolution of the snake body form in terrestrial habitats at or near the beginning 
of the Late Cretaceous, followed by rapid transcontinental geographic dispersal, crown­
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 45
clade origins, and high survivorship of latest Cretaceous taxa into the Palaeogene. This 
record, in conjunction with genomic, phenotypic, and behavioural and ecological datasets 
from extant taxa (e.g., [149]) will continue to provide new hypotheses on the tempo, mode, 
and ecological contexts for the early history and diversification of one of the most successful 
vertebrate clades.
Further discovery from the fossil record will increasingly provide the majority of new 
data, however, as extant taxon sampling approaches saturation between and among clades 
that constitute the primary divisions of the snake crown. That being said, advancing our 
understanding of snake evolution using the fossil record will require advances in both 
analytical technique (e.g., [166, 167]) and research conduct. With respect to the latter, 
advancement will require avoiding fossils with dubious to unknown provenance due to 
commercial, often unethical, collection histories, and refraining from highly selective 
referral of disassociated skeletal elements to create stem taxa for high-impact publication. 
Similarly, shifting away from a discourse tenor in which disagreements are labeled as 
adversarial and opposing hypotheses are labeled as myths (see discussion in [28] and 
references therein), will be necessary for upcoming generations of research to successfully 
examine the origin and evolution of snakes from their fossil record with fresh perspective 
and new ideas.
Acknowledgements
For access to specimens, we thank the late E. Tchernov (Hebrew University, Jerusalem), 
D. J. Mohabey (Geological Survey of India), M. Reguero (Museo de La Plata), and C. L. Dal 
Sasso and G. Teruzzi (Museo di Storia Naturale di Milano). We thank C. A. Brochu 
(University of Iowa) for images of Haasiophis. We thank the editors for the invitation to 
contribute to this volume, and especially D. J. Gower for his editorial patience. We thank 
D. J. Field (University of Cambridge), D. C. Evans (Royal Ontario Museum), R. Benson 
(Oxford University), and S. E. Evans (University College, London) for discussion on various 
aspects of this MS and A. Folie (Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences) and C. J. Bell 
(University of Texas at Austin) for constructive reviews. This research was funded by a 
Natural Environment Research Council award (NE/S000739/1) to JJH.
References
1. J. J. Head, K. de Queiroz, and H. W. Greene, 
Pan-Serpentes. In K. de Queiroz,
P. D. Cantino, and J. A. Gauthier, eds., 
Phylonyms: A Companion to the PhyloCode 
(Berkeley: CRC Press, 2020), pp. 1130-1134.
2. G. L. Walls, Ophthalmological implications 
for the early history of the snakes. Copeia, 
1940 (1940), 1-8.
3. A. D’a. Bellairs and G. Underwood, The 
origin of snakes. Biological Reviews, 26 
(1951), 193-237.
4. O. Rieppel, A review of the origin of snakes. 
Evolutionary Biology, 22 (1988), 37-130.
5. F. Nopcsa, Eidolosaurus und Pachyophis. 
Zwei neue Neocom-Reptilien.
Palaeontographica, 65 (1923), 99-154.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

46 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
6. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of the 
Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 705-709.
7. E. Tchernov, O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, 
M. J. Polcyn, and L. L. Jacobs, A fossil snake 
with limbs. Science, 287 (2000), 2010-2012.
8. S. Apesteguia and H. Zaher, A Cretaceous 
terrestrial snake with robust hindlimbs and 
a sacrum. Nature, 440 (2006), 1037-1040.
9. C. L. Caprette, M. S. Lee, R. Shine, 
A. Mokany, and J. F. Downhower, The 
origin of snakes (Serpentes) as seen 
through eye anatomy. Biological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 81 (2004), 469-482.
10. J. D. Scanlon, Skull of the large non­
macrostomatan snake Yurlunggur from the 
Australian Oligo-Miocene. Nature, 439 
(2006), 839-842.
11. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, 
T. R. Simoes, et al., New skulls and 
skeletons of the Cretaceous legged snake 
Najash, and the evolution of the modern 
snake body plan. Science Advances, 5 
(2019), p.eaax5833.
12. C. L. Camp, Classification of the lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 48 (1923), 289-481.
13. M. S. Y. Lee, The phylogeny of varanoid 
lizards and the affinities of snakes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, B, 352 (1997), 53-91.
14. M. S. Y. Lee, Convergent evolution and 
character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
Towards a resolution of squamate 
relationships. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 65 (1998), 369-453.
15. J. -C. Rage, La phylogenie des 
Lepidosauriens (Reptilia): une approche 
cladistique. Comptes Rendus, Acad6mie des 
Sciences, Paris, 294 (1982), 563-566.
16. J. Hallermann, The ethmoidal region of 
Dibamus taylori (Squamata: Dibamidae), 
with a phylogenetic hypothesis on dibamid 
relationships within Squamata. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 122 (1998), 
385-426.
17. S. E. Evans and L. J. Barbadillo, An unusual 
lizard from the Early Cretaceous of Las
Hoyas, Spain. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 124 (1998), 235-265.
18. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
19. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. D. B. Behlke, Assembling 
the squamate tree of life: perspectives from 
the phenotype and the fossil record.
Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural 
History, 53 (2012), 3-308.
20. J. J. Wiens, C. A. Kuczynski, T. Townsend, 
et al., Combining phylogenomics and 
fossils in higher-level squamate reptile 
phylogeny: molecular data change the 
placement of fossils. Systematic Biology, 59 
(2010), 674-688.
21. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Resolving the phylogeny of lizards 
and snakes (Squamata) with extensive 
sampling of genes and species. Biology 
Letters, 8 (2012), 1043-1046.
22. R. A. Pyron, F. T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens, 
A phylogeny and revised classification of 
Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards 
and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 93.
23. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses of more than 
4000 nuclear loci resolve the origin of 
snakes among lizard families. Biology 
Letters, 13 (2017), 20170393.
24. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, M. Talanda, 
et al., The origin of squamates revealed by 
a Middle Triassic lizard from the Italian 
Alps. Nature, 557 (2018), 706-709.
25. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, Un nouveau 
serpent bipede du Cenomanien (Cretace). 
Implications phyletiques. Comptes Rendus 
de l'Acad6mie des Sciences - S6rie IIA - Earth 
and Planetary Science, 330 (2000), 513-520.
26. J. A. Wilson, D. Mohabey, S. Peters, and 
J. J. Head, Predation upon hatchling 
sauropod dinosaurs by a new basal snake 
from the Late Cretaceous of India. PLOS 
Biology. 8 (2010), 1-5 doi:10.1371/journal. 
pbio.1000322.g005.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 47
27. H. Zaher and C. A. Scanferla, The skull of 
the Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
28. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes. 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2020).
29. J. -C. Rage, Encyclopedia of 
Paleoherpetology, part 11, Serpentes 
(Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag, 1984).
30. J. A. Holman, Fossil Snakes of North 
America. Origin, Evolution, Distribution, 
Paleoecology (Indianapolis: Indiana 
University Press, 2000).
31. C. Gans, Locomotion of limbless 
vertebrates: Pattern and evolution. 
Herpetologica, 42 (1986), 33-46.
32. J. G. Campano, Reaction forces and rib 
function during locomotion in snakes. 
Integrative and Comparative Biology, 60 
(2020), 215-231.
33. R. Hoffstetter and J. -P. Gasc, Vertebrae and 
ribs of modern reptiles. In C. Gans and 
T. S. Parsons, eds., Biology of the Reptilia, 
Vol. 1, Morphology (London: Academic 
Press, 1969), pp. 201-310.
34. B. R. Moon, Testing and inference of 
function from structure: Snake vertebrae do 
the twist. Journal of Morphology, 241 
(1999), 217-225.
35. R. L. Cieri, The axial anatomy of monitor 
lizards (Varanidae). Journal of Anatomy, 
233 (2018), 636-643.
36. W. Mosauer, The myology of the trunk 
region of snakes and its significance for 
ophidian taxonomy and phylogeny. 
Publications of the University of California 
at Los Angeles in Biological Sciences, 1 
(1935), 81-120.
37. W. Auffenberg, The vertebral musculature 
of Chersydrus (Serpentes). Quarterly 
Journal of the Florida Academy of Sciences, 
29 (1966), 155-162.
38. J. -P. Gasc, ^interpretation fonctionnelle 
de l’appareil musculo-squelettique de l’axe 
vertebral chez les Serpents (Reptilia).
M6moires du Museum National dHistoire 
Naturelle Serie A, 83 (1974), 1-182.
39. J. -P. Gasc, Axial musculature. In C. Gans 
and T. S. Parsons, eds., Biology of the 
Reptilia, Vol. 11, Morphology F (London: 
Academic Press, 1981), pp. 355-435.
40. D. A. Penning, Quantitative axial myology 
in two constricting snakes: Lampropeltis 
holbrooki and Pantherophis obsoletus. 
Journal of Anatomy, 232 (2018), 1016-1024.
41. D. Ritter, Axial muscle function during 
lizard locomotion. Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 199 (1996), 2499-2510.
42. S. W. Chapman and R. E. Conklin, The 
lymphatic system of the snake. Journal of 
Morphology, 58 (1935), 385-417.
43. G. Ottaviani and A. Tazzi, The lymphatic 
system. In C. Gans and T. S. Parsons, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 6, Morphology H 
(London: Academic Press, 1977), 
pp. 315-462.
44. T. C. Laduke, The fossil snakes of Pit 91, 
Racho La Brea, California. Contributions in 
Science, Natural History Museum of Los 
Angeles County, 424 (1991), 1-28.
45. J. J. Head, K. Mahlow, and J. MUller, Fossil 
calibration dates for molecular 
phylogenetic analysis of snakes 2: 
Caenophidia, Colubroidea, Elapoidea, 
Colubridae. Palaeontologia Electronica, 
19.2.2FC (2016), 1-21.
46. H. Zaher, F. G. Grazziotin, J. E. Cadle, et al., 
Molecular phylogeny of advanced snakes 
(Serpentes, Caenophidia) with an 
emphasis on South American 
xenodontines: a revised classification and 
descriptions of new taxa. Pap6is Avulsos de 
Zoologia, 49 (2009), 115-153.
47. J. B. Slowinski, A phylogenetic analysis of 
Bungarus (Elapidae) based on 
morphological characters. Journal of 
Herpetology, 28 (1994), 440-446.
48. J. J. Head, Snakes of the Siwalik Group 
(Miocene of Pakistan): systematics and 
relationship to environmental change. 
Palaeontologia Electronica, 8 (2005), 16A.
49. J. J. Head, Fossil calibration dates for 
molecular phylogenetic analysis of snakes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

48 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
1: Serpentes, Alethinophidia, Boidae, 
Pythonidae. Palaeontologia Electronica, 18 
(2015), 1-17.
50. S. E. Evans, Parviraptor (Squamata: 
Anguimorpha) and other lizards from the 
Morrison Formation at Fruita, Colorado. 
Museum of Northern Arizona Bulletin, 60 
(1996), 243-248.
51. J. -C. Rage and A. Richter, A snake from the 
Lower Cretaceous (Barremian) of Spain: 
The oldest known snake. Neues Jarbuchfur 
Geologie und Palaontologie, Monatshefte, 
Stuttgart, II.9 (1994), 561-565.
52. J. -C. Rage and F. Escuillie, The 
Cenomanian: stage of hindlimbed snakes. 
Carnets de G6ologie, Maintenon, Article 
2003/01 (2003), 1-11.
53. S. E. Evans, A new anguimorph lizard from 
the Jurassic and lower Cretaceous of 
England. Palaeontology, 37 (1994), 33-49.
54. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Nydam, A. Palci, and 
S. Apesteguia, The oldest known snakes 
from the Middle Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous 
provide insights on snake evolution. Nature 
Communications, 6 (2015), 1-11.
55. C. F. Ross, H.-D. Sues, and W. J. De Klerk, 
Lepidosaurian remains from the lower 
Cretaceous Kirkwood Formation of South 
Africa. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 
19 (1999), 21-27.
56. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, The braincases of 
mosasaurs and Varanus, and the 
relationships of snakes. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 129 (2000), 
489-514.
57. S. E. Evans, The skull of lizards and tuatara. 
In C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 20, Morphology 
H (Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of 
Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008), pp. 1-347.
58. R. Estes, T. H. Frazzetta, and E. E. Williams, 
Studies on the fossil snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Woodward: Part I. Cranial 
morphology. Bulletin of the Museum of 
Comparative Zoology, 140 (1970), 25-74.
59. G. Haas, Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas, 
snakelike reptile from the Lower 
Cenomanian: ventral view of the skull.
Bulletin du Mus6um national dHistoire 
naturelle, Serie 4, 2 (1980), 87-104.
60. O. Rieppel and J. J. Head, New specimens 
of the fossil snake genus Eupodophis Rage 
and Escuillie, from the mid-Cretaceous of 
Lebanon. Memorie della Societa Italiana di 
Scienze Naturali e Museo Civico di Storia 
Naturale di Milano, 23 (2004), 1-26.
61. D. Cundall and F. Irish, The snake skull. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt, and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 20, Morphology 
H (Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of 
Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008), 
pp. 349-692.
62. J. D. Scanlon, Cranial morphology of the 
Plio-Pleistocene giant madtsoiid snake 
Wonambi naracoortensis. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 50 (2005), 
139-180.
63. D. M. Martill, H. Tischlinger, and 
N. R. Longrich, A four-legged snake from 
the Early Cretaceous of Gondwana. Science, 
349 (2015), 416-419.
64. G. Cuny, J. -J. Jaeger, M. Mahboubi, and 
J. -C. Rage, Les plus anciens Serpents 
(Reptilia, Squamata) connus. Mise au point 
sur l’age geologique des Serpents de la 
partie moyenne du Cretace. Comptes 
Rendus des S6ances de l'Acad6mie des 
Sciences, t.311 (1990), 1267-1272.
65. J. D. Gardner and R. L. Cifelli, A primitive 
snake from the Cretaceous of Utah. In 
D.M. Unwin, ed., Cretaceous Fossil 
Vertebrates (London: The Paleontological 
Association, 1999), pp. 87-100.
66. R. L. Cifelli, J. I. Kirkland, A. Weil, 
A. L. Deino, and B. J. Kowallis, High- 
precision 40Ar/39Ar geochronology and 
the advent of North America’s Late 
Cretaceous terrestrial fauna. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, USA, 94 
(1997), 11163-11167.
67. L. Xing, M. W. Caldwell, R. Chen, et al., 
A mid-Cretaceous embryonic-to-neonate 
snake in amber from Myanmar. Science 
Advances, 4 (2018), eaat5042.
68. A. Hsiou, A. M. Albino, M. A. Medeiros, and 
R. A. B. Santos, The oldest Brazilian snakes 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 49
from the Cenomanian (early Late 
Cretaceous). Acta Palaeontologica 
Polonica, 59 (2014), 635-642.
69. A. M. Albino, J. D. Carrillo-Briceno, and 
J. M. Neenan, An enigmatic aquatic snake 
from the Cenomanian of Northern South 
America. PeerJ, 4 (2016), e2027.
70. J. -C. Rage, Un serpent primitif (Reptilia, 
Squamata) dans le Cenomanien (base du 
Cretace superieur). Comptes Rendus de 
l'Acad6mie des Sciences de Paris, S6rie II, 
307 (1988), 1027-1032.
71. H. E. Sauvage, Sur l’existence d’un Reptile 
du type Ophidien dans les couches a Ostrea 
columba des Charentes. Comptes Rendus 
Hebdomadaires des S6ances de l'Acad6mie 
des Sciences, 7 (1880), 1-2325.
72. R. Vullo, J. -C. Rage, and D. Neraudeau, 
Anuran and squamate remains from the 
Cenomanian (Late Cretaceous) of 
Charentes, western France. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 31 (2011), 
279-291.
73. J. -C. Rage, R. Vullo, and D. Neraudeau, 
The mid-Cretaceous snake Simoliophis 
rochebrunei Sauvage, 1880 (Squamata: 
Ophidia) from its type area (Charentes, 
southwestern France): Redescription, 
distribution, and palaeoecology. Cretaceous 
Research, 58 (2016), 234-253.
74. R. Hoffstetter, Un serpent terrestre dans le 
Cretace inferieur du Sahara. Bulletin de La 
Sociёtё Gёologique de France, 7 (1960), 
1-58.
75. C. G. Klein, N. R. Longrich, N. Ibrahim, 
S. Zouhri, and D. M. Martill, A new basal 
snake from the mid-Cretaceous of 
Morocco. Cretaceous Research, 72 (2017), 
134-141.
76. R. Vullo, A new species of Lapparentophis 
from the mid-Cretaceous Kem Kem beds, 
Morocco, with remarks on the distribution 
of lapparentophiid snakes. Comptes Rendus 
Palevol, 18 (2019), 765-770.
77. J. -C. Rage and D. B. Dutheil, Amphibians 
and squamates from the Cretaceous 
(Cenomanian) of Morocco - A preliminary 
study, with description of a new genus of 
pipid frog. Palaeontographica Abteilung A, 
285 (2008), 1-22.
78. F. Nopcsa, Ergbenisse der 
Forschungsreisen Prof. E. Stromers in den 
WUsten Agyptens, II. Wirbeltier-Reste de 
rBaharije-Stufe (unterstes Cenoman). 5. 
Die Symoliophis-Reste. Abhandlungen der 
Bayerischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 
Mathematisch-naturwissenschaftliche 
Abteilung, 30 (1925), 1-27.
79. L. A. Nessov, V. I. Zhegallo, and 
A. O. Averianov, A new locality of Late 
Cretaceous snakes, mammals and other 
vertebrates in Africa (western Libya). 
Annales de Pateontologie, 84 (1998), 
265-274.
80. G. Haas, On a new snakelike reptile from 
the Lower Cenomanian of Ein Jabrud, near 
Jerusalem. Bulletin Du Мизёит National 
d’Histoire Naturelle, 1 (1979), 51-64.
81. A. Houssaye, Rediscovery and description 
of the second specimen of the hind-limbed 
snake Pachyophis woodwardi Nopcsa, 1923 
(Squamata, Ophidia) from the 
Cenomanian of Bosnia Herzegovina. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 
(2010), 276-279.
82. J. Bolkay, Mesophis nopcsai n.g. n.sp. ein 
neues, schlangenahnliches Reptil aus de 
runteren Kreide (Neocom) von Bilek- 
Selista (Ost-Hercegovina). Glasnik 
zemaljskog Muzeja u Bosni i Hercegovini, 37 
(1925), 125-135.
83. R. L. Nydam, Lizards and Snakes from the 
Cenomanian through Campanian of 
Southern Utah: filling the Gap in the fossil 
record of Squamata from the Late 
Cretaceous of the Western Interior of 
North America. In A. L. Titus and 
M. A. Loewen, eds., At the Top of the 
Grand Staircase: The Late Cretaceous of 
Southern Utah (Bloomington & 
Indianapolis: Indiana University Press, 
2013), pp. 370-423.
84. D. Duric, D. Radosavljevic, D. Petrovic, 
M. Radonjic, and P. Vojnovic, A new 
evidence for pachyostotic snake from 
Turonian of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Annales
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

50 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
Geologiques de La Peninsule Balkanique, 78 
(2017), 17-21.
85. F. de Broin, E. Buffetaut, J. -C. Koeniguer, 
et al., La fauna de Vertebres continentaux 
du gisement d’In Beceten (Senonien du 
Niger). Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires 
Des Seances des Seances de l’Academie des 
Sciences de Paris, Serie D, 279 (1974), 
469-472.
86. J. -C. Rage, Les continents peri-atlantiques 
au Cretace Superieur: Migrations des 
faunes continentales et problemes 
paleogeographiques. Cretaceous Research, 
2 (1981), 65-84.
87. T. C. Laduke, D. W. Krause, J. D. Scanlon, 
and N. J. Kley, A Late Cretaceous 
(Maastrichtian) snake assemblage from the 
Maevarano Formation, Mahajanga Basin, 
Madagascar. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 30 (2010), 109-138.
88. R. T. J. Moody and P. J. C. Sutcliffe, The 
Cretaceous deposits of the Iullemmeden 
Basin of Niger, central West Africa. 
Cretaceous Research, 12 (1991), 137-157.
89. L. M. V. Meunier and H. C. E. Larsson, 
Trematochampsa taqueti as a nomen 
dubium and the crocodyliform diversity of 
the Upper Cretaceous in Beceten 
Formation of Niger. Zoological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 182 (2018), 659-680.
90. A. Smith-Woodward, On some extinct 
reptiles from Patagonia, of the Genera 
Miolania, Dinilysia, and Genyodectes. 
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of 
London, 1 (1901), 169-184.
91. M. W. Caldwell and A. M. Albino, 
Exceptionally Preserved Skeletons of the 
Cretaceous Snake Dinilysia patagonica 
Woodward, 1901. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 22 (2003), 861-866.
92. M. W. Caldwell and J. Calvo, Details of a 
new skull and articulated cervical column 
of Dinilysia patagonica Woodward, 1901. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 28 
(2008), 349-362.
93. C. A. Scanferla and J. I. Canale, The 
youngest record of the Cretaceous snake 
genus Dinilysia (Squamata, Serpentes).
South American Journal of Herpetology, 2 
(2007), 76-81.
94. O. C. Marsh, Notice of New Reptiles from 
the Laramie Formation. American Journal 
of Science, 43 (1892), 449-453.
95. N. R. Longrich, B. A. S. Bhullar, and 
J. A. Gauthier, A transitional snake from the 
Late Cretaceous period of North America. 
Nature, 488 (2012), 205-208.
96. J. -C. Rage and C. Werner, Mid-Cretaceous 
(Cenomanian) snakes from Wadi Abu 
Hashim, Sudan: The earliest snake 
assemblage. Palaeontologia Africana, 35 
(1999), 85-110.S.
97. L. Wick and T. A. Shiller, New taxa among a 
remarkably diverse assemblage of fossil 
squamates from the Aguja Formation 
(lower Campanian) of West Texas. 
Cretaceous Research, 114 (2020), 104516.
98. J. J. Head, A South American snake 
lineage from the Eocene Greenhouse of 
North America and a reappraisal of the 
fossil record of ‘anilioid’ snakes. Geobios, 
(2020), doi.org/10.1016/j. 
geobios.2020.09.005.
99. J. -C. Rage and G. Wouters, Decouverte du 
plus ancien palaeopheide (Reptilia, 
Serpentes) dans le Maestrichtien du Maroc. 
Geobios, 12 (1979), 293-6.
100. A. C. Pritchard, J. A. McCartney, 
D. W. Krause, and N. J. Kley, New snakes 
from the Upper Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) 
Maevarano Formation, Mahajanga Basin, 
Madagascar. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 34 (2014), 1080-1093.
101. A. Miralles, J. Marin, D. Markus, et al.. 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
102. J. A. Schiebout, C. A. Rigsby, S. D. Rapp, 
J. A. Hartnell, and B. R. Standhardt, 
Stratigraphy of the Cretaceous-Tertiary and 
Paleocene-Eocene transition rocks of Big 
Bend National Park, Texas. The Journal of 
Geology, 95 (1987), 359-375.
103. M. Auge and J.-C. Rage, Herpetofaunas 
from the upper Paleocene and lower
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 51
Eocene of Morocco. Annales de 
Pal6ontologie, 92 (2006), 235-253.
104. T. S. Fachini, S. Onary, A. Palci, et al., 
Cretaceous blind snake from Brazil fills 
major gap in snake evolution. iScience, 
(2020), 101834.
105. R. O. Gomez, A. M. Baez, and
G. W. Rougier, An anilioid snake from the 
Upper Cretaceous of northern Patagonia. 
Cretaceous Research, 29 (2008), 481-488.
106. G. L. Georgalis and K. T. Smith, 
Constrictores Oppel, 1811 - the available 
name for the taxonomic group uniting boas 
and pythons. Vertebrate Zoology, 70 (2020), 
291-304.
107. J. J. Head, J. I. Bloch, A. K. Hastings, et al., 
Giant boid snake from the Palaeocene 
neotropics reveals hotter past equatorial 
temperatures. Nature, 457 (2009), 715-717.
108. E .M. Roberts, A. L. Deino, and M. A. Chan, 
[40]Ar/[39]Ar age of the Kaiparowits 
Formation, southern Utah, and correlation 
of contemporaneous Campanian strata and 
vertebrate faunas along the margin of the 
Western Interior Basin. Cretaceous 
Research, 26 (2005), 307-318.
109. N. R. Longrich, B. A. S. Bhullar, and
J. A. Gauthier, Mass extinction of lizards 
and snakes at the Cretaceous-Paleogene 
boundary. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 109 (2012), 
21396-21401.
110. R. Isaza, M. Garner, and E. Jacobson, 
Proliferative osteoarthritis and 
osteoarthrosis in 15 snakes. Journal of Zoo 
and Wildlife Medicine, 31 (2000), 20-27.
111. E. Schrank, Palynology of the elastic 
Cretaceous sediments between Dongola 
and Wadi Muqaddam, northern Sudan. 
Berliner geowissenschaftliche 
Abhandlungen, (A), 120 (1990), 149-168.
112. E. Schrank, Nonmarine Cretaceous 
correlations in Egypt and northern Sudan: 
palynological and palaeobotanical 
evidence. Cretaceous Research, 13 (1992), 
351-368.
113. C. Werner, Die kontinentale 
Wirbeltierfauna aus der unteren
Oberkreide des Sudan (Wadi Milk 
Formation). Berliner Geowissenschaftliche 
Abhandlungen, (E), 13 (1994), 221-249.
114. R. Vullo and D. Neraudeau, When the 
‘primitive’ shark Tribodus 
(Hybodontiformes) meets the ‘modern’ ray 
Pseudohypolophus (Rajiformes): the unique 
co-occurrence of these two durophagous 
Cretaceous selachians in Charentes (SW 
France). Acta Geologica Polonica, 58 (2008), 
249-255.
115. P. C. Owusu Agyemang, E. M. Roberts, 
R. Bussert, D. Evans, and J. MUller, U-Pb 
detrital zircon constraints on the 
depositional age and provenance of the 
dinosaur-bearing Upper Cretaceous Wadi 
Milk Formation of Sudan. Cretaceous 
Research, 97 (2019), 52-72.
116. A. A. M. Eisawi, Palynological evidence of a 
Campanian-Maastrichtian age of the 
Shendi Formation (Shendi Basin, central 
Sudan). American Journal of Earth Sciences, 
2 (2015), 206-210.
117. K. A. O. Salih, D. C. Evans, R. Bussert, 
N. Klein, M. Nafi, and J. MUller, First record 
of Hyposaurus (Dyrosauridae, 
Crocodyliformes) from the Upper 
Cretaceous Shendi Formation of Sudan. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 36 
(2016), p.e1115408.
118. N. Klein, R. Bussert, D. Evans, et al., Turtle 
remains from the Wadi milk formation 
(upper cretaceous) of northern Sudan. 
Palaeobiodiversity and 
Palaeoenvironments, 96 (2016), 281-303.
119. O. W. M. Rauhut, A dinosaur fauna from 
the Late Cretaceous (Cenomanian) of 
northern Sudan. Palaeontologia Africana, 
35 (1999), 61-84.
120. K. M. Claeson, H. M. Sallam, 
P. M. O’Connor, and J. J. Sertich, A revision 
of the Upper Cretaceous lepidosirenid 
lungfishes from the Quseir Formation, 
Western Desert, central Egypt. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 34 (2014), 
760-766.
121. M. Martin, Protopterus nigeriensis nov. sp., 
l’un des plus anciens protopteres—Dipnoi
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

52 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
(In Beceten, Senonien du Niger). Comptes 
Rendus de I'Acaddmie des Sciences, Series 
IIA, Earth and Planetary Science, 325 
(1997), 635-638.
122. O. Otero, Current knowledge and new 
assumptions on the evolutionary history of 
the African lungfish, Protopterus, based on 
a review of its fossil record. Fish and 
Fisheries, 12 (2011), 235-255.
123. J. -C. Rage and H. Cappetta, Vertebrates 
from the Cenomanian, and the geological 
age of the Draa Ubari fauna (Libya). 
Annales de Paldontologie, 88 (2002), 79-84.
124. N. Ibrahim, P. C. Sereno, D. J. Varricchio, 
et al., Geology and paleontology of the 
Upper Cretaceous Kem Kem Group of 
eastern Morocco. ZooKeys, 928 (2020), 
1-216.
125. D. M. Mohabey, J. J. Head, and J. A. Wilson, 
A new species of the snake Madtsoia from 
the Upper Cretaceous of India and its 
paleobiogeographic implications. Journal 
of Vertebrate Paleontology, 31 (2011), 
588-595.
126. R. O. Gomez, F. F. Garberoglio, and 
G. W. Rougier, A new Late Cretaceous 
snake from Patagonia: Phylogeny and 
trends in body size evolution of madtsoiid 
snakes. Comptes Rendus Palevol, 18 (2019), 
771-781.
127. H. Yi and M. A. Norell, The burrowing 
origin of modern snakes. Science Advances, 
1 (2015), p.e1500743.
128. J. -C. Rage, Un caenophidien primitif 
(Reptilia, Serpentes) dans l’Eocene 
inferieur. Compte Rendu Sommaire des 
Sdances de la Socidtd Gdologique de France, 
XVII o2 (1975), 46-48.
129. J. -C. Rage, A. Folie, R. S. Rana, et al., 
A diverse snake fauna from the early 
Eocene of Vastan Lignite Mine, Gujarat, 
India. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica, 53 
(2008), 391-403.
130. J. -C. Rage and M. Auge, Squamate reptiles 
from the middle Eocene of Lissieu 
(France). A landmark in the middle 
Eocene of Europe. Geobios, 43 (2010), 
253-268.
131. J. J. Head, P. A. Holroyd, J. H. Hutchison, 
and R. L. Ciochon, First report of snakes 
(Serpentes) from the late middle Eocene 
Pondaung Formation, Myanmar. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 25 (2005), 
246-250.
132. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, et al., Large-scale 
molecular phylogeny, morphology, 
divergence-time estimation, and the fossil 
record of advanced caenophidian snakes 
(Squamata: Serpentes). PloS One, 14 
(2019), p.e0216148.
133. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, On the 
phylogenetic relationships of the 
Cretaceous snakes with legs, with special 
reference to Pachyrhachis problematicus 
(Squamata, Serpentes). Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 22 (2002), 
104-109.
134. H. Zaher and K. T. Smith, Pythons in the 
Eocene of Europe reveal a much older 
divergence of the group in sympatry with 
boas. Biology Letters, 16 (2020), p.20200735.
135. §. Vasile, Z. Csiki-Sava, and M. Venczel, 
A new madtsoiid snake from the Upper 
Cretaceous of the Hajeg Basin, western 
Romania. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 33 (2013), 1100-1119.
136. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, Tooth 
implantation and replacement in 
squamates, with special reference to 
mosasaur lizards and snakes. American 
Museum Novitates, 3271 (1999), 1-19.
137. A. Houssaye, ‘Pachyostosis’ in aquatic 
amniotes: a review. Integrative Zoology, 4 
(2009), 325-340
138. M. S. Y. Lee and J. D. Scanlon, Snake 
phylogeny based on osteology, soft 
anatomy and ecology. Biological Reviews, 
77 (2002), 333-401.
139. S. M. Harrington and T. W. Reeder, 
Phylogenetic inference and divergence 
dating of snakes using molecules, 
morphology and fossils: New insights into 
convergent evolution of feeding 
morphology and limb reduction. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 121 (2017), 
379-394.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the first 80 million years of snake evolution 53
140. O. Rieppel, A. G. Kluge, and H. Zaher, 
Testing the phylogenetic relationships of 
the Pleistocene snake Wonambi 
naracoortensis Smith. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 22 (2002), 812-829.
141. J. P. Rio and P. D. Mannion, The osteology 
of the giant snake Gigantophis garstini from 
the upper Eocene of North Africa and its 
bearing on the phylogenetic relationships 
and biogeography of Madtsoiidae. Journal 
of Vertebrate Paleontology, 37 (2017), 
p.e1347179.
142. J. D. Scanlon, Nanowana gen. nov., small 
madtsoiid snakes from the Miocene of 
Riversleigh: Sympatric species with 
divergently specialised dentition. Memoirs 
of the Queensland Museum, 41 (1997), 
393-412.
143. J. D. Scanlon and M. S. Y. Lee, The 
Pleistocene serpent Wonambi and the early 
evolution of snakes. Nature, 403 (2000), 
416-420.
144. P. B. Snetkov, Vertebrae of the sea snake 
Palaeophis nessovi Averianov 
(Acrochordoidea, Palaeophiidae) from the 
Eocene of Western Kazakhstan and 
phylogenetic analysis of the superfamily 
Acrochordoidea. Paleontological Journal, 
45 (2011), 305-313.
145. A. Houssaye, J. -C. Rage, N. Bardet, et al., 
New highlights about the enigmatic marine 
snake Palaeophis maghrebianus 
(Palaeophiidae; Palaeophiinae) from the 
Ypresian (Lower Eocene) phosphates of 
Morocco. Palaeontology, 56 (2013), 647-661.
146. S. Bajpai and J. J. Head, An early Eocene 
palaeopheid snake from Vastan Lignite 
Mine, Gujarat, India. Gondwana. 
Geological Magazine, 22 (2008), 85-90.
147. A. Palci, M. N. Hutchinson, M. W. Caldwell, 
and M. S. Lee, The morphology of the inner 
ear of squamate reptiles and its bearing on 
the origin of snakes. Royal Society Open 
Science, 4 (2017), 170685.
148. P. M. Barrett, A. J. McGowan, and V. Page, 
Dinosaur diversity and the rock record. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society, B, 276 
(2009), 2667-2674.
149. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, 
et al., The origin of snakes: Revealing the 
ecology, behavior, and evolutionary history 
of early snakes using genomics, 
phenomics, and the fossil record. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 15 (2015), 87.
150. R. Estes, Middle Paleocene lower 
vertebrates from the Tongue River 
Formation, southeastern Montana. Journal 
of Paleontology, 50 (1976), 500-520.
151. R. Hoffstetter, Nouvelles recoltes de 
serpents fossiles dans l’Eocene Superieur 
du desert Libyque. Bulletin du Mus6um 
national d’Histoire naturelle, 33 (1961), 
326-331.
152. J. -C. Rage, Fossil snakes from the 
Palaeocene of Sao Jose de Itaborai, Brazil. 
Part I. Madtsoiidae, Aniliidae.
Palaeovertebrata, 27 (1998), 109-144.
153. J. -C. Rage, G. Metais, A. Bartolini, et al., 
First report of the giant snake Gigantophis 
(Madtsoiidae) from the Paleocene of 
Pakistan: paleobiogeographic implications. 
Geobios, 47 (2014), 147-153.
154. J. -C. Rage, S. M. T. Bajpai, J. G. Thewissen, 
and B. N. Tiwari, Early Eocene snakes from 
Kutch, Western India, with a review of the 
Palaeophiidae. Geodiversitas, 25 (2003), 
695-716.
155. R. G. Reynolds, M. L. Niemiller, and
L. J. Revell, Toward a Tree-of-Life for the 
boas and pythons: Multilocus species-level 
phylogeny with unprecedented taxon 
sampling. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 71 (2014), 201-213.
156. W. A. Clemens, Evolution of the 
mammalian fauna across the Cretaceous- 
Tertiary boundary in northeastern 
Montana and other areas of the western 
interior. Geological Society of America, 
Special Paper, 361 (2002), 217-245.
157. M. Friedman, Explosive morphological 
diversification of spiny-finned teleost fishes 
in the aftermath of the end-Cretaceous 
extinction. Proceedings of the Royal Society, 
B, 277 (2010), 1675-1683.
158. Y. J. Feng, D. C. Blackburn, D. Liang, et al., 
Phylogenomics reveals rapid, simultaneous 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

54 JASON J. HEAD, ALEXANDRA F. C. HOWARD, AND JOHANNES MULLER
diversification of three major clades of 
Gondwanan frogs at the Cretaceous- 
Paleogene boundary. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 114 
(2017), E5864-E5870.
159. M. E. Alfaro, B. C. Faircloth,
R. C. Harrington, et al., Explosive 
diversification of marine fishes at the 
Cretaceous-Palaeogene boundary. Nature 
Ecology and Evolution, 2 (2018), 688-696.
160. D. J. Field, A. Bercovici, J. S. Berv, et al., 
Early evolution of modern birds structured 
by global forest collapse at the end- 
Cretaceous mass extinction. Current 
Biology, 28 (2018), 1825-1831.
161. J. -C. Rage, Fossil snakes from the 
Palaeocene of Sao Jose de Itaborai, Brazil. 
Part III. Ungaliophiinae, Booids incertae 
sedis, and Caenophidia. Summary, update, 
and discussion of the snake fauna from the 
locality. Palaeovertebrata, 36 (2008), 37-73.
162. A. Scanferla and K. T. Smith, Exquisitely 
preserved fossil snakes of Messel: Insight 
into the evolution, biogeography, habitat 
preferences and sensory ecology of early 
boas. Diversity, 12 (2020), 100.
163. R. A. Pyron and F. T. Burbrink, Extinction, 
ecological opportunity, and the origins of 
global snake diversity. Evolution, 66 (2012), 
163-178.
164. J. A. McCartney, S. N. Bouchard, 
J. A. Reinhardt, et al., The oldest 
lamprophiid (Serpentes, Caenophidia) 
fossil from the late Oligocene Rukwa Rift 
Basin, Tanzania and the origins of African 
snake diversity. Geobios, (2020), 
 
10.1016/j.geobios.2020.07.005.
doi.org/
165. G. G. Simpson, A new fossil snake from the 
Notostylops beds of Patagonia. Bulletin of 
the American Museum of Natural History, 
67 (1933), 1-22.
166. F. O. Da Silva, A. C. Fabre, Y. Savriama, 
et al., The ecological origins of snakes as 
revealed by skull evolution. Nature 
Communications, 9 (2018), 
 
.
https://doi.org/
10.1038/s41467-017-02788-3
167. A. Watanabe, A. C. Fabre, R. N. Felice, 
et al., Ecomorphological diversification in 
squamates from conserved pattern of 
cranial integration. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 116 
(2019), 14688-14697.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.005 Published online by Cambridge University Press

4
The Diversity and Distribution 
of Palaeogene Snakes
A Review with Comments on Vertebral Sufficiency
Krister T. Smith and Georgios L. Georgalis
4.1 Introduction
The first clear fossil indications of modern clades of snakes are in the Palaeogene. Many 
major groups, including ‘scolecophidians’ (blindsnakes), probably originated earlier, and 
some extinct groups sometimes allied with Alethinophidia, such as Madtsoiidae and 
Pachyophiidae, together with Palaeophiidae, Nigerophiidae and incertae sedis alethinophi- 
dians ([1-4]; Chapter 9), are well known already in the Cretaceous. Molecular studies indicate 
that the radiation of alethinophidians was well underway in the early Cenozoic [5-7].
It is well known that the vast majority of snake fossils are isolated trunk vertebrae (e.g., [8, 
9]). This can scarcely surprise, because snakes have so very many of them. A recurring 
refrain of later twentieth century commentaries on the snake fossil record - echoing 
Cuvier’s opinion at the dawn of comparative anatomy [10] - is that isolated trunk vertebrae 
are insufficient for detailed systematic study [11-13]. This too can scarcely surprise, because 
it is difficult to imagine that a vertebra, however exactingly it may be examined, can have 
enough diagnostic features to distinguish the >3,800 extant species, much less their extinct 
relatives - especially when ontogenetic, intracolumnar, and intraspecific variation are 
considered. Thus it is, that at the close of the twentieth century scarcely a handful of fossil 
snakes were known from more than a few broken bits, and most work on early fossil snakes 
was conducted without any really detailed understanding of their phylogenetic affinities. 
And so from the Palaeogene (Palaeocene, Eocene, and Oligocene epochs), palaeontology 
could demonstrate only a high morphological and alpha taxonomic diversity.
Several conceptual and material advances have given new insight into the phylogenetic, 
rather than only phenotypic, diversity of Palaeogene snakes. First, there has been a shift 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

56 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
away from dichotomous keys (e.g., boas vs pythons, natricines vs. colubrines) and towards 
the use of apomorphies in identifying major lineages [13-15]. In any bifurcating key, one of 
the character states is usually primitive, the other derived, and the former only tells one 
what a species is not. In addition, a dichotomous key tends to elide crucial phylogenetic 
nuance about the level at which characters are diagnostic, even if apomorphic.
Second, there has been increased emphasis on reconstructing the entire vertebral 
column, and if possible the skull [15-19]. This delivers a better understanding of intraco- 
lumnar variation, to assist in alpha taxonomy, and of anatomy. A more complete skeletal 
reconstruction enhances the discovery of phylogenetically useful information. Even - or 
especially - caudal vertebrae have proven useful (e.g., [20, 21]).
Third, quantification is growing in prominence. Serious effort at quantification actually 
began with Auffenberg’s [22] monograph on the fossil snakes of Florida, but this pioneering 
aspect of his work was not widely adopted. Quantification has three major advantages: it 
lends precision to otherwise vague terms (like ‘moderately vaulted’) and hence contributes 
to reproducibility; it allows for population-level variation to be measured and analysed; and 
it allows for detailed analysis of intracolumnar and ontogenetic change [22-24].
Finally, many new discoveries in the Palaeogene have illuminated the early history of 
snakes. These discoveries include associated material (partial or complete skeletons) and 
material from geographically under-represented areas, particularly Gondwanan continents 
[19, 25-30]. Gondwanan fossils are especially important if much of the early history of 
snakes transpired there.
In this chapter, we bring together in one place all described Palaeogene fossil snakes and 
place currently valid taxa in a defensible scheme. We examine the spatiotemporal 
distribution of snakes in the Palaeogene to document patterns and highlight where more 
work is needed. Finally, we address the nature of the snake fossil record by examining the 
sufficiency of vertebrae to study phylogenetic affinity and species diversity.
4.2 Taxonomic Framework of Palaeogene Snakes
Extant snakes have traditionally been divided into two groups, Scolecophidia (the fossorial 
blindsnakes) and Alethinophidia (everything else) (e.g., [31]). Due especially to the use of 
molecular data, some parts of the snake tree are in a state of flux [5, 32, 33]. For a 
framework, we follow Burbrink et al. [34] on the phylogeny of extant snake groups. As in 
many other recent studies, they found Scolecophidia to be paraphyletic, and ‘Anilioidea’ to 
be polyphyletic, with Anilius more closely related to Tropidophiidae (forming the clade 
Amerophidia) than to Cylindrophiidae and Uropeltidae.
For larger groups of extinct snakes (Madtsoiidae, Palaeophiidae, Nigerophiidae, 
Russellophiidae) we must rely on morphology. According to some phylogenetic analyses 
Madtsoiidae is a stem snake clade [35-38], but here we follow the alternative interpretation 
[39-41] that madtsoiids are crown snakes on the stem of Alethinophidia.
Palaeophiidae is usually considered to contain Archaeophis, Palaeophis and Pterosphenus 
(e.g., [8]). The latter two genera are known exclusively from vertebrae and are united by 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 57
more or less laterally compressed centra, reduced prezygapophyses, pterapophyses 
developed to some extent, and vertical rather than slanted cotylar and condylar edges 
[18]. Their affinities remain unclear (see [42] for a review]. They might be related to 
Acrochordidae [43-45] or to Cretaceous marine snakes [31, 46]. Further study of the skull 
of ‘Archaeophis’ turkmenicus (see [47]) may bring clarity. We conservatively regard 
Palaeophiidae here as a monophyletic, incertae sedis lineage of the total clade of 
Alethinophidia.
Nigerophiidae was erected for a single genus, Nigerophis, but subsequently additional 
taxa have been described, including some from the Cretaceous ([48]; see below). Rage [8, 
49, 50] regarded Nigerophiidae as close to both Palaeophiidae (see also [51]) and especially 
Acrochordidae. Head et al. [3] noted, however, that synapomorphies of Nigerophiidae and 
Acrochordidae have not been presented. We consider Nigerophiidae as an incertae sedis 
lineage of the total clade of Alethinophidia.
Russellophiidae was erected for a single genus, Russellophis, which remains the only valid 
russellophiid genus in the Palaeogene. However, Russellophiidae has also been reported 
from the Late Cretaceous [2]. Rage [52] considered it an early caenophidian family (see also 
[8]). Head et al. [3] gave the following apomorphies as supporting its position in the total 
clade of Caenophidia: elongate centrum; small, circular cotyle and condyle; and well- 
developed paralymphatic grooves defining a haemal keel. We follow the latter authors, 
who distinguished between crown and stem.
For the purposes of this review we adopt the higher-level taxonomic hierarchy given in 
Table 4.1. The lowest-level entities (usually species) are treated individually and alphabetic­
ally in Supplementary Appendix 4.S1, where details on the attribution of individual species 
to higher taxa can also be found.
4.3 The Distribution of Palaeogene Snakes
4.3.1 Distribution of Localities in Space and Time
In this section we summarize the distribution of localities that have yielded Palaeogene 
fossil snakes. For detailed lists with references, see Supplementary Appendix 4.S2.
Africa (Fig. 4.1) was for a long time poorly known. Various localities had been discovered 
on British, French, and German expeditions in the twentieth century. These represent 
marginal marine environments and the Trans-Saharan Seaway, which once divided West 
Africa from the remainder of the continent (see [56]). Palaeocene and Eocene are dominant. 
However, new Eocene and Oligocene localities are yielding surprising snake assemblages.
The Neotethyan part of Asia (Fig. 4.2) has yielded principally marine localities with 
aquatic snakes recovered on Russian expeditions. However, rare terrestrial localities in 
Mongolia and Southeast Asia have yielded tantalizing specimens. Most surprising in recent 
years have been Eocene assemblages with mixtures of aquatic and terrestrial snakes from 
Indo-Pakistan. Insofar as this subcontinent was docking with Asia, it is likely that they 
preserve a mixture of Gondwanan and Laurasian faunal components. At the same time, the 
absence of terrestrial snakes from eastern Asia at a time when rich mammalian faunas are
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

58 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Table 4.1. Here we give what we feel is a defensible classification of Palaeogene fossil snakes.
Valid taxa are all listed, whereas unnamed distinct or potentially distinct or indeterminate forms are 
subsumed into composite entries for simplicity. Named species that are currently considered junior 
synonyms or nomina dubia are not included. The lowest level entries in the classification are treated 
alphabetically in Supplementary Appendix 4.S1; thus, the classification can also be seen as a key to 
Supplementary Appendix 4.S1. An inverted triangle (5) before a taxon name indicates a total clade, 
i.e., the crown clade plus its stem [53]. For instance, 5Serpentes would include both crown snakes 
(including extinct ones) as well as stem snakes like Najash rionegrina [54]. It is important to be clear 
on this point because the distinction is frequently not observed in the literature [55] and the 
assignment of a species to some higher taxon is potentially misleading. However, in most cases 
total-clade names have not formally been erected, hence our informal approach. Where there is 
positive evidence that a genus name is inappropriate (e.g., because of non-monophyly), we put 
quotes around it. The lack of quotation marks should not be construed to mean that there is positive 
evidence for the monophyly of most genera.
Serpentes Linnaeus, 1758
‘Scolecophidia’ Dumeril and Bibron, 1844
‘Scolecophidia’ incertae sedis
5Alethinophidia Nopsca, 1923
5Alethinophidia incertae sedis
fAfrotortrix draaensis Rage et al., 2021 
fAmaru scagliai Albino, 2018 
‘anilioids’ incertae sedis 
fConiophis sp.
fEoanilius europae Rage, 1974 
fEoanilius oligocenicus Szyndlar, 1994 
fFalseryx neervelpensis Szyndlar et al., 2008 
fGoinophis minusculus Holman, 1976 
fHoffstetterella brasiliensis Rage, 1998 
fKataria anisodonta Scanferla et al., 2013 
fPlatyspondylia germanica Szyndlar and Rage, 2003 
fPlatyspondylia lepta Rage, 1974 
fPlatyspondylia sudrei Rage, 1988 
fRottophis atavus (von Meyer, 1855)
fSzyndlaria aureomontensis Rage and Auge, 2010 
fTuscahomaophis leggetti Holman and Case, 1992 
fVectophis wardi Rage and Ford, 1980
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 59
Table 4.1. (cont.)
fMadtsoiidae Hofstetter, 1961
fAlamitophis tingamarra Scanlon, 2005 
f Gigantophis garstini Andrews, 1901 
fMadtsoia bai Simpson, 1933 
fMadtsoia camposi Rage, 1998 
fMadtsoiidae indet.
fPatagoniophis australiensis Scanlon, 2005 
fPlatyspondylophis tadkeshwarensis Smith et al., 2016
Amerophidia Vidal et al., 2007
Aniliidae Fitzinger, 1826
fBorealilysia carinata (Hecht, 1959) 
fBorealilysia gunnelli Head, 2021
5Tropidophiidae Brongersma, 1951
Tropidophiidae indet.
5Constrictores Oppel, 1811 sensu Georgalis and Smith (2020)
Booidea sensu Pyron et al. (2014)
fBavarioboa Szyndlar and Schleich, 1993
fBavarioboa bachensis Szyndlar and Rage, 2003 
fBavarioboa crocheti Szyndlar and Rage, 2003 
fBavarioboa herrlingensis Szyndlar and Rage, 2003 
fBavarioboa minuta Szyndlar and Rage, 2003 
fBavarioboa vaylatsae Szyndlar and Rage, 2003
fPhosphoroboa filholii (Rochebrune, 1880) 
5Boidae Gray, 1825 sensu Pyron et al. (2014)
fCorallus priscus Rage, 2001 
fEoconstrictor fischeri (Schaal, 2004) 
fEoconstrictor spinifer (Barnes, 1927) 
fTitanoboa cerrejonensis Head et al., 2009
Charinaidae Gray, 1849
fCalamagras angulatus Cope, 1873
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

60 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Table 4.1. (cont.)
fCalamagras murivorus Cope, 1873 
fCalamagras weigeli Holman, 1972 
fMesselophis variatus Baszio, 2004 
fRageryx schmidi Smith and Scanferla, 2021 
fRieppelophis ermannorum (Baszio and Schaal, 2004)
‘erycines’ incertae sedis
fCrythiosaurus mongoliensis Gilmore, 1943 
fBransateryx vireti Hoffstetter and Rage, 1972 
fCadurceryx filholi Hoffstetter and Rage, 1972 
fCadurceryx pearchi Holman et al., 2006 
f’Calamagras’ gallicus Rage, 1977
Pythonoidea sensu Wallach et al. (2014)
Loxocemidae Cope, 1861
fOgmophis compactus Lambe, 1908
Messelopythonidae Smith and Scanferla, 2021
fMesselopython freyi Zaher and Smith, 2020 
fPalaeopython cadurcensis (Filhol, 1877) 
fPalaeopython ceciliensis Barnes, 1927 
fPalaeopython helveticus Georgalis and Scheyer, 2019 
fPalaeopython schaali Smith and Scanferla, 2021
Pythonidae Fitzinger, 1826
fMorelia riversleighensis (Smith and Plane, 1985)
Pythonoidea incertae sedis
5Constrictores incertae sedis
fAnilioides nebraskensis Holman, 1976 
fBoavus sp.
fBoavus affinis Brattstrom, 1955 
fBoavus brevis Marsh, 1871 
fBoavus idelmani Gilmore, 1938 
fBoavus occidentalis Marsh, 1871
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 61
Table 4.1. (cont.)
tCadurcoboa insolita Rage, 1978 
tCalamagras sp.
t’Calamagras’ platyspondyla Holman, 1976 
t’Calamagras’ primus Hecht, 1959 
t’Calamagras' turkestanicus Danilov and Averianov, 1999 
tCheilophis huerfanoensis Gilmore, 1938 
tChubutophis grandis Albino, 1993 
tConantophis alachuaensis Holman and Harrison, 2000 
tCoprophis dakotaensis Parris and Holman, 1978 
tDawsonophis wyomingensis Holman, 1979 
tDunnophis sp.
tDunnophis cadurcensis Rage, 1974 
tDunnophis matronensis Rage, 1973 
tDunnophis microechinus Hecht, 1959 
tGeringophis sp.
tGeringophis depressus Holman, 1976 
tGeringophis robustus Holman and Harrison, 2001 
tGeringophis vetus Holman, 1982a 
tHechtophis austrinus Rage 2001 
tHelagras orellanensis Holman, 1983 
tHelagras prisciformis Cope, 1883a 
tHordleophis balconae Holman, 1996 
tHuberophis georgiensis Holman, 1977b 
tItaboraiophis depressus Rage, 2008 
tOgmophis sp.
tOgmophis oregonensis Cope, 1883b 
tOgmophis voorhiesi Holman, 1977b 
t”Palaeopython” neglectus Rochebrune, 1884 
tPaleryx rhombifer Owen, 1850 
tParaepicrates brevispondylus Hecht, 1959 
tParaplatyspondylia batesi Holman and Harrison, 1998
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

62 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Table 4.1. (cont.)
tParaungaliophis pricei Rage, 2008 
tPaulacoutophis perplexus Rage, 2008 
tPlesiotortrix edwardsi Rochebrune, 1884 
tPterygoboa sp.
tRukwanyoka holmani McCartney et al., 2014 
tSanjuanophis froehlichorum Sullivan and Lucas, 1988 
tTallahattaophis dunni Holman and Case, 1988 
tTotlandophis americanus Holman and Harrison, 2001 
tTotlandophis thomasae Holman and Harrison, 1998 
tWaincophis australis Albino, 1987 
tWaincophis cameratus Rage, 2001
tWaincophis pressulus Rage, 2001 
tPalaeophiidae Lydekker, 1888b
tArchaeophis proavus Massalongo, 1859 
t’Archaeophis’ turkmenicus Tatarinov, 1963 
tPalaeophis sp.
tPalaeophis africanus Andrews, 1924 
tPalaeophis casei Holman, 1982b 
tPalaeophis colossaeus Rage, 1983b 
tPalaeophis ferganicus Averianov, 1997 
tPalaeophis grandis (Marsh, 1869) 
tPalaeophis littoralis Cope, 1868a 
tPalaeophis maghrebianus Arambourg, 1952 
tPalaeophis nessovi Averianov, 1997 
tPalaeophis oweni Zigno, 1881 
tPalaeophis tamdy (Averianov, 1997) 
tPalaeophis toliapicus Owen, 1841 
tPalaeophis typhaeus Owen, 1850 
tPalaeophis vastaniensis Bajpai and Head, 2007 
tPalaeophis virginianus Lynn, 1934 
tPalaeophis zhylan (Nessov, 1984) 
fPterosphenus sp.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 63
Table 4.1. (cont.)
fPterosphenus biswasi Rage et al., 2003 
fPterosphenus kutchensis Rage et al., 2003 
f Pterosphenus schucherti Lucas, 1899 
fPterosphenus schweinfurthi (Andrews, 1901) 
fPterosphenus sheppardi Hoffstetter, 1958
.........................................................................................................................................................................................
fAnomalophis bolcensis (Massalongo, 1859)
5Colubroides Zaher et al., 2009 
f’Coluber’ cadurci Rage, 1974 
5Colubriformes incertae sedis 
5Colubroidea incertae sedis 
5Elapidae incertae sedis 
fFloridaophis auffenbergi Holman, 1999
Lamprophiidae incertae sedis 
fNatrix mlynarskii Rage, 1988b 
fNebraskophis oligocenicus Holman, 1999 
fProcerophis sahnii Rage et al., 2008 
fTexasophis bohemiacus Szyndlar, 1987 
fTexasophis galbreathi Holman, 1984 
fTexasophis hecki Bohme, 2008 
fThaumastophiidae Zaher et al., 2021
fThaumastophis missiaeni Rage et al., 2008 
fRenenutet enmerwer McCartney and Seiffert, 2016
fHeadonophis harrisoni Holman, 1993 
fNigerophiidae Rage, 1975b
fAmananulam sanogoi McCartney et al., 2018 
f’Nessovophis’ zhylga Averianov, 1997 
fNigerophis mirus Rage, 1975b 
fWoutersophis novus Rage, 1980
.........................................................................................................................................................................
fRussellophis crassus Rage et al., 2008 
fRussellophis tenuis Rage, 1975a
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

64 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Figure 4.1 Palaeogene snake localities in Africa. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for 
colour version.
known (e.g., [57]) remains one of the most conspicuous points about the Palaeocene and 
Eocene there. Although the occurrence of carnivorous anguimorph lizards (e.g., [58]) 
possibly explains the absence of snakes, these animals are well known in North America 
and Europe [59, 60] and co-preserved in many different localities [61].
Australia (Fig. 4.3) remains poorly known because the Palaeogene is so poorly repre­
sented, with only two confidently assigned localities. It was previously thought that many 
Riversleigh localities were Oligocene in age [62]. Possible early occurrences of ‘Laticauda’ 
from the RSO site [63] and of Wonambi barriei from the CS site [64] are early Miocene 
according to recent radiometric dating [65]. Specimens referable to Yurlunggur from ‘Carl 
Creek’ and to Yurlungurr [sic, for Yurlunggur] cf. camfieldensis (a vertebra) from the 
Kangaroo Well fauna of the Ulta Limestone, whose assignment to the late Oligocene was 
based on biochronology [66], may also be closer to middle and early Miocene, respectively 
[65]. Undescribed snake records from the D-Site, Hiatus, and White Hunter localities [67] 
could not yet be radiometrically dated but are correlated biochronologically with the late 
Oligocene [65]. All three species from the early Eocene of Tingamarra are referred to genera 
first described from South America; these may have evolved (by dispersal or vicariance) as a
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 65
Figure 4.2 Palaeogene snake localities in Asia. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for colour version.
Figure 4.3 Palaeogene snake localities in Australia. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for 
colour version.
result of an original connection between the two continents, probably via Antarctica [19]. 
On the other hand, the Palaeogene fauna of western Antarctica (i.e., the James Ross Basin) 
is similar to that of South America but unlike that of East Antarctica, suggesting the 
presence of barriers (geographic or climatic) that limited exchanges [68].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

66 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Figure 4.4 Palaeogene snake localities in Europe. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for 
colour version.
Europe (Fig. 4.4) has been most intensely studied of all areas due to the long history of 
palaeontology there. With the exception of the fissure fills of Walbeck, the Palaeocene is 
dominated by marginal marine environments that preserve aquatic and terrestrial taxa. 
Marginal marine environments are also documented in the Eocene, together with fully 
marine environments around the Black Sea, but terrestrial environments are increasingly 
represented, especially with the fissure fills of Quercy [69]. Additionally, the Konservat- 
Lagerstatten of Messel (e.g., [70]), Geiseltal (e.g., [24, 71]), and Monte Bolca (e.g., [72]) are 
Eocene. Fissure fills are also abundant at Oligocene localities.
North America (Fig. 4.5) has also been intensely studied, beginning in the nineteenth 
century with Leidy, Cope, and Marsh. However, the North American record has not been 
critically revised, unlike the European one (e.g., [24, 73]). Some fully terrestrial Palaeocene 
localities are known from the Rocky Mountain interior, whereas others are known from the 
Gulf Coast and East Coast. The latter preserve abundant aquatic snakes. A similar distribu­
tion of localities is known from the Eocene. With the exception of the John Day Basin, 
Oligocene localities are restricted to the western edge of the Great Plains and marginal 
marine environments or fissure fills in peninsular Florida.
Finally, South America (Fig. 4.6) was for a long time unusual in that the Palaeocene 
record there seemed better known than that of the rest of the Palaeogene. However, newer 
geochronological studies indicate that most localities compiled here, including Itaborai, 
pertain to the lower Eocene [74, 75] Prominent remaining Palaeocene localities are 
Cerrejon and Tiupampa. The Eocene is principally represented by terrestrial localities in
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 67
Figure 4.5 Palaeogene snake localities in North America. A single locality on Ellesmere Island, 
Canada, at 79 “N latitude is not shown. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for colour version.
the San Jorge Basin. However, a marine site from the coast of Ecuador is also known. Thus 
far, snakes are known from only a single Oligocene locality in the San Jorge Basin. Insofar as 
South America was isolated throughout much of the Cenozoic [76], perhaps endemic 
snakes arose there, as among mammals [77].
4.3.2 Distribution of Taxa in Space and Time
Given the apparent age of their divergences (e.g., [32]), their present diversity, and their 
distribution in the subtropics to tropics on all continents except Antarctica, it is certain that 
the minor Palaeogene records of scolecophidians capture only very little of their history. 
Presently tropical squamates were widespread in middle latitudes in the early Palaeogene 
(e.g., [78]), so it seems unlikely that scolecophidians were not more widely distributed. 
Their small size doubtlessly contributes to their under-representation [8].
The present diversity of ‘anilioids’, fossorial non-caenophidian alethinophidians, is 
centred on the Indian subcontinent and Southeast Asia in the form of Uropeltidae, 
Anomochilus and Cylindrophis, whereas Anilius itself is found in the Neotropics. 
Curiously, no fossil representatives have been reported from the Palaeogene there. An 
adequate interpretation of ‘anilioid’ biogeography must await a final resolution of their 
relationships to other snakes as well as fossil discoveries. Thus far, Palaeogene fossils are 
known from North Africa, North and South America and possibly Europe (depending on 
the status of Eoanilius) and central and southwestern Asia.
Tropidophiidae represents a special problem. Among extant taxa, this name applies 
strictly to the South American and Caribbean genera Tropidophis and Trachyboa, but 
sometimes fossils are assigned to ‘Tropidophiidae sensu lato’ (i.e., including the booid
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

68 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Figure 4.6 Palaeogene snake localities in South America. See Supplementary Appendix 4.S3 for 
colour version.
clade Ungaliophiinae). Insofar as ‘Tropidophiidae sensu lato’ is polyphyletic, discussion of 
its biogeography is not meaningful. The best case for the fossil occurrence of 
Tropidophiidae sensu stricto is in the Fayum [30]. From Europe and Anatolia 
(Platyspondylia, Szyndlaria, Falseryx) there are other plausible tropidophiids; the morpho­
logical evidence for these assignments is reviewed in detail in Supplementary Appendix 4. 
S1. This is an important problem, for if confirmed, it would represent a large range 
extension and call into question the assignment of numerous Constrictores incertae sedis, 
because there are no published vertebral synapomorphies of the latter group [79].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 69
For Constrictores (sensu [79]), booids have the most detailed record. Several booid 
clades - Ungaliophiinae, Charinainae, and Neotropical boas - are represented by well- 
preserved specimens from the Eocene of Europe, and Neotropical boas are known also 
from the South American Palaeocene. This record has been interpreted as representing 
dispersal to Europe of several lineages from the New World in association with warm 
climates in the earliest Eocene, although the route of dispersal is uncertain in the absence 
of phylogenetically well-placed fossils from the Palaeogene of North America and Africa 
[41]. Other major lineages (Candoia, Calabaria, and Sanziniidae as well as Bolyeriidae and 
Xenophidion) presently lack a fossil record, so palaeontology contributes little to discus­
sions of their origin [80].
‘Erycines’ have played a very prominent role in the fossil history of booids in Europe and 
North America (e.g., [20, 50]), culminating in Holman’s [9] attribution of most smaller 
Palaeogene booids to this group. As reviewed by Smith [15], there is no published 
apomorphic evidence for erycines in North America prior to the Miocene. However, the 
discovery of a stem representative of Charinainae in Messel [81] is consistent with an early 
divergence of the group, and continued study of the North American Palaeogene with a 
focus on apomorphic traits will probably produce older relatives of North American 
‘erycines’. It is more difficult to interpret the significance of other Palaeogene ‘erycines’ 
from Europe. Although apomorphic evidence from caudal vertebrae strongly suggest an 
alliance of these with ‘erycines’, it is unclear to which of the two clades (Erycidae or 
Charinainae) these species pertain due to ‘erycine’ polyphyly (e.g., [82]).
The two extant non-pythonid pythonoid genera, Xenopeltis and Loxocemus, are 
Laurasian, and the stem of the latter is known from late Eocene fossils in North 
America. Pythonidae occurs today from Africa through southern Asia to Australia. 
However, there have been tantalising hints that fossil pythonids may have been present 
in the Eocene of Europe (Supplementary Appendix 4.S1). Scanlon [83] recognized these 
taxa could play a key role in interpreting pythonoid biogeography. A specimen from 
Messel, which had been illustrated and mentioned as a possible pythonid [84], was later 
described [85] as a stem pythonid, Messelopython freyi. Analyses in the latter study 
confirmed a Laurasian origin of Pythonoidea and Pythonidae, conditioned on the occur­
rence of M. freyi in Europe.
For many years J.-C. Rage’s reports of unusual taxa in the early Palaeogene were the 
only hints of the origins of Caenophidia (e.g., [49]). Particularly fascinating have therefore 
been reports of new taxa, not all named, from Gondwana. These include: a diverse snake 
assemblage from the lower Eocene of India that contained taxa (Thaumastophis, 
Procerophis) suggestive of Caenophidia [26]; the potential stem caenophidian Kataria 
from the Palaeocene of Tiupampa [28]; and an assemblage from the Oligocene of 
Tanzania dominated by Colubriformes, unlike any known contemporaneous assemblage 
[29, 86]. These discoveries, coupled with the absence of caenophidians (except perhaps 
aquatic snakes such as Nigerophiidae) in the early Palaeogene of Laurasia, are consistent 
with their origin in Gondwana. Future discoveries there have great potential to reconcile 
the early Palaeogene divergence times (as inferred from molecular studies) with the fossil 
record.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

70 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
4.4 The Ecology of Palaeogene Snakes
Isolated snake vertebrae are fairly common as fossils, whereas articulated material is rare 
[50]. The axial musculoskeletal system in snakes is more intimately associated with 
locomotion than in perhaps any other tetrapod group [87]. Thus, for most of the history 
of snake palaeontology, deductions based on vertebral morphology most commonly pro­
vided hints at the way of life of fossil taxa (e.g., [88]). Mosauer’s [89] study of myology 
remains a landmark. Osteological studies include those of Johnson [90] and Schaal et al. 
[91]. Yet it has not yet been possible to fully disentangle phylogenetic from adaptive features 
in snake vertebrae, a subject with enormous potential importance to the interpretation of 
fossil snakes. Rare cranial elements, especially the quadrate bone, have occasionally pro­
vided insight as well (e.g., [16]). More recently, quantitative studies of body proportions 
[41], made possible by whole snake fossils, and of the inner ear ([92-94]; Chapter 13), made 
possible by цСТ scans, have provided further insight.
Palaeogene snakes occupied a variety of terrestrial habitats. Fossoriality has been widely 
assumed for fossil ‘anilioids’ and supposed ‘erycines’ having reduced neural spines and 
depressed neural arches [9, 16]. This assumption may be correct in many cases, but study of 
the Messel snake assemblage, which preserves complete skeletons, invites caution. Rageryx 
has vertebral features considered typical for ‘fossorial’ snakes, yet was inferred to be 
ground-dwelling based on body proportions [41] and shows no evidence of fossorial 
adaptations in the skull, including in the inner ear [81]. Body proportions of Messelophis 
variatus, whose vertebrae resemble Dunnophis in their elongation, extremely reduced 
neural spines and depressed neural arches, approach those of arboreal snakes [41]. In 
Messel, Eoconstrictor was also determined to be ground dwelling, most likely a generalist 
[41]. The proportion of trunk to caudal vertebrae has been examined in a statistical fashion 
[15], but the method has not yet been applied outside the original locality, the Medicine 
Pole Hills.
Palaeophiidae, Nigerophiidae, and Russellophiidae are widely considered to be aquatic 
on the basis of derived features of the ribs and vertebrae. In Archaeophis proavus, according 
to Janensch [94], the following features indicate an aquatic mode of life (by comparison 
with extant aquatic snakes, especially Acrochordidae): lateral compression of the trunk, low 
position of the synapophyses, length and shape of the ribs (distinctly curved only proxim­
ally), and loss of gastrosteges. Janensch [94] even suggested that A. proavus might have had 
a ventral skin-fold in place of gastrosteges, like Acrochordus. Janensch [94] found the same 
rib form in Anomalophis bolcensis. Owen [88] and Marsh [95] similarly took Palaeophis to 
be aquatic. Houssaye et al. [96, 97] additionally documented osteosclerosis, an adaptation 
related to buoyancy in aquatic tetrapods, in Palaeophis maghrebianus, Russellophis tenuis, 
and Nigerophis mirus.
The extent to which these taxa were inhabitants of brackish water, near-shore 
environments or the open ocean remains unclear, but geological context brings insight. 
The general distribution of Palaeophiidae closely tracks past coastlines. Janensch [94] 
considered the limestone of Monte Bolca, preserving Anomalophis bolcensis and 
Archaeophis proavus, to be marine. Pterosphenus spp. have been described from mangrove 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 71
or estuarine deposits [98] and from localities that were 102-103 km from shore [99]. 
Palaeophis is chiefly documented from marginal marine habitats but some records are 
probably further from the palaeoshoreline of the Neotethys (see [100]). It has been noted 
[101] that russellophiids are found solely in fluviatile or deltaic sediments, except for two 
localities in France (Saint-Maximin and Bretou), largely consistent with aquatic habitats.
Faunal associations were emphasized by Parmley and DeVore [102] for Palaeophis and 
Pterosphenus. In the Hardie Mine various vertebrate taxa (gars, trionychid turtles, 
crocodylians) are very commonly found, but also a high diversity of sharks, including forms 
that do not commonly enter brackish waters. Parmley and DeVore [102] reconstructed the 
areas as ‘open marine, nearshore shallow-water habitat (similar to shallow inlet bays found 
today along the Gulf of Mexico coastline)’. Holman et al. [103] summarized evidence that 
palaeophiids co-occurred with terrestrial animals in the United States and concluded that 
species of Palaeophis, especially the smaller ones, were estuarine in habits but that 
Pterosphenus may have inhabited the open ocean. Rage et al. [18], reviewing the occur­
rences of Pterosphenus, suggested that it was a coastal dweller (marine, brackish, and 
freshwater near coast) and perhaps favoured mangroves.
A single palaeophiid species (Palaeophis africanus) obtained a very broad (transatlantic) 
distribution [102]. On the whole, the very broad distribution of Palaeophiidae was taken as 
an indication of true marine, not freshwater or mere brackish water, preferences [104].
The preponderance of aquatic snakes in the early Palaeogene is one of the most salient 
aspects of the Cenozoic snake fossil record. At least four major lineages (Palaeophiidae, 
Nigerophiidae, Russellophiidae, Anomalophis) are known; five, if Archaeophiinae is deter­
mined to be distinct from Palaeophiinae. The principal problem with interpretation is that 
their interrelationships are poorly understood. Three main hypotheses stand out. (1) If all 
are related to Acrochordidae, then this lineage possibly underwent an adaptive radiation in 
the early Palaeogene. If, on the other hand, Nigerophiidae, Russellophiidae, and 
Anomalophis are distributed around the base of Caenophidia, then either (2) snakes 
invaded marginal marine environments multiple times in the latest Cretaceous and the 
Palaeogene, or (3) the ancestor of Caenophidia was aquatic. Further discoveries clarifying 
the phylogenetic relations of these taxa will be crucial to evaluating these hypotheses.
In rare cases where complete specimens are known, data on trophic ecology can be gleaned 
from gut contents. Such specimens are generally confined to Konservat-Lagerstatten, most 
notably Messel [70]. There, the boid relative Eoconstrictor is known to have consumed 
crocodylians [105] and basilisk lizards [106]. Although these animals are ectothermic, 
Eoconstrictor is inferred to have possessed infrared-imaging pit organs in the upper jaw [41].
The evolution of body size has not been studied in detail in Palaeogene snakes. However, 
the early Palaeogene is notable for the very large size of some taxa. Titanoboa cerrejonensis 
is the largest known snake, living or extinct [23], and some palaeophiids and madtsoiids, 
together with Chubutophis grandis [25] and Palaeopython cadurcensis [24], also obtained 
extremely large sizes [96, 107-111]. It has been noted [112] that Madtsoiidae of the 
Cenozoic in South America are all larger than those of the Cretaceous. On the other end 
of the spectrum, some taxa scarcely exceeded 50 cm in total length [81, 113], and others, 
like Eoanilius and some scolecophidians, may have been smaller still. It has been suggested
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

72 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
[73] that the small size of Eoanilius and Platyspondylia possibly allowed them to survive the 
‘Grande Coupure’ extinction event at the Eocene-Oligocene boundary.
4.5 The Problem of Vertebral Sufficiency
The widespread apprehension that fossil snake vertebrae are in many cases not sufficient 
for detailed systematic study (see Head et al., Chapter 3, for an alternative view) finds some 
support in the catalogue here. In particular, most constrictors and extinct snake taxa known 
solely from vertebrae (like Nigerophiidae) have poorly constrained relationships; the case 
for Archaeophiinae might change only when the skulls of Archaeophis proavus and 
‘Archaeophis’ turkmenicus are fully analysed. Yet the question of vertebral sufficiency 
involves two distinct issues. (1) Do snake vertebrae accurately record phylogenetic affinity? 
(2) Do snake vertebrae accurately record species diversity? We address each of these 
questions in a preliminary fashion below, recognizing that a more robust - but also far 
more difficult - approach would involve tests with extant species.
4.5.1 Do Snake Vertebrae Accurately Record Phylogenetic Affinity?
We operationalize this question by addressing the following: (1) Are taxa based on cranial or 
both cranial and vertebral material more precisely placed phylogenetically than taxa based 
solely on vertebral material? (2) Are vertebrae indirectly associated with phylogenetic precision?
Because of its high palaeodiversity, we focus here solely on Constrictores. If a species 
could be assigned only to Constrictores, its placement was considered ‘imprecise’. If it 
could be assigned to a finer level, its placement was considered ‘precise’. Note that we 
considered only direct information. For instance, Bavarioboa is assigned (precisely) to 
Booidea because of the ectopterygoid-pterygoid articulation of B. crocheti, but those elem­
ents are not known for other species. Thus, only one of the species is precisely assigned 
based on direct data. We counted the number of vertebral specimens and number of cranial 
elements in the hypodigm (or best-known population).
The results of this classification are shown in Figure 4.7A. Of the taxa considered, 72 per 
cent (=61/85) are known only from vertebrae. A few could be assigned precisely on the basis 
of possessing ‘erycine’ features in caudal vertebrae. Where cranial elements are known, the 
mean number of elements is 6.9 and the median 2.5. The stark difference arises because a 
few taxa are known from more or less complete skulls. Of the 85 species considered, 
vertebral counts could be estimated for 82. Most precisely identified taxa tend to be found 
in the upper right of the graph (many vertebrae and skull elements). Thus, we conducted 
nested stepwise multiple logistic regression in R v3.5 [114], the full model being: Precision ~ 
Ncranial + ln(Nvert). We compared models using the Akaike Information Criterion (AIC).
The logistic regression of vertebral number (AIC = 71.69) and of cranial element number 
(AIC = 66.08) on precision both yielded individually significant, positive coefficients (p = 
0.00084 and p = 0.00109, respectively), and both models were much better fitting than the null 
model in which neither variable plays a role (AIC = 82.94). However, the cranial-only model is 
clearly superior to the vertebral model by AIC. Furthermore, the full model with both
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 73
(A)
Imprecise 
• Precise
о
о 
о
о 
о 
о 
— оо •
о • о 
о
о о о о «ооовоо <d ажоэо оо оо
0
4
ln(No. vertebrae)
8
(B)
0 
20 
40
о Europe
□ North America 
о South America 
Д Africa
A Asia
Australia
т
60 
80 
100 
120
(C)
No. of studied units (filled = localities, open = formations)
Figure 4.7 (A) Relationship between vertebral count, number of cranial elements, and precision of 
phylogenetic placement in Palaeogene Constrictores. Each point (N = 85) represents a species or 
unnamed local population. (B) Relationship between the number of formations and of localities and 
Palaeogene snake palaeodiversity in different geographic regions. In many cases, the formation of a 
locality is unknown, and these were listed as ‘Unknown formation 1’ etc. (see text). (C) Combinations 
of survivorship and speciation rate that would produce a cumulative total of 500 or 1000 snake species 
by the end of the Palaeogene.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

74 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
explanatory variables (AIC = 66.06) was no better than the cranial-only model, and in the full 
model only the coefficient of cranial element number was statistically significant (p = 0.015).
We interpret these results as follows. Cranial elements contribute significantly to phylo­
genetic placement in Constrictores, whereas vertebrae do not. However, a large number of 
vertebrae is a strong predictor of the preservation of cranial elements. In fact, the only case 
in which substantial cranial material is present without vertebrae is the isolated skull 
comprising the holotype of Crythiosaurus mongoliensis. Assuming these results for 
Constrictores are representative of snakes as a whole, we can affirmatively answer the first 
question posed at the beginning of the section. In answer to the second question, we find 
that a large vertebral sample size is associated with a greater probability that cranial 
elements are preserved and so is indirectly associated with precision.
4.5.2 Do Snake Vertebrae Accurately Record Species Diversity?
We operationalize this question by addressing the following: (1) How does palaeodiversity 
relate to sampling intensity in different geographic regions? (2) Is extrapolated 
palaeodiversity of Palaeogene snakes biologically plausible?
Regarding the first question, Raup [115] first clearly showed that observed palaeodiversity 
covaries with sampling intensity of sedimentary rock in which fossils are found. The 
number of formations is often taken as an estimate of sampling intensity (e.g., [116]). 
Insofar as a geological formation is a lithologic unit with a particular character deposited 
at a particular place and time, it typically represents a particular broad-scale environment. 
Although a formation may include many facies, which are more closely tied to habitat, 
formations are easier to count than facies. Hence, it is thought, the larger the number of 
formations sampled, the more complete the habitat sampling, and - one expects - the 
larger the number of possible species. Secular variation in rock preservation can thus lead 
to artifactual fluctuations in palaeodiversity, so-called ‘megabiases’ [117].
We evaluated two covariates of palaeodiversity: number of localities and number of 
formations. The former values are quite firm in our data set, the latter squishy. The 
formation is frequently unknown in Europe, and especially for fissure-fills, which are quite 
common in our data set. Where formation name is unclear, we counted ‘unknown forma­
tion 1’ etc. In some cases, as in the Paris and North Sea Basins, this may overestimate the 
number of distinct formations. As expected, the number of localities is always greater than 
the number of formations, because each formation is represented by at least one locality.
Despite the foregoing caveats, the relationship between palaeodiversity and both number 
of formations and number of localities is qualitatively similar: a convex-up curve (Fig. 4.7B). 
Europe, followed by North America, are most intensively studied, Australia the least (linked 
to its meagre Palaeogene outcrop). Remarkably, Africa, Asia, and South America plot very 
close together. Viewing geographic areas (continents) as samples of an equivalent global 
fauna (cf. [118]), the number of taxa rises with increased sampling, but more slowly. There 
are many convex upward or monotonically increasing functions, some asymptotic, some 
not, so it is not very meaningful to try to fit curves to these data. Nevertheless, they suggest 
that palaeodiversity flattens at more intense sampling, as expected.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 75
The second subquestion in this section concerns unknown true Palaeogene species diver­
sity, which we approached as follows. We first attempted to extrapolate regional and global 
palaeodiversity for the Palaeogene based on our observed samples of that diversity. We then 
compared the order of magnitude of this extrapolated palaeodiversity with lineage-through­
time plots and with theoretical values computed with plausible speciation rates.
We used two biodiversity-theoretic methods to estimate on the basis of the reference 
sample - a taxon-by-locality occurrence table - for each geographic area the minimum 
palaeodiversity of that area; we also did this for the whole world. The first is the Chao2 
method, which takes account of the taxa present only in one or two localities [119]. The 
second is the more generalized incidence-based coverage estimator (ICE), which takes 
account of all rare taxa, where ‘rare’ is some arbitrary, user-defined cut-off, к [119]. We 
followed the recommended default к =10 but note that estimated minimum diversity, SICE, 
was effectively stable at к > 2. All calculations were performed in EstimateS v9.0 [120].
Results are shown in Table 4.2. Unlike for raw data (Fig. 4.7B), minimum palaeodiversity 
is highest in South America, followed by Europe. Africa, Asia, and North America were fairly 
similar, and Australia clearly last. In some cases (Australia and South America, possibly 
Europe), SICE has not reached a plateau, implying that it could rise with the discovery of 
new localities. World minimum palaeodiversity SChao2 was 573.5 species (95 per cent C.I. 
390.8-903.5), and world SICE was 558.8 species. Note that these estimators are not distribu­
tive: for instance, SChao2 (A+B) / SChao2 (A) + SChao2 (B).
Table 4.2. Minimum palaeodiversity of Palaeogene snakes in six geographic areas and the world as 
a whole.
Nloc is the number of localities, Sobs the observed species diversity, SChao2 the Chao2 estimate of 
minimum species diversity (with 95 per cent confidence interval), and SICE the ICE estimate of 
minimum species diversity. For Chao2, the ‘classic’ rather than ‘bias-corrected’ formula was used 
following recommendation in program documentation due to the coefficient of variation. Some valid 
taxa were excluded from the incidence-based table because they come from imprecisely known 
localities: ‘Palaeopython’ neglectus and Plesiotortrix edwardsi. All precisely identified species were 
used, whereas all taxa with qualifiers like ‘cf.’, ‘aff.’ and so forth were excluded as formally 
unidentified. Thus, where a locality did not have precisely identified taxa, it was not included. Overall, 
162 localities were thus included.
Geographic region
Nloc.
Sobs.
SChao2
95% C.I. (Chao2)
SICE
Africa
12
21
69.2
33.7-203.9
69.2
Asia
10
22
82.2
38.3-244.4
91.7
Australia
2
4
7.0
4.5-23.1
7.0
Europe
79
51
191.2
92.2-528.4
105.0
North America
52
46
98.6
65.8-185.6
109.3
South America
7
20
210.0
100.6-467.6
182.9
World
162
164
573.5
390.8-903.5
558.8
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

76 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
These estimates are one order of magnitude lower than extant snake species diversity, which 
is 3,879 species according to the Reptile Database ([121], accessed 7 May 2021). However, true 
diversity in the Palaeogene must have been different. First of all, it was much earlier in the 
radiation of snakes, and especially Colubriformes (which comprise most of modern species 
diversity, >3,150 species), so that standing diversity would have been much lower. Moreover, 
the ‘scolecophidian’ lineages, with about one-sixth of modern species diversity, can be dis­
counted, because they are thought largely to be indistinguishable on the basis of vertebrae 
(e.g., [8]). It is the non-caenophidian alethinophidians (‘Henophidia’), with c. 102 species 
today, that dominate all Palaeogene assemblages in the New World and Europe.
What is a plausible value for the cumulative species diversity of snakes in the Palaeogene? 
Figure 4.7C describes how cumulative diversity is influenced by two variables: instantaneous 
speciation rate (lineage-Ma-1) and the number of lineages surviving the K-Pg extinction. (We 
are not concerned with extinction or net diversification here.) There is a swath bounded by 
cumulative diversity of 500 and 1,000 species corresponding, in part, to plausible values of 
these two variables. Assuming standing diversity of early-branching alethinophidians at the 
K-Pg boundary was 100 species, there would be 17 surviving lineages given an 83 per cent 
extinction rate, as for squamates in North America [4]. Accordingly, speciation rates between 
about 0.08 and 0.11 would yield 500-1,000 species. Comparable speciation rates are found in 
the angiosperm clade Fagales, the crown of which originated in the Early Cretaceous and 
evolved into 1,370 species today but lacks a hyperdiverse subclade like Colubriformes [122]. 
In sum, itis plausible that true cumulative species diversity is of the same order of magnitude 
as extrapolated (minimum) palaeodiversity.
If many species cannot be distinguished based on vertebrae, and snake vertebrae are by 
far the most common fossils, then one could conclude that snake palaeodiversity will 
always be lower than true species diversity for the same time slice. However, the rough 
calculations above (extrapolations of palaeodiversity and computations of cumulative 
lineage diversity) suggest that the two values may not diverge as much as commonly 
conceived. Indeed, they raise the prospect that - with sufficient sample size and attention 
to intracolumnar variation - palaeontological morphospecies may not diverge so very 
greatly from biological species [17]. Integrative taxonomic studies incorporating DNA data 
(e.g., [123]) will provide more careful assessments of individual clades in the future. 
Additionally, the possibility must be entertained that other snake clades besides 
Colubriformes - for example, Constrictores - underwent a more rapid diversification in 
the Palaeogene than their present diversity would suggest.
4.6 Conclusions
The idea that a single mid-trunk vertebra can generally be used to identify the species of its 
possessor as well as establish its phylogenetic relationships is patently untenable. Taxa 
based solely on vertebrae are generally insufficient for precise phylogenetic placement, but 
given a large sample size and careful attention to variation, they may more closely approxi­
mate biological species than commonly believed. We see grounds for optimism:
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 77
1. 
Even if snake palaeodiversity was generally lower than true biological diversity, this 
would only limit comparisons with extant species diversity. It would not suggest that 
comparison among fossil time horizons does not yield meaningful conclusions, nor 
would it suggest limits on the study of disparity through time.
2. 
We believe that the palaeodiversity of snake taxa based solely on vertebrae will more 
closely approach true species diversity when sample size is large, so that all aspects of 
variation can be considered.
3. 
Many species based principally on vertebrae could be placed phylogenetically when 
cranial elements could be associated with them. Cranial elements are much rarer than 
vertebrae in a snake skeleton, but high vertebral sample size predicts the occurrence of 
cranial elements. It is incumbent on snake specialists to go themselves through screen- 
washed concentrate in order to recognize these elements.
There is the well-known story of the gambler who evening after evening enters a saloon to 
play cards and loses every time. Taking pity on him, a regular pulls him aside to ask: ‘Don’t 
you know the game is crooked?’ ‘I know’, he responds, ‘but it’s the only game in town’. To 
be cognisant of the limitations of snake vertebrae allows us to adjust our expectations and 
make the most of the snake fossil record.
Acknowledgements
We thank the editors, Dave Gower and Hussam Zaher, for the opportunity to contribute to 
this volume and the Linnean Society and Systematics Association for underwriting the 
symposium on which it is based. Hussam Zaher and Jason Head kindly permitted us to 
include in-press work in this review. We thank Agustin Scanferla for insight into South 
American geology. The manuscript benefited from the close reading and constructive 
criticism of two anonymous reviewers.
References
1. J.-C. Rage and G. Wouters, Decouverte du 
plus ancien Palaeopheide (Reptilia, 
Serpentes) dans le Maestrichtien du Maroc. 
Geobios, 12 (1979), 293-296.
2. J.-C. Rage and C. Werner, Mid-Cretaceous 
(Cenomanian) snakes from Wadi abu 
Hashim, Sudan: The earliest snake 
assemblage. Palaeontologia Africana, 35 
(1999), 85-110.
3. J. J. Head, K. Mahlow, and J. MUller, Fossil 
calibration dates for molecular 
phylogenetic analysis of snakes 2: 
Caenophidia, Colubroidea, Elapoidea,
Colubridae. Palaeontologia Electronica, 
19.2.2FC (2016), 1-21.
4. N. R. Longrich, B. -A. S. Bhullar, and 
J. A. Gauthier, Mass extinction of lizards 
and snakes at the Cretaceous-Paleogene 
boundary. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 109 (2012), 
21396-21401.
5. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, 
et al., The origin of snakes: revealing the 
ecology, behavior, and evolutionary 
history of early snakes using genomics, 
phenomics, and the fossil record.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

78 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15 
(2015), 87.
6. S. M. Harrington and T. W. Reeder, 
Phylogenetic inference and divergence 
dating of snakes using molecules, 
morphology and fossils: new insights into 
convergent evolution of feeding 
morphology and limb reduction. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 121 (2017), 
379-394.
7. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, et al., Large-scale 
molecular phylogeny, morphology, 
divergence-time estimation, and the fossil 
record of advanced caenophidian snakes 
(Squamata: Serpentes). PloS ONE, 
14 (2019), e0216148.
8. J.-C. Rage, Serpentes (Handbuch der 
Palaoherpetologie, v. 11) (Stuttgart: Gustav 
Fischer Verlag, 1984).
9. J. A. Holman, Fossil Snakes of North 
America: Origin, Evolution, Distribution, 
Paleoecology (Bloomington, Indiana: 
Indiana University Press, 2000).
10. G. Cuvier, Recherches sur les Ossemens 
Fossiles, ou l'on R(tablit les Caracteres de 
Plusierus Animaux dont les Revolutions du 
Globe Ont D(truit les Especes. Vol. 4 (Paris: 
E. d’Ocagne: 1823).
11. S. B. McDowell, A catalogue of the snakes 
of New Guinea and the Solomons, with 
special reference to those in the Bernice 
P. Bishop Museum. Part III. Boinae and 
Acrochordoidea (Reptilia, Serpentes). 
Journal of Herpetology, 13 (1979), 1-92.
12. A. G. Kluge, Calabaria and the phylogeny 
of erycine snakes. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 107 (1993), 293-351.
13. J. J. Head, Phylogenetic significance of 
vertebral morphology in snakes: 
Implications for interpreting the fossil 
record. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 
22 (2002), 63A.
14. C. J. Bell, J. J. Head, and J. I. Mead, Synopsis 
of the herpetofauna from Porcupine Cave. 
In A. D. Barnosky, ed., Biodiversity 
Response to Climate Change in the Middle 
Pleistocene: The Porcupine Cave Fauna 
from Colorado (Berkeley, California:
University of California Press, 2004), 
pp. 117-126.
15. K. T. Smith, New constraints on the 
evolution of the snake clades 
Ungaliophiinae, Loxocemidae and 
Colubridae (Serpentes), with comments on 
the fossil history of erycine boids in North 
America. Zoologischer Anzeiger, 252 (2013), 
157-182.
16. J. -C. Rage, Les serpents des phosphorites 
du Quercy. Palaeovertebrata, 6 (1974), 
274-303.
17. Z. Szyndlar, Fossil snakes from Poland. Acta 
Zoologica Cracoviensia, 28 (1984), 1-156.
18. J.-C. Rage, S. Bajpai, J. G. M. Thewissen, 
and B. N. Tiwari, Early Eocene snakes from 
Kutch, western India, with a review of the 
Palaeophiidae. Geodiversitas, 25 (2003), 
695-716.
19. J. D. Scanlon, Australia’s oldest known 
snakes: Patagoniophis, Alamitophis, and cf. 
Madtsoia (Squamata: Madtsoiidae) from 
the Eocene of Queensland. Memoirs of the 
Queensland Museum, 51 (2005), 215-235.
20. R. Hoffstetter and J. -C. Rage, Les Erycinz 
fossiles de France (Serpentes, Boidz): 
comprehension et histoire de la sous- 
famille. Annales de Pal(ontologie 
(Vert(br(s), 58 (1972), 82-124.
21. Z. Szyndlar and W. Bohme, Redescription 
of Tropidonotus atavus von Meyer, 
1855 from the upper Oligocene of Rott 
(Germany) and its allocation to Rottophis 
gen. nov (Serpentes, Boidae).
Palaeontographica A, 240 (1996), 145-161.
22. W. Auffenberg, The fossil snakes of Florida. 
Tulane Studies in Zoology, 10 (1963), 
127-213.
23. J. J. Head, J. I. Bloch, A. K. Hastings, et al., 
Giant boid snake from the Palaeocene 
neotropics reveals hotter past equatorial 
temperatures. Nature, 457 (2009), 715-717.
24. G. L. Georgalis, M. Rabi, and K. T. Smith, 
Taxonomic revision of the snakes of the 
genera Palaeopython and Paleryx 
(Serpentes, Constrictores) from the 
Paleogene of Europe. Swiss Journal of 
Palaeontology, 140 (2021), 18.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 79
25. A. M. Albino, Snakes from the Paleocene 
and Eocene of Patagonia (Argentina): 
paleoecology and coevolution with 
mammals. Historical Biology, 7 (1993), 
51-69.
26. J.-C. Rage, A. Folie, R. S. Rana, et al., 
A diverse snake fauna from the early 
Eocene of Vastan Lignite Mine, Gujarat, 
India. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica, 53 
(2008), 391-403.
27. J.-C. Rage, M. Pickford, and B. Senut, 
Amphibians and squamates from the 
middle Eocene of Namibia, with comments 
on pre-Miocene anurans from Africa. 
Annales de Pateontologie, 99 (2013), 
217-242.
28. A. Scanferla, H. Zaher, F. E. Novas, C. de 
Muizon, and R. Cespedes, A new snake 
skull from the Paleocene of Bolivia sheds 
light on the evolution of macrostomatans. 
PLoS ONE, 8 (2013), e57583.
29. J. A. McCartney, N. J. Stevens, and
P. M. O’Connor, The earliest colubroid- 
dominated snake fauna from Africa: 
perspectives from the late Oligocene 
Nsungwe Formation of southwestern 
Tanzania. PLoS ONE, 9 (2014), e90415.
30. J. A. McCartney and E. R. Seiffert, A late 
Eocene snake fauna from the Fayum 
Depression, Egypt. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 36 (2016), e1029580.
31. R. Hoffstetter, Squamates de type moderne. 
In J. Piveteau, ed., Trait6 de Pal6ontologie, 
Vol 5 (Paris: Masson, 1955), pp. 605-662.
32. N. Vidal, J.-C. Rage, A. Couloux, and
S. B. Hedges, Snakes (Serpentes). In
S. B. Hedges and K. Kumar, eds., The 
Timetree of Life (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2009), pp. 390-397.
33. F. T. Burbrink and B. I. Crother, Evolution 
and taxonomy of snakes. In R. D. Aldridge 
and D. M. Sever, eds., Reproductive Biology 
and Phylogeny of Snakes (Boca Raton, 
Florida: CRC Press, 2011), pp. 19-53.
34. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
35. M. S. Y. Lee and J. D. Scanlon, Snake 
phylogeny based on osteology, soft 
anatomy and ecology. Biological Reviews, 
77 (2002), 333-401.
36. J. D. Scanlon, Skull of the large non­
macrostomatan snake Yurlunggur from the 
Australian Oligo-Miocene. Nature, 439 
(2006), 839-842.
37. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
38. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Nydam, A. Palci, and 
S. Apesteguia, The oldest known snakes 
from the Middle Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous 
provide insights on snake evolution. Nature 
Communications, 6 (2015), 5996.
39. J. A. Wilson, D. M. Mohabey, S. E. Peters, 
and J. J. Head, Predation upon hatchling 
dinosaurs by a new snake from the Late 
Cretaceous of India. PLoS Biology, 8 (2010), 
e100322.
40. H. Zaher and C. A. Scanferla, The skull of 
the Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
41. A. Scanferla and K. T. Smith, Exquisitely 
preserved fossil snakes of Messel: insight 
into the evolution, biogeography, habitat 
preferences and sensory ecology of early 
boas. Diversity, 12 (2020), 100.
42. G. L. Georgalis, L. Del Favero, and 
M. Delfino, Italy’s largest snake - 
redescription of Palaeophis oweni from the 
Eocene of Monte Duello, near Verona. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 65 (2020), 
523-533.
43. L. A. Nessov, Paleogene sea snakes as 
indicators of water mass peculiarities on 
the east of Tethys Ocean [in Russian]. 
Vestnik St. Petersberg University, Series 7, 2 
(1995), 3-9.
44. E. A. Zvonok and P. B. Snetkov, New 
findings of snakes of the genus Palaeophis 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

80 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
Owen, 1841 (Acrochordoidea: 
Palaeophiidae) from the middle Eocene of 
Crimea. Proceedings of the Zoological 
Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences, 
316 (2012), 392-400.
45. V. Wallach, K. L. Williams, and J. Boundy, 
Snakes of the World: A Catalogue of Living 
and Extinct Species (Boca Raton, London 
and New York: CRC Press, 2014).
46. F. B. Nopcsa, Die Familien der Reptilien. 
Fortschritte der Geologie und Palaontologie, 
2 (1923), 1-210.
47. L. P. Tatarinov, The cranial structure of the 
lower Eocene sea snake ‘Archaeophis’ 
turkmenicus from Turkmenia.
Paleontological Journal, 22 (1988), 
73-79.
48. T. C. LaDuke, D. W. Krause, J. D. Scanlon, 
and N. J. Kley, A Late Cretaceous 
(Maastrichtian) snake assemblage from the 
Maevarano Formation, Mahajanga basin, 
Madagascar. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 30 (2010), 109-138.
49. J.-C. Rage, L’origine des Colubroides et des 
Acrochordoides (Reptilia, Serpentes).
Comptes Rendus de l'Acaddmie des Sciences, 
D, 286 (1978), 595-597.
50. J.-C. Rage, Fossil history. In R. A. Seigel, 
J. T. Collins, and S. S. Novak, eds., Snakes: 
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology (New 
York: Macmillan, 1987), pp. 51-76.
51. J. A. Holman and G. R. Case, A puzzling 
new snake (Reptilia: Serpentes) from the 
late Paleocene of Mississippi. Annals of the 
Carnegie Museum, 61 (1992), 197-205.
52. J.-C. Rage, Un caenophidien primitif 
(Reptilia, Serpentes) dans l’Eocene 
inferieur. Comptes Rendu Sommaire des 
Sdances de la Socidtd Gdologique de France, 
2 (1975), 46-47.
53. P. D. Cantino and K. de Queiroz, 
International Code of Phylogenetic 
Nomenclature, v. 4c (2010). Downloaded 
from: 
 
.
https://www.ohio.edu/phylocode/
PhyloCode4c.pdf
54. S. Apesteguia and H. Zaher, A Cretaceous 
terrestrial snake with robust hindlimbs and 
a sacrum. Nature, 440 (2006), 1037-1040.
55. J. J. Head, Fossil calibration dates for 
molecular phylogenetic analysis of snakes 
1: Serpentes, Alethinophidia, Boidae, 
Pythonidae. Palaeontologia Electronica, 
18.1.6FC (2015), 1-17.
56. M. A. O’Leary, M. L. Bouare, K. M. Claeson, 
et al., Stratigraphy and paleobiology of the 
Upper Cretaceous-lower Paleogene 
sediments from the Trans-Saharan 
Seaway in Mali. Bulletin of the American 
Museum of Natural History, 436 (2019), 
1-177.
57. Y. Q. Wang, J. Meng, C. K. Beard, et al., 
Early Paleogene stratigraphic sequences, 
mammalian evolution and its response to 
environmental changes in Erlian Basin, 
Inner Mongolia, China. Science China 
Earth Sciences, 53 (2010), 1918-1926.
58. L.-P. Dong, S. E. Evans, and Y. Wang, 
Taxonomic revision of lizards from the 
Paleocene deposits of the Qianshan Basin, 
Anhui, China. Vertebrata PalAsiatica, 54 
(2016), 243-268.
59. R. Estes, Sauria Terrestria, Amphisbaenia 
(Handbuch der Palaoherpetologie, v. 10A) 
(Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer Verlag, 1983).
60. G. L. Georgalis, Necrosaurus or 
Palaeovaranus? Appropriate nomenclature 
and taxonomic content of an enigmatic 
fossil lizard clade (Squamata). Annales de 
Paldontologie, 103 (2017), 293-303.
61. G. L. Georgalis and T. M. Scheyer, A new 
species of Palaeopython (Serpentes) and 
other extinct squamates from the Eocene of 
Dielsdorf (Zurich, Switzerland). Swiss 
Journal of Geosciences, 112 (2019), 383-417.
62. M. Archer, H. Godthelp, S. Hand, and 
D. Megirian, Fossil mammals of 
Riversleigh, northwestern Queensland: 
preliminary overview of biostratigraphy, 
correlation and environmental change. 
Australian Zoologist, 25 (1989), 29-65.
63. J. D. Scanlon, M. S. Y. Lee, and M. Archer, 
Mid-Tertiary elapid snakes (Squamata, 
Colubroidea) from Riversleigh, northern 
Australia: early steps in a continent-wide 
adaptive radiation. Geobios, 36 (2003), 
573-601.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 81
64. J. D. Scanlon and M. S. Y. Lee, The 
Pleistocene serpent Wonambi and the early 
evolution of snakes. Nature, 403 (2000), 
416-420.
65. J. Woodhead, S. J. Hand, M. Archer, et al., 
Developing a radiometrically-dated 
chronologic sequence for Neogene biotic 
change in Australia, from the Riversleigh 
World Heritage Area of Queensland. 
Gondwana Research, 29 (2016), 153-167.
66. D. Megirian, P. Murray, L. Schwartz, and 
C. von der Borch, Late Oligocene Kangaroo 
Well Local Fauna from the Ulta Limestone 
(new name), and climate of the Miocene 
oscillation across central Australia.
Australian Journal of Earth Sciences, 51 
(2004), 701-741.
67. M. Archer, D. A. Arena, M. Bassarova, et al., 
Current status of species-level 
representation in faunas from selected 
fossil localities in the Riversleigh World 
Heritage Area, northwestern Queensland. 
Alcheringa Supplement, 1 (2006), 1-17.
68. M. Reguero, F. Goin, C. Acosta 
Hospitaleche, T. Dutra, and S. Marenssi, 
Late Cretaceous/Paleogene West Antarctica 
Terrestrial Biota and Its Intercontinental 
Affinities (Dordrecht: Springer, 2013).
69. S. Legendre, B. Sige, G. Astruc, et al., Les 
phosphorites du Quercy: 30 ans de 
recherche. Bilan et perspectives. Geobios, 
30, supplement 1(1997), 331-345.
70. K. T. Smith, S. F. K. Schaal, and
J. Habersetzer, eds., Messel: An Ancient 
Greenhouse Ecosystem (Stuttgart: 
Schweizerbart, 2018).
71. G. Krumbiegel, H. Haubold, and L. RUffle, 
Das eozane Geiseltal: ein 
mitteleuropaisches 
Braunkohlenvorkommen und seine 
Pflanzen- und Tierwelt (Wittenberg: 
Ziemsen, 1983).
72. M. Friedman and G. Carnevale, The Bolca 
Lagerstatten: shallow marine life in the 
Eocene. Journal of the Geological Society, 
London, 175 (2018), 569-579.
73. Z. Szyndlar and J.-C. Rage, Non-erycine 
Booidea from the Oligocene and Miocene of
Europe (Krakow: Polish Academy of 
Sciences, 2003).
74. M. O. Woodburne, F. J. Goin, M. Bond, 
et al., Paleogene land mammal faunas of 
South America; a response to global 
climatic changes and indigenous floral 
diversity. Journal of Mammalian Evolution, 
21 (2014), 1-73.
75. M. O. Woodburne, F. J. Goin, 
M. S. Raigemborn, et al., Revised timing of 
the South American early Paleogene land 
mammal ages. Journal of South American 
Earth Sciences, 54 (2014), 109-119.
76. R. Estes and A. Baez, Herpetofaunas of 
North and South America during the Late 
Cretaceous and Cenozoic: Evidence for 
interchange? In F. G. Stehli and S. D. Webb, 
eds., The Great American Interchange. 
Topics in Geobiology, Vol. 4 (New York: 
Plenum Press, 1985), pp. 139-197.
77. G. G. Simpson, Splendid Isolation: The 
Curious History of South American 
Mammals (New Haven, Conn.: Yale 
University Press, 1980).
78. K. T. Smith, A new lizard assemblage from 
the earliest Eocene (zone Wa0) of the 
Bighorn Basin, Wyoming, USA: 
Biogeography during the warmest interval 
of the Cenozoic. Journal of Systematic 
Palaeontology, 7 (2009), 299-358.
79. G. L. Georgalis and K. T. Smith, 
Constrictores Oppel, 1811 - the available 
name for the taxonomic group uniting boas 
and pythons. Vertebrate Zoology, 70 (2020), 
291-304.
80. B. P. Noonan and P. T. Chippindale, 
Dispersal and vicariance: The complex 
evolutionary history of boid snakes. 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 40 
(2006), 347-358.
81. K. T. Smith and A. Scanferla, A nearly 
complete skeleton of the oldest definitive 
erycine boid (Messel, Germany). 
Geodiversitas, 43 (2021), 1-24.
82. T. P. Wilcox, D. J. Zwickl, T. A. Heath, and 
D. M. Hillis, Phylogenetic relationships of 
the dwarf boas and a comparison of 
Bayesian and bootstrap measures of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

82 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
phylogenetic support. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 25 (2002), 
361-371.
83. J. D. Scanlon, Montypythonoides: the 
Miocene snake Morelia riversleighensis 
(Smith and Plane, 1985) and the 
geographical origin of pythons. Memoirs of 
the Association of Australasian 
Palaeontologists, 25 (2001), 1-35.
84. Z. Szyndlar and W. Bohme, Die fossilen 
Schlangen Deutschlands: Geschichte der 
Faunen und ihrer Erforschung. 
Mertensiella, 3 (1993), 381-431.
85. H. Zaher and K. T. Smith, Pythons in the 
Eocene of Europe reveal a much older 
divergence of the group in sympatry with 
boas. Biology Letters, 16 (2020), 20200735.
86. J. A. McCartney, S. N. Bouchard, 
J. A. Reinhardt, et al., The oldest 
lamprophiid (Serpentes, Caenophidia) 
fossil from the late Oligocene Rukwa Rift 
Basin, Tanzania and the origins of African 
snake diversity. Geobios, 66-67 (2021), 
67-75.
87. J.-P. Gasc, Snake vertebrae - a mechanism 
or merely a taxonomist’s toy? In A.
d. A. Bellairs and C. B. Cox, eds., 
Morphology and Biology of Reptiles.
Linnean Society Symposium Series Number 
3 (London: Academic Press, 1976), 
pp. 177-190.
88. R. Owen, Monograph on the Fossil Reptilia 
of the London Clay. Part II. Crocodilia, 
Ophidia (London: The Palaeontographical 
Society, 1850).
89. W. Mosauer, The myology of the trunk 
region of snakes and its significance for 
ophidian taxonomy and phylogeny. 
Publications of the University of California 
at Los Angeles in Biological Sciences, 1 
(1935), 81-120.
90. R. G. Johnson, The adaptive and 
phylogenetic significance of vertebral form 
in snakes. Evolution, 9 (1955), 367-388.
91. S. Schaal, S. Baszio, and J. Habersetzer, 
Differenzierung von Schlangenarten 
anhand qualitativer und quantitativer 
Merkmale sowie konventioneller
StreckenmaEe und Indizes. Courier 
Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg, 255 (2005), 
133-169.
92. H. Yi and M. A. Norell, The burrowing 
origin of modern snakes. Science Advances, 
1 (2015), e1500743.
93. A. Palci, M. N. Hutchinson, M. W. Caldwell, 
and M. S. Y. Lee, The morphology of the 
inner ear of squamate reptiles and its 
bearing on the origin of snakes. Royal 
Society Open Science, 4 (2017), 170685.
94. W. Janensch, Uber Archaeophis proavus 
Mass., eine Schlange aus dem Eocan des 
Monte Bolca. Beitrage zur Palaontologie 
und Geologie Ostereich-Ungarns und des 
Orients, 19 (1906), 1-33.
95. O. C. Marsh, Introduction and Succession of 
Vertebrate Life in America (New Haven, 
Connecticut: Unknown, 1877).
96. A. Houssaye, J.-C. Rage, N. Bardet, et al., 
New highlights about the enigmatic marine 
snake Palaeophis maghrebianus 
(Palaeophiidae; Palaeophiinae) from the 
Ypresian (Lower Eocene) phosphates of 
Morocco. Palaeontology, 56 (2013), 647-61.
97. A. Houssaye, A. Herrel, R. Boistel, and J.- 
C. Rage, Adaptation of the vertebral inner 
structure to an aquatic life in snakes: 
Pachyophiid peculiarities in comparison to 
extant and extinct forms. Comptes Rendus 
Palevol, 18 (2019), 783-799.
98. J. W. Westgate, Paleoecology and 
biostratigraphy of marginal marine Gulf 
Coast Eocene Vertebrate localities. In 
G. F. Gunnell, ed., Eocene Biodiversity: 
Unusual Occurrences and Rarely Sampled 
Habitats (New York: Kluwer Academic, 
2001), pp. 263-297.
99. J. H. Hutchison, Pterosphenus cf. P. 
schucherti Lucas (Squamata, Palaeophidae) 
from the late Eocene of peninsular Florida. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 5 
(1985), 20-23.
100. A. O. Averianov, Paleogene sea snakes from 
the eastern part of Tethys. Russian Journal 
of Herpetology, 4 (1997), 128-142.
101. S. Duffaud and J.-C. Rage, Les remplissages 
karstiques polyphases (Eocene, Oligocene,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and distribution of palaeogene snakes 83
Pliocene) de Saint-Maximin (Phosphorites 
du Gard) et leur apport a la connaissance 
des faunes europeennes, notamment pour 
l’Eocene moyen (MP 13). 2.- Systematique: 
amphibiens et reptiles. In J. -P. Aguilar, 
S. Legendre, and J. Michaux, eds., Actes du 
Congres BiochroM'97 (Memoire Travaux 
EPHE 21) (Montpellier: Institut 
Montpellier, 1997), pp. 729-35.
102. D. Parmley and M. DeVore, Palaeopheid 
snakes from the late Eocene Hardie Mine 
local fauna of central Georgia. Southeastern 
Naturalist, 4 (2005), 703-722.
103. J. A. Holman, D. T. Dockery, III, and
G. R. Case, Paleogene snakes of Mississippi. 
Mississippi Geology, 11 (1990 [1991]), 
1-12.
104. W. Janensch, Pterosphenus Schweinfurthi 
Andrews und die Entwicklung der 
Palaeophiden. Archivfur Biontologie, 1 
(1906), 311-350.
105. H. W. Greene, Dietary correlates of the 
origin and radiation of snakes. American 
Zoologist, 23 (1983), 431-441.
106. K. T. Smith and A. Scanferla, Fossil snake 
preserving three trophic levels and 
evidence for an ontogenetic dietary shift. 
Palaeobiodiversity and 
Palaeoenvironments, 96 (2016), 589-599.
107. O. C. Marsh, Description of a new and 
gigantic fossil Serpent (Dinophis grandis) 
from the Tertiary of New Jersey. American 
Journal of Science, Series 2, 48 (1869), 
397-400.
108. C. W. Andrews, A Descriptive Catalogue of 
the Tertiary Vertebrata of the Fayum, Egypt 
(London: Longmans, 1906).
109. J.-C. Rage, Palaeophis colossaeus nov. sp. 
(le plus grand Serpent connu?) de l’Eocene 
du Mali et le probleme du genre chez les 
Palaeopheinae. Comptes Rendus de 
l'Acad6mie des Sciences (S6rie II), 296 
(1983), 1741-1744.
110. J. P. Rio and P. D. Mannion, The osteology 
of the giant snake Gigantophis garstini from 
the upper Eocene of North Africa and its 
bearing on the phylogenetic relationships 
and biogeography of Madtsoiidae. Journal 
of Vertebrate Paleontology, 37 (2017), 
e1347179.
111. J. A. McCartney, E. M. Roberts, L. Tapanila, 
and M. A. O’Leary, Large palaeophiid and 
nigerophiid snakes from Paleogene Trans­
Saharan Seaway deposits of Mali. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 63 (2018), 207-220.
112. J.-C. Rage, Fossil snakes from the 
Palaeocene of Sao Jose de Itaborai, Brazil. 
Part III. Ungaliophiinae, booids incertae 
sedis, and Caenophidia. Summary, update, 
and discussion of the snake fauna from 
the locality. Palaeovertebrata, 36 (2008), 
37-73.
113. S. Schaal and S. Baszio, Messelophis 
ermannorum n. sp., eine neue Zwergboa 
(Serpentes: Boidae: Tropidopheinae) aus 
dem Mittel-Eozan von Messel. Courier 
Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg, 252 (2004), 
67-77.
114. R Core Team. R: A Language and 
Environment for Statistical Computing 
(Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, 2016).
115. D. M. Raup, Taxonomic diversity during 
the Phanerozoic. Science, 177 (1972), 
1065-1071.
116. R. B. J. Benson, R. J. Butler, J. Lindgren, and 
A. S. Smith, Mesozoic marine tetrapod 
diversity: mass extinctions and temporal 
heterogeneity in geological megabiases 
affecting vertebrates. Proceedings of the 
Royal Society of London B, 277 (2009), 
829-834.
117. M. Kowalewski and K. W. Flessa, Improving 
with age: The fossil record of lingulide 
brachiopods and the nature of taphonomic 
megabiases. Geology, 24 (1996), 977-980.
118. M. L. Rosenzweig, Species Diversity in Space 
and Time (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1995).
119. N. J. Gotelli and A. Chao, Measuring and 
estimating species richness, species 
diversity, and biotic similarity from 
sampling data. In S. A. Levin, ed., 
Encyclopedia of Biodiversity (2nd ed), Vol 5 
(Waltham, Mass.: Academic Press, 2013), 
pp. 195-211.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

84 krister T. smith and georgios L. georgalis
120. R. K. Colwell. Estimate S v9.0 (PC). 9.0 ed. 
(Storrs, Connecticut: University of 
Connecticut; 2013).
121. P. Uetz, P. Freed, and J. Hosek, The Reptile 
Database, 
. (2021).
www.reptile-database.org
122. Y. W. Xing, R. E. Onstein, R. J. Carter, 
T. Stadler, and H. P. Linder, Fossils and a 
large molecular phylogeny show that the 
evolution of species richness, generic 
diversity, and turnover rates are 
disconnected. Evolution, 68 (2014), 
2821-2832.
123. F. Pokrant, C. Kindler, M. Ivanov, et al.
Integrative taxonomy provides evidence for 
the species status of the Ibero-Maghrebian 
grass snake Natrix astreptophora. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 118 (2016), 
873-888.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.006 Published online by Cambridge University Press

5
Miocene Snakes of Eurasia
A Review of the Evolution of Snake Communities
Martin Ivanov
5.1 Introduction
The main features of today’s Eurasian snake fauna were assembled during the Miocene 
(~23-5 Ma), and so this epoch is critical for understanding the origins and early evolution of 
this fauna. The origin of Miocene snakes in Eurasia can be traced back to the Palaeogene. 
The last epoch characterized in Eurasia by mid-latitude tropical conditions and rapid 
diversification of snake clades is the early and middle Eocene. However, worldwide cooling 
since the Early Eocene Climatic Optimum (EECO; 53.3-49.1 Ma) with a short-term warming 
~40.7-39.6 Ma (MECO; Middle Eocene Climatic Optimum) [1, 2] and a subsequent steep 
drop in temperatures around the Eocene-Oligocene transition (33.9 Ma) resulted in a 
remarkable extinction period, the ‘Grande Coupure’ (~33.4 Ma) (e.g., [3]). Several squamate 
lineages temporarily left Europe or became extinct long before the complete physical 
separation of Europe and North America but retreat of some populations into refugia in 
other parts of Europe cannot be excluded [4]. The snake families Palaeophiidae, 
Anomalophiidae, Russellophiidae, and Nigerophiidae did not survive into the Oligocene 
(for Palaeogene snakes see Chapter 4). The evolution of Cenozoic European snake faunas 
was last summarized by Rage [3]; with more detailed discussions of the evolution of 
Neogene snakes restricted to particular taxa [5-7] or particular areas [8-10].
Given the importance of the Miocene for understanding the origins and evolution of 
Eurasian snakes, the main aim of this chapter is a comprehensive review of Eurasian 
Miocene snakes in the context of contemporary taxonomy [11-13], chronostratigraphy, and 
palaeoclimatological and palaeogeographical evolution. This review is based on data col­
lected from almost 150 Eurasian localities covering almost 18 Ma (Fig. 5.1, Supplementary 
Table 5.S1).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

86 MARTIN IVANOV
50
45
40
35
55
350" 
0" 
10" 
20" 
30" 
40"
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
30" 
40" 
50" 
60
70" 
80" 
90" 
100" 
110" 
120" 
130" 
140
ф late Oligocene - early Miocene
Ф early Miocene - middle Miocene
О late Miocene
О early Miocene
О middle Miocene
Figure 5.1 Distribution of Eurasian Miocene snake localities, A, Europe; B, Asia. Positions of the most 
important localities are highlighted. For locality name indicated by a number, coordinates and 
updated ages see Supplementary Table 5.S1. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in 
some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 87
5.2 Eurasian Snakes at the Late Oligocene to Early 
Miocene Transition
The Oligocene climate was warmer than present, with prevailing subtropical conditions in 
mid-latitudes in most of Eurasia. Small representatives of Booidea and Amerophidia 
(Tropidophiidae, Aniliidae; sensu [13]) became dominant. ‘Ancient’ survivors beyond the 
‘Grande Coupure’ occurred sympatrically with new invaders. These mostly Asiatic immi­
grants penetrated into Europe as early as MP 21-MP 22 as a result of the closure of the 
Turgai Sea connection in the East. Early Oligocene snakes from Asia are still poorly known, 
so we can only speculate about dispersal routes of these first invaders into Europe. 
Dispersal via a wide continental connection north of the Paratethys and subsequent 
penetration across the marshy terrestrial barrier between the North Sea and the 
Paratethys, the Mazury-Mazowsze continental bridge (34 Ma), seems plausible [14] 
although a southern dispersal route from Anatolia across numerous islands in southeastern 
Europe (today’s Balkan Peninsula) cannot be ruled out. The Turkish early/late to late 
Oligocene herpetofauna from Kavakdare (MP 25) and Kocayarma (MP 26-MP 27) indicates 
a clear affinity with European amphibian and reptile communities [15, 16].
During the Miocene (23.03-5.3 Ma), the epicontinental Paratethys sea had flooded most 
of southern Central and Eastern Europe. In the Middle East, a continental connection 
between Eurasia and Africa originated at the Oligocene-Miocene transition as a result of 
a collision between the Eurasian and Afro-Arabian Plates, enabling exchanges of terrestrial 
fauna approximately 20-18 Ma [17]. The early Miocene was characterized by the return of a 
warm and humid climate. In continental environments, mean annual temperature (MAT) 
estimated from the palaeobotanical record quicky increased in Central Europe after the 
relatively cold early Aquitanian from ~16 °C to 18 °C and temperatures >16 °C persisted 
during the Burdigalian. The coldest monthly mean temperature (CMMT) was ~6 °C in 
Central Europe [18]. Eastern Asia (Eastern China) was cooler with MAT 13.5 °C and CMMT 
5-6 °C during the early Miocene [19].
In Asiatic Eurasia, latest Oligocene (latest Chattian, MP 30; 23.2-23.03 Ma) to earliest 
Miocene (Aquitanian, MN 1-MN 2; 23.03-20.44 Ma) snakes occur rarely in several localities 
in Anatolia (Figs. 5.1 and 5.2) which was then an island separated from the rest of Asia [20]. 
The occurrence of Anilioidea (Eoanilius cf. oligocenicus, for current taxonomy see Chapter 4), 
Tropidophiidae (Falseryx), Booidea (Bavarioboa, Albaneryx) and ‘Colubridae’ (Texasophis; 
for taxonomy of fossil ‘Colubridae’ see Supplementary Table 5.S2) (Fig. 5.3) as well as other 
amphibians and reptiles (e.g., Latonia, palaeobatrachids, Eopelobates, Salamandra, and 
Pseudopus) in the late Oligocene to early Miocene of Anatolia prove communication between 
Asiatic and European herpetofaunas [16, 21, 22].
In southern Asia, the oldest fossil of Acrochordidae, the sister group of all other extant 
caenophidians [12, 13], is Acrochordus cf. dehmi from the earliest Miocene of Kharinadi 
Formation, Gujarat, Western India (Fig. 5.3; [23]). The first distinct A. dehmi from the Kamlial 
Formation of the Siwalik Group on the Potwar Plateau, Pakistan is of similar or younger age. 
Therefore, the origin and early diversification of this genus, known from numerous localities
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
G>N>-^0<£>00~40
.............. 1......... 1......... 1........ . ■ 1.........1......... 1.........
O1
.................. ............
-h-whj_
*
ocoa>~40>
 
...... . ..............              1................1 ..............1 ■ ■ ■ ■ 1 ■ ■
Age (Ma)
EARLY MIOCENE
MIDDLE MIOCENE
LATE MIOCENE
subepoch
REGIONAL 
STAGES
N
Aquitanian 5
Burdigalian 
: Л 
I 
w
о 
Langhian 
ь, Serravallian
ь 
о
» 
Tortonian
-4
S Messinian
Я
0
0
stage/age
Egerian
Eggenburgian 
Ottnang. Karpatian
Badenian
Sarmatian
Pannonian
Pontian
Central
Paratethys
Caucasian s.l.
Sakaraulian
Kotsakhurian
Tarkhanian
Chok- • 
rakian <□
Konk- 
ian
Sarmatian s.l. 
Maeotian
Pontian .Kimmer- 
ian
Eastern
Paratethys
z
-1
.........j “I
MN4
..... “i
of
MN 
7+8
®z
° Z
z
"MN
12
MN
13
MN Zones (W. Eur. 
/Cen. Europe)
KI 
KU 
KA
Turkey
SW+W. ASIA
» RU1
Georgia
•---- • AS
S. Arabia
•' AY
• 
» MK1
♦ 
♦ MK2
•-- • BA
* * PP1 
PA A® ; РА1ВФ 
• KE 
•—• SE1A 
I • BO1A
Kazakhstan
CEN. + S.ASIA
TG
• CH
Russia
Pakistan
SGPP #■
PSD
—• RA
’A
India
!
3AK 
гик
Nepal
BUK-A
Mongolia
SE.+E. ASIA
SHA
ER •------ •
China
MLML
Thailand
• M Z
Japan
Figure 5.2 Miocene time scale and biostratigraphy (for sources see Supplementary Figure 5.S1) with stratigraphical position of Asian snake 
localities. Turkey: KI, Kil^ak 0, 3A, 3B; KU, Kurucan; KA, Kargi 1-3; PAS, Pa§alar. Georgia: RU1, Rustavi 1; Saudi Arabia: AS, Al-Sarrar. 
Kazakhstan: AY, Ayakoz; MK1 and MK2, Malyi Kalkaman 1 and 2; BA, Baikadam; PP1, Petropavlovsk 1; PA1A and PA1B, Pavlodar 1A and 1B; KE, 
Kedey; SE1A, Selety 1A; BO1A, Borki 1A. Russia: TG, Tagay (Togay), Ol’khon Island, Baykal Lake; CH, Cherlak. Pakistan: SGPP, Siwalik Group- 
Potwar Plateau; India: PSD, Pasuda; PA, Palasava; RA, Raun. Nepal: BAK, Babai Khola (Dang Valley), TUK, Tui Khola (Dang Valley). Mongolia: 
BUK-A, Builstyn Khudang-A. China: SHA, Shantung; ER, Ertemte. Thailand: LML, Li Mae Long. Japan: MIZ, Mizunami.

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
NMZ. W.
JMMM—k—x—k 
—
йЮ-'-ООСО-ЧО 
..I....I....I.1............ 1 .... 1 .... 1 .... 1 .... 1......
Ol
-kWN5^O<P00-405 
.............. 1.... 1.... 1.... 1.... 1.... 1.... 1.......1... .1.................................. Age (Ma)
EARLY MIOCENE
MIDDLE MIOCENE
LATE MIOCENE
subepoch
J 
M
5 Aquitanian £ 
Burdigalian
5 
CD
о 
Langhian £ Serravallian
Ч 
ГОо
я 
Tortonian
S
4 
pi
£ Messinian £
я 
w
stage/age
Egerian
Eggenburgian 
Ottnang, Karpatian
Badenian
Sarmatian
Pannonian
Pontian
Central 
Parat
Caucasian s.l.
Sakaraulian 
Kotsakhurian
Tarkhanian
Chok- * Konk- 
rakian <S ian
Sarmatian s.l. 
Maeotian
Pontian Kimmer’ 
ian
Eastern
Parat.
Figure 5.3 Miocene stratigraphic ranges of snake taxa (mostly extinct genera and species) reported from Asia. A, Scolecophidia; B, Anilioidea; C, 
Tropidophiidae; D, Boidae; E, Erycidae; F, Pythonidae; G, Acrochordidae; H, Viperidae; I, Elapidae; J, Natricidae; K, ‘Colubridae’; (1) Scolecophidia 
indet.; (2) Eoanilius oligocenicus; (3) Falseryx sp.; (4) Bavarioboa sp.; (5) Albaneryx volynicus; (6) Eryx sp. 1; (7) Eryx sp. 2; (8) Eryx sp. + ‘Eryx- 
Gongylophis’ group; (9) Python sp.; (10) Acrochordus dehmi; (11) Acrochordus, different from A. dehmi; (12) Viperidae (‘Oriental’ vipers); (13) 
Vipera sp. (‘European’ vipers, ‘V. aspis’ complex); (14) Gloydius sp.; (15) Trimeresurus sp.; (16) Bungarus sp.; (17) Naja sp.; (18) Elapidae? indet. 
similar to Ophiophagus; (19) ‘Mionatrix’ diatomus; (20) Gansophis potwarensis; (21) Chotaophis padhriensis; (22) Sivaophis downsi; (23) Hierophis 
hungaricus; (24) Texasophis bohemiacus; (25) Texasophis sp.; (26) Elaphe dione; (27) ‘Elaphe’ sp. Dashed pattern = uncertain occurrence. Fossil 
snake occurrences according to [21-23, 27, 28, 60, 64, 83, 84, 87, 104].

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press
stage/age
! ro
I w
i. ■ ■ 1 . ■ ■ . i
Ю 
,,, ,1,
ГО
.. .7... .... 1.....
CD 
.....1.......
CO
0
ci ..... 7, ■ ■ ■
О
N> 
■ ■.. 1 ■ ■ ■.....7..,,
О
<0
Co 
-4
.....Г ... i.... 1 ■
Age (Ma)
| 
EARLY MIOCENE
MIDDLE MIOCENE
LATE MIOCENE
subepoch
Langhian
Aquitanian
Serravallian
rortonian
Sarmatian
Ottnang.
Eggenburgian
Karpatian
Caucasian s.l.
Sakaraulian
Kotsakhurian
Central 
Paratethys 
Eastern
m О
Chok- £ Konk- 
rakian ian
Egerian
-s
z —
MN4 
MN
3
“i
0,2 
.............3 ?S
z . 
ffiZ
MN
10
- g
MN 
13 
MN12
MN Zones (W. Eur. 
J Cen. Europe)
;•--- • Qp w
AMR
Portugal
SW. + W. EUROPE
AG
> • CO
*  L '
ACM
i 
•—•SB
Spain
•—♦ OSC 
:
•—• FDF
GA
: 
CM ••
1 
MCC •
: 
ve •
Italy
SGLP 
MLB 
PC 
MC
LGO
•-•£
LG5
LG7
SOB
France
WB6 
•—• ww
c-r‘U'1
•—• RO13
••HD •♦GR1
• SA 
• LA3
•• 0GG2 
• GA2b
• ST 
ф ф Oh
Germany
CENTRAL EUROPE
•—• uw„
•--- <AMO
STU3
• LAN1• pe'
OPH
ME
DO
• SU
Czechia
IVB
•-♦OB
• GD
• GRA
»-• KO
Austria
•—•LI
RU
• P04 *PO2
• 
• P05 Hungary
•------• MA1 
• MA3
•—• SH3
•• DNV-ZF 
I •-• DNV-B
Slovakia
•—•OP
Poland
CR1
Romania
E. + SE. EUROPE
TS
*  •—*VA
•-- ------• BU
• 
; 
• KA
•
Moldavia
•—> GR
>•• KLI
•—• FR2
•—•
NE2I
•—• KR
•-• CH
NE2
•-•NE
Bl •-•
E•—• NU1
•—• AN
t/l•-------• OR
Ukraine
•--- • SO
Russia
• RP
P
MT
<••
Greece
• • KD 
KY
MA •-
Figure 5.4 Miocene time scale and biostratigraphy (for sources see Supplementary Figure 5.S1; black dashed lines = Western Europe; grey dashed 
lines = Central Europe) with stratigraphical positions of European snake localities. Portugal: QP, Quinta das Pedreiras (Lisbon); AMR, Amor.

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 91
in Siwalik Group of Pakistan, Nepal, and northern India as well as from early Miocene of 
Thailand, can be placed before the Palaeogene-Neogene boundary [23-30].
European late Oligocene snakes are well documented only from France and Germany. 
Despite the low number of localities around the Oligocene-Miocene transition, the late 
Oligocene to early Miocene (MP 29-MN 2) decrease of snake diversity, named the ‘Dark 
Period’ [6], is conspicuous in comparison with the rich communities of MP 28. Anilioids 
were Oligocene survivors as documented by the likely permanent presence of Eoanilius up 
to the early Langhian, MN 5 [31]. The last E. oligocenicus has been reported from the early 
Miocene (early MN 3) of Oschiri, Italy (Fig. 5.4) [32, 33]. The tropidophiid genus Falseryx 
first appeared in the early Oligocene of France (MP 22) but left Europe for about 10 Ma as 
documented by its uncertain appearance in the late Aquitanian (MN 2a) of Amoneburg, 
Germany. Falseryx, which invaded Europe probably from southwestern Asia, can be unam­
biguously distinguished from the erycid genus Bransateryx only by the morphology of 
caudal vertebrae, so Cernansky et al. [34] assumed that trunk vertebrae from various 
collections previously attributed to erycines might actually belong to tropidophiids.
The early Aquitanian decrease of temperatures in Central Europe with MAT ~16 °C and 
CMMT ~5.5 °C continued towards the Western Asia with MAT ~14-16 °C and CMMT 
~2-5 °C [18, 35]. The distribution of Amerophidia and Booidea was affected by this change 
and most Oligocene Boidae and Tropidophiidae did not survive the Oligocene-Miocene 
transition at mid-latitudes. The Erycidae genus Bransateryx is represented rarely byB. vireti 
in MN 1 of Paulhiac, France [36] and two coeval German localities, Weisenau, MN 2 - old 
collection ([37]; though, caudal vertebrae are missing) and Weifcenburg 6, MN 1-MN 2 
(B. cf. vireti; Ivanov, unpublished data). Bransateryx cf. vireti from Germany indicates that
Figure 5.4 (cont.) Spain: AG, Agramon; CO, Corcoles; LCV, Les Cases de la Valenciana; ACM, 
Abocador de Can Mata; AL, Algora; SB, Salobrena. Italy: OSC, Oschiri; FDF, Fosso della Fittaia; CM, 
Cava Monticino; MCC, Moncucco Torinese; VE, Verduno; GA, Gargano ‘terre rosse’. France: SGLP, 
St.-Gerand-le-Puy; MLB, Montaigu-le-Blin; PC, Poncenat; MC, Marcoin; LC, Laugnac; SV, Serre de 
Verges; BE1, Beon 1; AR, Artenay; LGO, La Grive - old levels; VC, Vieux-Collonges; LIA, L’Isle 
d’Abeau; SAN, Sansan; LG5, LG7, La Grive 5, 7; SOB, Soblay. Germany: WE, Weisenau; WB6, 
WeiEenburg 6; AMO, Amoneburg; UW, Ulm-Westtangente; OPH, Oppenheim/Nierstein; WW, 
Wintershof-West; STU3, Stubersheim 3; SCH1, Schnaitheim 1; PE2, Petersbuch 2; LAN1, Langenau 1; 
RO13, Rothenstein 13; OGG 2, Oggenhausen 2; HD, Hader; GR1, Griesbeckerzell 1a+1b; SA, 
Sandelzhausen; LA3, Laimering 3; GA2b, Gallenbach 2b; HA6C, Hambach 6C; ST, Steinheim 
a. Albuch; OH, Ohningen; Czechia: ME, Merkur-North; DO, Dolnice; MO, Mokra-Western Quarry; 
IVB, Ivancice near Brno; SU, Suchomasty. Austria: OB, Oberdorf; GD, Grund; GRA, Gratkorn; KO, 
Kohfidisch; Hungary: LI, Litke 1, 2; MA1, MA2, MA3, Matraszolos 1, 2, 3; SH3, Samsonhaza 3; FE, 
Felsotarkany 1+3/2; RU, Rudabanya; TA3, Tardosbanya 3; PO2,4,5, Polgardi 2, 4, 5; Slovakia: DNV-ZF, 
Devinska Nova Ves - Zapfe’s fissures; DNV-B, Devmska Nova Ves - ‘Bonanza’; Poland: OP, Opole. 
Romania: SU, Subpiatra 2; TS, Tasad; TU, Taut; VA, Varciorog; CR1, Cretesti 1. Moldavia: BU, Buzhor; 
KA, Kalfa. Ukraine: GR, Gritsev; KLI, Klimentovichi; FR2, Frunzovka 2; KR, Krivoy Rog; NE2, 
Novoelizabetovka 2 (lower layer); NE2l, Novoelizabetovka 2 (bone-bearing lens); CHE, 
Cherevichnoie; NEM, Novaya Emetovka 2; BI, Bielka; NU1, Novoukrainka 1; AN, Andreevka; OR, 
Orekhovka. Russia: SO, Solnechnodolsk. Greece: ALI, Aliveri; KD, Karydia; KY, Kymi; RP, Ravin de la 
Pluie; PK, Pikermi; MT, Maritsa; MA, Maramena 1-3; AM, Ano Mentochi.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

92 MARTIN IVANOV
Figure 5.5 Early Miocene stratigraphic ranges of snake taxa (mostly extinct genera and species) in 
Western (black) and Central + Eastern (grey) Europe. A, Scolecophidia; B, Anilioidea; C, 
Tropidophiidae; D, Boidae; E, Erycidae; F, Pythonidae; G, Viperidae; H, Elapidae; I, Natricidae; J, 
‘Colubridae’; (1) Scolecophidia indet.; (2) Eoanilius oligocenicus; (3) Eoanilius sp.; (4) Falseryx 
petersbuchi; (5) Falseryx sp.; (6) Bavarioboa, morphotype 1; (7) Bavarioboa hermi; (8) Bavarioboa sp.; 
(9) Bransateryx vireti; (10) Eryx sp.; (11) Python europaeus; (12) Python sp.; (13) Vipera antiqua; (14) 
Vipera platyspondyla; (15) Vipera sp. (‘European’ vipers, ‘V. aspis’ complex); (16) Viperidae 
(‘Oriental’ vipers); (17) ‘Micrurus’ gallicus; (18) Naja romani; (19) Naja sp.; (20) Natrix sansaniensis; 
(21) Natrix merkurensis; (22) ‘Natrix’ natricoides; (23) Natrix morphotype 1; (24) Natrix sp.; (25) 
Neonatrix europaea; (26) Neonatrix nova; (27) Neonatrix sp.; (28) Palaeonatrix lehmani; (29) 
Palaeonatrix sp.; (30) ‘Coluber’ cadurci; (31) ‘Coluber’ dolnicensis; (32) ‘Coluber’ caspioides; (33) 
‘Coluber’ suevicus; (34) ‘Coluber’ pouchetii; (35) ‘Coluber’ sp.; (36) Hierophis hungaricus; (37) 
Texasophis bohemiacus; (38) Texasophis meini; (39) Elaphe sp.; (40) Telescopus sp. Dashed pattern = 
uncertain occurrence. Data according to: taxa 1-12: [6, 34, 44, 66]; taxa 13-16 [5]; taxon 17 [39, 44, 51]; 
taxa 18-19 [9, 39]; taxa 20-40 [7, 34].
populations of B. vireti were simultaneously evolving both in Central and Western Europe 
since the late Oligocene, MP 27 [6]. The disappearance of Bransateryx from Central Europe 
and its survival up to MN 2 in France (Saint-Gerand-le-Puy and Poncenat) [36, 38] might be 
explained by lower temperatures and increased humidity in Central Europe and lack of arid 
or semi-arid environments. The extant genus Eryx replaced Bransateryx in southern Europe 
probably as early as MN 3 (Fig. 5.5).
The first Viperidae, of the ‘aspis’ complex, appeared in the early Miocene of Weisenau 
(MN 2; Vipera cf. V. antiqua) and St.-Gerand-le-Puy, France (MN 1 or MN 2a) [5, 39]. The 
exact biostratigraphic age of Weisenau is still debated [3], so isolated fangs from MN 2 of 
Oppenheim/Nierstein, Germany [40] corresponding in size to fangs of the ‘V. aspis’ com­
plex, represent the first stratigraphically unquestionable record of Viperidae. Rage [3] 
accepted that elapoid fangs reminiscent of Naja spp. and Bungarus from Oppenheim/ 
Nierstein might represent immature viperids but the presence of still-undescribed 
vertebrae closely similar to those of natricids and non-Naja elapoids, reported by Kuch 
et al. [40], indicate that elapoids were indeed present in MN 2 of Central Europe.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 93
Colubroidea (sensu [12, 13]) are largely unknown in the earliest Miocene (Fig. 5.5) with 
the exception of ‘Coluber’ cadurci from Aquitanian of Weisenau and France [39, 41]. Two 
morphotypes of Coluber s.l. as well as cf. Natrix sp. and possibly the geologically oldest 
Neonatrix have been reported from Amoneburg, MN 2a [34].
5.3 Early and Middle Burdigalian (Early Miocene): A Rapid 
Change in Composition of European Snake Communities
The early Burdigalian (~late MN 2 and most of MN 3; 20.4-18.2 Ma) warming, interrupted in 
the Paratethys area by the Early Ottnangian Cooling (EOC) event (18.1-17.8 Ma; [42]), was 
followed in the late middle Burdigalian (late Ottnangian; 17.5-17.3 Ma) by rapid warming in 
western Central Europe (NAFB, North Alpine Foreland Basin) with paratropical 
temperatures ~22-24 °C and mean annual precipitation (MAP) ~830-1350 mm. Even during 
the coldest month of the year the temperature probably did not fall below 16.7 °C [43].
Eurasian snakes underwent a significant change during MN 3. Early Burdigalian warming 
is evidenced by the tropidophiid Falseryx petersbuchi at Bissingen 1, and Wintershof-West 
([44]; pers. obs.). The Miocene dispersal of Falseryx in Central Europe most likely slightly 
preceded that of boid genus Bavarioboa (Fig. 5.5) [34]. Bavarioboa which disappeared from 
the European fossil record in the late Oligocene for almost 5 million years, occurred again 
in Central Europe in the early Burdigalian but Miocene representatives were different from 
those that inhabited France and Germany in the Oligocene [6]. I consider early Miocene 
Bavarioboa from Central Europe as an Asian newcomer from the east or southeast. The first 
Miocene appearance of Bavarioboa in Europe is in the early Burdigalian (MN 3a) of 
Merkur-North (or Ahrnkov), Czechia [45]. The presence of this genus in slightly younger 
Schnaitheim 1 and Wintershof-West localities, Germany (both MN 3b; Fig. 5.4) indicates 
that Bavarioboa, in Schnaitheim 1 probably B. hermi (pers. obs.), spread rapidly in Central 
Europe together with other non-erycid Booidea, before the EOC. A large pythonid (centrum 
length >10 mm, width 13-14 mm) from the early Miocene (MN 3/4) of Kymi, Greece can be 
attributed to Python (P. euboicus; [6,46]). Although the biostratigraphical age is not certain, 
it might represent the first Miocene dispersal of Python into Europe either from Asia or 
Africa because the ‘Gomphotherium land bridge’ existed in the Burdigalian [20, 47].
‘Oriental vipers’ characterized by large dimensions of relatively short and wide vertebrae 
and massive hypapophyses, have their first European occurrence in Wintershof-West [44] 
and Schnaitheim 1 (Ivanov, unpublished). Among Elapoidea, only small representatives 
with centrum length rarely reaching 3 mm have been reported in MN 3. These resemble 
recent coral snakes such as Calliophis or have been attributed to the genus ‘Micrurus’ [44, 
45] (for explanation of quotation marks see Supplementary Table 5.S2). Recent molecular 
studies recover a well-supported Calliophis clade (excluding C. bivirgatus [12]) as sister 
group to all other extant Elapidae [12, 48], and are consistent with an Asian origin of coral 
snakes. Although several morphologically different types of coral snakes likely occurred in 
NAFB, large elapids, usually attributed to the genus Naja, did not appear at mid-latitudes in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

94 MARTIN IVANOV
Western or Central Europe before the beginning of the Miocene Climatic Optimum (MCO), 
because Naja is more thermophilic than most ‘Oriental vipers’ [39, 49-51].
Colubroid snakes underwent a first massive dispersal to Central Europe in MN 3 as 
reported from Merkur-North (MN 3a) and Wintershof-West (MN 3b) [44,45]. ‘Colubridae’ 
and Natricidae are highly dominant in Merkur-North, with several taxa making their first 
appearance: ‘Coluber’ dolnicensis, ‘C’. suevicus, ‘C’. caspioides, Natrix merkurensis and N. 
sansaniensis (Fig. 5.5; for explanation of quotation marks in generic names see 
Supplementary Table 5.S2). However, Wintershof-West provides a colubroid assemblage 
of different composition, with common Boidae and Viperidae (‘Oriental vipers’) 
also occurring.
The Burdigalian was a crucial period for the evolution of European snake faunas with MN 
2 and early MN 3 snake communities markedly different from those of late MN 3 and MN 4. 
Although non-erycid Booidea have been rarely documented from the early Burdigalian 
sites, large representatives of Boidae and Pythonidae, together with other highly thermo­
philic snakes, became common soon after the EOC. This change, linked with a strong 
increase in snake diversity, was quite rapid and lasted probably no more than several 
hundred thousand years.
5.4 Miocene Climatic Optimum (MCO): The ‘Golden Age’ 
of Eurasian Snake Faunas
The MCO (~17-14.5 Ma; [52,53]) represents, after the late Ottnangian warming event, the 
warmest Miocene period. Palaeobotanical records of xyloflora in combination with occur­
rences of highly thermophilic reptiles (Python) indicate slight lowering of MAT to 18.6-20.8 
°C and CMMT 8.1-13.3 °C from the late Karpatian to early Badenian [43, 54]. Forests 
changed to subtropical semi-deciduous, later (early Badenian) to oak-laurel and finally 
(late Badenian) to dry deciduous, consistent with palaeobotanic data from other regions of 
Central Europe [43, 55]. This coincides with a marked seasonality, up to six months per year 
with rainfall < 60 mm (14.7-14.5 Ma) [52, 56]. In Central Paratethys (Korneuburg Basin, 
Austria) the presence of the alligatoroid Diplocynodon and possibly cordylid lizards indicate 
a warm climate with MAT ~17 °C and CMMT ~3-8 °C, which persisted in this area up to the 
late Karpatian [57-59].
Late early and early middle Miocene snakes are currently almost unknown from Asia 
(Fig. 5.2). The wide distribution of Python in southern and southwestern Asia (Fig. 5.3) is 
documented by its continual occurrence in the Siwalik Group from the middle Burdigalian 
to the latest Miocene (~18 Ma-6.78 Ma; [28]), as well as the presence of a ‘medium sized 
Python’ from Al-Sarrar, Saudi Arabia [60], and its westernmost Asian record in the earliest 
middle Miocene (late MN 5) of Pasalar, Turkey [61]. A possibly close relationship between 
Anatolian Python and a pythonid from Kymi, MN 3/4 (P. euboicus) cannot be excluded 
given that faunal exchanges have been documented between Anatolia and the Greek 
mainland via the landmass connection that existed during the early and early middle 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 95
Miocene [61]. The Al-Sarrar locality also yielded erycids of the ‘Eryx-Gongylophis’ group but 
the oldest Asiatic Eryx, described on the basis of a fragmentary posterior caudal vertebra, is 
from the Aquitanian (MN 1 to MN 2) of Ayakoz, Kazakhstan [62] and precedes its first 
appearance in southern Europe (Fig. 5.3).
Caenophidian clades are represented by indeterminate viperids, ‘colubrids’ and elapids 
of the Naja-group from Al-Sarrar [60]. Indeterminate small-sized Viperidae and larger 
specimens resembling extant Montivipera xanthina have been reported from the late early 
Miocene of Zaisan Basin, Kazakhstan [63]. A colubroid, Mionatrix diatomus from the late 
early Miocene (MN 4) of Shandong, China [64] is inadequately defined and needs revision 
(Supplementary Table 5.S2). The allocation of a fragmentary vertebra from the late early 
Miocene (17.9-17.2 Ma) of Mizunami, Japan to cf. Trimeresurus sp. [65] cannot be con­
sidered the earliest unambiguous Crotalinae [30].
The European snake fauna of the late early and early middle Miocene (MN 4 and MN 5) 
was highly diversified (Figs. 5.5 and 5.6). The continuous occurrence of Scolecophidia in 
France since the latest Oligocene (MP 30) up to the early Miocene (MN 4) indicates the 
western provenance of early Miocene scolecophidians from Central Europe.
The late Burdigalian (MN 4 and early MN 5) was closely linked with a rapid dispersal of 
large Boidae and Pythonidae in Central and Western Europe as a result of onset of the 
MCO. Bavarioboa hermi became widespread in Europe from MN 4 [6, 66]. Despite the fact 
that the late Burdigalian B. ultima from Rothenstein 13, Germany does not represent a fully 
adult specimen [6], it appears that up to the early Badenian, when the MCO culminated, the 
average size of Booidea was increasing [67]. The largest Eurasian constrictor was Python, 
whose first indisputable European appearance is from MN 4 in France and Czechia [51, 66]. 
Pythonids are among the most thermophilic European Miocene squamates and their 
occurrence is closely linked to the warmest MCO phases. The youngest European python 
record, Python sp. from the Langhian (early Badenian; MN 5) of Griesbeckerzell 1a and 1b, 
Germany [54], is similar to P. europaeus documented from several French localities: Beon 1, 
MN 4 [51], La Grive P & B and Vieux-Collonges, both MN 5 [6, 49]. I assume that large 
Boidae and Pythonidae did not survive in Europe after the Langhian-Serravallian transition 
as a result of deterioration of climatic conditions. Although the extinct sand boa Albaneryx 
depereti has been reported from the late Langhian of France [68], erycids of the extant genus 
Eryx appeared in Spain as early as the middle Burdigalian, MN 4 or ? MN 3 [69, 70]. The 
return of Erycidae into Central Europe (Fig. 5.6), documented by caudal vertebrae of Eryx 
from Gallenbach 2b and Laimering 3, Germany (late MN 5), resulted most likely from 
increased impact of seasonality with arid periods 14.7-14.5 Ma [52]. Tropidophiidae 
became extinct in Eurasia shortly after the MCO, as documented by the last uncertain 
occurrence of Falseryx in Steinheim (13.6-13.4 Ma; [6]).
‘Oriental vipers’ and large elapids became common in Europe. ‘Oriental vipers’ and 
‘European vipers’ of the ‘V. aspis’ complex (Fig. 5.5) inhabited Europe sympatrically during 
the late Burdigalian [31,51]. Large Viperinae ‘Oriental vipers’ or Daboia (see Supplementary 
Table 5.S2) have been identified from Griesbeckerzell 1b [54]. Their vertebrae are substan­
tially larger than those of the other known ‘Oriental vipers’ and resemble vertebrae from 
Vieux-Collonges, France [49, 71].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

96 MARTIN IVANOV
Figure 5.6 Latest early to late Miocene stratigraphic ranges of snake taxa (mostly extinct genera and 
species) in Western (black) and Central + Eastern (grey) Europe. (A) Latest early and middle 
Miocene (MN 5-MN 7+8) snakes: A, Scolecophidia; B, Anilioidea; C, Tropidophiidae; D, Boidae; E, 
Erycidae; F, Pythonidae; G, Viperidae; H, Elapidae; I, Dipsadidae; J, Natricidae; K, ‘Colubridae’; (1) 
Scolecophidia indet.; (2) Eoanilius sp.; (3) Falseryx sp.; (4) Bavarioboa hermi; (5) Bavarioboa ultima; 
(6) Bavarioboa sp.; (7) Albaneryx depereti; (8) Albaneryx volynicus; (9) Eryx sp.; (10) Python 
europaeus; (11) Python sp.; (12) Vipera aegertica; (13) ‘Vipera’ sp. or Daboia sp.; (14) Macrovipera 
ukrainica + Macrovipera sp.; (15) Viperidae (‘Oriental’ vipers); (16) Vipera sp. (‘European’ vipers, ‘V. 
aspis’ complex); (17) Viperidae ‘V. berus’ complex; (18) Crotalinae gen. et sp. indet. 1 and 2; (19) 
‘Micrurus’ gallicus; (20) ‘Micrurus’ sp.; (21) Naja romani; (22) Naja sp.; (23) ‘Paleoheterodon’ 
arcuatus; (24) Natrix sansaniensis; (25) Natrix rudabanyaensis; (26) ‘Natrix’ natricoides; (27) Natrix 
longivertebrata; (28) Natrix sp.; (29) Neonatrix europaea; (30) Neonatrix crassa; (31) Neonatrix sp.; 
(32) Palaeonatrix silesiaca; (33) Palaeonatrix lehmani; (34) ‘Coluber’ dolnicensis; (35) ‘Coluber’ 
caspioides; (36) ‘Coluber’ suevicus; (37) ‘Coluber’ pouchetii; (38) ‘Coluber’ sp.; (39) Hierophis 
hungaricus; (40) Texasophis meini; (41) Texasophis sp.; (42) Zamenis kohfidischi; (43) ‘Elaphe’ sp.; (44) 
Zamenis sp.; (45) Telescopus sp.; (46) Coronella miocaenica. (B) Late Miocene (MN 9-MN 13) 
snakes: A, Scolecophidia; B, Erycidae; C, Viperidae, D, Psammophiidae; E, Elapidae; F, Dipsadidae; 
G, Natricidae; H, ‘Colubridae’; (1) Scolecophidia indet.; (2) Albaneryx sp.; (3) Eryx jaculus; (4) Eryx 
sp.; (5) Macrovipera gedulyi; (6) Macrovipera sarmatica; (7) Macrovipera sp.; (8) Viperidae (‘Oriental’ 
vipers); (9) Vipera meotica; (10) Vipera sp. (‘European’ vipers, ‘V. aspis’ complex); (11) Viperidae ‘V. 
berus’ complex; (12) Malpolon sp.; (13) Psammophis sp.; (14) ‘Micrurus’ sp.; (15) Naja romani; (16) 
Naja iberica; (17) Naja sp.; (18) ‘Paleoheterodon’ arcuatus; (19) Natrix rudabanyaensis; (20) Natrix 
longivertebrata; (21) Natrix sp.; (22) Neonatrix sp.; (23) ‘Coluber’ pouchetii; (24) ‘Coluber’ sp.; (25) 
Dolichophis sp.; (26) Platyceps planicarinatus; (27) Hierophis hungaricus; (28) Zamenis algorensis; (29) 
Zamenis kohfidischi; (30) ‘Elaphe’ kormosi; (31) Zamenis praelongissimus; (32) Zamenis szyndlari;
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 97
The elapid genus Naja, first documented in Europe (Fig. 5.5) by N. romani from the early 
Miocene (MN 4a) of Petersbuch 2, Germany [39, 72] appeared simultaneously in several 
late Burdigalian and Langhian (MN 4 and MN 5) sites in Germany, Austria, France, and 
Spain [31, 50, 51, 70, 73, 74]. The origin of Elapidae is still debated because the geologically 
oldest elapids are from Africa though molecular data place elapid origins in Asia 35-30 Ma 
[75]. A posterior trunk vertebra of Elapid morphotype A from the late Oligocene Nsungwe 
Formation (~24 Ma), Tanzania is similar to extant Naja haje and N. nigricollis [75] but the 
absence of cranial elements and caudal vertebrae prevent unambiguous distinction from 
the Asiatic complex of Naja. Despite a close affinity ofN. romani with the Asiatic complex of 
Naja [72], the first N. romani might have dispersed into Europe either from Asia or Africa. 
‘Micrurus’ cf. gallicus from Samsonhaza, Hungary (MN 6; [10]) is likely the last occurrence 
of this species in Central Europe, although small elapids might have survived in Central 
Europe up to the earliest late Miocene [50].
A close early Miocene communication of snake faunas between Central and Western 
Europe is also documented by the distribution of colubroids. Several natricids that first 
appeared in Central Europe in the early Burdigalian (MN 3) have their relatives in the 
middle Burdigalian (MN 4) of France including Natrix sansaniensis, N. aff. merkurensis and 
Neonatrix europaea. On the other hand, ‘colubrines’ reported from the latest early Miocene 
of France such as ‘Coluber’ pouchetii and Texasophis meini, probably appeared in the latest 
early and earliest middle Miocene localities of Central Europe [31, 51, 76]. Several of the 
above mentioned extinct species inhabited Europe during the late Burdigalian and 
Langhian such as N. sansaniensis and ‘C.’ pouchetii from Sansan (MN 6), France and ‘C.’ 
cf. caspioides from Oberdorf, Austria (MN 4) and Griesbeckerzell 1a (MN 5), Germany [54, 
68, 77]. Only ‘C.’ pouchetii survived for about 7.5 Ma, as documented by its last occurrence 
in the early late Miocene (MN 9) of Rudabanya, Hungary [50]. The early Badenian (MN 5) 
deposits from Grund, Austria provide the first occurrence of Zamenis kohfidischi ([73]; for a 
new allocation of extinct European Elaphe species into genus Zamenis see Supplementary 
Table 5.S2). This first possible occurrence of fossil Zamenis coincides with its likely diver­
gence time estimated from molecular data ~8.5-15.0 Ma [78].
Texasophis and Neonatrix were considered to be of North American origin [79]. The 
oldest evidence of Neonatrix is N. elongata from the early Miocene of South Dakota and 
Texas [80, 81]. However, if ? Neonatrix sp. appeared in Central Europe in MN 2 [34] and 
N. europaea first appeared in MN 3 [44], we cannot ascertain whether the European 
representatives of Neonatrix, including N. nova from Dolnice (MN 4), Czechia [76], indeed 
came from North America or originated in Asia. According to Szyndlar [50], European 
representatives of Neonatrix might have represented a different lineage of tiny snakes and
Figure 5.6 (cont.) (33) ‘Elaphe’ sp.; (34) Telescopus bolkayi; (35) Telescopus sp.; (36) Coronella 
miocaenica; (37) Coronella sp.; (38) Hispanophis coronolloideus; (39) Periergophis micros; (40) 
Paraxenophis spanios. Dashed pattern = uncertain occurrence. Data according to: taxa A1-11 and 
B1-4 [6, 8, 10, 54, 67-69, 82, 125]; A12-18 and B5-11 [5, 10, 91, 110]; B12-13 [7, 126]; A19-20 and B14 
[10, 49, 67, 93]; A21-22 and B15-17 [9, 10, 31, 50, 105-107, 122]; A23 and B18 [79, 126]; A24-46 and 
B19-40 [7, 54, 93].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

98 MARTIN IVANOV
he recommended the use of the generic name in quotation marks (Supplementary Table 5. 
S2). A peculiar ‘colubrid’ snake from Greek localities Karydia and possibly also Aliveri (both 
MN 4a) differs from all known taxa by the presence of ‘paracentral ridges’ in precaudal 
vertebrae. Although the skeletal anatomy of extant African and Asian snakes is poorly 
documented, the absence of ‘paracentral ridges’ in all European extinct and extant snakes 
indicates that this snake could represent a short-lived radiation with African (via 
‘Gomphotherium Landbridge’) or Asian origin [82].
5.5 Late Middle Miocene Snakes from Eurasia: 
A Step towards Modern Snake Faunas in Europe
The late Langhian to early Serravallian (~14-13.5 Ma) was marked by a sharp drop in MAT 
by 7 °C (15.4-14.8 °C) and CMMT ~11 °C [52]. The climate became much drier in the late 
Serravallian (13.5-11.5 Ma) with MAP ~150-200 mm in the driest period. This cooling led to 
the disappearance of large Booidea and Pythonoidea from Europe and caused extinction of 
other highly thermophilic reptiles such as alligatoroids, chameleons, and giant tortoises in 
Central Europe [52]. Snake diversity decreased regardless of the low number of 
Serravallian localities.
After the MCO, Eurasian Booidea were represented mainly by erycids with the exception 
of southern and southeastern Asia where tropical conditions favoured pythonids [26, 28]. 
Erycids (Figs. 5.3 and 5.6) were represented by the extinct genus Albaneryx and extant Eryx. 
Albaneryx depereti inhabited France [36, 67] during the late Langhian and Serravallian 
(~14.2-12.2 Ma), whereas slightly younger A. volynicus was probably distributed from 
Central and Eastern Europe as far as Kazakhstan [10, 83, 84]. The last known Albaneryx is 
from the late Tortonian (Maeotian, MN 12) of Ukraine [85].
Serravallian snake communities from Asia are well documented only from Li Mae Long, 
Thailand, 13.3-13.12 Ma [26, 86] and Baikadam and Malyi Kalkaman 1, Kazakhstan, 13-12 
Ma (Fig. 5.3; [84]). The Thailand snake community includes Pythonidae (Python sp.), 
Acrochordidae (Acrochordus, different from A. dehmi), Xenodermidae, Viperidae, 
Natricidae, and ‘Colubridae’, indicating humid conditions with a dominance of aquatic 
forms and presence of arboreal species [26]. Kazakh localities provide an interesting mix of 
snakes closely related to those that inhabited Europe during the latest early and earliest 
middle Miocene, such as Texasophis bohemiacus, ‘Coluber’ (= Hierophis) cf. hungaricus and 
vipers of the ‘V. aspis’ complex, together with snakes that probably never appeared in 
Central and Western Europe such as Elaphe aff. dione and the genus Gloydius, which 
represents the geologically oldest unambiguous Crotalinae (Fig. 5.6; [84]). Thus, possible 
homogeneity of snake communities over a large part of Eurasia (except southern Asia) 
throughout the middle Miocene [87] has not been demonstrated. Serravallian snakes from 
the Siwalik Group of Pakistan are represented by indeterminate erycids, the ‘colubrid’ 
Sivaophis downsi, with unusually tall neural spines, that survived up to the latest 
Miocene (~6.35 Ma), and a Colubroid morphotype A [28].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 99
In Europe, the oldest known representatives of the genus Macrovipera have been 
reported from the Serravallian (MN 7+8) of Tauf and Varciorog, Romania [10] with the first 
diversification of this genus (M. ukrainica, M. sarmatica) around the middle-late Miocene 
transition [88, 89]. Palaeontological data thus support Macrovipera and Montivipera split­
ting about 15-13 Ma, as inferred from molecular data [90]. The only European Crotalinae 
(Fig. 5.6) comes from the late middle to early late Sarmatian (s.l.) of Gritsev [91], with the 
two completely preserved maxillae differing from a small maxilla of slightly older Gloydius 
from Kazakhstan. In any case, crotalines were largely distributed in Asia and Eastern 
Europe during the late middle and early late Miocene and a number of isolated vertebrae, 
formerly attributed to ‘viperines’, might actually belong to Crotalinae.
Among elapoids, ‘Micrurus’ cf. gallicus from the French sites La Grive L7 and La Grive M, 
both MN 7 + 8 [92] represents the last known occurrence of ‘Micrurus’ in Western Europe 
(Fig. 5.6). However, in Central/southeastern Europe the fossil record of small Elapoidea 
resembling Micrurus or Calliophis extends up to the early late Miocene, MN 9 [50], with an 
uncertain last occurrence of ‘Micrurus’ from the Miocene-Pliocene transition in Maramena, 
Greece [93]. Large elapids represented by the genus Naja were distributed accross Europe 
as indicated by occurrences of Naja romani in France and Ukraine [71, 94, 95].
By far the most diverse European snake fauna, from La-Grive-Saint-Alban fissure fillings 
in France, yielded several colubroid taxa for which a North American origin was proposed, 
including Texasophis meini, ‘Paleoheterodon’ arcuatus (generic allocation is questionable: 
Supplementary Table 5.S2), Neonatrix europaea and N. crassa [79]. A preliminary study of 
Colubroidea from La Grive L7 and M fissure fillings [92] reported rather diversified com­
munities including ‘C.’ cf. dolnicensis, several morphotypes attributed to ‘Coluber’ sp. 
(= Coluber s.l.), ‘Elaphe’ sp., T. meini, Natrix cf. sansaniensis, and several morphotypes of 
Natrix sp. (including N. aff longivertebrata sensu [96]) and Neonatrix sp.
In Central and Eastern/southeastern Europe, middle to earliest late Miocene Colubroidea 
are reported mainly from Hungary, Romania, and Ukraine [e.g., 7-9, 97]. ‘Colubrines’ are 
represented by several taxa (Fig. 5.6) including ‘C.’ pouchetii, ‘C.’ suevicus, ‘Coluber’ sp., 
Hierophis hungaricus, ‘Elaphe’ sp., Texasophis cf. meini, Zamenis sp. and the first appear­
ance of Coronella miocaenica [10, 37, 98]. Natricids are represented by the last, uncertain 
occurrence of N. sansaniensis, but N. rudabanyaensis probably first appeared in the fossil 
record here [10, 98]. Natrix cf. longivertebrata reported from the earliest late Miocene of 
Gritsev might represent the first appearance of the extinct N. longivertebrata but the 
postcranial skeleton remains undescribed [99]. Palaeonatrix is represented by the only 
known occurrence ofP. silesiaca from Opole, Poland, the genus Neonatrix was documented 
from Devmska Nova Ves, Slovakia [7, 9, 100].
5.6 Late Miocene Climatic Oscillations and Their Relation 
to the Composition of Eurasian Snake Communities
There was a strong climatic change in Europe about 10.7-9.7 Ma. In Central and Western 
Europe, rather high MAT -14-17 °C [34] were accompanied by increased MAP to 1500 mm.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

100 MARTIN IVANOV
This ‘wash-house’ climate persisted for about 1 Ma [101]. Favorable climatic conditions are 
reflected in the composition of the early Vallesian (MN 9) herpetofauna. However, a sudden 
change occurred approximately 9.7-9.5 Ma when the MAP dropped to values similar to or 
even lower than those of recent times. This change led to an ecosystem collapse, the 
‘Vallesian Crisis’, that resulted in the retreat of temperate evergreen forests and expanding 
steppe biomes [102]. From about 8 Ma, several further decreases in precipitation intensity 
occurred in Europe, the most substantial about 7 Ma [101]. During the latest Miocene 
(Messinian), an extensive aridification resulted in the formation of a continental connection 
between Africa and the Iberian Peninsula, allowing extensive faunal exchange. This con­
nection existed until the beginning of the Pliocene [102].
The only diverse snake fauna known from the late Miocene of Asia is from the Siwalik 
Group of Pakistan, where the thermophilic assemblage of a highly humid environment 
included Python, Acrochordus dehmi, Gansophis potwarensis, Bungarus, Chotaophis 
padhriensis, Sivaophis downsi and a Colubroid morphotype B. Bungarus from the Siwalik 
Group occurs close to its extant westernmost distribution in southeastern Iran [103], 
indicating a palaeobiogeographic barrier between South Asia and Europe ~10 Ma [28]. 
Late Miocene (Vallesian) localities from Mongolia (Fig. 5.2) provide two morphologically 
different representatives of Eryx and two morphotypes of large-sized Colubrinae [103]. 
However, the posterior trunk vertebra of ‘Natricinae indet.’ from Builstyn-Khudang 
A (figs. 2a-e in [104]), with probably low neural spine and short prezygapophyseal pro­
cesses could be attributed to elapoids rather than natricids.
In Central Europe, the early late Miocene (MN 9) site of Rudabanya, Hungary (Fig. 5.4) 
preserves a rich snake community from rather warm and humid conditions closely 
preceding the onset of the ‘Vallesian Crisis’. A diverse colubroidean fauna includes extinct 
‘C.’ pouchetii, Hierophis hungaricus, Telescopus bolkayi, Natrix rudabanyaensis and cf. 
Neonatrix sp., large elapids of the extant genus Naja, small indeterminate elapoids similar 
to Micrurus, and ‘Oriental vipers’ [50]. Ophidian localities coeval with the ‘Vallesian Crisis’ 
(Fig. 5.4; Supplementary Table 5.S1) are rare, including Ravin de la Pluie, Greece [105] 
and Suchomasty, Czechia (early MN 10). The Greek locality provided only several 
fragmentary vertebrae of indeterminate ‘colubrines’ and Naja cf. romani, whereas a 
small booid (probably an erycid) and indeterminate ‘Colubrinae’ occur in Suchomasty 
(pers. obs.).
A short-term improvement in climatic conditions occurred about 9-8.5 Ma [101] 
resulting in a quick recovery of the vertebrate communities as documented rarely from 
the early Turolian (MN 11) Kohfidisch site, Austria [106-108]. Scolecophidians have their 
last known occurrence in Central Europe but persisted in the Apennine Peninsula to the 
latest Miocene [109]. ‘Oriental vipers’ are represented by Macrovipera gedulyi, originally 
described from Kohfidisch as Vipera burgenlandica Bachmayer & Szyndlar, 1985 but 
recently synonymized with Macrovipera gedulyi (Bolkay, 1913) known from the latest 
Miocene of Hungary (Supplementary Table 5.S2; [110]). Elapidae are represented by Naja 
romani (Fig. 5.6) with the largest known specimens having a mean centrum length of 9.8 
mm [108]. It is interesting that comparably large Naja specimens did not occur in the stable, 
high temperature environment known from the late early Miocene. Among Colubroidea, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 101
extinct Zamenis kohfidischi and Platyceps planicarinatus occur in Kohfidisch (for Platyceps, 
currently inhabiting the Balkan Peninsula [103], see Supplementary Table 5.S2). Natricids 
are represented by Natrix longivertebrata [106-108].
Ophidian localities from the Tortonian-Messinian transition (MN 12) are distributed in 
Eastern/southeastern Europe with the exception of Tardosbanya 3, Hungary, where extinct 
ratsnakes, ‘Elaphe’ kormosi and Zamenis praelongissimus (Supplementary Table 5.S2), have 
been documented as well as small viperines similar to the extant Vipera ursinii ([5, 111]; 
M. Venczel, unpublished data). Several coeval localities from Ukraine yielded ‘Oriental 
vipers’ and small vipers of the ‘V. aspis’ complex including V. meotica from Cherevichnoie 
and possibly Orekhovka, MN 13 [85, 97].
The latest Miocene (MN 13) is characterized by increased snake diversity (Fig. 5.6). 
‘Oriental vipers’ occurred for the last time in Central Europe, as documented by 
Macrovipera gedulyi from Polgardi 2, 4 and 5 [112, 113]. However, in southwestern 
Europe, ‘Oriental vipers’ have been documented in the late Miocene to early Pliocene of 
the Balearic Islands [114, 115] and persisted in the Iberian Peninsula until the early 
Pleistocene [116]. Extinct Macrovipera kuchurganica from Kuchurgan, Ukraine documents 
the persistence of ‘Oriental vipers’ in Eastern Europe up to the early Pliocene [88]. ‘Oriental 
vipers’ occur around the southeastern border of Europe today with Macrovipera inhabiting 
Greek islands of the Cyclades Archipelago in the Aegean Sea and Cyprus (Macrovipera 
schweizeri, M. lebetina) and Montivipera inhabiting northeastern Greece and several Greek 
islands as well as European part of Turkey [103]. Although ‘European vipers’ of the ‘V. aspis’ 
complex appeared in Europe first and likely have been sympatric with ‘Oriental vipers’ 
since MN 3, fossil records indicate that ‘Oriental vipers’ were probably more common in 
Europe throughout most of the Miocene. Small vipers of the ‘V. berus’ complex first 
appeared in Central Europe at the beginning of the late middle Miocene and became the 
dominant viperine group in Central Europe during the Pliocene and ultimately in the early 
Pleistocene [9, 97].
The Hungarian localities Polgardi 2, 4, and 5 yielded the last known occurrences of 
Hierophis hungaricus, Zamenis szyndlari (see Supplementary Table 5.S2) and Coronella 
miocaenica as well as ‘E.’ kormosi and Z. praelongissimus, that became extinct in the early 
Pliocene [111-113]. The parabasisphenoid of Natrix cf. longivertebrata from Polgardi 4 is 
intermediate between N. longivertebrata and N. natrix [112] and precaudal vertebrae lack 
the strongly elongated centrum typical of N. longivertebrata from R^bielice Krolewskie 1A 
(type locality, MN 16; [117]). Therefore, I assume that Polgardi sites might contain the 
oldest occurrences of the extant grass snake N. natrix. This is in agreement with an inferred 
late Miocene divergence of N. natrix from N. astreptohora 10.6-9.6 Ma [118]. The latest 
Miocene to earliest Pliocene (MN 13-MN 14) snake assemblage from Maramena, Greece 
documents affinity with colubroids from Central Europe, including the last, uncertain 
occurrences of H. hungaricus and N. rudabanyaensis. This southward range constriction 
of Central European snakes has been documented for lizard groups such as agamids, 
cordylids, varanids, some anguids (Pseudopus) and amphisbaenians [119-121]. However, 
snake species including Periergophis micros and Paraxenophis spanios completely differ 
from known European taxa. The affinities of these snakes with other caenophidian lineages, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

102 MARTIN IVANOV
such as dipsadids, lamprophiids, or psammophiids cannot be excluded, so an African or 
Asiatic origin currently seems most likely [93].
The dispersal of African lineages into southern Europe most probably resulted from an 
extensive aridification of the Mediterranean area during the Messinian Salinity Crisis around 
5.96-5.33 Ma. An African origin is presupposed for several snake lineages documented from 
the latest Miocene and early Pliocene of Iberian Peninsula, including Eryx primitivus from 
Gorafe and Moreda (MN 15), Psammophis from Salobrena, MN 13, Malpolon mlynarskii 
from Layna, MN 15 and Naja iberica from Algora, MN 13 [69, 122-124]. However, it is not 
known whether these endemic lineages penetrated Europe directly via a terrestrial connec­
tion that appeared due to the closure of the Straight of Gibraltar or first invaded southeastern 
Europe and then migrated to the west. Elapoid snakes were distributed only in southern 
regions of Europe. The last known Micrurus-like snake occurred in Maramena (MN 13-14) 
whereas the genus Naja reported from Solnechnodolsk, Russia [125] persisted in southern 
regions of Europe up to the late Pliocene [9, 72].
5.7 Summary
The Miocene was the most-recent crucial epoch in the origins of the major elements of the 
modern Eurasian snake fauna. Although knowledge of Asian Miocene snakes is still limited, 
there was a clear communication between European and Asiatic snake communities since the 
Turgai Strait closure in the early Oligocene. Palaeogeographic evolution of the Paratethys area 
played an important role in the origin of at least two main dispersal routes for Asiatic (or 
African) newcomers into Europe. The northern route via the Mazury-Mazowsze continental 
bridge probably played a more important role in the early Oligocene. The southern dispersal 
route from Anatolia across numerous islands situated in southeastern Europe (today’s Balkan 
Peninsula) also existed but a massive snake invasion from Asia (or Africa) was possible as late 
as the Burdigalian. The Burdigalian was a key period for the evolution of the European snake 
fauna, with MN 2 and early MN 3 snake communities markedly different from those of late 
MN 3 and MN 4. Tropidophiidae (Falseryx), Boidae (Bavarioboa), and ‘Oriental vipers’, 
known since the early Burdigalian, became common after the early Ottnangian Cooling 
(EOC). This increase in snake diversity correlates with the late Ottnangian warming 
(17.5-17.3 Ma). This change was quite rapid and lasted probably no more than a few hundred 
thousand years. The Miocene Climatic Optimum was associated with a substantial dispersal 
of non-erycid Booidea and ‘Oriental vipers’ in Europe. The first appearance of large elapids of 
the genus Naja during the middle Burdigalian (Ottnangian) coincides in Europe with the first 
indisputable appearance of Pythonidae. The highly thermophilic genus Python inhabited 
Europe for about 3 Ma and disappeared at the end of the Langhian due to rapid cooling 
(14-13.5 Ma). However, Naja survived up to the late Pannonian in Central Europe and in 
southern Europe even up to the late Pliocene. The climatically less-demanding ‘Oriental 
vipers’ (Macrovipera) disappeared from Central Europe in the latest Miocene but persisted 
in Western Europe until the early Pleistocene. There was a communication of the snake 
assemblages between Asia and Europe at mid-latitudes throughout the early and middle
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 103
Miocene. However, the east-west composition of this fauna was not homogeneous, at least 
since the middle Miocene, as evidenced by the snake fauna of Kazakhstan (middle Miocene; 
~13-12 Ma) which includes taxa that probably never significantly penetrated into Europe, 
including the geologically oldest Crotalinae. Miocene snakes from South and Southeast Asia 
resemble those that currently inhabit this region. Increasing aridity at the end of the Miocene 
and the existence of a continental connection between Eurasia and Africa led to the invasion 
of snake lineages from Africa and/or Southwest Asia. Although several lineages dispersed in 
southern Europe (Psammophiidae), others represent probably restricted occurrences such as 
‘colubrid’ snakes (Periergophis, Paraxenophis) from the Miocene-Pliocene transition of 
southeastern Europe. In Central and Eastern Europe, the last notable diversification occurred 
of ‘colubrid’ snakes (Zamenis) closely related to extant relatives.
Acknowledgements
I am deeply grateful to Salvador Bailon (Centre national de la recherche scientifique, 
Institut ecologie et environnement, INEE), Marton Venczel (Tarii Crisurilor Museum, 
Oradea) and Massimo Delfino (Dipartimento di Scienze della Terra, Universita di Torino) 
for their constructive reviews that improved my manuscript. I thank Krister T. Smith 
(Department of Messel Research and Mammalogy, Senckenberg Research Institute) who 
helped to export datasets into maps. I also would like to express my gratitude to both 
editors of the volume, Hussam Zaher and David Gower, for the invitation to contribute to 
the meeting and this volume, and to the latter for helping to improve the English translation 
of this chapter. This study was funded through the Specific research project at the Faculty of 
Science at Masaryk University, Brno (MUNI/A/1394/2021).
References
1. S. M. Bohaty and J. C. Zachos, Significant 
Southern Ocean warming event in the late 
middle Eocene. Geology, 31 (2003), 
1017-1020.
2. S. M. Bohaty, J. C. Zachos, F. Florindo, and 
M. L. Delaney, Coupled greenhouse 
warming and deep-sea acidification in the 
middle Eocene. Paleoceanography, 24 
(2009), PA2207.
3. J.-C. Rage, Mesozoic and Cenozoic 
squamates of Europe. Palaeobiodiversity 
and Palaeoenvironments, 93 (2013), 
517-543.
4. T. J. Cleary, R. B. J. Benson, S. E. Evans, and 
P. M. Barrett, Lepidosaurian diversity in the 
Mesozoic-Palaeogene: the potential roles 
of sampling biases and environmental 
drivers. Royal Society Open Science, 5 
(2018), 171830.
5. Z. Szyndlar and J.-C. Rage, Fossil record of 
the true vipers. In G. W. Schuett, 
M. Hoggren, M. E. Douglas and
H. W. Greene, eds., Biology of the Vipers 
(Eagle Mountain: Eagle Mountain 
Publishing, 2002), pp. 419-444.
6. Z. Szyndlar and J.-C. Rage, Non-erycine 
Booidea from the Oligocene and Miocene of 
Europe (Krakow: Institute of Systematics 
and Evolution of Animals, Polish Academy 
of Sciences, 2003).
7. Z. Szyndlar, Early Oligocene to Pliocene 
Colubridae of Europe: a review. Bulletin de 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

104 MARTIN IVANOV
la Societe Geologique de France, 183 (2012), 
661-681.
8. Z. Szyndlar, A review of Neogene and 
Quaternary snakes of Central and Eastern 
Europe. Part I: Scolecophidia, Boidae, 
Colubridae. Estudios geologicos, 47 (1991), 
103-126.
9. Z. Szyndlar, A rewiew of Neogene and 
Quaternary snakes of Central and Eastern 
Europe. Part II: Natricinae, Elapidae, 
Viperidae. Estudios geologicos, 47 (1991), 
237-266.
10. M. Venczel, Middle-late Miocene snakes 
from the Pannonian Basin. Acta 
Palaeontologica Romaniae, 7 (2011), 
343-349.
11. R. A. Pyron, R. G. Reynolds, and
F. T. Burbrink, A taxonomic revision of 
boas (Serpentes: Boidae). Zootaxa, 3846 
(2014), 249-260.
12. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PloS ONE, 14 (2019), e0216148.
13. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
14. M. Ivanov, Changes in the composition of 
the European snake fauna during the Early 
Miocene and at the Early/Middle Miocene 
transition. Palaontologische Zeitschrift, 74/4 
(2001), 563-573.
15. A. Cernansky, D. Vasilyan, G. L. Georgalis, 
et al., First record of fossil anguines 
(Squamata; Anguidae) from the Oligocene 
and Miocene of Turkey. Swiss Journal of 
Geosciences, 110 (2017), 741-751.
16. D. Vasilyan, Z. Rocek, A. Ayvazyan, and 
L. Claessens, Fish, amphibian and reptilian 
faunas from latest Oligocene to middle 
Miocene localities from Central Turkey. 
Palaeobiodiversity and 
Palaeoenvironments, 99 (2019), 723-757.
17. R. L. Bernor, M. Brunet, L. Ginsburg, et al., 
A consideration of some major topics 
concerning Old World Miocene Mammalian 
chronology, migrations and paleogeography. 
Geobios, 20 (1987), 431-439.
18. V. Mosbrugger, T. Utescher, and
D. L. Dilcher, Cenozoic continental climatic 
evolution of Central Europe. PNAS, 102 
(2005), 14964-14969.
19. Q-Q Zhang, T. Smith, J. Yang, and C.-S. Li, 
Evidence of a cooler continental climate in 
East China during the warm early 
Cenozoic. PLoS ONE, 11 (2016), e0155507.
20. F. Rogl, Circum-Mediterranean Miocene 
palaeogeography. In G. E. Rossner and 
K. Heissig, eds., The Miocene Land 
Mammals of Europe (MUnchen: Verlag Dr. 
Friedrich Pfeil, 1999), pp. 39-48.
21. Z. Szyndlar and I. Hosgor, Bavarioboa sp. 
(Serpentes, Boidae) from the Oligocene/ 
Miocene of eastern Turkey with comments 
on connections between European and 
Asiatic snake faunas. Acta Palaeontologica 
Polonica, 57 (2012), 667-671.
22. E. Syromyatnikova, G. L. Georgalis, 
S. Mayda, T. Kaya, and G. SaraQ, A new 
early Miocene herpetofauna from KilQak, 
Turkey. Russian Journal of Herpetology, 26 
(2019), 205-224.
23. J. J. Head, D. M. Mohabey, and J. A. Wilson, 
Acrochordus Hornstedt (Serpentes, 
Caenophidia) from the Miocene of Gujarat, 
western India: temporal constraints on 
dispersal of a derived snake. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 27 (2007), 720-723.
24. R. Hoffstetter, Les serpents du Neogene du 
Pakistan (couches des Siwaliks). Bulletin de 
la Societe Geologique de France, 7 (1964), 
467-474.
25. R. M. West, J. H. Hutchison, and J. Munthe, 
Miocene vertebrates from the Siwalik Group, 
western Nepal. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 11 (1991), 108-129.
26. J-C. Rage and L. Ginsburg, Amphibians and 
squamates from the Early Miocene of Li 
Mae Long, Thailand: the richest and most 
diverse herpetofauna from the Cainozoic of 
Asia. In Z. Rocek and S. Hart, eds.,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 105
Herpetology ’97 (Prague: Ministry of 
Environment of the Czech Republic, 1997), 
pp. 167-168.
27. J.-C. Rage, S. S. Gupta, and G. V. R. Prasad, 
Amphibians and squamates from the 
Neogene Siwalik beds of Jammu and 
Kashmir, India. Palaontologische 
Zeitschrift, 75 (2001), 197-205.
28. J. Head, Snakes of the Siwalik Group 
(Miocene of Pakistan): Systematics and 
relationships to environmental change. 
Palaeontologia Electronica, 8.1.18A (2005), 
1-33.
29. K. L. Sanders, Mumpuni, A. Hamidy, J. J. 
Head, and D. J. Gower, Phylogeny and 
divergence times of filesnakes 
(Acrochordus): inferences from 
morphology, fossils and three molecular 
loci. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 56 (2010), 857-867.
30. J. J. Head, K. Mahlow, and J. MUller, Fossil 
calibration dates for molecular 
phylogenetic analysis of snakes 2: 
Caenophidia, Colubroidea, Elapoidea, 
Colubridae. Palaeontologia Electronica, 19 
(2016), 1-21.
31. Z. Szyndlar, Snake fauna (Reptilia: 
Serpentes) from the Early/Middle Miocene 
of Sandelzhausen and Rothenstein 13 
(Germany). Palaontologische Zeitschrift, 83 
(2009), 55-66.
32. B. Mennecart, D. Zoboli, L. Costeur, and 
G. L. Pillola, On the systematic position of 
the oldest insular ruminant Sardomeryx 
oschiriensis (Mammalia, Ruminantia) and 
the early evolution of the Giraffomorpha. 
Journal of Systematic Palaeontology 
(published online June 2018): 
 
.
https://doi
.org/10.1080/14772019.2018.1472145
33. M. Venczel and B. Sanchiz, Lower Miocene 
Amphibians and Reptiles from Oschiri 
(Sardinia, Italy). Hantkeniana, 5 (2006), 
72-75.
34. A. Cernansky, J.-C. Rage, and J. Klembara, The 
Early Miocene squamates of Amoneburg 
(Germany): The first stages of modern 
squamates in Europe. Journal of Systematic 
Palaeontology, 13/2 (2015), 97-128.
35. M. S. Kayseri-Ozer, Spatial distribution of 
climatic conditions from the Middle 
Eocene to Late Miocene based on 
palynoflora in Central, Eastern and 
Western Anatolia. Geodinamica Acta, 26/ 
1-2 (2013), 122-157.
36. R. Hoffstetter and J.-C. Rage, Les Erycinae 
fossiles de France (Serpentes, Boidae). 
Comprehension et histoire de la sous- 
famille. Annales de Paleontologie 
(Vertebres), 58/1 (1972), 81-124.
37. Z. Szyndlar and W. Bohme, Die fossile 
Schlangen Deutschlands: Geschichte der 
Faunen und ihrer Erforschung. 
Mertensiella, 3 (1993), 381-431.
38. J. MUller, Untermiozane Kieferfragmente 
von Schlangen (Reptilia: Serpentes: 
Erycinae) aus der franzosischen Lokalitat 
Poncenat. Neues Jahrbuchfur Geologie und 
Palaontologie, Mh., 1998/2 (1998), 119-128.
39. Z. Szyndlar and H. H. Schleich, Description 
of Miocene Snakes from Petersbuch 2 with 
comments on the Lower and Middle 
Miocene Ophidian faunas of Southern 
Germany. Stuttgarter Beitrage zur 
Naturkunde, B 192 (1993), 1-47.
40. U. Kuch, J. MUller, C. Modden, and 
D. Mebs, Snake fangs from the Lower 
Miocene of Germany: evolutionary stability 
of perfect weapons. Naturwissenschaften, 
93 (2006), 84-87.
41. J.-C. Rage, The oldest known colubrid 
snakes. The state of the art. In Z. Szyndlar, 
ed., A Festschrift in honour of Professor 
Marian Mlynarski on the occasion of his 
retirement, Acta zoologica cracoviensia, 31/ 
13 (1988), 457-474.
42. P. Grunert, A. Tzanova, M. Harzhauser, and 
W. E. Piller, Mid-Burdigalian Paratethyan 
alkenone record reveals link between 
orbital forcing, Antarctic ice-sheet 
dynamics and European climate at the 
verge to Miocene Climate Optimum. 
Global and Planetary Change, 123(Part A) 
(2014), 36-43.
43. M. Bohme, A. Bruch, and A. Selmeier, The 
reconstruction of Early and Middle 
Miocene climate and vegetation in
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

106 MARTIN IVANOV
Southern Germany as determined from the 
fossil wood flora. Palaeogeography, 
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 253 
(2007), 91-114.
44. V. Pachk, M. Ivanov, and A. H. Lujan, 
Early Miocene snakes from the locality 
of Wintershof-West (Germany). In 
M. Marcola, O. Mateus and
M. Moreno-Azanza, eds., Abstract book of 
the XVI Annual Meeting of the European 
Association of Vertebrate Palaeontology, 
Caparica, Portugal June 26th-July 1st 
(Lisbon, 2018), p. 144.
45. M. Ivanov, The oldest known Miocene 
snake fauna from Central Europe: Merkur- 
North locality, Czech Republic. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 47/3 (2002), 
513-534.
46. F. Romer, Uber Python Euboicus, eine 
fossile Riesenschlange aus tertiarem 
Kalkschiefer von Kumi auf der Insel 
Euboea [On Python Euboicus, a fossil giant 
snake from the Tertiary shale of Kumi in 
the island of Euboea]. Zeitschrift der 
Deutschen Geologische Gesellschaft, 22 
(1870), 582-590.
47. G. L. Georgalis, M. K. Abdel Gawad, 
S. M. Hassan, et al., Oldest co-occurrence 
of Varanus and Python from Africa-first 
record of squamates from the early 
Miocene of Moghra Formation, Western 
Desert, Egypt. PeerJ, 8 (2020), e9092.
48. A. Figueroa, A. D. McKelvy, L. L. Grismer 
et al., A species-level phylogeny of extant 
snakes with description of a new colubrid 
subfamily and genus. PLoS ONE, 11 (2016), 
e0161070.
49. M. Ivanov, Snakes of the lower/middle 
Miocene transition at Vieux-Collonges 
(Rhone; France), with comments on the 
colonization of western Europe by 
colubroids. Geodiversitas, 22/4 (2000), 
559-588.
50. Z. Szyndlar, Snake fauna from the Late 
Miocene of Rudabanya. Palaeontographia 
Italica, 90/2003 (2005), 31-52.
51. J.-C. Rage and S. Bailon, Amphibians and 
squamate reptiles from the late early
Miocene (MN 4) ofBeon 1 (Montreal-du- 
Gers, southwestern France). Geodiversitas, 
27/3 (2005), 413-441.
52. M. Bohme, The Miocene Climatic 
Optimum: evidence from the ectothermic 
vertebrates of Central Europe. 
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, 
Palaeoecology, 195 (2003), 389-401.
53. J. C. Zachos, G. R. Dickens, and R. E. Zeebe, 
An early Cenozoic perspective on 
greenhouse warming and carbon-cycle 
dynamics. Nature, 451 (2008), 279-283.
54. M. Ivanov and M. Bohme, Snakes from 
Griesbeckerzell (Langhian, Early 
Badenian), North Alpine Foreland Basin 
(Germany), with comments on the 
evolution of snake fauna in Central 
Europe during the Miocene Climatic 
Optimum. Geodiversitas, 33/3 (2011), 
411-449.
55. A. A. Bruch, T. Utescher, C. Alcalde 
Olivares, et al., Middle and Late Miocene 
spatial temperature patterns and gradients 
in Europe - preliminary results based on 
palaeobotanical climate reconstructions. 
Courier Forschungsinstitut Senckenberg, 249 
(2004), 15-27.
56. M. Bohme, A. Ilg, A. Ossig, and
H. KUchenhoff, New method to estimate 
paleoprecipitation using fossil amphibians 
and reptiles and the middle and late 
Miocene precipitation gradients in Europe. 
Geology, 34/6 (2006), 425-428.
57. M. Bohme, Lower Vertebrates (Teleostei, 
Amphibia, Sauria) from the Karpatian of 
the Korneuburg Basin - palaeoecological, 
environmental and palaeoclimatical 
implications. Beitrage zur Palaontologie, 27 
(2002), 339-353.
58. P. M. Tempfer, Amphibians and Reptiles of 
the Karpatian Central Paratethys. In 
R. Brzobohaty, I. Cicha, M. Kovac and 
F. Rogl, eds., The Karpatian. A Lower 
Miocene Stage of the Central Paratethys 
(Brno: Masaryk University, 2003), 
pp. 285-290.
59. N. Dolakova and M. Slamkova, 
Palynological Characteristics of Karpatian
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 107
Sediments. In R. Brzobohaty, I. Cicha, 
M. Kovac and F. Rogl, eds., The Karpatian. 
A Lower Miocene Stage of the Central 
Paratethys (Brno: Masaryk University, 
2003), pp. 325-337.
60. H. Thomas, S. Sen, M. Khan, B. Battail, and 
G. Ligabue, The Lower Miocene fauna of 
Al-Sarrar (Eastern province, Saudi Arabia), 
Atlal, Journal of Saudi Arabian 
Archaeology, 5 (1982), 109-136.
61. G. L. Georgalis, S. Mayda, B. Alpagut, et al., 
The westernmost Asian record of pythonids 
(Serpentes): the presence of Python in a 
Miocene hominoid locality of Anatolia. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, (2020), 
 
.
https://doi.org/10.1080/02724634.2020
.1781144
62. D. V. Malakhov, The early Miocene 
herpetofauna of Ayakoz (Eastern 
Kazakhstan). Biota, 6/1-2 (2005), 29-35.
63. V. M. Chkhikvadze, Preliminary results of 
studies on tertiary amphibians and 
squamate reptiles of the Zaisan Basin. In 
I. Darevsky, ed., Questions of herpetology, 
The Sixth All-Union Herpetological 
Conference (Tashkent: Nauka, 1985) 
pp. 234-235. (in Russian)
64. A. Sun, Notes on fossil snakes from 
Shanwang, Shangtung. Vertebrata 
Palasiatica, 4 (1961), 310-312.
65. J. A. Holman and M. Tanimoto, Cf. 
Trimeresurus Lacepede (Reptilia: 
Squamata: Viperidae: Crotalinae) from the 
Early Miocene of Japan. Acta zoologica 
cracoviensia, 47/1 (2004), 1-7.
66. M. Ivanov, A. Cernansky, I. Bonilla 
Salomon, and A. H. Lujan, Early Miocene 
squamate assemblage from the Mokra- 
Western Quarry (Czech Republic) and its 
palaeobiogeographical and 
palaeoenvironmental implications. 
Geodiversitas, 42/20 (2020), 343-376.
67. J.-C. Rage and Z. Szyndlar, Latest 
Oligocene-Early Miocene in Europe: Dark 
Period for booid snakes. Comptes Rendus 
Palevol, 4 (2005), 428-435.
68. M. Auge and J.-C. Rage, Les Squamates 
(Reptilia) du Miocene moyen de Sansan 
(Gers, France). M6moires du Mus6um 
national d’Histoire naturelle, 183 (2000), 
263-313.
69. Z. Szyndlar and H. H. Schleich, Two species 
of the genus Eryx (Serpentes; Boidae; 
Erycinae) from the Spanish Neogene with 
comments on the past distribution of the 
genus in Europe. Amphibia - Reptilia, 15 
(1994), 233-248.
70. Z. Szyndlar and F. Alferez, Iberian snake 
fauna of the Early/Middle Miocene 
transition. Revista Espanola de 
Herpetologpa, 19 (2005), 57-70.
71. Z. Szyndlar and J.-C. Rage, Oldest fossil 
vipers (Serpentes: Viperidae) from the Old 
World. Kaupia, 8 (1999), 9-20.
72. Z. Szyndlar and J.-C. Rage, West Palearctic 
cobras of the genus Naja (Serpentes: 
Elapidae): interrelationships among extinct 
and extant species. Amphibia - Reptilia, 11 
(1990), 385-400.
73. P. M. Miklas-Tempfer, The Miocene 
Herpetofaunas of Grund (Caudata; 
Chelonii, Sauria, Serpentes) and MUhlbach 
am Manhartsberg (Chelonii, Sauria, 
Amphisbaenia, Serpentes), Lower Austria. 
Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in 
Wien, A 104 (2003), 195-235.
74. G. Daxner-Hock, P. M. Miklas-Tempfer, 
U. B. Gohlich, et al., Marine and terrestrial 
vertebrates from the Middle Miocene of 
Grund (Lower Austria). Geologica 
Carpathica, 55/2 (2004), 191-197.
75. J. A. McCartney, N. J. Stevens, and 
P. M. O’Connor, The Earliest Colubroid- 
Dominated Snake Fauna from Africa: 
Perspectives from the Late Oligocene 
Nsungwe Formation of Southwestern 
Tanzania. PLoS ONE, 9(3) (2014), e90415.
76. Z. Szyndlar, Snakes from the Lower 
Miocene locality of Dolnice 
(Czechoslovakia). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 7 (1987), 55-71.
77. Z. Szyndlar, Vertebrates from the Early 
Miocene lignite deposits of the opencast 
mine Oberdorf (Western Styrian Basin, 
Austria). Annalen des Naturhistorischen 
Museums in Wien, A 99 (1998), 31-38.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

108 MARTIN IVANOV
78. D. Salvi, J. Mendes, S. Carranza, and 
D. J. Harris, Evolution, biogeography and 
systematics of the western Palaearctic 
Zamenis ratsnakes. Zoologica Scripta, 47 
(2018), 441-461.
79. J.-C. Rage and J. A. Holman, Des Serpents 
(Reptilia, Squamata) de type Nord­
Americain dans le Miocene francais. 
Evolution paraltele ou dispersion? Geobios, 
17 (1984), 89-104.
80. J. A. Holman, Reptiles of the Egelhoff local 
fauna (Upper Miocene) of Nebraska. 
Contributions from the Museum of 
Paleontology, the University of Michigan, 24 
(1973), 125-134.
81. J. A. Holman, Fossil Snakes of North 
America. Origin, Evolution, Distribution, 
Paleoecology (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 2000).
82. G. L. Georgalis, A. Villa, M. Ivanov et al. 
Early Miocene herpetofaunas from the 
Greek localities of Aliveri and Karydia - 
bridging a gap in the knowledge of 
amphibians and reptiles from the early 
Neogene of southeastern Europe. Historical 
Biology, 31 (2019), 1045-1064.
83. G. A. Zerova. The first find of a fossil Sand 
Boa of the genus Albaneryx (Serpentes, 
Boidae) in the USSR. Vestnik Zoologii, 5 
(1989), 30-35.
84. M. Ivanov, D. Vasilyan, M. Bohme, and 
V. S. Zazhigin, Miocene snakes from 
northeastern Kazakhstan: new data on the 
evolution of snake assemblages in Siberia. 
Historical Biology, 31/10 (2019), 1284-1303.
85. Z. Szyndlar and G. A. Zerova, Miocene 
snake fauna from Cherevichnoie (Ukraine, 
USSR), with description of a new species of 
Vipera. Neues Jahrbuchjur Geologie und 
Palaontologie, A, 184 (1992), 87-99.
86. Y. Chaimanee, C. Yamee, B. Marandat, and 
J.-J. Jaeger, First middle Miocene rodents 
from the Mae Moh Basin (Thailand): 
Biochronological and paleoenvironmental 
implications. Bulletin of Carnegie Museum 
of Natural History, 39 (2007), 157-63.
87. J.-C. Rage and I. G. Danilov, A new Miocene 
fauna of snakes from eastern Siberia, Russia.
Was the snake fauna largely homogenous in 
Eurasia during the Miocene? Comptes 
Rendus Palevol, 7 (2008), 383-390.
88. G. A. Zerova, A. N. Lungu, and
V. M. Chkhikvadze, Large fossil vipers from 
northern Black Seaside and Transcaucasus. 
Trudy zoologicheskogo Instituta Akademii 
Nauk S.S.S.R., 158/1986 (1987), 89-99. (in 
Russian)
89. G. A. Zerova, Vipera (Daboia) ukrainica -a 
new viper (Serpentes; Viperidae) from the 
Middle Sarmatian (Upper Miocene) of the 
Ukraine. Neues Jahrbuchjur Geologie und 
Palaontologie, A, 184 (1992), 235-249.
90. J. Smi'd and K. A. Tolley, Calibrating the 
tree of vipers under the fossilized birth­
death model. Scientific Reports, 9 (2019), 
5510 
-019- 
41290-2
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598
91. M. Ivanov, The first European pit viper 
from the Miocene of Ukraine. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 44/3 (1999), 
327-334.
92. M. Ivanov, Fossil snake assemblages from 
the French Middle Miocene localities at La 
Grive (France). In Abstracts volume and 
excursions field guide, The 7th European 
workshop of vertebrate palaeontology, July 
2-7, 2002, (Sibiu, 2002), pp. 26-27.
93. G. L. Georgalis, A. Villa, M. Ivanov, et al., 
Fossil amphibians and reptiles from the 
Neogene locality of Maramena (Greece), 
the most diverse European herpetofauna at 
the Miocene/Pliocene transition boundary. 
Palaeontologia Electronica, 22.3.68 (2019), 
1-99.
94. R. Hoffstetter, Contribution a l’etude des 
Elapidae actuels et fossiles et de 
l’osteologie des Ophidiens. Archives du 
Mus6um d'Histoire Naturelle de Lyon, 15 
(1939), 1-78.
95. Z. Szyndlar and G. A. Zerova, Neogene 
cobras of the genus Naja (Serpentes: 
Elapidae) of East Europe. Annalen des 
Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien, A 91 
(1990), 53-61.
96. J.-C. Rage and Z. Szyndlar, Natrix 
longivertebrata from the European
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MIOCENE SNAKES OF EURASIA 109
Neogene, a snake with one of the longest 
known stratigraphic ranges. Neues 
Jahrbuch fUr Geologie und Palaontologie, 
Mh., 1 (1986), 56-64.
97. G. A. Zerova, Late Cainozoic localities of 
snakes and lizards of Ukraine. Revue de 
Palteobiologie, 7 (1993), 273-280.
98. M. Venczel and E. §tiuca, Late middle 
Miocene amphibians and squamate 
reptiles from Tauj, Romania. Geodiversitas, 
30 (2008), 731-763.
99. M. Ivanov, Hadi evropskteho kenozoika. MS, 
PhD Thesis (Brno: Masaryk University, 
1997), pp. 1-217. (in Czech)
100. M. Ivanov, The snake fauna of Devmska 
Nova Ves (Slovak Republic) in relation to 
the evolution of snake assemblages of the 
European Middle Miocene. Acta Musei 
Moraviae, Scientiae geologicae, 83 (1998), 
159-172.
101. M. Bohme, A. Ilg, and M. Winklhofer, Late 
Miocene ‘washhouse’ climate in Europe. 
Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 275 
(2008), 393-401.
102. J. Agusti and M. Anton, Mammoths, 
Sabertooths, and Hominids - 65 million Years 
of Mammalian Evolution in Europe, (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2002).
103. P. Uetz, P. Freed, and J. Hosek, eds., The 
Reptile Database, 
 
, (2020), accessed (20/04/2020).
www.reptile-database
.org
104. M. Bohme, 3. Herpetofauna (Anura, 
Squamata) and palaeoclimatic 
implications: preliminary results. In 
G. Daxner-Hock, ed., Oligocene-Miocene 
vertebrates from the Valley of Lakes 
(Central Mongolia): morphology, 
phylogenetic and stratigraphic 
implications, Annalen des 
Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien, 108 
(2007), 43-52.
105. G. L. Georgalis, J.-C. Rage, L. de Bonis, and 
G. D. Koufos, Lizards and snakes from the 
late Miocene hominoid locality of Ravin de 
la Pluie (Axios Valley, Greece). Swiss 
Journal of Geosciences, 111 (2018), 169-181.
106. F. Bachmayer and Z. Szyndlar, Ophidians 
(Reptilia: Serpentes) from the Kohfidisch 
fissures of Burgenland, Austria. Annalen 
des Naturhistorischen Museums in Wien, A 
87 (1985), 79-100.
107. F. Bachmayer and Z. Szyndlar, A second 
contribution to the ophidian fauna 
(Reptilia, Serpentes) of Kohfidisch, Austria. 
Annalen des Naturhistorischen Museums in 
Wien, A 88 (1987), 25-39.
108. P. M. Tempfer, The Herpetofauna 
(Amphibia: Caudata, Anura; Reptilia: 
Scleroglossa) of the Upper Miocene Locality 
Kohfidisch (Burgerland, Austria). Beitrage 
zur Palaontologie, 29 (2005), 145-253.
109. S. Colombero, C. Angelone, E. Bonelli, 
et al., The Messinian vertebrate 
assemblages of Verduno (NW Italy): 
another brick for a latest Miocene bridge 
across the Mediterranean. Neues Jahrbuch 
fur Geologie und Palaontologie, A, 272/3 
(2014), 287-324.
110. V. Codrea, M. Venczel, L. Ursachi, and 
B. Rajoi, A large viper from the early 
Vallesian (MN 9) of Moldova (E-Romania) 
with notes on the palaeobiogeography of 
late Miocene ‘Oriental vipers’. Geobios, 50 
(2017), 401-411.
111. M. Venczel and G. Vardai, The genus 
Elaphe in the Carpathian Basin: Fossil 
record. Nymphaea Folia naturae Bihariae, 
28 (2000), 65-82.
112. M. Venczel, Late Miocene snakes from 
Polgardi (Hungary). Acta zoologica 
cracoviensia, 37/1 (1994), 1-29.
113. M. Venczel, Late Miocene snakes (Reptilia: 
Serpentes) from Polgardi (Hungary): a 
second contribution. Acta zoologica 
cracoviensia, 41/1 (1998), 1-22.
114. S. Bailon, P. Bover, J. Quintana, and 
J. A. Alcover, First fossil record of Vipera 
Laurenti 1768 ‘Oriental vipers complex’ 
(Serpentes: Viperidae) from the Early 
Pliocene of the western Mediterranean 
islands. Comptes Rendus Palevol, 9 (2010), 
147-154.
115. E. Torres, S. Bailon, P. Bover, and J. A. Alcover, 
Sobre la presencia de un viperido de gran talla 
perteneciente al Complejo de Viboras 
Orientales en el yacimiento de Na Burguesa-1 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

110 MARTIN IVANOV
(Mioceno Superior/Plioceno Inferior, 
Mallorca). Jornadas de Paleontologia SEP, 30 
(2014), 237-240.
116. H.-A. Blain, S. Bailon, and J. Agusti, The 
geographical and chronological pattern of 
herpetofaunal Pleistocene extinctions on 
the Iberian Peninsula. Comptes Rendus 
Palevol, 15 (2016), 731-744.
117. Z. Szyndlar, Fossil snakes from Poland. 
Acta zoologica cracoviensia, 28/1 (1984), 
3-156.
118. F. Pokrant, C. Kindler, M. Ivanov, et al., 
Integrative taxonomy provides evidence for 
the species status of the Ibero-Maghrebian 
grass snake Natrix astreptophora. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 118 (2016), 
873-888.
119. M. Delfino, T. Kotsakis, M. Arca, et al., 
Agamid lizards from the Plio-Pleistocene 
of Sardinia (Italy) and an overview 
of the European fossil record of the 
family. Geodiversitas, 30/3 (2008), 641-656.
120. G. L. Georgalis, A. Villa, E. Vlachos, and 
M. Delfino, Fossil amphibians and reptiles 
from Plakias, Crete: A glimpse into the earliest 
late Miocene herpetofaunas of southeastern 
Europe. Geobios, 49 (2016), 433-444.
121. A. Villa and M. Delfino, Fossil lizards and 
worm lizards (Reptilia, Squamata) from the 
Neogene and Quaternary of Europe: an 
overview. Swiss Journal of Palaeontology, 
138/2 (2019), 177-211.
122. Z. Szyndlar, Ophidian fauna (Reptilia, 
Serpentes) from the Upper Miocene of 
Algora (Spain). Estudios geologicos, 41 
(1985), 447-465.
123. Z. Szyndlar, Two new extinct especies of 
the genera Malpolon and Vipera (Reptilia, 
Serpentes) from the Pliocene of Layna 
(Spain). Acta Zoologica Cracoviensia, 31/27 
(1988), 687-706.
124. S. Bailon and C. Verbeke, Reptiles 
escamosos del Mioceno final (MN13) de 
Salobrena (Granada, Espana). In 
B. Martinez-Navarro, P. Palmqvist, 
M. Patrocinio Espigares and S. Ros- 
Montoya, eds., Libro de resumenes XXXV 
Jornadas de la Sociedad Espanola de 
Paleontologia, (2019), pp. 37-38.
125. E. Syromyatnikova and A. Tesakov, 
Preliminary report on herpetofauna from the 
Solnechnodolsk locality (late Miocene), 
Russia. In A. MacKenzie, E. Maxwell and 
J. Miller-Camp, eds., Abstracts of papers, 75th 
Annual Meeting of the Society of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 14-17 October 2015, (Dallas, 
2015), p. 221.
126. A. M. Villa, G. Carnevale, M. Pavia, et al., 
An overview on the late Miocene 
vertebrates from the fissure fillings of 
Monticino Quarry (Brisighella, Italy), with 
new data on non-mammalian taxa. Rivista 
Italiana di Paleontologia e Stratigrafia, 127 
(2) (2021) 297-354.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.007 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part II
Palaeontology and the
Marine-Origin Hypothesis
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

6
Sea-Serpentism
Olivier Rieppel
6.1 Introduction: The Genesis of a Myth
On 2 June 1849, the Scientific American (volume 4, p.290) reported news of a sea serpent 
sighting: ‘... the clipper ship Sophia Walker, Captain Wiswell, was chased around Cape 
Horn by an enormous sea serpent, half a mile long, and that Captain Wiswell was so 
terrified that his eyes stuck out far enough to hang a Quaker’s hat upon.’ A summary of sea 
serpent sightings dating back to 1895, published in the 12 October issue of the Scientific 
American of that year, specified that the creature ‘always remains at the bottom of the sea 
except in July and August, when it makes its appearance at the surface of the water ... One 
will doubtless not fail to remark that the sea serpent has selected just those two months in 
which newspapers most suffer from a dearth of news!’ Indeed, a modern statistical analysis 
confirmed: ‘sea-serpent sightings do tend to be a summer phenomenon’, although the idea 
that this was due to a dull season of the year was found to be ‘difficult to test’ [1: p.301].
Perhaps the earliest and most famous appearance of the sea serpent is on the Carta 
marina drawn by Olaus Magnus (1490-1557), a catholic priest who, following the conver­
sion of his native Sweden to Lutheranism, sought exile in Rome. In 1527, Olaus began work 
on a map of northern Europe (mostly Scandinavia), which he completed in 1539 [2]. The 
Carta marina is the earliest, more or less correct map of northern Europe, which Olaus 
enriched and explained through a commentary book, Historia de Gentibus 
Septentrionalibus (History of the Northern People), first printed in Rome in 1555 [2]. The 
sea in Olaus’s map was populated by all kinds of mythical creatures, amongst them two sea 
serpents located near the coast of Norway. The more northern one of these he identified, in 
the key to his map, as ‘A worm 200 feet long wrapping itself around a big ship and 
destroying it’; the smaller southern one shown in a location near Bergen he identified as 
‘A sea snake, 30 or 40 feet long’ [2: p.12]. A remarkable detail concerning the smaller 
southern sea serpent is that it is shown to propel itself forward through vertical undulations
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

114 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
of its body, not sideward undulation as eels, or true snakes, would do. In his commentary 
book, Olaus was more explicit:
They who in works of navigation on the coasts of Norway employ themselves in fishing or 
merchandise do all agree in this strange story, that there is a serpent there which is of a 
vast magnitude, namely 200 foot long, and moreover, 20 foot thick; and is wont to live in 
rocks and caves toward the sea-coast about Berge: which will go from his holes on a clear 
night in summer, and devour calves, lambs, and hogs, or else it goes into the sea to feed on 
polypus (octopus), locusts (lobsters), and all sorts of sea-crabs. He hath commonly hair 
hanging from his neck a cubit long, and sharp scales, and is black, and he has flaming, 
shining eyes. This snake disquites the shippers; and he puts up his head on high like a 
pillar, and catcheth away men, and he devours them ... (translation from H. Lee [3: p.56]; 
also translated in Pontoppidan [4: p.208], who disputes the occurrence of the beast near 
Bergen; see also Oudemans [5: p.10], for a slightly more modern translation).
6.2 The Proliferation of a Myth
Olaus Magnus’s report on sea serpents off the coast of Norway made it promptly into the Historia 
Animalium, published by the famous Swiss physician and naturalist Conrad Gesner (1516-1565) 
in Zurich in 1558 [6]. Gesner [6: p.1040] illustrates both sea serpents that appear on Olaus 
Magnus’s Carta marina in mirrored woodcuts, the smaller one again displaying distinct vertical 
undulations of its body as it moves forward, the other one coiling its massive body around a ship 
while snatching a sailor off of it. Gesner writes of Olaus Magnus’s sea serpent that it:
... sometimes appears near Norway in fine weather, and is dangerous to sea-men, as it 
snatches away men from the ships. Mariners tell that it incloses ships, as large as our 
trading vessels ...It sometimes makes such large coils above the water, that a ship can go 
through one of them ... (translation from Oudemans [5: p.107]).
It has been argued that sea serpent sightings multiplied following the publication, in 1755, 
of the English translation of Erik Pontoppidan’s (1698-1764) The Natural History of Norway 
[7]. There, Pontoppidan [4: p.195-196], Bishop of Bergen, wrote: ‘The Soe Ormen, the Sea­
Snake, Serpens Marinus Magnus ... is a wonderful and terrible Sea-monster, which 
extremely deserves to be taken notice of by those who are curious to look into the 
extraordinary works of the great creator’. Most significantly, the sea serpent described 
and illustrated by Pontoppidan again propelled itself forward by vertical undulation of its 
body (Fig. 6.1). Pontoppidan [4: p.206] describes ‘round lumps’ or ‘folds’ that are visible 
when a sea serpent surfaces, and goes on to cite the German Scholar Adam Olearius 
(1599-1671), who in his ‘Gottdorf Museum’ wrote: ‘... [in] the North sea, he saw in the 
water, which was very calm, a Snake, which appeared at that distance to be as thick as a 
pipe of wine, and had 25 folds’ (Olearius [8: p.19]; translation from Pontoppidan [4: p.207]). 
Pontoppidan then goes on to surmise that the number of folds that ‘may be counted on a 
Sea-snake ... is not always the same, but depends on the various sizes of them’ [4: p.207].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sea-serpentism 115
Figure 6.1 The Great Sea-Serpent, reproduced from Pontoppidan [4: plate 27].
6.3 The Scientific Approach to a Myth
The various sea serpent sightings reported throughout the nineteenth century have been 
collected and commented upon by Oudemans [5]. Here, only one of the most notorious 
cases will be recounted, involving a pathological specimen of the common black racer 
(Coluber constrictor) with a series of bumps along its back found near Gloucester, 
Massachusetts [9, 10]. The Gloucester Sea Serpent was first spotted near Cape Ann when 
it entered Gloucester Harbor on 6 August 1817, ‘in pursuit of shoals of fishes, herrings, 
squids, &c. on which it feeds. Its motions are very quick; it was seen by great many, but all 
attempts to catch it have failed, although $5000 has been offered for its spoils’ [11: p.433].
In the month of August 1817, it was currently reported on various authorities, that an 
animal of very singular appearance had been recently and repeatedly seen in the harbor of 
Gloucester, Cape Ann, about thirty miles distant from Boston. It was said to resemble a 
serpent in its general form and motions, to be of immense size, and to move with wonderful 
rapidity; to appear on the surface of the water only in calm and bright weather; and to seem 
jointed or like a number of buoys or casks following each other in a line. In consequence of 
these reports, at a meeting of the Linnean Society of New England, holden at Boston on the 
18th day of August, the Hon. John Davis, Jacob Bigelow, M. D., and Francis C. Gray, Esq.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

116 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
were appointed a Committee to collect evidence with regard to the existence and appear­
ance of any such animal.
Such opens the Report of a Committee of the Linnean Society of New England, relative to a 
large marine animal, supposed to be a serpent, seen near Cape Ann, Massachusetts, in August 
1817, published in 1817 by Cummings and Hilliard in Boston (hereafter referred to as 
Report [12]). Eye-witnesses who claimed to have spotted the Sea Serpent were confronted 
with a list of questions drawn up by the Committee, and asked to testify under oath. The 
committee members were identified as ‘men of fair and unblemished character in 
Gloucester’ by one commentator [13: p.89], who also surmised that the classic summertime 
appearance of the Gloucester Sea Serpent may be explained by it being ‘migratory, like the 
Coluber Natrix in Hungary, and may pass the winter season in Mexico or South America’ 
[13: p.91]. The leading British geologist of the time, Charles Lyell (1797-1875), when 
commenting on the Gloucester Sea Serpent investigation, likewise emphasized: ‘I am well 
acquainted with two of the three gentlemen’ on the committee [14: p.111].
The various reports delivered to the Linnean Society committee were not entirely free of 
contradictions: ‘These two points - the vertical or horizontal nature of the creature’s 
undulations when moving, and the apparent ‘bunches’, or serrations exhibited by the 
outline of its back - seem to have formed rather a bone of contention among both the 
observers and the Committee’ [15: p.39]. With much hindsight, Gould [15: p.40] wrote with 
reference to the putative vertical undulations of the Sea Serpent, ‘the structure of its 
backbone must have been truly astonishing - it must have looked like a series of universal 
joints’. Because the Gloucester Sea Serpent was never caught or killed, it was at the time an 
unexpected opportunity to investigate the matter when on 27 September 1817, a small 
black snake was caught and killed ‘in a field near Loblolly cove, about a mile and a half from 
Sandy Bay village’ (Report [12: p.44]). The little black snake was brought to Boston for the 
Linnean Society committee members to inspect it: ‘The animal had the general form and 
external characters of a serpent; but was remarkably distinguished from all others of that 
class known to your Committee, by a row of protuberances along the back, apparently 
formed by undulations of the spine’ (Report [12: p.38]). The specimen was consequently 
named a new genus and species, Scoliophis atlanticus (the ‘flexible Atlantic snake’). The 
committee members recognized the similarities the specimens shared with the common 
black racer (Coluber constrictor), a snake frequently seen in this area, but insisted that it 
differed ‘strikingly ...by its undulating back’ (Report [12: p.38]). Part of the specimen was 
eventually dissected in an attempt to clarify the functional anatomy of the vertebral 
musculoskeletal system in vertical undulation: ‘The structure of the spine is very singular, 
and different from that of any serpent we have seen, or known to be described ... The 
structure of the different vertebrae varies to accommodate itself to this configuration [i.e., 
vertical undulation], so that the spine cannot be extended into a straight line without 
dislocation of its parts’ (Report [12: p.40]). In a footnote to those observations, the commit­
tee added: ‘This is the reverse of what Cuvier asserts of serpents in general’ (Report [12: 
p.41]) - Georges Cuvier (1769-1832), of course, being the famous palaeontologist and 
functional and comparative anatomist at the National Museum of Natural History in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sea-serpentism 117
Paris. Cuvier’s younger counterpart in Britain, Sir Richard Owen (1804-1892), would 
eventually side with the latter, however. In his account of the anatomy of the ophidian 
vertebral column, Owen noted: ‘there is no natural undulation of the body upwards and 
downwards, it is permitted only from side to side...’ [16: p.153].
Considering the snake with the bumpy back and its unique vertebral column to represent 
a new species, the committee members introduced it under the name Scoliophis atlanticus. 
Justice of the Peace Lonson Nash from Gloucester, who testified in front of the committee, 
was not alone in presuming the ‘young’ serpent ‘to be the progeny of the remarkable Sea 
Serpent, that was so often seen in the harbour’, and assured his audience: ‘Should it 
thereafter be ascertained, that the great serpent has been seen on land here, I shall take 
the earliest opportunity to inform you of a fact, so important’ (Report [12: p.46]). The 
assumption motivating this expectation was, of course, that the Sea Serpent would deposit 
its eggs on land in sandy soil near the shore, as modern sea turtles do.
In contrast, the French zoologist H. de Blainville (1777-1850) pointed out that Scoliophis 
atlanticus was identical with the common black racer (Coluber constrictor), except for its 
bumpy back. With respect to the conclusion that the small snake found on land should be 
an offspring of the animal seen in the sea -’the probability diminishes to almost completely 
zero’ [17: p.304]. This highly skeptical position was confirmed by the French naturalist and 
explorer Alexandre Lesueur (1778-1846), who inspected the little snake with the bumpy 
back from Loblolly cove, and compared it with Coluber constrictor. He found no characters 
in the external appearance of Scoliophis that would justify its recognition as a separate 
genus, and when it came to the vertebral column in a section of the body forming a bump, 
he observed: ‘the vertebrae that constitute this part show a high degree of irregularity and 
indeed a notable deformation ... I have no doubt whatsoever that this represents a totally 
anomalous condition; perhaps the individual received a series of blows in its youth ...’ [18: 
p.468]. Commenting on what became known as the Scoliophis ‘hoax’, the leading British 
Geologist Charles Lyell noted of the New England Linnean Society committee: ‘Just as they 
were concluding their report, an unlucky accident raised a laugh at the expense of the 
Linnean Committee, and enabled the incredulous to turn the whole matter into ridicule’ 
[14: p.112]. The ‘accident’ was the finding of the Loblolly cove serpent: ‘It had a series of 
bumps on his back, caused by the individual happening to have a diseased spine’ [14: 
p.112]. Indeed, during his travels in the United States, Lyell had realized what impact the 
Gloucester Sea Serpent saga had had on the broader public: ‘After the year 1817, every 
marvelous tale was called in the United States a snake story ...’ [14: p.113].
6.4 Names Change Meanings: The Myth Turns Real
Every incredible tale was called a ‘snake story’; evidently, the term ‘snake’ no longer 
referred to snakes only in this context, but to whatever the ‘marvelous tale’ was about. 
A similar looseness of meaning became increasingly apparent with respect to the term ‘sea 
serpent’, which no longer referred to a giant marine snake only, but to any monstrous, 
unidentified animal spotted in the sea. The October 19, 1850 issue of the Scientific American 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

118 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
reported: ‘a large sea serpent has been seen in the Penobscot Bay ...It is not known to what 
species of fish this monster belongs, neither is it improbable that in ancient times it was 
known as the ‘leviathan’ ...’ The 27 December 1879, issue of the Scientific American 
described how a giant octopus could create the appearance of a ‘hydrophidian or marine 
serpent.’ In the 19 March 1887 issue of the Scientific American, an anonymous letter writer 
professed: ‘It has been my belief for some years that there is some fitful gigantic wanderer 
inhabiting the ocean ... I think it is the sea serpent ... I shall not attempt to classify it. 
Whether it belongs to the mammalia, reptilia, or pisces, whether it be ophidian, cetacean, 
or saurian, I must leave it to the naturalist to determine.’ On 31 December 1892, the 
Scientific American reported a sea serpent sighting by the crew on the Liverpool mail 
steamer Angola, and concluded: ‘As is usual in cases of the kind, the signatories have been 
subjected to a great deal of ridicule, but they are nevertheless convinced that the monster 
they saw was a marine mystery and a sea serpent.’ The Inspector of Fisheries Frank 
Buckland concluded: ‘It is, therefore, evident to my mind that the coast of Norway and 
the north of Scotland are occasionally visited by a living creature, which, for want of a better 
name, is called ‘The Great Sea Snake’’ [19: p.411].
In 1892, the Director of the Zoological Garden at the Hague, Anthonie Cornelius 
Oudemans (1858-1943) published his major treatise on The Great Sea-Serpent [5], of which 
an anonymous review in Nature stated: ‘It is impossible, however, to treat this laborious 
work as a scientific treatise.’ And yet: ‘Enough has been written [on sea serpents] to prove 
that this volume is not without a certain amount of interest ... to open its pages at random 
one is sure to be arrested by some startling phase of belief or by some marvelous 
narration ...’ [20]. Oudemans [5] chronologically listed and analysed reports of sea serpent 
sightings, carefully trying to discern phantasy from fact. Commenting on Conrad Gesner’s 
[6] account of Olaus Magnus’s sea serpent (see above), Oudemans [5: p.109] wrote: ‘Here 
we meet with three other characteristics of the sea-serpent: it is harmless when not 
provoked, it encircles ships and turns them upside down, and its coils are so gigantic that 
a ship can go through one of them. The first characteristic is a real one: the sea-serpent is 
perfectly harmless...,’ the other characterizations he deemed exaggerations. Of the Report 
of the Committee of the Linnean Society of New England, Oudemans [5: p.163] stated in 
support of the existence of the Gloucester Sea Serpent: ‘We observe that the Linnean 
Society has exerted all its energies in the matter and has acted with greatest accuracy.’ 
But what, in Oudemans’s opinion, is the sea serpent, which he proposed to name - 
following Rafinesque [11] - Megophias megophias? ‘It will be quite superfluous to tell my 
readers to which order of animals I think that this Megophias megophias belongs. It runs 
like a red thread through my whole volume, that I firmly believe that it belongs to the order 
of Pinnipedia’ [5: p.546] - i.e., it resembles a sea-lion [5: p.568].
6.5 The Real Sea Serpent
In contrast to Oudemans’s conclusion, the fossils of marine Late Cretaceous reptiles - the 
mosasaurs - had for some already become the material basis of real sea serpents. The 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sea-serpentism 119
Philadelphia-based paleontologist Edward Drinker Cope (1840-1897) is perhaps best 
known for his engagement in the dinosaur ‘Bone Wars’ against Yale paleontologist 
Othniel Charles Marsh (1831-1899). These played out in the American West during the 
‘Great Dinosaur Rush’ that lasted from 1877 through 1892. In the year 1869, Cope 
published in the Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural History a paper titled ‘On 
the reptilian orders Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria’ [21]. What is of interest here is the 
name Pythonomorpha (see Polcyn et al., Chapter 7), which translates as ‘reptiles that 
resemble pythons in their anatomy’. Cope [21: p.258] included two families in his 
Pythonomorpha, the Clidastidae and Mosasauridae, the latter two colloquially referred to 
as mosasaurs, marine reptiles from the Late Cretaceous. By the end of the Cretaceous, 
mosasaurs had ascended to the apex of the marine food-chain, many species exceeding 
four meters (13 feet) in length. Cope [21: p.262] himself described the fossil remains of a 
very large mosasaur as those of a new species, Mosasaurus maximus [see also 22: p.189]. 
Today, this species is treated as a junior synonym of Mosasaurus hoffmannii [23], famously 
the very first mosasaur to have ever been collected, at St. Pietersberg south of Maastrich 
(the Netherlands) between 1770 to 1774 [24]. The estimated total length reached by that 
species, based on new material of Mosasaurus hoffmannii from Penza (Russia), is 17 meters 
(55 feet) [25].
When reviewing the anatomy of mosasaurs, Cope [21] noted that they share a number of 
characteristics with lizards, but more interestingly they also share many characteristics with 
snakes. One of the most striking snake characters in mosasaurs concerns their lower jaw: 
‘The mandibular arch is very much like that of serpents’ [21: p.255]. In lizards, as in all 
tetrapods, the dentary bones in the right and left mandible meet anteriorly in a syndesmotic 
suture (that may co-ossify in the adult, as in mammals). In mosasaurs and snakes, there is 
no mandibular symphysis, permitting the left and right mandible to move independently 
from one another. Another striking feature shared by snakes and mosasaurs is a joint in the 
middle of the mandible, between the dentary and the postdentary bones, allowing for 
further mobility and expansion. This led Cope [21: p.157] to conclude that mosasaurs’ 
‘habit was to devour [their prey] whole’, as snakes do.
‘From the preceding evidence, we may look upon the mosasauroids and their allies as a 
race of gigantic, marine, serpent-like reptiles, with powers of swimming and running, like 
the modern Ophidia. Adding a pair of short anterior paddles, they are not badly represented 
by old Pontoppidan’s figure of the sea serpent ... Thus in the mosasauroids, we almost 
realize the fictions of snake-like dragons and sea serpents, in which men have been ever 
prone to indulge. On account of the ophidian part of their affinities, I have called this order 
the Pythonomorpha. ([21: p.257-258]; see also Fig. 6.1)
Cope’s account of the Pythonomorpha was subsequently scrutinized by Owen, a critique 
which Cope [26] answered in a lengthy rebuttal. In it, Cope once again stressed his 
conclusion ‘that the Pythonomorpha are nearer to the Ophidia than are the Lacertilia’ 
[26: p.310]. Owen [27: p.714] criticized Cope for having claimed that the mosasaur repre­
sents ‘a marine animal, scientifically entitled to be called ‘serpent’ ... unless the ‘great sea 
serpent’ of our newspapers should establish its claims for admittance into the scientific 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

120 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
catalogue.’ Interestingly, in his reply Cope invoked the indeterminacy of meaning of the 
term ‘sea serpent’ again: ‘As to the use of the term sea-serpent, since I have not referred 
these reptiles [i.e., the pythonomorphs] to the Ophidia, the term involves no error’ 
[26: p.310].
6.6 The Sea Serpent’s Legs
In a book review titled The Serpent World, Shine [28: p.1946] regretted: ‘Unfortunately, Lee 
and Caldwell’s work on the fabulous missing link (Pachyrhachis, ‘the snake with legs’) was 
published too recently for inclusion in the book.’ What is meant here is the re-description 
by Caldwell and Lee [29] and Lee and Caldwell [30] of the fossil snake Pachyrhachis 
problematicus from marine sediments of mid-Cretaceous age, found near Ein Yabrud in 
the Judean Hills (West Bank, Middle East). The remarkable thing about this fossil snake is 
that it has small, but well-developed hindlimbs. On account of those limbs, it had already 
been praised as an ‘almost ideal intermediate’ between varanoids and snakes in what at 
that time was the standard textbook on Vertebrate Paleontology [31]. Caldwell and Lee’s 
[29, 30] cladistic analysis supported this interpretation of P. problematicus, more specifically 
linking the ‘snake with limbs’ to mosasauroids, a clade of Cretaceous marine 
(anguimorphan or varanoid: Augusta et al., Chapter 8; but see [32]) squamates. 
Eventually, Cope’s pythonomorph scenario, now cast in the light of the step-wise evolution 
of macrophagy in mosasaurs and the descendant snakes, was re-invented by claiming 
mosasaurs to ‘represent a crucial intermediate stage’ in the origin of snakes not from ‘small 
burrowing lizards, as commonly assumed, but [from] large marine forms’ instead [21, 33: 
p.655-656].
Doubts were soon cast on such identity of Pachyrhachis [34], later fueled by the discovery 
of two additional taxa of marine snakes with well-developed hindlimbs from the mid­
Cretaceous of the Middle East (Haasiophis [35, 36] and Eupodophis [37, 38]). At the bottom 
of the dispute lies the question: are these marine ‘snakes with limbs’ the perfect missing 
link between snakes and mosasauroids, or are they more advanced snakes nested firmly 
among crown-group alethinophidians? The latter scenario implies, however, that limb 
reduction in basal snakes either occurred repeatedly [39], or alternatively, and more 
parsimoniously, that the hindlimbs in these mid-Cretaceous marine pachyophiid snakes 
would have re-developed from meager rudiments still present in their ancestors (see 
discussion in [35] and Zaher et al., Chapter 9).
One pioneering study of the developmental mechanisms underlying the evolution of 
the snake body plan is that of Cohn and Tickle [40]. Their study addressed the genetic 
basis of body regionalization, rather than body elongation per se, and how the develop­
ment, or loss, of limbs is correlated with the axial regionalization (compartmentaliza­
tion) of the body [41]. The postcranial body axis of a generalized tetrapod (think of a 
quadrupedal lizard) is compartmentalized into the neck, trunk and tail. On the bound­
ary between neck and trunk are located the pectoral girdle and the forelimbs. On the 
boundary between trunk and tail are located the pelvic girdle and the hindlimbs. Cohn 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sea-serpentism 121
and Tickle [40] could show that the expression pattern of certain so called Hox genes 
sharply demarcates the neck from the trunk in tetrapods, thereby also specifying the 
identity of neck and trunk respectively. Gene expression patterns in a python indicated 
that in snakes, the identity of the trunk has been extended anteriorly up to the very first 
neck vertebra (atlas). That is to say, the ancestral neck in snakes has become thoraca- 
lized, although it is not entirely clear that the snake precloacal axial skeleton lost all 
signs of regionalization [42-44]. In the absence of the boundary zone signal between the 
ancestral neck and trunk there is no trace of a pectoral girdle or forelimb rudiments in 
any snake known, fossil and extant, nor do anterior limb buds sprout from the lateral 
body wall in any snake embryo (Tetrapodophis, an enigmatic fossil squamate from the 
Early Cretaceous of Brazil combines snake-like features with well-developed fore- and 
hindlimbs: [45]). The hindlimbs, on the other hand, are not affected through the 
thoracalization of the ancestral neck, and start to sprout from the python body wall, 
forming embryonic limb buds. But here again, certain molecular signals that structure 
limb development in a normal tetrapod (e.g., a quadrupedal lizard) are suppressed in 
the python limb bud, and the tissue in which these signals originate degenerates. 
Hindlimb development is thus truncated at an early stage in python. The result is that 
only a rudimentary femur develops. The chemical signals that fail to sustain the python 
limb bud growth and full-term morphogenesis are in large part mediated by Sonic 
hedgehog and fibroblast growth factors. When such growth factors are artificially 
inserted into the python limb bud, the latter was found to be thereby stimulated to 
grow to larger size than would be normal [40: p.476].
In a further follow-up study, even greater scrutiny was brought to bear on the analysis 
of limb reduction in pythons and boas [46]. Among a number of experiments the study 
also targeted the expression of a gene called SOX9 in the python hindlimb bud. SOX9 is 
a protein-coding gene that plays a regulatory role in skeleton formation (and also sex 
determination). As such, ‘SOX9 expression in python hindlimbs delineates discrete 
skeletal condensations’, initially marking out ‘pre-chondrogenic skeletal condensations’ 
of a ‘Y-shaped domain’ [46: p.2971]. This is, indeed, a classic stage of limb development 
in all tetrapods, where at an early stage both in the fore- and hindlimb the early 
cartilage condensation is in a Y-shaped form from which, in the hindlimb, the precur­
sors of the femur, tibia and fibula differentiate [47]. Ultimately it proved possible to 
identify, in the python hindlimb bud, three discreet SOX9 expression domains ‘that 
resemble the three major segments ... of the tetrapod limbs’, and hence ‘could be 
anlagen of the femur, tibia and fibula, and digital plate’ [46: p.2971]. The upshot of this 
finding is ‘that python embryos develop transitory cartilage condensations of the lower 
leg and foot’, suggesting ‘that re-acquisition of fully developed hindlimbs in extinct 
snakes may not have required de-novo re-evolution of lost structures, but could have 
resulted from persistence of the embryonic legs’ [46: p.2971]. In summary, the ‘re­
acquisition of complete limbs in some extinct snakes could have resulted from acti­
vation of a largely intact but dormant limb developmental program in snake embryos’ 
[48: p.9]. The re-development of limbs from ancestral limb rudiments in squamates is 
thus a distinct possibility (see also [49]).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

122 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
6.7 Conclusion
The snake is a powerful symbol of birth, death, and rebirth in mythology, alchemy, and 
psychology. In mythology, the snake resides either deep underground, or deeply sub­
merged at the bottom of the sea or other bodies of water. In evolutionary biology, the 
classic scenarios concerning snake origins that have been identified by Lee et al. [33] in 
their sketch of the pythonomorph scenario are either from small, secretive or even 
burrowing lizard-like forms, or from large, marine macrophagous forms such as mosasaurs. 
The first scenario, the origin of snakes from small, burrowing lizard-like forms, was recently 
branded as a myth [50]. But sea serpentism is deeply steeped in mythology as well (see 
discussion in [51]). And either scenario is at odds with the squamate tree of life based on 
genomic data, where snakes come out as sister-group to a clade that comprises the sister­
taxa Iguania and Anguimorpha [52-54]. Snakes, fossil and extant, have to this day not 
conclusively revealed the secret of their place of birth. To lift the veil that shrouds the 
evolutionary origin of snakes will require continued careful and unbiased morphological 
study, as well as a willingness to confront the issue why genomic data [53] yield a pattern of 
higher-level squamate relationships that is so fundamentally different from the tree based 
on morphological data [32], and counterintuitive as well (with dibamids at its base). It is fair 
to say that from a philosophical perspective we may never obtain certainty in our know­
ledge of snake origins, but we know one thing for certain: that the morphological and 
genomic data yield fundamentally incongruent trees of higher-level squamate relation­
ships. It is time to ask the question why this should be so.
Acknowledgements
I thank Hussam Zaher and David Gower for inviting me to contribute to this volume. I am 
very grateful to Hussam Zaher, Aleta Quinn, Francisca Leal, and an anonymous reviewer 
who offered comments that greatly improved the content of the paper.
References
1. R. Westrum. Knowledge about sea-serpents. 
In R. Wallis, ed., On the Margins of Science: 
The Social Construction of Rejected 
Knowledge (Staffordshire: University of 
Keele, 1979), pp. 293-314.
2. J. Nigg, Sea Monsters. A Voyage around the 
World’s Most Beguiling Map (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2013).
3. H. Lee, Sea Monsters Unmasked (London: 
William Clowes and Sons, 1883).
4. E. Pontoppidan, The Natural History of 
Norway (London: A. Linde, 1755).
5. A. C. Oudemans, The Great Sea-Serpent. 
An Historical and Critical Treatise (Leiden: J. 
Brill, 1892).
6. C. Gesner, Historia Animalium, liber IV, qui 
est de piscium & aquatilium animantium 
natura (ZUrich: Christoph Froschauer, 1558).
7. D. Loxton and D. R. Prothero, Abominable 
Science! Origins of the Yeti, Nessie, and Other 
Famous Cryptids (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2013).
8. A. Olearius, Gottorffische Kunst-Cammer.
(Schleswig: J. Holwein)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sea-serpentism 
123
9. L. Rieppel, Albert Koch’s Hydrarchos craze. 
In C. Berkowitz, B. Lightman, eds., Science 
Museums in Transition (Pittsburgh: 
University of Pittsburgh Press, 2017), 
pp. 139-160.
10. L. Rieppel Hoaxes, Humbugs, and frauds. 
Distinguishing truth from untruth in early 
America. Journal of the Early Republic, 38 
(2018), 501-529.
11. C. S. Rafinesque, Dissertation on Water 
Snakes, Sea Snakes, and Sea Serpents. 
American Monthly Magazine and Critical 
Review, 1 (1817), 431-435.
12. Anonymous, Report of a Committee of the 
Linnean Society of New England, relative to a 
large marine animal, supposed to be a 
serpent, seen near Cape Ann, Massachusetts, 
in August 1817 (Boston: Cummings and 
Hilliard, 1817).
13. W. Peck, Some observations on the Sea 
Serpent. Memoirs of the American Academy 
of Arts and Sciences, 4 (1818), 86-91.
14. C. Lyell, A Second Visit to the United States of 
North America (New York: Harper & 
Brothers, 1849).
15. R. T. Gould, The Case for the Sea-Serpent 
(London: Philip Allan, 1930).
16. R. Owen, A History of British Fossil Reptiles 
(London: Cassell & Co, 1849-1884).
17. H. d. Blainville, Sur un nouveau genre de 
Serpent, Scoliophis, et le serpent de mer vu 
en Amerique en 1817. Journal de Physique, 
de Chimie, et d’Histoire Naturelle, 86 (1818), 
297-304.
18. A. Lesueur, Sur le serpent nomme 
Scoliophis. Journal de Physique, de 
Chimie, et d’Histoire Naturelle, 86 (1818), 
466-469.
19. F. Buckland, Notes and Jottings from Animal 
Life (London: Smith Elder, 1886).
20. Anonymous, The Great Sea-Serpent. Nature, 
47 (1893), 506-507.
21. E. D. Cope, On the reptilian orders, 
Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria.
Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural 
History, 12 (1869), 250-266.
22. E. D. Cope, Synopsis of the extinct Batrachia, 
Reptilia and Aves of North America.
Transactions of the American Philosophical 
Society, ns, 14 (1871), 1-252, i-xxxiii.
23. E. W. A. Mulder, Transatlantic latest 
Cretaceous mosasaurs (Reptilia Lacertilia) 
from the Maastrichtian type area and New 
Jersey. Netherland Journal of Geosciences - 
Geologie en Mijnbouw, 78 (1999), 281-300.
24. N. Bardet and J. W. M. Jagt, Mosasaurus 
hoffmanni, le ‘Grand Animal fossile des 
Carrieres de Maestricht’: deux siecles 
d’histoire. Bulletin du Mus6um National 
dHistoire Naturelle, 4eme serie - section C - 
Sciences de La Terre, Pateontologie, G6ologie, 
Min&alogie, 18 (1996), 569-593.
25. D. V. Grigoriev, Giant Mosasaurus 
hoffmanni (Squamata, Mosasauridae) from 
the Late Cretaceous (Maastrichtian) of 
Penza, Russia. Proceedings of the Zoological 
Institute RAS, 318 (2014), 148-167.
26. E. D. Cope, Professor Owen on the 
Pythonomorpha. Bulletin of the United 
States Geological and Geographical Survey of 
the Territories, 4 (1878), 299-311.
27. R. Owen, On the rank and affinities in the 
reptilian class of the Mosasauridae, Gervais. 
Quarterly Journal of the Geological Society of 
London, 33 (1877), 682-715.
28. R. Shine, The serpent world. Science, 277 
(1997), 1945-1946.
29. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of the 
Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 705-709.
30. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, Anatomy 
and relationships of Pachyrhachis 
problematicus, a primitive snake with 
hindlimbs. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London B, 353 (1998), 
1521-1552.
31. R. L. Carroll, Vertebrate Paleontology and 
Evolution (New York: W. H. Freeman, 1988).
32. J. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano et al., 
Assembling the squamate tree of life: 
Perspectives from the phenotype and the 
fossil record. Bulletin of the Peabody Museum 
of Natural History, 53 (2012), 3-308.
33. M. S. Y. Lee, G. L. Bell, and M. W. Caldwell, 
The origin of snake feeding. Nature, 400 
(1999), 655-659.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

124 OLIVIER RIEPPEL
34. H. Zaher, The phylogenetic position of 
Pachyrhachis within snakes (Squamata, 
Lepidosauria). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 18 (1998), 1-3.
35. O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, E. Tchernov, and 
M. J. Polcyn, The anatomy and relationships 
of Haasiophis terrasanctus, a fossil snake 
with well-developed hind limbs from the 
Mid-Cretaceous of the Middle East.
Journal of Paleontology, 77 (2003), 536-558.
36. E. Tchernov, O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, et al., 
A fossil snake with limbs. Science, 287 
(2000), 2010-2012.
37. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, Un nouveau 
serpent bipede du Cenomanien (Cretace). 
Implications phyletiques. Comptes Rendus 
de l' Acad(mie des Sciences Paris, Earth and 
Planetary Science , 330 (2000), 513-520.
38. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, The Cenomanian: 
stage of hindlimbed snakes. Carnets 
Geologiques, 2003/01 (2003), 1-11.
39. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, The phylogenetic 
relationships of Pachyrhachis problematicus, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes 
(Lepidosauria, Squamata). Comptes Rendus de 
l'Acad(mie des Sciences, Paris (Serie IIA), Earth 
and Planetary Science, 329 (1999), 831-837.
40. M. J. Cohn and C. Tickle, Developmental 
basis of limblessness and axial patterning in 
snakes. Nature, 399 (1999), 474-479.
41. T. J. Sanger and J. J. Gibson-Brown, The 
developmental bases of limb reduction and 
body elongation in squamates. Evolution, 58 
(2004), 2103-2106.
42. J. M. Woltering, F. J. Vonk, H. Muller, et al., 
Axial patterning in snakes and caecilians: 
evidence for an alternative interpretation of 
the Hox code. Developmental Biology, 332 
(2009), 82-89.
43. T. Tsuihiji, M. Kearney, and O. Rieppel, 
Finding the neck-trunk boundary in snakes: 
anteoposterior dissociation of myological 
characteristics in snakes and its implications 
for their neck and trunk body 
regionalization. Journal of Morphology, 273 
(2012), 992-1009.
44. J. J. Head and P. D. Polly, Evolution of the 
snake body form reveals homoplasy in 
amniote Hox gene function. Nature, 520 
(2015), 86-89.
45. D. M. Martill, H. Tischlinger, and
N. R. Longrich, A four-legged snake from the 
Early Cretaceous of Gondwana. Science, 349 
(2015), 416-419.
46. F. Leal and M. J. Cohn, Loss and 
re-emergence of legs in snakes by modular 
evolution of sonic hedgehog and HOXD 
enhancers. Current Biology, 26 (2016), 
2966-2973.
47. N. Shubin and P. Alberch, A morphogenetic 
approach to the origin and basic 
organization of the tetrapod limb. 
Evolutionary Biology, 20 (1986), 319-387.
48. F. Leal and M. J. Cohn, Developmental, 
genetic and genomic insights into the 
evolutionary loss of limbs in snakes. The 
Journal of Genetics and Development, 56 
(2018), e23077.
49. J. J. Wiens, M. C. Brandley, and T. W. Reeder, 
Why does a trait evolve multiple times 
within a clade? Repeated evolution of 
snakelike body form in squamate reptiles. 
Evolution, 60 (2006), 123-141.
50. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2020).
51. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, Re-building the 
bridge between mosasaurs and snakes. 
Neues Jahrbuch fur Geologie und 
Palaontologie, Abhandlungen, 221 (2001), 
111-132.
52. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, et al., 
Resolving the phylogeny of lizards and 
snakes (Squamata) with extensive sampling 
of genes and species. Biology Letters, 8 
(2012), 1043-1046.
53. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, Phylogenomic 
analyses of more than 4000 loci resolve the 
origin of snakes among lizard families. 
Biology Letters, 13 (2017), 20170393.
54. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.009 Published online by Cambridge University Press

7
Reassessing the Morphological Foundations 
of the Pythonomorph Hypothesis
Michael J. Polcyn, Bruno G. Augusta, and Hussam Zaher
7.1 Introduction
The search for the phylogenetic positions of snakes and mosasaurians within Squamata and 
their relationship with one another has a long and controversial history. Molecular analyses 
are increasingly providing insights into snake relationships with support for their inclusion 
in the clade Toxicofera (e.g., Ruane and Streicher, Chapter 10), but with alternate arrange­
ments of Serpentes and Iguania as the sister to Anguimorpha [1, 2]. However, morphology- 
only analyses have failed to recover a well-supported position for snakes within Squamata 
[3-7]. Such lability has also plagued mosasaurian morphological systematics and likely for 
similar reasons as snakes; namely, their highly disparate morphology and imperfections in 
the fossil record of transitional forms. Our incomplete knowledge of the early evolution of 
the group has contributed to inconsistent phylogenetic hypotheses for mosasaurians 
recovered in recent squamate-wide analyses [5, 7].
Uncertainty of the phylogenetic position of mosasaurians is not a recent development. 
Shortly after their discovery in the eighteenth century, mosasaurs were considered fishes, 
crocodiles, and whales [8] but finally recognized as squamates [9, 10]. After Cuvier [10], 
mosasaurians were broadly accepted as being closely related to varanoid lizards, until Cope 
[11], confounded by what he considered a mosaic of snake, lizard, and sauropterygian 
characters presented by mosasaurs, rejected this. Cope instead erected a new order, 
Pythonomorpha, placing it in a trichotomy with his Ophidia and Lacertilia. Cope’s arrange­
ment led to protracted nineteenth century debates but no consensus (see [12, 13] and 
references therein).
With the discovery and growing knowledge of ‘aigialosaurids’, dolichosaurids, and other 
Cenomanian snake-like squamates, focus shifted, with aigialosaurids being considered by 
Nopcsa [14, 15] ancestral to snakes, dolichosaurids, and mosasaurs, and underpinning the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

126 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
hypothesis of a marine origin for snakes (see Zaher et al., Chapter 9). However, Cope’s 
pythonomorph concept and any close relationship of snakes and mosasaurians was 
rejected by Camp [12] in favour of a varanid affinity, which heralded a long pause in the 
discussion (but see [16]).
Over 70 years later, Lee’s [17] phylogenetic study of varanoid lizards led to recovery of 
a snake-mosasaur affinity and revival of the clade-name Pythonomorpha. Although used in 
a different sense from Cope [11], the revived Pythonomorph Hypothesis of snake origins 
was promoted and expanded [18-20] and critically rebutted [6, 21-24], culminating in what 
can respectfully be recognized as a stalemate [25]. The concept of Pythonomorpha has 
persisted and evolved with a renewed focus on dolichosaurids and a somewhat fluid 
diagnosis [26-33].
Table 7.1 presents a synoptic view of morphological characters used to diagnose 
Pythonomorpha. Understanding details of morphology from a mosasaurian perspective, 
that underlie purported pythonomorph synapomorphies, is a critical first step in assessing 
homology statements and character definitions. To that end, in this chapter we present new 
morphological data for exceptionally well-preserved early diverging (non-mosasaurid) 
mosasaurians (dolichosaurids and ‘aigialosaurids’) and the early diverging plioplatecarpine 
mosasaurid Tethysaurus nopcsai, and address issues that influenced prior analyses (e.g., 
narial retraction). Ultimately, our goals are to provide a succinct snapshot of the morph­
ology of early diverging mosasaurians that purportedly unites mosasaurians with snakes, 
and to present new data clarifying morphology.
7.2 The Morphology of Early Diverging Mosasaurians
Morphological observations presented here are based on first-hand study of specimens, 
high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scans, and research casts. All specimens 
referred in the text are listed with their collection number in Supplementary Appendix 7.S1. 
We follow the phylogeny and nomenclature for Mosasauria given by Augusta et al. 
(Chapter 8). We use the term mosasaurians (= Mosasauria) to include dolichosaurids, 
‘aigialosaurids’, and mosasaurids. For the purpose of this chapter, we use the term ‘early 
diverging mosasaurians’ for the mosasaurian assemblage, predominantly known from the 
Cenomanian-Turonian (~100-~90 Ma) and which includes dolichosaurids and ‘aigialo- 
saurids’. We consider Tethysaurus, Russellosaurus, Dallasaurus, Yaguarasaurus, and 
Halisaurinae ‘early diverging’, generally morphologically plesiomorphic members of 
Mosasauridae. We further consider the remaining mosasaurians listed in this chapter as 
‘later diverging’, generally morphologically more derived mosasaurids of the subfamilies 
Plioplatecarpinae, Mosasaurinae, and Tylosaurinae (Supplementary Figure 7.S1a). We 
present new data elucidating narial retraction in mosasaurians and thereafter generally 
follow the order outlined in Table 7.1. Due to space limitations, most morphological 
descriptions and supporting notes are in the Supplementary Appendix 7.S1, which gener­
ally follows the structure of this chapter.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 127
Table 7.1 Synoptic listing of characters used to diagnose Pythonomorpha.
Letters in parentheses designate diagnosis citation: A = Cope [11]; B = Lee [17]; C = Lee and 
Caldwell [19]; D = Caldwell [38]; E= Lee [4]; F= Lee and Caldwell [40]; G = Pierce and Caldwell [30]; 
H = Palci and Caldwell [36]; I = Paparella et al. [31]. Minor differences in the wording of character 
descriptions were ignored, but where meaning was changed, we included both versions. Some entries 
were edited for clarity, designated by brackets around edited word or passage. Characters in italics 
indicate usage in most recent diagnosis [31]. Note 1: Cope’s use of ‘squamosal’ is unclear to us in 
this context.
Premaxilla
Premaxillary teeth four or fewer (B,C,E,F,G)
Median premaxillary tooth absent (E,F,G)
Premaxilla contacts frontals (H)
Maxilla
There is merely a squamosal suture between the maxillary and premaxillary (A) 1
Maxilla enters suborbital foramen (B,C)
Lacrimal foramen
Lacrimal foramen enclosed entirely by prefrontal (B,C)
Lacrimal foramen within prefrontal or absent (E,F,G)
Septomaxilla
Long posteromedial flange of septomaxilla (D,E,F,G,I)
Septomaxilla free of maxilla (E,F,G)
Palatine
Palatine with long anterior process (B)
Pterygoid
Pterygoids elongate and bear numerous teeth, and in one type are free, except at the extremities (A)
Anterior process of pterygoid distinct from lateral process (B,C,E,F,G)
Pterygoid teeth large and recurved (B,C)
Presence of pterygoid teeth (D)
Pterygoid teeth, when present, as large as maxillary teeth (E,F,G,H)
Ectopterygoid
Ectopterygoid-palatine contact absent, maxilla enters suborbital fenestra (H)
Frontal
Frontal is a single median element (H)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

128 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Table 7.1 (cont.)
Parietal
Parietal downgrowths prominent flanges (A,B,C,E,F,G,H,I)
Parietal-prootic contact extensive (E,F,G,H,I)
Basisphenoid
Basipterygoid processes do not project far from body of basisphenoid (B,C,E,F,G,I)
Basipterygoid processes expanded anteroposteriorly (B,C)
Body of basisphenoid extends far anteriorly beyond dorsum sellae (B)
Cultriform process straight in lateral view (B,C,E,F,G)
Anterior brain cavity floored by wide cultriform process (E,F,G)
Main body (wide portion) of parasphenoid extends anteriorly some distance in front of dorsum sella, 
before tapering into a narrow cultriform process (C)
Vidian canal is an open groove anteriorly (B,C)
Rear opening of vidian canal situated far posteriorly (B,C)
Otooccipital
Crista circumfenestralis encircling footplate of stapes (B,C)
Stapes footplate surrounded by flanges from prootic and opisthotic (E,F,G)
Supraoccipital
Supraoccipital sutured with parietals along its entire dorsal margin (B,C,H)
Supraoccipital sutured to parietal (E,F,G)
Supratemporal
Opisthotic projects free from the cranium, and is the suspensorium of the os quadratum (A)
Opisthotic [supratemporal] is supported by a pedestal projecting from the cranial walls, composed of 
the prolonged prootic in front, and the exoccipital [opisthotic] behind, which embraces the 
suspensorium for much of its length (A)
Squamosal [supratemporal] bone is present (A)
Supratemporal forms part of braincase and contacts prootic (C )
Supratemporal-prootic contact (B,E,F,G,H,I)
Supratemporal forms part of paroccipital process of braincase (E,F,G)
Supratemporal intercalated between quadrate and braincase (B)
Quadrate
There is no columella. [The stapes was unknown to Cope] (A)
Os quadratum is movably articulated to the opisthotic [supratemporal] (A)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 129
Table 7.1 (cont.)
Os quadratum embraces and encloses the meatus auditorius externus (A)
Extracolumella with extensive contact with quadrate (B,C)
Quadrate with large, posteroventrally curved, suprastapedial process (H,I)
Quadrate suspended entirely by supratemporal (C )
Quadrate suspended mostly or entirely by supratemporal (E,F,G)
Dentary
Mandibular symphysis highly mobile (A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I)
Dentary straight in lateral view (E,F,G,I)
Meckelian groove confined to medial surface of lower jaw (B,C)
Anterior end of Meckel’s canal on medial surface of dentary (E,F,G,I)
Development of a large subdental shelf (I)
Splenial-Dentary
Reduced splenial-dentary suture (D)
Anterior tip of splenial on medial surface of dentary (B,C,E,F,G)
Coronoid-Splenial
Posterior end of splenial does not overlap coronoid; convergent in Lanthanotus (B,C,E,F,G)
Coronoid does not contact splenial (B)
Splenial-Angular
Vertical articulation between splenial and angular (A,B,C,E,F,G,H)
[Splenial angular] greatly exposed in lateral view (H)
Surangular exposed in medial view of lower jaw (C)
Postdentary-dentary
Splenial does not substantially overlap postdentary elements (E,F,G,I)
Reduced overlap of the postdentary-dentary bones (D)
Coronoid
Coronoid with straight or convex ventral edge (C,E,F,G,I)
Posterior ramus of coronoid reduced or absent (B)
Subcoronoid fossa absent (B,E,F,G)
Anterior end of coronoid meets dentary directly (D)
Coronoid does not overlap dentary laterally (C)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

130 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Table 7.1 (cont.)
Adductor fossa
Adductor fossa faces dorsally (B,C,E,F,G)
Articular-prearticular
Articular and prearticular fused (E,F,G)
Compound bone
Angular [articular] bone is distinct (A)
Tooth implantation
Teeth have no fangs (A)
Discrete sockets (alveoli) under all marginal teeth (C)
Tooth replacement
Recumbent (horizontal) replacement teeth (B,C,E,F,G)
Vertebrae
Zygosphenes and zygantra present (A,B,C,D,E,F,G,H,I)
Absence of posterior process on atlas neural arch (B,C).
Condyles on centra circular in shape (B,C,E,F,G)
Five or more pygals (B)
Tail laterally compressed, i.e., transverse processes reduced anteriorly and absent posteriorly, 
chevrons and neural spines elongated (H)
Ribs
Abdominal cavity is long, and is surrounded by many short, curved ribs, which have a free 
anteroposterior movement on vertical, articulating surfaces, and which commence immediately 
behind the head (A)
Ribs begin from third cervical (B,C,E,F,G,I)
Girdles
Pelvic elements not suturally united (B,C,H,I)
Pubic plate oriented parasagittally, wide in lateral view (H)
Limbs
Femur stout (B)
Straight, short femur (C)
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 131
Table 7.1 (cont.)
Distal end of tibia gently convex for astragalocalcaneal articulation (I)
Astragalus and calcaneum separate (C,H,I)
Other postcranial
Cranial and axial epiphyses absent (B,C,I)
Osteoderms lost (B,C,H)
7.2.1 Snout, Palate, and Circumorbital Bones
Characters of the snout, dermal palate, and circumorbital series have played a promin­
ent role in squamate systematics historically; however, due in part to a lack of data on 
that anatomy in early mosasaurians, phylogenetic analyses of Mosasauria using 
squamate-wide data sets have yielded varied and inconclusive results [5, 7, 34, 35]. 
Furthermore, the snouts of derived mosasaurids are highly modified by secondary 
marine and feeding adaptations, making direct comparisons with the plesiomorphic 
condition difficult. Cope interpreted the unique premaxillary-maxillary suture in mosa­
saurs as snake-like which is confounding, because mosasaur taxa available to him at that 
time were highly derived forms with the uniquely expanded premaxillary-maxillary 
contact described below, and bear no resemblance to the snake condition. The maxilla 
entering the suborbital fenestra was proposed by Lee [17, 19] to unite mosasaurs and 
snakes. This character is roughly equivalent to Palci and Caldwell’s [36] character 59 
‘ectopterygoid-palatine contact absent, maxilla enters suborbital foramen [fenestra]’ and 
is addressed below with the account of the ectopterygoid and its relationship with 
adjacent bones. No premaxillary or maxillary characters are included in the most recent 
diagnosis of Pythonomorpha [31].
Narial Retraction
Although narial retraction has long been recognized as a feature shared by varanoids and 
mosasaurians [5, 12, 13, 37], Caldwell et al. [34] criticized its use as a single character, 
arguing that topological relationships of constituent bones as opposed to the fenestration 
itself, should be considered instead. We generally agree with that, however, in doing so, 
Caldwell et al.’s recharacterization ensured the link between mosasaurians and varanids 
was weakened (p. 116 in [38]). Snout morphology in early diverging mosasaurians and early 
diverging plioplatecarpines clarifies narial retraction in Mosasauria because they preserve a 
morphology more comparable to the plesiomorphic varanoid condition and in some cases 
even more similar to varanids. We briefly summarize here and provide more details in 
Supplementary Appendix 7.S1.
All dolichosaurids that sufficiently preserve snout morphology allowing examination 
possess some degree of anteriorly retracted nares, in that the anterodorsal margin of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

132 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Figure 7.1 Narial retraction in Mosasauria, depicting schematic views of bony nares. Generalized 
dolichosaurid condition (A) based on Pontosaurus lesinensis, P. kornhuberi, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 133
maxilla is tall and possesses a long contact with the lateral edge of the premaxilla, forming a 
posteromedially trending premaxillary-maxillary suture. In some cases, the nasal process of 
the premaxilla is quite wide and forms a long posterior contact with the maxilla, as in 
Coniasaurus (Fig. 7.1H-J). All mosasaurians examined also possess posterior retraction of 
the nares, in that the posterior margin is formed largely by the frontal and prefrontal. In 
dolichosaurids, the anterior frontal is broad and the narial emargination largely transverse, 
whereas in ‘aigialosaurids’ and early diverging plioplatecarpines, the anterolateral parts of 
the frontal are greatly reduced, emarginating the posteromedial part of the nares with the 
anteromedial frontal projecting into the narial space (Fig. 7.1E-G). The relationship of the 
nasal process of the premaxilla to the frontal, and the variable morphology of the nasals, 
trends from being similar to the varanoid condition (in dolichosaurids and halisaurines) 
toward reduction and loss of the nasals in more derived mosasaurids. Within Mosasauria, 
contact between the premaxilla and frontal is present only in early diverging plioplatecar- 
pines and derived mosasaurids, but was considered one of the defining characters of early 
pythonomorphs [36]. Pontosaurus lesinensis possesses narrow paired nasals, a condition 
shared with halisaurines (Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). In both cases the posterior nasals 
are much narrower than the frontal (Fig. 7.1A, D). The earliest instance of premaxillary- 
frontal contact is in the early Turonian Tethysaurus, which exhibits slight overlap. In the late 
Turonian plioplatecarpine Yaguarasaurus (Fig. 7.1C) the premaxilla overlies the frontal and 
forms a long spatulate posterior terminus, sutured to the anterodorsal surface, a condition 
common to all non-halisaurine derived mosasaurids. Both Tethysaurus and Yaguarasaurus 
(contra [39]) possess nasals ventrolateral to and spanning the anterior part of the frontal 
and posterior part of the nasal process of the premaxilla (not visible in dorsal view). In 
derived mosasaurids, there is a reduction in size and in some cases loss (or non­
preservation) of the nasal bones.
Early diverging mosasaurians possess a typical varanid snout morphology with respect to 
narial retraction. The morphology associated with anterior narial retraction, and especially 
the increasing contribution of the premaxilla in the formation of the snout, stands in 
marked contrast to the regressed contact between premaxilla and maxillae in snakes, in 
which the loss of the premaxillary-maxillary suture is intimately related to increased snout 
kinesis. Equally important are details of the posteriorly retracted nares, in which early 
diverging mosasaurians share extremely narrow nasals separating the elongate nasal
Figure 7.1 (cont.) Coniasaurus gracilodens; generalized plesiomorphic mosasaurid condition (B) 
based on Tethysaurus nopcsai; generalized derived mosasaurid condition (C) based on 
Yaguarasaurus columbianus; halisaurine condition (D) based on YPM-40383 and Eonatator coellensis. 
Ventral view of frontals of (E) Eonatator cf. sternbergi (RMM-6890), (F) Coniasaurus gracilodens 
(NHMUK-R44141), and (G) Tethysaurus nopcsai (SMU-75486). Partial premaxilla of Coniasaurus sp. 
(DMNH-1602) in (H) dorsal, (I) ventral, and (J) left lateral views. Partial premaxilla of Dallasaurus 
turneri (SMU-76529) in (K,M) ventral, (L) dorsal, and (N) posterolateral and slightly dorsal oblique 
views. Abbreviations: e.f, foramen for ethmoid nerve; F, frontal; in.pr, incisive process; Favm.pr, 
frontal anterior ventral median process; M.ft, maxillary facet; N, nasal; P.fr, Parietal fragment; Pfr.ft, 
prefrontal facet; Po.ft, postorbitofrontal facet; Pxn.pr, nasal process of the premaxilla; ss.ft, 
supraseptale facet; Sx, septomaxilla.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

134 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
(d)
(j)
Pxam.pr
L
(e)
Prf.ft
Mx.ft
(n)
vpr
(q)
(r)
(p)
Mx.g
Prf.ft
(k)
Prf.ft
(o)
Prf.ft
L
V.pr
(t)
(u)
io.f
?Pa.f
Mx.ft
Pa
io.f
Prf.t
Pt.ft
(f)
(g)
(i)
(h)
vnn.g vno
J.ft Pal.ft
(l)
Sx.pmpc
(m)
(s)
Figure 7.2 Snout region of Coniasaurus gracilodens (NHMUK-R44141) and the palatine of 
Dolichosaurus longicollis (NHMUK-R49002). Right maxilla and rearticulated lacrimal in (A) lateral,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 135
process of the premaxilla from the frontal. The nasals are further reduced in more derived 
mosasaurids which, along with premaxillary-frontal suturing, contributes to loss of kinesis. 
This stands in contrast to the condition in stem snakes such as Najash [32] in which 
posteriorly broad nasals contact the frontal posteriorly and posterolaterally. Narial retrac­
tion in snakes appears to be intimately related to increasing snout kinesis, an evolutionary 
trend that is opposite to that in mosaraurians.
Premaxilla
Fewer teeth and absence of a median premaxillary tooth have been cited as pythonomorph 
characters (Table 7.1) [4, 17, 30, 40]. Although mosasaurs do possess fewer premaxillary 
teeth, these are pleurodont, symmetrically spaced, and a median tooth is present in some 
forms (Fig. 7.1 H-N; see also Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). These purported pythono- 
morph synapomorphies are not present in the most recent diagnosis of Pythonomorpha [31].
Septomaxillae and Vomers
Chemosensory adaptations of the dermal palate in squamates played a large role in their 
classification historically (e.g., [3, 12, 16]) but the morphology in mosasaurians, specifically 
of the septomaxilla, is only superficially known in a few taxa [41-43]. Camp [43] first 
reported the elongate posteromedial process of the septomaxilla in Plotosaurus and this 
character was hypothesized as a synapomorphy of Pythonomorpha by Caldwell [38] and 
others [4, 30, 31, 38, 40] and the character ‘septomaxilla free of maxilla’ was used by Lee [4], 
Lee and Caldwell [40], and Pierce and Caldwell [30], but not in more recent diagnoses.
HRCT scans of Coniasaurus gracilodens and Tethysaurus nopcsai provide new details of 
the septomaxilla and conjugate structures (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3; Supplementary Appendix 7. 
S1). The septomaxilla in Tethysaurus is composed of an anterior cupola, open medially, 
walled by the maxilla laterally, and a dorsolateral flange of the vomer posterolaterally
Figure 7.2 (cont.) (B) dorsal, posterolateral oblique, (C) medial, (D) medial, showing detail of 
maxilla-lacrimal contact, (E) ventral, and (J) dorsal views. Right vomer in (F) ventral, (I) dorsal, and 
(L) lateral views. Left vomer in (G) ventral, (H) dorsal, and (K) lateral views (K is reversed for 
comparison). Articulated anterior part of right vomer and septomaxilla of Tethysaurus nopcsai (SMU- 
75486) in (M) lateral view. Right lacrimal of Coniasaurus gracilodens in (N) lateral, (O) medial, (P) 
posterior, (Q) dorsal, and (R) ventral views. Dolichosaurus longicollis palatine in (S) dorsal, (T) ventral, 
and (U) posteroventral oblique views. Abbreviations: Ec, ectopterygoid; F, frontal; f.map, maxillary 
artery posterior; f.maa, foramen maxillary artery anterior; g.Ld, groove for lacrimal duct; in.pr, incisive 
process; io.f, infraorbital foramen; io.pr, infraorbital process; J, jugal; L, lacrimal; L.f, lacrimal foramen; 
L.f.d, dorsal lacrimal foramen; L.f.v, ventral lacrimal foramen; Mx, maxilla; Mx.ft, maxillary facet; Mx. 
g, groove to receive dorsal margin of maxilla; N, nasal; N.ft, nasal facet; P, parietal; Pa, palatine; Pa.f, 
palatine foramen; Pa.vp.ft, palatine vomer process facet; Pt.ft, pterygoid facet; Px, premaxilla; Pxam. 
pr, anteromedial process of premaxilla; Px.ft, premaxillary facet; Prf.ft, prefrontal facet; r.vno, recess 
for vomernasal organ; Sx, septomaxilla; Sx.pmpc, septomaxilla posteromedial process of cupola; Sx.ft, 
septomaxilla facet; V.pr, vomer process; vno, vomeronasal opening; vno.r, recess for vomernasal 
organ; vnn.g, groove for vomeronasal nerve; vpr, ventral parallel ridges; Scale bar = 5mm. See 
Supplementary Figure 7.S12 for colour version.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Figure 7.3 Morphology of the snout and antorbital series of Tethysaurus nopcsai from HRCT 
reconstructions. Parasagittally (slightly left of midline) sectioned цСТ-based model of the skull of 
Tethysaurus nopcsai (SMU-75486) in (A) left medial and (B) dorsal views. Septomaxilla and vomer of 
same in (C) left lateral, (D) right lateral, and (E) posterior views. Right septomaxilla in (F), dorsal view 
with cross sections of posterior portion. Partial orbital series in (G) posterior, (H) detailed posterior, 
and (I) posterolateral oblique views. Abbreviations: Ec, ectopterygoid; d.lf, dorsal lacrimal foramen; F, 
frontal; io.f, infraorbital foramen; J, jugal; L, lacrimal; Mx, maxilla; N.ft, nasal facet; Pavpr.ft, facet for 
the vomer process of the palatine; Prf, prefrontal; Px, premaxilla; Sx, septomaxilla; V, vomer; v.lf, 
ventral lacrimal foramen. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For 
the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 137
(Fig. 7.3B) yielding the incomplete neochoanate condition (sensu [44]). The short poster­
olateral process loosely overlies the maxilla and the longer posteromedial process 
(Fig. 7.3F) is ventrally concave and projects posterodorsally, contacting the ventrolateral 
nasal process of the premaxilla. Although the septomaxilla is not preserved in C. gracilo- 
dens, conjugate structures on the anteromedial maxilla and vomers leave no doubt its 
septomaxilla was similar (Fig. 7.2B, C, I, J).
Notwithstanding consequences of narial retraction and reduced anterior accommoda­
tion space, the morphology of the septomaxilla and vomer in Tethysaurus is similar in 
most respects to that of Lanthanotus and Heloderma. In Lanthanotus, the cupola is more 
domed, the posterolateral process elaborated, the palatine process of the vomer broad to 
receive the spatulate anterior palatine, and the dorsolateral process that meets the 
septomaxilla behind the incisura Jacobsoni more robust, and diagonally oriented. The 
relationship of the vomer with the blade-like vomer process of the palatine in Tethysaurus 
is most similar to, but more vertically oriented, than the sample of Varanus examined. 
The vomer process of the palatine in Heloderma is rod-like and articulates with a 
U-shaped trough in the posterior part of the vomer in that taxon. All varanoids have 
some form of a posteromedial process of septomaxilla (Supplementary Figure 7.S3a-e), 
although in Varanus the septomaxilla is structurally more complex. Extreme elongation of 
the posteromedial part of the septomaxilla occurs in Varanus rudicollis, for instance, 
though also laterally expanded and contacting the maxilla over an extended distance 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S3h). Interestingly, these taxa also possess retracted fleshy nares, 
suggesting septomaxilla elongation may be correlated with the opening of the dorsal wall 
of the nasal capsule.
Transverse reduction of the septomaxilla in snakes contributes to its high aspect ratio, 
giving the appearance of a long septomaxilla. However, when comparing the cupola length 
to the length of the posteromedial process (flange) of the septomaxilla of stem snakes 
(e.g., Najash [32]) to the one in varanoids and mosasaurs, it appears that the former is 
substantially shorter than the latter: only 24 per cent of the length of the cupola in Najash 
compared to 80 per cent in Lanthanotus, 43 per cent in Heloderma, 200+per cent in Varanus 
dumerilii, 145 per cent in V. niloticus, and 175 per cent in Tethysaurus. Tethysaurus falls 
within the range of Varanus ssp. and, along with the other varanoids measured, possesses a 
relatively longer posteromedial process than Najash. Thus, a ‘long’ posteromedial process 
of the septomaxilla in snakes cannot be considered a synapomorphy of Pythonomorpha 
[4, 30, 31, 38, 40].
In addition to comparisons of ‘length’, the posteromedial septomaxilla flange in Najash is 
blade-like and more similar to that of Heloderma (Supplementary Figure 7.S3b) than to the 
more complex, vaulted process in Tethysaurus (Fig. 7.3F). Furthermore, the septomaxilla in 
snakes lies primarily ventral to the nasal bones, whereas in mosasaurs (and varanoids) it 
lies primarily ventral to and contacts the nasal process of the premaxilla. The only similarity 
identified in Najash and Tethysaurus and inferred in Coniasaurus gracilodens is contact 
between the posterolateral margin of the cupola and a dorsal projection of the vomer, but 
this condition is also present in Heloderma and Lanthanotus, and further elaborated in 
Varanus.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Palatine
A single palatine character was proposed by Lee [17] - ‘Palatine with long anterior process’. 
Although in mosasaurids the pterygoid process is markedly shorter and the anterior part 
more elongate, in dolichosaurids the pterygoid process is about the length of the anterior 
vomer process (Fig. 7.2S). Other aspects of the palatine in mosasaurians are markedly 
different than in snakes (Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). The edentulous palatine in 
mosasaurians has a long contact with the posteromedial surface of the maxilla. In dorsal 
view, between the maxillary contact and the vertically oriented blade-like vomer process, is 
a concave floor with intersecting sulci and its anterior part forms the concave posterior 
emargination of the internal choana (Fig. 7.2S-U; Supplementary Figure 7.S4a-c). 
Posterolaterally, the path for the maxillary artery and maxillary branch of the trigeminal 
nerve is not fully enclosed by the palatine, but merely roofed by a lateral projection that 
contacts the lacrimal, maxilla and jugal (Fig. 7.3G-I). In some mosasaurine mosasaurids, 
the lateral process is ventrolaterally elaborated, forming a structure superficially similar to 
the infraorbital foramen, but open ventrally (Supplementary Figure 7.S4d-g). In varanids, 
Heloderma, anguioids, Shinisaurus, and stem snakes like Najash [32], the path for the 
maxillary artery and maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve passes through the palatine 
via the infraorbital foramen.
Lacrimal
A pythonomorph character ‘lacrimal foramen within prefrontal or absent’, was proposed by 
Lee [17], subsequently used by Lee [4], Lee and Caldwell [40], Pierce and Caldwell [30], but 
later dropped by Palci and Caldwell [36] and Paparella et al. [31]. Details of the lacrimal and 
its contacts with adjacent bones are poorly known in mosasaurians. We report here for 
the first time two well-preserved examples; the dolichosaurid Coniasaurus gracilodens 
(Fig. 7.2N-R) and Tethysaurus nopcsai (Fig. 7.3G-I; Supplementary Figure 7.S4d-i; 
Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). Notwithstanding changes in proportions, the general 
morphology and contacts of the lacrimal with adjacent bones in C. gracilodens and 
T. nopcsai is consistent with that in anguimorphs [45], but differs in the following respects. 
The lacrimal is approximately half the height of the prefrontal in contrast with the condition 
in Varanus. The articulation for the lacrimal is present as a facet on the ventrolateral part of 
the prefrontal in all mosasaurian specimens in which this region is preserved. Compared to 
the condition in Varanus, the ventromedial articulation of the lacrimal with the prefrontal 
in T. nopcsai and C. gracilodens is substantially reduced and the contact with the palatine is 
more extensive than its contact with the jugal in T. nopcsai. In both cases, the lacrimal 
foramen is open and delimited by both lacrimal and prefrontal walls and in no way 
resembles the condition in snakes, as previously suggested [4, 36, 38] (Table 7.1).
Pterygoid and Ectopterygoid
Five pterygoid and one ectopterygoid characters have been proposed as pythonomorph 
synapomorphies (Table 7.1). Cope [11] considered The pterygoids are elongate and bear 
numerous teeth, and in one type are free, except at the extremities, a snake character.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 139
Lee [17] introduced ‘Pterygoid teeth large and recurved’ and ‘Anterior process of pterygoid 
distinct from lateral process’ (Table 7.1). Caldwell [38] included the mere ‘presence of 
pterygoid teeth’ in his diagnosis, noting it was equivocal. Most recently, ‘pterygoid teeth, 
when present, as large as maxillary teeth’ was used by Lee [4], Lee and Caldwell [40], Pierce 
and Caldwell [30], and Palci and Caldwell [36]. Paparella et al. [31] included no pterygoid 
characters in their diagnosis. Palci and Caldwell [36] also included ‘ectopterygoid-palatine 
contact absent, maxilla enters suborbital fenestra’ in their diagnosis, a character related to 
the previously abandoned ‘maxilla enters suborbital foramen’ [17].
The pterygoid has been described in the dolichosaurids Coniasaurus gracilodens [27] and 
C. crassidens [46]. Both possess teeth substantially smaller than the marginal teeth. The 
pterygoids are well known in mosasaurids [13] in which the pterygoid teeth are substantially 
smaller than the marginal teeth except in Prognathodon in which the pterygoid teeth 
approach the size of the marginal teeth. Additionally, the pterygoid in mosasaurs is further 
differentiated from both snakes and varanoids in the elaboration of a posteromedial process 
underlying the anterolateral parabasisphenoid. At the confluence of this process and the 
quadrate process, a dorsomedially facing fossa receives the short basipterygoid processes in 
a syndesmotic joint (Supplementary Figure 7.S4a, b). Similarly, a small medial process 
buttressing the basipterygoid process occurs in Varanus komodoensis, but not in some 
congeners (Supplementary Figure 7.S2g). The ectopterygoid in mosasaurians is gracile and 
generally L-shaped [47], its slender anterior ramus articulating with the jugal over an 
extended distance, clasping the posteromedial maxilla in some forms. Thus, the primary 
structural components bridging the pterygoid and the maxilla are the combined ectopter­
ygoid and jugal (Fig. 7.3G-H). This is fundamentally different from both the varanoid and 
snake conditions in which a robust, rod-like ectopterygoid is the primary structural com­
ponent and the jugal contacts it anteriorly and in a more dorsal position (as in Varanus) or 
barely contacts the posteromedial corner of the jugal as in Najash [32]. Loss of contact 
between ectopterygoid and palatine in snakes and mosasaurians [36] is fundamentally 
different. In snakes, loss of contact is associated with the elongate suborbital projection of 
the maxilla terminating in a typical relationship with the ectopterygoid, but well posterior to 
the palatine-maxillary articulation. In mosasaurians, as exemplified in Tethysaurus, the two 
elements are in close proximity but have lost contact due to the unique and significantly 
reduced mosasaurian ectopterygoid (Fig. 7.3G-I; Supplementary Figure 7.S4i). See 
Supplementary Appendix 7.S1 for more details on the mosasaurian ectopterygoid.
7.2.2 Skull Roof and Braincase
Fifteen pythonomorph skull roof and braincase synapomorphies have been previously 
proposed (Table 7.1), with only three included in the latest diagnosis of the group [31]: 
‘parietal downgrowths [as] prominent flanges’, ‘parietal-prootic contact extensive’, and 
‘basipterygoid processes do not project far from body of basisphenoid’. Paparella et al. 
[31] scored Pontosaurus kornhuberi, Adriosaurus, Mosasaurus hoffmannii, and Platecarpus 
tympaniticus for the snake condition of parietal downgrowth and those same taxa (except 
Adriosaurus) for suturing of the parietal and prootic; however, Paparella et al.’s scoring for 
dolichosaurids cannot be confidently verified due to crushing and poor preservation
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Figure 7.4 Braincase and suspensorium. Relationships of the braincase and suspensorium 
elements of Tethysaurus nopcsai (SMU-75486) in (A) right lateral, and (B) posterior views;
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 141
(Supplementary Figure 7.S1b-e). The mosasaurids in their matrix were scored for the short 
basipterygoid processes and dolichosaurids as unknown for this character.
Parietal Downgrowth
Pontosaurus kornhuberi appears to have some downgrowth, but no more than in Varanus 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S5a). Neither of the early diverging plioplatecarpines, Tethysaurus 
(Fig. 7.4A, B) and Russellosaurus, present any notable downgrowth (Supplementary Figure 7. 
S5b; see also Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). The alar process of the prootic in Russellosaurus 
shows evidence of ligamentous attachment to the parietal margin (fig. 3 in [47]). In 
halisaurines, there is moderate downgrowth of the lateral parietal margins which articulate 
with the distal part of the relatively short alar process of the prootic (Fig. 7.4C, D). However, 
downgrowth of the parietal descending processes is no greater than in adult V. niloticus 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S5a). The condition in mosasaurines such as Clidastes (Fig. 7.4E) is 
derived with substantial downgrowth of the parietal lateral margin articulating with the dorsal 
part of the extremely short alar processes of the prootic and posteriorly with the tall 
supraoccipital. This morphology is accentuated in Prognathodon saturator (Fig. 7.4F) [48]. 
Vertical expansion of the parietal facilitates increased area for muscle attachment, and together 
with the combination of sutural contacts with the anteriorly shifted braincase, forms a pillar­
like akinetic structure, well suited to resist the increased bite forces in these large mosasaur- 
ians. There is no verifiable evidence of snake-like downgrowth of the lateral margins of the 
parietal nor suturing of the parietal and prootic in any early diverging mosasaurian. 
Development of these features in derived mosasaurids is the result of convergence.
Prootic-Supratemporal Contact
Contact between supratemporal and prootic is a long-standing putative pythonomorph 
character [4, 17, 36, 40] retained in the latest diagnosis [31] (Table 7.1). In stem snakes such 
as Najash, the supratemporal contacts the prootic but is superficial to it [32]. The contact is 
extensive and largely on the dorsal part of the prootic. As noted elsewhere [24], the 
supratemporal in mosasaurians is unique in the development of an anteroventral process 
that articulates medially with the paroccipital process, with its distal portion overlapped 
laterally by the prootic (Fig. 7.4A, C, M) (Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). In other words, the
Figure 7.4 (cont.) Phosphorosaurus ponpetelegans (HMG-1528) in (C) right lateral, and (D) posterior 
views. Clidastes propython (UAM-VP2001.2.1) in (E) right lateral view. Prognathodon saturator 
(NHMM-1998141) in (F) right lateral view. Details of temporal elements of Varanus sp. (unnumbered 
SMU specimen), in (G) articulated and (H-J) disarticulated left lateral views. Details of temporal 
elements in Halisaurus sp. (MGUAN-PA25) in (K-M) disarticulated left lateral views; Braincase 
elements of Dolichosaurus longicollis (NHMUK-R49002) in (N) right lateral oblique, (O) posterior, and 
(P) ventral posterolateral oblique views. Abbreviations: a.vc, anterior opening of vidian canal; Bo, 
basioccipital; Bs, basisphenoid; bt.pr, basipterygoid process of basisphenoid; cr.tu, crista tuberalis; f. 
jug, jugular foramen; Ot, otoocipital; oc, occipital condyle; P, parietal; P.plp, posterolateral process of 
parietal; Pro, prootic; psr, parasphenoid rostrum; p.vc, posterior opening of vidian canal; Q.ft, 
quadrate facet; So, supraoccipital; sph.t, spheno-occipital tubercle; St, supratemporal; St.avp, 
supratemporal anteroventral process; St.ft, supratemporal facet; Sq, squamosal; vc, vidian canal. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
part of the supratemporal contacting the prootic is sandwiched between it and the 
paroccipital, fundamentally different from the condition in snakes. If mere contact between 
supratemporal and prootic is the criterion for scoring mosasaurians for the snake condition, 
that contact, albeit minor, is also present in some species of Varanus and in Lanthanotus 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S5g, h). Comparison of the condition of the temporal complexes 
in Varanus (Fig. 7.4G-J) and halisaurines (Fig. 7.4K-M) reveals striking similarities, with the 
exception of the novel anteroventral process of the supratemporal in mosasaurs.
Braincase
Braincase characters proposed as pythonomorph synapomorphies include: ‘Basipterygoid 
processes do not project far from body of basisphenoid’ [4, 17, 19, 30, 31, 40]; ‘Basipterygoid 
processes expanded anteroposteriorly’ [17, 19]; ‘Body of basisphenoid extends far anteriorly 
beyond dorsum sellae’ [17]; ‘Cultriform process straight in lateral view’ [4, 17, 19, 30, 40]; 
‘Anterior brain cavity floored by wide cultriform process’ [4, 30, 40]; ‘Main body (wide 
portion) of parasphenoid extends anteriorly some distance in front of the dorsum sellae, 
before tapering into a narrow cultriform process’ [19]; ‘Vidian canal is an open groove 
anteriorly’ [17, 19]; ‘Rear opening of vidian canal situated far posteriorly’ [17, 19]; ‘Crista 
circumfenestralis encircling footplate of stapes’ [17, 19]; ‘Stapes footplate surrounded by 
flanges from prootic and opisthotic’ [17, 19, 30]; ‘Supraoccipital sutured with parietals along 
its entire dorsal margin’ [17, 19, 36], and ‘Supraoccipital sutured to parietal’ [4, 30, 40].
The majority of those characters have been addressed critically elsewhere [24, 49]. 
Although it is clear that the braincase of mosasaurids share no derived characters with 
snakes (Fig. 7.4A-F), details in dolichosaurids are largely unknown due to poor 
preservation with a single exception. Dolichosaurus longicollis was redescribed by 
Caldwell [28], which included some aspects of the braincase. Our HRCT exploration of 
the holotype revealed previously hidden elements and allowed reidentification of other 
elements that are briefly summarized here. The element described as the parietal [28] is the 
basioccipital and fragments of the otooccipitals, and the otooccipital and prootic are more 
extensive than previously described (Fig. 7.4N-P). An elongate, distally expanding 
paroccipital process is present, unlike the truncated element previously figured [28]. The 
basioccipitial and articulated portions of the otooccipitals show a typical varanoid condition 
with a dorsolaterally sloped margin of the crista tuberalis, as in Varanus. Although not 
addressing any characters purportedly uniting snakes and mosasaurians, it confirms a 
typical varanid-like braincase in dolichosaurids. See additional comments on the braincase 
of Dolichosaurus from HRCT in the Supplementary Appendix 7.S1.
Basipterygoid Processes
The character ‘basipterygoid processes do not project far from body of basisphenoid’ [17, 31, 
40] derives from the superficial similarity of the basipterygoid processes in some mosasaurs 
and snakes. This similarity led Lee [17] to consider the processes and their modifications as 
homologous, nothwithstanding that in snakes they arise from a different developmental 
pathway compared to other squamates [25]. Lee divided the morphology into two characters, 
one for overall length of the process and another for the nature of the distal articulating 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 143
surface, using Platecarpus to illustrate the condition in mosasaurians. Broad fan-like basip- 
terygoid processes (as Lee figured) are found only in tylosaurines and some plioplatecar- 
pines. Halisaurines and mosasaurines have subrectangular, distally expanding basipterygoid 
processes [50, 51] (Supplementary Figure 7.S7b). Other than length and more anteroventral 
trajectory, their basipterygoid processes resemble the typical varanoid condition. The basip- 
terygoid processes are short in all known mosasaurians compared with varanoids and the 
corresponding articulation with the pterygoids is syndesmotic within a deep fossa on the 
dorsomedian surface of the pterygoid at the confluence of the quadrate and basisphenoid 
processes (Supplementary Figure 7.S7c-d), buttressing the pterygoids from above.
7.2.3 Suspensorium and Quadrate
Dolichosaurids and halisaurines retain the plesiomorphic relationship of the 
supratemporal to the parietal and squamosal. Although knowledge of details in dolicho- 
saurids is limited, portions of the suspensorium in Coniasaurus gracilodens and 
Judeasaurus tchernovi are preserved (Supplementary Appendix S7.1). The quadrate is 
supported from above by the posteroventral tip of the supratemporal and to a lesser extent, 
the posteroventral squamosal as in Varanus (Fig. 7.4G-I; Supplementary Figure 7.S5a). By 
the Turonian, early diverging plioplatecarpines show increased contribution of the squa­
mosal to support of the quadrate (Supplementary Figure 7.S5b). Additionally, the squamo­
sal and supratemporal develop an immobile sutural contact, accompanied by increased 
complexity in the supratemporal parietal contact [47].
The Quadrate
Three quadrate characters have been used in Pythonomorpha diagnoses. Cope (p. 253 in 
[11]) proposed ‘The os quadratum embraces and encloses the meatus auditorius externus’, 
which in his view was unique to his Pythonomorpha. Cope’s character has been revived as 
‘quadrate with large, posteroventrally curved, suprastapedial process’ [36] and, most 
recently, ‘quadrate suprastapedial process recurved posteroventrally’ [31].
Determining a ‘large’ suprastapedial process (SSP) is subjective unless that determin­
ation is made quantitatively. The SSP of the quadrate in mosasaurs is expanded compared 
to the Varanus condition and is also posteroventrally curved; however, a similar suprasta- 
pedial process is also present in some teiids (e.g., Tupinambis and Dracaena). Both 
elongation and curvature of the suprastapedial process is present in stem snakes, but 
appears exaggerated compared to the relatively short main shaft of the element. 
Comparing the length of the SSP with the distance from the dorsal coronoid-dentary 
junction to the centre of the mandibular glenoid, the posterior extent of the process in 
Najash is 22 per cent, versus 34 per cent in Lanthanotus, 23 per cent in Varanus 
exanthematicus and 16 per cent in V. komodoensis, and thus falls within the range of other 
varanoids. Comparing functional aspects of an elongate suprastapedial is revealing. In 
snakes such as Najash and Cylindrophis, the dorsomedial quadrate shaft and the entire 
length of the SSP contacts the supratemporal. In contrast, mosasaurians show the varanid 
condition, in which the SSP’s contact with both the supratemporal and squamosal is 
restricted to a relatively small dorsomedial area, with all of the quadrate shaft and much 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
of the SSP not participating at all in the support. A plausible explanation for the relatively 
large SSP in snakes is that it is purely a structural adaptation, increasing contact area 
medially with the supratemporal and thus increasing mechanical support for the quadrate. 
Additionally, there are other aspects of the quadrate in mosasaurs that suggest their 
specialized quadrate is an adaptation for underwater hearing (Supplementary Appendix 
S7.1), contrasting with snakes which have lost the typical impedance matching system of 
lizards and are instead optimized for transmission of vibrations from the substrate [52].
7.2.4 Mandibles
Several aspects of the mandibles have been cited as pythonomorph characters. These 
include a free dentary symphysis, geometry of the dorsal dentary margin, orientation of 
Meckel’s groove, development of a medial ridge on the subdental shelf, a number of 
characters associated with reduction of overlap and increased mobility in the mid­
mandible, reduction in the medial aspects of the coronoid, orientation of the adductor 
fossa, and fusion of the prearticular (Table 7.1).
Free Symphysis of Mandibles
Beginning with Cope [11], all Pythonomorpha diagnoses have included the free symphysis of 
the mandibles (Table 7.1). Although most dolichosaurids are too poorly preserved in this region 
to be scored, close examination and comparisons with previously published specimens show 
Coniasaurus, Opetiosaurus and Haasiasaurus have a symphysial morphology nearly identical 
to that in Varanus (Fig. 7.6H-J), and is also present but modified in derived mosasaurids 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S8c-i). This morphology is closely linked to another problematic 
character - ‘anterior end ofMeckel’s canal on medial surface of dentary” [4,30,31,40]. Meckel’s 
canal in non-snake squamates is within the symphysial region [53] and therefore, by necessity is 
more or less medially facing. In Coniasaurus, Opetiosaurus and Haasiasaurus (Fig. 7.6I, J), the 
symphysial area dorsal and ventral to Meckel’s canal are roughly the same as in Varanus 
(Fig. 7.6H) but in more derived mosasaurids, there is increased participation of the ventral part 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S8e, f) (Supplementary Appendix S7.1).
Dentary Margin
‘Dentary straight in lateral view’ has been proposed as a pythonomorph character [4, 41, 30, 
31]. Paparella et al. [31] scored a straight dentary margin for Dolichosaurus and both 
Pontosaurus species as well as Tetrapodophis. The condition in available specimens of 
Pontosaurus and Tetrapodophis is unclear due to poor preservation. Broader comparisons 
reveal a curved margin in Coniasaurus, Judeasaurus, Haasiasaurus, but not Opetiosaurus 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S9c-e, g). Curvature is also present in some derived 
mosasasaurids [48] (Supplementary Appendix 7S.1).
Dentary Subdental Shelf Development
This character was initiated by Lee [17] but included only in the most recent diagnosis of 
Pythonomorpha [31]. As formulated [17] the character reads ‘Subdental shelf medial to 
teeth. Present, 0. Absent, 1’. We take use of the term ‘subdental shelf’ to mean the dorsally 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 145
projecting ridge of bone lingual to the teeth, hereafter referred to as the lingual ridge (sensu 
[22]). More recent use of the character [30, 31, 36] deviated from Lee’s intent, with both 
snakes and mosasaurians scored using the form ‘Subdental shelf: Weakly developed (0), 
large (1), absent (2)’. In Coniasaurus, there is no development of a lingual ridge of bone 
medial to the region containing pleurodont teeth (Fig. 7.6E, F). In Haasiasaurus, 
Opetiosaurus, and Tethysaurus (Supplementary Figure 7.S9e-h), there is a short lingual 
ridge of bone that forms the medial wall of a trough containing the pleurodont teeth, with 
Tethysaurus being the earliest mosasaurid known to possess poorly developed interdental 
ridges separating the bases of the teeth. The lingual ridge present in early diverging 
mosasaurians is derived for the group, not homologous to the basal plate described by 
Lessmann ([54]: discussed by [22]) and which provides direct support for the medial part of 
the tooth. The incipient lingual ridge of the latter three taxa presents an intermediate 
condition between Dolichosaurus and derived mosasaurids, in which the lingual ridge is 
substantially developed dorsally, in some cases reaching the level of the labial ridge 
(pleura) to form a deep alveolar groove [22]. This morphology consists of compact bone 
and has nothing to do with the type of tissues that provides attachment for the teeth and 
that have been intensely discussed in the literature [55]. In derived mosasaurids, the lingual 
ridge is pronounced but variable, and in some taxa (e.g., Mosasaurus, Tylosaurus, 
Selmasaurus) it is greatly developed and completely encloses the dorsomedial wall of the 
dentary, and along with development of interdental alveolar bone, forms discrete sockets. 
The relative height of the lingual ridge is quite variable among mosasaurians but there does 
seem to be a trend towards extreme development of the lingual ridge in some derived 
mosasaurids in separate subfamilies, as noted above. Other members of those same 
subfamilies retain low lingual ridges, suggesting this may be an adaptation to strengthen 
the jaw and/or provide additional lingual support for the tooth ‘roots’. Notwithstanding the 
broad variation noted above, the scoring in recent work conflates alethinophidian tooth 
implantation [22] that results in the ‘discrete sockets’ of snakes with the clearly independ­
ently acquired derived condition seen in forms such as Mosasaurus.
Intramandibular Joint
Cope [11] noted the articulating surfaces of the angular and splenial in his concept of 
Pythonomorpha, considering it a snake character. Different aspects of the intramandibular 
region have been employed, including: ‘Posterior end of splenial does not overlap coro­
noid’ [4, 17, 19, 30, 40]; ‘Coronoid does not contact splenial’ [17]; ‘Splenial does not 
substantially overlap postdentary elements’ [4, 30, 31, 40]; ‘Reduced overlap of the 
postdentary-dentary bones’ [38]; ‘Vertical articulation between the splenial and angular’ 
[4, 11, 17, 19, 36, 40]; ‘Splenial and angular greatly exposed in lateral view’ [36]; and 
‘Surangular exposed in medial view of lower jaw’ [19].
All of these characters are associated with increasing kinesis while maintaining structural 
support. Only one of these characters ‘Splenial does not substantially overlap postdentary 
elements’ is cited in the most recent diagnosis of Pythonomorpha [31]. Notwithstanding the 
non-quantitative nature of ‘substantial’, Coniasaurus crassidens (Fig. 7.5A), Opetiosaurus, 
and Haasiasaurus (Supplementary Figure 7.S9e) show contact of the posterodorsal splenial
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
1 
2 3 4 
5 
6 7 
8 
9
Figure 7.5 Partial mandibles of Coniasaurus crassidens (NHRI-R-3421) and Dolichosaurus longicollis 
(NHMUK-R49002). Partial left mandible of C. crassidens in (A) medial view with numbered vertical
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 147
and coronoid to the same or greater degree than seen in Lanthanotus in which the 
anteromedial coronoid lies adjacent to the posterior dentary, similar to the condition in 
Najash. However, that contact in mosasaurians, as minor as it is, is predominantly con­
trolled by the posterodorsal extent of the splenial, because the coronoid medial processes 
(anterior and posterior) are highly reduced.
The morphology of the contact between the angular and splenial has historically played a 
prominent role in the Pythonomorph Hypothesis, included in most diagnoses [4, 11, 17, 19, 40], 
though not the most recent [31] in which the ‘snake-mosasaur’ condition was scored for 
Lanthanotus. Beyond the relatively transverse suture between the angular and the splenial 
(which is at least superficially similar in snakes and mosasaurs), there are substantial 
differences in the details of that contact, as there are in the morphology and contacts 
of the entire suite of bones involved in the intramandibular joint [6] (Supplementary 
Appendix S7.1).
The intramandibular regions of mosasaurs and snakes are fundamentally different, 
exhibiting only superficial similarities (as also interpreted by [6, 56]). The situation is best 
summarized by Gauthier [56]: ‘Some similarity is to be expected, especially since there is 
but one place in a squamate mandible where a mobile joint could form between the 
dentary-splenial and postdentary bones.’
Posterior Mandible Characters
Characters of the postdentary mandible that have been used to support the Pythonomorph 
Hypothesis include: ‘Posterior ramus of coronoid reduced or absent’ [17]; ‘Coronoid with 
straight or convex ventral edge’ [4, 19, 30, 40]; ‘Coronoid does not overlap dentary laterally’ 
[19]; ‘Anterior end of coronoid meets dentary directly’ [38]; ‘Subcoronoid fossa absent’ [4, 
17, 30, 40]; ‘Adductor fossa faces dorsally’ [4, 17, 19, 30, 40]; and ‘Articular and prearticular 
fused’ [4, 30, 40] (Table 7.1).
Reduction of the antero- and posteromedial processes of the coronoid is shared by 
mosasaurs and snakes; however, as was the case with the intramandibular complex, other 
major differences in the coronoid and its contacts suggest convergence rather than 
homology. Additionally, reduction of the medial processes render the character 
‘Subcoronoid fossa absent’ [4, 17, 30, 40] redundant. Mosasaurians are quite variable in 
exposure of the surangular below the coronoid and above the articular.
Though the coronoid in early diverging mosasaurians possess reduced medial processes, 
it is otherwise comparable to Varanus, sharing only minor overlap of the posterodorsal
Figure 7.5 (cont.) lines to indicate position of (B) HRCT slices illustrating cross sections of 
intramandibular elements. Cross section (C) of Coniasaurus mandible between slices 1 and 2 of (B) 
compared with (D Varanus komodoensis (TNHC 95803; Digimorph HRCT data), and (E) Cylindrophis 
ruffus (FMNH 60958; Digimorph HRCT data). Partial right mandible (F-L) of Dolichosaurus 
longicollis. Articulated surangular and articular, with re-articulated coronoid in (F) lateral, (G) 
anterior, and (K) medial views. Associated left splenial, angular and fragmentary dentary in (H) 
medial, (I) posteromedial oblique, (J) ventral, and (L) lateral (reversed) views. Abbreviations: An, 
angular; af, adductor fossa; Art, articular; Cb, compound bone; Co, coronoid; D, dentary; mf, 
mandibular foramen; Mk.fs, Meckel’s fossa; San, surangular; Spl, splenial; t, tooth. Scale in (a) = 5mm.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

148 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
Figure 7.6 Dentition and mandibular symphysis. Coniasaurus gracilodens (NHMUK R44141) partial 
left maxilla in (A) medial view and (B) inset detailed view of the same, and partial right maxilla
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 149
dentary, a notched anterodorsal margin, and straddling the anterodorsal suranglar with 
most of the articulating surface on the lateral side of the surangular (Fig. 7.5C, d; 
Supplementary Figure 7.S10i-m). This condition is different from the that in the stem snake 
Najash, in which the coronoid substantially overlaps the posteromedial dentary and articu­
lates on the medial side of the compound bone [32] as in the crown snake Cylindrophis 
(Fig. 7.5E).
The adductor fossa in all early diverging mosasaurians faces medially (e.g., 
Dolichosaurus; Fig. 7.5K; Supplementary Figure 7.S10b). In some derived mosasaurids, 
upgrowth of the dorsal articular margin obscures medial exposure. In all mosasaurians in 
which it can be examined, the articular and prearticular are fused with neither being fused 
to the surangular.
7.2.6 Marginal Dentition
The marginal dentition in derived mosasaurids possesses a highly modified implantation, 
that Cope [11] interpreted as snake-like. Lee and Caldwell [19] included ‘teeth set in 
discrete sockets’ in their list of ‘pythonomorph characters of Pachyrhachis’. ‘Recumbent 
(horizontal) replacement teeth’ is included in all but the most recent diagnoses of 
Pythonomorpha [4, 17, 30, 40]. Though dolichosaurids and Opetiosaurus were reported to 
possess alveoli separated by interdental plates [40], this was subsequently corrected [31] 
based on recognition of pleurodont implantation in early diverging mosasaurians, as 
previously noted [57] in Haasiasaurus. Below, we provide a brief description of tooth 
implantation and replacement in dolichosaurids, ‘aigialosaurids’ and mosasaurids.
Tooth Implantation
In the dolichosaurids Coniasaurus and Judeasaurus, tooth implantation is pleurodont with 
minimally developed base of attachment [58] (Fig. 7.6A-E; Supplementary Figure 7.S9a-d), 
and without interdental and lingual ridges. Plicidentine is absent. All early diverging 
mosasaurians retain a fully pleurodont condition. Opetiosaurus, Haasiasaurus, and 
Tethysaurus have a low lingual ridge and in Tethysaurus thin interdental alveolar bone 
separates alveoli (Supplementary Figure 7.S9h). In early diverging and derived mosasaur- 
ids, there are varying degrees of interdental alveolar bone development and upgrowth of 
the lingual ridge of the subdental shelf, which along with the medial surface of the lingual 
ridge, surrounds the tooth bases and forms sockets in many taxa. Although Bertin et al. [55] 
illustrated the condition in what we consider derived mosasaurids (their figure 8f ), early 
diverging mosasaurians do not have thecodont implantation, but instead all have a
Figure 7.6 (cont.) (reversed for comparison) in (C) medial view with inset of (D) select orthogonal 
HRCT slices. Coniasaurus crassidens (NHRI-R-3421) partial right mandible in (E) medial view 
(reversed) and left partial mandible in (F) medial view with inset (G) of select orthogonal HRCT slices 
of left mandible. Left dentary of (H) Varanus sp. (unnumbered SMU specimen), (I) Coniasaurus sp. 
(SMU 69019), and (J) Opetiosaurus bucchichi (NMW specimen, reversed for comparison).
Abbreviations: Mk.fs, Meckel’s fossa; Pxam.pr, anteromedial process of premaxilla; rp, resorption pit; 
rt, replacement tooth; S.ft, Symphysial facet.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
pleurodont tooth implantation with upgrowth of the lingual ridge either absent 
(Coniasaurus, Dolichosaurus) or poorly developed (Aigialosaurus, Pontosaurus, 
Haasiasaurus, Judeasaurus). In that sense, Coniasaurus and Dolichosaurus retain a fully 
pleurodont implantation comparable to varanids and helodermatids, in which the teeth are 
ankylosed to the inclined labial wall of the tooth bearing bone, lacking a subdental shelf or 
lingual ridge (Supplementary Appendix 7.S1).
Tooth Replacement
The left maxilla of the holotype of Coniasaurus gracilodens preserves a single replacement 
tooth in a slightly recumbent orientation, posteromedial to the sixth tooth position which is 
partially resorbed as is its counterpart on the right (Fig. 7.6 A-C). Similar resorption is seen in 
C. crassidens although no replacement teeth are present (Fig. 7.6E, F). The resorption pits are 
more posteromedially oriented in C. crassidens than in C. gracilodens, but both species 
possess broadly open pulp cavities (Fig. 7.6D, G). Slightly recumbent replacement tooth 
crowns are present in Haasiasaurus gittelmani but, as in C. gracilodens, it is unclear whether 
this might result from postmortem displacement. The lack of plicidentine, development of 
resorption pits, and the posteromedial position of the replacement tooth in dolichosaurids is 
intermediate between iguanid and varanid replacement modes and consistent with an 
anguinoid condition [59]. A replacement tooth develops posteromedially while resorption 
initiates from the alveolar foramen medially or slightly posteromedially. The size of the 
resorption pit initially lags development of the replacement tooth (e.g., Fig. 7.6B), but later 
accelerates, with attachment tissues resorbed shortly before shedding the functional tooth, 
by which time the replacement tooth is nearly fully grown [16, 59]. This mode of replacement 
is seen in Haasiasaurus [57] which has numerous replacement teeth of various stages but no 
associated resorption pits. Resorption pits on the posteromedial base of attachment, likely 
associated with developing replacement teeth, is first seen in Tethysaurus. In derived 
mosasaurids resorption is more apparent and begins on or near the posteromedial dorsal 
surface of the bone of attachment, following the leading surface of the bell stage of the 
developing tooth, but ultimately creating deep crypts that accommodate the fully developed 
replacement tooth (see also Supplementary Figure 7.S9i and associated text).
Mosasaurians are more similar to anguioids than they are to snakes in terms of tooth 
implantation and replacement. In light of the other characters presented, recumbent 
replacement teeth are likely the result of convergence.
7.2.7 Postcrania
Many postcranial characters have been used to diagnose Pythonomorpha, including: 
‘Zygosphenes and zygantra present’ [4, 11, 17, 19, 30, 31, 36, 38, 40]; ‘Absence of posterior 
process on the atlas neural arch’ [17, 19]; ‘Condyles on centra circular in shape’ [4, 17, 19, 
30, 40]; ‘Five or more pygals’ [17]; ‘Tail laterally compressed, i.e., transverse processes 
reduced anteriorly and absent posteriorly, chevrons and neural spines elongated’ [36]; ‘The 
abdominal cavity is long, and is surrounded by many short, curved ribs, which have a free 
antero-posterior movement on vertical, articulating surfaces, and which commence imme­
diately behind the head’ [11]; ‘Ribs begin from third cervical’ [4, 17, 19, 30, 40]; ‘Pelvic 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 151
elements not suturally united’ [17, 19, 31, 36]; ‘Pubic plate oriented parasagittally, wide in 
lateral view’ [36]; ‘Femur stout’ [17]; ‘Straight, short femur’ [19]; ‘Distal end of tibia gently 
convex for astragalocalcaneal articulation’ [31]; ‘Astragalus and calcaneum separate’ [19, 31, 
36]; ‘Cranial and axial epiphyses absent’ [17, 19, 31]; and ‘Osteoderms lost’ [17, 19, 36].
Most of these characters are secondary aquatic adaptations broadly distributed in marine 
amniotes that independently evolved limbs and hind parts optimized for swimming [60]. 
Changes in ossification patterns of the vertebral column, limb elements and bony epiphyses 
[61], and reduction in the mesopodials [62] are all common among secondarily derived 
marine amniotes, some of which may be the result of paedomorphosis [63]. As such, this 
suite of characters is prone to homoplasy as seen among subfamilies of mosasaurids [64] 
and thus appear to be of limited phylogenetic utility, especially at higher levels.
The most recent diagnosis of Pythonomorpha [31] cited five postcranial characters. Two 
of them (astragalus and calcaneum separate, and cranial and axial epiphyses absent) are 
subject to paedomorphism or ontogenetic variation. It is not uncommon for these elements 
to appear separate in early ontogeny and fuse later. The sub-adult condition in Varanus 
exanthematicus is illustrated by Sullivan [65]. A fused astragalus-calcaneum occurs in 
Haasiasaurus [57]. Ossification of epiphyses and other skeletal elements [66] generally tend 
to reduce during the evolution of mosasaurians.
A third character, distal end of tibia gently convex for astragalocalcaneal articulation, is 
difficult to judge. Some of the dolichosaurid specimens for which this was scored by 
Paparella et al. [31] are poorly preserved and badly crushed (Supplementary Figure 7.S11). 
A new specimen of Coniasaurus (Supplementary Figure 7.S11a), preserved 3-dimensionally, 
clearly illustrates a concave articulation on the distal tibia. It is not possible to judge if this was 
the case in Adriosaurus and Acteosaurus fossils given their badly crushed state 
(Supplementary Figure 7.S11b, c) and those taxa should be scored as unknown for this 
character. It is common in secondarily adapted marine amniotes to reduce ossification and 
retain only cartilaginous epiphyses, as in derived mosasaurids; however, halisaurines and 
‘aigialosaurids’ present an intermediate step in retaining calcified but not fully fused epiphy­
ses. Reduction and loss of ossification in carpal and tarsal elements occurs during the 
evolution of mosasaurids [62], but they otherwise retain or enhance a full complement of 
the other limb bones. Because they manifest so differently, homology of reduction in 
ossification of distal limb elements in stem snakes and in mosasaurians is unclear.
A fourth postcranial character, presence of zygosphenes and zygantra, which occurs in all 
dolichosaurids, ‘aigialosaurids’, and basal members of all mosasaurid subfamilies except 
Halisaurinae, is an unlikely pythonomorph character because zygosphenes and zygantra 
are broadly present in Squamata [3, 7]. Although not scored for these taxa by Gauthier et al. 
[7], zygosphenes and zygantra are present in Saniwa ensidens, Estesia mongoliensis, 
Gobiderma pulchrum, and Telmasaurus grangeri. In all non-snake squamates in which 
they are present, zygosphenes have an anterior medial notch. Given the differences in 
morphology in snakes and its distribution within varanoids, and other squamate groups, 
the phylogenetic utility of this character is questionable.
The fifth and final postcranial character we address is ‘ribs begin third cervical vertebra or 
anterior’. As formulated, the scoring is binary; third vertebra and anterior versus fourth 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
vertebra and posterior. There appears to be a cervical rib adjacent to the third cervical 
vertebra in the dolichosaurid Pontosaurus kornhuberi [29]; however, the cervical region in 
both Pontosaurus lesinensis and Primitivus manduriensis are too badly preserved to score 
this character (contra [31]). In the holotype of Aigialosaurus dalmaticus a short cervical rib 
lies predominantly on the axis, but is probably associated with the third cervical vertebra. 
Derived mosasaurids have cervical ribs beginning on the axis vertebra, optimized as an 
unambiguous synapomorphy of both Mosasauridae and Dibamidae according to [7]. The 
condition is unclear in Najash and Dinilysia. Ribs have been scored as present on the third 
or more anterior cervical vertebra [31] for the limbed Cenomanian snakes, Pachyrhachis, 
Haasiophis, and Eopodophis. However, ribs beginning on the 5th vertebra have been 
described for Pachyrachis [19]. X-rays of Haasiophis [67] show ribs beginning on the 5th 
or 6th vertebra. Gauthier et al. [7] used an ordered five-state scheme to formulate this 
character (one for each cervical vertebra 3-6 upon which the first rib appears). Their 
findings for pachyophiids are consistent with our own observations (contra [31]).
7.3 Conclusions and Closing Remarks
Most of the previously reported characters supporting the Pythonomorph Hypothesis are 
problematic, due to incomplete fossil preparation, artefacts of taphonomy, limited com­
parisons, misinterpretations of anatomy, incomplete taxon sampling, or inadequate char­
acter formulation and/or scoring. For many of the mosasaurian specimens used in prior 
work, taphonomic issues are substantial and need to be addressed and clearly communi­
cated in future descriptive work and in those studies performing character scoring for 
phylogentic studies. Over-interpretation of fossils, influenced by prior phylogenetic hypoth­
eses, may lead to confirmation bias in character formulation and scoring.
Augusta et al. (Chapter 8) present a cladistic analysis focused on inferring the position of 
mosasaurians within Squamata, including new data reported here. With the inclusion of 
those data, mosasaurians are found to lie within Anguimorpha, as the sister taxon to 
Varanoidea. The addition of data from well-preserved early branching mosasaurians pro­
vided new and corrected scoring for a handful of key characters in Augusta et al.’s study, 
including intermediate states that clarified homoplasy instances. The results include a 
dramatically reduced lability of Mosasauria compared to that found by Gauthier et al. [7] 
and subsequent work based on their matrix (see Augusta et al. and Zaher et al., Chapters 8 
and 9). Nonetheless, even though parsimony analysis recovers Mosasauria as a proximal 
outgroup of Varanoidea, the morphology of mosasaurians presented herein raises some 
interesting questions. The apparently plesiomorphic state of the infraorbital foramen of the 
palatine (ventrally open), the unique reduction of the ventral part of the lacrimal and its 
relationship with the prefrontal, the reduction of the anterior ramus of the ectopterygoid 
and its reduced contact with the maxilla, the lack of plicidentine, and anguinoidean tooth 
replacement in early diverging mosasaurians, all deviate from the typical varanoid condi­
tion and allow alternate interpretations. However, the most parsimonious explanation 
based on the results of Augusta et al. (Chapter 8) is that mosasaurians are regressed 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 153
varanoids, the palatine and infraorbital characters secondarily derived as marine 
adaptations associated with streamlining and narrowing of the skull along with narial 
retraction and reorganization of the nasal capsule for marine-adapted respiration and 
osmoregulation (see Supplementary Appendix 7.S1). The degree of narial retraction, pos­
teriorly narrow nasals, and the unique lacrimal and palatine characters shared by 
dolichosaurids and other mosasaurians support the monophyly of this group to the exclu­
sion of both varanoids and snakes. Nonetheless, two pythonomorph characters remain: the 
uniquely regressed medial coronoid and the splenial-angular contact. However, in light of 
the data presented here, it is increasingly difficult to interpret these as anything other than 
convergence.
Acknowledgements
Detailed acknowledgements are given in Supplementary Appendix 7.S1. The authors thank 
Olivier Rieppel, Nicholas Fraser, Louis Jacobs, and Anne Schulp for constructive criticism 
on the submitted and earlier versions of the manuscript.
References
1. T. M. Townsend, A. Larson, E. Louis, and 
J. R. Macey, Molecular phylogenetics of 
Squamata: the position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the root 
of the squamate tree. Systematic Biology, 53 
(2004), 735-757.
2. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R.A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
3. R. Estes, K. de Queiroz, and J. A. Gauthier. 
Phylogenetic relationships within Squamata. 
In R. Estes and G. K. Pregill, eds., Phylogenetic 
Relationships of the Lizard Families 
(Stanford, California: Stanford University 
Press, 1988), pp. 119-281.
4. M. S. Y. Lee, Convergent evolution and 
character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
towards a resolution of squamate 
relationships. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 65 (1998), 369-453.
5. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology.
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
6. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, The 
intramandibular joint in squamates, and the 
phylogenetic relationships of the fossil snake 
Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas. Fieldiana 
Geology, 43 (2000), 1-69.
7. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. Behlke, Assembling the 
squamate tree of life: Perspectives from the 
phenotype and the fossil record. Bulletin of 
the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 53 
(2012), 3-308.
8. E. W. A. Mulder, Maastricht Cretaceous finds 
and Dutch pioneers in vertebrate 
palaeontology. In J. L. R. Touret and R.
P. W. Visser, eds., Dutch Pioneers of the 
Earth Sciences (Amsterdam: Royal 
Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences, 
2004), pp. 165-176.
9. A. G. Camper, Lettre de A.G. Camper a 
G. Cuvier sur les ossemens fossiles de la 
montagne de St. Pierre, a Maёstricht.
Journal de Physique, de Chimie, et d’Histoire 
Naturelle, 51 (1800), 278-291.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

154 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
10. G. Cuvier, Sur le grand animal fossile des 
carrieres de Maestricht. Annales du Museum 
National d’Histoire Naturelle, 12 (1808), 
145-176.
11. E. D. Cope, On the reptilian orders, 
Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria. 
Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural 
History, 12 (1869), 250-266.
12. C. L. Camp, Classification of the lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 48 (1923), 289-481.
13. D. A. Russell, Systematics and morphololgy 
of American mosasaurs (Reptilia, Sauria). 
Bulletin of the Peabody Museum of Natural 
History, 23 (1967), 1-241.
14. F. Nopcsa, Uber die varanusartigen lacerten 
Istriens. Beitrage zur Palaontologie 
Osterreich-Ungarns und des Orients, 15 
(1903), 31-42.
15. F. Nopcsa, Eidolosaurus und Pachyophis: 
Zwei neue Neocom-Reptilien.
Palaeontographica, 65 (1923), 99-154.
16. S. B. McDowell and C. M. Bogert, The 
systematic position of Lanthanotus and the 
affinities of the anguinomorphan lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 105 (1954), 1-142.
17. M. S. Y. Lee, The phylogeny of varanoid 
lizards and the affinities of snakes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London, B352 (1997), 
53-91.
18. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of the 
Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 705-709.
19. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, Anatomy 
and relationships of Pachyrhachis 
problematicus, a primitive snake with 
hindlimbs. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London. B353 (1998), 
1521-1552.
20. M. S. Y. Lee, G. L. Bell, and M. W. Caldwell, 
The origin of snake feeding. Nature, 400 
(1999), 655-659.
21. H. Zaher, The phylogenetic position of 
Pachyrhachis within snakes (Squamata, 
Lepidosauria). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 18 (1998), 1-3.
22. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, Tooth implantation 
and replacement in squamates, with special 
reference to mosasaur lizards and snakes. 
American Museum Novitates, 3271 (1999), 
1-19.
23. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, The phylogenetic 
relationships of Pachyrhachis problematicus, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes 
(Lepidosauria, Squamata). Comptes Rendus 
de S6ances de l'Acad6mie des Sciences (S6rie 
IIA), Earth and Planetary Science, 329 
(1999), 831-837.
24. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, The braincases of 
mosasaurs and Varanus, and the 
relationships of snakes. Zoological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 129 (2000), 489-514.
25. O. Rieppel and M. Kearney, The origin of 
snakes: limits of a scientific debate. Biologist 
(London), 48 (2001), 110-114.
26. M. W. Caldwell and J. A. Cooper, 
Redescription, palaeobiogeography and 
palaeoecology of Coniasaurus crassidens 
Owen, 1850 (Squamata) from the Lower 
Chalk (Cretaceous; Cenomanian) of SE 
England. Zoological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 127 (1999), 423-452.
27. M. W. Caldwell, Description and 
phylogenetic relationships of a new species 
of Coniasaurus Owen, 1850 (Squamata). 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 19 
(1999), 438-455.
28. M. W. Caldwell, On the aquatic squamate 
Dolichosaurus longicollis Owen, 1850 
(Cenomanian, Upper Cretaceous), and the 
evolution of elongate necks in squamates. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 20 
(2000), 720-735.
29. M. W. Caldwell, A new species of 
Pontosaurus (Squamata, Pythonomorpha) 
from the Upper Cretaceous of Lebanon and 
a phylogenetic analysis of Pythonomorpha. 
Memorie della Societa Italiana di Scienze 
Naturali e del Museo Civico di Storia 
Naturale di Milano, 34 (2006), 1-42.
30. S. E. Pierce and M. W. Caldwell, 
Redescription and phylogenetic position of 
the Adriatic (Upper Cretaceous;
Cenomanian) dolichosaur Pontosaurus 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

REASSESSING THE PYTHONOMORPH HYPOTHESIS 155
lesinensis (Kornhuber, 1873). Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 24 (2004), 373-386.
31. I. Paparella, A. Palci, U. Nicosia, and 
M. W. Caldwell, A new fossil marine lizard 
with soft tissues from the Late Cretaceous of 
southern Italy. Royal Society Open Science, 5 
(2018), 172411.
32. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, 
T. R. Simoes, et al., New skulls and skeletons 
of the Cretaceous legged snake Najash, and 
the evolution of the modern snake body 
plan. Science Advances, 5 (2019), eaax5833.
33. M. C. Mekarski, D. Japundzic, K. Krizmanic, 
and M. W. Caldwell, Description of a new 
basal mosasauroid from the Late Cretaceous 
of Croatia, with comments on the evolution 
of the mosasauroid forelimb. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 39 (2019), 
e1577872.
34. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Carroll, and H. Kaiser, 
The pectoral girdle and forelimb of 
Carsosaurus marchesetti [sic] 
(Aigialosauridae), with a preliminary 
phylogenetic analysis of mosasauroids and 
varanoids. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 15 (1995), 516-531.
35. G. L. Bell, Jr. A phylogenetic revision of 
North American and Adriatic 
Mosasauroidea. In J. M. Callaway and 
E. L. Nicholls, eds., Ancient Marine Reptiles 
(New York: Academic Press, 1997), 
pp. 293-332.
36. A. Palci and M. W. Caldwell, Redescription 
of Acteosaurus tommasinii von Meyer, 1860, 
and a discussion of evolutionary trends 
within the clade Ophidiomorpha. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 (2010), 94-108.
37. M. deBraga and R. L. Carroll, The origin of 
mosasaurs as a model of macroevolutionary 
patterns and processes. Evolutionary 
Biology, 27 (1993), 245-322.
38. M. W. Caldwell, Squamate phylogeny and 
the relationships of snakes and 
mosasauroids. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 125 (1999), 115-147.
39. M. E. Paramo-Fonseca, Yaguarasaurus 
columbianus (Reptilia, Mosasauridae), a 
primitive mosasaur from the Turonian
(Upper Cretaceous) of Colombia. Historical 
Biology, 14 (2000), 121-131.
40. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, Adriosaurus 
and the affinities of mosasaurs, 
dolichosaurs, and snakes. Journal of 
Paleontology, 74 (2000), 915-937.
41. T. Konishi and M. W. Caldwell, New 
specimens of Platecarpus planifrons (Cope, 
1874) (Squamata: Mosasauridae) and a 
revised taxonomy of the genus. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 27 (2007), 59-72.
42. N. Bardet, X. Pereda Suberbiola, and N.- 
E. Jalil, A new mosasauroid (Squamata) from 
the Late Cretaceous (Turonian) of Morocco. 
Comptes Rendus Palevol, 2 (2003), 607-616.
43. C. L. Camp, California mosasaurs. Memoirs of 
the University of California, 13 (1942), 1-68.
44. O. Rieppel, J. A. Gauthier, and J. A. Maisano, 
Comparative morphology of the dermal 
palate in squamate reptiles, with comments 
on phylogenetic implications. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 152 (2008), 
131-152.
45. J. L. Conrad, Skull, mandible, and hyoid of 
Shinisaurus crocodilurus Ahl (Squamata, 
Anguimorpha). Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 141 (2004), 399-434.
46. B. A. Bell, P. A. Murry, and L. W. Osten, 
Coniasaurus Owen, 1850 from North 
America. Journal of Paleontology, 56 (1982), 
520-534.
47. M. J. Polcyn and G. L. Bell, Jr., Russelosaurus 
coheni, n. gen., n. sp., a 92 million-year-old 
mosasaur from Texas (USA), and the 
definition of the parafamily Russellosaurina. 
Netherlands Journal of Geosciences, 84 
(2005), 321-334.
48. R. W. Dortangs, A. S. Schulp, E.
W. A. Mulder, et al., A large new mosasaur 
from the Upper Cretaceous of The 
Netherlands. Netherlands Journal of 
Geosciences, 81 (2002), 1-8.
49. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, Re-building the 
bridge between mosasaurs and snakes. Neues 
Jahrbuchjur Geologie und Palaontologie, 
Abhandlungen, 221 (2001), 111-132.
50. T. Konishi, M. W. Caldwell, T. Nishimura, 
K. Sakurai, and K. Tanoue, A new
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

156 michael J. polcyn, bruno G. augusta, and hussam zaher
halisaurine mosasaur (Squamata: 
Halisaurinae) from Japan: the first record in 
the western Pacific realm and the first 
documented insights into binocular vision in 
mosasaurs. Journal of Systematic 
Palaeontology, 14 (2016), 809-839.
51. M. J. Polcyn, J. Lindgren, N. Bardet, et al., 
Description of new specimens of Halisaurus 
arambourgi Bardet & Pereda Suberbiola, 
2005 and the relationships of Halisaurinae. 
Bulletin de la Sociёtё Gёologique de France, 
183 (2012), 123-136.
52. C. B. Christensen, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 
C. Brandt, and P. T. Madsen, Hearing with 
an atympanic ear: good vibration and poor 
sound-pressure detection in the royal 
python, Python regius. Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 215 (2012), 331-342.
53. C. M. Holliday, N. M. Gardner,
S. M. Paesani, M. Douthitt, and J. L. Ratliff, 
Microanatomy of the mandibular symphysis 
in lizards: patterns in fiber orientation and 
Meckel’s cartilage and their significance in 
cranial evolution. Anatomical Record, 293 
(2010), 1350-1359.
54. M. H. Lessmann, Zur labialen Pleurodontie 
an Lacertilier-Gebissen. Anatomischer 
Anzeiger, 99 (1952), 35-67.
55. T. J. Bertin, B. Thivichon-Prince,
A. R. LeBlanc, M. W. Caldwell, and L. Viriot, 
Current perspectives on tooth implantation, 
attachment, and replacement in Amniota. 
Frontiers in Physiology, 9 (2018), 1630.
56. J. A. Gauthier, Fossil xenosaurid and anguid 
lizards from the early Eocene Wasatch 
Formation, southeast Wyoming, and a 
revision of the Anguioidea. Contributions to 
Geology, University of Wyoming, 21 (1982), 
7-54.
57. M. J. Polcyn, E. Tchernov, and L. L. Jacobs, 
The Cretaceous biogeography of the eastern 
Mediterranean with a description of a new 
basal mosasauroid from ‘Ein Yabrud, Israel. 
In Y. Tomida, T. H. Rich and P. Vickers-Rich, 
eds., Proceedings of the Second Gondwanan 
Dinosaur Symposium (National Science 
Museum Monograph 15), (Tokyo: National 
Science Museum, 1999), pp. 259-290.
58. A. Haber and M. J. Polcyn, A new marine 
varanoid from the Cenomanian of the 
Middle East. Netherlands Journal of 
Geosciences, 84 (2005), 247-255.
59. O. Rieppel, Tooth replacement in 
anguinomorph lizards. Zoomorphologie, 91 
(1978), 77-90.
60. N. P. Kelley and N. D. Pyenson, Evolutionary 
innovation and ecology in marine tetrapods 
from the Triassic to the Anthropocene. 
Science, 348 (2015), aaa3716.
61. A. Houssaye, Palaeoecological and 
morphofunctional interpretation of bone 
mass increase: an example in Late 
Cretaceous shallow marine squamates. 
Biological Reviews, 88 (2013), 117-139.
62. M. W. Caldwell, Ontogeny and phylogeny of 
the mesopodial skeleton in mosasauroid 
reptiles. Zoological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 116 (1996), 407-436.
63. O. Rieppel, Helveticosaurus zollingeri Peyer 
(Reptilia, Diapsida) skeletal 
paedomorphosis, functional anatomy and 
systematic affinities. Palaeontographica 
Abteilung A, Palaozoologie, Stratigraphie, 
208 (1989), 123-152.
64. G. L. Bell and M. J. Polcyn, Dallasaurus 
turneri, a new primitive mosasauroid from 
the Middle Turonian of Texas and 
comments on the phylogeny of 
Mosasauridae (Squamata). Netherlands 
Journal of Geosciences, 84 (2005), 177-194.
65. C. Sullivan, The role of calcaneal ‘heel’ as a 
propulsive lever in basal archosaurs and 
extant monitor lizards. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 30 (2010), 1422-1432.
66. A. Houssaye, J. Lindgren, R. Pellegrini, et al., 
Microanatomical and histological features in 
the long bones of mosasaurine mosasaurs 
(Reptilia, Squamata) - implications for 
aquatic adaptation and growth rates. PLoS 
ONE, 8 (2013), e76741.
67. O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, E. Tchernov, and 
M. J. Polcyn, The anatomy and relationships 
of Haasiophis terrasanctus, a fossil snake 
with well-developed hind limbs from the 
Mid-Cretaceous of the Middle East. Journal 
of Paleontology, 77 (2003), 536-558.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.010 Published online by Cambridge University Press

8
A Review of Non-Mosasaurid (Dolichosaur 
and Aigialosaur) Mosasaurians 
and Their Relationships to Snakes
Bruno G. Augusta, Hussam Zaher, Michael J. Polcyn, 
Anthony R. Fiorillo, and Louis L. Jacobs
8.1 Introduction
Mosasaurians are an extinct clade of aquatic and semiaquatic squamates whose fossils 
are found in upper Cretaceous marine rocks globally, with the earliest known forms from 
the lower Cretaceous (Berriasian-Hauterivian; 145-129 Ma) of Japan [1] and lower 
Cenomanian (upper Cretaceous; 98 Ma) of the Middle East [2]. They dominated global 
seas for over 30 million years until their demise at the end of the Maastrichtian (66 Ma) 
[3-5], at the K-Pg mass extinction event [6].
Mosasaurian fossils have been known since the late eighteenth century, with one of the 
first remains being an exceptionally large mosasaur skull, famously denominated at that 
time as ‘Le Grand Animal de Maestricht’ [7]. Currently, more than 100 species and 
thousands of specimens of mosasaurians are known, with their diversity broadly divided 
into three major lineages, with the likely paraphyletic early-branching lineages commonly 
referred to as dolichosaurs (or dolichosaurids; Dolichosauridae) and aigialosaurs (or aigia- 
losaurids; Aigialosauridae), and the more deeply nested, specialized clade referred to as 
Mosasauridae. Mosasauridae includes four broadly accepted monophyletic subfamilies - 
Mosasaurinae, Plioplatecarpinae, Tylosaurinae, and Halisaurinae - with some exceptionally 
large forms such as the mosasaurine Mosasaurus hoffmannii (17.5 m) and the tylosaurine 
Hainosaurus bernardi (13m) [3, 8-18].
Non-mosasaurid mosasaurians have a confusing phylogenetic and taxonomic history. 
Recently, Madzia and Conrad [19] cleared some controversies surrounding the use of the 
higher-level names - such as Natantia Owen, 1851, Mosasauria Huxley, 1872, Mosasauri 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

158 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Gadow, 1898, Mosasauromorpha Furbringer, 1900, Mosasauroidea Camp, 1923, and 
Mosasauriformes Hay, 1930 - that are mostly junior synonyms of Mosasauridae, a name 
first proposed by Gervais [20]. Gervais [20] also coined Dolichosauridae, while Gorjanovic- 
Kramberger [21] formulated Aigialosauridae, for the marine Tethyan forms known at that 
time (Zaher et al., Chapter 9). More recently, a consensus was reached to use the name 
Mosasauroidea for the minimally inclusive clade including aigialosaurids and mosasaurids 
[15, 19], i.e., non-dolichosaurid mosasaurians based on current understanding of 
phylogeny. Although a detailed nomenclatural revision of mosasaurians is still needed, 
especially regarding non-mosasaurid-mosasaurians, it is beyond the scope of this 
chapter, which follows Conrad’s [15] and Madzia and Conrad’s [19] usage of names for 
that purpose.
Dolichosaurids were relatively small and long-bodied lizards commonly interpreted as 
closely related to mosasauroids [15, 18, 22-24]. However, in the last 20 years, some authors 
have argued that dolichosaurids were instead more closely related to snakes [16, 25, 26]. 
Dolichosaurids are characterized primarily by an elongated neck (> 10 cervical vertebrae), 
reduced forelimbs, and zygosphene-zygantrum accessory articulation in dorsal vertebrae 
[1, 15, 16, 25, 26]. Dolichosaurids are found in Cenomanian-Turonian (100.5-89.8 Ma) 
marine sediments of North America and Eurasia [27-31]. Seventeen dolichosaurid taxa 
have been described, but Acteosaurus crassicostatus is probably a junior synonym of 
Adriosaurus suessi [32] and Introrsisaurus pollicidens was described on the basis of a single 
shed tooth from an entirely distinct geological context (Jurassic outcrop; [33]), so a more 
balanced position is to recognize 15 currently valid dolichosaurid taxa (listed in 
Supplementary Table 8.S1).
Aigialosaurs form a grade of semiaquatic marine squamates [10, 17, 23, 34], known from 
upper Cretaceous rocks of Europe, Asia, and North America [8, 35-37]. A close relationship 
between aigialosaurs and mosasaurids is supported by a suite of characters, such as the 
presence of a strongly curved suprastapedial process of the quadrate, expanded tooth 
bases, lateral compression, and dorsoventral deepening of the tail, and a scapula shorter 
than the coracoid [10, 15, 17]. McDowell and Bogert [38] considered the living lizard 
Lanthanotus borneensis to be a relict aigialosaur, but subsequent works rejected that 
hypothesis [3, 8, 39, 40]. Eight described taxa are here considered aigialosaurs 
(Supplementary Table 8.S2).
Cuvier [41] provided the first detailed monograph on a mosasaurian and concluded that 
it was related to extant monitor lizards (Varanidae), but also shared characters with Iguania. 
Subsequent studies [42-44] largely followed Cuvier’s arrangement. However, Cope [45] 
suggested a closer relationship with snakes, arguing mosasaurs shared a mosaic of snake­
like and lizard-like characters that precluded their subordination to either group, therefore 
erecting a new order, Pythonomorpha, to distinguish them from other lizards and snakes. 
Cope’s hypothesis triggered an intense debate, with some authors in favour of a varanoid 
affinity [46-50], others in favour of a snake affinity [51, 52], and a third group suggesting a 
distinct subdivision for mosasaurs within lacertilians [53, 54]. Camp’s [55] study of lizards 
reviewed this debate, concluding that mosasaurs were ‘derived from a varanoid stock 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 159
through the Aigialosauridae’ ([55]; p. 418), suggesting a classification in which Cope’s 
mosasaurs were allocated to the superfamily Mosasauroidea of platynotan anguimorphs.
Camp’s conclusions were followed by most authors through the next decades [3, 33, 38, 
39, 56-58], ending the debate on mosasaurian affinities in the pre-cladistic era. In the 1990s 
Lee [59] revisited mosasauroid affinities in a cladistic framework, reviving Cope’s 
Pythonomorpha Hypothesis as a clade containing mosasauroids and snakes. Varying 
interpretations of the anatomy of mosasaurians and limbed snakes drove the discussion 
on clade affinities during the late 1990s and early 2000s (Zaher et al., Chapter 9), turning 
mosasaurian affinities into one of the most debated topics in squamate systematics. 
Because the Pythonomorpha Hypothesis is founded on the assumption that Mosasauria 
represents the sister group of snakes [16, 23, 24, 26], or that snakes are nested within a 
dolichosaurid assemblage [16, 25, 26, 59-62], investigating the phylogenetic signal retrieved 
in mosasaurs that supports this hypothesis represents an important step towards clarifica­
tion of the origin of snakes and mosasaurs alike. More recently, Gauthier et al. [18] 
suggested an alternative hypothesis in which mosasaurians are distantly related to 
Anguimorpha, as sister to a monophyletic Scleroglossa.
Regardless of the large number of studies on mosasaurian anatomy and interrelation­
ships, consensus has not been reached about their hypothesized affinities with snakes and 
other squamates. Four mainly conflicting hypotheses have been proposed: (1) the 
Varanoid Hypothesis, in which mosasaurians are more closely related to varanoid lizards 
than to other squamates ([3, 8, 10, 11, 15, 38, 55]; Zaher et al., this volume); (2) the 
Pythonomorph Hypothesis, in which mosasaurians are the sister group of snakes [23, 
24, 59, 62, 63]; (3) the Ophidiomorph Hypothesis, in which Pythonomorpha is monophy­
letic but snakes are nested within dolichosaurids [25, 26, 28, 61, 62, 64]; and (4) the Stem- 
scleroglossan Hypothesis, in which mosasaurians are distantly related to varanoids and 
snakes [18]. A summary of the main hypotheses regarding dolichosaurid and aigialosaur 
phylogenetic affinities is provided in Figure 8.1.
Because both the Ophidiomorph and Pythonomorph Hypotheses are based on snakes 
being more closely related to mosasaurians than to any other squamate lineage (Fig. 8.1B, 
C, I, J, and K), and the former is also based on snakes being deeply nested within 
dolichosaurids (Fig. 8.1E and G), revising the anatomy and systematic relationships of 
dolichosaurids and aigialosaurs will also shed light on whether these taxa are related or 
not to the origin of snakes. Here we test these hypotheses and further discuss higher-level 
mosasaurian interrelationships with an expanded morphological dataset that incorporates 
new and previously known key specimens of non-mosasaurid mosasaurians. For our 
morphological observations, we benefitted from high-resolution цСТ scan data of key 
specimens. Our primary focus is to examine mosasaurian cladistic relationships within 
squamates, with special reference to the putative relationships between mosasaurians and 
snakes, so we aimed to test their affinities with an expanded morphological dataset 
including an increased taxonomic sampling of well-preserved non-mosasaurid mosasaur- 
ians, and new characters and scorings (see Supplementary Appendix 8.S1 for details of 
taxon sampling and data partitions).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

160
AUGUSTA, ZAHER, POLCYN, FIORILLO
AND JACOBS
Mosasauroidea
Mosasauroidea
dolichosaurids
Mosasauria
Mosasauria
Figure 8.1 Simplified cladograms showing the main hypotheses of dolichosaurid and aigialosaur 
phylogenetic relationships. Horizontal bars highlight the position of dolichosaurids, aigialosaurs, 
Mosasauria, and Mosasauroidea as applied here.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 161
8.2 An Historical Perspective of Dolichosaurids 
and Aigialosaurs
Owen [44] described the first dolichosaurids, Coniasaurus crassidens and Dolichosaurus 
longicollis, classifying them within his tribe Repentia, order Lacertilia, being separated from 
mosasaurs that were allocated into the tribe Natantia. Cornalia and Chiozza [65] described 
Mesoleptos zendrinii and recognized affinities with Owen’s dolichosaurids. Von Meyer [66] 
named Acteosaurus tommasinii based on an articulated postcranial skeleton from Slovenia, 
recognizing affinities with Owen’s dolichosaurids but classifying the taxon into his long­
necked ‘Macrotrachela’, inclusive of plesiosaurs. Two additional dolichosaurids, 
Pontosaurus (Hydrosaurus) lesinensis Kornhuber, 1873 and Adriosaurus suessi Seeley, 
1881, were named in the nineteenth century, although in their original descriptions they 
were considered related to varanoid lizards, and not particularly to any other known 
dolichosaurid. At the end of the nineteenth century, the first two aigialosaur taxa were 
described, Aigialosaurus dalmaticus Gorjanovic-Kramberger, 1892 and Carsosaurus 
marchesetti Kornhuber, 1893. While Kornhuber [67] considered Carsosaurus a varanid, 
Gorjanovic-Kramberger [21] reviewed the classification of all Cretaceous semiaquatic 
mosasaurians known at that time, allocating Acteosaurus, Adriosaurus, Pontosaurus, and 
Aigialosaurus to the newly erected Aigialosauridae, while Mesoleptos was placed in 
Varanidae and Dolichosaurus maintained in its own family Dolichosauridae. Kornhuber 
[68] described Opetiosaurus bucchichi and rejected the validity of Gorjanovic-Kramberger’s 
family Aigialosauridae, arguing for an inclusion of both Opetiosaurus and Aigialosaurus in 
Varanidae. Camp [55] considered Mosasauroidea to include only Mosasauridae, depicting 
aigialosaurids as direct ancestors of mosasaurids, and dolichosaurids as the sister group of 
Mosasauridae and Aigialosauridae. Nopcsa [50] named Eidolosaurus trauthi based on a 
slab containing a natural mould of an articulated postcranial skeleton and considered it, 
together with Mesoleptos, as an intermediate form between dolichosaurids and aigialosaurs.
After the prolific descriptions of dolichosaurids and aigialosaurs during the late nine­
teenth and early twentieth centuries, further new taxa were named at the end of the 
twentieth century. Acteosaurus crassicostatus was first described by Calligaris [69] from 
the Cenomanian-Turonian (100.5-89.8 Ma) of Slovenia, but Caldwell and Lee [32] con­
sidered it to be a junior synonym of Adriosaurus suessi. A series of early diverging Tethyan 
forms were described - including Aphanizocnemus libanensis Dal Sasso and Pinna, 
1997 from the middle Cenomanian (97 Ma) of Lebanon; Coniasaurus gracilodens 
Caldwell, 1999 from the lower to middle Cenomanian (100.5-97 Ma) of England; 
Haasiasaurus gittelmani (Polcyn, Tchernov and Jacobs, 1999) from the lower 
Cenomanian (100.5 Ma) of Israel; Carentonosaurus mineaui Rage and Neraudeau, 
2004 from the Cenomanian (100.5-93.9 Ma) of France; Judeasaurus tchernovi Haber and 
Polcyn, 2005 from the upper Cenomanian-lower Turonian (96-92 Ma) of Israel; 
Pontosaurus kornhuberi Caldwell, 2006 from the Cenomanian (100.5-93.9 Ma) of 
Lebanon; Komensaurus carrolli Caldwell and Palci, 2007 from the upper Cenomanian 
(93.9 Ma) of Slovenia (formerly referred in the literature to as the ‘Trieste aigialosaur’);
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

162 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Adriosaurus microbrachis Palci and Caldwell, 2007 from the upper Cenomanian (93.9 Ma) 
of Slovenia; Vallecillosaurus donrobertoi Smith and Buchy, 2008 from the lower Turonian 
(92 Ma) of Mexico; Adriosaurus skrbinensis Caldwell and Palci, 2010 from the upper 
Cenomanian (93.9 Ma) of Slovenia; Primitivus manduriensis Paparella, Palci, Nicosia and 
Caldwell, 2018 from the upper Campanian-lower Maastrichtian (72.1 Ma) of Italy; and 
Portunatasaurus krambergeri Mekarski, Japundzic, Krizmanic and Caldwell, 2019 from the 
Cenomanian-Turonian (100.5-89.8 Ma) of Croatia - all loosely associated to either the 
dolichosaurid or aigialosaur lineages. Among those, Pontosaurus, Aphanizocnemus, and 
Adriosaurus were often found as supporting the Ophidiomorph Hypothesis, in which 
dolichosaurids form a paraphyletic assemblage with respect to snakes [25, 60, 61, 64].
8.3 Morphological versus Molecular Evidence 
in Squamate Systematics
Prior to discussing our phylogenetic results, we briefly review the two main competing 
hypotheses of squamate relationships supported by separate morphological and molecular 
evidence. Hypotheses of squamate relationships based on morphological data reconstruct 
the primary (basalmost) divergence as between Iguania and Scleroglossa [15, 18, 23, 25, 40, 
70, 71]. An exception is the work of Simoes et al. [63] in which Gekkonomorpha is sister to 
all other squamates. Within Scleroglossa, three major lineages are universally represented: 
Gekkota, Scincomorpha, and Anguimorpha, but their composition and proposed relation­
ships with other scleroglossan lineages varies [15]. Most important for our work are the 
differences among in-group relationships of Anguimorpha. Major lineages of limbless 
squamates, such as snakes and dibamids, are variably found within Anguimorpha [18, 25, 
40, 71] or not [15, 23, 72]. Varanoidea consistently comprises Heloderma, Lanthanotus, 
Varanus, and all descendants of their last common ancestor. Proposed anguimorph clades 
and taxa representing the closest relatives of varanoids vary in the literature, such as 
Anguidae [25], Xenosauridae [18], or a clade formed variously by both [15, 23, 40, 72]. In 
morphological analyses including fossil taxa, Mosasauria is consistently found either within 
Varanoidea [4, 11, 17, 73, 74], closely related to varanoids [15], or closely related to snakes 
[16, 25, 26, 59, 62, 63]. An exception to these scenarios is the global analysis of squamates 
provided by Gauthier et al. [18], in which mosasaurians are stem-scleroglossans.
In molecular analyses, the sister of all other squamates is either Dibamia [75-78] or 
Dibamia and Gekkota [24, 79]. Unidentata, a clade composed of squamates exclusive of 
Dibamia and Gekkota, is frequently found in molecular analyses [24, 75-77, 79]. Instead of 
recovering Iguania as sister to all other squamates, molecular analyses find a much less 
inclusive clade, Toxicofera, comprising iguanians, anguimorphs, and snakes [24, 75, 76, 79­
81]. Within Anguimorpha, molecular analyses have found support for relationships distinct 
from those recovered by analyses of morphological data; instead of a monophyletic 
Varanoidea, they recover a dichotomy between Old (Paleoanguimorpha) and New World 
(Neoanguimorpha) anguimorphs. The position of mosasaurians in combined molecular 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 163
and morphological trees varies, either within Anguimorpha and closely related to varanoids 
[76], within Toxicofera as the sister group of snakes [24], or within Toxicofera as the sister 
group of a clade comprising Anguimorpha and Iguania [82].
8.4 Character Scoring and the Quality of Phylogenetic 
Reconstructions of Mosasaurian Relationships
Recently, a series of studies discussed methods for phylogenetic reconstruction of mosa- 
sauroid relationships [83-86]. Although finding the best models for phylogenetic recon­
structions represents an important step in any phylogenetic analysis, we address another 
problem often present when fossil taxa are included in datasets: character scorings based 
on poorly preserved specimens or on published interpretative drawings.
Simoes et al. [84] applied various methods in an attempt to resolve in-group mosasauroid 
incongruences, including Maximum Likelihood, Bayesian inference, and implied weight 
maximum parsimony. Madzia and Cau [86] revised their dataset and criticized some of 
Simoes et al.’s [84] choices, such as not integrating stratigraphic information into their 
Bayesian analysis, keeping all characters unordered without justification, and the reconstruc­
tion of a possibly artificial dolichosaurid grade by choosing Adriosaurus suessi as the outgroup. 
Madzia and Cau [86] also revised mosasaurian nomenclature and clade definitions. In a 
previous contribution, Simoes et al. [83] questioned the quality of characters present in 
exceptionally large phylogenetic matrices, particularly regarding squamate relationships, con­
cluded that many of the characters in larger matrices (such as in [18]), should be recoded or 
even excluded due to failure in tests of similarity, conjunction, independency, and due to the 
distinction between characters and character states. Laing et al. [85] criticized Simoes et al.’s 
[83] deleting of ‘problematic’ characters, arguing that large matrices are inevitable and neces­
sary for the development of systematics, because morphological data will only increase over 
time. Simoes et al. [87] responded, arguing misinterpretation of their original ideas.
In assessing dolichosaurid character scorings in the morphological matrices of Conrad 
[15] and Gauthier et al. [18], especially regarding Adriosaurus, Aphanizocnemus, and 
Eidolosaurus, it is clear that many scored states are not observable in available specimens, 
suggesting that the authors relied on potentially misleading literature descriptions and 
interpretative drawings. For example, the recently redescribed Adriosaurus suessi [25] 
specimen NHMUK-R2867 is nearly complete but extremely poorly preserved, and we 
dispute many aspects of the redescribed and illustrated characters, especially in the skull. 
Figure 8.2 compares a recent photograph of the skull of NHMUK-R2867 with Lee and 
Caldwell’s [25] interpretative drawing. In their discussion, Lee and Caldwell ([25]: 
p. 924-925) report four character states supporting the clade formed by Adriosaurus and 
their Ophidia: (1) premaxilla-maxilla contact mobile, (2) frontals paired, (3) 
postorbitofrontal ventral process large, (4) supratemporal superficial. However, none of 
these characters is clearly observable in the specimen. Breaks and erosion of the bony 
surfaces preclude precise, accurate assessment of Adriosaurus skull morphology. In 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

164 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
particular, the posterior of the skull is an indistinguishable bony mass in our assessment, 
preventing confident interpretation of bones posterior to the frontal. A mediolateral break 
through the skull level with the orbits seems to have broken the frontal during taphonomic 
processes (Fig. 8.2C). We disagree with Lee and Caldwell’s [25] interpretation of paired 
frontals in this specimen. The anterior portion of the frontal appears to be the best- 
preserved part of the skull, revealing two important features: a triradiate morphology 
anteriorly and lack of midline suture, consistent with a single bone. These features match 
more with the condition found in other anguimorphs, similar to the frontal of Coniasaurus 
gracilodens [27], and clearly distinct from that of snakes. Poor preservation is an issue in 
most dolichosaurid specimens from Europe, especially regarding the cranial region. The 
holotype of Aphanizocnemus, MSNM V783, has most of its skull badly crushed, and very 
few skull characters can be scored for this taxon (Fig. 8.2D). The Eidolosaurus holotype, 
GBA 1923-001-0001, lacks the skull and its postcranium is preserved as a mould (Fig. 8.2E), 
severely limiting the number of characters that can be scored.
Reliable character scoring can be aided by firsthand observations, better preserved 
specimens, appropriate visualization techniques, assessments of taphonomic processes, 
and conservative interpretation. Misinterpretation of morphology leads to inaccuracies in 
character scorings that can cause unreliable phylogenetic reconstructions. We are not 
suggesting exclusion of imperfect fossil specimens from systematic analysis, because they 
can also be very important in reconstructing phylogenetic relationships [88, 89], rather we 
stress particular care and diligence when scoring characters based on poorly preserved 
specimens or based only on the literature.
8.5 A Phylogenetic Reappraisal of Dolichosaurid 
and Aigialosaur Affinities
Our analysis (methods and additional discussion provided in Supplementary Appendix 8. 
S1) consistently recovered mosasaurians within Anguimorpha, as the sister of Varanoidea 
(Fig. 8.3A). This topology is notably distinct from that found by Gauthier et al. [18], which 
recovered Mosasauria outside Anguimorpha. Our results do not support the 
Pythonomorph Hypothesis because we did not find dolichosaurids, nor any other mosa- 
saurian taxa, more closely related to snakes than to varanoid lizards. Our results are closer 
to those of Rieppel and Zaher [11], Rieppel et al. [73], Conrad [15], Wiens et al. [76], Conrad 
et al. [17], and Yi and Norell [74], although they differ in that mosasaurians are sister to 
Varanoidea instead of nested within the latter taxon. Synapomorphies for anguimorph 
clades are provided in Section 1.8 of Supplementary Appendix 8.S1.
Anguimorpha is supported by 14 unambiguous synapomorphies. Mosasauria could be 
scored for eight of them, including the presence of long and converging vomer ventral 
ridges, long slender palatine process clasped in a groove on the dorsal surface of vomer, 
and at least seven cervical vertebrae. Gauthier et al. [18] found Mosasauria to be outside 
of their ‘Scleroglossa’, as the sister group of that clade, presenting 24 synapomorphies 
supporting crown Scleroglossa, for which mosasaurians could be scored for only three.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 165
Figure 8.2 Dolichosaurids with poorly preserved skulls. (A) interpretation of the Adriosaurus suessi 
skull NHMUK-R2867, frontal morphology as presented by Lee and Caldwell [25] (redrawn from [25]); 
(B) recent photograph of the same specimen; (C) reinterpretation of the frontal morphology on the 
same specimen (white lines indicate the three main pieces of the frontal bone as interpreted here); 
(D) Aphanizocnemus libanensis skull MSNM V783; (E) Eidolosaurus trauthi holotype, GBA 1923-001­
0001. Abbreviations: F, frontal; F1, F2 and F3, fragments of the frontal; P, parietal; Prf, prefrontal.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

166 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Mosasauroidea
Mosasauridae
Mosasauria
Gekkota
Gekkota
Scincoidea
Lacertoidea
Helodermatidae
Helodermatidae
Xenosauridae
Xenosauridae
Estesia
------ Estesia
Lanthanotus
------Saniwa
Saniwa
Lanthanotus
Varanus
Sphenodon 
Dibamidae
Scincoidea
Lacertoidea
Sphenodon 
Dibamidae
Serpentes 
Iguania
Anguidae 
Shinisaurus 
[Mosasauria | 
Aiolosaurus
Serpentes 
Iguania
Figure 8.3 Phylogenetic relationships of dolichosaurids, aigialosaurs and mosasaurids, based on 
morphology, as recovered in this analysis. (A) simplified cladogram of the squamate topology 
recovered here, strict consensus of 63,040 MPTs. The “fossorial group” is the same recovered by 
Gauthier et al. [18], constituted by dibamids, amphisbaenians and snakes. Numbers indicate clades
Anguidae
Shinisaurus
Mosasauria]
------ Aiolosaurus
Varanus
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 167
By increasing taxonomic sampling of dolichosaurids, aigialosaurs, and plesiopedal (taxa 
retaining limbs for facultative terrestrial locomotion sensu Polcyn and Bell [34]) mosasaur- 
ids, we were able to better evaluate synapomorphies in Mosasauria. This analysis con­
firmed nine characters supporting ‘Scleroglossa’ [18], including base of squamosal 
temporal ramus lying against the parietal, absence of squamosal ascending process, and 
splenial extending anteriorly to nearly two-thirds of the mandible length. Of the six 
‘scleroglossan’ synapomorphies of Gauthier et al. [18] that are certainly absent in mosa- 
saurians, five are interpreted as reversed in some other anguimorphs:
(1) 
temporal muscles originating dorsally on parietal (also reversed in Lanthanotidae + 
Varanidae)
(2) 
prearticular and surangular unfused (also in Heloderma and some fossil varanoids)
(3) 
simple, rod-like clavicle (also in Varanus salvator and Shinisaurus)
(4) 
interclavicle anterior process <0.2 length of interclavicle (also in Xenosaurus and 
Shinisaurus)
(5) 
absence of enlarged, subhemispherical distal epiphysis of ulna (also in Xenosaurus)
The remaining nine ‘scleroglossan’ characters could not be scored for dolichosaurids nor 
aigialosaurs due to lack of preservation. Running the analysis with unordered characters 
recovered mosasaurians as closely related to varanoids, and in a polytomy with varanids, 
Heloderma, Gobiderma, Estesia, and Aiolosaurus.
Origin of jaw musculature on parietal, narial retraction, expanded bases of marginal 
teeth, and lack of fusion between the articular-prearticular complex and surangular have 
supported the interpretation of mosasaurians being either closely related to [15] or nested 
within Varanoidea [4, 11, 17, 73, 74]. We recovered Mosasauria as the sister group of 
Varanoidea based on 13 unambiguous synapomorphies, including narial margin of maxilla 
arising at low angle, rod-like main portion of vomer, and prearticular and surangular 
unfused. These conditions are distinct from those found in Serpentes. Primitivus 
manduriensis and Eidolosaurus trauthi, originally described as dolichosaurids, are separ­
ated from other mosasaurians by not possessing characters such as a small carpal inter­
medium and V metatarsal not hooked.
A monophyletic Dolichosauridae was reconstructed, as in Paparella et al. [62], but in 
contrast to most other studies [15, 17, 25, 64]. Aphanizocnemus, recently proposed to be a 
scincogekkonomorph lizard instead of a dolichosaurid [90], was found to be sister of all 
other dolichosaurids. This taxon presents anatomical features distinct from those of typical 
mosasaurians (especially regarding limb morphology), but here it was recovered within
Figure 8.3 (cont.) as follows: (1) Squamata; (2) Scleroglossa; (3) Autarchoglossa; (4) Anguimorpha; 
(5) Scincomorpha; (B) phylogenetic relationships of anguimorphs, based on morphology, as 
recovered in this analysis. Numbers left of internal branches are Bremer support values, and numbers 
right of internal branches are Bootstrap values. (C) Topology recovered when using Wiens et al.’s [76] 
results as a molecular backbone constraint; (D) Topology recovered when using Reeder et al. [24] 
results as a molecular backbone constraint.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

168 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Dolichosauridae. A novel result of the present study is the recovery of two main 
dolichosaurid lineages: ‘dolichosaurines’ and ‘acteosaurines’.
‘Dolichosaurines’ were relatively more elongate, with more cervical and dorsal vertebrae, 
and more specialized limbs and tail for swimming. They ranged from southern to southeastern 
portions of the Western Interior Seaway (coniasaur records reported from Germany [91] and 
Australia [92], are here considered too fragmentary for a reliable taxonomic identification). 
‘Acteosaurines’ were slightly shorter, pachyostotic animals restricted to the palaeo-North 
Atlantic (around the present-day Adriatic Sea) [25, 26, 61].
The three aigialosaurs included here, Opetiosaurus, Komensaurus, and Aigialosaurus, 
were found in a polytomy with Mosasauridae, such that the monophyly of Aigialosauridae 
and its validity as a family was not supported. The mosaic anatomy of aigialosaurs, 
presenting intermediate characters between dolichosaurids, varanoids and mosasaurs, 
and the lack of more and better-preserved specimens, may be two important factors behind 
the poor resolution of this group’s relationships in this analysis.
We were unable to resolve the earliest divergences within Mosasauridae, with 
Russellosaurus, Tethysaurus, Dallasaurus, Eonatator, and the hydropedal clade (those with 
fully developed aquatic hind limbs and girdles) forming a polytomy. This is perhaps because 
of inadequate representation of mosasaurids. Future contributions utilizing a larger taxo­
nomic sample of mosasaurids in a more focused analysis should better reconstruct in-group 
relationships. The hydropedal mosasaur clade is supported by ten unambiguous 
synapomorphies, including frontal broadly overlapping prefrontal dorsally, a supratemporal 
longer than squamosal-parietal contact, and manual and pedal hyperphalangy.
To test alternative phylogenetic hypotheses for mosasaurian affinities, we performed two 
additional tests by applying two molecular phylogeny backbones in TNT [93] using the 
command ‘force’: (1) Wiens et al.’s [76] strict consensus (Fig. 8.3C), and (2) Reeder et al.’s 
[24] strict consensus (Fig. 8.3D). Both tests resulted in mosasaurians nesting within 
Paleoanguimorpha more closely related to varanids than to Shinisaurus. This result is 
remarkably similar to the outcome of Yi and Norell’s [74] combined morphological and 
molecular analysis. Minor differences between the distinct backbones are: using Wiens 
et al.’s [76] strict consensus resulted in 199 additional steps required for finding the MPTs, 
while with Reeder et al.’s [24] strict consensus 213 additional steps were required. These tests 
highlight the stronger phylogenetic signal of mosasaurians as anguimorph lizards, especially 
close to varanoids, and not closely related to snakes (as in the Pythonomorph Hypothesis), 
nor being part of a more inclusive squamate clade (as in Gauthier et al. [18]). These results 
also argue against a close sister group relationship between mosasaurs and snakes.
8.6 The Pythonomorph and Ophidiomorph 
Hypotheses Revisited
The Pythonomorph and Ophidiomorph Hypotheses have changed fundamentally during 
the past two decades (Fig. 8.4). Multiple variations in Pythonomorpha topologies suggest
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 169
C
Pythonomorpha
Mosasauroidea 
B
A
Pythonomorpha 
Mosasauria 
dolichosaurids
Pythonomorpha 
Mosasauria 
dolichosaurids
D 
Pythonomorpha
___________Mosasauria 
dolichosaurids
E 
Pythonomorpha
___________ Mosasauria_____  
dolichosaurids
F 
Pythonomorpha
___________ Mosasauria_____ 
dolichosaurids
G 
Pythonomorpha
____________ Mosasauria 
dolichosaurids
H
Pythonomorpha 
Mosasauria
Figure 8.4 Simplified cladograms highlighting how the Pythonomorpha Hypothesis has changed 
through time. Black bars indicate the position of relevant higher taxa.
that new information on dolichosaurid anatomy and relationships will improve under­
standing of mosasauroid evolution and relationships within Squamata. For our dataset, 
constraining Mosasauria into a most-parsimonious sister-group relationship with snakes 
requires 5,287 steps, 11 more than in our unconstrained results. The more than 100,000 
MPTs from this constrained analysis (Supplementary Figure 8.S9) presents different rela­
tionships within anguimorphs and also changes the relationships of non-snake radiations 
of Gauthier et al.’s [18] ‘fossorial group’. Varanids were successively found as closest
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

170 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Figure 8.5 Tooth attachment and implantation. Tooth-bearing elements are depicted in medial view. 
(A) left dentary of the varanoid Varanus rudicollis (SMU-unnumbered); (B) left dentary of the 
dolichosaurid Coniasaurus sp. nov. (DMNH-1601); (C) left mandible of the dolichosaurid 
Coniasaurus cf. C. crassidens (NHMUK R 3421); (D) right maxilla of the dolichosaurid Judeasaurus 
tchernovi (HUJI P 4000); (E) right dentary of the mosasauroid Opetiosaurus bucchichi (GBA 1901/002/ 
0001); (F) left dentary of the snake Leptotyphlops koppesi (MZSP 10992: courtesy of F. Curcio). Parts 
D and E flipped horizontally to facilitate comparison.
relatives of Pythonomorpha, with Estesia mongoliensis being the closest. Regarding the 
fossorial taxa, Dibamidae and Amphisbaenia were reconstructed as a clade as in Gauthier 
et al. [18], but within Scincidae, while Sineoamphisbaena hexatabularis and Anniella 
pulchra were within Anguidae.
A close relationship between mosasaurians and snakes in previous phylogenetic studies 
has typically been supported by characters related to limb and girdle reduction, tooth 
implantation and replacement, intramandibular joints, and the presence of zygantrum- 
zygosphene accessory articulations. Intense discussion about these sets of characters 
occurred during the late 1990s and early 2000s ([11, 25, 59, 94-100]; see also Zaher et. al., 
this volume), especially regarding tooth implantation and replacement patterns. However, 
most studies analysing tooth patterns in mosasaurians included only relatively deeply 
nested mosasaurids [96, 97, 100-102] and did not evaluate tooth attachment in less deeply 
nested forms that might be more likely to retain plesiomorphic conditions.
Overall patterns of tooth attachment and implantation in dolichosaurids are much more 
similar to those in varanoids than in snakes or deeply nested mosasaurids, presenting a 
plesiomorphic set of features defined as fully pleurodont (sensu Zaher and Rieppel [96]). In 
varanoids and dolichosaurids, tooth attachment sites are shallow, and the base of implant­
ation is only slightly expanded (Fig. 8.5A-D), differing from the more expanded base in 
mosasauroids (Fig. 8.5E), and especially from the highly modified pleurodonty seen in 
‘higher’ snakes (Fig. 8.5F; see also [96]). The cementum layer ankylosing teeth to bone is 
thin in both dolichosaurids and varanoids, but thicker independently in mosasauroids and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 171
‘higher’ snakes. Finally, there are no interdental ridges in any dolichosaurid or early 
mosasauroid (Fig. 8.5B-E), whereas this is typical in snakes. Tooth attachment in dolicho- 
saurids argues against the hypothesis of dolichosaurids being more closely related to snakes 
than to mosasauroids (see also Polcyn et al., Chapter 7). Similarities in the dentition of 
deeply nested mosasaurs and ‘higher’ snakes can be interpreted alternatively as 
convergence.
One of the main features of most works favoring the Ophidiomorph Hypothesis is 
dolichosaurids being more closely related to snakes than to mosasauroids [25, 26, 61, 64]. 
The hypothesis of snakes being most closely related to or even derived from dolichosaurids 
is based on proposed synapomorphies related to girdle and limb reduction, cervical 
vertebrae number, and cranial characters that are difficult to see in any dolichosaurid 
specimen. For example, none of the seven synapomorphies uniting dolichosaurids and 
snakes in a monophyletic Ophidiomorpha presented by Lee and Caldwell [25] can be 
adequately compared between the taxa: more than ten cervical vertebrae, scapulocoracoid 
reduced, interclavicle absent, forelimbs small, pelvis reduced, hindlimbs small, and pubis 
not expanded distally. The interpretation of snakes bearing elongate necks is based on the 
presence of hypapophyses along the axial series; however, developmental studies support 
the interpretation of snakes having short necks [103, 104]. Lack of girdle and limb elements 
is difficult to compare among limbless lineages. More recent works, such as Caldwell [61] 
and Palci and Caldwell [64], presented more synapomorphies supporting the monophyly of 
Pythonomorpha and Ophidiomorpha, but many of those are related to anatomical regions 
not quite visible in any dolichosaurid specimen, such as ‘crista prootica (ridge on lateral 
surface of the prootic, overhanging the foramen pro nervi facialis) reduced to weak ridge, or 
absent’ [61] and ‘ectopterygoid-palatine contact absent, maxilla enters suborbital fenestra’ 
[64]. The posterior process of the maxilla reaching or extending beyond the middle of the 
orbit is one of the synapomorphies uniting Adriosaurus and snakes according to Caldwell 
[61], but this character cannot be seen in available Adriosaurus material (Fig. 8.2), and it is 
not present in any mosasaurian taxon (Fig. 8.6A), which instead have short maxillary 
processes that do not extend past mid-orbit, as in varanoids and contrasting with the snake 
condition. Paired frontals were also presented as a character uniting Adriosaurus and 
snakes, but paired frontals are unknown in mosasaurians, with the paired frontals 
described by Lee and Caldwell [25] here interpreted as a single broken element, as 
discussed in Section 8.4 (Fig. 8.6B).
Our analysis inferred a grouping of dolichosaurids and mosasauroids in a monophyletic 
Mosasauria. A complete list of synapomorphies is provided in Supplementary Appendix 8. 
S1, but some are summarized here. The internasal process of the premaxilla is always 
exceptionally long, approaching the frontal (Fig. 8.6C). Mosasaurians present a typical and 
very particular quadrate morphology, with a highly developed suprastapedial process 
bending ventrally (Fig. 8.6D), and even touching the infrastapedial process in more deeply 
nested taxa [3]. Although some snakes have a somewhat expanded quadrate, it never 
approaches the particular condition seen in dolichosaurids and mosasauroids, in which 
the suprastapedial process is highly inclined ventrally. Mosasaurians also have a unique 
mandibular condition in which the surangular participates in the glenoid fossa (Fig. 8.6E),
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

172 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
Mosasauroidea Dolichosauridae 
Serpentes
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
Figure 8.6 Examples of morphological characters arguing against the Pythonomorpha Hypothesis. 
(A) extension of the posterior process of the maxilla. From left to right: Plotosaurus bennisoni (UCMP 
32778, courtesy of DigiMorph.org), Pontosaurus kornhuberi (MSNM V 3662) and Najash rionegrina 
(MPCA 500; line drawing based on Garberoglio et al., 2019 [107]). (B) fusion of the frontals; from left 
to right: Plotosaurus bennisoni (UCMP 32778, courtesy of DigiMorph.org), Adriosaurus suessi 
(NHMUK PR 2867; white lines represent a novel interpretation of the frontal morphology as discussed 
in section 8.4) and Dinilysia patagonica (MLP 26-410). (C) Extension of the internasal process of the 
premaxilla; from left to right: Plotosaurus bennisoni (UCMP 32778, courtesy of DigiMorph.org), 
Pontosaurus kornhuberi (MSNM V 3662) and Najash rionegrina (MPCA 500; line drawing based on 
Garberoglio et al., 2019, [107]). (D) Development of the quadrate suprastapedial process; from left to 
right: Komensaurus carrolli (MCSNT 11430-2), Judeasaurus tchernovi (HUJI P4000) and Dinilysia 
patagonica (MACN-RN 1013). (E) Participation of the surangular in the mandibular cotyle; from left to 
right: Aigialosaurus dalmaticus (BSP 1902 II 501), Adriosaurus suessi (NHMUK PR 2867) and Dinilysia 
patagonica (MACN-RN 1013). Abbreviations: art, articular; comp, compound bone; cot, cotyle; 
f, frontal; mx, maxilla; pmx, premaxilla; q, quadrate; sur, surangular.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 173
which is not seen in snakes. In summary, we find clear morphological evidence to support a 
monophyletic Mosasauria, and we have not found evidence to support the hypothesis that 
dolichosaurids are more closely related to snakes than to mosasauroids.
8.7 Concluding Remarks and Future Prospects
This contribution emphasizes the importance of taxon and specimen selection, and the 
application of techniques that maximize the capture of previously missing data. Many 
mosasaurian characters are scored here for the first time through the application of 
micro-CT scanning (Chapter 7). These techniques, as applied here, and in the richly 
illustrated work of Gauthier et al. [18], are largely focused on osteology, but new techniques 
such as contrast staining [105, 106] are now setting the stage for deeper morphological 
analyses that can generate data for phylogenetic systematics.
Beyond these technologies, better and more complete data for mosasaurians will accrue 
through the discovery of new specimens and reanalysis of currently curated specimens. As 
discussed in Section 8.4, many characters, especially from the skull, cannot currently be 
scored for most dolichosaurids. Our proposed topology of relationships within Mosasauria 
and the monophyly of Dolichosauridae are tentative. Data from new and better-preserved 
fossils will test the relationships proposed here. However, we present what we consider to 
be a robust set of characters supporting the hypothesis of dolichosaurids, aigialosaurs and 
mosasaurids being anguimorphs in a sister-group relationship with Varanoidea.
The sampling of more dolichosaurids and plesiopedal mosasauroids than in previous 
studies likely contributed to our inference that Mosasauria is firmly nested within 
Anguimorpha, as the sister of varanoids. More complete taxonomic sampling with good­
quality morphological data will hopefully resolve remaining conflicts in the systematics of 
the group. Based on currently available data, our interpretation is that a close phylogenetic 
relationship between mosasaurians and snakes can be rejected with confidence.
Acknowledgements
We thank Daniel Madzia, Anne Schulp and David Gower for providing constructive criti­
cism of the submitted manuscript. We are grateful to the following colleagues for granting 
access to specimens under their care: Sandra Chapman and Michael Day (Natural History 
Museum, London); John Cooper (Booth Museum of Natural History); Ursula Gohlich 
(Natural History Museum, Vienna); Irene Zorn (Geological Survey of Austria, Vienna); 
Cristiano Dal Sasso (Museo di Storia Naturale di Milano), Deborah Arbulla (Museo Civico 
di Storia Naturale di Trieste), Ron Tykoski and Karen Morton (Perot Museum of Nature and 
Science). We are indebted to Jessica Maisano, Matthew Colbert and Alberto Carvalho for 
providing valuable help with CT-data treatment and analysis and Diana Vineyard for 
helping with funding and administrative documentation. We also want to thank Jessica 
Maisano and DigiMorph.org for providing 3D reconstructions of several squamate taxa 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

174 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
scanned as part of the DigiMorph project funded by the National Science Foundation 
(DEB-0132227 and EF-0334961), and for allowing the reproduction of the Plotosaurus 
bennisoni 3D model in Figure 8.6. This research was financed in part by the Coordenagao 
de Aperfeigoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior - Brasil (CAPES; Finance Code 001) and 
ISEM at SMU to B.A., and Fundagao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (BIOTA/ 
FAPESP, 11/50206-9 and 18/11902-9) and Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento 
Cientffico e Tecnologico (CNPq 306777/2014-2) to H.Z.
References
1. S. E. Evans, M. Manabe, M. Noro, S. Isajis, 
and M. Yamaguchi, A longbodied lizard 
from the Lower Cretaceous of Japan. 
Paleontology, 49 (2006), 1143-1165.
2. M. J. Polcyn, E. Tchernov, and L. L. Jacobs, 
The Cretaceous biogeography of the 
eastern Mediterranean with a description 
of a new basal mosasauroid from ‘Ein 
Yabrud, Israel. In Y. Tomida, T.H. Rich and 
P. Vickers-Rich, eds., Proceedings of the 
Second Gondwanan Dinosaur Symposium 
(1999), pp. 259-290.
3. D. A. Russell, Systematics and morphology 
of American mosasaurs. Bulletin of the 
Peabody Museum of Natural History, 23 
(1967), 1-241.
4. M. DeBraga and R. L. Carroll, The origin of 
mosasaurs as a model of 
macroevolutionary patterns and processes. 
Evolutionary Biology, 27 (1993), 245-322.
5. M. J. Polcyn, L. L. Jacobs, R. Araujo, 
A. S. Schulp, and O. Mateus, Physical 
drivers of mosasaur evolution.
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, 
Palaeoecology, 400 (2014), 17-27.
6. W. B. Gallagher, K. G. Miller, R. M. Sherrell, 
et al., On the last mosasaurs: Late 
Maastrichtian mosasaurs and the 
Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary in New 
Jersey. Bulletin de la Socidtd Gdologique de 
France, 183 (2012), 145-150.
7. F. F. Pieters, P. G. Rompen, J. W. Jagt, and 
N. Bardet, A new look at Faujas de Saint- 
Fond’s fantastic story on the provenance 
and acquisition of the type specimen of 
Mosasaurus hoffmanni Mantell, 1829.
Bulletin de la Socidtd gdologique de France, 
183 (2012), 55-65.
8. R. L. Carroll and M. Debraga, Aigialosaurs: 
mid-Cretaceous varanoid lizards. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 12 (1992), 66-86.
9. T. Lingham-Soliar, Anatomy and functional 
morphology of the largest marine reptile 
known, Mosasaurus hoffmanni 
(Mosasauridae, Reptilia) from the Upper 
Cretaceous, Upper Maastrichtian of the 
Netherlands. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society of London B: Biological 
Sciences, 347 (1995), 155-172.
10. G. L. Bell, A phylogenetic revision of North 
American and Adriatic Mosasauroidea. In 
J. M. Callaway and E. L. Nicholls, eds., 
Ancient Marine Reptiles (Academic Press: 
Cambridge, 1997), pp. 293-332.
11. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, The 
intramandibular joint in squamates, and 
the phylogenetic relationships of the fossil 
snake Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas. 
Fieldiana Geology, 43 (2000), 1-69.
12. N. S. Bardet, X. P. Suberbiola,
M. Iarochene, B. Bouya, and M. Amaghzaz, 
A new species of Halisaurus from the Late 
Cretaceous phosphates of Morocco, and 
the phylogenetical relationships of the 
Halisaurinae (Squamata: Mosasauridae). 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
143 (2005), 447-472.
13. G. L. Bell and M. J. Polcyn, Dallasaurus 
turneri, a new primitive mosasauroid from 
the Middle Turonian of Texas and 
comments on the phylogeny of 
Mosasauridae (Squamata). Netherlands
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 175
Journal of Geosciences, 84, Special Issue 3 
(2005), 177-194.
14. J. Lindgren, The first record of Hainosaurus 
(Reptilia: Mosasauridae) from Sweden. 
Journal of Paleontology, 79 (2005), 1157-1165.
15. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
16. M. W. Caldwell and A. Palci, A new species 
of marine ophidiomorph lizard, 
Adriosaurus skrbinensis, from the Upper 
Cretaceous of Slovenia. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 (2010), 
747-755.
17. J. L. Conrad, J. C. Ast, S. Montanari, and 
M. A. Norell, A combined evidence 
phylogenetic analysis of Anguimorpha 
(Reptilia: Squamata). Cladistics, 27 (2011), 
230-277.
18. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. Behlke, Assembling the 
squamate tree of life: Perspectives from the 
phenotype and the fossil record. Bulletin of 
the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 53 
(2012), 3-308.
19. D. Madzia and J. Conrad, Mosasauridae. In 
K. C. de Queiroz, P. D. Cantino and 
J. A. Gauthier, eds., Phylonyms: 
A Companion to the PhyloCode (Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2020), pp. 1103-1108.
20. P. Gervais, Zoologie et Pateontologie 
Generale (Paris: A. Bertrand, 1852).
21. K. Gorjanovic-Kramberger, Aigialosaurus, 
eine neue Eidechse aus den 
Kreideschiefern der Insel Lesina, mit 
RUcksicht auf die bereits beschriebenen 
Lacertiden von Comen und Lesina. Glasnik 
hrvatskoga naravoslovnoga drustva 
(Societas historico-naturalis croatica) u 
Zagrebu, 7 (1892), 74-106.
22. M. J. Polcyn and G. L. Bell, Coniasaurus 
crassidens and its bearing on varanoid- 
mosasauroid relationships. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, Supplement, 14 
(1994), 42A.
23. M. W. Caldwell, Squamate phylogeny and 
the relationships of snakes and 
mosasauroids. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 125 (1999), 115-147.
24. T. W.Reeder, T. M. Townsend, 
D. G. Mulcahy, et al., Integrated analyses 
resolve conflicts over squamate reptile 
phylogeny and reveal unexpected 
placements for fossil taxa. PLoS One, 10 
(2015), e0118199.
25. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, 
Adriosaurus and the affinities of 
mosasaurs, dolichosaurs, and snakes. 
Journal of Paleontology, 74 (2000), 
915-937.
26. S. Pierce and M. W. Caldwell, Redescription 
and phylogenetic position of the Adriatic 
(Upper Cretaceous; Cenomanian) 
dolichosaur, Pontosaurus lesinensis 
(Kornhuber, 1873). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 24 (2004), 376-389.
27. M. W. Caldwell, Description and 
phylogenetic relationships of a new species 
of Coniasaurus Owen, 1850 (Squamata). 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 19 
(1999), 438-455.
28. M. S. Y. Lee and J. D. Scanlon, The 
Cretaceous marine squamate Mesoleptos 
and the origin of snakes. Bulletin of the 
Natural History Museum London (Zoology 
Series), 68 (2002), 131-142.
29. A. Haber and M. J. Polcyn, A new marine 
varanoid from the Cenomanian of the 
Middle East. Netherlands Journal of 
Geosciences, 84, Special Issue 3 (2005), 
247-255
30. L. L. Jacobs, K. Ferguson, M. J. Polcyn, and 
C. Rennison, Cretaceous S[13]C stratigraphy 
and the age of dolichosaurs and early 
mosasaurs. Netherlands Journal of 
Geosciences, 84, Special Issue 3 (2005), 
257-268.
31. M. C. Mekarski, D. Japundzic, K. Krizmanic, 
and M. W. Caldwell, Description of a new 
basal mosasauroid from the Late 
Cretaceous of Croatia, with comments on 
the evolution of the mosasauroid forelimb. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 39 
(2019), DOI: 10.1080/ 
02724634.2019.1577872.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

176 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
32. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, 
Reevaluation of the Cretaceous marine 
lizard Acteosaurus crassicostatus Calligaris, 
1993. Journal of Paleontology, 78 (2004), 
617-619.
33. J. Seiffert, Upper Jurassic lizards from 
central Portugal. Memories do Servigo 
Geologico de Portugal (Nova S6rie), 22 
(1973), 1-85.
34. M. J. Polcyn and G. L. Bell, Russellosaurus 
coheni n. gen., n. sp., a 92 million-year-old 
mosasaur from Texas (USA), and the 
definition of the parafamily 
Russellosaurina. Netherlands Journal of 
Geosciences, 84, Special Issue 3 (2005), 
321-333.
35. A. R. Dutchak, A review of the taxonomy 
and systematic of aigialosaurs. Netherlands 
Journal of Geosciences, 84, Special Issue 3 
(2005), 221-229.
36. Dutchak, A.R. and Caldwell, M.W., 
A redescription of Aigialosaurus 
(= Opetiosaurus) bucchichi (Kornhuber, 
1901) (Squamata: Aigialosauridae) with 
comments on mosasauroid systematics. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 29 
(2009), 437-452.
37. K. T. Smith and M. L. Buchy, A new 
aigialosaur (Squamata: Anguimorpha) with 
soft tissues remains from the Upper 
Cretaceous of Nuevo Leon, Mexico. Journal 
of Vertebrate Paleontology, 28 (2008), 85-94.
38. S. B. McDowell and C. M. Bogert, The 
systematic position of Lanthanotus and the 
affinities of the anguinomorphan lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 105 (1954), 1-142.
39. O. Rieppel, The Phylogeny of 
Anguinomorph Lizards (Basel: Birkhauser 
Verlag, 1980).
40. R. Estes, K. de Queiroz, and J. A. Gauthier, 
Phylogenetic relationships within 
Squamata. In R. P. Estes, ed., Phylogenetic 
Relationships of the Lizard Families 
(Stanford University Press: Stanford, 1988), 
pp. 119-282.
41. G. C. F. Cuvier, Sur le grand animal fossile 
des carrieres de Maestricht. Annales du
Mus6um National dHistoire Naturelle, 12 
(1808) 145-176.
42. G. Mantell, A tabular arrangement of the 
organic remains of the county of Sussex. 
Transactions of the Geological Society of 
London, 3 (1829), 201-216.
43. A. Goldfuss, The skull structure of the 
Mosasaurus, explained by means of a 
description of a new species of this genus. 
Transactions of the Kansas Academy of 
Science, 116 (2013), 27-46.
44. R. Owen, Description of the fossil reptiles of 
the Chalk Formation. In F. Dixon, ed., The 
geology and fossils of the Tertiary and 
Cretaceous Formations of Sussex (Longman, 
Brown, Green, and Longman: London, 
1850), pp. 378-404.
45. E. D. Cope, On the reptilian orders, 
Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria. 
Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural 
History, 12 (1869), 250-266.
46. R. Owen, On the rank and affinities in the 
reptilian class of the Mosasauridae, 
Gervais. Quarterly Journal of the Geological 
Society of London, 33 (1877), 682-715.
47. O. C. Marsh, New characters of 
mosasauroid reptiles. American Journal of 
Science, 19 (1880, 83-87.
48. G. H. C. L. Baur, On the characters and 
systematic position of the large sea-lizards, 
Mosasauridae. Science, 405 (1890), 262.
49. S. W. Williston, The relationships and 
habits of the mosasaurs. The Journal of 
Geology, 12 (1904), 43-51.
50. F. Nopcsa, Eidolosaurus und Pachyophis, 
zwei neue Neocom-Reptilien.
Palaeontographica, 65 (1923), 99-154.
51. G. A. Boulenger, Notes on the osteology of 
Heloderma horridum and H. suspectum, 
with remarks on the systematic position of 
the Helodermatide and on the vertebrae of 
the Lacertilia. Proceedings of the Zoological 
Society of London, 59 (1891), 109-118.
52. E. D. Cope, Reply to Dr. Bauer’s critique on 
my paper on the paroccipital bone of the 
scaled reptiles and the systematic position 
of the Pythonomorpha. American 
Naturalist, 29 (1895), 1003-1005.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 177
53. H. F. Osborn, A complete mosasaur 
skeleton, osseous and cartilaginous. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 1 (1899), 167-188.
54. G. J. Fejervary, Contributions to a 
monography on fossil Varanidae and on 
Megalanidae. Annales Historico-Naturales 
Musei Nationalis Hungarici, 16 (1918), 
341-467.
55. C. L. Camp, Classification of the lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of 
Natural History, 48 (1923), 289-481.
56. A. A. Bellairs, Observations on the snout of 
Varanus, and a comparison with that of 
other lizards and snakes. Journal of 
Anatomy, 83 (1949), 116.
57. G. Underwood, Lanthanotus and the 
anguinomorphan lizards: a critical review. 
Copeia, 1957 (1957), 20-30.
58. M. Borsuk-Biallynicka, Anguimorphans 
and related lizards from the Late 
Cretaceous of the Gobi Desert, Mongolia. 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 46 (1984), 5-105.
59. M. S. Y. Lee, The phylogeny of varanoid 
lizards and the affinities of snakes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London, Series B, 352 (1997), 53-91.
60. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2020).
61. M. W. Caldwell, A New Species of 
‘Pontosaurus’ (Squamata, Pythonomorpha) 
from the Upper Cretaceous of Lebanon and 
a phylogenetic analysis of Pythonomorpha. 
Societa Italiana di Scienze Naturali, 34 
(2006), 1-44.
62. I. Paparella, A. Palci, U. Nicosia and 
M. W. Caldwell, A new fossil marine lizard 
with soft tissues from the Late Cretaceous 
of southern Italy. Royal Society Open 
Science, 6 (2018), 172411.
63. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, M. Talanda, 
et al., The origin of squamates revealed by 
a Middle Triassic lizard from the Italian 
Alps. Nature, 557 (2018), 706-709.
64. A. Palci and M. W. Caldwell, Redescription 
of Acteosaurus tommasinii von Meyer, 
1860, and a discussion of evolutionary 
trends within the clade Ophidiomorpha. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 
(2010), 94-108.
65. E. Cornalia and L. Chiozza, Cenni geologici 
sull’ Istria. Giornale dell’ I. R. Instituto 
Lombardo, 3 (1852), 1-35.
66. H. von Meyer, Acteosaurus tommasinii aus 
dem schwarzen Kreide-Schiefer von 
Comen am Karste. Palaeontographica, 7 
(1860), 223-231.
67. A. Kornhuber, Carsosaurus Marchesettii, 
ein neuer fossiler Lacertilier aus den 
Kreideschichten des Karstes bei Komen. 
Abhandlungen der kaiserlich-koniglichen 
geologischen Reichsanstalt zu Wien, 17 
(1893), 1-15.
68. A. Kornhuber, A., Opetiosaurus Bucchichi, 
eine neue fossile Eidechse aus der unteren 
Kreide von Lesina in Dalmatien.
Abhandlungen der kaiserlich-koniglichen 
geologischen Reichsanstalt zu Wien, 17 
(1901), 1-24.
69. R. Calligaris, Acteosaurus crassicostatus 
nuova specie di Dolichosauridae negli 
Strati Calcarei Ittiolitici di Comeno. Atti 
Museo Civico di Storia Naturale di Trieste, 
45 (1993), 29-34.
70. J. Hallermann, The ethmoidal region of 
Dibamus taylori (Squamata: Dibamidae), 
with a phylogenetic hypothesis on dibamid 
relationships within Squamata. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 122 (1998), 
385-426.
71. S. E. Evans and L. J. Barbadillo, 
A shortlimbed lizard from the Lower 
Cretaceous of Spain. Special Papers in 
Palaeontology, 60 (1999), 73-85.
72. K. Q. Gao and M. A. Norell, Taxonomic 
revision of Carusia (Reptilia: Squamata) 
from the Late Cretaceous of the Gobi 
Desert, and phylogenetic relationships of 
anguimorphan lizards. American Museum 
Novitates, 3230 (1998), 1-51.
73. O. Rieppel, J. L. Conrad, and J. A. Maisano, 
New morphological data for Eosaniwa 
koehni Haubold, 1977 and a revised 
phylogenetic analysis. Journal of 
Paleontology, 81 (2007), 760-769.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

178 augusta, zaher, polcyn, fiorillo, and jacobs
74. H. Y. Yi and M. A. Norell, New materials of 
Estesia mongoliensis (Squamata: 
Anguimorpha) and the evolution of venom 
grooves in lizards. American Museum 
Novitates, 3767 (2013), 1-31.
75. N. Vidal and S.B. Hedges, The phylogeny of 
squamate reptiles (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) inferred from nine 
nuclear protein-coding genes. Comptes 
Rendus Biologies, 328 (2005), 1000-1008.
76. J. J. Wiens, C. A. Kuczynski, T. Townsend, 
et al., Combining phylogenomics and 
fossils in higher-level squamate reptile 
phylogeny: molecular data change the 
placement of fossil taxa. Systematic Biology, 
59 (2010), 674-688.
77. R. A. Pyron, F.T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens, 
A phylogeny and revised classification of 
Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards 
and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 1-53.
78. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses of more than 
4000 nuclear loci resolve the origin of 
snakes among lizard families. Biological 
Letters, 13 (2017), e20170393.
79. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for 
key traditional morphological 
relationships. Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 
502-520.
80. T. M. Townsend, A. Larson, E. Louis, and 
J. R. Macey, Molecular phylogenetics of 
Squamata: the position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the 
root of the squamate tree. Systematic 
Biology, 53 (2004), 735-757.
81. N. Vidal and S.B. Hedges, The molecular 
evolutionary tree of lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians. Comptes Rendus 
Biologies, 332 (2009), 129-139.
82. T. R. Simoes, O. Vernygora, M. W. Caldwell, 
and S. E. Pierce, Megaevolutionary 
dynamics and the timing of evolutionary 
innovation in reptiles. Nature 
Communications, 11 (2020), 1-14.
83. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, A. Palci, and 
R. L. Nydam, Giant taxon-character 
matrices: quality of character constructions 
remains critical regardless of size. 
Cladistics, 33 (2017) 198-219.
84. T. R. Simoes, O. Vernygora, I. Paparella, 
P. Jimenez-Huidobro, and M. W. Caldwell, 
Mosasauroid phylogeny under multiple 
phylogenetic methods provides new 
insights on the evolution of aquatic 
adaptations in the group. PLoS ONE, 12 
(2017), e0176773.
85. A. M. Laing, S. Doyle, M. E. L. Gold, et al., 
Giant taxon-character matrices: The future 
of morphological systematics. Cladistics, 34 
(2017), 333-335.
86. D. Madzia and A. Cau, Inferring ‘weak 
spots’ in phylogenetic trees: application to 
mosasauroid nomenclature. PeerJ, 5 (2017), 
e3782.
87. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, A. Palci, and 
R. L. Nydam, Giant taxon-character 
matrices II: a response to Laing et al. 
(2017). Cladistics, 34 (2017), 702-707.
88. J. A. Gauthier, A. G. Kluge, and T. Rowe, 
Amniote phylogeny and the importance 
of fossils. Cladistics, 4 (1988), 
105-209.
89. M. J. Donoghue, J. A. Doyle, J. Gauthier, 
A. G. Kluge, and T. Rowe, The importance 
of fossils in phylogeny reconstruction. 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics. 
20 (1989), 431-460.
90. M. M. Mekarski, The Origin and Evolution 
of Aquatic Adaptations in Cretaceous 
Squamates (Unpublished PhD Thesis: 
University of Alberta, 2017).
91. C. Diedrich, Ein dentale von Coniosaurus 
crassidens Owen (Varanoidea) aus dem 
Ober-Cenoman von Halle/Westf (NW- 
Deutschland). Geologie und Palaontologie 
in Westfalen, 47 (1997), 43-51.
92. J. D. Scanlon and S.A. Hocknull, 
A dolichosaurid lizard from the latest 
Albian (mid-Cretaceous) Winton 
Formation, Queensland, Australia. 
Transactions of the Kansas Academy of 
Science, Fort Hays Studies Special Issue -
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

MOSASAURIANS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 179
Proceedings of the Second Mosasaur 
Meeting (2008), 131-136.
93. P. A. Goloboff and S. A. Catalano, TNT 
version 1.5, including a full implementation 
of phylogenetic morphometrics. Cladistics, 
32 (2016), 221-238.
94. M. S. Y. Lee, Convergent evolution and 
character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
towards a resolution of squamate 
relationships. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 65 (1998), 369-453.
95. H. Zaher, The phylogenetic position of 
Pachyrhachis within snakes (Squamata, 
Lepidosauria). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 18 (1998), 1-3.
96. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, Tooth 
implantation and replacement in 
squamates, with special reference to 
mosasaur lizards and snakes. American 
Museum Novitates, 3271 (1999), 1-19.
97. M. W. Caldwell, L. A. Budney, and 
D. O. Lamoureux, Histology of tooth 
attachment tissues in the Late Cretaceous 
mosasaurid Platecarpus. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 23 (2003), 
622-630.
98. M. W. Caldwell and A. Palci, A new basal 
mosasauroid from the Cenomanian (U. 
Cretaceous) of Slovenia with a review of 
mosasauroid phylogeny and evolution. 
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 27 
(2007), 863-883.
99. O. Rieppel and M. Kearney, Tooth 
replacement in the Late Cretaceous 
mosasaur Clidastes. Journal of Herpetology, 
39 (2005), 688-692.
100. X. Luan, C. Walker, S. Dangaria, et al., The 
mosasaur tooth attachment apparatus as 
paradigm for the evolution of the 
gnathostome periodontium. Evolution & 
Development, 11 (2009), 247-259.
101. M. W. Caldwell, Ontogeny, anatomy and 
attachment of the dentition in mosasaurs 
(Mosasauridae: Squamata). Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 149 (2007), 
687-700.
102. A. R. LeBlanc, D. O. Lamoureux, and 
M. W. Caldwell, Mosasaurs and snakes 
have a periodontal ligament: timing and 
extent of calcification, not tissue 
complexity, determines tooth attachment 
mode in reptiles. Journal of Anatomy, 231 
(2017), 869-885.
103. C. Gomez, E. M. Ozbudak, J. Wunderlich, 
et al., Control of segment number in 
vertebrate embryos. Nature, 454 (2008), 
335-339.
104. M. J. Woltering, From lizard to snake; 
behind the evolution of an extreme body 
plan. Current Genomics, 13 (2012), 
289-299.
105. R. Montero, J. D. Daza, A. M. Bauer, and 
V. Abdala, How common are cranial 
sesamoids among squamates? Journal of 
Morphology, 278 (2017), 1400-1411.
106. J. Ollonen, F. O. Silva, K. Mahlow, and 
N. Di-Poi, Skull development, ossification 
pattern, and adult shape in the emerging 
lizard model organism Pogona vitticeps: a 
comparative analysis with other 
squamates. Frontiers in Physiology, 9 
(2018), 278.
107. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, 
T. R. Simoes, et al., New skulls and 
skeletons of the Cretaceous legged snake 
Najash, and the evolution of the modern 
snake body plan. Science Advances, 5 
(2019), eaax5833.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.011 Published online by Cambridge University Press

9
A Review of the Skull Anatomy and 
Phylogenetic Affinities of Marine 
Pachyophiid Snakes
Hussam Zaher, Bruno G. Augusta, Rivka Rabinovich, 
Michael J. Polcyn, and Paul Tafforeau
9.1 Introduction
The Mesozoic saw an expansion of many terrestrial vertebrate lineages, including snakes, a 
highly specialized group of squamates with a controversial origin [1]. Although mainly 
terrestrial, snakes invaded the aquatic environment several times. The first known marine 
radiation occurred during the Cenomanian, on the northern Gondwana margins in the 
Mesogean Ocean and Neo-Tethys Sea [2-4; hereafter collectively referred to as Tethyan], 
and provided some of the most complete fossil snakes known, including the first known 
snakes with fully developed hindlimbs [5-7]. This radiation has in recent decades fueled an 
intense debate on the origin and early diversification of snakes [5-14]. Central to this debate 
are conflicting interpretations of the anatomy and phylogenetic affinities of these marine 
snakes, and more specifically of the limbed species Eupodophis descouensi, Haasiophis 
terrasanctus, and Pachyrhachis problematicus, known from sediments of the southern 
Tethyan margin in the Levant (Lebanon and Israel; [15]). Prior to the redescription of 
Pachyrhachis and the discovery of Eupodophis and Haasiophis in the 1990s, three other 
genera - Simoliophis, Pachyophis, and Mesophis - were already known from northern and 
southern Tethyan deposits of Egypt, France, and Boznia-Herzegovina [16-19]. However, the 
lack of well-preserved skulls limited their contribution to clarifying the anatomy of the 
group. Tethyan marine Cenomanian snakes are varyingly grouped together in the literature 
under two different family names - Pachyophiidae Nopcsa 1923 and Simoliophiidae 
Nopcsa, 1925 - the former having priority.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 181
The first Tethyan marine snake to be described was Simoliophis rochebrunei (incorrectly 
spelled as S. rochebruni by Sauvage [16]). Sauvage [16] recognized S. rochebrunei as the 
oldest definitive snake known - until then, the oldest records were from the early Cenozoic 
([20]; see also Chapter 4) - but with unclear affinities within the group. Rochebrune [21] 
suggested a possible association with extant typhlopid snakes but noted several conspicu­
ous differences and especially the broad, high neural spine of Simoliophis.
In that same period, Cope [22] initiated the origin of snakes debate by suggesting that 
the mosasaurian families Mosasauridae and Clidastidae should be placed in a separate 
sub-order - Pythonomorpha - at the same rank as Lacertilia and Ophidia. This trig­
gered a reaction in the scientific community of that time, which led to a series of 
exchanges on the merits of the new classification and validity of the morphological 
evidence supporting it (see Supplementary Appendix 9.S1 for a list of references; and 
[23, 24] for a review of that literature). However, the debate quickly shifted to focus on 
the findings of new aigialosaurids and dolichosaurids [25-29] - elongated marine 
mosasaurians with a suite of characteristics approaching the snake body-plan - and 
of the first articulated marine Cenomanian snakes [17, 19]. This collection of mid­
Cretaceous aquatic forms from the Adriatic carbonate platform deposits seemed better 
suited than Cope’s pythonomorphs to represent a series of intermediate forms linking 
lizards to extant snakes.
In a series of influential contributions, Nopcsa ([17, 18] and additional references in 
Supplementary Appendix 9.S1) further developed the hypothesis of a marine origin of 
snakes, proposing that snakes derived from a marine aigialosaurid ancestor. Nopcsa [17] 
revised Boulenger’s classification of extant snakes, dividing them in Alethinophidia and 
Angiostomata, and creating the Cholophidia to accommodate the extinct forms 
Simoliophis, Palaeophis, Archaeophis, and his newly described Pachyophis woodwardi. 
According to Nopcsa [17], both Angiostomata and Alethinophidia descended from the 
Cholophidia. Similarly, dolichosaurids and mosasaurids would also derive independently 
from an aigialosaurid ancestor [17, 30], an opinion shared by Boulenger [31] and Dollo [32] 
(see also Supplementary Appendix 9.S1 for additional references).
Camp [23] did not accept a close affinity between snakes and any group of mosasaurian 
lizards, and classified Serpentes as a separate suborder at the same rank as Sauria, the 
latter including Mosasauroidea, Dolichosauridae, and Aigialosauridae. Apart from one 
notable exception [33], Camp’s influential work was followed for most of the twentieth 
century, until Lee [34] revived the hypothesis of a marine origin of snakes by advancing 
lines of evidence similar to Cope, with Pachyrhachis representing the best-known mor­
phological intermediate between mosasaurians and snakes [see 35 for a review]. Soon, 
dolichosaurids, aigialosaurids, and pachyophiids were viewed as successive stem taxa to 
crown Serpentes (e.g., [36]). However, in the last few years, these views were superseded 
in favor of a Jurassic origin of snakes [37-39], with ‘parviraptorids’ representing at least 
four stem-snake lineages. In that new scenario, the marine Cenomanian snakes are 
alethinophidians nested within the crown clade Serpentes [37], reconciling with previews 
views [7, 8]. However, ‘parviraptorids’ have had a complex taxonomic history, and have 
been attributed also to either Gekkonomorpha [40] and Anguimorpha [41]. New 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

182 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
associated material currently under study (see Chapter 2) may offer additional infor­
mation to resolve their affinities.
Despite the last twenty years of studies of marine Cenomanian snakes, and notwith­
standing the recent shift away from the ‘pythonomorph hypotheses’ (see Chapters 7 and 8), 
several controversial aspects of their anatomy persist. Differences in observations and 
anatomical interpretations for the group have led to conflicting conclusions in broader 
combined analyses of snake relationships (e.g., [42, 43]). A recent review [39] did not 
attempt to clarify the inconsistencies created by the new evidence [37] and previous work 
on Cenomanian snakes (e.g., [44]), instead proposing another phylogenetic scenario that 
combines a pythonomorph clade and pachyophiids nested within derived alethinophidian 
snakes [45].
In this chapter, we revisit the available morphological evidence of pachyophiids based on 
new preparations, high resolution computed tomography (HRCT) scans, and Synchrotron 
images, to help formulate the basis for a consensus and clarify the peculiar morphology of 
this group. We also address the phylogenetic affinities and the challenges posed by 
taphonomy to the study and interpretation of these specimens.
9.2 Monophyly and Taxonomic Content of Pachyophiidae
Simoliophis, Eupodophis, Pachyrhachis, Haasiophis, Pachyophis, and Mesophis may form a 
clade of exclusively Tethyan marine snakes diagnosed by their highly pachyostotic mid- 
and posterior trunk vertebrae and ribs, with pachyostosis being characteristically concen­
trated in the vertebral centrum [46] (Supplementary Figure 9.S1). However, pachyostosis 
also occurs in the Tethyan marine dolichosaurids and aigialosaurids [15, 47] and has been 
reported in more than 35 secondarily marine amniote groups [48]. Pachyostosis might be a 
synapomorphy shared by early mid-Cretaceous Tethyan mosasaurians and snakes, second­
arily lost within these groups, or might be a convergence favored by peculiar paleoenvir- 
onmental conditions of this period [47, 49]. Recently, the latter hypothesis received support 
through independent morphological and combined phylogenetic analyses [40, 42, 43, 50, 
51], suggesting that pachyostosis is a pachyophiid instead of a pythonomorph synapomor- 
phy. The recently described marine snake Lunaophis aquaticus [52] may represent a further 
example of convergence in which pachyostosis is concentrated in the zygapophyseal 
regions and does not affect the vertebral centra.
Apart from sharing mid- and posterior trunk vertebrae with pachyostotic centra, no other 
derived feature is known to be uniformly preserved in all six genera of pachyophiids. There 
are presently seven formally described species of pachyophiids (Supplementary Table 9.S1) 
and one possible undescribed species [53]. We summarized in Supplementary Tables 9.S1 
and 9.S2 the bones preserved on each specimen of Pachyophiidae as well as their vertebral 
and tooth counts. Fossil completeness was assessed directly on each specimen, or through 
Synchrotron and HRCT images, and high-resolution photographs.
Simoliophis rochebrunei Sauvage, 1880 was originally described based on one disarticu­
lated trunk vertebra from the Cenomanian of the Charentes region, France [16].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 183
Disarticulated vertebrae of Simoliophis were later reported from Cenomanian marine 
localities throughout the northern and southern Tethyan margins [53]. This material 
includes a second valid species of Simoliophis, S. libycus [54], and at least one undescribed 
species from Bahariya, Egypt [10].
Eupodophis descouensi Rage and Escuillie, 2000 (Figs. 9.1 and 9.2) is known from the 
holotype (MIM F49; ex-Rh-E.F. 9001-9003) and three additional specimens (MSNM-V3660, 
V3661, V4014) referred to this species [46] (Supplementary Figures 9.S2-S9). The four 
nearly completely articulated specimens derive from two different localities in Lebanon 
[46]. The holotype preserves an almost complete skull and articulated body (Fig. 9.1; 
Supplementary Figures 9.S2-S4). However, preservation of the skull and vertebrae is poor, 
split across part and counterpart. The skull is divided in the horizontal plane, leaving only 
internal views of the braincase exposed on both slabs. Dorsal and ventral views of the skull 
are visible only through Synchrotron imaging reconstructions (Fig. 9.2). Preservation is 
similar in MSNM-V3661, but only one slab is known and available for study (Supplementary 
Figures 9.S5-S6). MSNM-V4014 is mostly complete, except for the ventrally exposed skull 
(Supplementary Figures 9.S7-S8). MSNM-V3660 preserves an articulated body, lacking 
skull and tail (the latter possibly hidden below mid-trunk vertebrae on the slab; 
Supplementary Figure 9.S9). Both the holotype and MSNM-V3660 are of similar size, and 
significantly larger than the other two specimens.
Rieppel and Head [46] suggested that the two smaller individuals might belong to a 
distinct species but conservatively assigned them to Eupodophis descouensi. Although 
distinct in size, they share with the holotype the presence of elongated chevron bones, 
posteromedially curved supratemporals (MSNM-V3661), anteromedially curved and dis­
tally tapering vomerine processes of the palatine (MSNM-V4014), anteroposteriorly narrow 
frontals, long and distally tapering, posterodorsally oriented coronoids, and straight distally
Box 9.1 Abbreviations used in figures and text
al.pa, alar process of the parietal (“lateral wing”); amf, anterior mylohyoid foramen; ang, angular; 
asc, anterior semicircular canal; atl, atlas; ax, axis; bocc, basioccipital; bsph, basisphenoid; bspt, 
basipterygoid process of the basisphenoid; col, stapes; com, compound bone; co.pr, notch for the 
articular contact of the prefrontal; cor, coronoid; de, dentary; ect, ectopterygoid; ect.pt, ectopter­
ygoid process of the pterygoid; f.col, footplate of the columella; fo, fossa mandibularis; f.o, 
foramen ovalis; fr, frontal; ju, jugal; lat.com, lateral process of the compound bone; l.du, lacrimal 
duct; l.lff, left ventral subolfactory process (‘lateral frontal flange’); l.mfp, left medial frontal pillar; 
m.f, mental foramen; mx, maxilla; mx.pl, maxillary process of the palatine; na, nasal; n.prmx, 
nasal process of the premaxilla; of, optic foramen; oto, otoccipital; p.pr, paroccipital process of 
the otoccipital; pa, parietal; pf, postfrontal; pl, palatine; pl.mx, palatine process of the maxilla; 
post.mx, posterior end of the maxilla; prf, prefrontal; prmx, premaxilla; pro, prootic; prsph, 
parasphenoid; psc, posterior semicircular canal; prsph.r, parasphenoid rostrum; pt, pterygoid; 
qu, quadrate; set, sella turcica; s.cr, sagittal crest; so, supraoccipital; spl, splenial; st, supratem­
poral; sty, quadrate stylohyal process; tra, trabecula; v.pl, vomerine process of the palatine; V2, 
V3, trigeminal foramen; VII, foramen for the hyomandibular ramus of the facial nerve; vfn, medial 
vertical lamina (‘medial frontal flange’) of the nasal.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

184 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
Figure 9.1 Photographs with superimposed interpretive line drawings of the skull of Eupodophis 
descouensi (holotype MIM F49); (A) ventral view of the dorsal surface; (B) dorsal view of the ventral 
surface. See Box 9.1 for explanation of abbreviations. See Supplementary Figures 9.S3 and S4 for 
colour versions of photographs without line drawings.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 185
Figure 9.2 Synchrotron reconstructions of the skull of Eupodophis descouensi (holotype MIM F49);
(A) dorsal surface; (B) ventral surface. See Box 9.1 for explanation of abbreviations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

186 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
tapering, flat jugals (MSNM-V3661). The combination of these characters is consistent 
with conspecificity.
Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas, 1979 (Fig. 9.3) is known from two mostly complete, 
articulated specimens from the limestone quarries of Ein Yabrud, Palestinian Territories. 
The holotype (HUJ-PAL EY692) comprises an almost complete skull and body [55, 56] 
(Supplementary Figures 9.S10-S11). Posterior trunk vertebrae, hindlimbs and tail are not 
preserved. The skull was removed from the slab and prepared on both sides, with the dorsal 
side embedded in resin. The referred specimen (HUJ-PAL EY691) retains an almost com­
plete body with articulated hindlimbs and partially preserved skull and tail [57] 
(Supplementary Figures 9.S12-S13). The skull, also prepared on both sides, lies partially 
disarticulated below the vertebrae and ribs of mid-trunk vertebrae, on the right side of the 
ribcage. A string of articulated anteriormost vertebrae with developed hypapophyses is 
associated with the skull and also preserved below the ribcage. A second string of anterior 
trunk vertebrae is preserved slightly disconnected from the previous one.
Haasiophis terrasanctus Tchernov, Rieppel, Zaher, Polcyn & Jacobs, 2000 (Fig. 9.4) is 
known only from one complete and articulated specimen (HUJ-PAL EY695) (Supplementary 
Figures 9.S14-16). This was collected at the same quarries as the Pachyrhachis specimens 
and is prepared and mainly exposed in ventral view [35]. The dorsal side is embedded in 
resin. This is the best-preserved pachyophiid specimen known so far (Supplementary 
Table 9.S1).
Pachyophis woodwardi Nopcsa, 1923 (Fig. 9.5) is known from two specimens, the 
holotype (NHMW 1912-I8) and a referred specimen (NHMW 1912-I9) (Supplementary 
Figures 9.S17-S18). Both were collected in a quarry near Bileca, Bosnia-Herzegovina [58]. 
The holotype retains a well-preserved, articulated vertebral column exposed mostly in 
dorsal view, but no pelvic or hindlimb elements. Disarticulated cranial remains, including 
a left dentary and a possible posterior lower jaw, are also present. More cranial remains are 
preserved in the anteriormost region, but they are too badly crushed to be identified. The 
referred specimen, comprising three series of articulated but poorly preserved vertebrae, 
was recently redescribed [59]. Another specimen of marine snake from a quarry near Bileca, 
in the lower Turonian carbonates of Dubovac, was also recently described [60]. This 
specimen, composed of highly pachyostotic articulated vertebrae and ribs, is very similar 
to Pachyophis woodwardi in its neural arch and spine morphology, and highly pachyostotic 
ribs, and represents a third specimen of P. woodwardi or a congeneric species [60]. The 
Dubovac specimen reveals a centrum with a large, flat and square ventral surface, not 
visible in the first two specimens (Supplementary Figure 9.S1d), a characteristic unique to 
pachyophiids among snakes.
Mesophis nopcsai Bolkay, 1925 is known from a single specimen (NHM-BiH 2039) from 
a quarry in Selista, Bosnia-Herzegovina [19], and comprised originally part and counterpart 
slabs. The counterpart was recently rediscovered at the Natural History Museum of Bosnia- 
Herzegovina, while the main part is thought to be in a private collection [39]. It preserves 
a string of 79 articulated vertebrae exposed in ventral view. A cast of the holotype’s 
counterpart is deposited at the Naturhistorisches Museum Wien, Austria (Supplementary 
Figure 9.S18).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 187
Figure 9.3 Photographs of the skulls of Pachyrhachis problematicus; referred specimen (HUJ-PAL 
EY691) in (A) dorsal, and (B) ventral views; holotype (HUJ-PAL EY692) in (C) dorsal (with 
superimposed interpretive line drawing), and (D) ventral views. Original photograph from Haas [55: 
fig.6] used in (C). See Box 9.1 for explanation of abbreviations. (A black and white version of this 
figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

188 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
Figure 9.4 Photographs with superimposed interpretive line drawings of the skull of Haasiophis 
terrasanctus (holotype HUJ-PAL EY695); (A) dorsal view; (B) ventral view. See Box 9.1 for explanation 
of abbreviations. See Supplementary Figures 9.S15 and S16 for colour versions of photographs 
without line drawings.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 189
Figure 9.5 Skull fragments of Pachyophis woodwardi (holotype NHMW 1912-I8); (A-C) unidentified 
element; (D) dentary in dorsomedial view; (E) dentary in medial view. Letters A to C follow Lee et al. 
[58], who identified these structures as the angular (A), splenial (B), and compound bones (C). See 
Box 9.1 for explanation of abbreviations. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some 
formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
9.3 A Review of the Morphological Evidence
Many contributions have dealt with pachyophiid anatomy. The most relevant, providing a 
strong platform from which we expand our observations, are as follow: Pachyrhachis 
problematicus [9, 55-57, 61-66]; Haasiophis terrasanctus [9, 35, 64, 66]; Eupodophis 
descouensi [6, 46, 66]; Pachyophis woodwardi [17, 58]; Mesophis nopcsai [19]; Simoliophis 
rochebrunei [18, 53]. These studies focused on a small number of key features that were 
discussed in detail, often resulting in contradictory interpretations [39]. On most of these 
issues (especially in Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis) there is now consensus. However, 
several aspects of pachyophiid anatomy remain controversial, and others have not been 
described adequately. We review these points below, following the anatomical divisions of 
Cundall and Irish [67].
Synchrotron and HRCT methods are presented in Supplementary Appendix 9.S2. 
Institutional collection acronyms and specimens examined are listed in Supplementary 
Appendix 9.S3. Phylogenetic methods and results are reported in Supplementary Appendix 9.S4.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

190 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
9.3.1 Snout
Haas [55] and Lee and Caldwell [61] reported a premaxilla in Pachyrhachis (HUJ-PAL 
EY692) [contra 46]. The element is visible only in dorsal view, now under a thick layer of 
resin. A photograph of the dorsal surface of the skull before embedding [55] shows a small 
premaxilla with a concave anterior border and tapering nasal process (Fig. 9.3C). 
A premaxilla has been reported in Eupodophis (MSNM-V4014) [46], but we interpret that 
as the anterior tip of the right maxilla, still bearing the anteriormost maxillary tooth, and 
extending posteriorly below the right palatine (Supplementary Figure 9.S19). The premax­
illa of Haasiophis has been described in detail [35], though the presence of ventral foramina 
and its toothless condition has been questioned [66]. A pair of long, large laminar vomerine 
processes have been reported [66], but available HRCT reconstructions do not support this 
interpretation (Fig. 9.4; Supplementary Figure 9.S20). The premaxilla in Haasiophis is 
similar to that of Pachyrhachis in being small, narrow and toothless, tightly (but not 
suturally) situated between the maxillae and anchored primarily to the nasals by a moder­
ately long, distally tapering nasal process that projects between the descending laminae of 
the nasals (Fig. 9.4; Supplementary Figure 9.S20). Vomerine processes cannot be corrobor­
ated in any specimen.
Nasals are preserved in Pachyrhachis, Haasiophis, and Eupodophis. A left nasal is 
exposed in ventral view in the holotype of Eupodophis and the holotype of Pachyrhachis 
retains a similarly complete right nasal exposed in dorsal view (Figs. 9.1A and 9.3C). 
Haasiophis has both nasals preserved, exposed in both views (Fig. 9.4). The nasals in all 
three genera are long with a horizontal lamina and a moderately expanded medial vertical 
lamina. The latter is a typical alethinophidian feature. The holotype of Eupodophis offers 
the best view, the horizontal lamina tapers posteriorly towards and narrowly contacts the 
frontal (Fig. 9.1A). The morphology of the left nasal of Eupodophis holotype helps to identify 
a left fragmented nasal exposed in ventral view in MSNM-V4014, medial to the left dentary 
(Supplementary Figure 9.S19). The ventrally concave shape of the nasal is visible in the 
preserved surface of that bone, previously identified as a vomer [46]. Similarly, we identify 
in Pachyrhachis a long and narrow element that contacts the frontal posteriorly as a nasal 
(Fig. 9.3C). We therefore cannot corroborate a previous assertion [61] that the nasals in 
Pachyrhachis are short. The overall morphology of the nasal of Haasiophis differs from 
Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis by its posteriorly broader horizontal lamina and weak medial 
vertical lamina (probably due to dorso-ventral compression). Though the nasals are clearly 
separated posteriorly, the suture is not visible more anteriorly. It is difficult to determine the 
exact form of the nasals in dorsal view (Fig. 9.4A). In ventral view, the descending laminae 
clasp the nasal process of the premaxilla, suggesting that the nasals were separated 
throughout their length (Fig. 9.4B).
9.3.2 Braincase
Frontals are preserved in Pachyrhachis, Haasiophis, and Eupodophis, but their identifica­
tion varies among authors. The holotypes of Haasiophis and Eupodophis have the best- 
preserved frontals. They are very distinct in size and shape. The frontals of Haasiophis were 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 191
described [35] as a pair of broad and elongated bones that meet the parietal posteriorly in a 
U-shaped, anteriorly concave suture, and project anteriorly to meet the nasals beyond the 
frontal-prefrontal articulation. That study [35] also identified medial frontal pillars (flanges) 
exposed in ventral view, just in front of the parasphenoid rostrum. We confirm these 
observations, adding that only the left frontal retains its medial pillar, in contact with the 
left ventral subolfactory process, enclosing the olfactory tract as in alethinophidians 
(Fig. 9.4B; Supplementary Figure 9.S21). Although not lining up perfectly, due to postmor­
tem displacement, the vertical laminae of the nasals in Haasiophis contact the correspond­
ing medial frontal pillar ventrally, forming a prokinetic joint. The descending frontal flanges 
are preserved in contact with the lateral margin of the parasphenoid, closing the braincase 
ventrally (Fig. 9.4B; Supplementary Figure 9.S21). A small optic foramen is present at the 
triple junction of frontal-parietal-parasphenoid, formed in part by a weak notch in the 
anteroventral corner of the parietal (Fig. 9.4B). However, the size of the optic foramen 
cannot be ascertained because the frontal’s posteroventral corner is poorly preserved. In 
dorsal view, the frontals meet the nasals in a V-shaped, anteriorly concave contact. HRCT 
reconstructions of the holotype of Haasiophis show that the two bones contact dorsally but 
do not seem to overlap each other as in Dinilysia and Najash (Supplementary Figure 9.S21).
The holotype of Eupodophis has short, narrow frontals, best exposed in ventral view 
(Fig. 9.1A). Dorsally, they are scarcely visible due to the overlap of the large prefrontal’s 
articular knobs (Fig. 9.2A; Supplementary Figure 9.S22). The prefrontal precludes the lateral 
margin of the frontal from the orbit. Synchrotron images reveal poorly preserved medial 
frontal pillars pressed onto the medial wall of thick lateral frontal flanges (Supplementary 
Figure 9.S22). The latter extend ventrally, contacting the parasphenoid rostrum. The 
frontals contact the parietal posteriorly in a thick and narrow, slightly anteriorly W-shaped 
suture. The dorsal sagittal suture between the frontals is exposed in ventral (internal) view 
on the part (Fig. 9.1A).
A long, left frontal was identified in MSNM-V3661 with an anterior margin positioned at 
the level of the prefrontal-maxillary articulation and posterior end reaching the coronoid 
[46]. However, comparison with the holotype of Eupodophis suggests that the fronto­
parietal suture is still preserved in MSNM-V3661, at the level of the anterior tip of the 
jugal (Supplementary Figure 9.S23). Therefore, the left frontal of MSNM-V3661 would be 
short, as in the holotype. The posterior two-thirds of the bone, previously identified as 
frontal [46], is the left portion of the parietal. Similarly, the bone previously identified as the 
right frontal [46] is a fragment of the right portion of the parietal that retains its contact with 
the prefrontal, as in the holotype of Eupodophis. Another striking similarity of MSNM- 
V3661 with the holotype of Eupodophis is the large knob-like proximal head of the pre­
frontal preserved on its right element (Supplementary Figure 9.S23).
Previously [55, 61], the holotype and the referred specimen of Pachyrhachis were inter­
preted as retaining frontals, mainly exposed in the dorsal and ventral sides of their 
respective slabs. Frontals were described as long and narrow, fitting posteriorly into a 
shallow notch of the anterior margin of the parietal and projecting anteriorly beyond the 
ascending processes of the maxillae. Anteriorly, the frontals would contact poorly preserved 
elements identified as nasals [61]. However, comparison with Eupodophis suggests that the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

192 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
frontals in the Pachyrhachis holotype are also covered laterally and partly dorsally by the 
long prefrontals which overlapped the lateral surface of the frontal table and contacted the 
parietal dorsally. The frontals are still visible in dorsal view, medial to the prefrontals 
(Fig. 9.3C); they are anteroposteriorly short and laterally narrow as in Eupodophis. The 
short length of the frontals is revealed by their midline sutural contact on the skull table. 
The dorsolateral margin of the frontals receives a large prefrontal knob, as in Eupodophis. 
According to this new interpretation of Pachyrhachis, the two elements labeled in the 
referred specimen as frontals by Lee and Caldwell [61: figs. 5-6] cannot be identified 
unequivocally. However, they may represent a pair of postfrontals (‘postorbitofrontals’ of 
[61]; see discussion in § 9.3.4).
The parietal is complete in Haasiophis and only partially preserved in Pachyrhachis and 
Eupodophis. It is at least twice as long as wide in all three taxa. Pachyrhachis and 
Eupodophis share a similar morphology of the parietal table, which bears well-developed 
‘postorbital’ processes projecting laterally behind the orbit to form alar processes, or ‘lateral 
wings’, for the likely origin of hypertrophied adductor musculature thought to be associated 
with the massive coronoids (Figs. 9.2A and 9.3C). These alar processes are unique in not 
projecting from the anteroventral corner of the parietal, but rather only from the parietal’s 
dorsolateral anterior margin. The sagittal crest is well developed throughout most of the 
posterior two-thirds of the parietal table, diverging anteriorly and delineating two broad, 
deep concavities on the dorsal surface, likely for further anchorage of the adductor muscles. 
As in Pachyrhachis, the anterior margin of the table of Eupodophis is thick with two shallow 
concavities in which the short, narrow frontals articulate (Figs. 9.2A and 9.3C). The poster­
ior margin of the parietal and its exact sutural relations with the supraoccipital and prootic 
are not preserved in Pachyrhachis or Eupodophis. Haasiophis lacks parietal alar processes 
and the parietal table has straight lateral margins that broaden only slightly posteriorly 
(Fig. 9.4A). The absence of parietal alar processes is consistent with the plesiomorphically 
small coronoids. The sagittal crest is low and does not diverge anteriorly. The slightly 
curved facet projecting on the lateral aspect of the supraorbital process of the parietal is 
likely a ridge for the adductor muscles origin rather than a facet for a posterior orbital bone 
[35]. The element previously identified [35] as a postorbital is better interpreted as a jugal 
(see below). Therefore, Haasiophis lacks a posterior orbital element, an interpretation that 
better fits the morphology of the parietals, with smooth and straight lateral margins 
(Fig. 9.4A). Lateral descending flanges of the parietal are not preserved in Pachyrhachis 
and are fragmentary in the holotype of Eupodophis, but the left lateral descending flange is 
exposed on its internal view along with the left frontal in MSNM-V3661 (Supplementary 
Figure 9.S23). However, its connection with the parabasisphenoid, supraooccipital, and the 
prootic are lost. The lateral descending flanges in Haasiophis are well preserved and reach 
the parabasisphenoid in a sutural contact (Fig. 9.4B; Supplementary Figure 9.S21). A notch 
forming the optic foramen occurs on its anteroventral corner.
Prootics are well preserved in Haasiophis. They are partially visible ventrally, mainly 
covered by the supratemporals dorsally and pterygoids ventrally (Fig. 9.4B). In ventral view, 
the single trigeminal foramen is visible in the right prootic, posterior to the basisphenoid’s 
small basipterygoid process and medial to the quadrate process of the pterygoid. A small 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 193
foramen for the hyomandibular ramus of the facial nerve (VIIh) is exposed posterior to the 
trigeminal foramen (Fig. 9.4B). Unfortunately, the sutural contact between prootics and 
parietal is poorly preserved. Posteriorly, the left prootic is mostly covered laterally by the 
pterygoid but its posterior margin is partially exposed and reveals its contribution to the 
anterior and anterodorsal borders of a small fenestra ovalis in which a possible fragmentary 
stapedial footplate is still preserved in place (Fig. 9.4B; Supplementary Figure 9.S24). The 
footplate and fenestra are small when compared to the stem snakes Dinilysia and Najash 
[68, 69], resembling more the derived condition of the crown snake ear. The stapedial shaft 
is broken, with only the proximal part preserved. The posteroventral margin of the fenestra 
rotunda is badly eroded, along with most of the ventral surface of the posterior braincase. 
Thus, it is not possible to describe the contribution of the prootic, basioccipital, and 
otooccipital to the otic recess. The structure identified previously [35, 46] in Haasiophis 
and Eupodophis as a prootic flange was later [66] correctly identified as the ectopterygoid 
process of the pterygoid (Fig. 9.4B). The bone identified as a right exoccipital (otooccipital) 
in MSNM-V4014 [46] represents the ventral projection of the right prootic preserving the 
foramen for VIIh. We could not confirm the identification [61] of the prootic fragments in 
the holotype of Pachyrhachis.
Stapes are preserved in the holotypes of Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis [55] (Figs. 9.1B and 
9.3B; Supplementary Figure 9.S22). In Eupodophis, the split of the braincase in two slabs exposes 
the fenestra ovalis on the broken surface of the fragmented prootic, with the small stapedial 
footplate visible in an internal view, flanked by the anterior and posterior semicircular canals 
(Fig. 9.1B). The stapedial shafts of the stapes are exposed on both sides of the posterior 
braincase, in a typical position dorsal to the pterygoids and ventral to the supratemporals 
(Supplementary Figures 9.S22, S24). They are long and project posteriorly, but instead of 
slender needle-like structures both shafts are robust elements that are bowed laterally, like 
the supratemporals. In Pachyrhachis the stapes is slender, but its ends are obscured (Fig. 9.3B).
Apparently, only Haasiophis has well-preserved supraoccipital and otooccipitals 
(Fig. 9.4A). Previously [35] the otooccipitals were interpreted as displaced laterally during 
dorsoventral compression, resulting in loss of their medial contact above the tectum of the 
foramen magnum. HRCT reconstructions of Haasiophis confirm these observations. 
However, we cannot confirm whether these elements were in sutural contact. A typically 
alethinophidian, reduced paroccipital process is visible on both sides and receives the 
supratemporals in a sutural contact laterally.
Both parabasisphenoid and basioccipital are preserved in Pachyrhachis, Eupodophis, and 
Haasiophis. Previously [46] the presence in Eupodophis of a basioccipital (MSNM-V3661) and 
a parabasisphenoid (MSNM-V3661 and V4014) was mentioned, but in MSNM-V3661 these 
elements are poorly preserved and might instead be parietal fragments in internal view. The 
possible anterior portion of the parasphenoid in MSNM-V4014 is also poorly preserved; it 
could as well be part of the right lateral descending flange of the parietal, aligned with the right 
palatine and prootic. The parabasisphenoid is badly crushed in Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis 
(Figs. 9.3D and 9.4B), but in Eupodophis (MIM F49) is mostly complete and revealed both 
dorsally (exposed on the slab) and ventrally (digitally segmented from HRCT scan) (Figs. 9.1 
and 9.2). In dorsal view, the basisphenoid is bordered posteriorly by the basioccipital in a 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

194 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
continuous transverse suture, forming a concave surface constituting part of the floor of the 
cranial cavity. A deep, narrowly U-shaped sella turcica is located in the anterior part of the 
basisphenoid, deeply recessed below the posterior dorsum sella (crista sellaris) (Fig. 9.2B; 
Supplementary Figure 9.S22). The parasphenoid rostrum extends from the anterior margin of 
the sella turcica into the orbital region as a narrowed structure, flanked laterally by deep 
trabecular grooves (Fig. 9.2B). Its constriction resembles more the alethinophidian condition, 
but the intertrabecular crest of the parasphenoid (sensu [70]) is expanded and rod-like, 
laterally roofing the trabecular grooves. In ventral view, the basisphenoid and basioccipital 
of MIM F49 form an anteriorly directed triangular shape with a smooth and ventrally convex 
surface (Fig. 9.2B). As in Pachyrhachis, basipterygoid processes are absent in MIM F49. In 
contrast, Haasiophis possesses small alethinophidian-like basipterygoid processes. Both basi- 
sphenoid and basioccipital show clear signs of pachyostosis (Fig. 9.2B; Supplementary 
Figure 9.S22). The sutural contacts with parietal and prootic are not preserved in MIM F49, 
and the main foramina and ducts in the parabasisphenoid are obscured due to intense 
internal breakage (Supplementary Figure 9.S22).
9.3.3 Palatomaxillary Complex
Long, needle-like recurved teeth lacking plicidentine are preserved in the maxillae, 
dentaries, palatines, and pterygoids of Pachyrhachis, Eupodophis, and Haasiophis, and in 
the dentary of Pachyophis (tooth counts in Supplementary Table 9.S2). Tooth implantation 
is of the ‘modified alethinophidian type’ [9] (Figs. 9.1-9.5). Teeth are set in distinct sockets 
formed by prominent interdental ridges extending onto the lingual wall of the subdental 
shelf. The pleura is low, and the lingual dental ridge (or basal plate of [71]) is more 
horizontally directed and leveled with the pleura. In Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis the 
enamel is distinctly [35] to only slightly [61] striated, respectively. In Eupodophis and 
Pachyophis the enamel of the preserved teeth appears smooth (Figs. 9.1B and 9.5D,E). 
Lingual and labial ridges are clearly visible in the teeth of Haasiophis, Eupodophis (MSNM- 
V4014), and Pachyrhachis, but are not apparent in Pachyophis (Fig. 9.5). Previously men­
tioned furrowed teeth [72] in Pachyrhachis could not be confirmed.
Although visible in both specimens of Pachyrhachis, the maxillae are poorly exposed and 
difficult to delineate in detail (Fig. 9.3). The same is true for the two Milan specimens of 
Eupodophis (MSNM-V3661 and V4014) (Supplementary Figures 9.S5-9.S8). Haasiophis has 
better-preserved maxillae in both views, and the holotype of Eupodophis reveals an almost 
complete right maxilla that helps clarify important features (Figs. 9.1, 9.2, and 9.4). The 
maxilla of Haasiophis and Eupodophis projects posteriorly beyond the orbit. The palatine 
process of the maxilla of Eupodophis is broad with an oblique anterior sloping margin and a 
straight posterior margin. It underlies a similarly broad maxillary process of the palatine at 
the level of the anterior margin of the frontals. The maxilla is mainly straight except for a 
weak medial curvature anteriorly, with a smooth bluntly rounded tip indicating no sutural 
contact with the premaxilla. Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis share a robust maxilla and high 
ascending process firmly clasped by two prefrontal processes. Posterior to the ascending 
process, the maxilla decreases abruptly in height and forms a dorsoventrally flattened 
lamina that receives the flattened jugal on its dorsal surface, and possibly the ectopterygoid 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 195
(Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). A flattened posterior end is also visible in both maxillae of the referred 
specimen of Pachyrhachis (Fig. 9.3A). As in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis, the maxilla in 
Haasiophis articulates with the prefrontal on its medial surface at the level of its ascending 
process (Fig. 9.4). However, in contrast to the former two, it is not tightly clasped laterally by 
the prefrontal. Although not visible, the presence of an ascending process is indicated by 
the medial concave surface of the left maxilla in ventral view, which receives the anterior 
base of the medially clasping prefrontal process (Fig. 9.4B). A well-preserved palatine 
process of the maxilla is visible ventrally on both maxillae, and loosely articulating with 
the maxillary process of the palatine (Fig. 9.4B).
A complete ectopterygoid with contacts preserved is unknown in any specimen of 
Eupodophis or Pachyrhachis. Two elongated, slender J-shaped elements were previously 
[61] tentatively identified as ectopterygoids in the referred specimen of Pachyrhachis, and a 
large flattened element exposed in dorsal view on the left side of the skull of the holotype 
was also labeled. These two elements are very distinct from each other and cannot be 
identified with certainty as ectopterygoids. A fragment of a putative ectopterygoid is 
preserved along the medial surface of the right maxilla in the holotype of Eupodophis 
(Fig. 9.1A). However, this element is also broken on both extremities and seems to be 
intimately connected to an anterior fragment of pterygoid instead of its more posteriorly 
located ectopterygoid process. In any case, the putative ectopterygoids in both 
Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis are very distinct from the well-preserved ectopterygoids of 
Haasiophis (Fig. 9.4), which have long flat processes that articulate on the dorsal surface of 
the posterior end of the maxillae, as in typical alethinophidians. Although not visible on the 
right ectopterygoid, the posterior end of the left ectopterygoid of Haasiophis clasps the well- 
developed laterally projected ectopterygoid process of the pterygoid (Fig. 9.4B; 
Supplementary Figure 9.S24). A similarly large ectopterygoid process of the pterygoid is 
also preserved in Eupodophis, suggesting a similar clasping condition. However, ectopter­
ygoids are not sufficiently preserved in Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis to confirm this. 
Although poorly preserved, the pterygoids of Pachyrhachis appear to have large laterally 
projecting ectopterygoid processes, visible in ventral view (Fig. 9.3D).
The palatines and pterygoids articulate via a narrow overlapping contact, forming a 
highly mobile unit. The palatines of Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis share a narrow ante- 
romedially curved choanal process that tapers anteriorly to a pointed tip without articulat­
ing with the vomers (Figs. 9.1A and 9.3D). Haasiophis has a blunt, poorly developed, 
medially projected choanal process similar to that in some booids (sensu [1]) (Fig. 9.4B). 
In Eupodophis, Pachyrhachis, and Haasiophis, the anterior dentigerous process of the 
palatine projects freely between the maxilla and the vomeronasal complex. Posteriorly, 
the pterygoid bears a slender rod-like quadrate process that reaches the quadrate (Figs. 
9.1-9.4). A basipterygoid articulation on the pterygoid is lacking in all three genera.
9.3.4 The Circumorbital Bones
Prefrontals are well preserved in all three genera and tightly clasp the ascending process of 
the maxillae in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis, with a medial process fitting in a deep recess 
in the medial surface of the maxilla and a lateral process covering the dorsolateral surface of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

196 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
the ascending process (Figs. 9.2 and 9.3). In Haasiophis, the medial process also fits in a 
deep recess while the lateral process projects anteriorly on the dorsal surface of the maxilla 
covering its ascending process (Fig. 9.4). The prefrontal articulates on the lateral surface of 
the frontal via a salient knob-like process. In Haasiophis, the prefrontal knob articulates 
with the frontal via a notch at the middle of the lateral margin of a long frontal (Fig. 9.4A), 
whereas in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis the prefrontal knob covers most of the lateral 
surface of a very short frontal and articulates with the anterior and anterolateral margins of 
the parietal (Figs. 9.2A and 9.3C; Supplementary Figure 9.S22). Unlike the slender knob-like 
process of Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis, the prefrontal knob of Eupodophis is massive and 
expanded mediolaterally. The preserved portion of prefrontal of MSNM-V3661 in ventral 
view closely resembles the expanded prefrontal knob of the holotype of the species 
(Supplementary Figure 9.S23). Haasiophis preserves an enclosed lacrimal duct on the 
posterior surface of the prefrontal (Fig. 9.4A), a condition that seems to be also present in 
Eupodophis (Fig. 9.1A). A preserved posteromedial (inner) surface of the prefrontal is not 
visible in any specimen.
The distinctly curved, boomerang-shaped elements preserved at the level of the orbits in 
Haasiophis (Fig. 9.4A) were identified previously [35] as postorbitals. However, these 
elements are better interpreted as jugals, associated with the posterodorsal surface of the 
maxilla, as in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis. The absence of postfrontals or postorbitals in 
Haasiophis fits more accurately the morphology of the parietals, with smooth and straight 
lateral margins. The curved jugals of Haasiophis resemble the varanid condition, attached 
to the posterior end of the maxilla and directed posterodorsally without closing the poster­
ior margin of the orbit. They are very distinct from the peculiar jugals in Eupodophis and 
Pachyrhachis, which are dorsoventrally flat, straight, club-like laminae with an expanded 
proximal extremity that tapers distally to a narrow tip (Figs. 9.1-9.3).
The identification of a postfrontal or postorbitofrontal bone in Pachyrhachis and 
Eupodophis is controversial. The triradiate element at the level of the posterior margin of 
the orbit and contacting the jugal in Pachyrhachis has been identified as a postorbitofrontal 
[61] or a postfrontal ([66]; sensu [68]), and a postorbital has been identified in Haasiophis 
and Eupodophis [35, 46]. As discussed in detail elsewhere [51] (see Supplementary 
Appendix 9.S4, characters 73, 74, 77, and 170), the posterodorsal orbital element of snakes 
clasping the fronto-parietal suture corresponds to a postfrontal in both extinct and extant 
forms. A postorbital has not been confirmed in any known snake [70]. The presence of a 
composite postorbitofrontal bone [61] cannot be ruled out in the extinct taxa, but embryo­
logical evidence does not support that hypothesis for extant taxa.
We consider that Haasiophis lacks a postfrontal (see above) and we could not identify in 
the holotype of Eupodophis an element similar to the long and slender postfrontal present 
in MSNM-V3661 ('postorbital ‘of [46]). Instead, a large antero-posteriorly expanded laminar 
element is preserved ventral to the tip of the alar process of the parietal in the holotype 
(Fig. 9.2). Its dorsal end is excavated in a facet that articulates with the ventral surface of the 
tip of the alar process. This element appears to be a postfrontal whose peculiar shape differs 
significantly from the postfrontal of MSNM-V3661, the first evidence that these taxa may not 
be conspecific. However, the extremities are poorly preserved, and its morphology is 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 197
difficult to delineate. The holotype of Pachyrhachis, on the other hand, has well-preserved 
postfrontals (‘postorbitofrontals’ of [61]) with the right element preserving a blunt rod-like 
distal extremity that reached the jugal, probably forming a closed posterior orbit [61], and a 
notched expanded proximal extremity with two divergent processes that probably clasped 
the alar process of the parietal and reached the frontoparietal suture below the prefrontal 
knob. However, the postfrontals are displaced posteriorly and the exact relation between the 
posterior orbital bones are not preserved. The elements identified previously as frontals [61] 
in the referred specimen of Pachyrhachis are here identified as postfrontals (sensu [51]) with 
their distal rod-like and peculiar proximal notched expanded extremities resembling the 
right postfrontal exposed in the holotype’s dorsal surface. Nevertheless, this identification is 
provisional because the elements are displaced and poorly preserved (Supplementary 
Figure 9.S25).
9.3.5 Suspensorium and Mandible
The supratemporal was described in Pachyrhachis, Eupodophis, and Haasiophis as typic­
ally macrostomatan, being a slender and elongate element syndesmostically attached to the 
skull table and projecting posteriorly beyond the edge of the skull in a free-ending posterior 
process [6-8, 61]. However, important differences occur among these genera. A free-ending 
process of the supratemporal is present in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis but not in 
Haasiophis where the supratemporal is mainly a straight, slender lamina resting on top of 
the skull table without projecting beyond the otooccipital posteriorly (Fig. 9.4; 
Supplementary Figure 9.S25). The holotype of Eupodophis possesses a surprisingly robust 
supratemporal, transversely thick, rod-like, and bowed laterally (Figs. 9.1 and 9.2; 
Supplementary Figure 9.S22). It tapers to a point anteriorly but retains its thickness 
posteriorly, terminating bluntly. The supratemporal rests on concave facets on the dorsal 
surface of the parietal (Supplementary Figure 9.S22). Although broken in three pieces, the 
right supratemporal of Pachyrhachis holotype appears similar, being thick and bowed 
laterally (Supplementary Figure 9.S26). A thick rod-like posterior extremity is exposed 
ventrally (Fig. 9.4D).
Eupodophis and Pachyrhachis share broad subrectangular quadrates that lack supras- 
tapedial processes. The subrectangular shape is more accentuated in Pachyrhachis, 
where it is feebly bowed posteriorly (Fig. 9.3D; Supplementary Figure 9.S26) (see also 
[65]). The holotype of Eupodophis preserves an almost complete left quadrate that is 
very similar to the right quadrate in specimen MSNM-V4014 (Fig. 9.1A; Supplementary 
Figure 9.S8). The quadrate articulates with the supratemporal via a broad, oblique 
cephalic condyle (Fig. 9.1A). The broad rectangular shaft narrows abruptly at its distal 
end. The posterior (medial) margin of the quadrate shaft has a stylohyal at mid-height to 
receive the long stapedial shaft. The quadrate in Pachyrhachis bears a slightly more 
ventral stylohyal [65: fig. 6].
The quadrate of Haasiophis is a slender, mainly straight element with a slightly expanded 
cephalic condyle lacking a suprastapedial process (Fig. 9.4). A stylohyal is not preserved. 
The cephalic condyle articulates on the posterolateral surface of the supratemporal.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

198 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
Dentaries are preserved in Haasiophis, Eupodophis, Pachyrhachis, and Pachyophis, being 
complete only in Haasiophis and in Eupodophis (specimen MSNM-V4014). Tooth counts 
are given in Supplementary Table 9.S2. The dentary of Pachyophis is exposed only in medial 
view. Our observations agree mostly with a previous description [58], except that a mobile 
symphysis cannot be inferred because the anterior tip is not preserved (Fig. 9.5). A smooth, 
rounded tip is preserved in Haasiophis, Eupodophis, and Pachyrhachis, confirming loose 
contact between the hemimandibles. Multiple mental foramina occur in Pachyrhachis [61], 
but only a single foramen is present in Haasiophis (Fig. 9.4A; Supplementary Figure 9.S20). 
The number of foramina in Eupodophis was not reported previously, but the holotype has 
at least four in its right dentary. Mental foramina are not exposed in Pachyophis. Dentary 
tooth implantation in all four taxa is of the ‘modified alethinophidian type’ [9].
The splenial forms a large, anteriorly tapered triangular lamina in Eupodophis, 
Pachyrhachis, and Haasiophis, (Figs. 9.2B, 9.3B and 9.4B). The anterior mylohyoid foramen 
is fully enclosed (Fig. 9.4B; Supplementary Figure 9.S20). Posteriorly, the splenial forms a 
vertically expanded margin articulating with the angular on its ventral extremity in 
Haasiophis and Eupodophis. However, in Haasiophis, Pachyrhachis, and Eupodophis, the 
more dorsal and medial margins of the articulation between splenial and angular seem to 
be interlocked in a tongue in groove contact, as seen in a ventral view of the holotype of 
Pachyrhachis (Fig. 9.3D) and in HRCT and Synchrotron images of the holotypes of 
Haasiophis and Eupodophis, respectively (Supplementary Figure 9.S20). Nonetheless, a 
precise configuration of the splenial-angular articulation cannot be described due to poor 
preservation of this region in all three taxa.
It was suggested previously [58] that the holotype of Pachyophis retains a fragmentary 
portion of the lower jaw that preserves in place a vertically oriented intramandibular joint 
formed by contact between splenial and angular. We were unable to confirm this (Fig. 9.5). 
The enigmatic element identified previously as the right splenial (element B of [58]) is a thin 
lamina that does not expand distally to form a typical articular surface for the angular, while 
the putative angular (element A) seems to represent a broken part of the larger putative 
compound bone (element C). Although identification of these elements as corresponding 
to parts of the lower jaw cannot be discarded, we reject the evidence for a splenial and 
angular forming an intramandibular joint. Further preparation is needed in order to 
provide more compelling basis for the identification of these elements.
The coronoid is triradiate in Haasiophis, Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis, a plesiomorphic 
condition within snakes. The hypertrophied coronoid process in Pachyrhachis and 
Eupodophis is markedly distinct from Haasiophis. Although smaller, the Haasiophis cor­
onoid is robust and retains a large concave surface on the posterodorsal face of the 
coronoid process for a presumably well-developed bodenaponeurosis. The Eupodophis 
holotype and specimen MSNM-V3661 share a distally tapering posterodorsally directed 
coronoid (Fig. 9.2A; Supplementary Figure 9.S6) that is distinct from the distally broad 
coronoid present in Pachyrhachis holotype and referred specimen (Fig. 9.3).
The articular is preserved in Haasiophis, Eupodophis, and Pachyrhachis and, differently 
from mosasaurians [73], forms the entire surface of articulation for the quadrate, having a 
simple saddle-shaped form. A compound bone is present in these three genera.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 199
9.4 Pachyophiids as Derived Alethinophidian Snakes
In the last 20 years, pachyophiids have been subject to conflicting interpretations of their 
skeletal anatomy. This is due to a number of factors, including different styles of 
preservation at various localities and, to a lesser degree, collecting procedures and prepar­
ation which in some cases unavoidably damages the specimen, removing or altering the 
preserved morphology. None of the western and northern Tethyan specimens preserves a 
skull or pelvic and hindlimb elements (at least visible on the slab). The southern Tethyan 
specimens have mostly complete, but badly crushed skulls. Microscopic examination of 
Haasiophis and Pachyrhachis demonstrates the individual bones are highly fractured and 
subject to plastic deformation, obfuscating many important details. Specimens of 
Eupodophis, though better preserved, were damaged during collection by slab splitting, 
causing loss of many structures. The two specimens with skulls acquired by the Museum of 
Milan are each known only by one slab, the counterparts missing.
The three best-preserved specimens also include well-developed pelves and hind limbs, 
not known to occur in any extant snake. These plesiomorphic attributes conflicted with 
seemingly derived skull morphology, leading to the conclusion that either macrostomy 
evolved early in the total-group Serpentes, or that hind limbs and pelves re-evolved within 
crown Serpentes. Currently, the scenario of multiple independent reductions of hindlimbs 
in snakes, first suggested in 1999 [62], is now accepted as the most plausible scenario [37, 
42, 43, 50, 68, 74-76].
With the advent of large-scale molecular phylogenies, several long-standing concepts 
about extant snake interrelationships were challenged and ultimately revised in view of 
increasing molecular evidence. The term ‘Macrostomata’ represents a flagrant example, 
being traditionally applied to a morphologically supported clade of alethinophidian snakes 
that has never been retrieved in any recent molecular analysis (Chapter 10). Although more 
investigation is needed to rule out definitively the notion of a clade Macrostomata, func­
tional morphology shows that macrostomy likely represents a much more complex condi­
tion that has no relation with the origin of snake feeding [77] (see Chapter 19).
Recently [51], the affinities of pachyophiids were assessed with an expanded morpho­
logical and molecular dataset for 90 extinct and extant species of the well-supported [1] 
crown clade Toxicofera, comprising anguimorphs, iguanians and snakes. The combined 
matrix incorporates a molecular partition of 523,686 aligned nucleotides and a morpho­
logical partition of 785 morphological characters, totaling 524,471 characters (see 
Supplementary Appendix 9.S4 and [51]). Parsimony analysis resulted in the strict consensus 
tree shown in Figure 9.6 (complete consensus tree and list of synapomorphies for relevant 
clades are provided in Supplementary Appendix 9.S4).
In this analysis, total-group Serpentes is resolved as the sister group of a well-supported 
clade formed by Iguania and Anguimorpha. Although mainly reflecting recent molecular 
phylogenetic analyses, a close affinity between varanids and iguanians was previously 
noticed by Northcutt [78] who drew attention to at least six shared derived forebrain and 
midbrain characters supporting the group he named Dracomorpha and which included 
varanids, iguanians and teiids. We use here the term Dracomorpha for the crown clade 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

200 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
formed by the most recent common ancestor of Iguana and Varanus and all its descend­
ants. Mosasaurians are retrieved as dracomorphans, nested within Anguimorpha as the 
sister group of varanids (Platynota sensu Camp [23]). These results reinforce previous 
conclusions that the mosasaurian ‘wide-gaped’ condition evolved independently from 
alethinophidian snakes [8, 9, 62, 64].
The Cretaceous Tetrapodophis and Coniophis are recovered as the earliest diverging 
members of the total-group Serpentes, corroborating previous analyses [76, 79]. The 
Cretaceous Najash and Dinilysia are resolved as the sister group of crown-clade 
Serpentes [68, 69]. Pachyophiids and the Australian Cenozoic ‘madtsoiids’ are retrieved 
as alethinophidians, robustly nested within crown Serpentes (Fig. 9.6) [35, 43, 50, 68, 79].
Despite preservational limitations, pachyophiids share a surprisingly large number of 
alethinophidian characters, including: long nasals with ventrally descending laminae con­
tacting the frontals in a movable (prokinetic) joint; medial frontal pillars present; reduced 
paroccipital process of the otooccipital; deep, narrowly U-shaped sella turcica recessed 
below well-defined dorsum sella; basipterygoid process of basisphenoid absent or small 
and non-synovial; palatine process of maxilla and maxillary process of palatine overlap in a 
non-interlocking contact; ectopterygoid articulates broadly with dorsal surface of posterior 
end of maxilla (confirmed only in Haasiophis); palatine and pterygoid articulate via narrow, 
overlapping contact; anterior dentigerous process and short choanal process of palatine not 
tightly attached to vomer; supratemporal syndesmotically attached to skull table and 
substantially (only in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis) projected beyond edge of skull in 
free-ending posterior process; quadrate shaft bearing a stylohyal at mid-height.
However, retention of multiple plesiomorphic features in pachyophiids might support a 
resolution of the polytomy at the base of Alethinophidia with them as stem rather than 
crown alethinophidians. These include: prefrontals articulating with lateral margin of 
frontals; prominent ascending process of the maxillae; ophidiosphenoid absent; broad, 
laterally projecting ectopterygoid process of pterygoid; jugal present; multiple mental 
foramina (only in Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis); coronoid triradiate; vertebrae without 
prezygapophyseal processes; well-developed hindlimb and pelvis. Nonetheless, despite the 
presence of these plesiomorphic features, pachyophiids are not retrieved as stem Serpentes 
(Fig. 9.6).
9.5 Concluding Remarks
Pachyophiids are an early-diverging lineage of the total-clade Alethinophidia, with a 
combination of primitive and derived cranial and postcranial features unknown in any 
living snake. Medial frontal pillars are preserved only in Eupodophis and Haasiophis, but 
their presence reinforces the view that pachyophiids had a movable prokinetic joint. 
Although they seem to have developed a prokinetic snout, the prefrontals of pachyophiids 
plesiomorphically articulate on the lateral surface of the frontals via a salient knob-like 
articulation that likely prevented the degree of movement known to occur in extant 
‘macrostomatan’ alethinophidians (Chapter 19). On the other hand, even limited snout
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 201
Dracomorpha
। Gephyrosaurus bridensis
Lanthanotus borneensis
Haasiophis terra san ctus 
problematicus 
escouensi
Pontosaurus 
Opetiosaurus buccichr 
Aigialosaurus dalmalicus
Heloderma suspectum 
Heloderma horridum 
Xenosaurus pJalyceps 
Xenosaurus grandis 
Celestus enneagrammus 
Elgaria multicannata 
Pseudopus apodus
■ Peitosaurus granulosus 
Helodermoides tuberculatus
Figure 9.6 Temporally calibrated phylogenetic hypothesis of toxicoferan affinities, representing the 
consensus of four most parsimonious trees that resulted from Zaher and Smith’s [51] analysis of the 
combined dataset (see Supplementary Appendix 9.S4). Timescale is in millions of years. Support 
values for internal branches are jackknife/Bremer, where values of 100% (jackknife) or >20 (Bremer) 
are indicated with an asterisk.
Varanus exanthemat/cus
Varanus salvalor
Varanus acanlhurus
Shinisaurus crocodilurus
Anguimorpha
Wonambi naracoortensis 
Tropidophis haetianus 
Trachyboa boulengeri
Cylindrophis ruff us 
Uropeltis melanogaster 
Anomochilus leonardi 
Xenopeltis unicofor 
Loxocemus bicolor
Python molurus 
Aspidites melanocephalus 
Calabaria reinhardtir 
Lichanura trivirgata 
Ungaliophis continenta/is 
Exilrboa placata 
Eryx colubrinus 
Chilabothrus striatus 
Boa constrictor 
Xenophidion sp 
Casarea dussumieri 
Acrochordus granulatus 
Xenodermus javanicus 
Pareas hamptoni 
Daboia russelii 
Causussp 
Azemiops feae 
Agkistrodon coniorfrix 
Lachesis muta 
Bothrops asper 
Lvcopnidion capense 
Atractaspis irregularis 
Aparallactus werneri 
Micrurus fuMus 
Naja sp 
Notechisscutatus 
Laticauda colubrina 
Lampropeltis getula 
Coluber constrictor 
Thamnophis marcianus 
Natrix natrix 
Afronatrix anoscopus 
Xenochrophis piscator 
Amphiesma slolatum 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

202 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
movements, when coupled with a highly kinetic palato-maxillary arch, suggests that 
pachyophiids had acquired synchronous unilateral upper jaw movements, a condition 
likely to be absent in macrophagous stem snakes such as Najash and Dinilysia, which 
retain broad, overlapping vomero-palatine and palato-pterygoid contacts, and in the 
microphagous extant scolecophidians with an immobile naso-frontal contact. The peculiar 
supratemporal and quadrate of Pachyrhachis and Eupodophis indicates a unique suspen- 
sorial morphology that provides an additional backward extension of the mandible, confer­
ring a ‘hyper-macrostomous’ condition functionally convergent with extant 
alethinophidian booids and pythonoids [51]. Haasiophis lacks posteriorly projected supra­
temporals, which seem to have only a limited posterior extension. The peculiar ‘hyper- 
macrostomous’ nature of the pachyophiid suspensorial complex is not comparable to the 
condition in marine mosasaurians (contra [80]; see also Chapter 7).
Despite substantial advances in knowledge of pachyophiid cranial osteology, made 
possible through Synchrotron images, HRCT scans, and additional preparations of available 
specimens, important elements of the skull of pachyophiids remain unknown. The 
premaxilla, vomeronasal capsule and its connection with adjacent bones, ectopterygoid, 
postfrontal, and most of the posterior braincase and otic capsule of Eupodophis and 
Pachyrhachis are still unknown or incompletely described. Relevant information on the 
cranial morphology of Pachyophis, Mesophis, and Simoliophis is also lacking. We expect 
new fossil discoveries and rapidly advancing imaging technologies to provide additional 
information on these important aspects of pachyophiid skull anatomy.
Acknowledgements
See Supplementary Appendix 9.S6. In addition, we thank David Gower, Catherine Klein and 
Krister Smith for constructive reviews of the submitted manuscript.
References
1. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
2. J. Dercourt, L. P. Zonenshain, L.- E. Ricou, 
et al., Geological evolution of the Tethys 
belt from the Atlantic to the Pamirs since 
the Lias. Tectonophys, 123 (1986), 
241-315.
3. F. Berra and L. Angiolini, The evolution of 
the Tethys region throughout the 
Phanerozoic: A brief tectonic reconstruction.
American Association of Petroleum 
Geologists, Memoirs, 106 (2014), 1-27.
4. M. J. Polcyn, E. Tchernov, and L. L. Jacobs, 
The Cretaceous biogeography of the eastern 
Mediterranean with a description of a new 
basal mosasauroid from ‘Ein Yabrud, Israel. 
In Y. Tomida, T. H. Rich, and P. Vickers- 
Rich, eds., Proceedings of the Second 
Gondwanan Dinosaur Symposium, National 
Science Museum Tokyo, Monographs (1999), 
pp. 259-290.
5. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of the 
Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 705-709.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 203
6. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, Un nouveau 
serpent bipede du Cenomanien (Cretace). 
Implications phyletiques. Comptes Rendus 
de l’Academie des Sciences, Paris, Sciences de 
la Terre et des Planetes, 330 (2000), 513-520.
7. E. Tchernov, O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, 
M. J. Polcyn, and L. L. Jacobs, A fossil snake 
with limbs. Science, 287 (2000), 2010-2012.
8. H. Zaher, The phylogenetic position of 
Pachyrhachis within snakes (Squamata, 
Lepidosauria). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 18 (1998), 1-3.
9. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, Tooth implantation 
and replacement in squamates, with special 
reference to mosasaur lizards and snakes. 
American Museum Novitates, 3271 (1999), 
1-19.
10. J.-C. Rage and F. Escuillie, The Cenomanian: 
stage of hindlimbed snakes. Carnets de 
Geologie, 2003/01 (2003), 1-11.
11. J. D. Scanlon and M. S. Y. Lee, The Pleistocene 
serpent Wonambi and the early evolution of 
snakes. Nature, 403 (2000), 416-420.
12. J. D. Scanlon, Skull of the large non­
macrostomatan snake Yurlunggur from the 
Australian Oligo-Miocene. Nature, 439 
(2006), 839-842.
13. N. Vidal and S. B. Hedges, Molecular 
evidence for a terrestrial origin of snakes. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London B, 
271 (2004), S226-S229.
14. S. Apesteguia and H. Zaher, A Cretaceous 
terrestrial snake with robust hindlimbs and a 
sacrum. Nature, 440 (2006), 1037-1040.
15. N. Bardet, A. Houssaye, J.-C. Rage, and 
X. Pereda Suberbiola, The Cenomanian- 
Turonian (late Cretaceous) radiation of 
marine squamates (Reptilia): the role of the 
Mediterranean Tethys. Bulletin de la Sociёtё 
Gёologique de France, 179 (2008), 605-622.
16. H. E. Sauvage, Sur l’existence d’un reptile du 
type ophidien dans les couches a Ostrea 
columba des Charentes. Comptes Rendus de 
la Sociёtё de l'Academie des Sciences, Paris, 
91 (1880), 671-672.
17. F. Nopcsa, Eidolosaurus und Pachyophis, 
zwei neue Neocom-Reptilien.
Palaeontograpjica, 65 (1923), 99-154.
18. F. Nopcsa, Ergebnisse der Forschungsreisen 
Prof. E. Stromers in den WUsten Agyptens. 
II. Wirbeltier-Reste der Baharjie-Stufe 
(unterstes Cenoman). Abhandlungen der 
Bayerische Akademie der Wissenschaftern, 
Mathematische-naturwissenschaftliche 
Abteilung, 30 (1925), 5-27.
19. S. J. Bolkay, Mesophis nopcsai ngn sp. ein 
neues, schlangenahnliches reptil aus der 
unteren Kreide (Neocom) von Bilek-Selista 
(Ost-Hercegovina). Glasnik zemaljskog 
Muzeja u Bosni i Hercegovini, 37 (1925), 
125-135.
20. R. Owen, Palaeontology, or a systematic 
summary of extinct animals and their 
geological relations (Edinburgh: Adam and 
Charlos Black, 1860).
21. A.-T. d. Rochebrune, Revision des ophidiens 
fossiles du Museum d’Histoire naturelle.
Nouvelles Archives du Miisxum dHistoire 
Naturelle, 2eme Serie, 3 (1880), 271-296.
22. E. D. Cope, On the reptilian orders, 
Pythonomorpha and Streptosauria. 
Proceedings of the Boston Society of Natural 
History, 12 (1869), 250-266.
23. C. L. Camp, Classification of the lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 48 (1923), 289-481.
24. D. A. Russell, Systematics and morphololgy 
of American mosasaurs (Reptilia, Sauria). 
Peabody Museum of Natural History Bulletin, 
23 (1967), 1-241.
25. H. G. Seeley, On remains of a small lizard 
from the Neocomian rocks of Comen, near 
Trieste, preserved in the Geological Museum 
of the University of Vienna. Quarterly 
Journal of the Geological Society of London, 
37 (1881), 52-56.
26. A. Kornhuber, Uber einen neuen fossilen 
Saurier aus Lesina. Abhandlungen der 
kaiserlich-koniglichen geologischen 
Reichsanstalt, 5 (1873), 75-90.
27. A. Kornhuber, Carsosaurus Marchesettii, ein 
neuer fossiler Lacertilier aus den 
Kreideschichten des Karstes bei Komen. 
Abhandlungen der kaiserlich-koniglichen 
geologischen Reichsanstalt, 17 (1893), 
1-15.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

204 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
28. A. Kornhuber, Opetiosaurus Bucchichi, eine 
neue fossile Eidechse aus der unteren 
Kreide von Lesina in Dalmatien. 
Abhandlungen der kaiserlich-koniglichen 
geologischen Reichsanstalt, 17 (1901), 1-24.
29. K. Gorjanovic-Kramberger, Aigialosaurus, 
eine neue Eidechse aus den Kreideschiefern 
der Insel Lesina, mit RUcksicht auf die 
bereits beschriebenen Lacertiden von 
Comen und Lesina. Glasnik hrvatskoga 
naravoslovnoga drustva u Zagrebu, 7 (1892), 
74-106.
30. F. Nopcsa, Uber die varanusartigen lacerten 
Istriens. Beitrage zur Palaontologie und 
Geologie Osterreich-Ungarns und des Orients, 
15 (1903), 31-42.
31. G. A. Boulenger, Notes on the Osteology of 
Heloderma horridum and H. suspectum, with 
Remarks on the Systematic Position of the 
Helodermatide and on the Vertebrae of the 
Lacertilia. Proceedings of the zoological 
Society of London, 59 (1891), 109-118.
32. L. Dollo, Les ancetres des mosasauriens. 
Bulletin Scientifique de la France et de la 
Belgique, 38 (1903), 137-139.
33. S. B. McDowell and C. M. Bogert, The 
systematic position of Lanthanotus and the 
affinities of the anguinomorphan lizards. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 105 (1954), 1-142.
34. M. S. Y. Lee, The phylogeny of varanoid 
lizards and the affinities of snakes. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society of London B, 352 (1997), 53-91.
35. O. Rieppel, H. Zaher, E. Tchernov, and 
M. J. Polcyn, The anatomy and relationships 
of Haasiophis terrasanctus, a fossil snake 
with well-developed hind limbs from the 
Mid-Cretaceous of the Middle East. Journal 
of Paleontology, 77 (2003), 536-558.
36. A. Palci and M. W. Caldwell, Redescription 
of Acteosaurus tommasinii von Meyer, 1860, 
and a discussion of evolutionary trends 
within the clade Ophidiomorpha. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 30 (2010), 94-108.
37. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, T. Simoes, 
et al., New skulls and skeletons of the 
Cretaceous legged snake Najash, and the 
evolution of the modern snake body plan. 
Science Advances, 5 (2019), eaax5833.
38. F. F. Garberoglio, R. O. Gomez, T. R. Simoes, 
M. W. Caldwell, and S. Apesteguia, The 
evolution of the axial skeleton intercentrum 
system in snakes revealed by new data from 
the Cretaceous snakes Dinilysia and Najash. 
Scientific Reports, 9 (2019), 1-10.
39. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2020).
40. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
41. S. E. Evans, A new anguimorph lizard from 
the Jurassic and Lower Cretaceous of 
England. Palaeontology, 37 (1994), 33-49.
42. T. W. Reeder, T. M. Townsend, 
D. G. Mulcahy, et al., Integrated analyses 
resolve conflicts over squamate reptile 
phylogeny and reveal unexpected 
placements for fossil taxa. PLoS ONE, 10 
(2015), e0118199.
43. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, et al., 
The origin of snakes: revealing the ecology, 
behavior, and evolutionary history of early 
snakes using genomics, phenomics, and the 
fossil record. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15 
(2015), 87.
44. M. W. Caldwell, Snake phylogeny, origins, 
and evolution: the role, impact, and 
importance of fossils (1869-2006). In 
J. S. Anderson and Sues, H.-D., ed., 
Evolutionary Transitions and Origins of 
Major Groups of Vertebrates (Bloomington, 
Indiana: Indiana University Press, 2007), 
pp. 253-302.
45. I. Paparella, A. Palci, U. Nicosia, and 
M. W. Caldwell, A new fossil marine lizard 
with soft tissues from the Late Cretaceous of 
southern Italy. Royal Society Open Science, 5 
(2018), 172411.
46. O. Rieppel and J. J. Head, New specimens of 
the fossil snake genus Eupodophis Rage & 
Escuillie, from Cenomanian (Late 
Cretaceous) of Lebanon. Memorie Soc 
Italiana Sci Nat, 32 (2004), 1-26.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ANATOMY AND RELATIONSHIPS OF PACHYOPHIIDAE 205
47. J.-C. Rage and D. Neraudeau, A new 
pachyostotic squamate reptile from the 
Cenomanian of France. Palaeontology, 47 
(2004), 1195-1210.
48. A. Houssaye, ‘Pachyostosis’ in aquatic 
amniotes: a review. Integrative Zoology, 4 
(2009), 325-340.
49. M. J. Polcyn, L. L. Jacobs, R. Araujo, 
A. S. Schulp, and O. Mateus, Physical drivers 
of mosasaur evolution. Palaeogeography, 
Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 400 
(2014), 17-27.
50. J. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. D. B. Behlke, Assembling 
the squamate tree of life: Perspectives from 
the phenotype and the fossil record. Bulletin 
of the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 
53 (2012), 3-308.
51. H. Zaher and K. T. Smith, Pythons in the 
Eocene of Europe reveal a much older 
divergence of the group in sympatry 
with boas. Biology Letters, 16 (2020), 
20200735.
52. A. Albino, J. D. Carrillo-Briceno, and 
J. M. Neenan, An enigmatic aquatic snake 
from the Cenomanian of Northern South 
America. PeerJ, 4 (2016), e2027.
53. J. C. Rage, R. Vullo, and D. Neraudeau, The 
mid-Cretaceous snake Simoliophis 
rochebrunei Sauvage, 1880 (Squamata: 
Ophidia) from its type area (Charentes, 
southwestern France): Redescription, 
distribution, and palaeoecology. Cretaceous 
Research, 58 (2016), 234-253.
54. L. A. Nessov, V. I. Zhegallo, and 
A. O. Averianov, A new locality of Late 
Cretaceous snakes, mammals and other 
vertebrates in Africa (western Libya). 
Annales de Pateontologie, 84 (1998), 
265-274.
55. G. Haas, On a new snakelike reptile from the 
lower Cenomanian of ‘Ein Yabrud, near 
Jerusalem. Bulletin du Museum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, S6rie 4, 1 (1979), 
51-64.
56. G. Haas, Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas, 
snakelike Reptile from the lower 
Cenomanian: ventral view of the skull.
Bulletin du Museum National d’Histoire 
Naturelle, Paris, S6rie 2 (1980), 87-104.
57. G. Haas, Remarks on a new ophiomorph 
reptile from the Lower Cenomanian of Ein 
Jabrud, Israel. In L. L. Jacobs, ed., Aspects of 
Vertebrate History, in Honor of E H Colbert 
(Flagstaff, Arizona: Museum of Northern 
Arizona Press, 1980), pp. 177-92.
58. M. S. Y. Lee, M. W. Caldwell, and
J. D. Scanlon, A second primitive marine 
snake: Pachyophis woodwardi from the 
Cretaceous of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Journal 
of Zoology, 248 (1999), 509-520.
59. A. Houssaye, Rediscovery and description of 
the second specimen of the hind-limbed 
snake Pachyophis woodwardi Nopcsa, 1923 
(Squamata, Ophidia) from the Cenomanian 
of Bosnia Herzegovina. Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 30 (2011), 276-279.
60. D. Duric, D. Radosavljevic, D. Petrovic, 
M. Radonjic, and P. Vojnovic, A new 
evidence for pachyostotic snake from 
Turonian of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Geoloski 
anali Balkanskoga poluostrva, (2017), 17-21.
61. M. S. Y. Lee and M. W. Caldwell, Anatomy 
and relationships of Pachyrhachis 
problematicus, a primitive snake with 
hindlimbs. Philosophical Transactions of the 
Royal Society of London B, 353 (1998), 
1521-1552.
62. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, The phylogenetic 
relationships of Pachyrhachis problematicus, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes 
(Lepidosauria, Squamata). Comptes Rendus 
de Seances de l’Academie des Sciences 
(Serie IIA), Earth and Planetary Science, 329 
(1999), 831-837.
63. H. Zaher and O. Rieppel, On the 
phylogenetic relationships of the Cretaceous 
snakes with legs, with special reference to 
Pachyrhachis problematicus (Squamata, 
Serpentes). Journal of Vertebrate 
Paleontology, 22 (2002), 104-109.
64. O. Rieppel and H. Zaher, The 
intramandibular joint in squamates, and the 
phylogenetic relationships of the fossil snake 
Pachyrhachis problematicus Haas. Fieldiana 
Geology, 43 (2000), 1-69.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

206 zaher, augusta, rabinovich, polcyn, and tafforeau
65. M. J. Polcyn, L. L. Jacobs, and A. Haber, 
A morphological model and CT assessment 
of the skull of Pachyrhachis problematicus 
(Squamata, Serpentes), a 98 million year old 
snake with legs from the Middle East. 
Palaeontologica Electronica, 8 (2005), 1-24.
66. A. Palci, M. W. Caldwell, and R. L. Nydam, 
Reevaluation of the anatomy of the 
Cenomanian (Upper Cretaceous) hind- 
limbed marine fossil snakes Pachyrhachis, 
Haasiophis, and Eupodophis. Journal of 
Vertebrate Paleontology, 33 (2013), 1328-1342.
67. D. Cundall and F. J. Irish, The snake skull. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 20, Morphology 
H, The Skull of Lepidosauria (Ithaca, New 
York: Society for the Study of Amphibians 
and Reptiles, 2008), pp. 349-692.
68. H. Zaher and C. A. Scanferla, The skull of the 
Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
69. H. Zaher, S. Apesteguia, and C. A. Scanferla, 
The anatomy of the Upper Cretaceous snake 
Najash rionegrina Apesteguia & Zaher, 2006, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
156 (2009), 801-826.
70. S. B. McDowell, The skull of Serpentes. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt, and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 21, Morphology I, 
The Skull and Appendicular Locomotor 
Apparatus of Lepidosauria (Ithaca, New 
York: Society for the Study of Amphibians 
and Reptiles, 2008), pp. 467-620.
71. M. H. Lessmann, Zur labialen Pleurodontie 
an Lacertilier-Gebissen. Anatomischer 
Anzeiger, 99 (1952), 35-67.
72. E. Kochva, The origin of snakes and 
evolution of the venom apparatus. Toxicon, 
25 (1987), 65-106.
73. M. deBraga and R. L. Carroll, The origin of 
mosasaurs as a model of macroevolutionary 
patterns and processes. Evolutionary 
Biology, 27 (1993), 245-322.
74. S. Apesteguia and H. Zaher, A Cretaceous 
terrestrial snake with robust hindlimbs 
and a sacrum. Nature, 440 (2006), 
1037-1040.
75. S. M. Harrington and T. W. Reeder, 
Phylogenetic inference and divergence 
dating of snakes using molecules, 
morphology and fossils: new insights into 
convergent evolution of feeding 
morphology and limb reduction. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 121 (2017), 
379-394.
76. D. M. Martill, H. Tischlinger, and
N. R. Longrich, A four-legged snake from the 
Early Cretaceous of Gondwana. Nature, 349 
(2015), 416-419.
77. N. J. Kley, Prey transport mechanisms in 
blindsnakes and the evolution of unilateral 
feeding systems in snakes. American 
Zoologist, 41 (2001), 1321-1337.
78. R. G. Northcutt. Forebrain and midbrain 
organization in lizards and its phylogenetic 
significance. In N. Greenberg and 
P. D. Maclean, eds., Behavior and Neurology 
of Lizards (Rockville: National Institute of 
Mental Health, 1978), pp. 11-64.
79. N. R. Longrich, B.-A. S. Bhullar, and
J. A. Gauthier, A transitional snake from the 
Late Cretaceous Period of North America. 
Nature, 488 (2012), 205-208.
80. M. S. Y. Lee, G. L. Bell, and M. W. Caldwell, 
The origin of snake feeding. Nature, 400 
(1999), 655-659.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.012 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part III
Genomic Perspectives
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.013 Published online by Cambridge University Press

10
Using Comparative Genomics to Resolve 
the Origin and Early Evolution of Snakes
Sara Ruane and Jeffrey W. Streicher
10.1 Introduction
The use of molecular characters for phylogenetic analysis revolutionized the way biologists 
reconstruct evolutionary histories. This began with biochemical comparisons of whole 
molecules and rapidly developed into the direct determination of nucleic acid sequences 
during the late twentieth century. Advancements in DNA sequencing technology during the 
early twenty-first century ushered in the reality of sequencing whole nuclear genomes from 
non-model groups, including snakes [1]. An exciting application of comparing whole 
genomes is the insight they provide into the origin and early evolution of ancient radiations. 
Despite this, many practical questions remain unanswered for how these comparisons are 
best made and to what extent whole nuclear genomes will be advantageous for 
phylogenetic inference.
The nuclear genomes of animals are often large, multidimensional, plastic and filled with 
evolutionary histories arising from both deterministic (e.g., selection) and stochastic (e.g., 
genetic drift, incomplete lineage sorting, duplication events) processes. Notably, localized 
genomic histories are often conflicting with respect to the overall species history, a quality 
referred to as gene tree-species tree discordance [2]. Analytical methods have been 
developed to deal with this issue but are exclusively for use with aligned, homologous 
DNA sequences (e.g., [3]). While these methods are presumed effective at resolving phyl­
ogenies despite the ‘noise’ of gene-tree discordance, emerging evidence suggests some 
relationships remain unclear, even when using hundreds or thousands of nuclear genes. 
This is particularly notable in snakes, where several ancient bifurcations remain uncompel- 
lingly resolved despite large amounts of nuclear data having been applied to phylogenetic 
inference [4, 5]. There are at least two possible explanations: First, the majority of these 
‘unresolved branches’ are short and occur deep in the snake evolutionary tree, so it is
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

210 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
possible that they correspond to ancient, rapid radiations that are best explained by 
polytomies and not the bifurcating model assumed by tree-based analyses [6]. Second, 
moderate rates of substitution may cause substantial homoplasy rendering molecular 
sequence data ineffective for resolving short bifurcations that occurred in deep time [7]. 
Given the second possibility, that sequence data may not be able to resolve short yet 
real bifurcations, there is the need to reexamine comparative frameworks for extracting 
phylogenetic signal from nuclear genomes outside of DNA, RNA, and amino acid 
sequences [8].
In this chapter we review the history of molecule-based phylogenetic analysis in snakes 
leading up to the contemporary genomics revolution. We then explore how future phylo­
genetic inference might be made via comparisons of genome characteristics in addition to, 
or instead of, aligned DNA, RNA, and amino acid sequences. First, we begin with a 
discussion of the types of characters that nuclear genomes offer systematists, and then 
speculate how existing analytical approaches from systematic biology might be applied to 
comparative genomics (sensu [9]). Using available snake genomes, we provide two 
examples of coding nuclear genome qualities as polymorphic multistate characters. We 
then discuss perceived opportunities and challenges associated with this approach for 
inferring phylogenies. Finally, we conclude with a review of contentious and unresolved 
relationships among snakes that are likely to be discussed during the comparative 
genomics era. Throughout, we follow the taxonomy presented in Burbrink et al. (2020) 
[5] unless otherwise noted. To aid with interpretation, bolded terms are further defined in 
the Glossary (Box 10.1).
10.2 The Evolution of Molecular Phylogenetics for Snakes
Although contemporary herpetologists may think of molecular methods for phylogenetic 
estimation as originating in the 1980s-1990s and becoming standard over the past two 
decades, the use of molecular data to infer taxonomic relationships for snakes dates back to 
at least the 1930s (Fig. 10.1; [10-12]). These early studies recognized that due to limitations 
of the fossil record and a ‘sparsity of taxonomic characters’ molecular methods could 
potentially provide an unbiased and quantitative method to inform snake systematics 
[13]. Unlike today, these studies did not directly use DNA sequences. For many of these 
early experiments, serological reactions (also known as immunological correspondence) 
were used. These procedures use blood sera from snakes, which contains antigens, sub­
stances that can create an immune response. The antiserum, a serum with known anti­
bodies in it, is then prepared by injecting the snake sera into a rabbit, causing the rabbit to 
create antibodies to the antigens of that specific snake species. Blood is then drawn from 
the rabbit and spun down with the clear serum decanted; this is the antiserum. When a 
snake serum is then mixed with an antiserum, agglutination occurs if an antigen found in 
the snake blood is able to bind with antibodies found in the antiserum (meaning that if 
snake species A serum is mixed with the antiserum prepared using snake species A, a high 
degree of agglutination is expected because the antiserum should have the antibodies most
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 211
Box 10.1 Glossary of terms used in this chapter
Allozyme and Isozyme electrophoresis: An electrophoretic method for determining the degree of 
relatedness of taxa by separating out proteins (enzymes) of varying molecular weights and/or 
electrical charges by running them out on a gel; the different proteins (or alleles for a specific 
protein) have different rates of migration when subjected to electrical charges. This allows for the 
detection of genetic variation (allele frequencies) between species and/or within species and can 
be used to determine relatedness of taxa.
Cumulative and non-cumulative frequencies: Non-cumulative frequencies are essentially non­
ordered character states (represented by frequencies in Matrix a). Cumulative frequencies treat 
multistate characters as ordered, so that the first category (= frequency bin) of Matrix b is 
equivalent to the frequency of individuals that have character values greater than the first 
frequency bin of Matrix a.
DIRS elements: DIRs1-like elements (Dictyostelium Intermediate Repeat sequence 1) are a 
category of tyrosinase recombinase retrotransposon TEs.
DNA-hybridization: A method for determining the degree of relatedness of taxa by taking the 
DNA from one species ‘A’ and mixing it with the DNA from another species ‘B’; the double stranded 
DNA of each species is heated to allow the DNA strands to separate and then cooled together to 
subsequently anneal (‘hybridize’) between the two species when reforming the double stranded 
DNA. It is assumed that the more similar the sequences are to each other from the two species, 
the better they will bind together and thus require higher levels of energy (melting temperature) to 
be pulled apart when compared to less similar (less closely related) sequences.
DNA-transposons: These TEs differ from LTRs, LINEs and SINES in that they move using a DNA 
intermediate instead of an RNA intermediate.
Endogenous viral elements: DNA sequences that are derived from viruses. Can result from any 
virus that uses a host genome to replicate, including retroviruses, parvoviruses, bornaviruses, 
and circoviruses.
Gene ontology (GO) inference: Method for determining a gene’s structure and function so that 
both paralogous (closely-related) genes can be identified within genomes, and homologous genes 
can be identified across species.
LINE elements: Long interspersed nucleotide elements are a class of retrotransposons that are 
fairly common in snake genomes (and other squamate reptile genomes).
LTR elements: Long terminal repeats (LTR) are sequences found at the terminus of retro- 
transposons. These sites are also used by some viruses to insert into host genomes.
PLE elements: Penelope-like elements (PLEs) are a category of retrotransposon TEs that are 
distinguished by specialized endonuclease domains and the ability to retain introns.
Restriction-site Associated (RAD) datasets: A DNA sequence dataset composed of hundreds 
or (usually) thousands of short loci (50-200 base pairs) with single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) that can be used for phylogenetic inference. Datasets are generated by using one or more 
enzymes to digest the nuclear genome ofan organism at specific ‘cut’ sites, the resulting genomic 
fragments are sorted by size, and sequenced with the aim of generating a set of loci that contain 
SNPs for a particular species. Commonly used examples for snake phylogenetics include ddRAD- 
Seq, RAD-Seq, and genotyping-by-sequencing (GBS).
Serological reactions or Immunological correspondence: A method for determining the degree 
of relatedness of taxa by quantifying the degree of agglutination between the blood sera of a 
species ‘A’ when exposed to the antibodies (via an antiserum) of another species ‘B’. It is 
assumed that the more closely related the taxa are to one another, the greater the level of 
agglutination observed, due to the ability for the blood sera antigens of species A to bind with 
the antisera antibodies of species B.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

212 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
Box 10.1 (cont.)
Sex chromosome condition: Snakes have variable conditions of their sex chromosomes. In 
some species males, as in humans, are the heterogametic sex (= XY chromosomes); however, in 
most species females are the heterogametic sex (= ZW chromosomes). There are also some 
snakes with undifferentiated (in terms of size) sex chromosomes (= homomorphic).
Simple sequence repeats (SSRs): Also known as microsatellites, these are tandem repeats of 
di, tri- or tetra- nucleotides that appear throughout the nuclear genome. Often used in 
population genetics.
SINE elements: Short interspersed nuclear elements are a category of retrotransposon TEs that 
are non-autonomous and typically require an RNA intermediate to amplify. Non-autonomous TEs 
may be ideal phylogenetic markers.
Target-capture or Sequence-capture datasets: A DNA sequence dataset composed of hun­
dreds to thousands of short (ca. 300 base pairs) to long (ca. 1,000 base pairs) loci generated by 
preparing libraries from fragmented genomic DNA and using probes to target specific regions of 
the genome for subsequent sequencing, often conserved portions such as exons. Commonly used 
examples for snake phylogenetics include ultra-conserved elements (UCEs), anchored-hybrid 
enrichment loci (AHEs), and the squamate conserved loci set (SqCL)
Transposable elements (TEs): Also known as ‘jumping genes’, this is an all-encompassing term 
for mobile genetic elements that can change their position in a genome. Sometimes the move­
ment of TEs changes genome size or creates or reverses mutations.
specific for snake species A to bind to the antigens). When the blood of species A is mixed 
with antiserum made from species B, the degree of agglutination observed would be 
indicative of how similar the protein composition of the two snakes is and thus their degree 
of relatedness can be inferred.
Although these early studies typically lacked taxonomic breadth, they often inferred the 
same relationships as modern phylogenetic studies of snakes. For example, using antisera 
reactions, alligators and turtles were determined to be serologically closer to each other 
than they were to squamates [14], a finding that has been corroborated in recent studies 
that place testudines as the sister taxon to archosaurs [15, 16]. The same study [14] also 
found that within snakes, the elapids Lapemis and Naja were more closely related to each 
other than either is to Coluber or Crotalus and that within crotalines, Sistrurus and Crotalus 
were closer to one another than to Agkistrodon. In another study based on serological 
reactions [17], snakes in the tribe Lampropeltini (specifically Pantherophis, Pituophis, 
Rhinocheilus, and Lampropeltis) were found to be more closely related to each other than 
to a group of colubrines formed by Coluber, Masticophis, and Opheodrys, and these two 
groups of colubrids were more closely related to each other than to a group composed of 
the dipsadids Diadophis, Heterodon, and Farancia or to a natricid group of Thamnophis 
and Nerodia. Another early molecular method used for phylogenetic inference is subjecting 
body fluids (blood or fluids derived from blood) to electrophoresis and using migration 
rates and/or bands on the gel to determine relationships among taxa. An analysis of 
haemoglobin solutions from reptiles and amphibians, including 41 species of snakes [18],
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 213
(D)
(A)
Figure 10.1 Early contributors to the understanding that molecules extracted from snake tissues or 
cells have phylogenetic signal. (A) Fannie Eleanor Williams (1884-1963), Walter and Eliza Institute of 
Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. Image reprinted from the public domain. (B) Charles 
Halliley Kellaway (1889-1952), Walter and Eliza Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, Australia. 
Image reprinted from the Wellcome Collection under a Creative Commons Attribution license. (C) 
Shou-Hsian Mao (1922-2008), National Defense Medical Center, Taiwan, China. Image reprinted 
from [98] with permission of the Society for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles (SSAR). (D) Garth 
L. Underwood (1919-2002), University of the West Indies, Jamaica and Trinidad; City of London 
Polytechnic, UK; The Natural History Museum, London, UK; Image reprinted from [99] with 
permission of the SSAR. (E) Herbert C. Dessauer (1921-2003), Louisiana State University, United 
States. Image reprinted from [100] with permission of the American Society of Ichthyologists and 
Herpetologists. (F) Robin Lawson (1933-2013), California Academy of Sciences, United States. Image 
courtesy of Robert Drewes.
showed that Boidae (sensu latu), Colubridae (sensu latu) and Crotalidae (sensu latu) formed 
groups that could be distinguished from each other. This early molecular work demon­
strates that phylogenetic signal is clearly present at the scale of entire molecules and largely 
consistent with contemporary phylogenies.
In his paper Molecular approaches to the taxonomy of colubrid snakes Dessauer (Fig. 10.1) 
reviewed available molecular methods that could be applied to snake phylogenetics, including 
serological reactions as well as DNA-hybridization and high-resolution electrophoresis [19].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

214 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
He highlighted that previous molecular studies that indicate a close relationship between 
snakes and some lizard families (iguanids specifically), that Colubridae (sensu latu) is closely 
related to elapids and crotalids, and that both Old and New World natricids form a group 
separate from a list of snakes currently classified as colubrids and dipsadids. George and 
Dessauer [13] went further, using these techniques to test three previously proposed specific 
taxonomies, based on morphological characters for ‘colubrid snakes’ [20, 21]. The molecular 
results closely aligned with Underwood’s (Fig. 10.1; [21]) work which classified Coluber and 
Pituophis as colubrines within Colubridae, Heterodon as a xenodontine within Dipsadidae, 
and considered Homalopsidae, Natricidae and Acrochordidae as individual families separ­
ate from Colubridae, consistent with contemporary molecular phylogenies (e.g., [5]). 
As evidenced by intraspecific studies, early molecular methods were not limited to higher- 
level relationships but were also used to better understand taxonomy and biogeography 
(e.g., natricids [22]; sea snakes [23]; ratsnakes [24]).
Molecular work in snake systematics continued throughout the 1980s and early 1990s, 
with many researchers using immunological reactions and with allozyme-based studies 
that were popular in the early 1990s; these studies further corroborated earlier molecular 
studies on snake systematics and often included phylogenetic trees based on distance 
methods or parsimony (e.g., [25-27]). At this point, using molecules to infer snake phyl­
ogeny was no longer a rarity, as evidenced by Cadle’s seminal monograph [28] Phylogenetic 
relationships among advanced snakes, a molecular perspective. This work reviewed prior 
studies and provided new molecular evidence for some now well-accepted relationships 
among snakes, namely that viperids and elapids are not sister taxa despite having front- 
fanged venom delivery systems, that Atractaspis is not a viperid and is more closely related 
to elapids, and that viperids are the sister taxon of the remaining Colubriformes (an 
assortment of dipsadids, colubrids, elapids, and Atractaspis in [28]).
Starting in the mid-1990s, direct DNA-sequencing began replacing immunological and 
allozyme-based studies for phylogenetic inference due to its relative ease and lowered 
costs. The first ‘markers of choice’ for DNA sequencing originated from the mitochondrial 
genome (mtDNA). Mitochondrial genes have several properties that make them useful for 
phylogenetics, namely high mutation rates, low effective population sizes via haploid 
inheritance, and an ease of sequencing due to high copy numbers in tissues such as 
muscle and liver. Additionally, as more studies used the same mtDNA markers, the ability 
to combine new sequences with previously published datasets increased samples sizes and 
taxonomic breadth without financial cost. This likely led to the self-perpetuation and 
continuance of these studies within herpetology, including population genetics, phylogeo- 
graphy, and deep-node resolution. Studies of mtDNA helped to identify cryptic species [29], 
determine familial and interfamilial relationships [30, 31], and test long-standing hypoth­
eses pertaining to species limits [32]. By the mid-2000s it became clear that while extremely 
useful, mtDNA (and other single locus) studies were potentially limited in scope because 
single-gene trees may differ from the species tree. Thus, systematic studies would be better 
served by multilocus approaches including a variety of molecular markers [33, 34]. This led 
to an increase in snake studies that typically included mtDNA data along with anywhere 
from one to over a dozen nuclear loci [35-38].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 215
Currently, sequencing and bioinformatics capabilities allow snake researchers to take 
genome-scale approaches to systematic studies (i.e., hundreds to thousands of nuclear loci; 
see [39] for a thorough review of these data types). These studies include restriction-site 
associated DNA datasets (RAD-seq), which result in thousands of single-nucleotide poly­
morphisms (SNPs) that can be used for population or phylogeographic studies. Although 
SNP datasets can also be used for evolutionary comparisons across taxonomic levels, target 
capture datasets comprised of longer markers (often ca. 300-1,000 base pairs in length) 
tend to be more useful for examining relationships at deeper levels; these types of datasets 
include ultraconserved elements (UCEs [40]), anchored hybrid enrichment loci (AHE [41]), 
squamate conserved loci (SqCL [42]), and rapidly evolving long exons (RELEC [43]). 
Encouragingly, studies using these genome-scale datasets have revealed that previous 
approaches, including electrophoretic studies (e.g., ratsnakes, [24] vs [44]) and mtDNA 
sequence studies (e.g., Western diamondback rattlesnakes, [45] vs [46]) are often consistent 
with recent and presumably improved methods of phylogenetic inference. However, 
genome-scale datasets have also revealed novel relationships including the monophyly of 
Pythonoidea + Booidea + Uropeltoidea + Bolyeriidae and several subgroups within this 
clade [4, 5, 47].
The natural and presumed next step in the analytical evolution of molecular 
phylogenetics for snakes is comparative genomics, comparing entire nuclear genomes 
among species. We suspect that existing approaches using DNA-sequence alignments 
(and models of nucleotide evolution) will remain relevant for comparing large subsets of 
the nuclear genome but that new methods will also be developed for phylogenetic infer­
ence. These broader-scale comparisons will require a framework for character coding, 
interpretation, and analysis that is infrequently discussed in the systematics literature [9, 
48]. As such, a relevant first question is: what types of characters do snake genomes offer 
and how can they be coded for phylogenetic analysis?
10.3 Characteristics and Phylogenetic Coding 
of Snake Genomes
The nuclear genomes of snakes (ca. 1.5 Gb [1]) are typically smaller than mammal genomes 
(Fig. 10.2). At present, there have been 26 nearly complete nuclear genomes of snakes 
published (Table 10.1). Based on available data, the nuclear genomes of different snake 
species vary in several ways: overall size (number of nucleotides), GC-content and distri­
bution (e.g., isochores [49]), number of protein-coding genes, gene family diversity [50], 
content and distribution of transposable elements (TEs [51]), content and distribution of 
endogenous viral elements (EVEs [52]), sex chromosome condition [53], and overall 
structural similarity (synteny level). Although similar in size to bird genomes, snake 
genomes have some qualities that are more mammal-like, such as TE content (Fig. 10.2). 
Thus, snake nuclear genomes are dynamic and offer a plethora of characteristics beyond 
nucleotide sequences to apply towards phylogenetic inference.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

216 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
(A)
0.5
0.4
Pa Partial genome
• Whole genome
0
500
1000
0.3
(C)
0.4
0.5
2000 
2500 
3000 
3500
Mammal nuclear genome size (Mb)
Figure 10.2 (A) Relationship between nuclear DNA sequencing effort and transposable element (TE) 
content in partial and whole snake genomes. (B) Relationship between genome size and TE 
content in birds. (C) Relationship between genome size and TE content in mammals. Data from 
[51] and NCBI Genome database.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 217
Characters for phylogenetic analysis should have at least three qualities: (1) that 
homology can be reasonably assumed across operational taxonomic units, (2) that the 
character is heritable (thus being capable of accumulating phylogenetic signal), and (3) 
that the character can be coded for use in phylogenetic analysis. Many of the above 
nuclear genome qualities meet these criteria, so how might we analyse them? Unlike 
DNA-sequence alignment, which can be largely automated, preparing a comparative 
matrix of genome qualities is a nontrivial task. In many cases our ability to define the 
qualities we are interested in requires nuanced consideration. For example, the arrange­
ment of genes is a proposed quality that might inform phylogenetic inference [9], 
however defining genes (and gene families) requires gene ontology (GO) inference 
before any scoring of a character matrix can take place. Given that some methods for 
establishing GO terms produce false positives and are controversial [54], analytical 
choices will need to be carefully considered and justified. Thus, coding genome-level 
characters for phylogenetic analysis involves decision making that is reminiscent of 
coding complex morphological structures [55, 56]. Though the considerations necessary 
for coding complex characters are far more bespoke than near-automated nucleic acid 
sequence alignment, the existing morphological and paleontological literature provides 
valuable insights into how we might use qualities of nuclear genomes to infer 
phylogenies (see [57]).
Without standardized assembly methods and character definitions, precisely coding 
genome qualities of snakes will be difficult. Furthermore, there is clearly variation in how 
the existing literature reports genome qualities; using the same raw data for Boa constrictor, 
there have been at least three different estimates for repetitive content level (e.g., LTR 
elements: 1.4%, 9.6%, and 2.3% in [58-60], respectively). Despite these current limitations, 
we provide two examples below that compare coding strategies using available snake 
genomes. We considered inter-assembly comparison valuable because detectable phylo­
genetic signal suggests character coding might be robust to substantial analytical ‘noise’; 
therein providing a preliminary (albeit basic) test of the veracity of using genome-level 
characters for phylogenetic analysis of snakes.
Genome sizes of reptiles are known to have phylogenetic signal [61], so we selected 
qualities that might relate to genome size. As such, we coded two qualities using 
26 snake genomes and select squamate reptile outgroups (Table 10.1): genome size 
(in Megabases, Mb) and genome-wide GC-content (%). These data were either 
collected from the original publications or the NCBI genome summary pages (https:// 
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/). Next, because transposable elements have been shown 
to have phylogenetic signal in a variety of taxa [62, 63] we reanalysed reptile genome data 
from Pasquesi et al. [51] for 14 categories of repetitive element content (including SSRs, 
DNA transposons, LINEs, SINEs, LTRs) from eight snakes and select squamate outgroups 
(Table 10.2). We only included taxa from Pasquesi et al. [51] with full genomes, because 
partial genomes included in this study had, on average, higher estimated TE levels 
(Fig. 10.2A). To transform percentage summaries into continuous data (GC-content, repeti­
tive element content) we multiplied them by the total length (Mb) of each nuclear 
genome.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

218 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
Table 10.1. Nuclear genome characteristics from published snake genomes and select reptile 
outgroups.
Taxonomy follows Burbrink et al. [5]. NCBI = National Centre for Biotechnology Information, Maryland, 
United States. Sec. Mil. Med. Uni. = Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
Taxon
Family
Total length 
(Mb)
GC content
(%)
Citations
Boidae + Pythonidae
Boa constrictor
Boidae
1600.0
40.2
Bradnam et al. [101]
Python bivittatus
Pythonidae
1435.1
39.7
Castoe et al. [49]
Colubroidea
Thermophis baileyi
Dipsadidae
1747.7
41.1
Li et al. [59]
Thamnophis elegans
Natricidae
1743.3
41.1
Rockefeller University 
(NCBI)
Thamnophis sirtalis
Natricidae
1424.9
41.8
McGlothlin et al. [102]
Pantherophis guttatus
Colubridae
1404.2
38.3
Ullate-Agote et al. [103]
Pantherophis obsoletus
Colubridae
1692.5
39.1
University of Geneva 
(NCBI)
Ptyas mucosa
Colubridae
1721.5
39.2
University of Geneva 
(NCBI)
Elapidae
Pseudonaja textilis
Elapidae
1590.0
40.1
Earl et al. [104]
Laticauda colubrina
Elapidae
2024.7
35.6
Kishida et al. [105]
Laticauda laticauda
Elapidae
1558.7
40.1
Kishida et al. [105]
Hydrophis curtis
Elapidae
1910.0
39.7
Peng et al. [106]
Hydrophis 
melanocepahlus
Elapidae
1402.6
34.8
Kishida et al. [105]
Hydrophis hardwickii
Elapidae
1296.4
37.2
Sec. Mil. Med. Uni. 
(NCBI)
Hydophis cyanocinctus
Elapidae
1389.9
37.6
Sec. Mil. Med. Uni. 
(NCBI)
Emydocephalus ijimae
Elapidae
1625.2
40.3
Kishida et al. [105]
Naja naja
Elapidae
1768.5
40.4
Suryamohan et al. 
[107]
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 219
Table 10.1. (cont.)
Taxon
Family
Total length 
(Mb)
GC content
(%)
Citations
Ophiophagus hannah
Elapidae
1594.1
40.6
Vonk et al. [108]
Notechis scutatus
Elapidae
1665.5
40.2
Univ. New South Wales 
(NCBI)
Viperidae
Crotalus viridis
Viperidae
1340.2
39.4
Pasquesi et al. [51]
Crotalus pyrrhus
Viperidae
1126.5
38.5
Gilbert et al. [52]
Crotalus horridus
Viperidae
1520.3
34.3
University of Arkansas 
(NCBI)
Vipera berus
Viperidae
1532.4
41.3
Baylor College (NCBI)
Protobothrops flavoviridis
Viperidae
1413.2
38.2
Shibata et al. [97]
Protobothrops 
mucrosquamatus
Viperidae
1673.9
40.7
Aird et al. [109]
Deinagkistrodon acutus
Viperidae
1470.0
41.0
Yin et al. [57]
Other Toxicoferans
Varanus komodoensis
Varanidae
1557.2
43.9
van Hoek et al. [110]
Pogona vitticeps
Agamidae
1716.7
42.1
Georges et al. [111]
Anolis carlinensis
Polychrotidae
1799.1
40.8
Alfoldi etal. [112]
Outgroup
Gekko japonicus
Gekkonidae
2550.0
45.5
Liu et al. [113]
The nuclear genome characters we collected can be considered polymorphic multistate 
characters that vary both within and among species. There are several methods for coding 
these characters including generalized frequency coding (GFC) and step-matrix-gap­
weighting [64, 65]. Here, we used GFC on nuclear genome characters given that simulations 
suggest it outperforms step-matrix-gap-weighting [66]. Briefly, GFC requires four steps to 
code polymorphic multistate characters. First, for each quality of nuclear genome, observed 
variation is categorized as either counts (meristic data) or evenly-spaced ranges (continu­
ous data), referred to hereafter as ‘frequency bins’. In our two examples, we arbitrarily 
selected to divide genome qualities into eight frequency bins (though we acknowledge that 
exploring the impact of granularity, i.e., number of bins is worth undertaking at a later 
time). Second, an initial matrix (Matrix a) is made using non-cumulative frequencies. For
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 10.2. Select repetitive element characteristics of snake nuclear genomes as reported by Pasquesi et al. [51].
Genome sizes and percentages of 14 repetitive elements are as reported in Supporting Data 4 and 6 in the original study. Taxonomy follows
Burbrink et al. [5]. See Glossary in Box 10.1 for element definitions. *LINEs  percentage is combined total from CR1-L3, L2, BovB, L1 and other 
elements; DNA transposons percentage is combined hAT, Tc1 and other elements. Each subcategory was treated as a separate set of eight 
phylogenetic characters, which produced character matrices of 98 and 112 characters for cumulative and non-cumulative analyses, respectively.
Taxon
Family Total length (Mb)
SSRs
SINEs
LINEs
*
PLEs
DIRS
LTRs
DNA
*
Unclassified
Boidae + Pythonidae
Boa constrictor
Boidae
1387.2
2.34
2.58
14.73
1.05
0.05
2.50
7.82
5.43
Python bivittatus
Pythonidae
1385.3
1.99
1.60
13.16
0.93
0.05
1.90
4.98
5.98
Colubroidea
Thamnophis sirtalis
Natricidae
1122.6
2.83
3.90
10.35
1.11
0.87
2.60
10.48
6.37
Pantherophis guttatus
Colubridae
1358.4
2.60
3.53
14.04
1.66
0.74
3.38
12.43
3.99
Elapidae
Ophiophagus hannah
Elapidae
1379.2
2.99
3.09
14.03
1.46
0.60
2.79
8.84
6.74
Viperidae
Crotalus viridis
Viperidae
1129.3
2.26
1.83
14.22
1.49
1.11
4.25
9.92
5.03
Crotalus pyrrhus
Viperidae
1191.6
2.03
2.42
12.09
1.61
0.86
3.44
9.87
2.50
Deinagkistrodon acutus
Viperidae
1470.4
4.33
2.13
18.91
1.53
1.95
4.34
11.20
3.44
other toxicoferans
Ophisaurus gracilis
Anguidae
1729.3
1.89
2.21
15.03
0.77
0.54
6.49
11.39
6.34
Pogona vitticeps
Agamidae
1592.7
2.57
2.49
14.84
0.67
0.83
3.32
11.38
4.32
Anolis carolinensis
Polychrotidae
1701.4
1.74
1.40
17.66
0.25
2.58
3.67
7.93
5.70
Outgroup
Gekko japonicus
Gekkonidae
2402.0
1.07
6.90
15.05
0.69
1.98
3.31
2.97
10.53

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 221
each taxon, the observed frequencies of a character are placed into the frequency bins of 
Matrix a. Third, a second matrix (Matrix b) is constructed using cumulative frequencies, 
these summarize the frequency data obtained from Matrix a, and fill all columns to the right 
of an observed state (therein excluding the first bin). Finally, following Wiens’ [67] fre­
quency bins, the frequencies in Matrix b are replaced with letters to produce a new 
character matrix (Matrix c1). Non-cumulative frequencies can also be used from Matrix a 
to produce a lettered matrix (Matrix c2). Examples of these character matrices from our first 
dataset are available in Table 10.3. The maximum number of steps between each character 
state is limited to 25 (because of the Latin/Roman alphabet). However, this number of 
states is far more than has previously been used to code nuclear genome qualities in other 
vertebrate groups (e.g., [48]).
We constructed both cumulative and non-cumulative GFC matrices from snake genomes 
to compare their performance and ability to recover expected relationships (Fig. 10.3A). 
Specifically, we scored each method for its ability to recover the four branches in the 
expected topology. We used four ingroup taxa (Boidae + Pythonidae, Colubroidea, 
Elapidae, and Viperidae) and two outgroup taxa (other toxicoferans and Gekko japonicus). 
We grouped Boidae and Pythonidae together (given their supported monophyly [4, 5]). The 
outgroup taxon ‘other toxicoferans’ included Varanus komodoensis, Pogona vitticeps, and 
Anolis carolinensis in the first analysis and Ophisaurus gracilis, Pogona vitticeps, and Anolis 
carolinensis in the second analysis. Once coded using GFC, we used the phangorn package 
[68] in R statistical software [69] to load GFC matrices and conduct UPGMA analyses. 
Because of program limitations, all analyses in R recognized our letter matrix as ‘amino 
acid’ data. To ensure that inappropriate distance corrections were not performed, we used 
the ‘JC69’ model [70] which treats all character state changes as equally probable. We 
rooted all trees with Gekko japonicus, given that it was the most divergent outgroup 
included in these analyses.
In the first analysis (genome size, GC-content), GFC coding resulted in a character matrix 
of 14 characters using cumulative frequencies (Fig. 10.3C) and 16 characters for non- 
cumulative frequencies. The cumulative frequency coding tree recovered 75 per cent of 
the expected relationships (Fig. 10.3B). These ‘correctly’ inferred relationships included the 
monophyly of snakes and the sister relationship between Colubroidea and Elapidae. Only 
the placement of Viperidae and Boidae + Pythonidae differed from the expected tree. In 
contrast, the non-cumulative tree did not recover snakes as monophyletic and recovered 
only one of the expected relationships (25 per cent), that between Colubroidea and 
Elapidae (Fig. 10.3D). Results from our second analysis, the coding of content levels from 
14 repetitive elements, were based on larger character matrices (cumulative, 98 characters; 
non-cumulative, 112 characters). The results were overall similar to the first analysis, with 
the cumulative frequency tree recovering 75 per cent of expected relationships, however, 
the non-cumulative frequency tree failed to recover any of the expected relationships 
(Fig. 10.4). Interestingly, the placement of Viperidae differed between cumulative analyses 
in our examples. In the first analysis, Viperidae was the sister taxon of Boidae + Pythonidae 
whereas in the second it was the sister taxon of a clade containing Boidae + Pythonidae, 
Elapidae and Colubroidea.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 10.3. Character matrices derived by generalized frequency coding (after [63]) for Nuclear genome size (Mb) and GC-content 
(eightcharacters each).
Genome size characters are abbreviated as total length (TL) and GC-content characters as (GC). N = sample sizes upon which frequencies are 
based. Matrix A is non-cumulative frequencies. Matrix B is cumulative frequencies. Matrix C1 is coded cumulative frequencies. Matrix C2 is coded 
non-cumulative frequencies. Coding in both C matrices was based on table from Wiens [67]. See Table 10.1 for underlying data. B + P = Boidae + 
Pythonidae; COL = Colubroidea; ELAP = Elapidae; VIP = Viperidae; TOX = other toxicoferans; GEK = Gekko japonicus.
Taxon
N
TL1
TL2
TL3
TL4
TL5
TL6
TL7
TL8
GC1
GC2
GC3
GC4
GC5
GC6
GC7
GC8
Matrix A
B+P
2
0.5
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.5
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
COL
6
0.33
0.67
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.33
0.66
0
0
0
0
0
0
ELAP
11
0.28
0.63
0.09
0
0
0
0
0
0.36
0.64
0
0
0
0
0
0
VIP
7
0.71
0.29
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.57
0.43
0
0
0
0
0
0
TOX
3
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
GEK
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
Matrix B
B+P
2
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
0.5
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
COL
6
0.67
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
0.66
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
ELAP
11
0.72
0.09
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
0.64
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
VIP
7
0.29
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
0.43
0
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
TOX
3
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
N/A
GEK
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
N/A
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
N/A

CD
О i О i
CO i vH
Matrix C l
Ш
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

224 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
Figure 10.3 Test case of using generalized frequency coding (GFC) to code two qualities of nuclear 
genomes (assembly size and GC content) as characters for phylogenetic inference. (A) Expected 
phylogeny based on available literature. (B) Cumulative frequency derived UPGMA tree based on 
14 coded characters (C: data from Matrix C1 in Table 10.3.) that is mostly consistent with the expected 
example, except for the positions of Viperidae and Boidae + Pythonidae. (D) Non-cumulative 
frequency derived UPGMA tree that is very different from the expected tree, with some outgroups 
(other toxicoferans) nested within the ingroup (Serpentes). Solid circles indicate nodes consistent 
with a priori expectations from (A). All trees have been rooted with Gekko. See Table 10.3 for 
explanation of taxon abbreviations in matrix in part (C).
These basic examples of coding nuclear genome qualities as phylogenetic characters 
allow for two conclusions: (1) phylogenetic signal can likely be extracted using methods 
such as GFC and (2) the method of character coding matters because we found that 
cumulative frequency far outperformed non-cumulative frequency coding (which in one 
case produced a tree devoid of ‘correct’ relationships; Fig. 10.4B). This suggests that 
decisions about character coding will be important when comparing snake nuclear 
genomes in a phylogenetic context.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 225
(A)
-------Elapidae
(B)
Colubroidea
Boidae + Pythonidae
Viperidae
other toxicoferans
Gekko
Figure 10.4 Test case of using generalized frequency coding (GFC) to code 14 repetitive element 
categories of snake nuclear genomes as characters for phylogenetic analysis. (A) UPGMA tree 
resulting from cumulative GFC of 98 characters. (B) UPGMA tree resulting from non-cumulative 
analysis of 112 coded characters. Solid circles indicate nodes consistent with a priori expectations 
from Fig. 10.3A. All trees have been rooted with Gekko.
10.4 Unresolved and Contentious Branches for Snakes
As research on snake origins and relationships continues, systematists are likely to be most 
interested in using technical advancements to study unresolved relationships. Modern 
molecular work has clearly done much to advance our understanding of snake systematics, 
even resolving the taxonomic placement of some enigmatic taxa including Brachyorrhos 
[71], Xenophidion [72], and Xylophis [73]. However, despite the plethora of data now 
available for a broad taxonomic sampling of snakes, some branches within Serpentes 
remain contentious and/or poorly supported, with different molecular datasets and tree­
inference methods producing varying results.
10.4.1 Scolecophidia
Large and broadly sampled familial or generic-level phylogenies for snakes began 
appearing in the 1990s and 2000s and continue to the present day [4, 5, 35, 42, 74-81].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

226 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
Across these phylogenies there are several poorly supported and/or inconsistent place­
ments that persist regardless of the datasets or methodologies used. For example, although 
molecular phylogenetic studies challenge the monophyly of Scolecophidia (sensu latu), 
with most studies over the past decade indicating non-monophyly, the placement of major 
scolecophidian lineages varies [4, 5, 42, 78-80, 82, 83]. Specifically, these studies all find that 
Anomalepididae are, at minimum, an independent lineage (not sister to a lineage compris­
ing only other extant scolecophidians), although this may be dependent on the methods 
used when estimating the phylogeny (see [4]). However, even among the phylogenies that 
support a lack of scolecophidian monophyly, the position of Anomalepididae remains 
inconsistent (and with varying support), with the sister to all other living snakes 
(Alethinophidia) found to be either Anomalepididae (e.g., [5, 42, 47, 78, 84]) or all non- 
anomalepidid scolecophidians [4, 79, 82]. This uncertainty is particularly noteworthy 
because it has a profound impact on inferring ancestral states of the earliest divergences 
within Serpentes. Furthermore, not all scolecophidian families (e.g., Xenotyphlopidae) or 
major subfamilial lineages have been included in genome-scale analyses, leaving the non- 
monophyly of scolecophidians a hypothesis that requires further testing.
10.4.2 Colubroidea
Even when using well-sampled, large datasets and high-powered computational analyses, 
the relationships of families within Colubroidea (sensu stricto) (e.g., Natricidae and 
Grayiidae) and the relationships of some families within Elapoidea (e.g., Elapidae and 
Lamprophiidae) remain uncertain. This is indicated by low-support values and/or incon­
sistent placement in recent studies [5, 47], as well as in studies with fewer nuclear loci [79­
82, 84]. A commonality in these cases is relatively short internal branches [5], something 
that, as described in the Introduction (§ 10.1), remain a challenge in inferring phylogeny 
across the tree of life [2, 85] including for squamate systematic studies in general [36, 79].
10.4.3 Toxicofera and Macrostomata
Comparative genomics will likely be applied to understanding molecular snake phylogenies 
with particular relationships that greatly contrast with phylogenetic inferences based on 
traditional morphological characters. It was long agreed that within squamates, snakes 
were part of the Scleroglossa [86], a group consisting of gekkotans and autarchoglossans 
(i.e., all squamates exclusive of Iguania). However, molecular work began challenging this 
hypothesis, with phylogenies indicating that Iguania + Anguimorpha shared a more recent 
common ancestor with snakes [87-89]. This group (including snakes) was named 
Toxicofera [89]. Molecular evidence repeatedly supports the validity of Toxicofera to a 
degree that we would argue it is not contentious at this point [5, 47, 79, 82, 84, 90]. Given 
this, comparative genomics may offer little additional information beyond further testing of 
the sister taxon for Serpentes, i.e., the Serpentes (Iguania + Anguimorpha) relationship 
suggested by most genome-scale datasets [5, 47, 90].
Similarly, the lack of support that the ‘macrostomatan’ snakes form a clade within 
Serpentes has been repeatedly found to be a poorly supported hypothesis when using 
molecular data, specifically due to the evidence for Amerophidia (Aniliidae +
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 227
Tropidophiidae). Although found in recent genomic-scale phylogenies (e.g., [4, 5, 47]), this 
relationship was also frequently recovered in older, single locus studies (e.g., [76]), across 
various multilocus studies [36, 77-80, 82], and from one morphological study [91].
10.5 Conclusions
In this chapter we summarized almost 100 years of molecular studies that have informed 
our understanding of how the snake tree of life came to exist. Given the large amount of 
concordance between early and modern molecular phylogenetic analyses (§ 10.2), one may 
wonder if comparing whole genomes among snakes will provide any truly novel insights 
into snake phylogeny. As outlined previously (§ 10.4), despite genome-scale datasets often 
corroborating previous phylogenetic hypotheses, there are still plenty of uncertainties. It is 
these uncertainties that we think comparative nuclear genomics will be most relevant for 
addressing as we continue to study the origins of snakes. However, it remains unclear if we 
are broadly ready in terms of our analytical toolkits and resources to infer phylogenies using 
comparative genomics.
Although there is clearly phylogenetic signal in genome-level characters of snakes, we see 
several challenges to address before the potential of systematic comparative genomics can 
be fully explored. As discussed above (§ 10.3), current snake genome assemblies vary 
substantially in their quality, completeness, and the methodologies used to annotate them. 
As such, automated pipelines for the assembly and annotation of snake genomes from raw 
data would add precision to nuclear genome comparisons. Though these bioinformatics 
pipelines are currently available, they are computationally intensive, making them 
inaccessible to most snake systematists. Genomes are lacking from several major lineages 
of Serpentes including many of the early diverging radiations (e.g., Scolecophidia, 
Amerophidia, and Uropeltoidea). We recommend sequencing (near) complete genomes 
from representatives of these groups prior to exploring comparative genomics. Using GFC 
or similar methods may be helpful for extracting some phylogenetic signal, but may not be 
appropriate for coding all characteristics of nuclear genomes (e.g., sex chromosome condi­
tion). Performing more localized comparisons with particular nuclear genome qualities 
may also be beneficial because global summaries may miss subtle phylogenetic signal. For 
example, GC content may differ between macro- and micro-chromosomes [92]. Finally, 
establishing pragmatic methods for coding different qualities of snake genomes will likely 
require collaboration and validation from genomics researchers, much as developmental 
biologists have improved the use of morphological characters for phylogenetic inference. 
Key research areas that will aid approaches to comparative genomics include patterns of 
gene-family and transposable-element evolution [62, 63, 93]. The development of probabil­
istic models for how genomic qualities change through time would aid in leveraging 
likelihood-based approaches to phylogenetic inference.
Advances in molecular methodologies, in particular sequencing technologies and com­
putational power, have opened the door to integrating whole genomes with evolutionary 
research. Furthermore, some of these sequencing technologies enable us to generate 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

228 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
sequence data from historical, formalin-fixed museum specimens, allowing them to be 
placed in a molecular phylogeny [94, 95]. This also creates the possibility of eventually 
sequencing partial or whole nuclear genomes from extinct or rare species (sensu [96]). 
Comparative genomics of snakes has already informed an array of research disciplines 
including in the areas of toxicology [97] and genomic-landscape dynamics [51]. Although 
we emphasize that comparative genomics (whether applied as described in this chapter or 
with yet to be developed methods) is unlikely to be a panacea to all systematic problems or 
questions, we are confident that it will provide further insight into the early evolution of 
snakes. Clarifying the origin of snakes, however, will remain at least partly a 
palaeontological endeavour because additional fossils are needed to better place snake 
origins in the broader context of squamate reptile evolution.
Acknowledgements
We sincerely thank David Gower and Hussam Zaher for the invitation to present our joint 
talk ‘Conflicting histories: assessing phylogenetic signal across the genomes of snakes’ at 
the Linnean Society in London on 24 June 2019. We also thank them for editing this 
chapter. We thank Giulia Pasquesi and Davide Pisani for reviews that greatly enhanced 
the quality of this chapter. We are grateful to Henrique Costa, Rayna Bell, Bob Drewes, Bob 
Hansen (SSAR), Leo Smith (ASIH) and Kraig Adler (SSAR) for assistance with locating 
photographs for Figure 10.1 and the other participants of the ‘Contribution to the Origin 
and Early Evolution of Snakes’ symposium for an inspirational set of talks and interactions.
References
1. H. M. I. Kerkkamp, R. Manjunatha Kini, 
A. S. Pospelov, et al., Snake genome 
sequencing: Results and future prospects. 
Toxins (Basel), 8 (2016), 360.
2. J. H. Degnan and N. A. Rosenberg, Gene 
tree discordance, phylogenetic inference 
and the multispecies coalescent. Trends in 
Ecology and Evolution, 24 (2009), 332-40.
3. C. Zhang, M. Rabiee, E. Sayyari, and
S. Mirarab, ASTRAL-III: polynomial time 
species tree reconstruction from partially 
resolved gene trees. BMC Bioinformatics 19 
(2018), 153.
4. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses reveal novel 
relationships among snake families.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 100 
(2016), 160-169.
5. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
6. D. H. Huson, R. Rupp, and C. Scornavacca, 
Phylogenetic Networks: Concepts, 
Algorithms and Applications (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010).
7. M. C. Brandley, D. L. Warren, A. D. Leache, 
and J. A. McGuire, Homoplasy and clade 
support. Systematic Biology, 58 (2009), 
184-198.
8. J. L. Boore and S. I. Fuerstenberg, Beyond 
linear sequence comparisons: the use of 
genome-level characters for phylogenetic 
reconstruction. Philosophical Transactions 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 229
of the Royal Society London B, 363 (2008), 
1445-1451.
9. J. L. Boore,The use of genome-level 
characteristics for phylogenetic 
reconstruction. Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution, 21 (2006), 439-446.
10. C. H. Kellaway and F. E. Williams, The 
serological and blood relationships of some 
common Australian snakes. Australian 
Journal of Experimental Biology and 
Medical Science, 8 (1931), 123-132.
11. G. C. Bond, Serological Studies of the 
Reptilia: I. Hemagglutinins and 
hemagglutinogens of snake blood. The 
Journal of Immunology, 36 (1939), 1-9.
12. G. C. Bond and N. P. Sherwood, Serological 
studies of the Reptilia: II. The hemolytic 
property of snake serum. The Journal of 
Immunology, 36 (1939), 11-16.
13. D. W. George and H. C. Dessauer, 
Immunological correspondence of 
transferrins and the relationships of 
colubrid snakes. Comparative Biochemistry 
and Physiology, 33 (1970), 617-627.
14. E. Cohen, Immunological studies of the 
serum proteins of some reptiles. The 
Biological Bulletin, 109(1955), 394-403.
15. N. G. Crawford, B. C. Faircloth, 
J. E. McCormack, et al., More than 
1000 ultraconserved elements provide 
evidence that turtles are the sister group 
of archosaurs. Biology Letters, 8 (2012), 
783-6.
16. D. J. Field, J. A. Gauthier, B. L. King, et al., 
Toward consilience in reptile phylogeny: 
miRNAs support an archosaur, not 
lepidosaur, affinity for turtles. Evolution & 
Development, 16 (2014), 189-196.
17. D. D. Pearson, Serological and immuno- 
electrophoretic comparisons among 
species of snakes. Bulletin of the Serological 
Museum 36 (1966), 8.
18. H. C. Dessauer, W. Fox, and J. R. Ramirez, 
Preliminary attempt to correlate paper- 
electrophoretic migration of hemoglobins 
with phylogeny in Amphibia and Reptilia. 
Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics, 71 
(1957), 11-16.
19. H. C. Dessauer, Molecular approach 
to the taxonomy of colubrid snakes. 
Herpetologica, 23 (1967), 148-155.
20. H. G. Dowling, Hemipenes and other 
characters in colubrid classification. 
Herpetologica, 2(1967), 138-142.
21. G. L. Underwood, A Contribution to the 
Classification of Snakes (London: British 
Museum (Natural History), 1967).
22. S. -H. Mao and H. C. Dessauer, 
Selectively neutral mutations, transferrins 
and the evolution of natricine snakes. 
Comparative Biochemistry and 
Physiology Part A: Physiology, 40 (1971), 
669-680.
23. S. -H. Mao, B. -Y. Chen, and H. -M. Chang, 
The evolutionary relationships of sea 
snakes suggested by immunological cross­
reactivity of transferrins. Comparative 
Biochemistry and Physiology Part A: 
Physiology, 57 (1977), 403-406.
24. R. Lawson and H. C. Dessauer, 
Electrophoretic evaluation of the colubrid 
genus Elaphe (Fitzinger). Isozyme Bulletin, 
14 (1981), 83.
25. H. G. Dowlings, R. Highton, G. C. Maha, 
and L. R. Maxson, Biochemical evaluation 
of colubrid snake phylogeny. Journal of 
Zoology, 201 (1983), 309-329.
26. J. E. Cadle, H. C. Dessauer, C. Gans, and 
D. F. Gartside, Phylogenetic relationships and 
molecular evolution in uropeltid snakes 
(Serpentes: Uropeltidae): allozymes and 
albumin immunology. Biological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 40 (1990), 293-320.
27. J. B. Slowinski, A phylogenetic analysis of 
the New World coral snakes (Elapidae: 
Leptomicrurus, Micruroides, and Micrurus) 
based on allozymic and morphological 
characters. Journal of Herpetology, 29 
(1995), 325-338.
28. J. E. Cadle (1988). Phylogenetic 
relationships among advanced snakes: a 
molecular perspective. University of 
California Publications in Zoology, 119 
(1988), 1-77.
29. C. R. Feldman and G. S. Spicer (2002). 
Mitochondrial variation in sharp-tailed 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

230 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
snakes (Contia tenuis): Evidence of a 
cryptic species. Journal of Herpetology, 36 
(2002), 648.
30. F. Kraus and W. M. Brown, Phylogenetic 
relationships of colubroid snakes based on 
mitochondrial DNA sequences. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 122 (1998), 
455-487.
31. J. B. Slowinski and J. S. Keogh, Phylogenetic 
relationships of elapid snakes based on 
cytochrome b mtDNA sequences.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 15 
(2000), 157-164.
32. F. T. Burbrink, R. Lawson, and
J. B. Slowinski, Mitochondrial DNA 
phylogeography of the polytypic North 
American rat snake (Elaphe obsoleta): a 
critique of the subspecies concept. 
Evolution, 54 (2000), 2107-2118.
33. D. J. Funk and K. E. Omland, Species-level 
paraphyly and polyphyly: Frequency, 
causes, and consequences, with insights 
from animal mitochondrial DNA. Annual 
Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 
Systematics, 34 (2003), 397-423.
34. D. Rubinoff and B. S. Holland, Between two 
extremes: mitochondrial DNA is neither the 
panacea nor the nemesis of phylogenetic 
and taxonomic inference. Systematic 
Biology, 54 (2005), 952-961.
35. R. Lawson, J. B. Slowinski, B. I. Crother, and 
F. T. Burbrink, Phylogeny of the 
Colubroidea (Serpentes): new evidence 
from mitochondrial and nuclear genes. 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 37 
(2005), 581-601.
36. J. J. Wiens, C. A. Kuczynski, S. A. Smith, 
et al., Branch lengths, support, and 
congruence: Testing the phylogenomic 
approach with 20 nuclear loci in 
snakes. Systematic Biology, 57 (2008), 
420-431.
37. L. S. Kubatko, H. L. Gibbs, and
E. W. Bloomquist, Inferring species-level 
phylogenies and taxonomic distinctiveness 
using multilocus data in Sistrurus 
rattlesnakes. Systematic Biology, 60 (2011), 
393-409.
38. K. L. Sanders, M. S. Y. Lee, Mumpuni, T. 
Bertozzi, and A. R. Rasmussen, Multilocus 
phylogeny and recent rapid radiation of the 
viviparous sea snakes (Elapidae: 
Hydrophiinae). Molecular Phylogenetics 
and Evolution, 66 (2013), 575-591.
39. J. W. Streicher and S. Ruane, Phylogenomics 
of snakes. In eLS. Chichester: John Wiley & 
Sons Ltd, 2018, DOI: 10.1002/ 
9780470015902.a0027476).
40. B. C. Faircloth, J. E. McCormack, 
N. G. Crawford, et al., Ultraconserved 
elements anchor thousands of genetic 
markers spanning multiple evolutionary 
timescales. Systematic Biology, 61 (2012), 
717-726.
41. A. R. Lemmon, S. A. Emme, and 
E. M. Lemmon, Anchored hybrid 
enrichment for massively high-throughput 
phylogenomics. Systematic Biology, 61 
(2012), 727-44.
42. S. Singhal, M. Grundler, G. Colli, and 
D. L. Rabosky, Squamate conserved loci 
(SqCL): A unified set of conserved loci for 
phylogenomics and population genetics of 
squamate reptiles. Molecular Ecology 
Resources, 17 (2017), e12-e24.
43. B. R. Karin, T. Gamble, and T. R. Jackman, 
Optimizing phylogenomics with rapidly 
evolving long exons: Comparison with 
anchored hybrid enrichment and 
ultraconserved element. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution, 37 (2020), 904-922.
44. X. Chen, A. R. Lemmon, E. M. Lemmon, 
R. A. Pyron, and F. T. Burbrink, Using 
phylogenomics to understand the link 
between biogeographic origins and 
regional diversification in ratsnakes. 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 111 
(2017), 206-218.
45. T. A. Castoe, C. L. Spencer, and 
C. L. Parkinson, Phylogeographic 
structure and historical demography of the 
western diamondback rattlesnake (Crotalus 
atrox): A perspective on North American 
desert biogeography. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 42 (2007), 
193-212.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 231
46. D. R. Schield, D. C. Card, N. R. Hales, et al., 
The origins and evolution of chromosomes, 
dosage compensation, and mechanisms 
underlying venom regulation in snakes. 
Genome Research, 29 (2019), 590-601.
47. S. Singhal, T. J. Colston, M. R. Grundler, 
et al., Congruence and conflict in the 
higher-level phylogenetics of squamate 
reptiles: An expanded phylogenomic 
perspective. Systematic Biology, 70 (2021), 
542-557.
48. G. E. Sims, S. -E. Jun, G. A. Wu, and
S. -H. Kim, Whole-genome phylogeny of 
mammals: Evolutionary information in 
genic and nongenic regions. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences USA, 106 
(2009), 1777-17082.
49. T. A. Castoe, A. P. J. de Koning, K. T. Hall, 
et al., The Burmese python genome reveals 
the molecular basis for extreme adaptation 
in snakes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 110 (2013), 
20645-20650.
50. M. W. Giorgianni, N. L. Dowell, S. Griffin, 
et al., The origin and diversification of a 
novel protein family in venomous snakes. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 117 (2020), 10911-10920.
51. G. I. M. Pasquesi, R. H. Adams, D. C. Card, 
et al., Squamate reptiles challenge 
paradigms of genomic repeat element 
evolution set by birds and mammals. 
Nature Communications, 9 (2018), 2774.
52. C. Gilbert, J. M. Meik, D. Dashevsky, et al., 
Endogenous hepadaviruses, bornaviruses 
and circoviruses in snakes. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B, 281 (2014), 1122.
53. B. Augstenova, M. Johnson Pokorna, 
M. Altmanova, et al., ZW, XY, and yet ZW: 
Sex chromosome evolution in snakes even 
more complicated. Evolution, 72 (2018), 
1701-1707.
54. P. Palvildis, J. D. Jensen, W. Stephan, and 
A. Stamatakis, A critical assessment of 
storytelling: gene ontology categories and 
the importance of validating genome scans. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 29 (2012), 
3237-3248.
55. J. W. Archie, Methods for coding variable 
morphological features for numerical 
taxonomic analysis. Systematic Zoology, 34 
(1985), 326-345.
56. R. S. Thorpe, Coding morphometric 
characters for constructing distance 
Wagner networks. Evolution, 38 (1984), 
244-255.
57. J. V. Freudenstein, Characters, states and 
homology. Systematic Biology, 54 (2005), 
965-973.
58. W. Yin, Z-J. Wang, Q-Y. Li, et al., 
Evolutionary trajectories of snake genes 
and genomes revealed by comparative 
analyses of five-pacer viper. Nature 
Communications, 7 (2016), 13107.
59. J. -T. Li, Y. -D. Gao, L. Xie , et al., 
Comparative genomics investigation of 
high elevation adaptation in ectothermic 
snakes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 115 (2018), 
8406-8411.
60. D.C. Card, R. H. Adams, D. R. Schield, et al., 
Genomic basis of convergent island 
phenotypes in boa constrictors. Genome 
Biology and Evolution, 11 (2019), 3123-3143.
61. C. L. Organ, R. Godinez Moreno, and 
S. V. Edwards, Three tiers of genome 
evolution in reptiles. Integrative and 
Comparative Biology, 48 (2008), 494-504.
62. J. O. Kriegs, G. Churalov, M. Kiefmann, 
et al., Retrotransposed elements as archives 
for the evolutionary history of placental 
mammals. PLoS Biology, 4 (2006), e91.
63. D. Vitales, S. Garcia, and S. Dodsworth, 
Reconstructing phylogenetic relationships 
based on repeat sequence similarities. 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 147 
(2020), 106766.
64. E. N. Smith and R. L. Gutberlet Jr., 
Generalized frequency coding: A method of 
preparing polymorphic multistate 
characters for phylogenetic analysis. 
Systematic Biology, 50 (2001), 156-169.
65. J. J. Wiens, Character analysis in 
morphological phylogenetics: problems 
and solutions. Systematic Biology, 50 
(2001), 689-699.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

232 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
66. A. M. Lawing, J. M. Meik, and
W. E. Schargel, Coding meristic characters 
for phylogenetic analysis: A comparison of 
step-matrix gap weighting and generalized 
frequency coding. Systematic Biology, 57 
(2008), 167-173.
67. J. J. Wiens, Polymorphic characters in 
phylogenetic systematics. Systematic 
Biology, 44 (1995), 482-500.
68. K. P. Schliep, Phangorn: phylogenetic 
analysis in R. Bioinformatics, 27 (2011), 
592-593.
69. R Development Core Team, R: A Language 
and Environment for Statistical Computing 
(Vienna: R Foundation for Statistical 
Computing, 2019).
70. T. H. Jukes and C. R. Cantor, Evolution of 
protein molecules. In H. N. Munro, ed. 
Mammalian protein metabolism. Volume 3 
(New York: Academic Press, 1969), 
pp. 21-132.
71. J. C. Murphy and K. L. Sanders, First 
molecular evidence for the phylogenetic 
placement of the enigmatic snake genus 
Brachyorrhos (Serpentes: Caenophidia). 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 61 
(2011), 953-957.
72. R. Lawson, J. B. Slowinski, and
F. T. Burbrink, A molecular approach to 
discerning the phylogenetic placement 
of the enigmatic snake Xenophidion 
schaeferi among the Alethinophidia. 
Journal of Zoology, 263 (2004), 
285-294.
73. V. Deepak, S. Ruane, and D. J. Gower, 
A new subfamily of fossorial colubroid 
snakes from the Western Ghats of 
peninsular India. Journal of Natural 
History, 52 (2018), 2919-2934.
74. P. J. Heise, L. R. Maxson, H. G. Dowling, 
and S. B. Hedges, Higher-level snake 
phylogeny inferred from mitochondrial 
DNA sequences of 12S rRNA and 16S rRNA 
genes. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 12 
(1995), 259-265.
75. H. G. Dowling, C. A. Hass, S. B. Hedges, 
and R. Highton, Snake relationships 
revealed by slow evolving proteins: a 
preliminary survey. Journal of Zoology, 240 
(1996), 1-28.
76. J. B. Slowinski and R. Lawson, Snake 
phylogeny: evidence from nuclear and 
mitochondrial genes. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 24 (2002), 
194-202.
77. R. A. Pyron, F. T. Burbrink, G. R. Colli, et al., 
The phylogeny of advanced snakes 
(Colubroidea), with discovery of a new 
subfamily and comparison of support 
methods for likelihood trees. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 58 (2011), 
329-342.
78. R. A. Pyron, H. K. D. Kandambi,
C. R. Hendry, et al., Genus-level phylogeny 
of snakes reveals the origins of species 
richness in Sri Lanka. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 66 (2013), 
969-978.
79. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Resolving the phylogeny of lizards 
and snakes (Squamata) with extensive 
sampling of genes and species. Biology 
Letters, 8 (2012), 1043-1046.
80. A. Figueroa, A. D. McKelvy, L. L. Grismer, 
C. D. Bell, and S. P. Lailvaux, A species­
level phylogeny of extant snakes with 
description of a new colubrid subfamily 
and genus. PloS ONE, 11 (2016), 
e0161070.
81. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PloS ONE, 14 (2019), 
e0216148.
82. Y. Zheng and J. J. Wiens, Combining 
phylogenomic and supermatrix 
approaches, and a time-calibrated 
phylogeny for squamate reptiles (lizards 
and snakes) based on 52 genes and 4162 
species. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 94 (2016), 537-547.
83. A. Miralles, L. Marin, D. Markus, et al., 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

COMPARATIVE GENOMICS AND SNAKE ORIGINS 233
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
84. R. A. Pyron, R. A., F. T. Burbrink, and 
J. J. Wiens, A phylogeny and revised 
classification of Squamata, including 
4161 species of lizards and snakes. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 13 (2013), 93.
85. A. Rokas and S. B. Carroll, Bushes in the 
tree of life. PLoS Biology, 4 (2006), e352.
86. R. K. Estes, K. de Queiroz, and J. Gauthier, 
Phylogenetic relationships within 
Squamata. In R. Estes and G. Pregill, eds., 
Phylogenetic Relationships of the Lizard 
Families (Stanford: Stanford University 
Press 1988), pp.119-281.
87. K. M. Saint, C. C. Austin, S. C. Donnellan, 
and M. N. Hutchinson, C-mos, a nuclear 
marker useful for squamate phylogenetic 
analysis. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 10 (1998), 259-263.
88. T. M. Townsend, A. Larson, E. Louis, and 
J. R. Macey, Molecular phylogenetics of 
Squamata: the position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the 
root of the squamate tree. Systematic 
Biology, 53 (2004), 735-757.
89. N. Vidal and S. B. Hedges, The phylogeny 
of squamate reptiles (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) inferred from nine 
nuclear protein-coding genes. Comptes 
Rendus Biologies, 328 (2005), 1000-1008.
90. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses of more than 
4000 nuclear loci resolve the origin of 
snakes among lizard families. Biology 
Letters, 13 (2017), 20170393.
91. D. S. Siegel, A. Miralles, and R. D. Aldridge, 
R. D., Controversial snake relationships 
supported by reproductive anatomy. 
Journal of Anatomy, 218 (2011), 342-348.
92. D. R. Schield, D. C. Card, R. H. Adams, 
et al., Incipient speciation with biased gene 
flow between two lineages of the Western 
Diamondback Rattlesnake (Crotalus atrox). 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 83 
(2015), 213-223.
93. T. A. Williams, G. J. Szollosi, A. Spang, et al., 
Integrative modeling of gene and genome 
evolution roots the archaeal tree of life. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences USA, 114 (2017), E4602-4611.
94. S. Ruane and C. C. Austin, Phylogenomics 
using formalin-fixed and 100+ year-old 
intractable natural history specimens. 
Molecular Ecology Resources, 17 (2017), 
1003-1008.
95. S. Ruane, New data from old specimens. 
Copeia (in press).
96. C. Y. Feigin, A. H. Newton, L. Doronina, 
et al., Genome of the Tasmanian tiger 
provides insights into the evolution and 
demography of an extinct marsupial 
carnivore. Nature Ecology and Evolution, 2 
(2018), 182-192.
97. H. Shibata, T. Chijiwa, N. Oda-Ueda, et al., 
The habu genome reveals accelerated 
evolution of venom protein genes. Scientific 
Reports, 8 (2018), 11300.
98. K. Adler, Contributions to the History of 
Herpetology, Volume 3 (Vancouver: Society 
for the Study of Amphibians and Reptiles, 
1012), 564 pp.
99. R. S. Thorpe, Garth Underwood 
(1919-2002): A vision of reptile systematics. 
Herpetological Review, 34 (2003), 6-7.
100. E. A. Liner and C. J. Cole, Herbert 
C. Dessauer. Copeia, 2003 (2003), 
195-199.
101. K. R. Bradnam, J. N. Fass, A. Alexandrov, 
et al., Assemblathon 2: evaluating de novo 
methods of genome assembly in three 
vertebrate species. GigaScience, 2 (2013), 
2047-217x-2-10.
102. J. W. McGlothlin, J. P. Chuckalovcak, 
D. E. Janes, et al., Parallel evolution of 
tetrodotoxin resistance in three voltage­
gated sodium channel genes in the garter 
snake Thamnophis sirtalis. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution, 31 (2014), 
2836-2846.
103. A. Ullate-Agote, M. C. Milinkovitch, and 
A. C. Tzikia, The genome sequence of the 
corn snake (Pantherophis guttatus), a 
valuable resource for EvoDevo studies in 
squamates. International Journal of 
Developmental Biology, 58 (2014), 881-888.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

234 sara ruane and jeffrey W. streicher
104. S. T. H. Earl, G. W. Birrell, T. P. Wallis, et al., 
Post-translational modification accounts 
for the presence of varied forms of nerve 
growth factor in Australian elapid 
snake venoms. Proteomics, 6 (2006), 
6554-6665.
105. T. Kishida, Y. Go, S. Tatsumoto, et al., Loss 
of olfaction in sea snakes provides new 
perspectives on the aquatic adaptation of 
amniotes. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B, 286 (2019), 2019.1828.
106. C. Peng, J-L. Ren, C. Deng, et al., The 
genome of Shaw’s seasnake (Hydrophis 
curtus) reveals secondary adaptation to its 
marine environment. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution, 37 (2020), 1744-1760.
107. K. Suryamohan, S. P. Krishnankutty, 
J. Guillory, et al., The Indian cobra 
reference genome and transcriptome 
enables comprehensive identification of 
venom toxins. Nature Genetics, 52 (2020), 
106-117.
108. F. J. Vonk, N. R. Casewell, C. V. Henkel, 
et al., The king cobra genome reveals 
dynamic gene evolution and adaptation in 
the snake venom system. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences USA, 110 
(2013), 20651-20656.
109. S. D. Aird, J. Arora, A. Barua, et al., 
Population genomic analysis of a pitviper 
reveals microevolutionary forces 
underlying venom chemistry. Genome 
Biology and Evolution, 9 (2018), 2640-2649.
110. M. L. van Hoek, M. D. Prickett, R. E. Settlage, 
et al., The Komodo dragon (Varanus 
komodoensis) genome and identification of 
innate immunity genes and clusters. BMC 
Genomics, 20 (2019), 684.
111. A. Georges, Q. Li, J. Lian, et al., High- 
coverage sequencing and annotate 
assembly of the genome of the Australian 
dragon lizard Pogona vitticeps. GigaScience, 
4 (2015), 45.
112. J. Alfoldi, F. Di Palma, M. Grabherr, et al., 
The genome of the green anole lizards 
and a comparative analysis with birds 
and mammals. Nature, 477 (2011), 
587-591.
113. Y. Liu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wang, et al., Gekko 
japonicus genome reveals evolution of 
adhesive toe pads and tail regeneration. 
Nature Communications, 6 (2015), 10033.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.014 Published online by Cambridge University Press

11
The Evolution of Squamate Chitinase Genes 
(CHIAs) Supports an Insectivory-Carnivory 
Transition during the Early History of Snakes
Christopher A. Emerling
11.1 Introduction
As genome sequencing and assembly continues to improve in terms of feasibility, an 
increasing wealth of genomic resources have become available for research in the public 
domain. In regards to snakes, 2013 saw the first published serpent genomes [1, 2], and the 
National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) hosts 27 snake assemblies available 
for research at the time of this writing. Although these are but a tiny fraction of the >3,800 
extant species of Serpentes, they have provided evidence for the genomic basis of a number 
of major evolutionary events during the early history of snakes, including limb loss [2-6], 
the expansion of olfactory and vomeronasal sensory repertoires [1, 7], the minimization of 
gustation in conjunction with the forking of the tongue [4, 8], and the reduction of light­
dependent physiological processes [1, 4, 9], including colour vision.
One topic that has been understudied in snake history concerns evolutionary shifts in 
diet. Although most of the predominantly faunivorous non-serpent squamates include 
arthropods in their diet [10], most extant snakes can be described as carnivorous, largely 
feeding on vertebrate prey [11]. Certain modifications in snake anatomy and predation 
strategies likely reflect such a change in diet, including the presence of recurved teeth [12], 
and various prey-disabling traits, such as constriction and envenomation (see Chapters 12, 
18, and 19). However, there are some notable exceptions to this dietary trend in serpents: 
Dipsadidae, Pareidae, and Uropeltidae are or include annelid and/or mollusc specialists, 
Homalopsidae and Natricidae include crustacean specialists, and some of the earliest 
diverging lineages (‘Scolecophidia’) are today represented by myrmecophagous species, 
primarily specializing in eating ants and termites [11]. Furthermore, consumption of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

236 christopher A. emerling
arthropods (= ‘insectivory’, as applied here; sometimes termed arthopodophagy) has been 
recorded in some boids, viperids, elapids, lamprophiids, and colubroids [11], making it 
unclear whether a major dietary shift from generalized faunivory to a more strict carnivory 
was associated with the early evolution of snakes.
If such an evolutionary transition in diet did indeed occur, it may be reflected in extant 
serpent genomes. One set of genes that may help clarify snake history encodes chitinase 
enzymes. Chitinases degrade chitin, a polysaccharide that makes up much of the exoskel­
etons of arthropods, including insects. Chitinases are found across disparate vertebrates 
[13-15], although genetically they have been best characterized in placental mammals [16­
18]. Notably, the acidic mammalian chitinases (CHIAs), which are found in the digestive 
tracts of mammals [19-21], positively correlate with the proportion of invertebrates, pri­
marily arthropods, in the diet [16]. Specifically, up to five functional CHIAs, inherited from a 
probable insectivorous common ancestor, are found in placental mammalian lineages that 
likely have had a long history of sustained insectivory (e.g., afrotherian insectivores 
[Afroinsectiphilia], tree shrews [Scandentia], armadillos [Cingulata], anteaters 
[Vermilingua], tarsiers [Tarsiidae]), whereas committed herbivores and carnivores have 
inactivated and/or deleted four or all five of these CHIAs (e.g., elephants, manatees, and 
hyraxes [Paenungulata], sloths [Folivora], Old World fruit bats [Pteropodidae], toothed 
whales [Odontoceti], rhinos and horses [Perissodactyla], carnivorans). These observations 
are consistent with predictions from regressive evolution, in which adapting to a new niche 
renders a formerly useful trait superfluous [22], frequently leading to the loss and/or 
inactivation of genes underlying such traits [23-26].
Given the widespread consumption of arthropods by many squamates [10], it seems 
plausible that chitinases may be widespread in this clade. Chitinases have been reported in 
the digestive tracts of some lizards [15, 27, 28], suggesting that these species may also 
possess CHIAs. However, one question is whether squamate CHIAs vary in number as in 
placental mammals, with the number of genes having expanded and/or contracted over 
evolutionary history. By extension, if the lineage leading to Serpentes inherited chitinases 
from an ancestral squamate, did snakes lose CHIAs en masse, as expected when adapting to 
carnivory? This chapter seeks to address these questions by examining CHIA gene content 
in serpent and other squamate genomes.
11.2 Materials and Methods
11.2.1 Data Collection
I began by BLASTing (discontiguous megablast) [29] a reference human CHIA 
(NM_021797.4) against the nucleotide collection on NCBI, restricting the search to the 
taxon Squamata. NCBI’s Eukaryotic Genome Annotation pipeline creates gene models for 
many of their stored genome assemblies, providing access to annotated gene sequences. 
I downloaded all gene models with annotations that suggested homology with CHIA, such 
as acidic mammalian chitinase-like, chitinase-3-like protein 1 and chitotriosidase-1, and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 237
imported them into Geneious R9 [30]. I then performed additional BLASTs using the newly 
obtained gene models and also searched NCBI’s nucleotide collection directly based on the 
annotation name to ensure completeness. I recorded whether the sequence was predicted 
to be a pseudogene, as indicated by the ‘low quality’ annotation, designated when a 
predicted frameshift and/or premature stop codon has been ‘corrected’ during the creation 
of the model. Gene models for the following squamates were available at the time of this 
project: Gekko japonicus (Schlegel’s Japanese gecko; Gekkonidae), Lacerta agilis (sand 
lizard; Lacertidae), Podarcis muralis (common wall lizard; Lacertidae), Zootoca vivipara 
(viviparous lizard; Lacertidae), Pogona vitticeps (central bearded dragon; Agamidae), Anolis 
carolinensis (green anole; Dactyloidae), Python bivittatus (Burmese python; Pythonidae), 
Protobothrops mucrosquamatus (brown-spotted pit viper; Viperidae), Notechis scutatus 
(tiger snake; Elapidae), Pseudonaja textilis (eastern brown snake; Elapidae), Pantherophis 
guttatus (corn snake; Colubridae), Thamnophis elegans (western terrestrial garter snake; 
Natricidae), and Thamnophis sirtalis (common garter snake; Natricidae). Family-level 
classification follows that employed by Burbrink et al. [31].
After obtaining the gene models, to determine synteny, I BLASTed (megablast) each 
species’ sequences against their own respective genome assemblies in NCBI’s whole­
genome shotgun contigs database (WGS). I recorded the contigs and scaffolds with the best 
hits (nearly always 100 per cent identity) and the coordinates encompassing each predicted 
gene. Obtaining further synteny information (i.e., any non-chitinase genes) involved 
BLASTing (megablast) the intergenic and flanking (15,000+ bp) regions of representative 
species against the nucleotide collection, restricting the search to the identical respective 
species. I then recorded the annotation and accession number for each non-chitinase gene.
Within Geneious, I aligned whole gene sequences from WGS contigs and scaffolds to 
their respective gene models using default settings in MUSCLE [32] to understand exon 
structure. I also used this information to obtain additional snake sequences that do not yet 
have gene models. I took the whole CHIA gene for Python bivittatus, encompassing the 
exons, introns and flanking regions, and BLASTed it (discontiguous megablast) against the 
WGS for the following species: Crotalus viridis (prairie rattlesnake; Viperidae), Laticauda 
laticaudata (blue-lipped sea krait; Elapidae), Naja naja (Indian cobra; Elapidae), 
Ophiophagus hannah (king cobra; Elapidae), and Ptyas mucosa (oriental ratsnake; 
Colubridae). These taxa were chosen to maximize the number of phylogenetically distinct 
lineages available for reconstructing CHIA history in early snakes, rather than to character­
ize the CHIA complements for all available snake species. Furthermore, given that the 
Gekko japonicus assembly is relatively fragmentary, with many closely positioned genes 
being found on separate contigs and scaffolds (Supplementary Table 11.S1), I BLASTed 
(discontiguous megablast) the gene models of this species against the WGS for the 
gekkonid Paroedura picta (ocelot gecko), which has a far more contiguous assembly. All 
sequences were imported into Geneious for analysis.
11.2.2 Analyses
Within Geneious, I took the coding sequences of all putative squamate chitinase sequences 
and performed several rounds of automated sequence alignments (MUSCLE, nucleotide 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

238 christopher A. emerling
and translation align), plus manual adjustments. This was further guided by gene-tree 
estimations using the GTR-CAT model as implemented in RAxML v. 8.2.11 [33] with default 
parameters, until arriving on a final master alignment. Using this alignment, I translated all 
squamate sequences and examined them for the chitinolytic domain characteristic of 
functional chitinases (DXXDXDXE) [34], and the six cysteines towards the C-terminus 
associated with chitin-binding function [35].
After characterizing the functionality of each chitinase gene, I aligned this final batch of 
sequences (MUSCLE, translation align) to a CHIA alignment of placental mammals [16] and 
human CHIT1 (chitotriosidase; NM_003465), CHI3L1 (chitinase 3 like 1; NM_001276), 
CHI3L2 (chitinase 3 like 2; NM_004000) and OVGP1 (oviductal glycoprotein 1; 
NM_002557) sequences (Supplementary Appendix 11.S1), due to their being part of the 
wider chitinase gene family [36]. I then executed a RAxML v. 8.2.12 analysis on CIPRES 
(RAxML-HPC2 on XSEDE) [37] to estimate the gene tree for the squamate and mammalian 
chitinase genes. I used 500 bootstrap replications, but otherwise implemented default 
parameters. For comparison purposes, I have included dietary information for all of the 
focal taxa in Supplementary Table 11.S2.
11.3 Results
Despite the description of CHIAs as acidic ‘mammalian’ chitinases, these proteins are 
clearly not restricted to mammals, consistent with previous analyses [13, 36]. All examined 
squamates have at least one CHIA and as many as eight (Fig. 11.1, Supplementary Table 11. 
S1, Supplementary Appendix 11.S2). Notably, the examined snakes only possess a single 
CHIA, strongly contrasting with the other examined squamates: the next lowest count 
belongs to Pogona vitticeps with five CHIAs, seven are present in the gekkonids and 
Anolis carolinensis, and eight were found in the lacertids. Furthermore, all squamates 
examined have at least one chitotriosidase (CHIT1) and at least one chitinase-like-lectin 
(CHI3L1). Of the examined assemblies, the snake Thamnophis elegans is the only species 
with two of the former, and the lizard A. carolinensis is the sole species that has two of 
the latter.
The gene tree and synteny analyses provided the identities of some of the CHIA paralogs 
(Figs. 11.1 and 11.2, Supplementary Appendix 11.S2), but some appear to be distinct to 
squamates, or particular clades of squamates, and are not found in placental mammals. 
Placental mammal CHIAs have been named CHIA1, CHIA2, CHIA3, CHIA4 and CHIA5, 
forming distinct clades and consistent syntenic positions in association with the genes 
OVGP1, PIFO (protein pitchfork) and DENND2D (DENN domain containing 2D) [16]:
OV GP1 ! CHIA1 ! CHIA2 ! PIFO CHIA5 CHIA4 CHIA3 DEN N D2D
One squamate CHIA seems to clearly be an ortholog of CHIA3, supported by its 
phylogenetic clustering with mammalian CHIA3 (100 per cent bootstrap support [BS]) 
and its syntenic orientation (Figs. 11.1 and 11.2, Supplementary Appendix 11.S2). CHIA4 
and CHIA5 also appear to be present in squamates. Although they do not group with
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 239
Figure 11.1 Phylogram showing the estimated relationships of squamate chitinase genes to those of 
placental mammals, and a bird (Gallus gallus). This figure is a simplification of Supplementary 
Appendix 11.S2. Distinct clades are indicated by boxes and names, and taxonomic representation is 
shown by silhouettes (obtained from phylopic.org). Bootstrap support values are indicated for internal 
branches at the base of distinct paralog clades, and internal branches that are more basal than these.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Figure 11.2 Chronogram of relevant squamate lineages, with branch lengths derived from [40], showing the syntenic pattern of CHIA genes in the 
taxa studied and the inferred patterns of CHIA gains and losses. Pointed ends of gene symbols indicate direction of gene relative to other genes on 
the same chromosome. Exceptions are CHIA1A sequences indicated by an asterisk and showing two pointed ends: these are located on separate 
contigs or scaffolds. Whether this is due to the gene truly being located elsewhere in the genome or is an artifact of the assembly will require 
further research. Note that although indicated as Serpentes, the clade represented is Afrophidia, due to the absence of data for amerophidian and 
scolecophidian taxa. Silhouettes obtained from phylopic.org. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour 
version, please refer to the plate section].

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 241
mammalian CHIA4 and CHIA5, respectively, they are found immediately upstream of 
CHIA3, and form distinct squamate clades (CHIA4 86 per cent BS, CHIA5 99 per cent 
BS). Although the topology may reflect separate genes for mammalian and squamate 
CHIA4 and CHIA5, it is highly plausible that this pattern could reflect a distortion of the 
topology due to gene conversion.
To elaborate, a previous study provided evidence of gene conversion in CHIA4 and 
CHIA5 in numerous major lineages of mammals (Chiroptera [bats], Afrosoricida [African 
insectivores], Macroscelidea [elephant shrews], Tubulidentata [aardvark], Eulipotyphla 
[‘true’ insectivores], Scandentia [tree shrews], Cingulata [armadillos]), to the point that it 
appeared to greatly distort the ‘true’ gene-tree topology [16]. Specifically, when estimating 
the phylogeny for placental mammal CHIAs, CHIA4 became nested within CHIA5, and all 
other CHIA4 sequences were nested within a paraphyletic arrangement of chiropteran 
CHIA4 sequences. Furthermore, the sister group to CHIA4 was estimated to be chiropteran 
CHIA5s. However, upon removing all such bat sequences from the alignment, the resulting 
topology yielded CHIA4 and CHIA5 as monophyletic sister groups. Given the evidence for 
phylogenetically widespread gene conversion in placental mammals, and the importance of 
tandem gene orientation in gene conversion [38], gene conversion may similarly explain the 
lack of CHIA4 and CHIA5 monophyly between mammals and squamates.
Beyond CHIA3, CHIA4, and CHIA5, the five remaining squamate CHIAs appear to 
phylogenetically group with CHIA1, CHIA2, and human OVGP1, each representing a 
distinct clade (Fig. 11.1, Supplementary Appendix 11.S2). At least four of the five, when 
present, are in the same syntenic sequence, inverted in orientation relative to the CHIA3- 
CHIA5 grouping (Fig. 11.2), similar to CHIA1, CHIA2 and OVGP1 in mammals. Given that 
the topology and gene order prevent confident identification of any of the squamate genes 
as CHIA1 or CHIA2, here I tentatively describe them as CHIA1A, CHIA1B, CHIA1C, 
CHIA1D, and CHIA1E, which are oriented in that order when present on the same contig 
or scaffold. CHIA1A, however, is typically found on a separate contig or scaffold 
(Supplementary Table 11.S1), suggesting a separate genomic location for this gene. 
Furthermore, each of these CHIA clades has consistently strong bootstrap support: 92 per 
cent (CHIA1A), 99 per cent (CHIA1E) and 100 per cent (CHIA1B, CHIA1C, CHIA1D). 
Whereas CHIA1A, CHIA1B, CHIA1C, CHIA1D, CHIA3, CHIA4, and CHIA5 are all repre­
sented in the gekkonids, Anolis carolinensis, and the three lacertids, CHIA1E is found only 
in the lacertids, the agamid Pogona vitticeps lacks CHIA1C and CHIA5, and the snakes 
possess only CHIA1D. Possible pseudogenes include CHIA1C in A. carolinensis and 
CHIA1D in Gekko japonicus and Notechis scutatus.
Exon structure varies across the CHIA paralogs (Supplementary Table 11.S1): CHIA1A 
appears to range from 10 exons in Gekko japonicus, 15 in Anolis carolinensis and 20 in 
Zootoca vivipara; CHIA1B has either nine (Paroedura picta) or 11 (Z. vivipara); CHIA1C has 
5(Z. vivipara), 10 (A. carolinensis) or 11 (P. picta); CHIA1D has 10 exons across all 
12 examined species; CHIA1E has 11 in Z. vivipara; CHIA3 has nine (A. carolinensis) or 
11 (P. picta, Z. vivipara); CHIA4 has 11 (A. carolinensis, P. picta, Z. vivipara); and CHIA5 has 
seven (A. carolinensis) or 11 (P. picta, Z. vivipara). For comparison, all five mammalian 
CHIAs are reported to have 11 exons [16]. Although some deviations from this number in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

242 christopher A. emerling
squamates may be the result of assembly errors and/or poor gene model reconstruction, at 
least some are plausibly real, such as the consistent recovery of 10 exons in CHIA1D in 12 
species. Future studies will benefit from mRNA sequence data to validate the exon structure 
suggested by these gene models.
Among the CHIAs, there is variability in the presence of functional chitinolytic and chitin­
binding domains (Supplementary Table 11.S1). Whereas CHIA1B, CHIA1E, CHIA3, CHIA4 
and CHIA5 all have both domains intact in all species examined, CHIA1A, CHIA1C and 
CHIA1D appear to vary in domain functionality. In CHIA1A, Gekko japonicus lacks both 
domains, Pogona vitticeps and Anolis carolinensis lack a chitin-binding domain, whereas all 
three lacertids retain both intact. Furthermore, Zootoca vivipara appears to lack a chitino- 
lytic domain in CHIA1C, A. carolinensis seemingly has no chitin-binding domain, and the 
other three squamates have both intact. Finally, CHIA1D has a canonical chitinolytic 
domain in 16 of 18 sampled squamates, the exceptions being both Thamnophis spp., but 
the exon containing the chitin-binding domain is absent in all squamate species. As 
expected for chitinase-like-lectins [39], the CHI3L1 sequences appear to lack the potential 
for chitinase activity, given the absence of both the chitinolytic and chitin-binding domains. 
By contrast, CHIT1 varies, with most sequences possessing a chitinolytic domain and 
lacking a chitin-binding domain. The exceptions to the former include one of the two 
Thamnophis elegans CHIT1s, and those of Pogona vitticeps and all three lacertids. The only 
CHIT1 gene models retaining chitin-binding domains are, again, Pogona vitticeps and 
the lacertids.
11.4 Discussion
This is the first detailed analysis of the evolution of vertebrate chitinase genes in a taxon 
other than placental mammals, and it reveals that multiple CHIAs have a history at least as 
old as the origin of crown amniotes, roughly 320 million years ago [40]. Given uncertainties 
in the exact relationships of the paralogs, it is unclear how many CHIAs would have been 
present in the earliest amniotes, but it is plausible that there were at least five and perhaps 
more. The phylogenetic distribution of CHIA genes, however, more clearly suggests that the 
earliest crown squamates, some 200 million years ago [40, 41], had seven enzymatically 
active CHIAs (Fig. 11.2). Terrestrial ecosystems had been colonized repeatedly by chitinous 
arthropods, perhaps as early as 300 million years prior to the first squamates, with tremen­
dous diversification during this intervening period [42-45]. Presumably, as vertebrates 
adapted on land, such chitinous prey provided an invaluable energetic resource [46]. 
Being able to hydrolyze the primary component of arthropod exoskeletons would liberate 
other tissues for digestion, making chitinases an indispensable part of the earliest squa- 
mates’ genomic repertoire. The high frequency with which arthropods remain a part of 
typical lizards’ diets [10] supports this inference.
By contrast, the snakes sampled for this study appear to have lost nearly all of their 
CHIAs, suggesting the retention of only one, at least by the common ancestor of Afrophidia 
(all snakes except Amerophidia and ‘Scolecophidia’). The absence of additional chitinases 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 243
in afrophidian snakes is supported not only by the absence of gene models for the 
examined species, but the retention of the same syntenic orientation with flanking genes 
(Fig. 11.2), typically on the same contigs and scaffolds (Supplementary Table 11.S1). 
Further interrogations of the intergenic regions failed to yield evidence of CHIA 
pseudogenes in snakes, though more sensitive analyses may uncover some in future 
studies. Together, these results suggest that the absence of other CHIAs is not an issue of 
genome incompleteness, but rather reflects a major loss of these genes between when the 
serpent lineage diverged from other extant toxicoferans and prior to the origin of 
afrophidian snakes.
The extensive loss of CHIAs in placental mammals is typically associated with inferred 
transitions from insectivory to either herbivory or carnivory [16], the latter of which 
plausibly explains the pattern seen in snakes. Although variations in diet exist, snakes 
largely consume vertebrate prey [11], and a shift to such a diet is expected to lead to 
regression of the chitinase complement that was probably present in their arthropod­
consuming ancestors. Whereas most cases of CHIA gene loss have resulted in pseudogenes 
in placental mammals [16], the genes appear to be completely deleted, at least in 
afrophidian snakes.
Underlying this largely carnivorous behaviour is the presence of recurved teeth in most 
major lineages of serpents, a trait notably also found in carnivorous helodermatids and 
varanids [12, 47]. Importantly, early snake and putative snake fossils typically possess 
recurved teeth [48-51], further suggesting a transition to carnivory occurred during the 
early evolution of Serpentes. Cretaceous snake fossils, including vertebrate gut contents in 
Pachyrhachis problematicus and the putative stem serpent Tetrapodophis amplectus [48, 
52], plus suggestive predatory behaviour on sauropod hatchlings in Sanajeh indicus [53], 
further bolster this interpretation.
A limitation to this study, as well as to all genomic research on snakes to this point, is the 
sparse taxonomic representation for assembled genomes. Critically, although a handful of 
afrophidian genomes have been sequenced and assembled (e.g., Pythonidae, Viperidae, 
Elapidae, Colubroidea), as of this writing, there are currently no genome assemblies 
available for the sister group to afrophidians (Amerophidia), nor the more basally-diverging 
‘scolecophidian’ clades (Anomalepididae, Typhlopoidea, Leptotyphlopidae). Notably, the 
scolecophidian lineages predominantly, or exclusively, consume arthropods [11]. 
Therefore, it remains to be seen whether they retain the typical squamate complement of 
chitinase genes, or if they represent a secondary specialization in insectivory that inherited 
a depauperate set of CHIAs from a lineage of carnivorous stem snakes. In placental 
mammals, both patterns have seemingly been uncovered, with multiple lineages of 
insectivorous mammals retaining the ancestral set of five CHIAs, presumably reflecting a 
continuation of the dietary habits that they inherited, whereas some chitinophagous 
lineages such as mysticetes (baleen whales) and pholidotans (pangolins) appear to have 
inherited a single CHIA from non-insectivorous ancestors [16].
The possibility of a secondary adaptation to insectivory applies not only to scolecophi- 
dians but also to several lineages of afrophidian snakes. Such examples include the 
colubrids Scolecophis atrocinctus (black-banded snake), Tantilla spp. (centipede snakes),
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

244 christopher A. emerling
Eirenis spp. (dwarf racers), Stenorrhina spp., and Opheodrys spp. (green snakes) [11]. To be 
better adapted at consuming chitin, these species may employ novel duplicated CHIAs, 
amplify the expression of any remaining CHIAs, or perhaps utilize chitinophagous micro­
biota. Indeed, the latter two have been suggested as possible means by which myticetes and 
pholidotans have compensated for their diminished CHIA paralog counts [16, 54], and the 
discovery here of an apparently lacertid-specific chitinase (CHIA1E) suggests gene duplica­
tion remains a viable option. Future researchers would do well to explore these poorly 
studied taxa to better understand the genomic evolution underpinning the anatomical and 
physiological traits associated with the origin and diversification of snakes, including the 
inferred major transitions in dietary habits.
Acknowledgements
I thank Jeff Streicher and Mareike Janiak for taking the time to review the manuscript, and 
Jason Head, Hussam Zaher and David Gower for additional helpful comments, all of which 
improved the manuscript.
References
1. T. A. Castoe, A. P. J. De Koning, K. T. Hall, 
et al., The Burmese python genome reveals 
the molecular basis for extreme adaptation 
in snakes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences USA, 110 (2013), 
20645-20650.
2. F. J. Vonk, N. R. Casewell, C. V. Henkel, 
et al., The king cobra genome reveals 
dynamic gene evolution and adaptation in 
the snake venom system. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences USA, 110 
(2013), 20651-20656.
3. A. Ullate-Agote, M. C. Milinkovitch, and 
A. C. Tzikia, The genome sequence of the 
corn snake (Pantherophis guttatus), a 
valuable resource for EvoDevo studies in 
squamates. International Journal of 
Developmental Biology, 58 (2014), 881-888.
4. C. A. Emerling, Genomic regression of claw 
keratin, taste receptor and light-associated 
genes provides insights into biology and 
evolutionary origins of snakes. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 115 (2017), 40-49.
5. C. R. Infante, A. G. Mihala, S. Park, et al., 
Shared enhancer activity in the limbs and 
phallus and functional divergence of a 
limb-genital cis-regulatory element in 
snakes. Developmental Cell, 35 (2015), 
107-119.
6. E. Z. Kvon, O. K. Kamneva, U. S. Melo, et al., 
Progressive Loss of function in a limb 
enhancer during snake evolution. Cell, 167 
(2016), 633-642.e11.
7. T. Kishida, Y. Go, S. Tatsumoto, et al., Loss of 
olfaction in sea snakes provides new 
perspectives on the aquatic adaptation of 
amniotes. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 
286 (2019), 2019.1828.
8. H. Zhong, S. Shang, X. Wu, et al., Genomic 
evidence of bitter taste in snakes and 
phylogenetic analysis of bitter taste receptor 
genes in reptiles. PeerJ, 5 (2017), e3708.
9. B. W. Perry, D. C. Card, J. W. McGlothlin, 
et al., Molecular adaptations for sensing and 
securing prey and insight into amniote 
genome diversity from the garter snake 
genome. Genome Biology and Evolution, 10 
(2018), 2110-2129.
10. S. Meiri, Traits of lizards of the world: 
Variation around a successful evolutionary 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 245
design. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 27 
(2018), 1168-1172.
11. M. C. Grundler, SquamataBase: A natural 
history database and R package for 
comparative biology of snake feeding habits. 
Biodiversity Data Journal, 8 (2020), e49943.
12. T. Rowe, DigiMorph. 
 
(2020)
www.DigiMorph.org
13. Y. H. Chenand, and H. Zhao, Evolution of 
digestive enzymes and dietary diversification 
in birds. PeerJ, 7 (2019), e6840.
14. D. P. German, B. C. Nagle, J. M. Villeda, 
et al., Evolution of herbivory in a 
carnivorous clade of minnows (Teleostei: 
Cyprinidae): Effects on gut size and digestive 
physiology. Physiological and Biochemical 
Zoology, 83 (2010), 1-18.
15. C. Jeuniaux, Chitinase: an addition to the list 
of hydrolases in the digestive tract of 
vertebrates. Nature, 192 (1961), 135-136.
16. C. A. Emerling, F. Delsuc, and
M. W. Nachman, Chitinase genes (CHIAs) 
provide genomic footprints of a post­
Cretaceous dietary radiation in placental 
mammals. Science Advances, 4 (2018), 
eaar6478.
17. M. C. Janiak, M. E. Chaney, and A. J. Tosi, 
Evolution of acidic mammalian chitinase 
genes (CHIA) is related to body mass and 
insectivory in primates. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution, 35 (2018), 607-622.
18. K. Wang, S. Tian, J. Galindo-Gonzalez, et al., 
Molecular adaptation and convergent 
evolution of frugivory in Old World and 
neotropical fruit bats. Molecular Ecology, 29 
(2020), 4366-4381.
19. R. G. Boot, E. F. C. Blommaart, E. Swart, 
et al., Identification of a novel acidic 
mammalian chitinase distinct from 
chitotriosidase. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry, 276 (2001), 6770-6778.
20. S. Strobel, A. Roswag, N. I. Becker, 
T. E. Trenczek, and J. A. Encarna^ao, 
Insectivorous bats digest chitin in the 
stomach using acidic mammalian chitinase. 
PLoS One, 8 (2013), e72770.
21. M. Ohno, M. Kimura, H. Miyakazi, et al. 
Acidic mammalian chitinase is a proteases- 
resistant glycosidase in mouse digestive 
system. Scientific Reports, 6 (2016), 37756.
22. D. Fong, T. Kane, and D. Culver, 
Vestigialization and loss of nonfunctional 
characters. Annual Review of Ecology and 
Systematics, 26 (1995), 249-268.
23. C. A. Emerling and M. S. Springer, Eyes 
underground: Regression of visual protein 
networks in subterranean mammals.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 78 
(2014), 260-270.
24. R. W. Meredith, G. Zhang, M. T. P. Gilbert, 
E. D. Jarvis, and M. S. Springer, Evidence for 
a single loss of mineralized teeth in the 
common avian ancestor. Science, 346 (2014), 
1254390.
25. R. Albalat and C. Canestro, Evolution by 
gene loss. Nature Reviews Genetics, 17 
(2016), 379-391.
26. P. Feng, J. Zheng, S. J. Rossiter, D. Wang, and 
H. Zhao, Massive losses of taste receptor 
genes in toothed and baleen whales. 
Genome Biology and Evolution, 6 (2014), 
1254-1265.
27. R. S. Marsh, C. Moe, R. B. Lomneth, 
J. D. Fawcett, and A. Place, Characterization 
of gastrointestinal chitinase in the lizard 
Sceloporus undulatus garmani (Reptilia: 
Phrynosomatidae). Comparative 
Biochemistry and Physiology Part B: 
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 128 
(2001), 675-682.
28. I. Koludarov, T. N. W. Jackson, B. op den 
Brouw, et al., Enter the dragon: The dynamic 
and multifunctional evolution of 
Anguimorpha lizard venoms. Toxins, 9 
(2017), 242.
29. S. F. Altschul, W. Gish, W. Miller, 
E. W. Myers, and D. Lipman, Basic local 
alignment search tool. Journal of Molecular 
Biology, 215 (1990), 403-410.
30. M. Kearse, R. Moir, A. Wilson, et al., 
Geneious Basic: An integrated and 
extendable desktop software platform for the 
organization and analysis of sequence data. 
Bioinformatics. 28 (2012), 1647-1649.
31. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

246 christopher A. emerling
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
32. R. C. Edgar, MUSCLE: Multiple sequence 
alignment with high accuracy and high 
throughput. Nucleic Acids Research, 32 
(2004), 1792-1797.
33. A. Stamatakis, RAxML version 8: A tool for 
phylogenetic analysis and post-analysis of 
large phylogenies. Bioinformatics, 30 (2014), 
1312-1313.
34. A. M. Olland, J. Strand, E. Presman, et al., 
Triad of polar residues implicated in 
pH specificity of acidic mammalian 
chitinase. Protein Science, 18 (2009), 
569-578.
35. L. W. Tjoelker, L. Gosting, S. Frey, et al., 
Structural and functional definition of the 
human chitinase chitin-binding domain. 
Journal of Biological Chemistry, 275 (2000), 
514-520.
36. M. Hussain and J. B. Wilson, New 
paralogues and revised time line in the 
expansion of the vertebrate GH18 family. 
Journal of Molecular Evolution, 76 (2013), 
240-260.
37. M. A. Miller, W. Pfeiffer, and T. Schwartz, 
Creating the CIPRES Science Gateway for 
inference of large phylogenetic trees. 2010 
Gateway Computing Environments 
Workshop (GCE) (2010), 1-8.
38. J. M. Chen, D. N. Cooper, N. Chuzhanova, 
C. Ferec, and G. P. Patrinos, Gene 
conversion: Mechanisms, evolution and 
human disease. Nature Reviews Genetics, 8 
(2007), 762-775.
39. G. H. Renkema, R. G. Boot, F. L. Au, et al., 
Chitotriosidase a chitinase, and the 39-kDa 
human cartilage glycoprotein, a chitin­
binding lectin, are homologues of family 
18 glycosyl hydrolases secreted by human 
macrophages. European Journal of 
Biochemistry, 251 (1998), 504-509.
40. I. Irisarri, D. Baurain, H. Brinkmann, et al., 
Phylotranscriptomic consolidation of the 
jawed vertebrate timetree. Nature Ecology 
and Evolution, 1 (2017), 1370-1378.
41. Y. Zheng and J. J. Wiens, Combining 
phylogenomic and supermatrix approaches, 
and a time-calibrated phylogeny for squamate 
reptiles (lizards and snakes) based on 52 genes 
and 4162 species. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 94 (2016), 537-547.
42. J. Lozano-Fernandez, A. R. Tanner, 
M. N. Puttick, et al., A Cambrian-Ordovician 
terrestrialization of arachnids. Frontiers in 
Genetics, 11 (2020), 182.
43. L. S. F. Lins, S. Y. W. Ho, and N. Lo, An 
evolutionary timescale for terrestrial isopods 
and a lack of molecular support for the 
monophyly of Oniscidea (Crustacea: 
Isopoda). Organisms, Diversity and 
Evolution, 17 (2017), 813-820.
44. B. Misof, S. Liu, K. Meusemann, et al., 
Phylogenomics resolves the timing and 
pattern of insect evolution. Science, 346 
(2014), 763-767.
45. R. Fernandez, G. D. Edgecombe, and 
G. Giribet, Phylogenomics illuminates the 
backbone of the Myriapoda Tree of Life 
and reconciles morphological and 
molecular phylogenies. Scientific Reports, 8 
(2018), 83
46. S. P. Modesto, D. M. Scott, and R. R. Reisz, 
Arthropod remains in the oral cavities of 
fossil reptiles support inference of early 
insectivory. Biology Letters, 5 (2009), 
838-840.
47. K. M. Melstrom, The relationship between 
diet and tooth complexity in living 
dentigerous saurians. Journal of 
Morphology, 278 (2017), 500-522.
48. D. M. Martill, H. Tischlinger, and
N. R. Longrich, A four-legged snake from the 
Early Cretaceous of Gondwana. Science, 349 
(2015), 416-419.
49. M. W. Caldwell, R. L. Nydam, A. Palci, and 
S. Apesteguia, The oldest known snakes 
from the Middle Jurassic-Lower Cretaceous 
provide insights on snake evolution. Nature 
Communications, 6 (2015), 5996.
50. N. R. Longrich, B. A. S. Bhullar, and
J. A. Gauthier, A transitional snake from the 
Late Cretaceous period of North America. 
Nature, 488 (2012), 205-208.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INSECTIVORY—CARNIVORY TRANSITION IN EARLY SNAKES 247
51. M. W. Caldwell and M. S. Y. Lee, A snake 
with legs from the marine Cretaceous of 
the Middle East. Nature, 386 (1997), 
705-708.
52. G. Haas, On a new snakelike reptile from 
the Lower Cenomanian of Ein Jabrud, 
near Jerusalem. Bulletin du Mus6um 
National d’Histoire Naturelle Paris, 1 (1979), 
51-64.
53. J. A. Wilson, D. M. Mohabey, S. E. Peters, and 
J. J. Head, Predation upon hatchling dinosaurs 
by a new snake from the Late Cretaceous of 
India. PLoS Biology, 8 (2010), e1000322.
54. J. G. Sanders, A. C. Beichman, J. Roman, 
et al., Baleen whales host a unique gut 
microbiome with similarities to both 
carnivores and herbivores. Nature 
Communications, 6 (2015), 8285.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.015 Published online by Cambridge University Press

12
Origin and Early Diversification of the 
Enigmatic Squamate Venom Cocktail
Vivek Suranse*,  Ashwin Iyer*,  Timothy N. W. Jackson*,  
and Kartik Sunagar*
* These authors contributed equally
12.1 Introduction
Nature is replete with examples of strategies so effective that they evolve time and again, 
independently in divergent lineages. These strategies are represented by functional traits 
associated with them. Eyes are one such trait, and venom is another. Venom has evolved 
independently in over 100 lineages across the animal kingdom, including cnidarians, 
scorpions, spiders, mammals, and squamate reptiles [1]. Venom is a secretory concoction 
of biochemically disparate components that is deployed by one organism (the venomous 
organism) to disrupt the normal physiological and biochemical functions of another (the 
target organism) in ways that facilitate feeding, defence, or competitor deterrence. Venoms 
are produced by specialized tissues (either a compartmentalized gland or specialized cells), 
and actively inoculated to the target animal through the infliction of wounds [2]. Thus, in 
contrast to the historical definition, the modern definition of venom is inclusive of haema- 
tophagous (blood-feeding) animals, such as vampire bats, lampreys, and leeches that 
possess adaptations to facilitate their unique diet [2]. During the course of evolution, animal 
venoms have diversified under the influence of natural selection to attack myriad regulatory 
systems responsible for homeostasis. To efficiently deliver this complex bioactive cocktail, 
venomous organisms have evolved diverse delivery systems such as fangs, forcipules, 
harpoons, spines, stingers, and stinging cells (the nematocytes of cnidarians).
Though over a hundred convergent origins of venom have been documented in the 
animal kingdom, the emergence of this trait in squamate reptiles has been a matter of 
contentious debate. Our understanding of the origin and evolution of squamate venoms
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 249
Gekkonidae
Iguania
Anguidae
Varanidae
Venom delivery systems
Boidae
Elapidae
Colubridae
Figure 12.1 (A) Alternative hypotheses of the evolution of venom in squamate reptiles, showing 
single (red), dual (yellow) and multiple (purple) origins. The phylogeny shown here is based on [10]. 
(B) The position of fangs and venom glands (red) in front-fanged (i: proteroglyphous and ii: 
solenoglyphous), rear-fanged (iii: opisthoglyphous) and fangless (iv: aglyphous) snakes, highlighting 
the diversity of venom-delivery systems in this lineage. (A black and white version of this figure will 
appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
Hclodcrmatidac
Scolecophidia
Viperidae ।
Atractaspididae
has been somewhat hampered by a historical focus of venom research on species that are 
medically important to humans. Traditionally, reptiles that did not pose a medical threat to 
humans were considered non-venomous, and venom was perceived to be restricted to 
deeply nested clades. In the recent past, venom research from an ecological and evolution­
ary perspective has argued against this popular belief. Nonetheless, multiple distinct 
scenarios have been described in attempts to explain the evolutionary origins of venom 
in squamates (Fig. 12.1A). The so-called ‘Toxicofera Hypothesis’, for example, argues for a 
single early origin of venom in the common ancestor of the Toxicofera clade, which 
comprises snakes (Serpentes) and anguimorph and iguanian lizards [3-6]. In contrast, 
others have favoured a hypothesis with at least two independent origins of venom in 
squamates, one in ‘advanced snakes’ (Caenophidia) and another in helodermatid angui- 
morphs [7, 8]. Furthermore, multiple origins of venom in snakes have also been suggested 
[9]. Though our current understanding may point to a single origin of venom in squamates, 
unequivocal evidence to resolve this long-standing debate is lacking. Although tracing the 
precise origin of venom in squamates is crucial for understanding the evolution and early 
diversification of snakes and lizards, the complex and dynamic nature of venom evolution 
and its possible existence as a ‘marginal trait’ in many taxa may result in this knowledge 
remaining elusive. In this chapter, we summarize current understanding of the phylogen­
etic origins of squamate venoms and the mechanisms that have underpinned their 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

250 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
evolutionary diversification. We highlight the major limitations of various hypotheses that 
have been proposed to explain the origin(s) of venom in this enigmatic clade.
12.2 Venom from an Ecological Perspective
Venom composition is influenced by numerous ecological and environmental factors, such as 
diet, ontogeny, predator pressure, intraspecific competition, and geographic distribution 
[11-14]. Animal venoms often evolve remarkable specificity towards the natural prey and 
predators of the organisms that produce them, which may render them relatively ineffective 
against mammals, including humans. However, a natural anthropocentric bias in our thinking 
has historically seen only animals that are capable of inflicting clinically significant envenom- 
ings on humans labelled ‘venomous’. Having been predominantly assessed within this anthro­
pocentric framework, the ecological roles of venom have largely been ignored. Recently, the 
importance of understanding venom as an ecological trait has begun to be more widely 
recognized, although ‘venom ecology’ remains a neglected area within toxinology [15, 16].
Considerable differences in snake venom composition and activity are observable at 
various phylogenetic levels. Snake venoms can vary starkly among families [17], closely 
related species [18], geographically disparate populations of the same species [11, 13, 
19-21], and even developmental stages in the life of a single individual [22-24]. Although 
the majority of venom components are shared by all snakes, some toxin types in the 
venoms of Elapidae, Viperidae, and ‘non-front-fanged’ lineages within Caenophidia, have 
become the defining features of each of these clades. While differences in venom compos­
ition at higher taxonomic levels are explained by the dynamic recruitment and diversifi­
cation of particular toxin types, prominent differences at lower taxonomic levels are 
attributed to differing ecology and environmental conditions.
Diet is a crucial ecological factor governing venom composition. Stark variations in 
venom profiles associated with dietary shifts are frequently encountered in widely distrib­
uted snake species [11, 25]. Because snake venoms are evolutionary innovations that 
primarily facilitate subduing of prey and defense against predators, they often evolve 
remarkable specificity and potency towards natural prey or predators. For example, some 
saw-scaled vipers (Echis spp.) that chiefly prey upon scorpions attain a venom composition 
that is highly potent towards arthropods [26], while tree snake (e.g., Boiga irregularis) 
venoms contain toxins that are minimally toxic to mammals but extremely toxic to the 
lizards and birds that they primarily feed upon [27]. Likely as a consequence of the 
energetic costs associated with the production of complex venom cocktails, complete 
degeneration of toxin-encoding genes and associated venom-delivery apparatus has been 
observed in oophagous sea snakes that no longer depend on venom for predation [28]. 
A switch in the relative expression of venom components has also been reported across the 
developmental stages of snake species, strongly correlating with dietary shifts [22, 23]. The 
molecular mechanisms underpinning such dramatic shifts are not fully understood, 
although small RNAs (e.g., microRNA) have been implicated in shaping ontogenetic 
changes in venom profiles [29].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 251
The reciprocal evolution of increased toxin potency and toxin resistance is another 
important process in venom evolution. Several lineages have convergently evolved resist­
ance by adopting similar molecular strategies, such as altering receptors targeted by toxins, 
overexpression of decoy receptors, or evolving toxin-specific enzyme inhibitors [30-32]. 
Adaptive venom resistance in ground squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi) against rattlesnake 
(Crotalus viridis oreganus) venoms, and in opossums (Marsupialia: Didelphidae) that feed 
on pit vipers, are among the best-studied examples of such ‘chemical arms races’ [33-35]. 
Ground squirrels and opossums have independently acquired toxin inhibitors in their 
blood, while convergent mutations in the acetylcholine receptors of the Egyptian mongoose 
(Herpestes ichneumon) and honey badger (Mellivora capensis) enable these carnivores to 
prey on various snake species [36, 37].
12.3 Composition of Venom Cocktails
Venoms are complex cocktails of bioactive molecules, such as proteins, carbohydrates, 
salts, and other organic components [38]. Despite the enormous diversity of toxic molecules 
in venoms, several components have been independently recruited by many animal 
lineages. Such remarkable convergence may be the result of evolutionary contingencies, 
such as the existence of ubiquitous molecular targets in prey and predators [39]. Despite 
being constituted by diverse toxin types from distinct gene families (Table 12.1), many 
components exert toxicities by functioning in concert. For instance, hyaluronidase in snake 
venoms acts as a ‘spreading factor’ by degrading hyaluronan of the extracellular matrix and 
facilitating the diffusion of other venom components [40, 41]. Similarly, the DNase enzyme 
in some snake venoms can prevent the ensnaring of toxins by Neutrophil Extracellular 
Traps (NETs). These NETs are formed during a process termed ‘NETosis’, where neutro­
phils extrude their nuclear DNA as traps to limit diffusion of venom proteins [42]. Snake 
venoms may also contain a variety of proteases that can act synergistically to perturb the 
blood coagulation cascade [43]. Likewise, various pre- and post-synaptic elapid neurotoxins 
can simultaneously antagonize a diversity of receptors involved in neurotransmission, 
resulting in the impairment of signal transduction and rapid paralysis [44].
Most snakes capable of delivering clinically severe bites to humans belong to Elapidae 
(cobras, kraits, coral snakes, taipans, mambas, and sea snakes), Viperidae (vipers, adders, 
and rattlesnakes), and Atractaspidinae (mole vipers and stiletto snakes). Many non-front- 
fanged caenophidian snakes do not pose a medical threat to humans; however, boomslangs 
(Dispholidus typus), twig snakes (genus Thelotornis) and some keelbacks (genus 
Rhabdophis) can inflict medically significant envenomings [45]. Elapid venoms are chiefly 
constituted by type I PLA2 and 3FTx, while viperid venoms are enriched with type II PLA2, 
SVMP, and SVSP [46]. Non-front-fanged caenophidian venoms split the difference, typically 
being dominated either by 3FTx or SVMP [45].
In contrast to Caenophidia, which includes the venomous lineages discussed above, 
members of Henophidia (including pythons, boas, sunbeam snakes, Asian pipe snakes, 
and shieldtail snakes), have historically been considered non-venomous. This is in part
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 12.1. The distribution of toxins in distinct lineages of toxicoferan squamates.
Only those toxins whose roles in envenomation have been validated experimentally are shown. NFF: non-front-fanged; 3FTx: three-finger toxin; 
SVMP: snake venom metalloproteinase; SVSP: snake venom serine protease; PLA2: phospholipase A2 type I-III; CRiSP: cysteine-rich secretory 
proteins; KUN: Kunitz peptides; CVF: cobra venom factor; LAAO: L-amino acid oxidase; NP: natriuretic peptides; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth 
factor; NGF: nerve growth factor; DNase: deoxyribonuclease; HYAL: hyaluronidase; AChE: acetylcholinesterase; NTD: 5’-nucleotidase; PDE: 
phosphodiesterase; LEC: lectins; CYS: cystatins; AVIT: AVIT-domain peptides; DEF: defensins; VEF: veficolins; HEL: helokinestatins; EXE: 
exendins; GTx: goannatyrotoxin; CTx: cholecystoxin; ESP: epididymal secretory protein; VESP: vespryn. Enzymatic toxins are marked with asterisks.
3FTx
SVMP*
SVSP*
PLA*
CRiSP
KUN
CVF
LAAO*
NP
Elapidae
✓
✓
✓
✓ (I)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Viperidae
..................................................................................✓
✓ (II)
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
NFF Caenophidia
.................
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Henophidia
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
X
Varanidae
X
X
X
✓ (III )
✓
✓
X
X
✓
Helodermatidae
X
✓
✓
✓ (III)
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
Iguanidae
X
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
X
VEGF
NGF
DNase*
HYAL*
AChE*
NTD*
PDE*
LEC
CYS
Elapidae
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Viperidae
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
NFF Caenophidia
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Henophidia
✓
✓
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Varanidae
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
✓
✓
Helodermatidae
X
X
X
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Iguanidae
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
✓
X

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

254 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
because the most well-known henophidians, the pythons (Pythonoidea) and boas (Boidae), 
typically employ constriction to subdue prey. However, some henophidians, including 
Uropeltoidea (Asian pipe snakes and shieldtail snakes), simply swallow prey after biting it 
repeatedly, without reliance on constriction. Homologues of venom proteins, including 
3FTx, lectin, CRiSP, CVF, and vespryn, have been identified in the oral-gland 
transcriptomes of both pythonoids and uropeltoids [47]. 3FTx and lectin, in particular, were 
not only identified as dominant transcripts in various gland types of these snakes but were 
also detected in the predominantly mucosal oral secretions of several species. In complete 
contrast to the rapid diversification of 3FTxs in Caenophidia [48], 3FTxs from distinct 
families of henophidian snakes are extremely conserved, despite being separated by >90 
million years of evolutionary history [47]. In the absence of selection pressures, protein­
encoding genes often follow a neutral evolutionary path that leads to degeneration (e.g., 
[28]). Evolutionary conservation of 3FTx homologues in henophidians suggests that their 
evolution is strongly constrained, which may be indicative of an important yet unidentified 
function [47]. Given their low abundance in the oral secretions of henophidians, it seems 
unlikely that 3FTxs play a role in prey subjugation, but further investigation of the oral 
secretions of non-caenophidians is a priority for researchers interested in unravelling the 
early evolutionary history of snake venom [49].
Given their medical relevance, the Gila monster (Heloderma suspectum) and beaded 
lizard (H. horridum) are the only lizards to have typically been considered ‘venomous’. 
Helodermatid lizard venoms are predominantly composed of kallikrein-like serine prote­
ases and type III PLA2s, along with defensins, helokinestatins, and exendins in lower 
amounts [50]. Exendin-4 from H. suspectum venom has been a lead compound for the 
manufacture of an anti-diabetic drug [51]. Considering their ability to inflict clinically 
significant envenoming in humans and the biodiscovery potential of their venoms, 
Helodermatidae remains the most studied group of toxicoferan lizards. Their close rela­
tives, the monitor lizards (Varanidae and Lanthanotidae) are typically regarded as non- 
venomous despite varanid dental glands, homologous to the venom glands of snakes and 
helodermatid lizards, having been identified (and christened ‘the gland of Gabe’) decades 
ago [52]. Manifestations of Komodo dragon (V. komodoensis) bites including rapid swelling, 
localized disruption in blood clotting and shooting pain, were considered to result from 
pathogenic bacteria in the lizards’ saliva [53]. These assumptions were later challenged by 
studies that argued for the plausibility of Komodo dragons utilizing bioactive secretions 
(i.e., venom) rather than bacteria in prey capture [54]. Monitor lizard salivary secretions 
were subsequently shown to vary greatly in composition with CRiSPs, kallikrein-like serine 
proteases, and type III PLA2 predominantly present in all varanid species (Table 12.1; [55]).
Similarly, again despite the evidence of homologous dental glands [52], iguanian lizards 
were ignored by toxinologists until recently, when transcripts belonging to several protein 
families that are homologous to snake venom toxins, including LAAO, в-defensins, and 
cystatins, were identified in iguanian oral-gland transcriptomes [47]. Comparisons of the 
snake and toxicoferan lizard oral secretions reveal several other shared protein families, 
including CRiSP, natriuretic peptide, hyaluronidase, and kallikrein, which have been pro­
posed to be part of the ancestral toxicoferan ‘venom arsenal’ [56].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 255
12.4 Evolutionary Origin and Diversification 
of Squamate Venom
Toxin-encoding genes are theorized to have evolved from endophysiological genes that 
perform various biochemical and regulatory functions in the producing animal [3]. Over the 
course of evolution, these genes have diversified into a plethora of structural forms with 
diverse biochemical functions. This astounding toxin diversity has been explained by 
various molecular and evolutionary mechanisms.
Gene duplication has played a major role in the expansion and diversification of venom. 
Toxin-encoding genes are hypothesized to follow a ‘birth and death’ model of gene evolution 
where, post-duplication, one of the copies is relieved of pre-existing selection pressures and 
has increased propensity to acquire changes [57, 58]. Owing to the accelerated rate of 
changes, it may undergo degeneration (pseudogenization) or acquire novel functions (neo­
functionalization), resulting in the emergence of multi-locus gene families with remarkable 
structural and functional diversity (Fig. 12.2; [59, 60]). However, this redundancy may not 
necessarily underpin gene diversification and instead could potentially translate to elevated 
expression levels. Concerted evolution, where a high degree of sequence similarity is main­
tained between duplicates through homologous recombination [61], leads to the overexpres­
sion of identical toxins [62]. Overexpression of specific toxins can drastically alter venom 
biochemistry and potency, thereby facilitating evolutionary adaptations. Stochastic gene and 
domain degeneration have also influenced the snake venom repertoire. Domain loss in 
viperid SVMP has led to the origin of remarkable structural-functional disparity [59] and 
has potentiated the origin of novel neurotoxins in non-front-fanged caenophidians [63].
Several theories have been proposed to explain the origin of venom proteins. According to 
the recruitment hypothesis, following duplication ofan endophysiological gene with expres­
sion across a broad range of tissue types, one of the duplicates is recruited and selectively 
expressed in the venom gland. This is followed by the accumulation of variations and the 
origination of novel toxin functions [57, 58, 64, 65]. In contrast, the restriction hypothesis 
proposes that genes that are expressed in multiple physiological tissues, including the venom 
gland, may undergo duplication followed by subfunctionalization: the division of ancestral 
role among duplicates. Over time, the expression of one of the duplicates is restricted to the 
venom gland, while the other retains its multi-tissue expression profile [66]. A stepwise 
intermediate nearly-neutral evolutionary recruitment (SINNER) model has recently been 
proposed [67], based on the transcriptional profiling of toxin-encoding gene homologues in 
various tissues of the Burmese python (Python bivittatus). According to this model, which 
shares similarities with the restriction hypothesis, toxin-encoding genes originate when a 
recently duplicated precursor follows three crucial steps for recruitment into the venom 
gland: (1) a near-constitutive low expression of this gene in the venom gland, (2) venom 
gland specific over-expression, and (3) an overall decrease in expression across physiological 
tissue types. Thus, these models explain how endophysiological genes that are typically 
expressed in the oral glands or other physiological tissues, may have served as the primal 
stock for the origin of squamate venoms [3].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

256 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
Figure 12.2 The remarkable structural and functional diversity in 3FTxs, illustrated by homology 
models of 3FTxs and their disulfide bonds. Short- (A) and long-chain (B) a-neurotoxins target various 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subtypes, while cytotoxins (C) bind to anionic lipids in the 
plasma membrane leading to cell lysis. Heterodimeric a-bungarotoxins (D) antagonize nAChRs at the 
neuromuscular junctions, while muscarinic 3FTxs (E) antagonize muscarinic AChRs. Calliotoxins (F) 
are known to activate the voltage-gated sodium channels (Nav1.4), whereas fasciculins (G) inhibit 
AChE. Calciseptin (H) selectively blocks L-type calcium channels, while basal 3FTxs (I) remain 
uncharacterized. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour 
version, please refer to the plate section).
Various molecular processes could underpin the diversification of toxin-encoding genes. 
Among these, alternative splicing and trans-splicing, the inclusion of exons from the same 
or different transcripts, respectively, have been shown to produce diverse protein isoforms 
in vertebrates [68]. Genome-wide searches and transcriptomic profiling of toxin-encoding 
genes in the habu pit viper (Protobothrops flavoviridis) has revealed the contribution of 
these processes in generating toxin diversity [69]. The role of alternative splicing in gener­
ating physiological and venom isoforms of AChE in the banded krait (the elapid Bungarus 
fasciatus) [70] and helokinestatin in the Gila monster [71] have also been well-documented.
Positive Darwinian selection, which is characterized by an increased non-synonymous 
(nucleotide changes that alter the encoded amino acid) to synonymous (nucleotide changes 
that do not alter the resultant amino acid) substitution rate, has played a significant role in snake 
venom diversification (Fig. 12.3; [48, 59, 72, 73]). The rapid accumulation of variation in exposed 
residues (RAVER) model proposes that changes introduced by positive selection mostly mani­
fest in regions that do not perturb a molecule’s structural or functional integrity, such as loops
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 257
Figure 12.3 Molecular evolution of snake venom proteins. Homology models, shown here, highlight 
the degree of evolutionary conservation on a gradient scale of blue to maroon (1-9). Amino acid sites 
under positive selection are shown in red. Although many toxins rapidly diversify under positive 
selection (A-C), those that target conserved cellular features (D-E) or experience structural 
constraints (F), undergo negative selection. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in 
some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
and surface-exposed residues [48]. Historically, positive selection has been predominantly 
invoked to explain the diversification of venoms, while the effects of negative (or purifying) 
selection, which is responsible for sequence conservation, were largely unrecognized. Recently, 
a two-speed mode for venom evolution in evolutionarily old and young lineages has been 
suggested [39]. Toxin-encoding genes in evolutionarily ancient lineages with origins between 
700-400 millions of years ago (Mya; e.g., cnidarians, scorpions, centipedes, spiders, octopus, 
cuttlefish, and squid) were found to be under the influence of strong negative selection, while 
evolutionarily younger lineages originating between 55-30 Mya (e.g., cone snails and 
caenophidian snakes) were typified by toxin-encoding genes diversifying rapidly under positive 
selection. It has been postulated that during adaptation to substantial shifts in ecology and/or 
the environment, toxin-encoding genes may experience strong positive selection and generate 
the necessary venom variation for targeting novel prey and predators. However, once potent 
toxins are generated, and the venom cocktail is evolutionarily tinkered to impart effective 
potency, the rate of evolution slows down, and the toxin-encoding genes evolve under negative 
selection that preserves structural and functional integrity [39]. A strong influence of negative 
selection can also be noted in toxins that serve a defensive role, exert toxicities by targeting 
conserved features, or experience structural constraints (Fig. 12.3; [21, 39, 48]).
12.5 Venom Delivery Systems
The snake venom system comprises the venom glands and fangs. Snakes can be grouped 
morphologically on the presence, absence, and position of fangs into rear-fanged 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

258 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
(opisthoglyphous), front-fanged (solenoglyphous and proteroglyphous), and those lacking 
fangs (aglyphous) (Fig. 12.1B). In solenoglyphous snakes, the hollow hypodermic needle­
like fangs are the sole teeth on the shortened and highly mobile maxillae and point 
posteriorly. The maxillae are hinged with the braincase, allowing the fangs to be folded 
away or to swing forward into an injecting position. Proteroglyphous elapid snakes are 
equipped with short hollow fangs at the front of less mobile maxillae, which they share with 
additional teeth. The grooved fangs of opisthoglyphous snakes are found towards the back 
of the maxillae and are preceded on that bone by numerous teeth that function to secure 
prey [74].
The ophidian venom gland is an extensively modified dental gland (Chapter 18). In front- 
fanged snakes, the adductor externus profundus (Viperidae) or superficialis (Elapidae) 
muscles overlap the venom glands to facilitate a high-pressure injection of venom. The 
evolution of this efficient delivery apparatus, ca. 50 Mya, has had a substantial impact 
on the evolution of venom itself, likely driving the rapid diversification of many venom 
toxin superfamilies. This fascinating coevolution of venom and venom-delivery apparatus 
underscores the fact that changes in gross anatomy can greatly influence molecular evolu­
tion [48, 75]. In contrast to their elapid and viperid counterparts, most non-front-fanged 
caenophidians lack such musculature. This prevents rapid and efficient injection of venom, 
and these snakes often chew on prey to attempt inoculation. Interestingly, however, 
rudimentary compressor musculature has evolved several times independently in non­
front-fanged snakes [4]. The toxin-secreting dental gland of non-front-fanged species is 
sometimes referred to as Duvernoy’s gland [76], but these glands are developmentally 
homologous to the venom glands in front-fanged snakes [74], and appear to fulfil the same 
primary function (venom production and secretion) rendering this term redundant ([49]). 
Fascinatingly, despite the diversity of venom-delivery apparatuses, the venom glands and 
associated venom-injecting teeth of all caenophidian snakes share common evolutionary 
and developmental origins [77].
Non-caenophidian snakes, which do not depend on venom for prey incapacitation, are 
aglyphous (Fig. 12.1B). In addition to the venom glands, snakes possess a diversity of oral 
glands, including labial and rictal glands (Oliveira and Zaher, Chapter 18). Labial glands are 
responsible for mucus secretion, but the precise role of rictal glands remains unclear. 
Although rictal gland secretions of some henophidians were reported in the earlier part 
of the twentieth century to be toxic to birds [78], transcripts homologous to caenophidian 
toxins were retrieved from rictal glands of these snakes only recently [47]. This perhaps 
suggests a common evolutionary origin of ophidian oral glands. In contrast to caenophi- 
dians, the mandibular and maxillary glands of henophidians are composed chiefly of 
mucous- rather than protein-secreting (serous) cells, and they provide lubrication to 
facilitate swallowing feathered avian or furred mammalian prey [47].
In contrast to snakes, toxicoferan lizards have relatively simple venom-delivery systems 
[71]. Iguanians have retained plesiomorphic seromucous mandibular and maxillary dental 
glands [56], while a loss of maxillary glands and supporting musculature has been observed 
in some of their anguimorphan relatives [47]. Though few species have been investigated to 
date, dental glands of iguanians that feed on vertebrates appear to have a greater 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 259
proportion of serous cells than those of insectivorous and herbivorous species, which are 
largely composed of mucoid cells. In contrast, all non-toxicoferan lizards investigated 
possess a largely mucoid mandibular gland, with or without a maxillary gland. Both 
Anguimorpha and Iguania have grooved mandibular teeth associated with their dental 
glands, which may serve as an apparatus for venom delivery in some anguimorphs [47]. 
Interestingly, the glands of the Gila monster and some monitor lizards of the genera 
Varanus and Lanthanotus are enlarged and have convergently evolved well-structured 
lumens and segregation of the protein- and mucus-secreting regions [71].
12.6 The Long-Standing Debate on the Origin of Venom 
in Squamate Reptiles
Given the highly dynamic evolution of both venom and venom-delivery systems within 
Squamata, tracing the evolutionary origins of the venom system has been challenging, but 
several hypotheses have been proposed. An early hypothesis proposed two independent 
origins: in the common ancestor of Caenophidia, and in helodermatid lizards (Fig. 12.1A; 
[7]). On the other hand, it was conjectured that these venom systems arose as derivations of 
homologous dental glands [52], although the phylogenetic relationships between snakes 
and anguimorph lizards remained unclear.
More recently, molecular phylogenetics has recovered strong support for a clade compris­
ing Serpentes, Anguimorpha, and Iguania [10], and because all venomous squamates are 
members of this assemblage, the clade was christened Toxicofera [6]. Transcriptomic profil­
ing of the oral glands of toxicoferans resulted in the identification of a set of common 
transcripts shared by most members [56]. Many of these genes exhibited either high 
sequence similarity to known toxins or were assigned a putative toxic role given their 
enzymatic function. Phylogenetic reconstruction of the evolutionary histories of these genes 
inferred reciprocal monophyly of such putative toxins and their endophysiological homo­
logues. Furthermore, consideration of the anatomy of toxicoferan lizard oral glands revealed 
that dental glands (i.e., modified labial glands with ducts opening at the base of the teeth) are 
a synapomorphy of the clade [79], a finding anticipated by previous work [52]. Given the lack 
of evidence of an ecological role in feeding or defence for the secretions of these glands in 
iguanians, they were referred to as an incipient venom system [80]. Iguanians and the 
anguimorph Pseudopus apodus have both mandibular and maxillary dental glands, whereas 
other anguimorphs and snakes were argued to have lost the maxillary and mandibular 
glands, respectively [79]. The presence of protein-secreting dental glands in both the upper 
(maxillary) and lower jaw (mandibular), therefore, is an inferred trait of the most recent 
common ancestor (MRCA) of all toxicoferans. Taken together, these findings were inter­
preted as providing support for a single early origin of the venom system in Toxicofera [56]. 
Following the proposal of this hypothesis, transcriptomic profiling of salivary glands of a 
diversity of toxicoferans provided evidence for the recruitment of several additional puta­
tively toxic genes in the toxicoferan MRCA [47, 54, 71].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

260 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
However, the Toxicofera Hypothesis of venom origins, which relied heavily on the 
inference of ancestral recruitment and reciprocal monophyly of putative toxin-encoding 
genes, has been challenged. It has been argued that failing to compare the expression 
profiles of oral glands with physiological tissues may result in the incorrect identification of 
endophysiological proteins as venom toxins. Indeed, comparative transcriptomics involving 
multiple tissues from various toxicoferans revealed a broad tissue-expression profile for 
many genes that were initially hypothesized as ancestrally recruited toxins, and a lack of 
consistent venom or salivary gland-specific overexpression was noted [81]. Furthermore, 
reinvestigation of phylogenetic histories of toxin-encoding genes and their endophysiolo- 
gical homologues resulted in paraphyletic groupings. These discrepancies were leveraged 
as arguments against the Toxicofera Hypothesis and, in concordance with Kochva’s two- 
origin theory, to conjecture at least two origins of venom in squamates, with a possible third 
independent origin in monitor lizards [81]. Moreover, some authors have also argued 
for multiple independent origins of venom systems within Caenophidia, with Elapidae, 
Viperidae, and some medically important non-front-fanged species having evolved 
venom and associated delivery systems independently after divergence from their common 
ancestor [9].
12.7 The Verdict: Evidence for and against the Toxicofera 
Hypothesis of Squamate Venoms
Understanding the phylogeny of snakes and lizards is crucial for unravelling the origin of 
venom in squamates. Had lizards and snakes formed reciprocally monophyletic clades, a 
single early origin of venom would have been highly unlikely. Molecular phylogenetics has 
overturned previous hypotheses of squamate relationships and provides strong support for 
a clade (Toxicofera) comprising Iguania, Anguimorpha, and Serpentes [6, 10, 82].
Anatomical investigations of toxicoferans have uncovered several shared morphological 
features. The dental glands primarily responsible for toxin secretion are associated with the 
upper jaw of snakes and the lower jaw of most anguimorph lizards, while iguanian dental 
glands are associated with both jaws. Dental glands appear to be a synapomorphy of 
Toxicofera and, thus, the inferred MRCA of this clade likely possessed mixed seromucous 
dental glands associated with both jaws; an arrangement retained in Iguania, while snakes 
and anguimorphs evolved specialized glands with discrete serous and mucous-secreting 
regions, associated with the upper and lower jaws, respectively [56]. Utilization of venom 
for predation and/or defence may have influenced the diversification of snake and angu- 
imorph lizard venom systems, while those of many iguanians remained incipient due to 
their herbivorous and insectivorous diets.
Transcriptome sequencing of dental glands from diverse toxicoferans revealed several 
shared, putative toxin-encoding genes, leading to the proposition of ‘basal (sic) recruitment’ 
of such toxins in the MRCA of toxicoferans and a single early origin of venom in this clade [47, 
54, 56, 71]. In the absence of functional validation, the oral-gland expression of genes 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 261
homologous to those that encode toxins does not necessarily provide evidence that the 
products of these genes possess a toxic function. It is important to sample diverse tissues 
to distinguish endophysiological proteins with increased expression across broad tissue 
types, including venom glands. Furthermore, it must be noted that whether or not a gene 
product is a functional toxin is a question about the deployment of that gene product in the 
ecology of the producing organism, and not simply about its homology, site of expression, or 
in vitro activity [80]. Comparative transcriptomics of various tissues from a few toxicoferans 
have revealed a broad tissue-expression profile for many of the genes that were presumed to 
be ancestrally recruited as toxins, and this has been interpreted as evidence against the 
Toxicofera Hypothesis [81]. However, for clear hypothesis testing, itis imperative to compre­
hensively and comparatively analyse multiple tissue types from a diversity of both toxico- 
feran and non-toxicoferan reptiles, which studies thus far have failed to do.
Although many of these proteins are unlikely to serve a venom function, at least in most 
toxicoferans, the toxic role of proteolytic enzymes with venom-gland overexpression cannot 
be ruled out. Proteases can not only participate in the processing of venom proteins but can 
also induce non-specific pathologies in the victim when injected in large amounts. 
Although it has been stated otherwise [81], proteins with broad tissue expression could, 
therefore, serve multiple functions, and do not necessarily require post-transcriptional 
processing, such as alternative splicing. Therefore, broad tissue-expression profiles alone 
cannot be used to discount the role of venom gland overexpressed proteins in envenoma­
tion. Moreover, given the necessity for increased secretion, many venom genes may possess 
strong promoters, resulting in a ‘leaky’ expression profile in non-venom gland tissues. 
Thus, the direct comparison of expression values, which are extremely low for many 
toxin-encoding genes (Fig. 12.4A; [81]), without the usage of appropriate statistics can be 
misleading [83]. Furthermore, Hargreaves et al.’s [81] expression data exhibits unusually 
large variability between venom gland tissue replicates (Fig. 12.4B), possibly because they 
source samples at various time points (0, 16, 24, and 48 hours post-milking). As the authors 
leverage these expression values to support their findings and argue against the Toxicofera 
Hypothesis, sourcing venom gland tissues from the same time point would have been an 
appropriate strategy. Further, the authors did not establish orthology between toxin­
encoding genes and their endophysiological homologues, which could lead to erroneous 
interpretations. Thus, the claims made by Hargreaves et al., [81] based on their transcrip- 
tomic data to refute the Toxicofera Hypothesis need reassessment.
The Toxicofera Hypothesis was also challenged on the grounds of non-reciprocal mono- 
phyly of toxins and endophysiological proteins [81]. However, most gene trees presented by 
Hargreaves et al. [81] included low branch support and/or unresolved relationships. 
Therefore, conclusions drawn regarding the role of many proteins in envenomation, based 
exclusively on potentially unreliable tree topologies, are questionable. Moreover, non­
reciprocal monophyly could also stem from the limited divergence of genes from their 
plesiotypic endophysiological homologues, as seen in co-opted genes that serve multiple 
functions and those that are recently recruited into venom.
Based on the interpretation of the word ‘venomous’, multiple origins of venom have also 
been proposed in squamates, including at least three independent origins in Caenophidia
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

262 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
Saw-scaled 
©viper 
(E. coloratus)
AChE transcript 1 
AChE transcript 2 
AVIT 
CTL-i
CTL-k 
Crotamine-like 
LAAO-a
LIPA-b 
PLA2 IIA-a 
PLA2 IIA-b 
Renin 
SVMP-f 
SVMP-h 
SVMP-I 
SVMP-o 
SVMP-r 
SVMP-s 
SVMP-t 
SVMP-u 
VEGF-a 
VEGF-b 
VEGF-c
Corn 
snake
Rough green 
snake
Royal 
python 
(P. regius) (O. aestivus)(E. macularius) (P. guttatus)
Leopard 
gecko
PLA2 IIA-c 
CTL-b 
CTL-d 
CTL-e 
CTL-g 
CTL-j 
SVMP-a 
SVMP-b 
SVMP-d 
SVMP-i 
Ser. Prot.-a 
Ser. Prot.-b
CRISP-b 
VEGF-f 
3FTx-a
VG SC SK SG SC SK SG SC SK SG SC SK SG SC SK
20
10
60000
40000
20000
Venom gland 
(E. coloratus)
0
Figure 12.4 The estimated transcript abundance values for many toxin-encoding genes sequenced 
from the scent gland (SC), skin tissue (SK) and venom gland (VG) or salivary gland (SG) of painted 
saw-scaled viper (Echis coloratus), royal python (Python regius), rough green snake (Opheodrys 
aestivus), leopard gecko (Eublepharis macularius) and corn snake (Pantherophis guttatus) by 
Hargreaves et al. [81] are either extremely low (A) or exhibit large deviations across replicates 
(R1-R4; B). These heatmaps were generated using the supplementary data from [81]. (A black and 
white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the 
plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 263
and another in helodermatid lizards [9]. This interpretation is based on the argument that 
the pharmacological or biochemical testing of ‘toxic substances’ in the saliva of particular 
medically unimportant squamates (i.e., most non-front-fanged snakes) is insufficient, and 
their actual biological roles should be investigated [9]. Although we agree with this sugges­
tion, it should be noted that biological roles of ‘toxic substances’ have nothing to do with 
toxicity to humans. Such anthropocentric assumptions are invalidated by many studies that 
clearly demonstrate the potent prey-specific activities of snake venoms [26, 27]. These 
salivary secretions evolve to facilitate predation or defense of their producers, the ability 
of venoms to inflict severe clinical symptoms in humans should not be a criterion for their 
inclusion into the definition of venom. Thus, considering the modern definition of venom 
and the phylogenetic history of Caenophidia, we consider it highly unlikely that venom has 
multiple independent origins within this lineage. On the other hand, high-pressure venom 
delivery systems have undoubtedly evolved multiple times within the group, i.e., there has 
been independent specialization towards the use of venom as a primary trophic trait 
within Caenophidia.
Though currently available evidence provides space for multiple interpretations, the 
picture it paints suggests that dental glands are a synapomorphy of Toxicofera and that 
this glandular anatomy represents an exaptation that paved the way for the subsequent 
evolution of specialized venom systems. Thus, whether there was a single origin of the 
venom system in the Toxicofera MRCA or multiple origins in separate lineages depends 
largely on the usage of the term ‘venom system’. Although an incipient squamate venom 
system may have had a single early origin, specializations in venom systems have very likely 
originated convergently in distinct toxicoferan clades. It is interesting to note that the 
research on embryonic development and morphogenesis of snake dentition has shown 
that both front and rear fangs have a common evolutionary origin, and that the extant 
diversity of snakes may have been underpinned by the convergent specializations of the 
venom glands and their associated dental structures [77]. Current evidence is not sufficient 
to draw conclusions regarding the precise origin of venom in reptiles, and we may never be 
in possession of such evidence. It seems probable, however, that the MRCA of Caenophidia 
possessed a functional venom system. Given the presence of large toxin-secreting oral 
glands in plesiomorphic non-caenophidian genera (e.g., Cylindrophis and Anilius), as well 
as in highly divergent scolecophidian lineages, venom may even be an ancestral snake 
character, the occurrence of numerous reversals within that clade notwithstanding (see [80] 
and [49] for further discussion).
12.8 Conclusion
The origin of venom in squamates has been a topic of never-ending debate. The rapid 
diversification of venom systems as an adaptation to differing ecologies and environments 
makes them among the most dynamic features of squamate reptiles. With the paucity of 
whole-genome and ecological data available for toxicoferans and their outgroups, the 
current understanding of venom origins is primarily based on anatomical, phylogenetic, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

264 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
and transcriptomic studies. A comparative genomics approach to examine the synteny (i.e., 
colocalization) of toxin-encoding genes and their endophysiological homologues in the 
genomes of both toxicoferan reptiles and their close, non-venomous relatives may further 
our understanding of the evolutionary origin of squamate venom. However, given the 
complexity of venom systems and their dynamic nature, elucidating the evolutionary 
history of this trait could remain an arduous challenge.
Acknowledgements
The authors are thankful to editor David Gower (National History Museum, London) and 
reviewers Giulia Zancolli (University of Lausanne) and Nicholas Casewell (Liverpool School 
of Tropical Medicine) for their invaluable inputs and suggestions which greatly helped to 
improve the quality of the manuscript. We thank Genevieve Jackson for contributing snake 
venom-gland illustrations in Figure 12.1B.
References
1. V. Schendel, L. D. Rash, R. A. Jenner, and E. 
A. B. Undheim, The diversity of venom: the 
importance of behavior and venom system 
morphology in understanding its ecology 
and evolution. Toxins (Basel), 11 (2019), 666.
2. B. G. Fry, K. Roelants, D. E. Champagne, 
et al., The toxicogenomic multiverse: 
convergent recruitment of proteins into 
animal venoms. Annual Review of Genomics 
and Human Genetics, 10 (2009), 483-511.
3. B. G. Fry, From genome to ‘venome’: 
molecular origin and evolution of the snake 
venom proteome inferred from phylogenetic 
analysis of toxin sequences and related body 
proteins. Genome Research, 15 (2005), 
403-420.
4. B. G. Fry, H. Scheib, L. van der Weerd, et al., 
Evolution of an arsenal: structural and 
functional diversification of the venom 
system in the advanced snakes 
(Caenophidia). Molecular and Cellular 
Proteomics, 7 (2008), 215-46.
5. B. G. Fry, N. Vidal, L. van der Weerd, 
E. Kochva, and C. Renjifo, Evolution and 
diversification of the Toxicofera reptile 
venom system. Journal of Proteomics, 72 
(2009), 127-136.
6. N. Vidal and S. B. Hedges. The phylogeny of 
squamate reptiles (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) inferred from nine nuclear 
protein-coding genes. Comptes Rendus 
Biologies, 328 (2005), 1000-1008.
7. E. Kochva, Oral glands of the Reptilia. 
Biology of the Reptilia. 8 (1978), 43-162.
8. F. H. Pough, R. M. Andrews, J. E. Cadle, 
et al., Herpetology 3rd edn. (New Jersey: 
Prentice Hall, 2004).
9. K. V. Kardong, S. A. Weinstein, and
T. L. Smith, Reptile venom glands: form, 
function, and future. In S. P. Mackessy, ed., 
Handbook of Venoms and Toxins of Reptiles 
(Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2009), 
pp. 65-91.
10. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al. Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
11. J. C. Daltry, W. WUster, and R. S. Thorpe, 
Diet and snake venom evolution. Nature, 
379 (1996), 537-40.
12. H. L. Gibbs, L. Sanz, J. E. Chiucchi, 
T. M. Farrell, and J. J. Calvete, Proteomic 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 265
analysis of ontogenetic and diet-related 
changes in venom composition of juvenile 
and adult Dusky Pigmy rattlesnakes 
(Sistrurus miliarius barbouri). Journal of 
Proteomics, 74 (2011), 2169-2179.
13. G. Zancolli, J. J. Calvete, M. D. Cardwell, 
et al., When one phenotype is not enough: 
divergent evolutionary trajectories govern 
venom variation in a widespread rattlesnake 
species. Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 
286 (2019), 20182735.
14. N. R. Casewell, T. N. W. Jackson, 
A. H. Laustsen, and K. Sunagar, Causes and 
Consequences of Snake Venom Variation. 
Trends in Pharmacological Sciences, 41 
(2020), 570-581.
15. T. N. W. Jackson, H. Jouanne, and N. Vidal, 
Snake venom in context: Neglected clades 
and concepts. Frontiers in Ecology and 
Evolution, 7 (2019), 332.
16. M. V. Modica, K. Sunagar, M. Holford, and 
S. Dutertre,. Diversity and evolution of 
animal venoms: Neglected targets, 
ecological iInteractions, future perspectives. 
Frontiers in Ecology and Evolution, 8 
(2020), 65.
17. F. C. Cardoso, C. R. Ferraz, A. Arrahman, 
et al., Multifunctional toxins in snake 
venoms and therapeutic implications: from 
pain to hemorrhage and necrosis. Frontiers 
in Ecology and Evolution, 7 (2019), 218.
18. N. R. Casewell, R. A. Harrison, W. WUster, 
and S. C. Wagstaff, Comparative venom 
gland transcriptome surveys of the saw- 
scaled vipers (Viperidae: Echis) reveal 
substantial intra-family gene diversity and 
novel venom transcripts. BMC Genomics, 10 
(2009), 564.
19. R. B. Currier, R. A. Harrison, P. D. Rowley, 
G. D. Laing, and S. C. Wagstaff, Intra-specific 
variation in venom of the African Puff Adder 
(Bitis arietans): Differential expression and 
activity of snake venom metalloproteinases 
(SVMPs). Toxicon, 55 (2010), 864-873.
20. R. R. Senji Laxme, S. Khochare, H. F. de 
Souza, et al., Beyond the ‘big four’: Venom 
profiling of the medically important yet 
neglected Indian snakes reveals disturbing 
antivenom deficiencies. PLoS Neglected 
Tropical Diseases, 13 (2019), e0007899.
21. K. Sunagar, E. A. Undheim, H. Scheib, et al., 
Intraspecific venom variation in the 
medically significant Southern Pacific 
Rattlesnake (Crotalus oreganus helleri): 
biodiscovery, clinical and evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Proteomics, 99 
(2014), 68-83.
22. T. N. Jackson, I. Koludarov, S. A. Ali, et al., 
Rapid radiations and the race to 
redundancy: An investigation of the 
evolution of Australian elapid snake venoms. 
Toxins (Basel), 8 (2016), 309.
23. S. P. Mackessy, K. Williams, and 
K. G. Ashton, Ontogenetic variation in 
venom composition and diet of Crotalus 
oreganus concolor: a case of venom 
paedomorphosis? Copeia, 2003 (2003), 
769-782.
24. D. R. Rokyta, M. J. Margres, M. J. Ward, and 
E. E. Sanchez, The genetics of venom 
ontogeny in the eastern diamondback 
rattlesnake (Crotalus adamanteus). PeerJ, 5 
(2017), e3249.
25. L. Sanz, H. L. Gibbs, S. P. Mackessy, and 
J. J. Calvete, Venom proteomes of closely 
related Sistrurus rattlesnakes with divergent 
diets. Journal of Proteome Research. 5 (2006), 
2098-2112.
26. A. Barlow, C. E. Pook, R. A. Harrison, and 
W. WUster, Coevolution of diet and prey­
specific venom activity supports the role of 
selection in snake venom evolution. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B, 276 
(2009), 2443-2449.
27. S. P. Mackessy, N. M. Sixberry, 
W. H. Heyborne, and T. Fritts, Venom of the 
Brown Treesnake, Boiga irregularis: 
ontogenetic shifts and taxa-specific toxicity. 
Toxicon, 47 (2006), 537-548.
28. M. Li, B. G. Fry, and R. M. Kini, Eggs-only 
diet: its implications for the toxin profile 
changes and ecology of the marbled sea 
snake (Aipysurus eydouxii). Journal of 
Molecular Evolution, 60 (2005), 81-89.
29. J. Durban, A. Perez, L. Sanz, et al., Integrated 
‘omics’ profiling indicates that miRNAs are 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

266 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
modulators of the ontogenetic venom 
composition shift in the Central American 
rattlesnake, Crotalus simus simus. BMC 
Genomics, 14 (2013), 234.
30. B. Ujvari, N. R. Casewell, K. Sunagar, et al., 
Widespread convergence in toxin resistance 
by predictable molecular evolution. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA, 112 (2015), 
11911-11916.
31. A. H. Rowe, Y. Xiao, M. P. Rowe, 
T. R. Cummins, and H. H. Zakon, Voltage­
gated sodium channel in grasshopper mice 
defends against bark scorpion toxin. Science, 
342 (2013), 441-446.
32. M. L. Holding, D. H. Drabeck, S. A. Jansa, 
and H. L. Gibbs, Venom resistance as a 
model for understanding the molecular 
basis of complex coevolutionary 
adaptations. Integrative and Comparative 
Biology, 56 (2016), 1032-1043.
33. J. E. Biardi, D. C. Chien, and R. G. Coss. 
California ground squirrel (Spermophilus 
beecheyi) defenses against rattlesnake 
venom digestive and hemostatic toxins. 
Journal of Chemical Ecology, 32 (2006), 
137-154.
34. S. A. Jansa and R. S. Voss, Adaptive evolution 
of the venom-targeted vWF protein in 
opossums that eat pitvipers. PLoS One, 6 
(2011), e20997.
35. M. L. Holding, J. E. Biardi, and H. L. Gibbs, 
Coevolution of venom function and venom 
resistance in a rattlesnake predator and its 
squirrel prey. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B, 283 (2016), 20152841.
36. D. Barchan, S. Kachalsky, D. Neumann, 
et al., How the mongoose can fight the 
snake: the binding site of the mongoose 
acetylcholine receptor. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 89 
(1992), 7717-7721.
37. D. H. Drabeck, A. M. Dean, and S. A. Jansa. 
Why the honey badger don’t care: 
Convergent evolution of venom-targeted 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in 
mammals that survive venomous snake 
bites. Toxicon, 99 (2015), 68-72.
38. K. Sunagar, N. Casewell, S. Varma, et al., 
Deadly innovations: unraveling the 
molecular evolution of animal venoms. In 
P. Gopalakrishnakone and J. J. Calvete, eds., 
Venom Genomics and Proteomics 
(Dordrecht: Springer, 2014), pp. 1-23.
39. K. Sunagar and Y. Moran. The rise and fall of 
an evolutionary innovation: Contrasting 
strategies of venom evolution in ancient and 
young animals. PLoS Genetics, 11 (2015), 
e1005596.
40. K. S. Girish, D. K. Jagadeesha, K. B. Rajeev, and 
K. Kemparaju. Snake venom hyaluronidase: 
an evidence for isoforms and extracellular 
matrix degradation. Molecular and Cellular 
Biochemistry, 240 (2002), 105-110.
41. A. T. Tu and R. R. Hendon, Characterization 
of lizard venom hyaluronidase and evidence 
for its action as a spreading factor.
Comparative Biochemistry and Physiology B, 
76 (1983), 377-383.
42. G. D. Katkar, M. S. Sundaram,
S. K. NaveenKumar, et al., NETosis and lack 
of DNase activity are key factors in Echis 
carinatus venom-induced tissue destruction. 
Nature Communications, 7 (2016), 11361.
43. Q. Lu, J. M. Clemetson, and K. J. Clemetson. 
Snake venoms and hemostasis. Journal of 
Thrombosis and Haemostasis, 3 (2005), 
1791-1799.
44. S. Xiong and C. Huang. Synergistic strategies 
of predominant toxins in snake venoms. 
Toxicology Letters, 287 (2018), 142-154.
45. C. M. Modahl and S. P. Mackessy, Venoms 
of rear-fanged snakes: New proteins and 
novel activities. Frontiers in Ecology and 
Evolution, 7 (2019), 279.
46. T. Tasoulis and G. K. Isbister, A review and 
database of snake venom proteomes. Toxins 
(Basel), 9 (2017), 9.
47. B. G. Fry, E. A. Undheim, S. A. Ali, et al., 
Squeezers and leaf-cutters: differential 
diversification and degeneration of the 
venom system in toxicoferan reptiles. 
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 12 
(2013), 1881-1899.
48. K. Sunagar, T. N. Jackson, E. A. Undheim, 
et al., Three-fingered RAVERs: Rapid
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

origin of the squamate venom cocktail 267
Accumulation of Variations in Exposed 
Residues of snake venom toxins. Toxins 
(Basel), 5 (2013), 2172-2208.
49. T. N. Jackson, B. Young, G. Underwood, 
et al., Endless forms most beautiful: The 
evolution of ophidian oral glands, including 
the venom system, and the use of 
appropriate terminology for homologous 
structures. Zoomorphology, 136 (2017), 
107-130.
50. K. W. Sanggaard, T. F. Dyrlund, 
L. R. Thomsen, et al., Characterization of the 
gila monster (Heloderma suspectum 
suspectum) venom proteome. Journal of 
Proteomics, 117 (2015), 1-11.
51. M. K. K. Yap and N. Misuan, Exendin-4 from 
Heloderma suspectum venom: From 
discovery to its latest application as type II 
diabetes combatant. Basic & Clinical 
Pharmacology & Toxicology, 124 (2019), 
513-527.
52. E. Kochva. The origin of snakes and 
evolution of the venom apparatus. Toxicon, 
25 (1987), 65-106.
53. W. Auffenberg. The Behavioral Ecology of the 
Komodo Monitor (Gainsville, FL: University 
Presses of Florida, 1981).
54. B. G. Fry, S. Wroe, W. Teeuwisse, et al., 
A central role for venom in predation by 
Varanus komodoensis (Komodo Dragon) and 
the extinct giant Varanus (Megalania) 
priscus. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences of the USA, 106 (2009), 8969-8974.
55. I. Koludarov, T. N. Jackson, B. op den 
Brouw, et al., Enter the dragon: The dynamic 
and multifunctional evolution of 
Anguimorpha lizard venoms. Toxins (Basel), 
9 (2017), 242.
56. B. G. Fry, N. Vidal, J. A. Norman, et al., Early 
evolution of the venom system in lizards and 
snakes. Nature, 439 (2006), 584-588.
57. M. Nei, X. Gu, and T. Sitnikova, Evolution by 
the birth-and-death process in multigene 
families of the vertebrate immune system. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences of the USA, 94 (1997), 7799-7806.
58. B. G. Fry, W. WUster, R. M. Kini, et al., 
Molecular evolution and phylogeny of elapid 
snake venom three-finger toxins. Journal of 
Molecular Evolution, 57 (2003), 110-129.
59. N. R. Casewell, S. C. Wagstaff, R. A. Harrison, 
C. Renjifo, and W. WUster, Domain loss 
facilitates accelerated evolution and 
neofunctionalization of duplicate snake 
venom metalloproteinase toxin genes. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 28 (2011), 
2637-2649.
60. K. Suryamohan, S. P. Krishnankutty, 
J. Guillory, et al., The Indian cobra reference 
genome and transcriptome enables 
comprehensive identification of venom 
toxins. Nature Genetics, 52 (2020), 106-117.
61. D. D. Brown, P. C. Wensink, and E. Jordan, 
A comparison of the ribosomal DNA’s of 
Xenopus laevis and Xenopus mulleri: the 
evolution of tandem genes. Journal of 
Molecular Biology, 63 (1972), 57-73.
62. Y. Moran, H. Weinberger, J. C. Sullivan, 
et al., Concerted evolution of sea anemone 
neurotoxin genes is revealed through 
analysis of the Nematostella vectensis 
genome. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 
25 (2008), 737-747.
63. A. Brust, K. Sunagar, E. A. B. Undheim, et al., 
Differential evolution and 
neofunctionalization of snake venom 
metalloprotease domains. Molecular and 
Cellular Proteomics, 12 (2013), 651-663.
64. D. Kordis and F. Gubensek, Adaptive 
evolution of animal toxin multigene families. 
Gene, 261 (2000), 43-52.
65. N. R. Casewell, W. WUster, F. J. Vonk, 
R. A. Harrison, and B. G. Fry. Complex 
cocktails: the evolutionary novelty of 
venoms. Trends in Ecology and Evolution, 28 
(2013), 219-229.
66. A. D. Hargreaves, M. T. Swain, M. J. Hegarty, 
D. W. Logan, and J. F. Mulley, Restriction 
and recruitment-gene duplication and the 
origin and evolution of snake venom toxins. 
Genome Biology and Evolution, 6 (2014), 
2088-2095.
67. J. Reyes-Velasco, D. C. Card, A. L. Andrew, 
et al., Expression of venom gene homologs 
in diverse python tissues suggests a new 
model for the evolution of snake venom.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

268 suranse, iyer, jackson, and sunagar
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 32 (2015), 
173-183.
68. Q. Lei, C. Li, Z. Zuo, et al., Evolutionary 
Insights into RNA trans-Splicing in 
Vertebrates. Genome Biology and Evolution, 
8 (2016), 562-577.
69. T. Ogawa, N. Oda-Ueda, K. Hisata, et al., 
Alternative mRNA splicing in three venom 
families underlying a possible production of 
divergent venom proteins of the Habu 
Snake, Protobothrops flavoviridis. Toxins 
(Basel), 11 (2019), 581.
70. X. Cousin, S. Bon, J. Massoulie, and C. Bon, 
Identification of a novel type of alternatively 
spliced exon from the acetylcholinesterase 
gene of Bungarus fasciatus. Molecular forms 
of acetylcholinesterase in the snake liver and 
muscle. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 273 
(1998), 9812-9820.
71. B. G. Fry, K. Winter, J. A. Norman, et al., 
Functional and structural diversification of 
the Anguimorpha lizard venom system. 
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 9 (2010), 
2369-2390.
72. V. J. Lynch, Inventing an arsenal: adaptive 
evolution and neofunctionalization of snake 
venom phospholipase A2 genes. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 7 (2007), 2.
73. K. Sunagar, W. E. Johnson, S. J. O’Brien, 
V. Vasconcelos, and A. Antunes, Evolution of 
CRISPs associated with toxicoferan-reptilian 
venom and mammalian reproduction. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 29 (2012), 
1807-1822.
74. K. Jackson, The evolution of venom-delivery 
systems in snakes. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 137 (2003), 337-354.
75. I. Koludarov, T. N. Jackson, A. Pozzi, and 
A. S. Mikheyev, Family saga: reconstructing 
the evolutionary history of a functionally 
diverse gene family reveals complexity at the 
genetic origins of novelty. bioRxiv, (2019), 
583344.
76. A. M. Taub. Ophidian cephalic glands. 
Journal of Morphology, 118 (1966), 
529-542.
77. F. J. Vonk, J. F. Admiraal, K. Jackson, et al., 
Evolutionary origin and development of 
snake fangs. Nature, 454 (2008), 630-633.
78. M. Phisalix and R. Caius. L’extension de la 
fonction venimeuse dans 1’ordre entiere des 
ophidiens et son existence chez des familles 
ou elle n’avait pas ete soup^onnee jusqu’i^i. 
Journal de Physiologie et de Pathologie 
Gtofrale, 17 (1918), 923-964.
79. B. G. Fry, N. R. Casewell, W. WUster, et al., 
The structural and functional diversification 
of the Toxicofera reptile venom system. 
Toxicon, 60 (2012), 434-448.
80. T. N. Jackson and B. G. Fry, A tricky trait: 
Applying the fruits of the ‘function debate’ in 
the philosophy of biology to the ‘venom 
debate’ in the science of toxinology. Toxins, 
8 (2016), 263.
81. A. D. Hargreaves, M. T. Swain, D. W. Logan, 
and J. F. Mulley, Testing the Toxicofera: 
comparative transcriptomics casts doubt on 
the single, early evolution of the reptile 
venom system. Toxicon, 92 (2014), 140-156.
82. T. Townsend, A. Larson, E. Louis, and 
J. R. Macey. Molecular phylogenetics of 
squamata: the position of snakes, 
amphisbaenians, and dibamids, and the root 
of the squamate tree. Systematic Biology 53 
(2004), 735-757.
83. A. Conesa, P. Madrigal, S. Tarazona, et al., 
A survey of best practices for RNA-seq data 
analysis. Genome Biology, 17 (2016), 13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.016 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part IV
Neurobiological Perspectives
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.017 Published online by Cambridge University Press

13
Using Adaptive Traits in the Ear to Estimate 
Ecology of Early Snakes
Hongyu Yi
13.1 Introduction
Snakes losing limbs marks a major shift of body plan in tetrapod evolution, like whales 
gaining flippers and birds gaining wings. It remains unsettled whether body elongation and 
limb reduction occurred in ancestral snakes as an adaptive response to living in subsurface 
habitats or in the ocean [1-4]. In the past decade, new approaches have been applied to 
identify fossorial and aquatic specialists in the early evolution of snakes, using virtual 
models of the ear of fossils [4-7]. High-resolution X-ray computed tomography (HRXCT) 
can image internal structures of extant and fossil snakes without damaging specimens, and 
morphological datasets of snake endocranial sensory systems are developing rapidly [8, 9]. 
This chapter reviews the osseous part of the inner ear of major snake lineages, comparing 
shape of the bony labyrinth and stapes among habitat generalists and (fossorial or aquatic) 
specialists. This chapter also reviews quantitative approaches to analysing bony labyrinth 
geometry and to estimating habitat use of extinct snakes.
13.2 The Snake Inner Ear: General Anatomy and Function
The snake inner ear comprises the membranous labyrinth and the bony labyrinth. The 
membranous labyrinth is formed of sensory cells and membranous tubes filled with 
endolymph fluid. Surrounding the membranous labyrinth is the bony labyrinth, formed 
of ossified canals and cavities (Fig. 13.1). The bony labyrinth includes three structures: the 
cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular canals (Fig. 13.1). The cochlea houses the cochlear 
duct that processes air-borne sound. The vestibule and semicircular canals house sensory 
organs to register movement and maintain positional equilibrium: the saccule, utricle, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

272 HONGYU YI
Figure 13.1 Anatomy of the squamate ear. (A-D) Ptyas mucosa, a terrestrial snake. (E-F) Varanus 
indicus, a terrestrial lizard. (A) Skull of P. mucosa showing bony elements related with sound 
perception. (B) Isolated sound-transmitting and processing apparatuses of P. mucosa. (C-D) The 
bony labyrinth of P. mucosa in lateral and medial view, respectively. (E) Skull of V. indicus showing 
bony elements related with sound perception. (F) Isolated sound-transmitting and processing 
apparatuses of V. indicus. (G-H) The bony labyrinth of V. indicus in lateral and medial view, 
respectively. Anatomical abbreviations: asc, anterior semicircular canal; lab, bony labyrinth; cc, 
common crus; coch, cochlea; lsc, lateral semicircular canal; psc, posterior semicircular canal; stp, 
stapes; qu, quadrate; ves, vestibule; VIII, foramina for vestibulocochlear nerve. Scale bar = 3 mm.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 273
semicircular ducts [10]. A branch of the vestibulocochlear nerve penetrates the medial wall 
of the vestibule (Fig. 13.1D, H).
In lizards, environmental sound is transmitted into the inner ear via the external ear and 
the middle ear [11]. Snakes differ from most lizards in lacking an external ear, but they 
maintained the stapes bone in the middle ear to transmit sound vibrations (Fig. 13.1). 
Additional environmental vibrations are transmitted via muscles and bones in the skull [12].
The osseous inner ear, or the bony labyrinth, is associated with the perception of sound 
and equilibrium in vertebrates [10, 13]. As with other ossified elements in the skeleton, the 
bony labyrinth can be readily imaged using HRXCT. A series of CT images can be stacked 
virtually to form a three-dimensional virtual model of the inner ear (Fig. 13.1C-D, G-H). As 
CT models of the snake ear accumulate, particular morphological specializations have been 
shown to occur repeatedly in clades with similar habits, including burrowing (fossorial) or 
swimming [4, 6]. In the following section, morphology of the ossified inner and middle ear 
is reviewed for all major families of Serpentes (Fig. 13.2). The phylogeny and classification 
of extant squamates considered here follows that employed in two recent large-scale 
studies [14, 15].
13.3 Morphological Variation of the Bony Labyrinth 
in Habitat Generalists and Specialists
Many snakes are habitat generalists. They are good climbers, swimmers, and racers in 
various terrestrial terrains [16]. However, some snakes live predominantly in one type of 
habitat. Burrowing snakes spend more or less of their lives in litter, soil and/or sand, with 
more dedicated burrowers feeding on soil vertebrates and invertebrates. Most marine 
snakes are pelagic, spending their entire life cycle in the ocean [16].
Soil habitats are typically characterized by tight space, dim light, and environmental 
sound transmitted via partly solid substrate. In contrast, the habitats of marine snakes 
typically have open spaces, more intense light, and sound vibrations transmitted by air and 
water. In response to these different environmental conditions, sensory organs (e.g., eyes 
and ears) evolve adaptively [4, 6, 17-20]. Variation in the morphology of the snake inner ear 
correlates to some extent with the primary habitat of a species [4, 7, 17, 21, 22]. In the 
following section, the morphology of the inner ear of snake families is reviewed, including 
the morphology of fossilized inner ears of some stem snakes.
13.3.1 Typhlopidae, Leptotyphlopidae, and Anomalepididae
The three families comprise small, possibly miniaturized burrowers generally known as 
blind snakes or worm snakes [16]. They form a monophyletic Scolecophidia in snake 
phylogenies generated from morphological and total evidence (morphology + molecule) 
data [3, 9, 23, 24], but recent large-scale molecular phylogenetic studies find Scolecophidia 
to be paraphyletic, with Anomalepididae more closely related to Alethinophidia than to 
other blind snakes [2, 14, 25-28].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

274 HONGYU YI
Л Generalist
• Fossorial
□ Aquatic
-• Bipes canaliculatus
A Heloderma suspectum
• 
Anniella pulchra 
A Varanus indicus 
A Varanus salvator
Typhlops jamaicensis
Rena dulcis
Liotyphlops argaleus
Anilius scytale
Cylindrophis maculatus 
Uropeltis ceylanica 
Loxocemus bicolor 
Xenopeltis unicolor 
---- A Python molurus
• 
Exiliboa placata
• 
Eryx colubrinus
■ 
A Boa constrictor
■ 
A Corallus caninus
□ 
Acrochodus javanicus
• 
Achalinus spinalis
A Pareas hamptoni
A Trimeresurus stejnegeri 
Erpeton tentaculatum 
Fordonia leucobalia
A Lamprophis lineatus
A Naja naja
Laticauda colubrina
Laticauda laticaudata
• 
Simoselaps bertholdi
A Echiopsis curta
Aipysurus laevis
Hydrophis caerulescens
- • Heterodon platirhinos
- 
A Chrysopelea ornata
A Boiga irregularis
- 
A Ptyas mucosa
—A Lampropeltis getulus 
■ i—A Rhinobothryum lentiginosum
• Sonora semiannuiata
Bipedidae 
Helodermatidae 
Anniellidae
Varanidae
Typhlopidae 
Leptotyphlopidae 
Anomalepididae 
Aniliidae 
Cylindrophidae 
Uropeltidae 
Loxocemidae 
Xenopeltidae 
Pythonidae 
Ungaliophiidae 
Erycidae
Boidae
Acrochordidae 
Xenodermidae 
Pareidae 
Viperidae
Homalopsidae
Lamprophiidae
Elapidae
Dipsadidae
Colubridae
Figure 13.2 Phylogeny (after [14, 15]) of extant squamates described in this chapter, showing 
convergent evolution of fossorial and aquatic habits.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 275
The bony labyrinths of the three families as sampled in this study (Fig. 13.3B-D) share 
short and stout semicircular canals that have not been found in alethinophidians (Figs. 
13.3-13.5). Wide semicircular canal diameters occur in Typhlops jamaicensis 
(Typhlopidae), Rena dulcis (Leptotyphlopidae), and Liotyphlops argaleus 
(Anomalepididae) (Fig. 13.3B-D). Given current comparative data [4, 6, 29], cross-sectional 
expansion of the semicircular canals cannot be linked with miniaturization or fossoriality. It 
remains unclear whether the membranous ducts inside the semicircular canals are also 
stout. In small fossorial snakes and lizards, including Cylindrophis (Fig. 13.3F), Anniella 
(Fig. 13.5K), and the miniaturized Dibamus (fig. S1 in [4]), the semicircular canals are 
slender. In fossorial alethinophidians, including Xenopeltis and Loxocemus, slender semi­
circular canals are more common (Fig. 13.3H-I).
Vestibule shape varies considerably among the three sampled scolecophidian families. In 
T. jamaicensis (Typhlopidae), the vestibule is enlarged ventral to the lateral semicircular 
canal (Fig. 13.3B-C). This differs from the morphology in other burrowing squamates, 
whose vestibule is most expanded in the part dorsal to the lateral semicircular canal. 
Unlike T. jamaicensis, R. dulcis (Leptotyphlopidae) has a small vestibule with no expansion 
(Fig. 13.3D). Although commonly considered a fossorial species, R. dulcis (the Texas blind 
snake) and other leptotyphlopids have been observed climbing trees [16]. It remains 
unclear whether R. dulcis differs from T. jamaicensis and L. argaleus in habitat preferences.
Despite the varying degree of vestibule expansions, the three species sampled here 
share a large fenestra ovalis that opens to a large stapedial footplate, which is similar to 
the condition in other burrowing squamates (Fig. 13.3B-D). The stapes of T. jamaicensis 
has a short, cylindrical shaft. In R. dulcis and L. argaleus, the stapedial shaft bifurcates 
distally.
13.3.2 Alethinophidia: Aniliidae, Cylindrophiidae, and Uropeltidae
The majority of extant snakes constitute the Alethinophidia to the exclusion of Typhlopidae, 
Gerrhopilidae, Leptotyphlopidae, and Anomalepididae [14]. Most extant alethinophidians 
comprise the clade Caenophidia (‘higher’ snakes). Among non-caenophidian alethinophi- 
dians, there are several clades of small to medium, fossorial snakes, including Aniliidae, 
Cylindrophiidae, Uropeltidae, and Anomochilidae (Fig. 13.2). These burrowing specialists 
display morphological adaptations in the ear corresponding to their habitat use [30, 31].
The bony labyrinth of Anilius scytale has slender semicircular canals surrounding a large 
vestibule, which is shared by Cylindrophis maculatus and Uropeltis ceylanica (Fig. 13.3E-G). 
In the latter two species, the vestibule is nearly spherical (Fig. 13.3F-G) (fig. 6 in [31]). 
Viewed dorsally, the vestibule bulges dorsolaterally. The lateral semicircular canal arcs 
smoothly, subparallel to the rounded vestibule. Ventral to the lateral semicircular canal, a 
large fenestra ovalis opens in the lateral wall of the vestibule and cochlea. In A. scytale, 
C. maculatus, and U. ceylanica, the fenestra ovalis is open from the ventral margin of the 
vestibule to the ventral margin of the cochlea. The stapedial footplate rests on the sub­
circular fenestra ovalis, and the diameter of the stapedial footplate approaches or exceeds 
the length of the stapedial shaft (Fig. 13.3E-G).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

276 HONGYU YI
(A)
г—• (В) Typhlopsjamaicensis 
1—• (C) Rena dulcis
(D) Liotyphlops argaleus
(E) Anilius scytale
(F) Cylindrophis maculatus
(G) Uropeltis ceylanica
(H) Loxocemus bicolor
(I) Xenopeltis unicolor
(J) Python molurus
• (K) Exiliboa placata 
(L) Eryx colubrinus 
(M) Boa constrictor 
(N) Corallus caninus
Figure 13.3 The bony labyrinth and stapes of non-caenophidian snakes. (A) Phylogenetic 
relationships (after [14]) of the species listed in this figure. Black dots denote fossorial species;
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 277
13.3.3 Alethinophidia: Pythonidae, Loxocemidae, and Xenopeltidae
Pythonids are terrestrial generalists that utilize a variety of habitats [32]. Their closest extant 
relatives are two monotypic families, Loxocemidae and Xenopeltidae, both of which are 
fossorial specialists (Fig. 13.2). These three lineages comprise Pythonoidea.
The habitat generalist Python molurus (Fig. 13.3J) has a bony labyrinth slightly different 
from that of Ptyas mucosa, a terrestrial generalist caenophidian (Fig. 13.1B-D). In 
P. molurus, the bony wall of the lateral semicircular canal conjoins with the vestibule, 
resembling a ‘burrowing’ ear. However, compared with its burrowing relatives (Loxocemus 
bicolor and Xenopeltis unicolor), P. molurus lacks a dorsally expanded vestibule and has 
stouter semicircular canals (Fig. 13.3H-K). With limited sampling of Pythonidae and its 
closely related clades, a definitive conclusion cannot be drawn as to whether the variations 
in the cross-sectional profiles are related to habitat and/or phylogeny.
The stapes of L. bicolor and X. unicolor are distinct from that of P. molurus (and other 
habitat generalists) in that they are shorter and stouter (Fig. 13.1B-D). Little variation is 
present in the shape of the stapes footplate, and all three species have a footplate that 
covers a large area in the lateral wall of the bony labyrinth (Fig. 13.3H-J).
13.3.4 Alethinophidia: Boidae, Erycidae, and Ungaliophiidae
Booidea, comprising Boidae and several boa-like clades, is sister to Pythonoidea [14, 27]. 
Like pythonids, boids are typically medium to large sized snakes that are generalists in 
terrestrial habitats [32]. Many boids are good swimmers, although exclusively aquatic 
species are unknown. Erycid and ungaliophiid booids are fossorial to semifossorial snakes 
that can actively burrow in loose sand and soil [16].
The lateral wall of the vestibule merges with the lateral semicircular canal in the 
terrestrial Boa constrictor, the arboreal Corallus caninus, and the two fossorial species 
Eryx colubrinus and Exiliboa placata (Fig. 13.3K-N). The same morphology is present in 
the semiaquatic Eunectes murinus (fig. S1 in [4]). Variation in the bony labyrinth is most 
evident in the region ventral to the lateral semicircular canal. In E. colubrinus and 
E. placata, expansion of the vestibule shows a spherical lateral view and a protruding 
triangular dorsal view (Fig. 13.3K-L). In contrast, lateral expansion of the vestibule is slight 
in B. constrictor (Fig. 13.3M) and inconspicuous in C. caninus (Fig. 13.3N). In the middle 
ear, the stapedial footplate is massive in E. colubrinus but diminutive in C. caninus. The 
latter species also has an elongated distal process of the stapes.
Figure 13.3 (cont.) white triangles denote terrestrial generalists. The labels (B-N) at the tips of 
branches in the phylogeny correspond to the labels of the virtual models below. (B-N) Virtual models 
of the bony labyrinth and stapes of the species in (A). For each species, the bony labyrinth and stapes 
is shown in lateral (left column) and dorsal (right) view. Not to scale. Anatomical abbreviations: asc, 
anterior semicircular canal; sta, stapes; ves, vestibule. (O) Skull of Typhlops jamaicensis in lateral view, 
with the bony labyrinth and stapes highlighted. Scale bar = 10 mm. (P) Skull of Python molurus in 
lateral view, with the bony labyrinth and stapes highlighted. Scale bar = 10 mm.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

278 HONGYU YI
(A)
— □ (В) Acrochodus javanicus
— • (C)Achalinus spinalis
— A (D)Pareas hamptoni
— A (E) Trimeresurus stejnegeri 
[-□ (F) Erpeton tentaculatum
1—• {G)Fordonia leucobalia
(H)Lamprophis lineatus
—Д (I) Naja naja
(J) Laticauda colubrina
(K) Laticauda laticaudata
-• (L) Simoselaps bertholdi 
(M)Echiopsis curta 
(N)Aipysurus laevis 
<O)Hydrophis caerulescens
asc
ves
(P)
(K)
Figure 13.4 The bony labyrinth and stapes of caenophidian snakes. (A) Phylogenetic relationships 
(after [14, 15]) of the species listed in this figure. Black dots denote fossorial species; white triangles
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 279
13.3.5 Caenophidia: Acrochordidae and Xenodermidae
The most shallowly nested extant caenophidians are Acrochordidae and Xenodermidae, two 
(together paraphyletic) clades with low extant diversity and distinctive ecologies [14, 27]. The 
three extant species of Acrochordidae are largely piscivorous and fully aquatic in freshwater 
and/or estuarine/coastal habitats [16, 33]. Xenodermidae includes poorly known, terrestrial 
and possibly semifossorial species feeding on invertebrates such as earthworms [34].
Acrochordus javanicus inhabits freshwater swamps and preys on fish in the bottom of the 
water column [35]. This species has been found to aggregate in burrows [16]. Its bony 
labyrinth shows a combination of characteristics typical of generalist and fossorial taxa. The 
vestibule of A. javanicus bulges dorsally (Fig. 13.4B), resembling the shape in aniliids, 
uropeltids, and xenopeltids (Fig. 13.3F-I). However, the semicircular canals wrap loosely 
around the vestibule, resembling those of terrestrial generalists (Fig. 13.1: the colubrid 
Ptyas mucosa). The stapes of A. javanicus is stout with a thickened shaft and a small 
footplate. The stapedial shaft is connected to the quadrate via movable cartilaginous 
articulations, which resembles the condition in fossorial alethinophidians including 
Xenopeltis, Loxocemus, and Uropeltis [36]. Although A. javanicus is aquatic, the enlarged 
vestibule and stapes resemble those of burrowing species, perhaps reflecting influences 
from its bottom-dwelling habit and sedentary lifestyle [16, 33].
In Xenodermidae, Achalinus spinalis is nocturnal and fossorial [37], feeding on earth­
worms [34]. It may burrow into loose soil, but few ecological data are available. The bony 
labyrinth of A. spinalis does resemble that of other burrowers in having a short anterior 
semicircular canal that does not bend ventrally at the junction with the anterior ampulla 
(Fig. 13.4C). In addition, the stapes of A. spinalis has a large footplate with a short distal 
shaft. The CT model of the stapes shows a clear fissure in its shaft, suggesting the distal part 
of the shaft might have had a calcified cartilage dorsal extension from the osseous shaft. 
Such calcification has been recorded in xenopeltids [36], but more data are needed to 
assess its presence in A. spinalis, and its functional significance, if any.
13.3.6 Caenophidia: Pareidae and Viperidae
Pareas hamptoni and Trimeresurus stejnegeri represent separate radiations of arboreal 
snakes in Pareidae and Viperidae, respectively [16]. Both species are about 1 m in total 
length and occur in subtropical forests in southeast Asia [16, 38, 39]. The bony labyrinths of 
P. hamptoni (Fig. 13.4D) and T. stejnegeri (Fig. 13.4E) share a relatively small vestibule and 
an elongate and ventrally arching anterior semicircular canal. Although spherical, the 
vestibule of P. hamptoni is much smaller than that of burrowing snakes, relative to the
Figure 13.4 (cont.) denote terrestrial generalists; white squares denote aquatic species. The labels 
(B-O) at the tips of branches in the phylogeny correspond to the labels of the virtual models below. 
(B-O) Virtual models of the bony labyrinth and stapes of the species in (A). For each species, the bony 
labyrinth and stapes is shown in lateral (left column) and dorsal (right) view. Not to scale. Anatomical 
abbreviations: asc, anterior semicircular canal; sta, stapes; ves, vestibule. (P) Skull of Simoselaps 
bertholdi in lateral view, with the bony labyrinth and stapes highlighted. Scale bar = 5 mm.
(Q) Skull of Hydrophis caerulescens in lateral view, with the bony labyrinth and stapes highlighted. 
Scale bar = 5 mm.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

280 HONGYU YI
volume of the whole bony labyrinth (compare Fig. 13.4D with Fig. 13.3H: Loxocemus bicolor 
and Fig. 13.4L: Simoselaps bertholdi). The stapedial footplate is small in P. hamptoni and 
T. stejnegeri, and the stapedial shaft is long in T. stejnegeri (Fig. 13.4D-E).
13.3.7 Caenophidia: Elapidae, Homalopsidae, and Lamprophiidae
Elapidae includes extant, fully aquatic sea snakes (including Aipysurus and Hydrophis) and 
the semiaquatic sea kraits (Laticauda) [27]. The closest extant relatives of sea snakes are 
terrestrial elapids such as Echiopsis (Fig. 13.4A). Therefore, the sea kraits and sea snakes 
likely represent at least two independent origins of aquatic, marine habits within 
hydrophiine elapids [20].
The vestibule is generally largest in fossorial elapids and smallest in aquatic elapids. 
Simoselaps bertholdi (Fig. 13.4L), a terrestrial fossorial elapid, has a large vestibule resem­
bling that of other caenophidian burrowers (Fig. 13.4C: Achalinus spinalis). In comparison, 
the aquatic elapids, Laticauda, Aipysurus, and Hydrophis (Fig. 13.4J-K, N-O), have a 
smaller vestibule relative to the size of the bony labyrinth. The fenestra ovalis and stapedial 
footplate are also small in aquatic species. Laticauda (Fig. 13.4J-K) and Hydrophis 
(Fig. 13.4O) have a particularly tiny stapedial footplate, making the stapes more rod-like 
than those of terrestrial and fossorial species.
Some fossorial elapids have a small vestibule and a large fenestra ovalis. The fossorial 
Brachyurophis australis inhabits sandy environments, and its large fenestra ovalis extends 
to the ventral margin of the cochlea (fig. 5 in [6]), resembling that of alethinophidian sand 
burrowers (Fig. 13.3L: Eryx colubrinus).
Homalopsidae comprises aquatic to semiaquatic species collectively called mud snakes 
[16]. Many species spend much of their time close to the bottom of water bodies, and some 
species burrow in mud flats. The fully aquatic Erpeton tentaculatum (Fig. 13.4F) has a 
proportionally larger vestibule than that of sea snakes, and it has a stapes similar to those of 
terrestrial (generalist) caenophidians such as Lamprophis lineatus (Fig. 13.4H). Fordonia 
leucobalia (Fig. 13.4G) burrows into mud to prey on crabs, and it has a bony labyrinth 
resembling that of the burrowing terrestrial elapid Simoselaps bertholdi rather than the 
closely related, more nektonic E. tentaculatum. Compared with E. tentaculatum, F. leuco- 
balia also has a larger vestibule and stouter stapes, with a short distal shaft.
13.3.8 Caenophidia: Colubroidea
Colubroidea consists of nearly 2,000 extant species, the majority of which are terrestrial 
generalists in contrast to exclusively fossorial or aquatic specialists. Several colubroid 
species are commonly called water snakes, but none of them is fully aquatic, and they lack 
the dorsally placed nostrils and laterally compressed tail in sea snakes [16]. The hog-nose 
dipsadid (Heterodon platirhinos) is known as a burrower, but it partly utilizes burrows 
made by other animals [40] and is less of an active, dedicated burrower than, for example, 
the non-caenophidian Uropeltis ceylanica.
Although extreme aquatic or fossorial adaptations are rare among colubroideans, some 
have evolved a unique locomotor style in arboreal species: controlled aerial descent. The 
arboreal southeast Asian Chrysopelea ornata glides from trees [41]. Here the bony labyrinth 
of C. ornata is compared with that of arboreal non-gliding snakes, including Boiga
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 281
Colubridae, Dipsadidae, Pareidae, Viperidae
Semi-fossorial Generalist (arboreal) Generalist (terrestrial)
asc
anterior
(A) Heterodon platirhinos
(B) Chrysopelea ornata
(C) Lampropeltis getulus
(E) Boiga irregularis
(D) Sonora semiannulata
(H) Trimeresurus stejnegeri
(F) Pty as mucosa
(G) Pareas hamptoni
T
(I) Rhinobothryum 
lentiginosum
Non-ophidian squamates
Fossorial 
Generalist 
Aquatic 
Figure 13.5 Morphological comparisons of squamate bony labyrinth and stapes. (A-J) Caenophidian 
snakes. Arrows point to the anterovental margin of the anterior semicircular canal. In arboreal 
caenophidians, the ventral bending of the anterior semicircular canals is prominent. (K-P) Lizards, 
including amphisbaenians. The cross sign denotes extinct taxa. Anatomical abbreviations: asc, 
anterior semicircular canal; f. oval., foramen ovalis; sta, stapes. Ear models not to scale.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

282 HONGYU YI
irregularis (Colubridae), Pareas hamptoni (Pareidae), and Trimeresurus stejnegeri 
(Viperidae). These arboreal species have a large anterior ampulla and a characteristic 
ventral bend of the anterior semicircular canal (Fig. 13.5B, F, H, I). Chrysopelea ornata 
(Fig. 13.5B) has a larger posterior ampulla than the arboreal non-gliding species.
In the middle ear, the stapes retains a similar shape among arboreal and terrestrial 
colubroids (Fig. 13.5: Ptyas mucosa, and Rhinobothryum lentiginosum). An exception is 
Lampropeltis getulus (Fig. 13.5C) that has a shorter stapedial shaft than other terrestrial 
generalists sampled in this study.
Possibly due to their semifossorial habits, ‘burrowing’ colubroids lack an enlarged vesti­
bule (Fig. 13.5A, D). In the dipsadid Heterodon platirhinos and colubrid Sonora 
semiannulata, the semicircular canals curve loosely around the vestibule, differing from 
the compact shape in non-colubroid burrowing species described above. However, the two 
colubroid species do resemble other burrowing snakes in having a short anterior semicircu­
lar canal with a simple curve in the anteroventral margin, which is clearly distinguishable 
from the elaborate anterior semicircular canals in arboreal and ground-dwelling colubroids 
(Fig. 13.5A-J). The stapes of S. semiannulata is as stout as that of other burrowing snakes, yet 
the stapes of H. platirhinos resembles that of terrestrial generalists, with a long shaft and 
small footplate. More behavioural and anatomical data are required for a greater sampling of 
colubroids to identify and interpret patterns of morphological variations in their inner ear.
13.4 Ears of Non-Ophidian Squamates (‘Lizards’)
In snakes, the vestibule is often relatively much larger in fossorial species, smaller in pelagic 
aquatic species, and intermediate in generalists. A similar pattern exists in lizards. The 
vestibule is large in volume and expanded dorsally in dedicated burrowers, including 
Typhlosaurus lineatus (Scincomorpha), Aprasia pulchella (Gekkota), Dibamus 
novaeguineae (Dibamidae) (fig. S1 in [4]), Anniella pulchra (Anguimorpha: Fig. 13.5K), 
and Bipes canaliculatus (Amphisbaenia). Lizard semicircular canals have widely varying 
shapes, but they are generally more compact in burrowing lizards and more loosely 
arranged around the vestibule in non-burrowing lizards (Fig. 13.5). Six species of lizards 
(including amphisbaenians) were sampled in this study (Table 13.1), and information on an 
additional species was obtained from the literature [7].
Compared with the burrowing Anniella pulchra and Bipes canaliculatus (Fig. 13.5K, N), 
surface-dwelling anguimorph lizards have a relatively smaller vestibule and longer semicir­
cular canals (Fig. 13.5L, O). The bony labyrinths of Heloderma and Varanus are more 
expanded than those of snakes along the vertical axis, so the dorsal margin of the common 
crus is located further dorsally from the horizontal plane of the lateral semicircular canal 
(Fig. 13.5). The bony labyrinth of the semiarboreal mangrove monitor, Varanus indicus, 
resembles that of arboreal snakes in having a small vestibule and an anteroventral bend in 
the anterior semicircular canal.
Although many extant lizards are good swimmers, none is as aquatic as the extinct, 
marine Mosasauria (sensu [9]). Two species of Platecarpus (Fig. 13.5M, P) have relatively 
very small vestibules [4, 7], similar to those of sea snakes (Fig. 13.4J, K, N, O). The similarity
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 283
Table 13.1. List of sampled specimens.
Family
Species
Specimen
Data source
Bipedidae
Bipes canaliculatus
AMNH R-113487
AMNHa
Helodermatidae
Heloderma suspectum
AMNH R-161167
AMNH
Anniellidae
Anniella pulchra
AMNH R-12851
AMNH
Varanidae
Varanus indicus
AMNH R-58389
AMNH
Varanus salvator
AMNH R-94538
AMNH
Typhlopidae
Typhlops jamaicensis
USNM 12378
UTCTb
Anomalepididae
Liotyphlops argaleus
MCZ R-66383
UTCTc
Leptotyphlopidae
Rena dulcis
TNHC 60638
UTCTb
Aniliidae
Anilius scytale
USNM 204078
AMNH
Cylindrophiidae
Cylindrophis maculatus
AMNH R-126605
AMNH
Uropeltidae
Uropeltis ceylanica
AMNH R-43344
AMNH
Loxocemidae
Loxocemus bicolor
FMNH 104800
AMNH
Xenopeltidae
Xenopeltis unicolor
AMNH R-161693
AMNH
Pythonidae
Python molurus
TNHC, to be accessioned
UTCTb
Boidae
Boa constrictor
FMNH 31182
UTCTc
Corallus caninus
AMNH R-55910
AMNH
Erycidae
Eryx colubrinus
FMNH 63117
UTCTb
Ungaliophiidae
Exiliboa placata
FMNH 207669
UTCTc
Acrochordidae
Acrochordus javanicus
AMNH R-92269
AMNH
Xenodermidae
Achalinus spinalis
AMNH R-34620
AMNH
Pareidae
Pareas hamptoni
AMNH R-153711
AMNH
Viperidae
Trimeresurus stejnegeri
AMNH R-21057
AMNH
Homalopsidae
Erpeton tentaculatum
AMNH R-153799
AMNH
Fordonia leucobalia
CAS 211970
UTCTc
Lamprophiidae
Lamprophis lineatus
AMNH R-50646
AMNH
Elapidae
Naja naja
FMNH 22468
UTCTb
Laticauda colubrina
AMNH R-28996
AMNH
Laticauda laticaudata
AMNH R-161778
AMNH
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

284 HONGYU YI
Table 13.1. (cont.)
Family
Species
Specimen
Data source
Simoselaps bertholdi
AMNH R-115427
AMNH
Echiopsis curta
AMNH R-115397
AMNH
Aipysurus laevis
AMNH R-5087
AMNH
Hydrophis caerulescens
AMNH R-86181
AMNH
Colubridae
Chrysopelea ornata
AMNH R-161965
AMNH
Boiga irregularis
AMNH R-69292
AMNH
Ptyas mucosa
AMNH R-33243
AMNH
Lampropeltis getulus
AMNH R-95965
AMNH
Rhinobothryum lentiginosum
AMNH R-52395
AMNH
Sonora semiannulata
AMNH R-170522
AMNH
Dipsadidae
Heterodon platirhinos
FMNH 194529
UTCTb
Notes: (a) All AMNH specimens were scanned on site at the MIF lab; specimens sourced from UTCT 
were scanned at the University of Texas High-Resolution X-ray Computed Tomography Facility and 
downloaded from either: (b) www.digimorph.org or (c) www.morphosource.org. Institutional 
abbreviations: AMNH, Herpetology collection, American Museum of Natural History, New York, USA; 
CAS, Herpetology collection, California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, USA. FMNH, Amphibian 
and Reptile Collection, Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, USA; MACN, Museo Argentino de 
Ciencias Naturales Bernardino Rivadavia, Buenos Aires, Argentina; MCZ, Museum of Comparative 
Zoology at Harvard University, Massachussets, USA; QMF, Palaeontological collections, Queensland 
Museum, Brisbane, Australia; SAMA, South Australian Museum, Adelaide, Australia; TNHC, Texas 
Natural History Collections, University of Texas at Austin, Texas, USA; USNM, United States National 
Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC, USA.
between the vestibule of the Cretaceous, pelagic [43] Platecarpus and modern sea snakes 
suggests that swimming locomotion strongly affects the shape of the bony labyrinth. 
Additional sampling in Mosasauria will help understand whether the extremely small 
vestibule occurs in all mosasaurs, and when it evolved.
13.5 Indicators of Ecology: Quantitative Analyses 
of the Squamate Bony Labyrinth
Using qualitative characters, it may not be possible to disentangle the impact of ecology and 
phylogeny on the shape of the squamate bony labyrinth. Using geometric morphometric 
approaches to generate quantitative data and phylogenetic independent contrast methods, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 285
adaptive traits in the bony labyrinth can be identified when phylogenetic signal is controlled for. 
It has been found that shape convergence occurred in the vestibules of burrowing and swimming 
squamates [4], and that the shape of the semicircular canals is influenced by phylogeny as well as 
ecology [6, 22]. The length of the semicircular canals in the fully marine mosasaurs is proportion­
ally as long as terrestrial lizards when compared with skull length [5, 7, 44].
13.5.1 Landmark-Based Multivariate Methods
In geometric morphometric studies, landmarks represent anatomically meaningful points at 
corresponding positions across a sample. Sets of landmarks and semilandmarks can be used 
to quantify the geometry of a skull or a single bone [45]. One challenge in landmarking the 
bony labyrinth is the smooth surface of the vestibule that is deficient in type 1 homologous 
landmarks, such as intersect points of bone sutures [46, 47]. Other methods of quantifying the 
shape of the semicircular canals may not apply to the vestibule. For instance, each osseous 
semicircular canal has a hollow core, and the ‘skeletonization’ method finds the central path 
of a semicircular canal by connecting multiple cross-sectional central points along the curve 
[48-51]. However, the vestibule is approximately spherical in multiple species, the local 
central points for these vestibules would all be a single point in the center. One solution is 
to place a small number of type 2 landmarks and a large number of semilandmarks around 
the lateral surface of the vestibule [4]. A type 2 landmark is a shape-maximum (farthest or 
nearest) point that is also at the intersect of two morphological structures [46] - for example, 
the intersection of the lateral semicircular canal and lateral ampulla. Semilandmarks are 
equidistant points distributed between type 2 landmarks [45, 52].
In order to quantitatively capture the bulging shape in burrowing specialists and the 
flattened shape in agile marine swimmers (Fig. 13.6A-B), Yi and Norell [4] placed semiland­
marks along two curves surrounding the vestibule and lateral semicircular canal. Using 
principal component analysis (PCA), a group of burrowing squamates were found to 
occupy a particular region in the morphospace of the vestibule and lateral semicircular 
canals (fig. 3 in [4]). This morphospace region is populated by obligate burrowers from 
across Squamata, including members of Elapidae (Simoselaps), Xenopeltidae (Xenopeltis), 
Uropeltidae (Uropeltis), Cylindrophiidae (Cylindrophis), Anguimorpha (Anniella), 
Amphisbaenia (Bipes), and Dibamidae (Dibamus). A sample of 45 snakes and lizards were 
subsequently divided into three habitat groups: burrowing, generalist, and aquatic. Using 
multivarite analysis of variance (MANOVA) of shape coordinates of the vestibule, significant 
differences were found among the three groups [4]. Additionally, phylogenetic signal was 
found to be non-significant in the shape data. However, equal branch lengths were used in 
the phylogenetic test, and this study could be improved by assigning absolute or relative 
time to the phylogeny [14, 15, 53].
Another approach to landmarking the squamate bony labyrinth has been to focus 
primarily on the shape of the semicircular canals. Georgi [8] described the bony labyrinth 
of varanid lizards and mosasaurs, suggesting that semicircular canal shape is indicative of 
habitat preference. In analysing controlled-aerial descent in iguanian lizards, Boistel et al. 
[50] found strong phylogenetic signal in general morphometric data of the bony labyrinth, 
but the shape of the posterior ampulla was affected by locomotor specializations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

286 HONGYU YI
t Type 2 landmarks • semilandmarks
Figure 13.6 Strategies of landmarking the bony labyrinth. (A-B) Landmarks and semilandmarks 
placed on the vestibule and lateral semicircular canal. Redrawn from Yi and Norell ([4 fig. S2]); (C-D) 
Landmarks and semilandmarks placed along the semicircular canals; there is one landmark on the 
lateral surface of the vestibule and one on the ventral tip of the cochlea. Redrawn from Palci et al. 
([6 fig. 1]). Ear models not to scale.
Placing dense semilandmarks on the semicircular canals, Palci et al. [6] identified signifi­
cant phylogenetic signal in the shape of the bony labyrinth of snakes (Fig. 13.6C-D), 
and a phylogenetic PCA found terrestrial obligate burrowers and the semifossorial mud 
snakes grouping together in morphospace ([6 fig. 3]). In this same study, canonical variate 
analysis of bony labyrinth shape data identified three groups comprising fossorial, semi- 
fossorial, and marine species, but groupings of terrestrial, arboreal, and semiaquatic 
species were not supported. Arboreal species appear to have generally more elaborate 
semicircular canals than terrestrial ground-dwelling species, but this distinction was not 
significant [6].
13.5.2 Semicircular Canal Size and Shape
Mammals exhibit size reduction in the inner ear when adapting to a fully aquatic life - 
cetaceans have shorter semicircular canals than those of terrestrial mammals [54]. 
Squamate semicircular canals follow a different trend in transitions from land to water [5, 
7]. In the fully marine mosasaurs and sea snakes, semicircular canal length follows a linear 
relationship with the skull length, independent of phylogeny [7]. In proportion to the skull, 
the semicircular canals are not significantly shorter in large mosasaurs than in small 
terrestrial lizards. In studies of the mammalian inner ear, semicircular canal length was 
regressed with body weight [54, 55]. In studies of the squamate inner ear, the logarithm 
of the semicircular canal length was regressed with the logarithm of skull size [5, 7], which 
was shown to be an equivalent method to that used in mammals [5]. In addition to 
semicircular canal length, Cuthbertson et al. [7] also compared degree of circularity. The 
anterior and posterior semicircular canals are strongly arched in the mosasaur 
Plioplatecarpus, consistent with the understanding that locomotor styles were unique in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 287
mosasaurs among lizards. Comparisons of angles between semicircular canals suggests that 
mosasaurs were most sensitive to movements in the pitch axis [7].
13.6 Estimating the Ecology of Extinct Snakes
Among extant squamates, it is clear that shape convergence of the bony labyrinth occurred 
multiple times in habitat specialists. For example, a relatively very large vestibule occurs in 
fossorial snakes and lizards (Fig. 13.5). Quantitative analysis of the bony labyrinth is a 
relatively new approach to estimating ecology in snakes for which behavioral and ecological 
data are lacking and where morphological data might be incomplete, as is the case in most 
fossil snakes. Most early snake fossils consist of isolated vertebrae and/or incomplete skull 
material, but the braincases of a few taxa are available for CT reconstructions of the bony 
labyrinth and stapes (Fig. 13.7).
The Cretaceous Dinilysia patagonica [56-58] is a stem snake [9, 59, 60] or possibly nested 
within the crown group close to the origin of extant alethinophidians [2, 61]. Since its 
discovery the habit ofD. patagonica has been under frequent debate. It was suggested to be 
semiaquatic, resembling modern Eunectes, based on a slightly dorsal position of the orbits 
[58], but this was later called into question [62], because dorsally placed eyes are also 
present in the fossorial Xenopeltis. Additionally, geological data revealed an arid inter-dune 
environment in which D. patagonica was fossilized [62], and its vertebral morphology has 
been considered to resemble that of extant semifossorial snakes [63].
The otic capsule occupies a large volume in the braincase of D. patagonica [4, 59]. The 
vestibule expands in directions dorsal and ventral to the lateral semicircular canal (Fig. 13.7A), 
which is as spherical as that of fossorial and semifossorial extant snakes, including Uropeltis, 
Xenopeltis, Simoselaps, and Fordonia (Figs. 13.3 and 13.4). The semicircular canals wrap tightly 
around the vestibule, which is another signature of extant fossorial specialists (Figs. 13.3-13.5). 
The anterior semicircular canal is simply shaped at its anteroventral margin, lacking the ventral 
bend observed in terrestrial generalists. In the middle ear of D. patagonica, a large stapedial 
footplate is present [59, 64], in contrast with the tiny stapedial footplate of extant sea snakes. 
Thus, there is little resemblance between D. patagonica and agile aquatic swimmers in the 
shape of the vestibule and semicircular canals. The only extant aquatic snakes with a similar 
vestibule to D. patagonica are semifossorial and semiaquatic mud snakes such as F. leucobalia 
(Fig. 13.4G) and Myron richardsonii ([6 fig. 5e]).
In the Cenozoic madtsoiids Yurlunggur and Wonambi [65, 66], the bony labyrinth 
reconstructed from CT data shows an enlarged vestibule with a large fenestra ovalis [22]. 
Yurlunggur in particular has a spherical vestibule resembling that of extant mud snakes 
([6 fig. 5e]) and sand-burrowing boids (Fig. 13.3L), suggesting semifossoriality.
13.7 Summary
Despite sharing an elongate limbless body, extant snakes utilize a wide diversity of 
habitats. Such diversity is reflected in the morphological variation of their bony
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

288 HONGYU YI
foramen 
ovalis
(A) Dinilysia patagonica f
foramen 
ovalis
(B) Yurlunggur sp.t
foramen 
ovalis —
posterior 
semicircular 
canal —
vestibule
/ anterior
' /semicircular
/ canal
posterior 
semicircular 
canal —У
vestibule
/ anterior
z semicircular 
? A. canal
posterior 
semicircular 
canal----------
anterior 
semicircular 
canal
Figure 13.7 The bony labyrinth of extinct snakes. (A) Dinilysia patagonica (MACN-RN 1014), 
redrawn from Yi and Norell ([4 fig.2]). (b) Yurlunggur sp. (QMF 45111-45391), redrawn from Palci 
et al. ([22 fig. 1a]). (c) Wonambi naracoortensis (SAM P30178A), redrawn from Palci et al. ([22 fig. 1b]).
The cross sign denotes extinct species. Scale bars = 5 mm.
(C) Wonambi naracoortensis t
labyrinths, the site of balance and hearing organs. A large spherical vestibule is 
observed in dedicated burrowers that mostly live and forage underground. 
Vestibular expansion towards its dorsal margin and along the horizontal axis occurs 
repeatedly in the snake phylogeny, notably in Aniliidae, Xenopeltidae, Boidae, and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 289
Elapidae. Not all burrowing snakes have a spherical vestibule, but a spherical vesti­
bule occurs only in dedicated burrowers. At the other end of the morphological 
spectrum, a small vestibule - reduced in size towards its dorsal margin - is present 
in marine snakes and in lizards that are active swimmers. Between these two mor­
phological extremes are the ears of habitat generalists in which variation is broad and 
continuous rather than sharp and categorical.
Virtual models reconstructed from CT data facilitate quantitative estimates of the 
ecology of extinct snakes, regarding habitat preferences and locomotor styles. Multiple 
quantitative analyses have shown that different regions of the bony labyrinth, including 
the vestibule, the semicircular canals, and the cochlea, vary independently. This 
indicates that different parts of the inner ear are subject to different selection pressures 
through evolution.
Dinilysia patagonica is the extinct taxon closest to the root of the extant snake tree for 
which adequate cranial material is available to examine the inner and middle ear, and 
morphology is suggestive of semifossorial to fossorial habits [4]. Improvements to testing 
correlation of ear morphology and ecology can be made in the refinement of quantitative 
approaches to capturing and analysing shape variation, as well as better, less categorical 
classifications of ecology. Using inner and middle ear morphology to accurately infer the 
ecology of the ancestral snake will depend also upon robust, well-resolved phylogenies for 
extinct and extant taxa, as well as much denser taxonomic and ontogenetic sampling, 
including new fossil discoveries.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Hussam Zaher and David Gower for the opportunity to participate in this book 
and the associated meeting. R. Guo provided sketch drawings of ear models in the figures. 
Susan Evans and David Gower provided constructively critical reviews. H. Yi is funded by 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 41702020 and 41688103), 
and the Chinese Academy of Sciences. The Herpetology Department at the American 
Museum of Natural History provided specimen access to the majority of extant snake 
specimens sampled in this study. For non-AMNH specimens of extant snakes, access was 
provided to CT data by California Academy of Sciences, Field Museum of Natural History, 
United States National Museum, Smithsonian Institution, Museum of Comparative 
Zoology-Harvard University, and University of Texas at Austin. Six files of CT data were 
downloaded from www.digimorph.org; four from www.MorphoSource.org, Duke 
University. Specimens deposited at the AMNH were scanned on site at the Microscopy 
and Imaging Facilities, funded by NSF EAR0959384. oVert TCN provided access to the CT 
data of Fordonia with data collection funded by NSF DBI-1701714 and DBI-1701787. 
oUTCT scan provided access to the CT data of 10 species of snakes originally appearing 
in ref. [9], with data collection funded by NSF EF-0334961 and data upload to 
MorphoSource funded by DBI-1902242.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

290 HONGYU YI
References
1. M. S. Y. Lee, G. L. Bell, and M. W. Caldwell, 
The origin of snake feeding. Nature, 400 
(1999), 655-659.
2. T. W. Reeder, T. M. Townsend, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Integrated analyses resolve conflicts 
over squamate reptile phylogeny and reveal 
unexpected placements for fossil taxa. PLoS 
ONE, 10 (2015), e0118199.
3. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, et al., 
The origin of snakes: revealing the ecology, 
behavior, and evolutionary history of early 
snakes using genomics, phenomics, and the 
fossil record. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15 
(2015), 87.
4. H. Yi and M. A. Norell, The burrowing origin 
of modern snakes. Science Advances, 1 
(2015), e1500743.
5. H. Yi and M. Norell, The bony labyrinth of 
Platecarpus (Squamata: Mosasauria) and 
aquatic adaptations in squamate reptiles. 
Palaeoworld, 28 (2019), 550-561.
6. A. Palci, M. N. Hutchinson, M. W. Caldwell, 
and M. S. Y. Lee, The morphology of the 
inner ear of squamate reptiles and its 
bearing on the origin of snakes. Royal Society 
Open Science, 4 (2017), 170685.
7. R. S. Cuthbertson, H. C. Maddin, 
R. B. Holmes, and J. S. Anderson, The 
braincase and endosseous labyrinth of 
Plioplatecarpus peckensis (Mosasauridae, 
Plioplatecarpinae), with functional 
implications for locomotor behavior. 
Anatomical Record, 298 (2015), 1597-1611.
8. J. A. Georgi, Semicircular canal morphology 
as evidence of locomotor environment in 
amniotes. Unpublished PhD thesis (Stony 
Brook, NY: The Graduate School, Stony 
Brook University, 2008).
9. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and A. D. B. Behlke, Assembling 
the squamate tree of life: perspectives from 
the phenotype and the fossil record. Bulletin 
of the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 
53 (2012), 3-308.
10. A. S. Romer, Osteology of the Reptiles 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1956).
11. S. E. Evans, The lepidosaurian ear: variations 
on a theme. In J. A. Clack, R. R. Fay and 
A. N. Popper, eds., Evolution of the 
Vertebrate Ear - Evidence from the Fossil 
Record. Springer Handbook of Auditory 
Research, 59 (New York: Springer 
International Publishing, 2016). pp. 245-84.
12. C. B. Christensen, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 
C. Brandt, and P. T Madsen, Hearing with an 
atympanic ear: good vibration and poor 
sound-pressure detection in the royal 
python, Python regius. Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 215 (2012), 331-342.
13. J. MUller, C. Bickelmann, and G. Sobral, The 
evolution and fossil history of sensory 
perception in amniote vertebrates. Annual 
Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 46 
(2018), 495-519.
14. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
15. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PLoS ONE, 14 (2019), e0216148.
16. H. Greene, Snakes: The Evolution of Mystery 
in Nature (Oakland: University of California 
Press, 2000).
17. M. R. Miller, The cochlear duct of lizards and 
snakes. American Zoologist, 6 (1966), 
421-429.
18. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, C. Jared, et al., 
Visual system evolution and the nature of 
the ancestral snake. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 28 (2015), 1309-1320.
19. T. Konishi, M. W. Caldwell, T. Nishimura, 
K. Sakurai, and K. Tanoue, A new 
halisaurine mosasaur (Squamata: 
Halisaurinae) from Japan: the first record in 
the western Pacific realm and the first 
documented insights into binocular vision in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 291
mosasaurs. Journal of Systematic 
Palaeontology, 14 (2016), 809-839.
20. B. F. Simoes, D. J. Gower, A. R. Rasmussen, 
et al., Spectral diversification and trans­
Species allelic polymorphism during the 
land-to-sea transition in snakes. Current 
Biology, 30 (2020), 2608-2615.
21. E. G. Wever, The Reptile Ear: Its Structure 
and Function (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1978).
22. A. Palci, M. N. Hutchinson, M. W. Caldwell, 
J. D. Scanlon, and M. S. Y. Lee, 
Palaeoecological inferences for the fossil 
Australian snakes Yurlunggur and Wonambi 
(Serpentes, Madtsoiidae). Royal Society 
Open Science, 5 (2018), 172012.
23. D. Cundall, V. Wallach, and D. A. Rossman, 
The systematic relationships of the snake 
genus Anomochilus. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 109 (1993), 275-299.
24. J. L. Conrad, Phylogeny and systematics of 
Squamata (Reptilia) based on morphology. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 310 (2008), 1-182.
25. J. J. Wiens, C. A. Kuczynski, S. A. Smith, 
et al., Branch lengths, support, and 
congruence: testing the 
phylogenomicapproach with 20 nuclear loci 
in snakes. Systematic Biology, 57 (2008), 
420-431.
26. R. A. Pyron, F. T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens, 
A phylogeny and revised classification of 
Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards 
and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 93.
27. A. Figueroa, A. D. McKelvy, L. L. Grismer, 
C. D. Bell, and S. P. Lailvaux, A species­
levelphylogeny of extant snakes with 
description of a new colubrid subfamily and 
genus. PLoS ONE, 11 (2016), e0161070.
28. A. Miralles, L. Marin, D. Markus, et al., 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
29. G. Haas, Anatomical observations on the 
head of Liotyphlops albirostris (Typhlopidae, 
Ophidia). Acta Zoologica, 45 (1964), 1-62.
30. O. Rieppel and J. A. Maisano, The skull of 
the rare Malaysian snake Anomochilus 
leonardi Smith, based on high-resolution X- 
ray computed tomography. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 149 (200), 
671-685.
31. J. C. Olori, Digital endocasts of the cranial 
cavity and osseous labyrinth of the burrowing 
snake Uropeltis woodmasoni 
(Alethinophidia: Uropeltidae). Copeia, 2010 
(2010), 14-26.
32. M. O’Shea, Boas and Pythons of the World 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2007).
33. K. L. Sanders, Mumpuni, A. Hamidy, J. J. 
Head, and D. J. Gower, Phylogeny and 
divergence times of filesnakes 
(Acrochordus): inferences from morphology, 
fossils and three molecular loci. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 56 (2010), 
857-867.
34. Y. Yamasaki and Y. Mori, Seasonal activity 
pattern of a nocturnal fossorial snake, 
Achalinus spinalis (Serpentes: 
Xenodermidae). Current Herpetology, 36 
(2017), 28-36.
35. R. Shine, P. Harlow, J. S. Keogh, and Boeadi, 
Biology and commercial utilization of 
acrochordid snakes, with special reference 
to Karung (Acrochordus javanicus). Journal 
of Herpetology, 29 (1995), 352-360.
36. D. Cundall and F. Irish, The snake skull. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt, and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Volume 20, 
Morphology H (Ithaca: Society for the Study 
of Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008). 
pp. 349-692.
37. L. Peng, D. Yang, S. Duan, and S. Huang, 
Mitochondrial genome of the Common 
burrowing snake Achalinus spinalis 
(Reptilia: Xenodermatidae). Mitochondrial 
DNA, Part B Resources, 2 (2017), 
571-572.
38. P. Guo and E.- M. Zhao, Comparison of skull 
morphology in nine Asian pit vipers 
(Serpentes: Crotalinae). Herpetological 
Journal, 16 (2006), 305-313.
39. C. W. You, N. A. Poyarkov, and S. M. Lin, 
Diversity of the snail-eating snakes Pareas
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

292 HONGYU YI
(Serpentes, Pareatidae) from Taiwan. 
Zoologica Scripta, 44 (2015), 349-361.
40. M. Plummer, Observations on hibernacula 
and overwintering ecology of Eastern 
hog-nosed snakes (Heterodon platirhinos). 
Herpetological Review, 33 (2002), 
89-90.
41. M. C. Michener and J. D. Lazell, Distribution 
and relative abundance of the hognose 
snake, Heterodon platirhinos, in eastern New 
England. Journal of Herpetology, 23 (1989), 
35-40.
42. J. J. Socha, Gliding flight in Chrysopelea: 
turning a snake into a wing. Integrative and 
Comparative Biology, 51 (2011), 969-982.
43. J. L. Bell and M. J. Polcyn, Dallasaurus 
turneri, a new primitive mosasauroid from 
the Middle Turonian of Texas and 
comments on the phylogeny of 
Mosasauridae (Squamata). Netherlands 
Journal of Geosciences, 84 (2005), 177-194.
44. H. Yi, D. Sampath, S. Schoenfeld, and 
M. A. Norell, Reconstruction of inner-ear 
shape and size in mosasaurs (Reptilia: 
Squamata) reveals complex aquatic 
adaptation strategies in secondary aquatic 
reptiles. Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 
32 Supplement (2012), 198A.
45. D. C. Adams and E. Otarola-Castillo, 
Geomorph: an R package for the collection 
and analysis of geometric morphometric 
shape data. Methods in Ecology and 
Evolution, 4 (2013), 393-399.
46. F. L. Bookstein, Morphometric Tool for 
Landmark Data: Geometry and Biology 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1991).
47. J. T. Richtsmeier, C. H. Paik, P. C. Elfert, 
T. M. Cole, and H. R. Dahlman, Precision, 
repeatability, and validation of the 
localization of cranial landmarks using 
computed tomography scans. The Cleft 
Palate-Craniofacial Journal, 32 (1995), 
217-227.
48. P. Gunz, M. Ramsier, M. Kuhrig, J.- 
J. Hublin, and F. Spoor, The mammalian 
bony labyrinth reconsidered, introducing a 
comprehensive geometric morphometric 
approach. Journal of Anatomy, 220 (2012), 
529-543.
49. X. Ni, J. J. Flynn, and A. R. Wyss, Imaging the 
inner ear in fossil mammals: high-resolution 
CT scanning and 3-D virtual 
reconstructions. Palaeontologica Electronica, 
15 (2012), 1-10.
50. R. Boistel, A. Herrel, R. Lebrun, et al., Shake 
rattle and roll: the bony labyrinth and aerial 
descent in squamates. Integrative and 
Comparative Biology, 51 (2011), 
957-968.
51. J. A. Georgi, J. S. Sipla, and C. A. Forster, 
Turning semicircular canal function on its 
head: dinosaurs and a novel vestibular 
analysis. PLoS ONE, 8 (2013), 1-11.
52. P. Gunz, P. Mitteroecker, and
F. L. Bookstein, Semilandmarks in three 
dimensions. In D. E. Slice, ed., Modern 
Morphometrics in Physical Anthropology 
(Boston: Springer, 2005), pp. 73-98.
53. Y. Zheng and J. J. Wiens, Combining 
phylogenomic and supermatrix approaches, 
and a time-calibrated phylogeny for 
squamate reptiles (lizards and snakes) based 
on 52 genes and 4162 species. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 94 (2016), 
537-547.
54. F. Spoor, S. Bajpai, S. T. Hussain, and 
K. Kumar, J. G. M. Thewissen, Vestibular 
evidence for the evolution of aquatic 
behaviour in early cetaceans. Nature, 417 
(2002), 163-165.
55. E. G. Ekdale, Comparative anatomy of the 
bony labyrinth (inner ear) of placental 
mammals. PLoS ONE, 8 (2013), 
e66624.
56. A. S. Woodward, On some extinct reptiles 
from Patagonia, of the genera Miolania, 
Dinilysia, and Genyodectes. Proceedings of 
the Zoological Society of London, 70 (1901), 
169-184.
57. R. Estes, T. H. Frazzetta, and E. E. Williams, 
Studies on the fossil snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Woodward. I. Cranial 
morphology. Bulletin Museum of 
Comparative Zoology of Harvard University, 
119 (1970), 25-74.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EARS AND EARLY SNAKE ECOLOGY 293
58. T. H. Frazzetta, Studies on the fossil snake 
Dinilysia patagonica Woodward. Part 2. Jaw 
machinery in the earliest snakes. Forma et 
Functio, 3 (1970), 205-221.
59. H. Zaher and A. Scanferla, The skull of the 
Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
60. T. R. Simoes, M. W. Caldwell, M. Talanda, 
et al., The origin of squamates revealed by a 
Middle Triassic lizard from the Italian Alps. 
Nature, 557 (2018), 706-709.
61. H. Zaher, S. Apesteguia, and A. Scanferla, 
The anatomy of the Upper Cretaceous snake 
Najash rionegrina Apesteguia & Zaher, 2006, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
156 (2009), 801-826.
62. M. W. Caldwell and A. M. Albino, 
Palaeoenvironment and palaeoecology of 
three Cretaceous snakes: Pachyophis, 
Pachyrhachis, and Dinilysia. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 46 (2001), 203-218.
63. M. K. Hecht, The vertebral morphology of 
the Cretaceous snake, Dinilysia patagonica 
Woodward. Neues Jarhbuch fur Geologie und 
Palaontologie, Monatshefte, 1982 (1982), 
523-532.
64. M. W. Caldwell and A. Albino, Exceptionally 
preserved skeletons of the Cretaceous snake 
Dinilysia patagonica Woodward, 1901.
Journal of Vertebrate Paleontology, 22 
(2002), 861-866.
65. J. D. Scanlon, A new large madtsoiid snake 
from the Miocene of the Northern Territory. 
The Beagle: Records of the Museums and Art 
Galleries of the Northern Territories, 9 (1992), 
49-60.
66. J. D. Scanlon and M. S. Y. Lee, The 
Pleistocene serpent Wonambi and the early 
evolution of snakes. Nature 403 (2000), 
416-420.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.018 Published online by Cambridge University Press

14
A Glimpse into the Evolution 
of the Ophidian Brain
Agustin Scanferla
14.1 Introduction
The brain is the principal organ of the central nervous system of vertebrates. It integrates 
internal (physiological) and external (environmental) sensory information in order to 
maintain homeostasis, as well as to coordinate actions to interact with the environment. 
Besides visual and auditory sensory systems, extant snakes display a panoply of sensory 
capabilities including an enhanced vomeronasal system that detects pheromones and other 
chemicals [1], pit organs that sense infrared radiation [2] and tactile organs for mechan­
oreception [3].
Comparative studies concerning brain anatomy can provide great insight into the 
evolution of sensory systems, mainly because the relative size and shape of the different 
segments that conform the brain of reptiles are deeply influenced by sensory organs [4]. 
Despite the diversity of sensory capabilities, comparative studies of brain gross anatomy 
and its relation to sensory organs are scarce for snakes, especially the gross anatomy of the 
different segments of the brain. The seminal work of Senn [5] deserves special mention, 
because its detailed description of the gross anatomy and cytoarchitecture of dissected 
brains is the only thorough survey matching these two different morphological levels of the 
snake brain. Senn was the first to document the contrasting morphology of the brain 
between the ‘basal’ burrowing ‘Scolecophidia’ (hereafter ‘blind snakes’) and more typically 
surface-dwelling Alethinophidia (booids, pythonids and relatives, caenophidians). 
Subsequently, some works dealing tangentially with gross anatomical traits of the snake 
brain were published, but only as part of studies based mostly on cytoarchitecture or 
encephalization (e.g., [6, 7]).
The advent and increasing availability of CT scanning has provided a new ability to 
examine endocranial cavities, especially for fossils. Digital endocasts are a valuable,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 295
Figure 14.1 Dissected brains (redrawn from [5]) of the anguimorph lizard Varanus flavescens (A) and 
the alethinophidian snake Xenopeltis unicolor (B) showing the main gross anatomical features 
discussed in this chapter. (C) Simplified snake cladogram depicting major groups of snakes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

296 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
non-destructive approach to study gross anatomy of the brain. Olori [8] was the first to 
depict the digital endocast of an extant snake, the non-caenophidian alethinophidian 
Uropeltis woodmasoni, and more recently Allemand et al. [9] published the first compara­
tive survey of brain endocasts. To date, only one endocast of a fossil snake has been 
documented, a natural endocast of the posterior brain and inner ear of the Cretaceous 
stem snake Dinilysia patagonica [10]. That study detected phylogenetic signal as well as 
ecological trends that shaped the brain during the course of snake evolution. The particular 
anatomy of the snake braincase, which is almost completely ossified, has supported claims 
that snake endocasts reflect the overall shape of the brain and the relative sizes of its parts 
[4, 8, 9, 11]. However, there are no explicit comparative surveys that test whether endocast 
shape matches actual gross anatomy of the brain.
Despite the efforts mentioned above, the gross anatomy of the snake brain remains 
largely unexplored and thus most of the evolutionary events behind the anatomical 
diversity of extant snake brains remain unclear. This chapter has four main aims: (1) to 
evaluate how reliably endocasts reflect brain gross anatomy in snakes, (2) to assess the most 
conspicuous features of the gross anatomy of snake brains, including the Cretaceous fossil 
stem snake Dinilysia patagonica, (3) to interpret some gross anatomical traits in light of 
evolutionary changes in sensory systems, and (4) to discuss these results in the context of 
the origin and evolution of snakes.
14.2 Gross Anatomy of the Snake Brain
14.2.1 Brain-Head Relations and Endocast Fidelity
The characteristic persistence of a platytrabic condition during the ontogeny of snakes 
results in a tubular anterior region of the braincase where the olfactory bulb region of the 
brain is housed. The interorbital space thus defined houses a broad olfactory bulb region in 
contrast to the thin olfactory peduncle present in most lizards (Fig. 14.1). However, the 
interorbital space of snakes with a large eye size (ES > 20, where ES, eye size, is eye 
diameter relative to skull length expressed as a percentage: see Supplementary Appendix 
14.S1 and S2) is notably reduced and consequently the olfactory bulbs undergo a remark­
able reduction in diameter and diverge anteriorly (Fig. 14.2A-D). Also, the anterior region 
of the cerebral hemispheres of snakes with large ES is laterally emarginated by the eyes 
(Fig. 14.2D) and the forebrain therefore acquires an amphora-like shape.
Figure 14.1 (cont.) discussed in the chapter, including ‘Scolecophidia’ (blind snakes), Uropeltoidea 
(Cylindrophiidae, Uropeltidae and Anomochilidae), Pythonoidea (Loxocemus bicolor, Xenopeltis spp. 
and Pythonidae), Booidea (Boidae, Candoiidae, Charinaidae, Erycinae, and Sanziniidae) and 
Caenophidia. Scale bars equal to 5 mm. II, optic tract; aob, accessory olfactory bulb + olfactory tracts; 
ch, cerebral hemisphere; cp, colliculus posteriores; cr, cerebellum; ep, epiphysis; fo, fila olfactoria; 
mo, medulla oblongata; mob, main olfactory bulb; ob, olfactory bulb; ot, optic tectum; otr, olfactory 
tract; p, pituitary; py, medullary pyramid; rf, rhomboid fossa.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 297
The otic capsules influence the posterior region of the brain in snakes. In blind snakes, 
the inner ears are located laterally and are widely separated from the midline (Fig. 14.2A), 
whereas in alethinophidians they are applied dorsolaterally to the hindbrain and close to 
the midline (Fig. 14.2B). The large otic region of the skull of snakes with a cranial longitu­
dinal shortening (blind snakes, uropeltoids, and some cryptozoic caenophidians) invades 
and thus embays the posterolateral aspect of the cerebral hemisphere in its posterolateral 
regions (Fig. 14.2E). Conversely, the otic region of snakes with elongated skulls is located 
posterior to the forebrain and thus the rear region of the cerebral hemisphere has a 
spherical shape, even in species with a relatively large otic region (Fig. 14.2F). Notably, 
the medial parietal pillar of the parietal bone encloses this cerebral region in most alethi- 
nophidians, whereas in blind snakes and uropeltids this bony structure is absent and 
therefore the cerebral hemispheres are in direct contact with the bony otic region 
(Fig. 14.2E, F).
There are some brain regions where the snake endocast fails to represent the brain gross 
anatomy. Compared to that of alethinophidians, the anteroventral area of the olfactory bulb 
region in blind snakes is not completely enclosed by bone. The subolfactory process of the 
frontal bone fails to surround the olfactory bulb region anteroventrally, and both the medial 
and lateral frontal flanges are absent. Conversely, these structures, which together form the 
medial frontal pillar, divide the anterior region of the olfactory bulbs in alethinophidians 
and thus provides bony boundaries that facilitate endocast segmentation from CT data. The 
medial parietal pillars are another bony feature with a direct influence on endocast fidelity 
in the posterior region of the cerebral hemispheres. These bony walls are in close contact 
with the cerebral hemispheres posteriorly, thus casting the shape of this brain segment 
(Fig. 14.2F). Conversely, the endocast of some snakes without medial parietal pillars such as 
blind snakes and uropeltids exhibits a triangular shape in this region ([8]; Fig. 14.2E), which 
does not conform to the actual spherical shape of the cerebral hemispheres (compare 
Fig. 14.2E with fig. 4 in [5]). The interaction between the brain and other cephalic structures 
represents a further source of ‘artifacts’ in endocasts. The dorsal region of the hindbrain is 
fully encapsulated by the supraoccipital and otooccipital bones, but there remains a 
conspicuous space between the skull roof and the region encompassing the posterodorsal 
region of the midbrain, the cerebellum and the rhomboid fossa. In life it is filled by the 
choroid plexus (Fig. 14.2G), which covers dorsally the rhomboid fossa and the cerebellum 
in squamates [12]. Endocasts thus record the space filled by the choroid plexus, masking 
the posteriormost region of the midbrain roof, the cerebellum and the rhomboid fossa.
14.2.2 Gross Brain Anatomy of Extant Snakes
As in other vertebrates, the various segments of the snake brain are arranged linearly along 
the longitudinal axis of the skull. Blind snakes and uropeltids exhibit a remarkable 
shortening along the longitudinal axis in comparison with most alethinophidian snakes 
[5, 8]. In blind snakes and uropeltids, this shortening can be appreciated through the 
considerable reduction of space and overlapping between brain segments (Fig. 14.3A). As 
will be detailed below, this aspect greatly influences the shape of the different brain 
segments in these fossorial species.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

298 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
Figure 14.2 Brain-head relations in snakes. Dorsal view of three-dimensional reconstructions based 
on microCT data of the skull, brain endocast and eyeballs of Typhlops jamaicensis (A), Python molurus 
(B), Tropidophis haetianus (C), and Coluber constrictor (D) figured at the same snout-condyle length. 
Dorsal view of the horizontal cutaway of the skull of the uropeltoid Teretrurus sanguineus (E) and 
Xenopeltis unicolor (F) showing the brain and inner ear endocasts. (G) Lateral views of (from top to 
bottom) the brain of the ‘basal’ alethinophidian Anilius scytale within the braincase (depicted as a 
sagittal cutaway), the brain with the inner ear and choroid plexus endocasts in natural position, and the 
brain endocast. ch, cerebral hemisphere; cp, choroid plexus; ES, relative size of the eyes (diameter as 
percentage of skull length); ie, inner ear endocast; mo, medulla oblongata; ol, olfactory lobe; p, pituitary 
gland; pi, medial parietal pillar; py, medullary pyramid. Dashed line delimits the area of influence on 
the endocast of the choroid plexus. Scale bars equal 2.5 mm.
Forebrain
In general terms, the forebrain of snakes can be divided into the olfactory bulb, cerebral 
hemispheres, and the thalamus, which includes the pituitary gland as the most conspicu­
ous gross feature. The olfactory bulb is essentially a tubular structure attached to the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 299
Figure 14.3 Dorsal (left), ventral (centre) and left lateral (right) views of the brain and the endocast of 
the blind snake Epictia albipuncta (A), the ‘basal’ alethinophidian Anilius scytale (B), the marine elapid
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

300 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
retrobulbar region of the cerebral hemispheres. It is composed of the main olfactory bulb 
anteriorly, and the accessory olfactory bulb plus both olfactory tracts (Fig. 14.1). The 
olfactory bulb of blind snakes is shorter than the length of the cerebral hemispheres. 
Conversely, most alethinophidians have an olfactory bulb longer than the cerebral hemi­
spheres. As noted above, eye size strongly influences the shape of the olfactory bulb among 
snakes. Those species with large ES exhibit marked lateral compression and consequently a 
reduction in diameter of the olfactory bulb (Fig. 14.3A, C). Notably, cryptozoic 
caenophidians (often with relatively smaller eye size) also show a marked shortening and 
widening of the olfactory bulb in much the same fashion as in major lineages of fossorial 
non-caenophidian alethinophidian snakes (blind snakes, uropeltids) and in contrast to 
surface-dwelling relatives (Fig. 14.4B, D). There are several filaments at the anterior tip of 
the main olfactory bulb that form the fila olfactoria (Fig. 14.3A-D), which is composed of 
unmyelinated axons that enter the olfactory bulb region from the nasal sac and the 
vomeronasal organ. The fila olfactoria is not represented in endocasts due to the lack of a 
cribriform plate or other analogous bony structure in snakes. Thus, snake endocasts fail to 
delimit the anterior tip of the olfactory bulb. The limit between the main olfactory bulb and 
accessory olfactory bulb regions can be only assessed in dissected brains through a vertical 
or oblique furrow (Fig. 14.3A-D). Left and right olfactory bulbs cannot be differentiated in 
snake endocasts due to the poor expression of this furrow. Notably, uropeltids appear to be 
the only major lineage of snakes with a distinctive configuration of the olfactory bulb, due to 
the existence of a long and thin peduncle bridging both olfactory bulbs [S5]. Regrettably, 
this peduncle and the main olfactory bulb cannot be observed in uropeltid endocasts, 
which only cast the posterior olfactory bulb region ([8]; Fig. 14.2F). The main olfactory bulb 
is invariably smaller than the accessory olfactory bulb in snakes. This latter structure does 
not form a conspicuous surface feature, thus its precise size and shape in dissected brains 
can be determined only through histological studies, which have demonstrated an import­
ant morphological diversity among snake groups [6, 13, 14].
The cerebral hemispheres of snakes bulge laterally in their posterior region, but the 
degree of expansion is variable among clades. Whereas in most alethinophidians examined 
it bulges strongly (Figs. 14.3C and 14.4A, C), blind snakes and fossorial or cryptozoic 
alethinophidians lack this posterior widening (Figs. 14.3A, B, D and 14.4B, D). In blind 
snakes, the posterodorsal region of the cerebral hemispheres (preoptic area) overlaps the 
anterior aspect of the optic tectum (Fig. 14.3A). Associated with this condition, the preoptic 
sulcus that separates the cerebral hemispheres from the optic tectum is barely recognizable
Figure 14.3 (cont.) Laticauda colubrina (C) and the cryptozoic elapid Micrurus pyrrhocryptus (D). II, 
optic tract; V1, ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve; V2, maxillary branch of the trigeminal 
nerve; V3, mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve; V2+V3, maxillary and mandibular branches of 
the trigeminal nerve; VIIh, hyoid ramus of the facial nerve; ah, adenohypophysis, aob, accessory 
olfactory bulb + olfactory tracts; avc, anterior opening of the Vidian canal; ch, cerebral hemisphere; cr, 
cerebellum; ep, epiphysis; fo, fila olfactoria; g, ganglionic chamber; mo, medulla oblongata; mob, 
main olfactory bulb; nh, neurohypophysis; ob, olfactory bulb region; ot, optic tectum; pvc, posterior 
opening of the Vidian canal; p, pituitary; py, medullary pyramid; rf, rhomboid fossa; tr, trabecula; ?, 
bilobed structure.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 301
Figure 14.4 Comparison of the brain endocast of surface-dwelling and cryptozoic caenophidians. 
The natricids Thamnophis marcianus (A) and Aspidura brachyorrhos (B); colubrids Coluber 
constrictor (C) and Tantilla gracilis (D). Skulls are figured at the same snout-condyle length. Scale 
bars equal 2.5 mm. ah, adenohypophysis; ch, cerebral hemisphere; mo, medulla oblongata; nh, 
neurohypophysis; ob, olfactory bulb region; ot, optic tectum; p, pituitary.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

302 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
in blind snake endocasts. Conversely, in most alethinophidians the preoptic sulcus is well 
developed, and thus the posterodorsal region of the cerebral hemispheres is clearly 
rounded (Fig. 14.3C, D). The lateral part of this sulcus is occupied by the medial parietal 
pillar, which separates the cerebral hemisphere from the bony otic region and the optic 
tectum (Fig. 14.2F). Thus, cerebral hemispheres of alethinophidians are the brain segments 
best represented in snake endocasts.
The epiphysis is located at the intersection of the preoptic and sagittal sulci. It is clearly 
visible on some alethinophidian brains (Fig. 14.3C), although it is not represented in 
endocasts because of its small size and low profile between the cerebral hemispheres and 
optic tectum.
A variety of morphologies of the pituitary gland can be recognized among surface­
dwelling and fossorial snakes [9, 15, 16]. The pituitary of fossorial or cryptozoic blind 
snakes and non-caenophidian alethinophidians is symmetrical and distinctly flattened, 
with the neurohypophysis being lateral or posterodorsal to the adenohypophysis 
(Fig. 14.3A, B). This gland in Anilius scytale exhibits a bilobed shape in ventral view 
(Fig. 14.3B), with the neurohypophysis lying posteriorly to the adenohypophysis. This 
spatial relationship is not easily identified in the corresponding endocast because the 
neurohypophysis lobe is barely discernible. Surface-dwelling alethinophidians bear a 
rounded, well-developed pituitary that settles in a deeply concave sella turcica located 
in the parabasisphenoid bone (Fig. 14.3C), often posteriorly projected in species with a 
large gland. Some species exhibit an asymmetry between the size of the adenohypophysis 
and neurohypophysis (Fig. 14.4A, C), with the neurohypophysis lying dorsolateral to the 
adenohypophysis. Notably, surveyed species of fossorial and cryptozoic caenophidians 
show a flattened pituitary (Figs. 14.3D and 14.4B, D), thus mirroring those of blind snakes 
and ‘basal’ alethinophidians.
Midbrain
The two prominent features of the midbrain roof in snakes are the optic tectum and to a 
lesser degree the colliculus posteriores (collicular region), which is located posteriorly. The 
optic tectum shows a considerable diversity in shape and size among extant snakes. It is 
usually divided into two spherical structures, the optic lobes, by a more-or-less defined 
sagittal sulcus. Blind snakes have the smallest eyes among extant snakes; their optic lobes 
are notably small and lack the typical spherical shape that characterizes alethinophidians 
(Fig. 14.3A). The anterior region of the optic tectum is embayed anteriorly between the 
posteromedial aspect of the cerebral hemispheres, thus it acquires a triangular shape in 
dorsal view. Endocasts of blind snakes fail to track the boundaries of the optic lobes, making 
it difficult to distinguish this brain segment from the cerebral hemispheres [9]. The fossorial 
non-caenophidian alethinophidian Anilius scytale, which has small eyes (ES 4.8) similar to 
blind snakes, has a small optic tectum, lacking any signs of division between optic lobes and 
collicular region (Fig. 14.3B). In contrast, the optic lobes of most surface-dwelling alethi- 
nophidians are rounded, well-defined structures behind the cerebral hemispheres. The size 
of the optic lobes is variable in alethinophidians, ranging from small bulges in fossorial and 
cryptozoic forms with small eyes (Figs. 14.3D and 14.4B, D) to large spherical structures 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 303
reaching the dorsal edge of the cerebral hemispheres in surface-dwelling species with 
larger eyes (ES > 13) (Figs. 14.3C and 14.4A, C). Endocasts reflect these two tendencies, 
although the sphericity of the optic lobes is less defined laterally. Remarkably, the endo­
casts of some large-bodied terrestrial alethinophidians such as Boa imperator or Python 
molurus, which also have relatively small eyes (ES ~ 12), have barely recognizable 
optic lobes.
The collicular region of snakes is posterior to the optic tectum. It departs from that of 
lizards in having two different structures, the torus semicircularis and paratorus [17], which 
display different degrees of development across the snake tree. Although the collicular 
region can accurately be identified through histological sections, a pair of bulges immedi­
ately behind the optic lobes are present in some species with well-developed tori. In 
species with a large collicular region, the midbrain roof becomes anteroposteriorly 
elongated (Figs. 14.1 and 14.3B), whereas it is mostly rounded in other snakes 
(Fig. 14.3C). In particular, some non-caenophidian alethinophidians, such as the uropeltoid 
Cylindrophis and pythonoid Xenopeltis, show a notable development of the collicular region 
(Fig. 14.1; [5, 17]). The distinction between the optic tectum and the collicular region is not 
detectable in endocasts, largely due to its small size and the influence of the choroid plexus 
on endocast shape.
Hindbrain
The hindbrain constitutes the transition between the brain itself and the spinal cord. 
Cerebellum, pons, and medulla oblongata are the main gross features of the hindbrain, 
besides the several cranial nerves with an origin in this part of brain.
The cerebellum of snakes is relatively small in comparison with legged lizards (Fig. 14.1). 
It is located in the large fold created by the cephalic and cervical flexures. Nieuwenhuys [18] 
described the cerebellum of snakes as a flat lamella projected posteriorly, but this is 
simplistic and applicable only to some species. Indeed, snakes exhibit at least two basic 
cerebellar shapes. Blind snakes have the relatively smallest cerebellum among snakes, 
characterized as a small, thin triangular lamina positioned deep in the fold delimited by 
the posterior region of the midbrain roof and the medulla oblongata (Fig. 14.3A). The 
cerebellum of non-caenophidian alethinophidians, although larger than that of blind 
snakes, is also lamellar shaped and small (Fig. 14.3B). In contrast, other alethinophidians 
have an anteroposterior thickening of the cerebellum (Fig. 14.3C), thus acquiring a trapez­
oidal shape. The cerebellum is projected posterodorsally, covering the dorsal region of the 
rhomboid fossa (Fig. 14.3C). As noted previously, the cerebellum cannot be discerned in 
snake endocasts.
The hindbrain ventral to the cerebellum is marked by a bulge, the pons. This region, most 
notable for being the origin of the trigeminal nerve (V), is homogeneous across snakes. The 
medulla oblongata is located immediately posterior to the pons without any clear signs of 
this transition. Its shape is strongly influenced by the longitudinal shortening observed in 
blind snakes and uropeltids, in which the entire hindbrain is particularly compacted 
(Fig. 14.3A). There are two walls delimiting the rhomboid fossa, which corresponds with 
the medullary pyramids (Figs. 14.3 and 14.4). The rhomboid fossa is notably small in blind 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

304 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
snakes and other fossorial and cryptozoic snakes due to the longitudinal shortening of the 
brain. Endocasts track most of the shape of the medulla oblongata, with the exception of the 
rhomboid fossa that is covered by the cast of the choroid plexus.
14.2.3 The Endocast of Dinilysia patagonica
Despite the incompleteness of available skull specimens, the segmentation of CT data for 
their neurocranial cavities allows a satisfactory reconstruction of the endocast of Dinilysia 
(Fig. 14.5A, B). This endocast reconstruction covers all regions of the brain due to the highly 
ossified condition of the braincase of Dinilysia [19, 20].
The endocast of Dinilysia resembles that of Anilius scytale (Fig. 14.3B), characterized by 
an elongated shape with no evidence of the longitudinal shortening and overlap between 
brain segments observed in blind snakes, uropeltids, and cryptozoic caenophidians. The 
elongate, slender olfactory bulb is distinctly bent downwards similar to those in lizards, thus 
contrasting with the straight shape observed in extant snakes. The bilobed shape that 
characterizes this region in extant snakes can only be observed in the anterior third of 
the Dinilysia endocast, through a wide and shallow longitudinal groove observed on the 
dorsal surface. The optic nerve exits through an opening located in the posterior third of the 
olfactory bulb, contrasting with the forward position observed in basal alethinophidians. 
There is no evidence of bulges or grooves that would allow an accurate identification of the 
different olfactory bulb regions and tracts.
The cerebral hemispheres of Dinilysia are relatively small in comparison with extant 
alethinophidians. The lateral bulge of the posterior region of the cerebral hemispheres is 
weakly expressed in comparison with most alethinophidians (Fig. 14.5A-C), instead resem­
bling the shape observed in blind snakes and cryptozoic caenophidians. Notably, the 
posterodorsal part of the cerebral hemispheres is markedly embayed (Fig. 14.5C), a feature 
not observed in other squamates. The pituitary of Dinilysia is well developed and symmet­
ric, housed in a deep sella turcica [20].
The midbrain roof of Dinilysia has a smooth, tubular shape and hence neither the optic 
tectum nor the collicular region can be differentiated. The strong correlation between the 
orbit and the eye size in snakes (r = 0.985, see electronic supplementary materials) allows 
an estimation of eye size for Dinilysia through a least-squares regression model 
(Fig. 14.5D). This eye size estimation (ES 12) falls into the range shared by some terrestrial 
large snakes such as Python molurus (ES 12) whose endocast also show a barely differenti­
ated optic tectum due to the moderate size of the optic lobes.
A remarkable feature of the endocast of Dinilysia, first reported by Trivino et al. [10], is 
the large and markedly bilobed structure located just behind the midbrain roof (Fig. 14.5C) 
and present in all three endocasts examined here. This feature is at the anteroposterior level 
of the pituitary, in the region corresponding with the choroid plexus, although in a more 
dorsal position and angled posterodorsally. A deep and wide groove divides this structure 
into two symmetric and anteroposteriorly elongated protuberances. Notably, a similar but 
smaller structure is present in some extant snakes such as the ‘basal’ alethinophidian 
Anilius scytale (Fig. 14.5C) and the homalopsid caenophidian Erpeton tentaculatum (fig. 6 
in [9]). The more dorsal and angled position of this structure in Dinilysia than that of extant
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 305
Figure 14.5 The endocast of the stem-snake Dinilysia patagonica. Obtained endocasts (A) and 
reconstruction (B) of the endocast based on specimens MACN RN 1013 and MACN RN 1014 in
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

306 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
snakes seems to be a by-product of the distinct, sizeable inner ear of this extinct taxon 
(Fig. 14.5C).
The hindbrain of Dinilysia is similar to that of extant alethinophidians in having a U- 
shaped configuration, but it is more pronounced in Dinilysia due to the extraordinary size 
of its otic region. As in other snakes with massive otic regions, such as Xenopeltis unicolor, 
the ventral region of the hindbrain, corresponding with the pons and medulla oblongata, is 
located below the horizontal plane delimited by the pituitary (Fig. 14.5A, B).
14.3 Discussion
Snakes represent a special case among reptiles because the braincase almost entirely 
encloses the whole brain, which in turn practically fills the neurocranial cavity. These 
features make snake endocasts a realistic representation of brain size and shape. 
Nevertheless, the cerebellum is an exception among the brain segments in snake endocasts 
because it is masked by the cast of the choroid plexus and probably also other non-neural 
structures located near to the hindbrain roof. Regardless, endocasts offer a valuable, non­
destructive approach to study brain gross anatomy in snakes, although complementary 
physical dissections and/or contrast-enhanced computed tomography of specimens with 
soft- and bony tissue are desirable to obtain an accurate and precise picture of the surface 
of this complex organ.
Previous studies of different groups of vertebrates reported common patterns in brain 
anatomy that cluster species with similar lifestyles that do not necessarily share close 
phylogenetic affinities (cf. [21]). In squamates, one of these ‘cerebrotypes’ was recently 
established for limbless lizards and some groups of snakes [22]. Based on the results of the 
present study, I recognize at least two main cerebrotypes in snakes. The ‘underground’ 
cerebrotype is characterized by tubular cerebral hemispheres, flattening of the pituitary, 
and the overlapping of different brain segments. This cerebrotype is characteristic of blind 
snakes, but also of all the examined cryptozoic species of caenophidians, which also share a 
short olfactory bulb. Remarkably, ‘basal’ alethinophidians (with the exception of 
Anomochilus) exhibit long olfactory bulb, thus departing from the pattern present in other 
basal forms such as blind snakes. On the other hand, the ‘surface’ cerebrotype is charac­
terized by well-spaced brain segments, a long olfactory bulb, posteriorly bulged cerebral
Figure 14.5 (cont.) dorsal (left), ventral (centre) and left lateral (right) view. (C) Brain and inner ear 
endocasts of Anilius scytale (left) and D. patagonica (right) in anterolateral view (not to scale). (D) 
Orbit diameter (log-transformed, x-axis) is plotted against eye diameter (y-axis) of 85 extant snake 
species (see Supplementary Appendix 14.S1, S2), with a line representing the linear regression model. 
(E) Lateral view of the skull of D. patagonica (upper) and Python molurus (lower) figured at the same 
snout-condyle length and rendered semitransparent to reveal the brain endocast and the eyeball (the 
latter inferred in D. patagonica). Scale bars equal 10 mm. II, optic tract; V2+V3, maxillary and 
mandibular branches of the trigeminal nerve; VII, facial nerve; avc, anterior opening of the Vidian 
canal; ch, cerebral hemisphere; ie, inner ear; mo, medulla oblongata; ob, olfactory bulb region; ot, 
optic tectum; p, pituitary; pvc, posterior opening of the Vidian canal; py, medullary pyramid; ?, 
bilobed structure.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 307
hemispheres and a bulky pituitary. This cerebrotype is found in terrestrial, aquatic, and 
arboreal species across the snake tree.
14.3.1 Burrowing and Brain Anatomy
Functional constraints associated with miniaturisation and burrowing in tetrapods induce 
profound evolutionary modifications in head anatomy [23, 24]. According to previous 
studies [5, 8] it is likely that these major evolutionary driving forces shaped the under­
ground cerebrotype features. The longitudinal shortening and overlap between brain 
segments seems to be an efficient way to accommodate the brain into the typically small 
(possibly miniaturized) skulls of fossorial and cryptozoic snakes. Similarly, the ‘spatial 
packing’ hypothesis explains the efficient packaging of relatively larger brains into a limited 
braincase space in mammals [25].
Among the impressive current diversity of caenophidian snakes, there is a plethora of 
cryptozoic species in most of recognized major lineages. For example, there are several 
cryptozoic species across the elapid tree, which consistently exhibit the underground 
cerebrotype (Fig. 14.6A). Interestingly, the species examined here indicate that this trend 
is also present in other caenophidian clades. The re-acquisition of the underground 
cerebrotype in phylogenetically distant groups of caenophidians (and probably other snake 
clades) suggests that brain gross anatomy is remarkably labile in snakes, a perhaps unex­
pected condition for such a complex organ.
The transition from surface to underground cerebrotypes and vice versa implies an 
important change in relative volume of several brain structures. Acceptance of the notion 
that the amount of neural tissue in a brain structure is proportional to the amount of 
processing [26] implies there are substantial differences in the ability to process sensory 
input between snakes with underground and surface cerebrotypes. The implications of this 
assertion are considered in the next section.
14.3.2 Gross Anatomical Features of the Brain and Their Correspondence 
with Histology of Some Sensory Processing Structures
Different regions of the brain undergo considerable evolutionary enlargement or reduction 
in relative size in lineages with surface or underground cerebrotypes. As might be expected, 
these changes are correlated with variations in volume tissue, expressed as reduction/ 
enlargement of nuclei or degree of layer thickness [5, 6, 13, 26-28].
Forebrain
The principal brain structures related to the chemosensory vomeronasal system (VNS) are 
the accessory olfactory bulb, dorsal ventricular ridge and nucleus sphericus. The latter is 
well developed in squamates, occupying up to one-third of the total telencephalic volume 
in some species [29]. Snakes have the largest nucleus sphericus among squamates [1], 
which is almost located in the posterior region of the cerebral hemispheres. These three 
main structures are notably dedifferentiated and small in fossorial and cryptozoic snakes 
[6, 13, 26], and in limbless burrowing lizards [30]. In particular, the absence of bulging of the 
cerebral hemispheres in burrowing snakes is plausibly related to the reduction of these
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

308 AGUSTfN scanferla
ES 24.1
ES 9.0
Figure 14.6 (A) Simplified cladogram of elapid snakes (modified from [52]) showing a dorsal view of 
endocasts of some cryptozoic and surface-dwelling species with their corresponding underground 
cerebrotype (grey-framed) and surface cerebrotype brains. (B) Dorsal view of the endocast of Coluber 
constrictor (left) and Achalinus spinalis (right), with transverse sections depicting the degree of 
development of major areas in the cerebral hemispheres and optic tectum of a surface cerebrotype 
and an underground cerebrotype, respectively, de, dorsal cortex; ns, nucleus sphericus; pdvr, 
posterior dorsal ventricular ridge; sgc, stratum album + griseum centrale; sgp, stratum album + 
griseum periventriculare; sgs, stratum album + griseum superficiale.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 309
brain structures, especially the nucleus sphericus (Fig. 14.6B). In reviewing the literature, 
regrettably, no compelling data were found to clarify whether smaller volume of neural 
tissue responsible for the processing of vomeronasal information is correlated with lower 
VNS use or performance. Curiously, the scanty available data on the anatomy of the VNS 
[31] and on behaviour [32] indicates that chemoreception plays an important role in the 
biology of fossorial snakes such as blind snakes.
A relatively small pituitary is noteworthy not only in fossorial and cryptozoic snakes but 
also in burrowing limbless lizards [9, 15, 16]. Although a relatively small pituitary seems to 
correspond with relatively low tissue volume, the diversity of arrangements of the different 
subparts that comprise the pituitary raises the question of whether flattening and 
rearrangement also contributes to its overall smaller size in forms.
Midbrain
Fossorial and cryptozoic snakes have notably thin and dedifferentiated optic tectum layers 
[5, 6, 26-28, 33]. In gross anatomical terms, this corresponds to notably small and simplified 
optic lobes (Fig. 14.6B). Senn [5] was the first to infer a causal relationship between a 
reduction in eye size and reduction of the optic tectum in fossorial and cryptozoic species. 
Subsequently, several authors [6, 9, 33, 27] concluded that snakes with well-developed eyes 
have a larger optic tectum than burrowing, eye-reduced forms. Notably, some surface 
dwellers such as large booids and pythonoids bear relatively small eyes (ES 11-12), but 
their optic tectum is similar to that of snakes with larger eyes. Although its major input is 
from the eyes, the optic tectum is a multisensory center that receives information from 
other sense organs. For example, the optic tectum receives input and integrates information 
from the infrared pit organs of pythonoids and booids [2], as well as mechanosensory 
information originated in tactile skin corpuscles or tentacles like in the homalopsid Erpeton 
tentaculatum [34]. Thus, although the anatomy of the optic tectum is clearly related to eye 
size, an accurate anatomical assessment of this brain segment should be evaluated con­
sidering the input of other sensory organs in addition to the eyes.
The collicular region is a very interesting part of the midbrain roof of snakes. Whereas in 
lizards it is formed only by the torus semicircularis, snakes bear an additional structure, the 
paratorus [5, 17]. The relative size of these structures varies with phylogeny; in blind snakes 
they are equal but in most alethinophidians the paratorus is larger [17]. The collicular 
region, often termed the midbrain auditory roof, is the structure that receives ascending 
auditory fibers in vertebrates and its variability in both size and complexity reflects the 
degree of development of the auditory system [35]. Contrary to the idea that their earless 
condition makes snakes poor hearers, a sound transmitting mechanism mediated by the 
skull bones suggests a capable system [36]. Furthermore, the presence of multiple auditory 
pathways in snakes suggests that their auditory system may be quite sophisticated [37]. To 
my knowledge, the auditory nature of the paratorus has never been thoroughly explored, 
but I hypothesize its evolution is linked to the peculiar auditory system of snakes. The 
development of the paratorus in alethinophidians possibly represents an improvement of 
auditory processing capabilities during the reinvasion of surface macrohabitats from a 
more fossorial ancestor.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

310 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
Hindbrain
The cerebellum of limb-reduced and limbless squamates tends to be relatively small in 
comparison with that of fully limbed species [18, 22, 37], suggesting that limblessness is 
causally related to its reduction in complexity and size. However, this relationship might 
not be straightforward in most alethinophidian snakes because the cerebellum of surface­
dwelling forms is equivalent in complexity and relative size to that of limbed lizards [22]. 
The cerebellum receives input from several sensory systems relayed through other regions 
of the brain and the spinal cord, being responsible for balance and the precise coordination 
of muscular activity [35]. It is thus reasonable to hypothesize that the increase in relative 
size and complexity of the cerebellum of surface-dwelling alethinophidians is causally 
related to the considerable resources that this brain region devotes to the integration of 
highly specialized sensory systems, the coordination of limbless locomotion, and complex 
behaviours such as constriction, caudal luring, or rattling.
14.3.3 Brain Gross Anatomy of Dinilysia, Its Palaeoecology, and Snake Origins
The singularity of the skull anatomy of Dinilysia patagonica has been extensively high­
lighted (e.g., [20, 38, 39]. Unsurprisingly, the digital endocasts show that the brain of 
Dinilysia also had an unusual gross anatomy. It is characterized by a very long and curved 
olfactory bulb, relatively small and posterodorsally embayed cerebral hemispheres, a well- 
developed and symmetrical pituitary, and an undifferentiated midbrain roof preceding a 
large bilobed structure. Notably, a specimen that preserves a partial natural endocast 
belonging to the older Patagonian Cretaceous snake Najash rionegrina displays the same 
bilobed structure located just behind the midbrain roof (fig. 1f of [40]). Furthermore, small 
cerebral hemispheres and the presence of a smooth, undifferentiated midbrain roof can be 
observed in another natural endocast of Najash (figs. 4-6 of [41]), thus suggesting that the 
unusual brain gross anatomy described for Dinilysia was also present in other stem snakes. 
The anatomical analysis performed here contradicts the interpretation [10] that the bilobed 
structure corresponds with the cerebellum. The cerebellum of all snake species examined 
here and previously [5, 18, 22] exhibits a lamellar or trapezoidal shape. Furthermore, 
comparisons made here clearly demonstrate that the cerebellum is not represented in 
snake endocasts. Therefore, this feature actually represents another brain region or a 
vascular structure, probably associated with the choroid plexus. Judging from the shape 
and position of this structure in extant snakes, this latter inference is considered 
more likely.
Dinilysia has been the focus of palaeoecological inferences in order to assess the habitat 
in which snakes first evolved. Recently, Yi and Norell ([42]; see also Chapter 13) analysed 
the anatomy of the inner ear of Dinilysia, highlighting its large size and bulbous shape, 
similar to the inner ear of fossorial and cryptozoic extant snakes. This resemblance under­
pinned the inference that Dinilysia was a burrowing form and that snakes likely evolved 
from a burrowing ancestor. This hypothesis was subsequently tested through an extensive 
analysis of squamate inner ear anatomy [39]. Palci et al. [39] observed that the inner ear 
morphology of Dinilysia is not exclusive to fossorial and cryptozoic extant snakes but it is 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 311
also present in some surface-dwelling taxa. Furthermore, the inner ear of Dinilysia falls 
outside of typical ecomorphological categories, thus making inner ear morphology less 
conclusive as an ecological predictor in this case [39]. Curiously, both aforementioned 
studies overlooked the fact that the inner ear of Dinilysia followed an unusual isometric 
growth trajectory in comparison with extant snakes, in which it follows a typical negative 
allometric trajectory during postnatal ontogeny [43].
Brain gross anatomy and eye-size estimation for Dinilysia reported here provide insight 
into the paleoecology of this extinct snake. Beyond its uniqueness, the elongated general 
shape of the brain of Dinilysia contrasts with the underground cerebrotype of most fossorial 
and cryptozoic extant snakes. Furthermore, the estimated eye size suggests that Dinilysia 
bore eyes equal to those of extant large surface-dwelling snakes such as some large 
pythonoids and booids. In addition, I suggest that body length is a relevant trait that 
contradicts a generally burrowing lifestyle for Dinilysia. Body length of extant fossorial 
and cryptozoic snakes never surpasses 1.5 m [44], whereas the body size estimations for 
Dinilysia based on skull length (Supplementary Appendix 14.S1, S2) indicates that it 
reached more than 3 m total length, greatly exceeding previous conjectures [42, 45]. 
Taken together, the absence of any unequivocal osteological feature related to burrowing, 
the information provided by brain gross anatomy and inferred eye size, and the estimated 
large body size suggest that D. patagonica was a surface-dwelling form.
The visual system has historically occupied a prominent place in debates about the origin 
and early evolution of snakes (Gower et al., Chapter 15) Since the influential work of Walls 
[46] the uniqueness of snake eye anatomy compared with that of lizards (and other reptiles) 
has been explained through a degeneration of the eye in a burrowing ancestor and a 
subsequent redevelopment of analogous structures during an evolutionary radiation above 
ground. Furthermore, many other snake features such as a closed bony braincase and loss 
of the middle ear were also explained through this evolutionary scenario. However, other 
studies of the visual system suggested a more complex interplay between burrowing and 
surface (though possibly nocturnal) stages in the early steps of ophidian evolution [28, 47]. 
Additionally, data for retinal photopigment genes ([48]; Gower et al., Chapter 13) does not 
support the interpretation (e.g., [49]) that the ancestral snake was as fossorial as extant blind 
snakes. In this way, there is a growing body of information suggesting the dawn of snake 
evolution was not restricted to fossorial animals but may have involved episodes of 
occupation of diverse macrohabitats coupled with correlated major transformations in skull 
anatomy and feeding behaviour [44, 50, 51]. The surface-dwelling lifestyle inferred here for 
Dinilysia patagonica and non-fossoriality of at least some other Cretaceous snakes, such as 
the marine simoliophiids, constitutes additional evidence that at least some of the early 
history of snakes occurred above ground.
14.4 Concluding Remarks
While compiling this chapter, it became clear to me that any attempt to uncover the 
diversity and evolution of the ophidian brain is an enormous task, because of the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

312 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
remarkable complexity of this organ and the intricate evolutionary history of this clade. 
Moreover, the diversity of the sensory paraphernalia that these skilled predators have 
acquired during their evolution provides further challenges. Although there is little prospect 
of a comprehensive picture of the evolution of the ophidian brain in the near future, some 
recent efforts offer new perspectives to achieve that. Broad-scale comparative surveys based 
on contrast-enhanced CT imagery together with geometric morphometrics are powerful 
tools. Applying new comparative data and approaches to the relationships between 
histology, the relative volume of each brain segment, and the condition of corresponding 
sensory organs across the ecological diversity of snakes will be very informative.
Acknowledgements
This study was conducted in part during the global lockdown imposed to curb COVID-19. 
My most sincere gratitude to all essential workers (especially health, food, and cleaning 
services) around the world who daily endangered their lives and allowed me to work. 
I thank David Gower and Hussam Zaher for inviting me to contribute to this book. I am also 
grateful to Bhart-Anjan Bhullar, David Gower and an anonymous reviewer for making 
helpful suggestions. A particular debt of thanks is due to Krister Smith for useful sugges­
tions and corrections to English grammar. Claudia Koch, Jennifer Olori, Filipa Sampaio, 
Jessie Maisano, and Matt Colbert provided assistance during scanning, and facilitated 
access to valuable CT data. This gratitude is extended to the staff of Digimorph, 
Morphosource and Phenome10K digital libraries. Thanks to Gabriel Lio for the skillful 
drawings of some brains. This work was funded by ANPCyT (PICT 2013-220) and 
CONICET (PIP 0497).
References
1. K. Schwenk, The evolution of 
chemoreception in squamate reptiles: a 
phylogenetic approach. Brain, Behaviour 
and Evolution, 41 (1993), 124-137.
2. R. C. Goris, Infrared organs of snakes: an 
integral part of vision. Journal of 
Herpetology, 45 (2011), 2-14.
3. J. M. Crowe-Riddell, R. Williams, L. Chapuis, 
and K. L. Sanders, Ultrastructural evidence 
of a mechanosensory function of scale 
organs (sensilla) in sea snakes 
(Hydrophiinae). Royal Society Open Science, 
6 (2019), 182022.
4. D. Starck, Cranio-cerebral relations in recent 
reptiles. In C. Gans, R. G. Northcutt and 
P. Ulinski, eds., Biology of the Reptilia Vol. 9,
Neurology A (London: Academic Press, 
1979), pp. 1-38.
5. D. G. Senn, Uber das optische System im 
Gehirn squamater Reptilien. Eine 
vergleichend-morphologische 
Untersuchung, unter besonderer 
Berucksichtigung einiger Wuhlschlangen. 
Acta Anatomica, 65 (1966), 1-87.
6. H. Masai, K. Takatsuji, and Y. Sato, 
Comparative morphology of the 
telencephalon of the Japanese colubrid 
snakes under consideration of habit. Journal 
of Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary 
Research, 18 (1980), 310-314.
7. R. Platel, Nouvelles donnees sur 
l’encephalisation des Reptiles Squamates.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 313
Zeitschrift fur Zoologische Systematik und 
Evolutionsforschung, 13 (1975), 161-184.
8. J. C. Olori, Digital endocasts of the cranial 
cavity and osseous labyrinth of the 
burrowing snake Uropeltis woodmasoni 
(Alethinophidia: Uropeltidae). Copeia, 2010 
(2010), 14-26.
9. R. Allemand, R. Boistel, G. Daghfous, et al., 
Comparative morphology of snake 
(Squamata) endocasts: evidence of 
phylogenetic and ecological signals. Journal 
of Anatomy, 231 (2017), 849-868.
10. L. N. Trivino, A. Albino, M. T. Dozo, and
J. D. Williams, First natural endocranial cast 
of a fossil snake (Cretaceous of Patagonia, 
Argentina). The Anatomical Record, 301 
(2018), 9-20.
11. J. A. Hopson, Paleoneurology. In C. Gans, 
R. G. Northcutt, and P. Ulinski, eds., Biology 
of the Reptilia, Vol. 9, Neurology A (New 
York: Academic Press, 1979), pp. 39-146.
12. H. J. Donkelaar, Reptiles. In
R. Nieuwenhuys, H. J. ten Donkelaar and 
C. Nicholson, eds., The Central Nervous 
System of Vertebrates (Berlin: Springer, 
1998), pp. 1313-1524.
13. M. Halpern, The telencephalon of snakes. In 
S. O. E. Ebbesson, ed., Comparative 
Neurology of the Telencephalon (New York: 
Plenum Press, 1980), pp. 257-294.
14. W. Rudin, Untersuchungen am 
olfaktorischen System der Reptilien. III. 
Differenzierungsformen einiger 
olfaktorischer Zentren bei Reptilien. Acta 
Anatomica, 89 (1974), 481-515.
15. H. Saint Girons, The pituitary gland. In 
C. Gans and T. S. Parsons, eds., Biology of 
the Reptilia, Vol. 3, Morphology C (London: 
Academic Press, 1970), pp. 135-199.
16. M. P. Schreibman, The pituitary gland. In P. 
K. T. Pang and M. P. Schreibman, eds., 
Vertebrate Endocrinology: Fundamentals 
and Biomedical Implications, Vol. 1 
(New York: Academic Press, 1986), 
pp. 11-55.
17. D. G. Senn, The saurian and ophidian 
colliculi posteriores of the midbrain. Acta 
Anatomica, 74 (1969), 114-120.
18. R. Nieuwenhuys, Comparative anatomy of 
the cerebellum. Progress in Brain Research, 
25 (1967), 1-93.
19. R. Estes, T. H. Frazzetta, and E. E. Williams, 
Studies on the fossil snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Woodward. I. Cranial 
morphology. Bulletin Museum of 
Comparative Zoology of Harvard University, 
119 (1970), 25-74.
20. H. Zaher and A. Scanferla, The skull of the 
Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
21. A. N. Iwaniuk, P. L. Hurd, and D. R. Wylie, 
Comparative morphology of the avian 
cerebellum: II. Size of folia. Brain, Behavior, 
and Evolution, 69 (2007), 196-219.
22. S. Macri, Y. Savriama, I. Khan, and N. Di-Poi, 
Comparative analysis of squamate brains 
unveils multi-level variation in cerebellar 
architecture associated with locomotor 
specialization. Nature Communications, 10 
(2019), 5560.
23. J. Hanken and D. B. Wake, Miniaturization 
of body size: organismal consequences and 
evolutionary significance. Annual Review of 
Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 24 
(1993), 501-519.
24. H. C. Maddin, J. C. Olori, and J. S. Anderson, 
A redescription of Carrolla craddocki 
(Lepospondyli: Brachystelechidae) based on 
high-resolution CT, and the impacts of 
miniaturization and fossoriality on 
morphology. Journal of Morphology, 272 
(2011), 722-743.
25. D. E. Lieberman, B. Hallgn'msson, W. Liu, 
T. E. Parsons, and H. A. Jamniczky, Spatial 
packing, cranial base angulation, and 
craniofacial shape variation in the 
mammalian skull: testing a new model using 
mice. Journal of Anatomy, 212 (2008), 
720-735.
26. D. G. Senn and R. N. Northcutt, The 
forebrain and midbrain of some squamates 
and their bearing on the origin of snakes. 
Journal of Morphology, 140 (1973), 153-152.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

314 AGUSTIN SCANFERLA
27. O. J. Reperant, D. Miceli, J.-P. Rio, and 
C. Weidner, The primary optic system in a 
microphthalmic snake (Calabaria 
reinhardtii). Brain Research, 408, 233-238.
28. O. J. Reperant, J.-P. Rio, R. Ward, et al., 
Comparative analysis of the primary visual 
system of reptiles. In C. Gans and 
P. S. Ulinski, eds., Sensory Integration.
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 17, Neurology C 
(Chicago and London: The University of 
Chicago Press, 1992) pp. 175-240.
29. R. Platel, Analyse volumetrique comparee 
des principales subdivisions 
telencephaliques chez les reptiles saurines. 
Journal fur Hirnforschung, 21 (1980), 
271-291.
30. R. G. Northcutt, Forebrain and midbrain 
organization in lizards and its phylogenetic 
significance. In N. Greenberg and 
P. D. Maclean, eds., Behavior and Neurology 
of Lizards (Rockeville: NIMH, 1978), 
pp. 11-64.
31. A. Gharzi, M. Abbasi, and P. Yusefi, 
Histological studies on the vomeronasal 
organ of the worm-like snake, Typhlops 
vermicularis. Journal of Biological Sciences, 
13 (2013), 372-378.
32. J. K. Webb and R. Shine, To find an ant: trail­
following in Australian blindsnakes 
(Typhlopidae). Animal Behaviour, 43 (1992), 
941-948.
33. H. Masai, Structural patterns of the optic 
tectum in Japanese snakes of the family 
Colubridae in relation to habit. Journal fur 
Hirnforschung, 14 (1973), 367-374.
34. K. C. Catania, The brain and behavior of 
the tentacled snake. Annals of New York 
Academy of Sciences, 1225 (2011), 
83-89.
35. A. B. Butler and W. Hodos, Comparative 
Vertebrate Neuroanatomy: Evolution and 
Adaptation (Hoboken: John Wiley, 2005).
36. C. B. Christensen, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, 
C. Brandt, and P. T. Madsen, Hearing with 
an atympanic ear: good vibration and poor 
sound-pressure detection in the royal 
python, Python regius. Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 215 (2012), 331-342.
37. O. Larsell. The cerebellum of reptiles: lizards 
and snake. The Journal of Comparative 
Neurology, 41 (1926) 59-94.
38. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin Of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton: Taylor & Francis, 2019).
39. A. Palci, M. N. Hutchinson, M. W. Caldwell, 
and M. S. Y. Lee, The morphology of the 
inner ear of squamate reptiles and its 
bearing on the origin of snakes. Royal Society 
Open Science, 4 (2017), 170685.
40. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia, T. Simoes, 
et al., New skulls and skeletons of the 
Cretaceous legged snake Najash, and the 
evolution of the modern snake body plan. 
Science Advances, 5 (2019), eaax5833.
41. F. F. Garberoglio, R. O. Gomez,
S. Apesteguia, et al., A new specimen with 
skull and vertebrae of Najash rionegrina 
(Lepidosauria: Ophidia) from the early Late 
Cretaceous of Patagonia. Journal of 
Systematic Palaeontology, 17 (2019), 
1533-1550.
42. H. Yi and M. A. Norell, The burrowing origin 
of modern snakes. Science Advances, 1 
(2015), e1500743.
43. A. Scanferla and B. A. S. Bhullar, Postnatal 
development of the skull of Dinilysia 
patagonica (Squamata-Stem Serpentes). The 
Anatomical Record, 297 (2014), 560-573.
44. A. Scanferla, Postnatal ontogeny and the 
evolution of macrostomy in snakes. Royal 
Society Open Science, 3 (2016), 160612.
45. M. W. Caldwell and A. M. Albino, 
Palaeoenvironment and palaeoecology of 
three Cretaceous snakes: Pachyophis, 
Pachyrhachis, and Dinilysia. Acta 
Palaeontologica Polonica, 46 (2001), 
203-218.
46. G. L. Walls, Ophthalmological implications 
for the early history of the snakes. Copeia 
1940 (1940), 1-8.
47. G. Underwood, The eye. In C. Gans and 
T.S. Parsons, eds., Biology of the Reptilia, 
Vol. 2, Morphology B (New York: Academic 
Press, 1970), pp. 1-97.
48. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, C. Jared, et al., 
Visual system evolution and the nature of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

EVOLUTION OF THE OPHIDIAN BRAIN 315
the ancestral snake. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 28 (2015), 1309-1320.
49. A. Miralles, L. Marin, D. Markus, 
et al., Molecular evidence for the 
paraphyly of Scolecophidia and its 
evolutionary implications. Journal of 
Evolutionary Biology, 31 (2018), 
1782-1793.
50. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, et al., 
The origin of snakes: revealing the ecology, 
behavior, and evolutionary history of early 
snakes using genomics, phenomics, and the 
fossil record. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15 
(2015), 87.
51. F. O. Da Silva, A.-C. Fabre, Y. Savriama, 
et al., The ecological origins of snakes as 
revealed by skull evolution. Nature 
Communications, 9 (2018), 376.
52. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PLoS ONE, 14 (2019), e0216148.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.019 Published online by Cambridge University Press

15
Eyes, Vision, and the Origins and Early 
Evolution of Snakes
David J. Gower, Einat Hauzman, Bruno F. SimOes and Ryan K. Schott
15.1 Introduction
This chapter addresses the origin and early evolution of snakes from the perspective of 
vision biology. It examines phenotypic and genotypic data for squamate reptiles, and asks 
what that can tell us about eyes and vision in the ancestral snake and thus, indirectly, about 
snake origins and early evolution. As advocated in Garth L. Underwood’s [1] A Contribution 
to the Classification of Snakes, and beyond, it is informative to draw upon many lines of 
evidence when addressing questions in evolutionary biology. So, why consider vision in 
particular? We suggest that this is worthwhile because (1) snake eyes differ notably from 
those of other squamates (see § 15.4.1), (2) of the role that eyes have played in the history of 
the subject, being used as evidence in support of fossorial (burrowing), nocturnal and 
aquatic hypotheses for snake origins (e.g., [2-7]), and (3) vertebrate vision is an intricate yet 
well-understood system providing a rich source of readily interpretable data. Much is 
known about the anatomy of vertebrate eyes, and how they function and have evolved. 
The physiology underlying photon capture, spectral sensitivity, colour discrimination, 
signal propagation, and the genes and proteins involved, have been largely characterised, 
making vision one of the best-known biological signal-transduction systems. Additionally, 
many aspects of eye function and evolution can be identified and quantified, including 
selective pressures, based on physical first principles and molecular genetics.
Here we provide an overview of the subject. We summarise types of data available, and 
how they might inform on the visual system of the earliest snakes. We assess the extent to 
which vision data might enable discrimination among competing hypotheses of ecological 
aspects of snake origins. We synthesise recent discoveries, identify gaps in knowledge, and 
assess future prospects.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 317
15.2 The Ancestral Snake and Other Terminology
We use ‘ancestral snake’ to refer to the most recent common ancestor of all extant snakes, 
i.e., the most recent common ancestor of crown snakes (Serpentes, as applied here). The 
same basis applies to our use of ‘ancestral alethinophidian’, ‘ancestral caenophidian’ etc. 
We use ‘lizard’ to refer informally to any non-snake squamate. The phylogenetic framework 
for this chapter is illustrated in Figure 15.1. We use the term ‘henophidia’ to informally refer 
to the paraphyletic group of all non-caenophidian alethinophidians. We use scolecophidian 
and Scolecophidia to refer to non-aethinophidian snakes, irrespective of whether or not this 
is a paraphyletic or monophyletic taxon (see e.g., Ruane & Streicher, Chapter 10). Snake 
classification otherwise follows Zaher et al. [8], and with the informal term ‘colubroid’ 
referring to members of Colubroidea. Names or abbreviations of genes are written in italics, 
and proteins encoded by genes are in upper case text. See Box 15.1 for a glossary of some 
vision biology terms used in this chapter.
15.3 Vertebrate Vision
Light reaches the retina after passing through ocular media (see § 15.4.2). Conversion of 
photons into electrical signals is termed phototransduction, and occurs in the outer 
segments of the outer-retinal photoreceptor cells. Vertebrate outer-retinal photoreceptors 
are of two main types, rods and cones, though at least some caenophidian snakes 
somewhat blur this distinction via photoreceptor evolutionary transmutation. 
Vertebrates, including snakes [9], also have inner-retinal, intrinsically photosensitive 
retinal ganglion cells, that express melanopsin and whose function in vision is not as well 
understood [10, 11]. Hereafter, we use ‘photoreceptor’ to refer to outer-retinal (rod and 
cone) photoreceptor cells. Typically, rods mediate low-light (scotopic) vision, and cones 
bright-light (photopic) and colour vision, with both types contributing to mesopic vision 
in intermediate light levels, though, again, at least some caenophidian snakes blur 
this distinction, possibly incorporating cone-like rods in photopic trichromatic colour 
vision [12-14].
Photons pass through the inner retinal layers before reaching photoreceptor outer 
segments, where visual pigments lie within stacks of membrane organelles termed discs. 
Vertebrate visual pigments each comprise a transmembrane opsin protein and a chromo­
phore. The chromophore is derived from vitamin A1 (retinal) or vitamin A2 (3,4- 
dehydroretinal), thus far only the former has been found in snakes. The chromophore sits 
within a binding pocket formed by the opsin, where it undergoes cis-trans photoisomeriza­
tion when struck by photons, changing the conformation of the opsin to trigger a transduc­
tion cascade. Electrical signals generated by phototransduction are propagated from 
hyperpolarized photoreceptors through to processing neural (bipolar, horizontal, amacrine 
and ganglion) cells in the retina and onto the brain via the optic nerve. Photoreceptor cells 
are then returned to a depolarised, dark state via the visual cycle, which includes visual 
pigments being regenerated with cis retinal.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

318 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Alethinophidia 
I----------------------------------------------------------------------------------1
Amerophidia 
Afrophidia
i----------- 1 i------------------------------------------------------------------- 1
Scolecophidia ‘Henophidia’ 
Caenophidia
Sphenodon (1)
Figure 15.1 Summary of the phylogenetic framework of extant squamates for the chapter. Numbers 
in parentheses are currently recognized extant species (based on [140]). A few species-poor lineages 
are not depicted, such as the total of four species of Bolyeriidae and Xenophidiidae, little studied, 
poorly known, probable close relatives of Pythonoidea. See § 15.2 for notes on taxon names.
Typically, rods are more sensitive and slower to return to a dark state than cones. Rod 
and cone physiological differences are explained by mostly distinct rod and cone copies of 
phototransduction and (to a lesser extent) visual-cycle genes such as kinases, ion exchan­
gers, transducins, and arrestins, though differing expression levels and photoreceptor
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 319
Box 15.1 Glossary of some vision biology terms used in this chapter. Words that are also 
titles of entries in the glossary are indicated in bold text
Accommodation: Adjustments by the eye to maintain objects in focus on the retina. In lizards 
accommodation occurs primarily by deformation of the lens, in snakes by moving the lens 
relative to the retina.
Acuity: The spatial resolution of image-forming vision. Higher acuity equates to sharper and more 
detailed images.
Brille: The spectacle - a specialized near-transparent scale overlying the cornea of the eye of most 
snakes and some lizards.
Chromophore: A molecule linked to an opsin protein to form a visual pigment. In most vertebrates, 
the chromophore is ‘retinal’ derived from vitamin A1 that upon capturing a photon undergoes 
isomerization, triggering a phototransduction cascade. The chromophore is located within a 
‘binding’ pocket within the opsin protein.
Crystallins: The main structural proteins forming the lens of the vertebrate eye.
Eye adnexae: Accessory structures associated with the eye, such as extraocular muscles, eyelids, 
conjunctiva, lacrimal glands, etc.
Fovea: A cone-rich, high-acuity area of the retina, present in most lizards and absent in 
most snakes.
Ganglion cells: Retinal ganglion cells are located in the inner retina and their axons form the optic 
nerve that extends into the brain. They receive visual information from cones and rods via other 
retinal neurons, such as horizontal, bipolar, and amacrine cells. Some ganglion cells (termed 
intrinsically photosensitive retinal ganglion cells) are themselves photosensitive and involved in 
non-visual functions that require light input such as circadian rhythms and the pupillary 
light reflex.
Melanopsin: An ancient opsin present in most extant deuterostomes. Normally responsible for 
circadian rhythms, and other non-visual responses to light such as the pupillary light reflex, 
melatonin suppression, skin-colour changes, etc. In vertebrates two paralogs occur, the 
Xenopus-like (Opn4x) and the mammalian-like (Opn4m) melanopsin, which originated from a 
duplication event early in vertebrate evolution. Snakes have only opn4x in their genomes.
Ocular media: Structures of the eye that light passes through before reaching the retina. In 
vertebrates, these are (from the retina outwards) the vitreous humor, lens, aqueous humor, and 
cornea. Most snakes also have extraocular media comprising the subspectacular space and 
spectacle. In a few highly fossorial snakes there is no spectacle and extraocular media 
comprise relatively unspecialized head scales and soft tissues between these and the eyes.
Oil droplet: Spherical organelle located in the inner segment of cones (and possibly rarely some 
rods) of some vertebrates, but not in any snakes. Oil droplets consist of sometimes pigmented 
lipids. Coloured oil droplets are typically characteristic of the cones of diurnal species, where 
they act as cut-off filters and increase the potential for colour discrimination. Oil droplets are 
also absent in other major vertebrate lineages that are thought to have adapted to low-light 
environments in their evolutionary history, such as crocodilians and mammals.
Opsin: A 7-transmembrane protein member of the G protein-coupled receptor superfamily. Opsins 
bond with light-sensitive chromophores to form visual pigments.
Peak absorbance: The wavelength of light at which absorption by a visual pigment is greatest, 
typically reported as Лmax. See also spectral tuning.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

320 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Box 15.1 (continued)
Photoreceptor: A cell in the retina capable of phototransduction. Although some inner-retinal 
ganglion cells are intrinsically photosensitive, the term ‘photoreceptor’ is typically applied to rod 
and cone cells in the outer retina.
Refractive index: The speed that light travels through a particular substance relative to passing 
through a vacuum. Light passes more slowly through substances with a higher refractive index. 
The refractive index determines the extent to which light is bent (refracted) as it enters a 
particular substance obliquely.
Ringwulst: The annular pad - thickened tissue around the equator of the lens of lizards. Absent in 
snakes, it plays a role in lens-deformation based accommodation.
Scleral ossicles: a ring of thin, typically overlapping bones that develop within the sclera (the 
outermost part of the eyeball). Absent in snakes but present in most lizards, where they likely 
have a role in accommodation. Scleral ossicles are also absent in other major vertebrate 
lineages that are thought to have adapted to low-light environments in their evolutionary history, 
such as amphisbaenians, crocodilians, and mammals.
Spectacle: See Brille.
Spectral tuning: Variation in the wavelength of peak absorbance of a visual pigment, as 
determined largely by the type of chromophore and the amino-acid residues of the opsin, 
especially at influential ‘tuning sites’.
Summation: Relationship among photoreceptor and bipolar and ganglion cells in the retina. High 
summation occurs when large numbers of photoreceptors converge on fewer bipolar cells that 
transfer signals to ganglion cells; this increases sensitivity but reduces acuity. Lowest (zero) 
summation occurs when a single photoreceptor contacts a single ganglion cell via a single 
bipolar cell.
Transcriptome: The set of RNA produced by transcription of DNA within a particular cell, organ, 
organism, or tissue type, such as eyes.
Transmission: The amount of light that passes through a substance or structure, such as 
components of the ocular media.
Transmittance: The amount of light absorbed, scattered, or reflected by a substance or structure.
Two-tiered retina: In some vertebrates, photoreceptors change length in relation to changes in 
ambient light via elongation and contraction of the myoid part of their inner segment. In these 
taxa, the photoreceptor layer of the retina is periodically notably ‘two-tiered’ - the outer parts of 
rods are scleral to those of cones under higher intensity light and vice versa under lower light. 
Some snakes might have permanently two-tiered retinas because only the latter condition has 
been observed, and because rods and cones of snakes are not known to undergo such 
photomechanical (retinomotor) movement.
UVA: Long-wavelength ultraviolet light of wavelengths between 315 and 400 nm.
ultrastructure also play a role. The regeneration of rod visual pigments occurs in the retinal 
pigment epithelium. For cone visual pigments, Muller glial cells are also involved. Excellent 
summaries and reviews of vertebrate photoreceptors, phototransduction and visual cycles 
are available (e.g., [15-18]).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 321
Ancestrally, vertebrates had five visual-opsin genes, rh1, rh2, sws1, sws2, and lws and 
these underwent various independent episodes of loss and duplication in multiple lineages 
(for review see [19]). Of these, four typically occur in cones (rh2, sws1, sws2, lws) and one in 
rods (rh1). The ancestral squamate retained the five ancestral vertebrate visual-opsin genes, 
with rh2 and sws2 being lost along the snake phylogenetic stem (e.g., [6, 19-21]).
15.4 Lines of Evidence
15.4.1 The Disparate Morphology of the Snake Visual System
The eyes (and eye adnexae) of extant snakes are highly distinctive compared to other 
vertebrates, and even to other squamate reptiles [2, 4, 22-26]. Notable differences between 
the eyes of lizards and snakes are summarised in Table 15.1 and Figure 15.2. There are 
additional detailed differences. For example, snake double cones differ from those of lizards 
(Fig. 15.3) in having a peripheral cell paranuclear body and a Muller cell that intervenes 
between the members of the double cell, and snake double and some single cones also 
have ellipsoids with refringent bodies, which are absent in lizards [2, 22-24].
The highly distinctive nature of the snake eye and adnexae have been used to infer the 
ecological origins of snakes. Walls [22] argued for a nocturnal ancestry in contrast to the 
largely diurnal lizards. Walls [2, 33] (see also [3, 27]) subsequently hypothesized a fossorial 
ancestry. Underwood [24, 25, 28] modified this, proposing an initial nocturnal phase 
followed soon after by fossoriality. In contrast, Caprette et al. [4] applied a morphological 
phylogenetics approach and interpreted their results as indicating that snake visual systems 
are more similar to those of aquatic rather than fossorial terrestrial vertebrates. A thorough 
reassessment is beyond the scope of this chapter, but we note that Caprette et al.’s results 
are not unambiguous. They found snake eyes to be most similar to those of caecilian 
amphibians, a group that Caprette et al. consider ‘primitively aquatic’, but which plesio- 
morphically were likely terrestrial and fossorial as adults, because the few extant caecilian 
species that have aquatic adults are deeply phylogenetically nested, far from the root of the 
caecilian tree (e.g., [29, 30]).
Other aspects of the visual system differing between typical snakes and lizards have been 
interpreted as consistent with hypotheses of a dim-light environment origin of snakes. 
Superficial neural layers in the optic tectum of the brain of snakes are reduced, with similar 
conditions in lizards reported only among lineages of typically fossorial, limb-reduced or 
limbless and small-eyed taxa, though snakes also have unique structural peculiarities [31­
34]. Brain anatomy and function is understudied in snakes (Chapter 14).
15.4.2 Ocular-Media Anatomy, Transmittance, and Refractive Index
The ocular media of snakes are (from the retina outwards) the vitreous humour, lens, 
aqueous humour, cornea, tissue or fluid in the intraconjuctival space between the cornea 
and the spectacle, and typically the spectacle (= Brille) [2, 26]. The latter is a specialized 
scale overlying the eye in most snakes, and so it and the space between it and cornea might 
more accurately be termed extraocular media. All snakes lack moveable eyelids. Some
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

322 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Table 15.1. Some differences in morphology between the eye (and eye adnexae) ofa typical lizard and 
a typical snake, based primarily on [1, 2, 22, 23, 25, 27, 35, 136-139].
Typical lizard
Typical snake
Eyelids & nictitating membrane
present
absent
Spectacle (Brille)
absent
present
Eyeball
oblate
subspherical
Sclera
chondrified
fibrous
Scleral ossicles
present
absent
Ciliary muscle
present
absent
Conjunctival drainage
two canaliculi
single canaliculus
Retractor bulbi & bursalis muscles
present
absent
Optic nerve
with septa
without septa
Lens
oblate, soft, with Ringwulst
spherical, firm, no Ringwulst
Accommodation mode
lens deformation
lens displacement
Lens pigments
absent
sometimes present
Fovea
present
absent
Retinal photoreceptor morphology
simplex
duplex
Photoreceptor oil droplets
present
absent
Contractile myoids
present
absent
Paraboloids
present
absent
Cone ellipsoids
non-refringent
refringent in some cones
Double cone accessory member
without paranuclear body
with paranuclear body
Retinal circulation
ectodermal conus
mesodermal conus
highly fossorial snakes (e.g., scolecophidians, Anilius, some uropeltoids) lack spectacles, 
their eyes instead lying beneath head scales that may or may not bulge above the surface of 
the adjacent scale(s) (e.g., [27]). Spectacles have played an important role in inferences 
about snake origins because in non-snake squamates they are restricted to fossorial taxa or 
to nocturnal taxa whose eyes are generally close to the substrate [35].
Vertebrate corneas and humours are typically highly transmissive from the infrared to 
ca. 300 nm (e.g., [36]), but some lenses contain pigments that prevent shorter-wavelength 
light reaching the retina. As far as we are aware, transmission data for snake corneas have
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 323
Figure 15.2 Differences between the eyes of typical lizards (A, C) and snakes (B, D), (redrawn from 
[4]; based on [23]). Lower pair of images show method of accommodation: lizards focus by deforming 
the lens via contraction of ciliary body muscles (bm, cm); snakes focus by moving their hard lens 
using changes in vitreous pressure controlled by contraction of iris muscles (im) (though see 
§ 15.4.2). Abbreviations: ap, annular pad (Ringwulst); bm, BrUcke’s ciliary muscle; cb, ciliary body; 
ch, choroid; cm, Crompton’s ciliary muscle; co, cornea; cp, conus papiliaris; el, eyelid; fo, fovea; ids, 
iris dilator and sphincter muscles; im, iris muscle; le, lens; sc, scleral cartilage; sf, sclera (fibrous); so, 
scleral ossicle; re, retina; rv, retinal blood vessels; sp, spectacle (Brille); ss, subspectacular space; vi, 
vitreous; zf, zonular fibres. See Supplementary Appendix 15.S1 for colour version.
been published only by Hart et al. [37], while spectacle and lens transmission data have 
been published for tens of species in multiple studies [38-42]. Spectacles and corneas are 
typically transmissive to wavelengths >350 nm, although there is some taxonomic variation 
in the former within the 350-400 nm range, at least within Caenophidia (with considerable 
UV blocking in, for example, Naja annulifera: [42]). Variation also occurs during scale­
shedding cycles and blood flow through the spectacle [41]. Based on measurements made 
using optical coherence tomography [43-46], spectacles are thicker in fossorial and aquatic 
than arboreal and ground-dwelling snakes [45]. Corneas are thickest in diurnal and arbor­
eal snakes [46].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

324 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
(A)
os.
(B)
od
ce
nu
ae
ce
my
pb
pn
nu
my
nu
Figure 15.3 Double cone photoreceptor of (A) snake (the dipsadid colubroid Hypsirhynchus 
callilaemus) and (B) lizard (the dactyloid Anolis lineatopis) (redrawn from [1]). Abbreviations: ae, 
ellipsoid of accessory member of double cone; ce, ellipsoid of chief (principal) member of double 
cone; my, myoid; nu, nucleus; od, oil droplet; os, outer segment; pb, paraboloid; pn, paranuclear 
body. Unlabelled horizontal straight lines indicate position of outer limiting membrane of the retina.
All nocturnal snakes examined thus far have very transmissive lenses, even to UVA (315-400 
nm) (Fig. 15.4N). Some diurnal snakes have similarly transmissive lenses across a broad range 
of wavelengths, whereas others block some or all light <400 nm (Fig. 15.4N). Evidence for the 
latter is thus far restricted to caenophidians, mostly highly visual hunters, consistent with the 
hypothesis that blocking UV enhances acuity (e.g., [36]) as well as perhaps protecting retinal 
cells from damage. Data are scant but, as far as is known, snakes with UV-blocking lenses have 
visual pigments with peak sensitivities >400 nm. Lens and spectacle transmission data have 
not been published for non-caenophidian snakes other than some pythonids and boids, so 
although the assumption is that the ancestral snake had highly transmissive ocular media, this 
is open to further testing with data for more extant squamates.
The refractive index of the ocular media of snakes has been measured directly or estimated 
in only a few caenophidian species [47, 48]. Compared with lizards, the refractive index of 
snake corneas is much lower and that of snake lenses much higher. Additionally, snake 
spectacles have greater refractive power than corneas. Snakes have substantially fewer lens 
crystallin genes than other amniotes, even compared to other lineages that, like snakes, have 
lost large numbers of ancestral vertebrate visual genes [49]. These losses may be related to 
differences in lens shape and rigidity, and associated differences in method of accommoda­
tion (Table 15.1). However, the implications of these losses, potential functional adaptation 
in remaining crystallins, and the possible recruitment of new, snake-specific lens crystallins 
have yet to be studied. Such studies would be worthwhile given that lens-crystallin gene 
losses and other changes are adaptive in other vertebrates (e.g., [50, 51]). Although generally 
accepted that the snake lens is rigid and that accommodation occurs by lens displacement 
along the optical axis (e.g., [2-7]), the mechanism is not fully clear and at least some snakes 
have a lens that is deformable to some degree - prompting calls for re-evaluation [52].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 325
Figure 15.4 Example observations of snake eye anatomy and physiology. (A) Schematic section 
through snake eye (left) showing position and orientation of retinal histological section (above right) 
and scanning electron (SE) micrograph (below right) images of natricid colubroid Thamnophis 
proximus. (B) Classical, haematoxylin and eosin-stained histological section of retina (outer or 
scleral surface at top of image) of a dipsadid colubroid. (C) Immunofluorescence labelling of
Spilotes pullatus
Hypsiqlena torquata
Primarily Diurnal
— Malpolon monspessulanus
— Ahaetulla nasuta
— Chrysopelea ornata
—Spalerosophts diadema
Not Primarily Diurnal
—Acrochordus javanicus
—Lamprophfc olivacevs
—Bogenophis subocularis
Pantherophis guttatus
— Fehis co/nratus
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

326 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
15.4.3 Pupils
Snakes have approximately circular pupils when dilated, that close down to varying degrees 
and shapes, most often slits (mostly vertical, some horizontal) or circles. At least some 
snakes constrict pupils in response to tactile stimuli [53] and dilate in response to some
Figure 15.4 (cont.) LWS-opsin (green) and SWS1-opsin (magenta) cone outer segments, 
superimposed on a differential interference contrast view of a retinal section of a crotaline viperid. 
(D) Immunofluorescence labelling of LWS-opsin (magenta) and SWS1-opsin (green) cone outer 
segments in a retinal section of a dipsadid colubroid. (E) SEM image of outer part of the rod- 
dominated retina of a boid henophidian, labelling outer parts of inner segments of large single cone 
(large filled arrow), small single cone (large unfilled arrow), and rod (small filled arrow). (F) SE 
micrographs of retinal photoreceptors of a diurnal dipsadid colubroid, showing different types of 
cone-like photoreceptors and lack of rod-like photoreceptors; the ‘vs’ are likely to be transmuted 
(cone-like) rods (G) Transmission electron micrographs of a double cone (left) and a large and 
small single cone (the latter probably a transmuted, cone-like rod) (right) of a diurnal natricid 
colubroid. (H) Confocal image stacks of immunofluorescence labelling of LWS opsin- (green) and 
SWS1 opsin- (magenta) containing outer segments of cone populations of a crotaline (left) and 
viperine (right) viperid (rods, not identified by immunolabelling, are much more abundant in the 
E. coloratus retina). (I) Immunofluorescence images of wholemounted retinas of colubrid colubroids 
with anti-LWS opsin antibody-labelled (red) outer segments of large single and double cones 
(left image), and anti-SWS1 antibody-labelled (green) outer segments of small single cones 
(right). (J) Photomicrograph of a Nissl-stained wholemounted retina, focusing on the GCL.
(K) Wholemounted retina of a diurnal dipsadid colubroid, focused on inner segments of 
photoreceptor layer, showing predominance of double and/or large single cones with rare small and 
very small single cones (examples indicated with red and black arrows, respectively), the latter are 
likely transmuted (cone-like) rods. (L) Topographic maps showing density distribution of 
photoreceptors in a terrestrial dipsadid colubroid (above) and semiaquatic dipsadid colubroid 
(below); white dots indicate position of optic-nerve head; values are photoreceptor cells per mm2. 
(M) Absorbance spectra for three visual pigments (shown as violet/blue, black and red curves for 
SWS1, RH1 and LWS opsin-based pigments, respectively) each for a terrestrial dipsadid colubroid 
(left) and marine elapid elapoid (right), numbers above curves are peak absorbance (Amax in nm). 
(N) Spectral transmission curves for lenses of a selection of snakes showing examples of highly and 
less-transmissive lenses in not- and primarily diurnal species. Some figure parts reproduced with 
permission, as follows: A (fig. 2 of [12]), B (fig. 5 of [74]), C (fig. 7a3 of [70]), E (fig. 1B of [69]), 
F (fig. 6a of [74]), G (fig. S7 of [12]), H (fig. 8. of [70]), M (replotted from data from [39, 66]), 
N (redrawn from fig. 3 of [38]). Source: B and F Copyright © 2014, reprinted with permission from 
© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel. C and H by permission of Oxford University Press. E Reprinted with 
permission from Ellis R. Loew, Jacqueline L. Johnson, Arnold J. Sillman © Wiley, 2001, Journal of 
Experimental Zoology 290(4):359-65. Abbreviations: a, accessory member of double cone; dc, 
double cone; gc, ganglion cell body; GCL, ganglion cell layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; IS, inner 
segments of photoreceptors; lc, large single cone; ng, non-ganglion cell; olm, outer limiting 
membrane; ONL, outer nuclear layer; OPL, outer plexiform layer; OS, outer segments of 
photoreceptors (rods and cones); p, principal (chief) member of double cone; PC, photoreceptor 
outer segments; PE, pigment epithelium; sc, small single cone; SCL, sclera; vs, very small single 
cone. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, 
please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 327
emotional states [54]. Pupil constriction typically occurs in response to illumination (e.g., 
[55]) but in at least some semiaquatic snakes it occurs upon entering water [53] despite 
typically lower light intensity than in air, perhaps to increase depth of field [56]. Pupil 
dynamics are little studied in reptiles, including snakes [56].
Establishing functional implications and causes of variation in pupil shape across verte­
brates is not straightforward and there have been few quantitative, detailed comparative 
analyses (see review in [56]). Evidence has been presented that foraging mode as well as 
diel activity explains variation in constricted pupil shape, at least for elapids [57]. Perhaps 
all highly fossorial (non-caenophidian) snakes have a circular pupil even when constricted, 
but so do some (but not all) diurnal snakes (e.g., Spalerosophis diadema: DJG pers. obs.). 
Pupils are present in many scolecophidians, but are reportedly absent in some species with 
very reduced eyes (e.g., [58]). Whatever the extent to which constricted pupil shape predicts 
ecology, reconstructing pupil shape in the ancestral snake with high confidence is non­
trivial because constricted-pupil shape is unknown for many species, especially for small­
eyed non-caenophidians. Reports of pupil shape in systematic accounts are often based on 
preserved specimens or, if in life, often do not report whether pupils were dilated or 
constricted (e.g., [59, 60]). Many excellent photographs of live snakes, for example in field 
guides, seemingly do not depict strongly constricted pupils. However, as far as we are 
aware, all extant non-caenophidian snakes have either circular or vertical slit or elliptical 
pupils when constricted. Horizontal pupils and more elaborate shapes, such as the ‘key- 
hole’-shaped pupils of Ahaetulla spp., are seemingly restricted to Caenophidia and so are 
likely derived conditions for snakes.
15.4.4 Retinal Anatomy
Major contributions to understanding snake retinal anatomy were undertaken using clas­
sical histology and light microscopy [1, 2, 22, 25, 26, 61-65]. These provided evidence 
demonstrating substantial differences in anatomy between snakes and other vertebrates 
(see § 15.4.1) and exceptional diversity in the complement of photoreceptor cells within 
snakes, that contributed to the development of fossorial and/or nocturnal snake-origin 
hypotheses. According to Walls [2, 23], the ancestral snake was fossorial with a rod-only 
retina, as in extant scolecophidians, but Underwood [24, 25, 28] viewed the relatively simple 
duplex (rod and cone) retina seen in ‘henophidians’ as more likely representative of the 
ancestral snake condition, implying loss of cones in scolecophidians. Walls, Underwood 
and others (e.g., [63]) agreed that features such as double cones, transmuted photorecep­
tors, and a fovea (a specialized, cone-rich, high-acuity retinal region) are derived for snakes, 
representing retinal elaboration within Caenophidia, and this has thus far survived scrutiny 
from additional morphological, molecular and phylogenetic studies.
Histology
Classical histology (e.g., Fig. 15.4A, B) data for snakes (and observation of gecko retinas: 
e.g., [2, 22]) underpinned Walls’ Transmutation Theory, that challenged the orthodox view 
that cones and rods are fixed, divergent photoreceptor types, and proposed instead that, at 
least to some extent, cones can evolve rod-like form (and perhaps function) and vice versa.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

328 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Walls’ transition series were based on outdated views of snake phylogeny, but his 
Transmutation Theory receives compelling support from modern studies of squamate 
vision (e.g., [12, 13, 20, 66, 67]).
Classical histological studies have not always correctly identified comprehensive photo­
receptor complements. For example, comparatively rare and subtly different small cones 
were overlooked by Walls, Underwood and others in pythonids and boids (see [68, 69]) and 
in crotaline viperids (see [70]).
Immunohistochemistry
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) involves labelling proteins to visualize them in histological 
sections (e.g., Fig. 15.4C, D). This technique has been applied to the natricid Thamnophis 
[12, 49], 10 dipsadids and two colubrids [13, 14], one viperine and one crotaline viper [70], 
and the scolecophidian Anilios [21]. Each of these studies immunolabeled particular visual 
opsins using antibodies or antiserum, combined with general cone- (and sometimes also 
rod-) agglutinin labels and DAPI ‘staining’ of nuclei, while three studies [12, 13, 49] focusing 
on photoreceptor transmutation also labelled rod-specific transducin, a phototransduction 
protein. These few studies provided several important and novel insights. Transmuted, 
cone-like rods in colubroids contain RH1 visual pigments and rod-specific transducin 
[12, 13, 49]. Despite snakes having only two typical cone visual pigments (SWS1, LWS) 
multiple cone populations can be identified based on varying combinations of morphology 
and opsin gene expression [14, 70]. Diurnal and nocturnal colubroids differ not only in the 
relative proportion of rods and cones, but also in the number of layers of nuclei in the outer 
nuclear layer of the retina [14]. Each member of viper double cones may express SWS1 or 
LWS within the same retina, a condition unknown elsewhere among vertebrates [70]. At 
least some scolecophidians retain a functional lws expressed in photoreceptor outer seg­
ments, even though no morphologically cone-like photoreceptors have been found in 
scolecophidians [21].
Electron Microscopy
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) of thin sections (e.g., Fig. 15.4G) enables ultra- 
structural observations (e.g., [12, 25, 71, 72]), including the relationship between the plasma 
membranes and cell membrane of photoreceptor outer segments (separate in typical rods, 
not in typical cones), and the unique nature of snake double cones. These data support 
Underwood’s hypothesis of a duplex retina in the ancestral snake (because of the occur­
rence of typical rod- and cone-like outer segments in those retinas), and Walls’ 
Transmutation Theory (because of cone-like ultrastructure in photoreceptors that resemble 
rods at lower magnification). As far as we are aware, TEM has not yet been applied to non- 
caenophidian snakes.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of critically point dried retinas provides detailed 
images of 3D structure and arrangement of retinal layers, especially photoreceptors (e.g., 
Fig. 15.4A, E, F). These techniques have been applied to pythonid, boid and caenophidian 
snakes [12, 37, 65, 68, 69, 73, 74]. Particular success has been achieved in discovering rare 
photoreceptor types overlooked by classical histology, and being combined with 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 329
physiological and/or molecular genetic data to better understand the homology and 
evolution of photoreceptors and visual pigments. SEM investigations of scolecophidians 
and amerophidians (and more afrophidian henophidians) would likely help to more 
accurately and precisely infer the ancestral snake retina.
Retinal Wholemounts
Retinas can be examined as flattened sheets [75, 76]. Such retinal wholemounts (e.g., Fig. 
15.4H-L) can yield a variety of (electro)physiological and morphological data, such as limits 
of acuity based on cone and ganglion-cell spacing [75]. For morphology, wholemounts can 
provide information on spatial arrangements (topography) of photoreceptors and other cell 
types (e.g., Fig. 15.4L), and on retinal blind spots, and aspects of retinal circuitry (see 
below). Regions of higher neuron density (‘specializations’) occur as two main types. Visual 
streaks are elongated higher-density regions, usually disposed along the nasal-temporal 
axis. Areae centrales are concentric higher-density regions that can occur in any quadrant 
of the retina. Variation in topography is often explained by ecology with, for example, 
nasal-temporal (‘horizontal’) streaks considered to be adaptations to open environments 
dominated by a horizon, and areae centrales as adaptations to more visually complex 
environments. However, topography is explained by phylogeny as well as visual ecology 
(e.g., [77-79]).
Retinal topographic analyses are carried out by quantifying cells of wholemounts labelled 
with different markers. For example, Nissl staining labels all cell types (nonspecifically) and 
is used to identify ganglion cells, and immunolabelling can be used to visualize different 
types of neurons, including photoreceptor types (e.g., [68]; Fig. 15.4H-K). Although widely 
applied in other vertebrates, very few stereological studies of snake retinas have been 
published, for only a few species of three caenophidian families: [37, 74, 80, 81].
Three diurnal species, the natricid Thamnophis sirtalis and two dipsadid Philodryas spp., 
have relatively low densities of photoreceptors (ca. 10,000 cells mm-2) with low conver­
gence to ganglion cells (ca. 2.5:1 in the area centralis) [74, 80]. Ganglion cell populations 
were described in only four studies [37, 74, 80, 81]. A horizontal streak was documented in 
the arboreal P. olfersii, and a ventral area centralis in the ground-dwelling P. patagoniensis, 
with this difference linked potentially causally with habitat use and capacity to locate 
predators in either the same level (arboreal), or upper part of the visual field (ground­
dwelling) [74]. In three marine elapids, a horizontal streak and two areae centrales (one 
nasal and one temporal) were observed, with two species having an additional ventral 
area - this variation explained possibly by differences in habitat use and/or foraging 
behaviour [37]. In comparisons of densities and distributions of ganglion cells in 12 
dipsadids [81], diurnal species had higher densities and estimated upper visual-acuity 
limits (see § 15.4.7 and § 15.4.11 for other measures of acuity) than nocturnal species 
(ca. 9,500 cells mm-2 and 2.5 cycles degree-1 versus ca. 7,600 cells mm-2 and 1.3 cycles 
degree-1, respectively). Most diurnal species had a horizontal streak, whereas nocturnal 
species had an area centralis in various regions - a ventral area in the semi-arboreal Dipsas 
might benefit viewing aerial predators, while a dorsal area in the fossorial Atractus might 
improve spatial resolution of the lower visual field [81].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

330 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Retinal Circuitry
Circuitry is the cellular connections and signal pathways within the retina, from the 
synaptic terminals of the photoreceptors to the optic nerve. Circuitry and signal processing 
play key roles in overall visual performance. Knowledge of the morphology of snake retinal 
circuitry comes from histology and retinal wholemounts (and IHC) but data are scant. 
Beyond sparse data on ganglion-cell densities (see previous section) information on cir­
cuitry in snakes is largely restricted to photoreceptor synaptic terminals and to the relative 
thicknesses and numbers of nuclei in the retinal layers.
Typically, vertebrate rods have small, relatively simple synaptic terminals (spherules) that 
connect to one or two bipolar or horizontal-cell dendrites, and cones have larger, more 
complex synaptic terminals (pedicels) connecting to hundreds of dendrites. Underwood 
was impressed that Alligator and geckos have photoreceptors with mostly rod-like outer 
segments but cone-like pedicels [82, 83], and by his own observations of similar anatomy in 
Vipera berus [24, 25]. This led Underwood [24] to propose ‘Pedlar transformation’ and 
‘Walls transformation’ as two components of photoreceptor transmutation - namely a 
synaptic-terminal modification component and an inner- and (especially) outer-segment 
modification component. In testing hypotheses of transmutation, much greater attention 
has been paid to overall photoreceptor morphology, especially outer segments, than to 
synaptic terminals and changes in retinal circuitry.
Substantial variation in the relative thickness and numbers of nuclei in inner and outer 
layers of caenophidian snake retinas has been reported [2, 14, 22, 25, 63, 84]. Underwood 
[84] related variation to different relative abundances of oligo- and polysynaptic photo­
receptors. However, such inferences are not possible without distinguishing among various 
bipolar cell types and among bipolar and other retinal neurons [70] - research that has not 
yet been carried out for snakes. Additionally, even if variation in the ratio between inner 
and outer nuclear layers (= inner nuclear quotient of [63]) is directly correlated with 
photoreceptor synaptic-terminal morphology, linking this with visual function and ecology 
might not be straightforward (see also [22]: 903) despite Underwood’s [84] claim that high 
levels of summation (inferred by a relatively thick outer nuclear layer) are correlated with 
nocturnality. Despite this, the discovery that diurnal species have relatively much thinner 
outer nuclear layers with fewer nuclei than nocturnal species in a small sample of 
colubroids [14] is a striking result that will hopefully prompt further research. Clarifying 
retinal circuity in the major phylogenetic lineages and in taxa with a range of ecologies and 
photoreceptor complements would seem worthwhile. It should improve reconstructions of 
the ancestral snake, and assessments of the extent to which that can be used to predict 
ancestral ecology.
15.4.5 Microspectophotometry
Microspectrophotometry (MSP) can be used to measure absorbance spectra of both inert 
and photosensitive pigments. Given that snakes lack photoreceptor oil droplets (e.g., [2, 25, 
26]), application of MSP in snakes has been restricted to visual, photosensitive pigments in 
situ in the outer segments of cone and rod photoreceptors. MSP of visual pigments requires 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 331
fresh retinal tissue dissected in the dark or under dim red light from animals that have been 
‘dark adapted’ for several hours, so that pigments are in their inactivated, 11-cis-retinal 
form (see § 15.3).
The chief features of absorbance spectra of visual pigments (e.g., Fig. 15.4M) that are 
interpreted are the wavelength of peak absorbance (Amax in nm), and shape of the normal­
ized curve. The latter gives an indication of which chromophore (vitamin A1 or A2) is 
combined with the opsin protein to form the visual pigment. Sources of error include 
incorrect photoreceptor identification or curve fitting as well as noisy data. Good prepar­
ations can allow data to also be generated on cell and segment sizes. Qualitative infor­
mation can also be obtained on features such as approximate proportions of major cell 
types, and the presence of double cones, but it can be difficult to obtain precise information 
on regional variation in photoreceptor densities, and rare cell types can be overlooked.
The first MSP data for snakes were published in 1989 for two viperids, a colubrid and a 
psammophiid [85]. MSP data have subsequently been published for a handful of snake 
species: viperids, elapids, dipsadids, colubrids, the natricid Thamnophis, Python, Boa, non- 
anomalepidid scolecophidians, and Anilius [5, 12, 37, 39, 68-70, 73]. These data have been 
used to identify classes of visual pigments, chromophores and photoreceptors, clarify 
relationships between opsin amino-acid sequences and pigment Amax, and provide insights 
into photoreceptor transmutation. They have also been used to support the conclusion that 
extremely fossorial scolecophidian and aniliid snakes have only rod pigments [5], though 
this is, at least in part, questioned by genomic data [21].
15.4.6 In vitro Regeneration of Visual Pigments
In vitro regeneration of visual pigments allows opsin genes to be heterologously expressed 
in cultured cells. The opsin protein is harvested from the cells, regenerated with a chro­
mophore (typically 11-cis-retinal) and purified, resulting in a functional, light-sensitive 
visual pigment. The regenerated pigment can then be assayed spectroscopically to deter­
mine dark and light state absorbance spectra, analogously to those measurements using in 
situ MSP (see § 15.4.5), which can in turn be used to estimate Amax. Several other functional 
aspects can also be measured. Visual-pigment activation rates can be measured in the dark 
by comparing the proportion of inactivated and activated visual pigment over time or by 
using a transducin-activation assay to compare transducin activation rates in the dark 
versus the light. Properties of light-state activation can be determined using fluorescence 
spectroscopy to measure the increase in fluorescence resulting from dissociation of the 
chromophore from the pigment after activation. How visual pigments react to different 
chemicals can also be measured. For example, hydroxylamine assays can indicate the 
conformation of the chromophore binding pocket, which typically differs between rod 
(closed) and cone (open) pigments.
Visual pigments from only a few snakes have been expressed so far. The first were from 
Xenopeltis unicolor [86], for which each of the three visual pigments (LWS, SWS1, and RH1) 
was expressed and their absorbance spectra measured. They were found to have Amax 
values of 550, 361, and 497 nm, respectively, slightly lower than the in situ MSP values 
measured for LWS and RH1 in the same study (558-562 and 499 nm, respectively).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

332 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Subsequently, expressed Thamnophis proximus RH1 was found to have a highly blue- 
shifted Amax of 481 nm, and to occur in superficially cone-like photoreceptors, providing 
molecular support for Walls’ [2] photoreceptor Transmutation Theory [12]. More recently, 
all three visual pigments (LWS, SWS1, RH1) from Pituophis melanoleucus were expressed 
and, similar to T. proximus, the RH1 was highly blue-shifted (481 nm) and expressed in 
cone-like rods [13]. Additionally, P. melanoleucus RH1 reacted to hydroxylamine, similar to 
the LWS pigment and unlike the control (bovine) RH1, consistent with a more cone-like 
function of P. melanoleucus RH1 [13].
RH1 has been expressed from four different elapids: the terrestrial Sinomicrurus japoni- 
cus boettgeri; a laticaudine sea krait, Laticauda semifasciata; and two hydrophiine sea 
snakes, Emydocephalus ijimae and Hydrophis ornatus [87]. The two hydrophiine RH1s 
had more-typical vertebrate RH1 Amax values at 494 and 490 nm, respectively, whereas 
the two other species had blue-shifted spectra similar to those in colubroids, with Amax 
values of 485 and 482 nm, respectively. The longer hydrophiine RH1 absorbances were 
inferred to be derived within Elapidae, and are consistent with in situ MSP measurements 
from two other hydrophiines [37, 87]. A functional explanation for this shift is unclear and 
unlikely related to photoreceptor transmutation because Hydrophis spp. also (like the 
colubroids) appear to have ‘transmuted’, cone-like rods [37, 66]. The same study [87] also 
expressed the LWS pigment ofH. ornatus, which has a Amax of 551 nm similar to that found 
for X. unicolor, and to the MSP data for other hydrophiines. Most recently, sws1 of the 
freshwater dipsadid Helicops modestus has been expressed [88]. Helicops spp. each have 
two distinct sws1 forms ([88], see also [38]) which expressed in vitro were confirmed UV and 
violet sensitive. This finding was supported by in situ MSP of UV- and violet-sensitive cones, 
and was linked to a single amino-acid substitution (Phe86Val).
To date, in vitro protein expression has not been used to infer properties of the visual 
system of the ancestral snake but, when combined with codon-based likelihood models for 
ancestral-sequence reconstruction, offers a powerful tool that could be applied to this 
purpose once sufficient sequence data for snakes are available to facilitate robust 
ancestral-sequence reconstruction. Studies of this type have been conducted for other 
vertebrates (e.g., [89]).
15.4.7 Visual-Pigment Spectral Tuning
Spectral tuning refers to Amax of visual pigments and its relationship to chromophore type 
(vitamin A1 or A2) and opsin amino-acid sequence. Background knowledge on the 
homology and physiology of vertebrate visual pigments allows predictions of Amax from 
opsin amino-acid sequences, to varying degrees of precision and confidence (e.g., [90]). 
Predictions have been largely based on tight correlations between Amax and amino-acid 
residues at a handful of key ‘tuning’ sites within opsins, especially in and around the 
chromophore binding pocket. Predictions of Amax can be tested by in situ MSP and/or in 
vitro regeneration (§ 15.4.5- 6).
Where measured and predicted Amax values can be compared for snake visual pigments, 
predictions have been upheld to within a few nm in most cases [38, 66, 70]. These 
comparisons of Amax have been undertaken for all three visual pigments found in snakes, 
based on correlations between amino-acid sequences in other vertebrates for RH1 [90], 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 333
SWS1 [91, 92] and LWS ([93], see review [94]). However, snake species yet to be subjected to 
in situ MSP or in vitro visual-pigment regeneration have also been found with opsin tuning­
site amino acids unknown in other vertebrates - so that confident predictions of Amax for 
these are not possible (e.g., [38, 70]). Furthermore, a few Amax predictions are substantially 
different from corresponding MSP data, for example for SWS1 in the viper Agkistrodon 
contortrix (416 nm versus predicted ca. 360 nm: [70]) and for LWS in the pythonid Python 
regius (551 nm versus predicted 560 nm: [68, 86]). There is no universal consensus about 
the impacts of all tuning-site mutations (e.g., [95]), and mismatches between predicted and 
measured Amax have prompted proposals of additional, as yet undiscovered mechanisms 
and/or tuning sites (e.g., [86, 96]).
The application of spectral-tuning predictions from opsin sequences allows reconstruc­
tion of ancestral Amax values based on reconstructions of ancestral opsin-gene sequences, 
and this has been applied in some cases to snakes [38, 70]. In general, tuning-site amino 
acids are conserved in snakes, making for straightforward ancestral-state reconstructions 
[38]. The SWS1 pigment is inferred to have been ultraviolet sensitive in the ancestral snake 
and ancestral alethinophidian [38] - ultraviolet-sensitive cone pigments are often associ­
ated with activity in low-light conditions (e.g., [97]). LWS and RH1 are estimated to have 
had an Amax of ca. 555 nm and 491-496 nm in the ancestral snake and 560 nm and 491-496 
nm in the ancestral alethinophidian, respectively [38].
15.4.8 Vision-Gene DNA Sequences, Including Genomes and Transcriptomes
Despite the first sequencing of a vertebrate opsin occurring in the early 1980s [98-100], the 
first snake visual-opsin sequence data were not published until 2009 [86]. These were rh1, 
sws1 and lws for Xenopeltis unicolor and Python regius, providing evidence for the loss of 
rh2 and sws2 in the snake stem but without an ancestral reduction of the visual system to a 
rod-only retina. Subsequently, visual-opsin genes have been sequenced for tens of species 
of snakes from most major lineages [5, 6, 12, 14, 38, 39, 66, 70, 87, 101, 102].
Snake visual-opsin sequences have not, to the best of our knowledge, been generated 
from direct protein sequencing. The first snake visual-opsin gene sequences were obtained 
by PCR amplification and Sanger sequencing using vertebrate opsin-gene primers applied 
to retinal complementary DNA (cDNA) synthesized from mRNA extracted from macerated 
eyes [86]. This approach was used to generate most currently available snake visual-opsin 
gene sequence data [5, 12-14, 38, 66, 70, 87, 102]. We know of only two reports of snake 
visual-opsin gene sequences generated using PCR and Sanger sequencing from genomic 
DNA (gDNA: [12, 39]). More recently, visual-opsin sequences have been obtained by Next 
Generation Sequencing (NGS), which has also provided sequence data for other snake 
visual-system genes. The first snake-vision data obtained using NGS were generated during 
whole-genome sequencing for the King cobra Ophiophagus hannah [103] and Burmese 
python Python bivittatus [104]. In addition to other snake whole or near-complete genomes 
(e.g., [49, 105]), visual-system gene sequences for snakes have been generated by NGS 
through transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) of mRNA from eyes or retinas [6, 21] and 
from targeted capture (hybrid enrichment) from gDNA [101].
Each of these approaches has different benefits and costs (e.g., [101]). Traditional PCR 
from eye cDNA followed by Sanger sequencing is efficient, in terms of time and expense, for 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

334 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
obtaining sequences for a few genes for tens of samples, and it generates data for functional 
genes expressed in a given time and place, but it requires freshly preserved eyes and can 
provide false negatives (inferred gene loss or pseudogenization), at least for small eyes and/ 
or genes with divergent sequences for which available primers are not suitable. Eye or 
retinal RNA-Seq avoids the need for primers and produces vastly more data but is substan­
tially more expensive if there is interest in only few genes, and has the same drawbacks as 
cDNA sequencing. RNA-Seq can also provide information on gene-expression levels but 
comparison among samples requires replication and controlled sampling, due to high 
variability in expression. gDNA sequencing removes reliance on fresh tissues and can 
ameliorate potentially overlooking genes due to low or variable expression but introduces 
other challenges. Sequencing gDNA using traditional PCR and Sanger sequencing can be 
challenging and time consuming due to the presence of introns. Whole-genome sequen­
cing using NGS provides more data, but with much greater time and cost investment, and 
desired sequences may still be missed because of difficulties associated with assembly and 
the stochastic nature of sequencing. Targeted capture can be used to enrich genomes for 
sequences of interest, which can reduce costs of genome sequencing when there are a large 
number of genes and/or species of interest, but this requires considerable up-front time 
investment and existing resources (e.g., genomes or transcriptomes), to design probes for 
enrichment (capture).
NGS approaches have determined that snakes retained up to 41 of 44 phototransduction 
and visual-cycle genes likely present in the ancestral squamate [21, 49, 104]. Only the 
visual-opsin genes rh2 and sws2 and the cone and rod phototransduction gene grk1 occur 
in at least some lizards but no snakes ([21] see also [6]). In the only scolecophidians thus far 
examined using NGS (Anilios spp.) 11 visual genes likely present in the ancestral snake are 
absent, seven involved in cone phototransduction, two in cone and rod phototransduction, 
and two in the visual cycle [21]. In addition to phototransduction and visual-cycle genes, 
snakes (at least alethinophidians) have lost at least eight non-visual opsin genes (light- 
associated genes not directly involved in image-forming vision) and five lens crystallin 
genes [20, 49].
Although beyond the scope of this chapter, it is worth also considering those genes 
having other (non-visual) light-associated functions when inferring environments 
inhabited by the earliest snakes and their closest non-snake relatives. The visual genes 
and proteins likely lost along the snake stem (Fig. 15.5) are absent also in some other extant 
vertebrate lineages, many of which are hypothesized to have lost (functional copies of ) 
these genes as adaptations to low-light environments. Examples are dominated by postu­
lated fossorial and/or nocturnal ancestry, such as for crocodylians [106], xenarthran 
mammals [107], and moles and mole rats [108], but also include cetaceans, especially those 
that dive to great depths and have echolocation [109]. Snake genomes examined thus far 
(i.e., excluding scolecophidians) also lack non-vision light-associated genes lost in these 
other vertebrate lineages [110], providing further evidence that, in their immediate ancestry 
and/or early history, snakes very likely adapted to low-light environments.
Vision-gene sequence data are useful in many ways. They provide an additional line of 
evidence for homology assessments (e.g., of visual pigments), allow predictions of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 335
ancestral 
squamate
LOSSES:
- cones?
- SWS1 opsin
- 9 phototransduction 
genes
stem and/or crown 
Scolecophidia
a
+?
LOSSES:
- double cones
- oil droplets
- paraboloids
- contractile myoids?
- SWS2, RH2 opsins
- 5 lens crystallins
- lizard-like optic tectum
- grk1phototransduction gene
ancestral 
snake
ancestral 
alethinophidian
Acrochordidae
Xenodermidae
Pareidae
iii
iv
a
b c
ancestral 
caenophidian
GAINS:
+ refringent cones
+ double cones
+ transmuted rods or cones
+ fovea
+ horizontal pupils
+ two-tiered retinas
+ pigmented lenses
+ opsin gene duplication and/or 
allelic polymorphism
vii
viii
ix
abcd
efgh
Figure 15.5 Summary of inferred evolutionary events in snake vision plotted onto a phylogeny (see 
Fig. 15.1). Cartoon photoreceptors show main rod and cone types found in major lineages: a = rod, 
b = large single cone, c = small single cone, d = large single refringent cone, e = double refringent cone, 
f = transmuted, rod-like cone, g = transmuted, rod-like double cone, h = transmuted, cone-like rod. 
Other photoreceptor types in Endoglyptodonta that might be recognized (e.g., those with elongated 
myoids in two-tiered retinas) are not shown. The precise branch on which changes occurred is not 
always clear; for example, a spectacle (not listed here) might have been acquired in stem snakes and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

336 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
physiology (see § 15.4.7), and enable insights into adaptive processes such as gene loss, 
duplication and expression, and alternative functional pathways that evolved to maintain 
visual requirements in different environmental, ontogenetic and evolutionary contexts. 
They also allow quantitative tests of selection (see § 15.4.9). For snake vision, sequence 
data have provided crucial evidence that the ancestral snake likely had a duplex retina with 
three visual opsins, retaining most of the genomic machinery for vision that is present in 
lizards (e.g., [6, 21]), that photoreceptor transmutation has occurred within snakes and 
results in changes in photoreceptor physiology as well as morphology [12, 13, 66], and that 
selective-pressure regimes differed in the evolution of visual (especially cone­
phototransduction) genes in lineages with transmuted photoreceptors [6].
15.4.9 Selection Tests for Inferring Molecular Genetic Evolution
Selection tests are useful for investigating molecular evolution of protein-coding genes, 
including those involved in vision. These tests use codon models of sequence evolution to 
infer selective pressures on genes by estimating nonsynonymous and synonymous substi­
tution rates, dN and dS, respectively [111]. A ratio of those rates, denoted w (= dN/dS), 
of < 1 indicates a conserved protein sequence, under purifying or negative selection. An 
w » 1 indicates neutral evolution, whereas if changes to the amino-acid sequence are 
advantageous and being favoured then w >1, indicating positive selection. Software pack­
ages implementing codon models of molecular evolution offer various models and selec­
tion tests [112, 113]. Many selection tests focus on detecting positive selection due to the 
potentially straightforward link between protein function and particular amino-acid substi­
tutions [111]. Other useful selection tests include those for relaxed selective constraint (e.g., 
RELAX; [114]), which can indicate changes in the functional importance of genes and, more 
generally, those that test for shifts in selective pressures among lineages (e.g., clade models; 
[115]). These models are useful in testing for long-term shifts in selection pressure associ­
ated with changes in ecology and function (e.g., [116, 117]).
Most applications of these methods to snake vision evolution have focused on visual­
opsin genes because effects of amino-acid substitutions on pigment function are compara­
tively well understood and can, in some cases, be further tested by in vitro expression and 
MSP [5, 12-14, 38, 39, 66, 70, 87, 88]. These studies have found that selective pressures on 
snake visual pigments vary considerably among lineages, with many instances of positive 
selection and shifts in selective pressure associated with different ecological traits, activity 
patterns, and habitats that suggest functional adaptation to different light environments. 
More recently, efforts have begun to study changes in selective pressure, and their
Figure 15.5 (cont.) been lost in scolecophidians and some henophidians, or might have arisen in 
stem or later alethinophidians. Note also that scolecophidians might be paraphyletic. Representative 
taxa of major lineages depicted in circles (photographers in parentheses): i = Indotyphlops sp. 
(Mendis Wickramasinghe), ii = Anilius scytale and iii = Corallus hortulanus (both: Gabriela 
Bittencourt), iv = Acrochordus javanicus (David Gower), v = Chrysopelea taprobanica, vi = Ahaetulla 
perroteti and vii = Trimeresurus macrolepis (all three: V. Deepak), viii = Leptodeira annulata and ix = 
Lycognathophis seychellensis (both: David Gower). See Supplementary Appendix 15.S1 for 
colour version.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 337
functional implications, in other vision genes and their proteins that function downstream 
of visual pigments [6, 20, 67], as well as the non-visual opsin, melanopsin [9].
One study [6] applied selection tests to address snake origins by testing Walls’ [2] 
hypothesis that the visual system underwent substantial degeneration during snakes’ 
fossorial ancestry. Profound degeneration predicts relaxed selective constraint in stem 
snakes, but no evidence for this was found in analyses of opsin and phototransduction 
genes of alethinophidian snakes and other reptiles [6]. Instead, patterns of selection were 
more consistent with a dim-light (e.g., nocturnal) origin of snakes that did not involve 
profound fossoriality [6].
15.4.10 Electrophysiology
Electroretinography measures the sum of electrical responses of retinal cells extracellularly, 
usually from the cornea. As far aswe are aware, there have been only three published reports of 
electroretinography applied to snakes. Jacobs et al. [118] aimed to detect retinal visual pigments 
in Thamnophis spp., but found only one of the three subsequently discovered by MSP and 
molecular genetic sequencing (though better results were obtained by increasing stimulus 
intensity, see [73]: 99). Elliot et al. [119] and Glickman et al. [120] used electroretinography to 
assess response to laser eye injuries in Elaphe, and provided data on acuity (ca. 1 cycle 
degree-1). Baker et al. [121] considered acuity in Nerodia (ca. 5 cycles degree-1) to be ‘good 
for a small eye’, approximately the equal of domestic cats, and approximately 20/120 in US 
human clinical terms. Although it has barely been applied to snakes, there is potential for 
electroretinography to explore aspects of snake vision, including tests of purported rod mono- 
chromats, that could provide insight into the visual biology of the earliest snakes. We know of no 
studies of intracellular electrophysiological activity of individual retinal cell types for snakes.
15.4.11 Behaviour
Although anatomy, molecular genetics and physiology can be used to make inferences about 
traits such as colour vision and acuity, verification requires behavioural experimentation. For 
example, multipigment retinas might be adaptations to increasing sensitivity and/or contrast 
rather than to polychromacy [122]. There have been few behavioural studies of snake vision, 
and seemingly none testing for colour vision. In perhaps the only study of its kind published 
thus far, Rumpff [123] quantified visual acuity in ten species of Indian snakes by optomotor 
response. Other acuity data for snakes have been derived not from behavioural experiments 
but from stereology (see § 15.4.4) or electrophysiology (see § 15.4.10). Many snakes feed on 
relatively large meals infrequently, making them challenging subjects for classical condition­
ing experiments of colour perception, brightness discrimination, or acuity. Little is known 
about learning abilities in snakes [124] but a few studies suggest there is potential in this 
direction. In Thamnophis sirtalis, learning of chemosensory stimuli of noxious food was 
enhanced by offering food with black and yellow versus green forceps [125], though it is 
unclear whether this is explained by shade and/or colour discrimination. Juvenile 
Agkistrodon piscivorus were successfully trained to locate food indicated by a visible red 
card [126], but it is unclear whether the stimulus was the card, its colour and/or its brightness.
The importance of vision to snakes, compared to other sensory systems, has largely not 
been assessed experimentally. Blindfolded Notechis scutatus (Elapidae) struggle to capture 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

338 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
mobile prey in laboratory conditions, and those naturally blinded by seabirds are able to 
feed, grow and reproduce successfully without sight only by feeding on abundant and 
largely immobile seabird chicks [127]. Experimental deprivation of eyes and/or infrared 
sensing pits in pythonids and boids found that both senses contribute to effective striking at 
mice, though vision may be the dominant imaging system [128].
15.4.12 Phylogenetics and Ancestral-State Estimation
In the absence of exceptionally-preserved fossil evidence of direct ancestors, ancestral-state 
estimation relies on having phylogenetic hypotheses and knowledge of trait conditions in 
terminal taxa. Thus, evolving (hopefully improving) understanding of squamate phyloge­
netics might require reassessments of previous ancestral estimates. Two prominent 
examples in the snake-origins literature are fossoriality and macrostomy. Previously, it 
was simple to infer fossoriality and non-macrostomy for the ancestral snake given the 
understanding that fossorial, narrow-gaped scolecophidians, aniliids and uropeltoids were 
together paraphyletic and lying outside a clade that includes all extant macrostomatan 
snakes (e.g., [129]). However, since Wilcox et al.’s [130] landmark paper, molecular 
phylogenetics has found increasingly strong evidence that aniliids and the non-fossorial, 
macrostomatan tropidophiids comprise a clade (Amerophidia; see Fig. 15.1) lying outside 
all other extant alethinophidians (Afrophidia: uropeltoids and macrostomatan pythonoids, 
booids and caenophidians; see Fig. 15.1). As a result, evidence for a fossorial, narrow-gape 
snake ancestor was eroded, and these traits in aniliids and uropeltoids became viewed as 
apo- rather than plesiomorphies, with these taxa potentially representing ‘regressed macro­
stomatans’ (see [131]). Even more recently, molecular phylogenetics has also found evi­
dence for the paraphyly of scolecophidians (see Chapter 10), and this has renewed support 
for a highly fossorial, narrow-gape ancestral snake with reduced eyes [7].
Shifting views of squamate phylogeny have long had an impact on evolutionary inter­
pretations of the snake eye. Walls [132] initially considered caenophidians with ‘all-cone’ 
retinas (now known to include cone-like rods) to be derived from duplex ancestors. 
Subsequently [2, 22, 23] he adopted the view, seemingly persuaded by herpetologists of 
the day, that aglyphous colubroids were shallowly phylogenetically nested within 
Caenophidia, and that the plesiomorphic caenophidian condition was an ‘all-cone’ retina 
such as he found in many colubroids - so that all ‘rods’ observed elsewhere within 
Caenophidia were instead transmuted cones. Fortunately, Walls nonetheless recognized 
that the duplex retina of boids and pythonids was more similar to the likely plesiomorphic 
snake condition, and instances of possible photoreceptor transmutation in caenophidians 
proved widespread enough that the main component of his Transmutation Theory was not 
buried and forgotten as understanding of snake phylogeny improved.
Thus far, ancestral states of snake visual-system phenotypic and genotypic traits have 
been inferred by parsimony, Maximum Likelihood, and Bayesian approaches (e.g., [7, 38, 
39, 70]). Estimation of ancestral phenotypes has been carried out using discrete rather than 
continuous characters. Although not performed using formal analyses, the presence or 
absence of functional copies of visual-opsin genes along internal phylogenetic branches has 
been conducted with the assumption that loss of (functional) opsin genes from the genome 
is irreversible (e.g., [5, 6, 21]).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 339
15.4.13 Palaeontology
Addressing the ecological (rather than only the phylogenetic) origins and early evolution of 
snakes requires consideration of long-extinct ancestors for which we probably lack (and 
might never have) direct evidence in the fossil record. Nonetheless, fossils provide the only 
direct evidence of extinct phenotypes, including combinations of features not necessarily 
present in extant taxa. Including extinct taxa in phylogenetic analyses often alters, and can 
improve, estimates of relationships of extant taxa (e.g., [133]). Additionally, the fossil and 
rock records provide information on palaeoenvironments, and evidence of particular 
phenotypes in particular locations in time and space (e.g., Head et al., Chapter 4).
The majority of the snake fossil record does not include cranial remains (Chapters 3 
and 4). Greater representation of (particularly articulated) crania occurs in marine 
Konservat-Lagerstatten than fossorial or other terrestrial habitat deposits. The majority of 
fossorial non-caenophidian snake species alive today burrow in moist tropical soils, and so 
their cranial remains are unlikely to be well fossilized. Extant fossorial snakes are typically 
relatively small, which likely further reduced the chance of preservation and future discov­
ery of fossils of similar snakes.
In the absence of exceptional preservation including soft tissues and/or DNA, there is a 
lack of information on the visual systems of extinct snakes. Additionally, orbital bones have 
been reduced or lost in multiple clades [134], limiting the ability to estimate eye sizes, with 
some exceptions (Chapter 14). Conversely, snake braincases and vomeronasal chambers are 
generally well ossified, potentially providing osteological correlates of the visual and other 
sensory systems in fossils (Chapters 13 and 14). Better understanding of the visual ability and 
ecology of extant snakes and bony correlates of their visual-system soft tissues will aid 
palaeobiological research, and the formulation and testing of snake-origin hypotheses.
15.5 The Visual System of the Ancestral and Other 
Early Snakes
Given their phylogenetic result of scolecophidian paraphyly and their ancestral-state 
estimations, Miralles et al. [7] proposed a highly fossorial, scolecophidian-like ancestral 
snake with substantially reduced eyes lacking cones, consistent with Walls’ [2, 23] hypothesis 
(see also [135]). In contrast, consideration of functional visual-gene complements, and a lack 
of evidence for relaxed selective constraint in phototransduction genes in stem snakes, led 
others to argue that the eyes of the ancestral snake were not as reduced as those known in any 
extant scolecophidian, instead retaining typical vertebrate cones and cone­
phototransduction and visual-cycle genes [5, 6, 21, 49]. Some of the visual gene-based 
arguments imply or explicitly acknowledge the assumption that re-evolution of lost genes 
is much more unlikely than morphological re-elaboration of many aspects of the eye and 
retina (e.g., [21]). We find it compelling that alethinophidian snakes have not only cones and 
rods and three visual opsin genes homologous with those of other vertebrates, but also have 
substantial genetic components of cone phototransduction and the visual cycle found in 
other vertebrates [6, 21, 67, 101]. Re-elaboration of the alethinophidian visual system from a
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

340 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
highly reduced ancestral-snake condition, as envisaged by Walls [2, 23], would be expected to 
be accompanied by substantially modified retinal-protein networks with novel components, 
of which there is no evidence in extant snakes. Thus, the reduced visual-system genotype as 
well as phenotype of extant scolecophidians studied thus far (which lack nearly 60 per cent of 
the cone phototransduction genes present in alethinophidians and other squamates: [21]) 
are much more plausibly interpreted as derived rather than plesiomorphic conditions for 
snakes - and these apomorphic reductions occurred at least twice if scolecophidians are 
paraphyletic. However, Miralles et al.’s [7] hypothesis of a scolecophidian-like ancestral 
snake can still find support if some other extant scolecophidians are found to plesiomorphi- 
cally retain more of the components of the visual system found in extant alethinophidians.
A summary of inferred evolutionary changes in some snake vision characters is provided 
in Figure 15.5. Limitations of this summary include sparse data for terminal taxa and 
lingering uncertainty about some phylogenetic relationships (Chapter 10). However, there 
is good evidence that the ancestral snake had a less-developed visual system than extant 
diurnal lizards, but retained three visual opsins (RH1, SWS1, LWS) and cones as well as 
rods. The ancestral alethinophidian (and possibly the ancestral snake) likely had a spectacle 
covering the eye, a highly transmissive lens, and a UV-sensitive visual pigment. The eyes of 
extant scolecophidians are clearly derived in many ways, and it is not yet fully clear which 
of their features might be plesiomorphic for snakes. Among extant taxa, the eyes of 
henophidians and non-endoglyptodont caenophidians are probably most similar to those 
of the ancestral snake, having a duplex retina with single cones but dominated by rods.
Although the visual system of the ancestral snake was simpler than that of typical extant 
lizards, those of many endoglyptodont caenophidians are derived in diverse ways. Too few 
taxa have been sampled thus far to establish precisely where within the caenophidian tree 
these features were acquired, but Endoglyptodonta includes the only snakes (and for some 
features the only vertebrates) known to have, for example, refringent cones, rod and cone 
photoreceptor transmutation, pigmented lenses, permanently two-tiered retinas (see e.g., 
[70]), horizontal pupils, foveas, double cones with both members expressing sws1, SWS1 
polymorphism, and possibly visual gene duplication. These features do not provide much 
in the way of evidence for snake origins, but clarifying the ancestral snake genotype and 
phenotype is important for understanding the origin of these novelties, and the extent to 
which the diversity and distinctiveness of caenophidian eyes can be explained by the 
simplified Bauplan of the ancestral snake eye.
15.6 Future Directions and Prospects
The hypothesis that we believe is currently best supported, that the ancestral snake had a 
visual system adapted to dim-light but perhaps not to extreme fossoriality of the sort seen in 
extant scolecophidians, can be tested further by generating additional, and more detailed, 
data on more extant scolecophidians and henophidians, especially amerophidians and 
uropeltoids. Some of these additional data can simply come from conducting similar 
investigations to those that have already been performed for a few species, but newer 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 341
approaches, such as single-cell transcriptomics, and studies of aspects of snake eyes and 
vision that have barely been studied thus far, such as eye development (not covered in this 
article) and retinal circuitry, and visual aspects of behaviour, will likely all yield useful 
information. Increasing availability of genomic resources, especially for non- 
endoglyptodonts, will provide a valuable resource for understanding the origin, early 
evolution, and function of snake eyes and vision. Closer attention could be paid in future 
to ways that visual-system traits might allow discrimination among inferring highly fossorial 
versus nocturnal and other dim-light ancestral ecologies. Other aspects for future study 
include the early evolution of vision-related traits in snakes within the context of other 
senses, especially their greatly expanded olfactory system.
Though less likely to inform the question of snake ancestry, there are many worthwhile 
research programmes to undertake on eyes and vision in caenophidian snakes. These 
include testing the hypothesis of the non-homology of snake and lizard double cones, 
investigating the transmutation of cones to cone-like rods (only the reverse of this has been 
studied in detail thus far, for a couple of species), and the origin and function of two-tiered 
retinas. The exceptional disparity and diversity of caenophidian eyes offers the opportunity 
to learn more about the function and evolvability of vertebrate vision.
Although snake eye and vision research has already contributed much in the way of 
evidence and ideas to snake-origins research, we believe it still has lots more to offer. The 
phenotypes and genotypes of only a few extant species have been studied, particularly for 
those key lineages that will have greatest impact on inferring ancestral-snake traits.
Acknowledgements
We thank Colin McCarthy for sharing an unpublished G.L. Underwood manuscript (A survey 
of snake retinas, with systematic implications - presented as a poster at the 2002 Joint Meeting 
of Ichthyologists and Herpetologists) that drew attention to Walls’ shifting ideas of evolution 
of the snake eye mentioned in § 15.4.12. Mendis Wickramasinghe, Gabriela Bittencourt and 
Deepak Veerappan are thanked for providing images of snakes used in Figure 15.5. This 
chapter was improved by constructive reviews of the submitted manuscript by Ron Douglas 
and Jeff Streicher, and helpful suggestions from Nihar Bhattacharyya, David Cundall and 
Jason Head. DJG thanks his coauthors plus Jim Bowmaker, Belinda Chang, Ron Douglas, 
Nathan Hart, David Hunt, Ellis Loew, Julian Partridge, Leo Peichl and Hans-Joachim Wagner 
for patiently helping him to learn about vertebrate vision.
References
1. G. Underwood, A Contribution to the 
Classification of Snakes (London: British 
Museum (Natural History), 1967).
2. G. L. Walls, The Vertebrate Eye and Its 
Adaptive Radiation (Bloomfield Hills, MI: 
Cranbrook Institute of Science, 1942).
3. A. D’A. Bellairs and G. Underwood, The 
origin of Snakes. Biological Reviews, 26 
(1951), 193-237.
4. C. L. Caprette, M. S. Y. Lee, R. Shine, 
A. Mokany, and J. F. Downhower, The 
origin of snakes (Serpentes) as seen 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

342 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
through eye anatomy. Biological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 81 (2004), 469-482.
5. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, C. Jared, et al., 
Visual system evolution and the nature of 
the ancestral snake. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 28 (2015), 1309-1320.
6. R. K. Schott, A. Van Nynatten, D. C. Card, 
T. A. Castoe, and B. S. W. Change, Shifts in 
selective pressures on snake 
phototransduction genes associated with 
photoreceptor transmutation and dim-light 
ancestry. Molecular Biology and Evolution, 
35 (2018), 1376-1389.
7. A. Miralles, J. Marin, D. Markus, et al., 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
8. H. Zaher, F. G. Grazziotin, J. E. Cadle, et al., 
Molecular phylogeny of advanced snakes 
(Serpentes, Caenophidia) with an 
emphasis on South American 
xenodontines: a revised classification and 
descriptions of new taxa. Pap6is Avulsos de 
Zoologia, 49 (2009), 115-153.
9. E. Hauzman, V. Kalava, D. M. O. Bonci, and 
D. F. Ventura, Characterization of the 
melanopsin gene (Opn4x) of diurnal and 
nocturnal snakes. BMC Evolutionary 
Biology, 19 (2019), 174.
10. M. L. Aranda and T. M. Schmidt, Diversity 
of intrinsically photosensitive retinal 
ganglion cells: circuits and functions.
Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences, 78 
(2021), 889-907.
11. N. M. Diaz, L. P. Morera, and M. E. Guido, 
Melanopsin and the non-visual 
photochemistry in the inner retina of 
vertebrates. Photochemistry and 
Photobiology, 92 (2016), 29-44.
12. R. K. Schott, J. MUller, C. G. Y. Yang, et al., 
Evolutionary transformation of rod 
photoreceptors in the all-cone retina of a 
diurnal garter snake. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 113 
(2016), 356-361.
13. N. Bhattacharyya, B. Darren, R. K. Schott, 
V. Tropepe, and B. S. W. Chang, Cone-like 
rhodopsin expressed in the all-cone retina 
of the colubrid pine snake as a potential 
adaptation to diurnality. Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 220 (2017), 
2418-2425.
14. E. Hauzman, D. M. O. Bonci, E. Y. Suarez- 
Villota, M. Neitz, and D. F. Ventura, Daily 
activity patterns influence retinal 
morphology, signatures of selection, and 
spectral tuning of opsin genes in colubrid 
snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 17 
(2017), 249-263.
15. T. D. Lamb, Evolution of phototransduction, 
vertebrate photoreceptors and retina. 
Progress in Retinal and Eye Research, 36 
(2013), 52-119.
16. K. Palczewski and P. D. Kiser, Shedding 
new light on the generation of the visual 
chromophore. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 117 (2020), 
19629-19638.
17. E. H. Choi, A. Daruwalla, S. Suh, 
H. Leinonen, and K. Palczewski, 
Retinoids in the visual cycle: role of the 
retinal G protein-coupled receptor. 
Journal of Lipid Research, 62 (2020), 
100040.
18. A. Morshedian, J. J. Kaylor, S. Y. Ng, et al., 
Light-driven regeneration of cone visual 
pigments through a mechanism involving 
RGR opsin in MUller glial cells. Neuron, 102 
(2019), 1172-1183.
19. W. I. L. Davies, S. P. Collin, and D. M. Hunt, 
Molecular ecology and adaptation of visual 
photopigments in craniates. Molecular 
Ecology, 21 (2012), 3121-3158.
20. N. J. Gemmell, K. Rutherford, S. Prost, 
et al., The tuatara genome reveals ancient 
features of amniote evolution. Nature, 584 
(2020), 403-409.
21. D. J. Gower, J. F. Fleming, D. Pisani, et al, 
Eye-transcriptome and genome-wide 
sequencing for Scolecophidia: implications 
for inferring the visual system of the 
ancestral snake. Genome Biology and 
Evolution, 13(2021), evab253.
22. G. L. Walls, The reptilian retina: I. A new 
concept of visual-cell evolution. American
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 343
Journal of Ophthalmology, 17 (1934), 
892-915.
23. G. L. Walls, Ophthalmological implications 
for the early history of the Snakes. Copeia, 1 
(1940), 1-8.
24. G. Underwood, Some suggestions 
concerning vertebrate visual cells. Vision 
Research, 8 (1968), 483-488.
25. G. Underwood, The eye. In C. Gans, 
T. S. Parson, eds., Biology of the Reptilia, 
Morphology B. (New York: Academic Press, 
1970), pp. 1-97.
26. A. Rochon-Duvigneaud, Les yeux et la 
vision des vert6br6s (Paris: Masson, 1943).
27. B. C. Mahendra, Some remarks on the 
phylogeny of the Ophidia. Anatomischer 
Anzeiger, 86 (1938), 347-356.
28. G. Underwood, On lizards of the family 
Pygopodidae. A contribution to the 
morphology and phylogeny of the 
Squamata. Journal of Morphology, 100 
(1957), 207-268.
29. M. Wilkinson, D. S. Mauro, E. Sherratt, and 
D. J. Gower, A nine-family classification of 
caecilians (Amphibia: Gymnophiona). 
Zootaxa, 64 (2011), 41-64.
30. D. San Mauro, D. J. Gower, H. MUller, et al., 
Life-history evolution and mitogenomic 
phylogeny of caecilian amphibians.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 73 
(2014), 177-189.
31. D. G. Senn, Uber das optische System im 
Gehirn squamater Reptilien; eine 
vergleichendmorphologische 
Untersuchung, unter besonderer 
Berucksichtigung einiger Wuhlschlangen. 
Acta Anatomica, 65 (1966), 1-87.
32. W. Stingelin and D. G. Senn, Morphological 
studies on the brain of Sauropsida. Annals 
of the New York Academy of Sciences, 167 
(1969), 156-163.
33. D. G. Senn and R. G. Northcutt, The 
forebrain and midbrain of some squamates 
and their bearing on the origin of snakes. 
Journal of Morphology, 140 (1973), 
135-151.
34. J. Reperant, J. P. Rio, R. Ward, et al., 
Comparative analysis of the primary visual 
system of reptiles. In C. Gans and 
S. Ulinski, eds., Biology of the Reptilia, 
Vol. 17 (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1992), pp. 175-240
35. G. L. Walls, The significance of the reptilian 
‘spectacle’. American Journal of 
Ophthalmology, 17 (1934), 1045-1047.
36. R. H. Douglas and G. Jeffery, The spectral 
transmission of ocular media suggests 
ultraviolet sensitivity is widespread 
among mammals. Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 281 (2014), 
20132995.
37. N. S. Hart, J. P. Coimbra, S. P. Collin, and 
G. Westhoff, Photoreceptor types, visual 
pigments, and topographic specializations 
in the retinas of hydrophiid sea snakes. 
Journal of Comparative Neurology, 520 
(2012), 1246-1261.
38. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, R. H. Douglas, 
et al., Visual pigments, ocular filters and the 
evolution of snake vision. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution, 33 (2016), 
2483-2495.
39. B. F. Simoes, D. J. Gower, A. R. Rasmussen, 
et al., Spectral diversification and trans­
species allelic polymorphism during the 
land-to-sea transition in snakes. Current 
Biology, 30 (2020), 2608-2615.
40. R. H. Douglas and N. J. Marshall, A review 
of vertebrate and invertebrate ocular filters. 
In S. N. Archer, M. B. A. Djamgoz, 
E. R. Loew, J. C. Partridge, and S. Vallerga, 
eds., Adaptive Mechanisms in the Ecology of 
Vision (The Netherlands: Springer, 1999), 
pp. 95-162.
41. K. Van Doorn and J. G. Sivak, Blood flow 
dynamics in the snake spectacle. Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 216 (2013), 4190-4195.
42. K. Van Doorn and J. G. Sivak, Spectral 
transmittance of the spectacle scale of 
snakes and geckos. Contributions to 
Zoology, 84 (2015), 1-12.
43. M. A. O. Da Silva, S. Heegaard, T. Wang, 
J. R. Nyengard, and M. F. Bertelsen, The 
spectacle of the ball python (Python regius): 
a morphological description. Journal of 
Morphology, 275 (2014), 489-496.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

344 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
44. H. Lauridsen, M. A. O. Da Silva, K. Hansen, 
et al., Ultrasound imaging of the anterior 
section of the eye of five different snake 
species. BMC Veterinary Research, 10 
(2014), 1-6.
45. M. A. O. Da Silva, S. Heegaard, T. Wang, 
et al., Morphology of the snake spectacle 
reflects its evolutionary adaptation and 
development. BMC Veterinary Research, 13 
(2017), 1-8.
46. M. A. O. Da Silva, J. T. Gade, C. Damsgaard, 
et al., Morphology and evolution of the 
snake cornea. Journal of Morphology, 281 
(2020), 240-249.
47. J. G. Sivak, The role of the spectacle in the 
visual optics of the snake eye. Vision 
Research, 17 (1977), 293-298.
48. C. L. Caprette, Conquering the cold 
shudder: the origin and evolution of snakes 
eyes. Unpublished PhD thesis, Ohio State 
University (2005).
49. B. W. Perry, D. C. Card, J. W. McGlothin, 
et al., Molecular adaptations for sensing 
and securing prey and insight into amniote 
genome diversity from the garter snake 
genome. Genome Biology and Evolution, 10 
(2018), 2110-2129.
50. G. J. Wistow, Molecular Biology and 
Evolution of Crystallins: Gene Recruitment 
and Multifunctional Proteins in the Eye 
Lens (Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 1995).
51. B. Roll, Multiple origin of diurnality in 
geckos: evidence from eye lens crystallins. 
Naturwissenschaften, 88 (2001), 293-296.
52. M. Ott, Visual accommodation in 
vertebrates: mechanisms, physiological 
response and stimuli. Journal of Comparative 
Physiology A, 192 (2006), 97-111.
53. C. L. Fontenot, Variation in pupil diameter 
in North American Gartersnakes 
(Thamnophis) is regulated by immersion in 
water, not by light intensity. Vision 
Research, 48 (2008), 1663-1669.
54. D. F. Munro, Vertical position of the pupil 
in the Crotalidae. Herpetologica, 5 (1949), 
106-108.
55. Y. L. Werner, Extreme adaptability to light, 
in the round pupil of the snake
Spalerosophis. Vision Research, 10 (1970), 
1159-1160.
56. R. H. Douglas, The pupillary light 
responses of animals: a review of their 
distribution, dynamics, mechanisms and 
functions. Progress in Retinal and Eye 
Research, 66 (2018), 17-48.
57. F. Brischoux, L. Pizzatto, and R. Shine, 
Insights into the adaptive significance of 
vertical pupil shape in snakes. Journal of 
Evolutionary Biology, 23 (2010), 1878-1885.
58. R. A. Pyron and V. Wallach, Systematics of 
the blindsnakes (Serpentes: Scolecophidia: 
Typhlopoidea) based on molecular and 
morphological evidence. Zootaxa, 3829 
(2014), 1-81.
59. D. J. Gower, A. Captain, and S. S. Thakur, 
On the taxonomic status of Uropeltis 
bicatenata (GUnther) (Reptilia: Serpentes: 
Uropeltidae). Hamadryad, 33 (2008), 
64-82.
60. V. B. Giri, D. J. Gower, A. Das, et al., A new 
genus and species of natricine snake from 
northeast India. Zootaxa, 4603 (2019), 
241-264.
61. G. Underwood, On the visual-cell pattern of 
a homalopsine snake. Journal of Anatomy, 
100 (1966), 571-575.
62. G. Underwood, A comprehensive approach 
to the classification of higher snakes. 
Herpetologica, 23 (1967), 161-168.
63. J. B. Rasmussen, The retina of 
Psammodynastes pulverulentus (Boie, 
1827) and Telescopus fallax (Fleischmann, 
1831) with a discussion of their 
phylogenetic significance (Colubroidea, 
Serpentes). Journal of Zoological 
Systematics and Evolutionary Research, 28 
(1990), 269-276.
64. J. B. Rasmussen, An intergeneric analysis of 
some boogie snakes - Bogert’s (1940) 
Group XIII and XIV (Boifinae, Serpentes). 
Vidensk Meddelelser fra Dansk 
Naturhistorisk Foren, 141 (1979), 97-155.
65. J. B. Rasmussen, A re-evaluation of the 
systematics of the African rear-fanged 
snakes of Bogert’s Groups XII-XVI, 
including a discussion of some 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 345
evolutionary trends within Caenophidia. In 
Proceedings of the International Symposium 
on African Vertebrates Zoologisches 
Forschungsinstitut und Museum Alexander 
Koenig (Bonn, 1985), pp. 531-548.
66. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, E. R. Loew, 
et al., Multiple rod-cone and cone-rod 
photoreceptor transmutations in snakes: 
evidence from visual opsin gene 
expression. Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 283 (2016), 20152624.
67. R. K. Schott, N. Bhattacharyya, and B.
S. W. Chang, Evolutionary signatures of 
photoreceptor transmutation in geckos 
reveal potential adaptation and 
convergence with snakes. Evolution, 73 
(2019), 1958-1971.
68. A. J. Sillman, J. K. Carver, and E. R. Loew, 
The photoreceptors and visual pigments in 
the retina of a boid snake, the ball python 
(Python regius). Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 202 (1999), 1931-1938.
69. A. J. Sillman, J. L. Johnson, and E. R. Loew, 
Retinal photoreceptors and visual pigments 
in Boa constrictor imperator. Journal of 
Experimental Zoology, 290 (2001), 359-365.
70. D. J. Gower, F. L. Sampaio, L. Peichl, et al., 
Evolution of the eyes of vipers with and 
without infrared-sensing pit organs. 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
126 (2019), 796-823.
71. O. Munk and J. B. Rasmussen. Note on the 
rod-like photoreceptors in the retina of the 
snake Telescopus fallax (Fleischmann, 
1831). Acta Zoologica, 74 (1993), 9-13.
72. W. H. Miller and A. W. Snyder, The tiered 
vertebrate retina. Vision Research, 17 
(1977), 239-255.
73. A. J. Sillman, V. I. Govardovskii, P. Rohlich, 
J. A. Southard, and E. R. Loew, The 
photoreceptors and visual pigments of the 
garter snake (Thamnophis sirtalis): a 
microspectrophotometric, scanning electron 
microscopic and immunocytochemical 
study. Journal of Comparative Physiology A, 
181 (1997), 89-101.
74. E. Hauzman, D. M. O. Bonci, S. R. Grotzner, 
et al., Comparative study of photoreceptor 
and retinal ganglion cell topography and 
spatial resolving power in dipsadidae 
snakes. Brain Behavior and Evolution, 84 
(2014), 197-213.
75. J. F. P. Ullmann, B. A. Moore, S. E. Temple, 
E. Femandez-Juricic, and S. P. Collin, The 
retinal wholemount technique: a window 
to understanding the brain and behaviour. 
Brain, Behavior and Evolution, 79 (2012), 
26-44.
76. J. Stone, The Whole Mount Handbook.
A Guide to the Preparation and Analysis of 
Retinal Wholemounts (Sydney: Maitland 
Publications, 1981).
77. J. Stone, Parallel Processing in the Visual 
System (New York: Plenum, 1983).
78. A. Hughes, The topography of vision in 
mammals of contrasting life style: 
comparative optics and retinal 
organisation. In F. Crescitelli, C. A. Dvorak, 
D. J. Eder, et al., eds., The Visual System in 
Vertebrates. Handbook of Sensory 
Physiology. Vol. 7 (Heidelberg, Berlin: 
Springer, 1977), pp. 613-756.
79. L. Schmitz, Evolution of retinal topography 
in coral reef fishes. Journal of Morphology, 
280 (2019), S69.
80. R. O. Wong, Morphology and distribution of 
neurons in the retina of the American garter 
snake Thamnophis sirtalis. Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 283 (1989), 587-601.
81. E. Hauzman, D. M. O. Bonci, and
D. F. Ventura, Retinal topographic maps: a 
glimpse into the animals’ visual world. In 
T. Heinbockel, ed., Sensory Nervous System 
(London: IntechOpen, 2018), pp. 101-126.
82. M. Kalberer and C. Pedler, The visual cells 
of the alligator: an electron microscopic 
study. Vision Research, 3 (1963), 323-329.
83. C. Pedler and R. Tilly, The nature of the 
gecko visual cell. Vision Research, 4 (1964), 
499-510.
84. G. Underwood, An overview of venomous 
snake evolution. In R. S. Thorpe, W. WUster 
and A. Malhotra, eds., Venomous Snake. 
Ecology, Evolution and Snakebite, The 
Zoological Society of London (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1997), pp. 1-13.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

346 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
85. V. I. Govardovskii and N. I Chkheidze, 
Retinal photoreceptors and visual pigments 
in certain snakes. Biological Abstracts, 90 
(1989), 1036.
86. W. L. Davies, J. A. Cowing, J. K. Bowmaker, 
et al., Shedding light on serpent sight: the 
visual pigments of henophidian snakes. 
Journal of Neuroscience, 29 (2009), 
7519-7525.
87. T. Seiko, T. Kishida, M. Toyama, et al., 
Visual adaptation of opsin genes to the 
aquatic environment in sea snakes. BMC 
Evolutionary Biology, 20 (2020), 1-13.
88. E. Hauzman, M. E. Pierotti,
N. Bhattacharyya, et al., Simultaneous 
expression of UV and violet SWS1 opsins 
expands the visual palette in a group of 
freshwater snakes. Molecular Biology and 
Evolution, 38 (2021), 5225-5240.
89. A. Van Nynatten, G. M. Castiglione, 
E. A. Gutierrez, N. R. Lovejoy, and B. 
S. W. Chang, Recreated ancestral opsin 
associated with marine to freshwater 
croaker invasion reveals kinetic and 
spectral adaptation. Molecular Biology and 
Evolution, 38 (2021), 2076-2087.
90. S. Yokoyama, Evolution of dim-light and color 
vision pigments. Annual Review of Genomics 
and Human Genetics, 9 (2008), 259-282.
91. S. Yokoyama, W. T. Starmer, Y. Takahashi, 
and T. Tada, Tertiary structure and 
spectral tuning of UV and violet pigments 
in vertebrates. Gene, 365 (2006), 
95-103.
92. D. M. Hunt and L. Peichl, S cones: 
evolution, retinal distribution, 
development, and spectral sensitivity. 
Vision Neuroscience, 31 (2014), 115-138.
93. S. Yokoyama, H. Yang, and W. T. Starmer, 
Molecular basis of spectral tuning in the 
red- and green-sensitive (M/LWS) 
pigments in vertebrates. Genetics, 179 
(2008), 2037-2043.
94. D. M. Hunt and S. P. Collin, The evolution 
of photoreceptors and visual 
photopigments in vertebrates. In 
D. M. Hunt, M. W. Hankins, S. P. Collin, 
and J. N. Marshall, eds., Evolution of Visual 
and Non-visual Pigments (Boston: Springer, 
2014), pp. 163-217.
95. F. E. Hauser, I. Van Hazel and B.
S. W. Chang, Spectral tuning in vertebrate 
short wavelength-sensitive 1 (SWS1) visual 
pigments: can wavelength sensitivity be 
inferred from sequence data? Journal of 
Experimental Zoology Part B: Molecular 
and Developmental Evolution, 322 (2014), 
529-539.
96. M. Martin, J. F. Le Galliard, S. Meylan, and 
E. R. Loew, The importance of ultraviolet 
and near-infrared sensitivity for visual 
discrimination in two species of lacertid 
lizards. Journal of Experimental Biology, 
218 (2015), 458-465.
97. C. C. Veilleux and M. E. Cummings, 
Nocturnal light environments and species 
ecology: implications for nocturnal color 
vision in forests. Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 215 (2012), 4085-4096.
98. P. A. Hargrave, J. H. McDowell, D. R. Curtis, 
et al., The structure of bovine rhodopsin. 
Biophysics of Structure and Mechanism, 9 
(1983), 235-244.
99. J. Nathans and D. S. Hogness. Isolation, 
sequence analysis, and intron-exon 
arrangement of the gene encoding bovine 
rhodopsin. Cell, 34 (1983), 807-814.
100. Y. A. Ovchinnikov, Rhodopsin and 
bacteriorhodopsin: structure-function 
relationships. FEBS Letters, 148 (1982), 
179-191.
101. R. K. Schott, B. Panesar, D. C. Card, et al., 
Targeted capture of complete coding 
regions across divergent species.
Genome Biology and Evolution, 9 (2017), 
398-414.
102. C. Katti, M. Stacey-Solis, N. A. Coronel- 
Rojas, and W. I. L. Davies, Opsin-based 
photopigments expressed in the retina of a 
South American pit viper, Bothrops atrox 
(Viperidae). Visual Neuroscience, 35 
(2018), e027.
103. F. J. Vonk, N. R. Casewell, C. V. Henkel, 
et al., The king cobra genome reveals 
dynamic gene evolution and adaptation in 
the snake venom system. Proceedings of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

eyes, vision, and snake origins 347
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 110 
(2013), 20651-20656.
104. T. A. Castoe, A. P. J. de Koning, K. T. Hall, 
et al., The Burmese python genome reveals 
the molecular basis for extreme adaptation 
in snakes. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, USA, 110 (2013), 
20645-20650.
105. W. Yin, Z. Wang, Q-.Y. Li, et al., 
Evolutionary trajectories of snake genes 
and genomes revealed by comparative 
analyses of five-pacer viper. Nature 
Communications, 7 (2016), 1-11.
106. C. A. Emerling, Archelosaurian color vision, 
parietal eye loss, and the crocodylian 
nocturnal bottleneck. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution, 34 (2016), 
666-676.
107. C. A. Emerling and M. S. Springer, 
Genomic evidence for rod monochromacy 
in sloths and armadillos suggests early 
subterranean history for xenarthra. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: 
Biological Sciences, 282 (2014), 20142192.
108. C. A. Emerling and M. S. Springer, Eyes 
underground: regression of visual protein 
networks in subterranean mammals.
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 78 
(2014), 260-270.
109. M. S. Springer, C. A. Emerling, N. Fugate, 
et al., Inactivation of cone-specific 
phototransduction genes in rod 
monochromatic cetaceans. Frontiers in 
Ecology and Evolution, 4 (2016), 61.
110. C. A. Emerling, Genomic regression of claw 
keratin, taste receptor and light-associated 
genes provides insights into biology and 
evolutionary origins of snakes. Molecular 
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 115 (2017), 
40-49.
111. M. Anisimova and C. Kosiol, Investigating 
protein-coding sequence evolution with 
probabilistic codon substitution models. 
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 26 (2009), 
255-271.
112. Z. Yang, PAML 4: Phylogenetic analysis by 
maximum likelihood. Molecular Biology 
and Evolution, 24 (2007), 1586-1591.
113. S. L. Kosakovsky Pond, S. D. W. Frost, and 
S. V. Muse, HyPhy: Hypothesis testing 
using phylogenies. Bioinformatics, 21 
(2005), 676-679.
114. J. O. Wertheim, B. Murrell, M. D. Smith, 
S. L. Kosakovsky Pond, and K. Scheffler, 
RELAX: Detecting relaxed selection in a 
phylogenetic framework. Molecular 
Biology and Evolution, 32 (2015), 
820-832.
115. J. P. Bielawski and Z. Yang, A maximum 
likelihood method for detecting functional 
divergence at individual codon sites, with 
application to gene family evolution. 
Journal of Molecular Evolution, 59 (2004), 
121-132.
116. R. K. Schott, S. P. Refvik, F. E. Hauser, 
H. Lopez-Fernandez, and B. S. W. Chang, 
Divergent positive selection in rhodopsin 
from lake and riverine cichlid fishes.
Molecular Biology and Evolution, 31 (2014), 
1149-1165.
117. J. L. Baker, K. A. Dunn, J. Mingrone, et al., 
Functional divergence of the nuclear 
receptor NR2C1 as a modulator of 
pluripotentiality during hominid evolution. 
Genetics, 203 (2016), 905-922.
118. G. H. Jacobs, J. A. Fenwick, M. A. Crognale, 
and J. F. Deegan, The all-cone retina of the 
garter snake: spectral mechanisms and 
photopigment. Journal of Comparative 
Physiology A, 170 (1992), 701-707.
119. W. R. Elliott, R. D. Glickman,
H. Rentmeister-Bryant, and H. Zwick, 
Functional assessment of snake retina 
using pattern ERG. Investigative 
Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 44 (2003), 
2706-2706.
120. R. D. Glickman, W. R. Elliott III, and 
N. Kumar, Functional and cellular 
responses to laser injury in the rat snake 
retina. In Optical Interactions with Tissue 
and Cells XVIII, 643511, International 
Society for Optics and Photonics (2007).
121. R. A. Baker, T. J. Gawne, M. S. Loop, and 
S. Pullman, Visual acuity of the midland 
banded water snake estimated from evoked 
telencephalic potentials. Journal of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

348 GOWER, HAUZMAN, SIMOES, AND SCHOTT
Comparative Physiology A, 193 (2007), 
865-870.
122. J. N. Lythgoe, Ecology of Vision (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1979).
123. H. Rumpff, Experimental studies on 
vision in Indian snakes. Journal of the 
Bombay Natural History Society, 76 (1979), 
475-480.
124. B. Szabo, D. W. A. Noble, and M. J. Whiting, 
Learning in non-avian reptiles 40 years on: 
advances and promising new directions. 
Biological Reviews, 96 (2021), 331-356.
125. T. D. Terrick, R. L. Mumme, and
G. M. Burghardt, Aposematic coloration 
enhances chemosensory recognition of 
noxious prey in the garter snake 
Thamnophis radix. Animal Behaviour, 49 
(1995), 857-866.
126. R. Friesen, Spatial learning of shelter 
locations and associative learning of a 
foraging task in the Cottonmouth, 
(Agkistrodon piscivorus). Unpublished 
MSc thesis, Missouri State University 
(2017).
127. F. Aubret, X. Bonnet, D. Pearson, and 
R. Shine, How can blind tiger snakes 
(Notechis scutatus) forage successfully? 
Australian Journal of Zoology, 53 (2005), 
283-288.
128. M. S. Grace and A. Matsushita, Neural 
correlates of complex behavior: vision and 
infrared imaging in boas and pythons. In 
R. Henderson and R. Powell, eds., Biology 
of the Boas, Pythons and Related Taxa 
(Eagle Mountain: Eagle Mountain 
Publishing), pp. 271-285.
129. M. S. Y. Lee, A. F. Hugall, R. Lawson, and 
J. D. Scanlon, Phylogeny of snakes 
(Serpentes): combining morphological and 
molecular data in likelihood, Bayesian and 
parsimony analyses. Systematics and 
Biodiversity, 5 (2007), 371-389.
130. T. P. Wilcox, D. J. Zwickl, T. A. Heath, and 
D. M. Hillis, Phylogenetic relationships of 
the dwarf boas and a comparison of 
Bayesian and bootstrap measures of 
phylogenetic support. Molecular
Phylogenetics and Evolution, 25 (2002), 
361-371.
131. O. Rieppel, ‘Regressed’ Macrostomatan 
Snakes. Fieldiana Life and Earth Sciences, 
2012 (2012), 99-103.
132. G. L. Walls, Visual purple in snakes. 
Science, 75 (1932), 467-468.
133. N. M. Koch, R. J. Garwood, and L. A. Parry, 
Fossils improve phylogenetic analyses of 
morphological characters. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B, 288 (2021), 20210044.
134. D. Cundall and F. Irish, The snake skull. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 20, Morphology H 
(Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of 
Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008), pp. 349-692.
135. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Resolving the phylogeny of lizards 
and snakes (Squamata) with extensive 
sampling of genes and species. Biology 
Letters, 8 (2012), 1043-1046.
136. J. B. Atkins and T. A. Franz-Odendaal, The 
sclerotic ring of squamates: an evo-devo- 
eco perspective. Journal of Anatomy, 229 
(2016), 503-513.
137. V. Franz, Vergleichende anatomie des 
wirbeltierauges. In L. Bolk, E. Goppert, 
E. Kallius and W. Lubosch, eds., Handbuch 
der vergleichenden anatomie der wirbeltiere 
(Urban and Schwarzenberg, Berlin, 1934), 
pp. 989-1292.
138. A d’A. Bellairs and J. D. Boyd, The 
lachrymal apparatus in lizards and 
snakes.-II. The anterior part of the 
lachrymal duct and its relationship with the 
palate and with the nasal and vomeronasal 
organs. Proceedings of the Zoological Society 
of London, 120 (1950), 269-310.
139. A d’A. Bellairs and J. D. Boyd, The 
lachrymal apparatus in lizards and snakes - I. 
The brille, the orbital glands, lachrymal 
canaliculi and origin of the lachrymal duct. 
Proceedings of the Zoological Society of 
London, 117 (1947), 81-108.
140. P. Uetz, P. Freed, R. Aguilar and J. Hosek, 
The Reptile Database. 
 (accessed March 10, 2021).
www.reptile- 
database.org
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.020 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Part V
Anatomical and Functional 
Morphological Perspectives
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.021 Published online by Cambridge University Press

16
Diversity and Evolution 
of Squamate Hemipenes
An Overview with Particular Reference 
to the Origin and Early History of Snakes
Giovanna G. Montingelli, David J. Gower, and Hussam Zaher
16.1 Introduction
The evolution of an intromittent organ capable of transferring sperm into the female 
reproductive tract is a key component in shifts from external to internal fertilization in 
many animal lineages [1, 2]. Recent studies indicate a unique origin of the copulatory organ 
in Amniota, with the ancestral amniote likely having a single midline phallus with an open 
and endodermally derived sulcus spermaticus [3]. Within Amniota, phallus morphology is 
especially diverse in Squamata, the diapsid radiation comprising lizards and snakes.
16.1.1 The Squamate Phallus
Squamates have a bilateral pair of copulatory organs termed hemipenes, with each hemi­
penis being a hollow organ that lies inverted and encapsulated in the base of the tail when 
not in use [4, 5]. In early stages of development, the external genitalia in mammals, 
lepidosaurs, turtles, and archosaurs emerge as two genital swellings anteriorly to the cloacal 
aperture that merge to form a single midline bud [3]. Squamate hemipenes originated from 
a modification of this ancestral developmental program, in which paired buds mature 
independently as two phallic structures and the sulcus spermaticus develops from an 
invagination of ectoderm on each hemipenis instead of the endoderm as in other amniotes 
[5, 6]. The absence of hemipenes in extant tuatara and lack of relevant fossil data for extinct 
rhynchocephalians (as far as we are aware) prevents unambiguous inference of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

352 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
presence or absence of hemipenes in the most-recent common ancestor of extant lepido- 
saurians [3], so the hemipenis is currently considered a squamate synapomorphy.
Each hemipenis opens to the exterior through an aperture on the lateral margin of the 
posterior lip of the cloacal opening [4]. Associated with the hemipenis are a series of 
specialized propulsor and retractor muscles, namely the m. retractor penis magnus, 
retractor penis parvus, and retractor penis basalis [4, 7]. In species with bilobed hemipenes, 
the retractor penis magnus can be divided for some distance before its insertion [4]. Arnold 
[7] offered a broader review of squamate hemipenial muscle variation, highlighting its 
potential for investigating higher-level relationships, and stressing the specialized nature 
of this musculature in snakes (and amphisbaenians).
During hemipenial eversion, lymph sinuses permeating the sulcate layer, and the blood 
sinus bordering the central lumen of the organ are filled with lymph and with blood, 
respectively. Simultaneously, the retractor muscles relax and the propulsors contract [4]. 
Only a basal portion of the organ is everted prior to insertion into the female cloaca, 
following which the organ becomes fully everted [8]. The external surface of the hemipenis 
(internal when inverted) bears the sulcus spermaticus, an open groove in which semen 
travels [4]. When completely everted, ornaments sometimes present on the external 
surface help to anchor the organ inside the female cloaca. Completely everted, elaborately 
ornamented hemipenes typically cannot be withdrawn from the female before being 
deflated [8]. For a brief consideration of aspects of hemipenial form and function, see 
Supplementary Appendix 16.S1.
Hemipenial morphology provides important systematic characters, first studied and used 
for this purpose by Cope [8, 9]. Cope combined observations of hemipenes and lungs to 
differentiate major groups of snakes, and he explored hemipenial variation within several 
families of lizards, noting a considerable variety of structures showing some parallelism 
with snakes. Subsequently, hemipenial characteristics have been used widely for systemat­
ics at multiple taxonomic levels (e.g., [4, 10, 11] and references therein).
Cope’s observations were of dissections of inverted (retracted) organs. More than 60 years 
after Cope's studies, standardized techniques for examination and description of everted 
hemipenes of preserved specimens began to be disseminated, starting with Dowling and 
Savage's [4] landmark study. Most subsequent studies used everted organs for descriptions 
and comparisons, though complementary study of inverted and everted conditions has 
been encouraged [12]. Several techniques to evert, inflate, and stain hemipenes have been 
proposed ([12-16] and references therein).
Despite a substantial literature, wide gaps in knowledge of squamate hemipenial 
diversity remain. Although snake and lizard hemipenes have been the focus of much 
(especially systematic) investigation, and some authors have carried out studies of both 
groups [17-21], as far as we are aware there have been no considerations of hemipenial 
diversity and evolution across all squamates (though see, e.g., [22]), particularly to infer 
states likely to have been present across the lizard-snake transition and at basal divergences 
within Serpentes. Previous hemipenial studies have typically been conducted at much finer 
scale, within rather than among major lineages. In this chapter, we provide an overview and 
summarize hemipenial morphological variation among major lineages of lizards and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 353
snakes. Comparisons were based on preparation of hemipenes from museum specimens, 
and from data compiled from literature. Based on the literature and our observations, we 
address some key questions, including: (1) are there differences between snake and lizard 
hemipenes? (2) does hemipenial morphology characterize major groups of lizards and 
snakes? (3) can we infer the morphology of the ancestral squamate and snake hemipenis? 
(4) what are the major trends in hemipenial evolution across the lizard-snake transition?
We do not document hemipenial morphology in all squamates but instead provide an 
overview of what is known for each major lineage. The amount of information available 
varies substantially depending on the group, and variation in the use of terms further 
complicates straightforward comparisons and summaries. For some larger extant groups 
(e.g., Anguiformes, Teiioidea, Endoglyptodonta) there is too much information for us to 
review comprehensively and we have likely inadvertently overlooked some works. We 
mapped some major hemipenial characters (Fig. 16.1) onto a recent phylogenetic hypoth­
esis for Squamata [23], aiming to provide an overview of squamate hemipenial morphology. 
We provide photographs of hemipenes of representatives of major squamate lineages, 
including gekkotans, scincomorphs, lacertibaenians (Fig. 16.2), teiioids, iguanians, 
anguiforms (Figs. 16.3 and 16.4), and snakes (Figs. 16.4-16.6). Except where noted 
(Figs. 16.2-16.6), hemipenes illustrated in this chapter were newly prepared from preserved 
specimens (see Supplementary Appendix 16.S1) following Zaher and Prudente’s [13] 
methodology. Higher-level classification follows Burbrink et al. [23] and Zaher et al. [24]; 
the number of currently recognized extant species reported for each group follows 
Uetz et al. [25]. We refer to all non-snake squamates informally as ‘lizards’.
16.2 Hemipenial Terminology
Squamate hemipenial terminology varies substantially. Although snakes benefit from a 
reasonably stable and unified terminological framework first idealized by Dowling and 
Savage [4], names used for the structures found in lizards are in a greater state of flux 
[10, 26-28], and it would be helpful for studies such as this to eventually have greater 
terminological consistency across squamates.
The vast majority of squamates share a general configuration comprising a hemipenial 
body and hemipenial lobe(s), with a generally sulcate and asulcate surface and a pair of 
lateral surfaces, and this can form the basis of a squamate-wide terminology. Because a 
major morphofunctional subdivision into body and lobular regions can be observed 
throughout Squamata, we consider it unnecessary here to apply a different terminology 
for lizards than for snakes (e.g., [10, 27]; see also § 16.2.1). We refer to both outer 
surfaces lying between the sulcate and asulcate surfaces as lateral (rather than one 
medial and one lateral) because we prefer a terminology based on the organ rather 
than its orientation to the body of its owner. The sulcate and asulcate surfaces are as 
broad or broader than the lateral surfaces. The sulcate surface is that on which the 
sulcus reaches the lobular region.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

354 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
□ ibamidae 
Gekkota 
Scincomorpha 
Amphisbaenia 
Lacertidae 
Teiidae 
Alopoglossidae 
Gymnophthalmidae 
Chamaeleonidae 
Agamidae 
Pleurodonta 
Anguiformes 
Leptotyphlopidae 
Typhlopoidea 
Anomalepididae 
Tropidophiidae 
Aniliidae 
Pythonoidea 
Booidea 
Uropeltidae 
Cylindrophiidae 
Acrochordidae 
Xenodermidae 
Pareidae 
Endoglyptodonta
1 
2345 
6 
789 
10
Dibamidae
?
?
?
0
?
?
0
?
?
Gekkota
0,1,2
0
0,1
0
0
0,2
o,1
0
0,1
0
Scincomorpha
0,1,2
0,1
0,1
0
0
0
0
1.3
0,1
0
Amphisbaenia
1,2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0,1
0
0,1
Lacertidae
1,2
0
1
0
0
0,2
0
1
0
0
Teiidae
0,1
0,1
1
0
0
0
0
1
2
0
Alopoglossidae
0.1
1
1
0,1
0
0
0
1
2
0
Gymnophthalmidae
1
0,1
0,1
0,1
(0),1
0
0
1
2
0
Chamaeleonidae
o,1
0
0
0
0
0
(0),1
2
1.2
0
Agamidae
1,2
0
(0)1
0
0
0,2
1
0
0
0
Pleurodonta
(0),1,2
0
(0),1
0
0
0,2
(0),1
2
0
0
Anguiformes
0,1,2
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
0,3
0,1
Leptotyphlopidae
0
0
0
1
0
0,2
0
0,2
0
0,1
Typhlopoidea
0
0
0
1
0,(1)
0,(1)
0
0,2
0,(3)
0,1
Anomalepididae
0
0
0
1
1
1
0
7
1
1
Tropidophiidae
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
2
0
Aniliidae
2
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
Pythonoidea
(OH,2
1
1
1
0
0
0,1
2
0,1
0,(1)
Booidea
(0),1,2
1
(0),1
1
0
0
0,1
2
0,1
0,(1)
Uropeltidae
0
1
0
1
(0),1
(0),1
0
0
0
0
Cylindrophiidae
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
?
?
Acrochordidae
2
1
1
1
0
1
0
0
0
(O),1
Xenodermidae
2
1
1
1
0
0,1
0,1
0
0
(0),1
Pareidae
2
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
1
Endoglyptodonta
(0),1,2
(O),1
(O),1
1 
(O),1
0,1,2
0,1
0
0,(1)
0,(1)
(C)
characters/states
0
1
2
3
1
Shape of hemipenis
unilobed
slightly bilobed
moderately to deply bilobed
2
Sulcus spermaticus
flared
not flared
3
Sulcus spermaticus
simple
bifurcate
4
Sulcus spermaticus and lips
wide, loose
narrow, tight
5
Spines on body
absent
present
6
Spines or spinules on lobes
absent
spines present
spinules present
7
Regular fields of calyces on lobes
absent
present
8
Flanges on body
absent
ridge- or lamina-like flanges
flounce-like flanges
bulbous folds
9
Substantial apical projections
absent
single fleshy projection
paired fleshy projections
mineralized
10
Apical disc or platform
absent
present
Figure 16.1 Phylogenetic relationships [23] and hemipenial diversity of Squamata. States in 
parentheses are rare conditions for lineages. See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1 for 
character optimizations.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 355
Figure 16.2 Hemipenes of (A) Delma inornata (Pygopodidae); (B) Pygomeles braconnieri (Scincidae; 
possibly incompletely everted); (C) Mabuya sp. (Scincidae; Reprinted from Sanchez-Martinez et al. 
with permission © 2019 American Association for Anatomy [36]); (D) Platysaurus sp. (Cordylidae);
Reprinted from Nunes et al. with permission © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.; (E) Gallotia stehlini 
(Lacertidae; incompletely inflated); (F) Amphisbaena brasiliana (Amphisbaenidae; reproduced with 
permission [14]). Sulcate (left) and asulcate (right) views. See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1 for 
colour version, and Box 16.1 for abbreviations.
Box 16.1 Abbreviations used in figures
a ar, apical area; a aw, apical awn; a cp, apical cup; a di, apical disc; a la, apical lamellae; b fo, 
bulbous fold; bu, bulbous-fold like structure; ca, calyces; fla, ridge- or lamina-like flange; fl l, flapped 
lip of the sulcus; flo, flounce; hb, hemibaculum; hl, hypertrophied lip of ss; il, inner lip of ss; ol, outer 
lip of ss; pr, paryphasmata; ro, rotula; se lo, secondary lobe; sp, spine; ss, sulcus spermaticus; wlp, 
wing-like process; arrow indicates point at which ss expands or bifurcates.
16.2.1 Hemipenial Lobes
Hemipenial lobes are typically characterized morphofunctionally, being the region distal 
from the point where the sulcus spermaticus generally divides or expands (see arrows in 
Figs. 16.1-16.6) and where there is a different ornamentation than on the hemipenial body. 
Although hemipenial lobes are clearly distinct structures in most snakes, they may not be so 
well delimited in lizards. Not all indicators of the boundary necessarily occur at exactly the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

356 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
Figure 16.3 Hemipenes of (A) Heterodactylus imbricatus (Gymnophthalmidae); (B) Teius teyou 
(Teiidae; courtesy P. Nunes); (C) Chamaeleo sp. (Chamaeleonidae); (D) Uromastyx aegyptia 
(Agamidae; incompletely everted); (E) Agama paragama (Agamidae); (F) Anguis fragilis (Anguidae). 
Sulcate (left) and asulcate (right) views. See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1 for colour version, and 
Box 16.1 for abbreviations.
same distance from the base of the hemipenis, but the junction between the hemipenial 
body and the lobular region is most clear in cases where the hemipenis is bilobed, the lobes 
are expanded transversely, the sulcus spermaticus is flared or bifurcate (see below), and/or 
where the lobes are capitate (demarcated from the body by a waist, groove or overhang) 
and differently ornamented than the body (e.g., Fig. 16.3E; Supplementary Figure 16.S1a). 
Rarely, the hemipenis is unilobed and subcylindrical (columnar) without substantial tran­
sitions in ornamentation along its length, the sulcus is simple, and/or lobes are not 
capitate - such that the body-lobe boundary is particularly unclear (e.g., Uropeltidae). In 
most instances a lobular region can be identified even if a fixed, discrete lobe-body 
boundary cannot be located. The hemipenial body may also possess differentiated orna­
mentations of its own, unless the hemipenis and its structures are evidently simplified or 
reduced, in which case the distinction between lobes and body also tends to fade or 
disappear (e.g., Psammophiidae). The extremities of lobes are sometimes distinctly 
regionalized morphologically, such as the textured cap-like apices in many amphisbaenids 
[29, 30], or the flattened to concave, sometimes rimmed apical platforms of varanoids
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 357
Figure 16.4 Hemipenes of (A) Pseudopus apodus (Anguidae); (B) Varanus prasinus (Varanidae); (C) 
Amerotyphlops minuisquamus (Typhlopidae); (D) Amerotyphlops paucisquamus (Typhlopidae;
possibly incompletely inflated); (E) Amerotyphlops brongersmianus (Typhlopidae); (F) Amerotyphlops 
reticulatus (Typhlopidae). Sulcate (left) and asulcate (right) views; (C-F) Reprinted from Graboski 
et al. © 2018 Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences [45]. See Box 16.1 for abbreviations. (A black and 
white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the 
plate section).
(e.g., [31]) or apical discs of some snakes (e.g., [11, 17]). We view apices as distinct, special­
ized parts of lobular regions that are absent in many squamates. In contrast, lobular regions, 
whether or not they include distinct apices, are identifiable in almost all squamates, which 
underlies our preference (see also § 16.2) for a bipartite (body, lobe) rather than tripartite 
(pedicel, truncus, apex: [27]) subdivision of the hemipenis, though in some taxa (particularly 
some varanids) the lobular region and a distinct apical region are essentially the same.
The degree of lobular division can be challenging to define. We recognize hemipenes as 
being unilobed (e.g., Figs. 16.2D, 16.3C, F, 16.4C-F, 16.5A-C, 16.6F), shallowly or slightly 
bilobed (e.g., Figs. 16.2B, 16.3A, B, D, 16.4B, 16.6A, B, D), or moderately to deeply bilobed 
(e.g., Figs. 16.2A, C, E, F, 16.3E, 16.4A, 16.5D-F, 16.6C, E).
Some hemipenial morphologies that have been discussed for snakes and given unifying 
terms have seemingly attracted no or much less attention in lizards. The reverse of this 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

358 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
situation might also occur, but our (arguably biased) perception is that terminology 
applied to lizard hemipenes is generally less unified. A prominent example is the termin­
ology applied to snakes describing lobular capitation. Lobes are semicapitate if their 
capitula have a basal waist on only one side (when seen in sulcate or asulcate views), 
and bicapitate if the lobes are clearly waisted on both sides [11]. Capitate lobes in snakes 
are especially obvious when calyculate [11]. Some lizard hemipenes, even including those 
without calyces on their lobes, might be considered capitate (e.g., Callopistes 
flavopunctatus: [28: fig. 54]) although not traditionally termed as such in the literature 
(but see e.g., [32]).
16.2.2 Sulcus Spermaticus
The sulcus spermaticus is a conspicuous homologous structure occurring throughout 
squamates (though unconfirmed in Dibamidae). It functions to transmit semen and com­
prises a continuous channel bordered by paired ‘lips’. The sulcus runs from the base of the 
hemipenial body distally to the lobular region, terminating at or towards the tip(s) of the 
organ. It can be wide or narrow, and shallow or deep and this can vary along its length. 
Sulcal lips can be very closely or more distantly spaced, vary from low, inconspicuous ridges 
to more prominent and sometimes frilled flaps that may at least partially cover the sulcus, 
and be symmetrical or highly asymmetrical (Fig. 16.2E). Whether the hemipenis is uni- or 
bilobed, the sulcus can be forked (bifurcate) or unforked (simple), and the unforked 
condition can be with largely parallel sulcal lips throughout, or flared (expanded) with 
distally diverging lips (Fig. 16.3C, D). In the bifurcate condition, the two distal sulcal 
branches each have a pair of lips, an inner and outer lip, with the inner lips typically less 
well developed (e.g., [33]; Fig. 16.3B, E). Bifurcation or flaring occurs at or close to the 
crotch between the bases of the lobes in bilobed hemipenes. Flared (expanded) sulci are 
superficially similar to bifurcate sulci (and can be difficult to tell apart in some cases), but as 
the outer lips diverge they are not paired by opposing inner lips to form a pair of grooves, 
and the open area bordered by the divergent (outer) lips forms a more or less conspicuous 
naked (unornamented) region. This region has been termed a distal cup or apical platform 
in varanids [10, 18], apical lobe in teiids [28], and sulcal pad in pygopodids [34]. Such 
regions often co-occur with lobular apical ornamentations in the form of folds, awns, and 
(rarely) mineralized projections (hemibacula) (see § 16.4.3).
We emphasize that we restrict the term ‘bifurcate sulcus’ to instances where a forked 
sulcus retains paired (inner and outer) lips along most of its length—some previous articles 
also refer to some flared or expanded sulci (with divergent outer lips but lacking inner lips) 
as forked or bifurcate (e.g., [35]). However, each branch of a bifurcate sulcus may also 
expand (flare) at its distal end, as occurs in many lizards (e.g., Mabuya altamazonica: fig. 1d 
of [36] and a few snakes [37]). Bifurcate sulci on bilobed hemipenes can be centripetal, 
bifurcating in the crotch with each branch extending along the medial (inner) surfaces of 
the lobes, or centrolineal or centrifugal, bifurcating slightly or clearly before (proximal to) 
the crotch and running along the sulcate or lateral surfaces of the lobes, respectively [38]. 
We apply the same terminology to the outer lips of flared (expanded, but not bifurcate) 
sulci on bilobed hemipenes. On a unilobed hemipenis, a simple unflared sulcus or a 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 359
bifurcate sulcus can also be described as centrolineal, if extending distally approximately 
along the midline on the sulcate surface, or centrifugal if shifting onto either lateral surface 
as it extends distally. A simple, expanded sulcus on a unilobed hemipenis can also be 
described using these terms based on the path taken by the flared outer lips.
16.2.3 Ornamentation
Hemipenial ornamentation refers to structural, typically raised features on the external 
surface of the everted organ (other than lobes and sulcus lips). The long list of terms 
employed to describe hemipenial ornamentation, paucity of histological investigations of 
tissue composition, and rarity of thorough homology assessments complicates comparisons 
across Squamata, especially at greater phylogenetic distances. Hemipenes are mostly 
ornamented with a variety of soft-tissue features of the lobes and (mostly distal part of) 
the body. Some of these soft-tissue ornaments may themselves bear smaller ornamenta­
tions such as fleshy papillae or mineralized spinules or spicules. Others are somewhat 
stiffened, in parts, by regions of denser, unmineralized connective tissue. Regions lacking 
ornamentation are termed naked.
In snakes, approximately transverse, fleshy ridge-, fold- or flap-like structures are univer­
sally termed flounces, but in lizards, superficially similar ornamentations on the lobes and 
body have been given many terms, including plicae [39], frills [18], paryphasmata [10], 
laminae [28], lamellae [35], creases [40], ridges [30], flounces and welts [9], with preference 
for terms seemingly tied partly to how prominent and/or substantial these structures are. In 
both snakes and lizards, flounces (and similar structures) may be more or less papillate 
and/or be reticulate, with linked longitudinal and transverse flanges bounding concavities 
that are termed calyces (e.g., Figs. 16.3C-E and 16.6B, C). The distinctive, well-developed 
transverse ornaments of many anguiforms are corrugated or ribbed flounce-like structures 
with longitudinal ridges and are typically termed paryphasmata (e.g., [10]), the longitudinal 
ridges sometimes giving them a superficially calyculate appearance. Where investigated 
histologically, paryphasmata (Figs. 16.3F and 16.4A, B) are composed of heterogeneously 
distributed areas of looser and denser connective tissue [41]. See § 16.4.5 for further 
discussion of terminology and possibly homology of transverse ornamental structures.
Mineralized ornamentation occurs in a few major lineages. Paired mineralized structures 
adorning the lobular extremities of hemipenes in varanids and some gekkonids have been 
given various terms, including cornua [26], horns [18], os penes [42], hemipenial bones [43], 
and hemibacula [10] (Fig. 16.4B). Some of these have been described as bony but without 
supporting histological data [44]. Where investigated histologically, as far as we are aware, 
hemibacula are cartilaginous [41]. Macroscopic mineralized, pointed spines projecting 
from the lobes and/or hemipenial body, are reported only within Gymnophthalmidae 
and Serpentes (e.g., [11, 14, 45]; Figs. 16.3A and 16.4F). Smaller mineralized spines (spin- 
ules) are also documented in snakes and gymnophthalmids, in the latter they always 
project from serial soft-tissue flanges ([11, 14]; and references therein). Mineralized spin- 
ules occur also in some other lizard groups, where they are typically even smaller and 
mainly confined to the lobes (e.g., pygopodids and a few iguanians: [10, 34]). To the best of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

360 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
our knowledge, it has not been suggested that the microscopic spinose structures in 
Lacertidae that have been termed spines or spiny epithelium or tubercles (e.g., [10, 33]) 
are mineralized, and they may be keratinized [30].
Beyond the mineralized lobular projections of varanids and some gekkonids, several 
major lineages have unmineralized lobular ornaments. These include large fleshy papillae 
[35] and awns [28] (Fig. 16.3A, B). Chamaeleonids bear particularly distinctive fleshy 
projections adorning the apical region of their hemipenes termed pedunculi, rotulae, and 
auriculae [27] (Fig. 16.3C).
Some superficially similar ornamentations are likely not homologous across squamates, 
such as lobular calyces of pygopodids and snakes or apical discs of xenopeltids and 
dipsadids. However, it seems reasonable to use a unified terminology for these structures 
in providing readily comparable descriptions, at least until more detailed investigations of 
diversity and homology have been conducted. Other probably not universally homologous 
but similar structures that might benefit from general terms that can be applied across 
Squamata include spinules and papillae, though note that the latter term has been applied 
to unmineralized but distinctive projections on lobular tips as well as on the hemipenial 
body and main parts of lobes. In the taxon accounts below (§ 16.3) we generally report the 
terms for ornamentation features used in the cited literature. See Discussion (§ 16.4) for 
further consideration of the meaning and utility of aspects of hemipenial terminology.
16.3 Diversity of the Squamate Hemipenis
Space and time constraints limit the scope of this article to summaries of main hemipenial 
features on the external surface of the everted organs of single or small numbers of adult (or 
probably adult) specimens. We largely avoid discussion of hemipenial musculature or 
armature (sensu [39]). There have been few studies of intraspecific geographical, individual 
and/or ontogenetic variation in squamate hemipenial morphology (e.g., [46-49]). There is 
evidence of seasonal variation in hemipenial size and/or ornamentation in at least some 
lacertid, gekkotan, and chamaeleonid lizards (e.g., [47, 50-52]), that indicates that further 
study of intraspecific variation is warranted.
16.3.1 Dibamidae
Most recent DNA studies find the small, fossorial dibamids (Dibamus and Anelytropsis: ca 
25 extant species) [53], as most closely related to gekkotans, together forming the sister 
group of all other extant squamates, or as lone sister to all other squamates [23, 54]. 
Information is scarce on dibamid hemipenial morphology [10, 53, 55], restricted to brief 
description and illustration for Dibamus greeri: ‘quite smooth conic formations tapering to 
the apex with a small hollow near the tip’ [55]. It appears to have unilobed, naked 
hemipenes, but it is unclear if the described organs are fully everted. The presence of a 
sulcus spermaticus was not mentioned by Darevsky [55] and cannot be confirmed from the 
published figures.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 361
16.3.2 Gekkota
Gekkotans comprise ca 2,000 extant species in seven families, Carphodactylidae (ca 32 
species), Diplodactylidae (ca 157 species), Eublepharidae (ca 43 species), Gekkonidae (ca 
1,400 species), Phyllodactylidae (ca 151 species), Pygopodidae (ca 46 species), and 
Sphaerodactylidae (ca 228 species). Hemipenial morphology is better known for the last 
four of these families. With exceptions, gekkotans generally have a slightly to deeply bilobed 
hemipenis, with a flared (simple) or bifurcate sulcus spermaticus (with the outer lips 
diverging more or less close to the crotch) and distinct ornamentation mainly confined to 
the lobes [10, 19, 34, 56]. Limbed gekkotans tend to have a unilobed or bilobed hemipenis 
with a long hemipenial body and short rounded, ‘club-shaped’ lobes (e.g., Gekko: [57]). The 
lobes can be naked but are typically ornamented with small, densely packed calyces 
restricted to the lobular region [56, 58-60] but which can extend proximally onto the 
hemipenial body [52, 57, 61], though the latter is mainly naked. Well-developed hemibacula 
were described in the sphaerodactylid Aristelliger and gekkonid Uroplatus lineatus [60]. 
Gekkonids tend to have a broadly flared sulcus on moderately bilobed hemipenes [57, 61].
Members of the near-limbless Pygopodidae generally have simplified hemipenes com­
pared to other gekkotans [10], interpreted as resulting from an ‘ancestral miniaturization 
event’ [34]. However, the characteristic club-shaped condition with a voluminous lobular 
region of other gekkotans occurs also in many pygopodids [34]. Most pygopodids have 
asymmetrically bilobed hemipenes (Fig. 16.2A), unilobed organs occurring only in species 
of Aprasia and Delma. A slightly inflated lobular crotch between the main lobes is reported 
for Pygopus nigriceps (the ‘tri-lobed’ condition of [34]). Hemipenes can be naked 
(Fig. 16.2A) or bearing spinules and calyces, that are mainly distributed on the lobes and 
distal part of the body. Calyces can be diminutive or large and deep (e.g., Pygopus 
lepidonotus: Supplementary Figure 16.S1a). The sulcus spermaticus is described as bifur­
cate for most pygopodids [10, 34], though most species seem to have a flared (non­
bifurcate) sulcus with a sometimes very wide naked area (‘sulcal pad’ of [34]) bordered 
by the sulcal outer lips (e.g., Supplementary Figure 16.S1a). When the sulcus is bifurcate, 
the branches are broad (expanded) and shallow (e.g., Fig. 16.2A).
16.3.3 Scincomorpha
Scincomorpha is an ecomorphologically diverse and speciose lineage comprising four 
families: Scincidae (ca 1,700 species), Cordylidae (ca 70 species), Gerrhosauridae (ca 40 
species), and Xantusiidae (ca 35 species). Little hemipenial information is available for 
Scincomorpha, and most of it is for Scincidae [10, 19, 36, 62, 63], where it is far from 
representative of this highly diverse lineage.
Hemipenes of the few scincids described - for the sphenomorphine, eugongyline, 
scincine, mabuyine, and lygosomine radiations [36, 62-65] (Fig. 16.2C) - are typically 
bilobed, but can be unilobed as in the lygosomine Riopa guentheri [64] and the 
Australian ‘Egernia group’ characterized by a ‘columnar hemipenis’ [65]. Bilobed scincid 
hemipenes appear to possess a sulcus that bifurcates centripetally on a pair of lobes that are 
either short and bulbous or long and slender, and unilobed hemipenes possess a simple 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

362 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
sulcus spermaticus that expands within the lobe to form a naked area delimited by the 
outer lips [36, 65]. Although scincid hemipenes are basically smooth, they exhibit different 
types of conspicuous, substantially inflated (bulbous) protuberances that are mainly trans­
versely oriented (e.g., [36, 66]) on the asulcate and lateral surfaces of the organ, but can also 
be longitudinally oriented (e.g., [9]) on the lateral surfaces of the body as in Pinoyscincus 
[62] - these have been termed ‘folds’ (e.g., [36]). The bulbous nature of these structures is 
observable only in well-everted and expanded hemipenes [36]. Although seemingly thin 
walled and soft, some of these bulbous folds bear streaks of what might be denser 
connective tissue (e.g., ‘ridges’ labeled in fig. 1 of [36]). Longitudinal folds on the asulcate 
surface of the lobes and distal half of the hemipenial body occur in representatives of the 
limbless Australian and Malagasy scincids Tropidoscincus and Pygomeles [67]. The hemi­
penis of Pygomeles is here illustrated for the first time, for a fully everted but incompletely 
expanded example (Fig. 16.2B): it is slightly bilobed with a proximally naked body and an 
expanded lobular region. On the sulcate surface, the sulcus is broad and delimited by lips 
that tend to broaden at the base of the lobular region where the sulcus flares (without inner 
lips) to form a naked area surrounded by expanded lobular tissues. A series of incompletely 
expanded transverse folds is visible on the asulcate surface, on the lobes and distal part of 
the body.
Little information is available for cordylids and gerrhosaurids [9, 10, 68, 69]. Based on the 
literature, cordylids have bulbous, seemingly unilobed (to possibly slightly bilobed) hemi­
penes [10]. The simple sulcus is oriented obliquely at its proximal end where one lip is 
hypertrophied, with the distal end of this hypertrophied section terminating lateral to the 
sulcus as a projection on the sulcate surface of the body (Fig. 16.2D). The sulcus is wide and 
shallow and fades out some distance from the distal end of the organ. The distal end is 
heavily creased and seemingly thin walled. The organ is devoid of spines or spinules. The 
body and lobes may bear approximately transverse irregular folds or ridges on especially 
the asulcate and lateral surfaces. Bohme [10] was unable to confirm Cope’s [9] description 
of calyces in any cordylid. A hemipenis of Platysaurus sp., is here illustrated for the first 
time (Fig. 16.2D), its morphology largely consistent with Bohme’s [10] description. The 
simple sulcus runs longitudinally on the main part of the body but is notably deflected 
obliquely at its proximal end. In the longitudinal part, the sulcus is very broad and shallow 
with low ridge-like lips, but in the more oblique section the more proximal lip is greatly 
hypertrophied into a fleshy flap with a free, somewhat lobular distal end. The distal end of 
the organ bears three bulbous and naked lobe-like structures conferring the appearance of 
a somewhat bilobed organ with an inflated bulbous fold in the crotch. The distal end of the 
sulcus fades out at the base of the midline bulb. Proximal to the trilobate distal end of the 
organ, a series of irregular, loose and soft, approximately transverse fold-like flanges run 
circumferentially around the hemipenis (except across the sulcus), being less prominent on 
the asulcate surface. A stiff plate of connective tissue was described underlying the floor of 
the sulcus of cordylids [10] that is not apparent in this specimen.
Gerrhosaurids have very similar hemipenes to cordylids [10, 68]. Descriptions are avail­
able for Gerrhosaurus, Zonosaurus, and Tracheloptychus but, as far as we know, illustrations 
only for G. flavigularis and Z. quadrilineatus [10, 21]. The organ is less bulbous than those 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 363
described for cordylids, slightly bilobed in G. flavigularis. The asulcate surface has a 
distinctive pocket overhung by the base of an apical area, which might be a synapomorphy 
of the family. Together, cordylids and gerrhosaurids appear to be diagnosed by the 
synapomorphic condition of a highly distinctive broad, shallow sulcus spermaticus that 
fades out distally and which has a proximally oblique, hypertrophied lip with a free 
distal projection.
It is difficult to reconcile Cope’s [9] description of the hemipenis of an unnamed xantusiid 
with Bohme’s [10] description of Xantusia henshawi. Hemipenial morphology in this family 
is even less well known than in cordylids and gerrhosaurids.
16.3.4 Teiioidea
This large lineage of New World lizards is characterized by a diverse, but highly characteristic, 
hemipenial morphology, from weakly ornamented to very elaborate organs [10, 14, 35, 70]. 
Among its major clades, gymnophthalmids (ca 270 species) are the only teiioids bearing 
prominent mineralized spines on the hemipenial body and lobes ([14]; Fig. 16.3A). Spines 
in gymnophthalmids are embedded as very regularly and densely disposed series of single 
rows in the distal edges of serial (and also densely and regularly spaced), approximately 
transverse soft-tissue structures on the body and lobes described by terms such as plicae, 
lamellae, and flounces [14, 35]. Even in cases where spines appear at first sight to be 
isolated (e.g., Echinosaura: [14]; Psilops: [71]), they are nonetheless regularly arranged and 
lie within vestigial soft-tissue flanges. Gymnophthalmids have unilobed to slightly bilobed 
hemipenes, often emphasized by a pair of fleshy apical awns or large papillae on their 
apical extremities or lobes (when differentiated) that may carry the distal extremities of the 
branches of the sulcus spermaticus. The outer lips of the sulcus spermaticus typically 
diverge a short distance from the distal tip of the organ, with a short median prominence 
often forming the inner lips of the sulcus, which is thus bifurcate rather than simply flared 
[14, 35] (Fig. 16.3A). The hemipenial crotch of Arthrosaura montigena bears the opening 
(‘orificium’) of a channel of unknown function and seemingly unknown elsewhere in 
squamates [72].
Hemipenial morphology within Teiidae (ca 170 species) has been documented for 
several species [9, 10, 21, 28, 70, 73]. The hemipenis is unilobed to slightly bilobed, with 
a centrolineal sulcus spermaticus, with the outer lips of the sulcus diverging a short 
distance from the crotch and with a bifurcate sulcus in most or perhaps all cases (e.g., 
[28:fig. 54]; Fig. 16.3B). Distally, each lobe typically possesses a more or less distinct pair of 
eversible, prominent apical awns ([28]; fleshy papillae of [9]) between which lies the distal 
extremity of the sulcus spermaticus branch (Fig. 16.3B). Awns can be very elaborate 
(Alexandresaurus: [74]) or rarely highly reduced; where reduced there may be fields of 
small papillae (Kentropyx: [28]; Supplementary Figure 16.S1c). The lateral sides and the 
asulcate surface bear subparallel, densely spaced, approximately transverse, low and rigid 
flanges (laminae of [28]; imbricate, transverse laminae of [9]). The flanges are generally 
unornamented macroscopically (bearing papillae in some Cnemidophorus: [28]), though 
microscopic mineralized spinules occur in at least some taxa [10, 28]. Naked areas with 
longitudinal folds that largely flatten out in the everted condition (‘expansion pleats’ of [28]) 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

364 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
have been described in the middle of the sulcate and asulcate surfaces [28]. Hemipenes in 
Alopoglossidae (29 species), the sister taxon to Gymnophthalmidae, are uni- to slightly bilobed 
and resemble those of Teiidae in lacking macroscopic mineralized spines [14, 75, 76]. The 
sulcus is bifurcate (contra [75]) with each branch extending between a pair of fleshy apical 
awns. The inner pair of awns (‘lobes’ of [75]) are hypertrophied and fused (or nearly so) along 
the midline (the midline crease between them is misidentified as the distal end of an unbi­
furcate sulcus by Ribeiro-Junior et al. [75]). Although hemipenes of all three major teiioid 
lineages are each distinct, they all share a bifurcate sulcus that extends to between a pair of 
apical awns.
16.3.5 Lacertibaenia
Lacertibaenia is a mainly molecularly supported clade comprising Lacertidae (ca 350 
species) and the fossorial Amphisbaenia (ca 200 species). Much research on lacertid 
hemipenes has focused on musculature, armature, and microornamentation. Images and 
detailed descriptions of the external features of fully everted and inflated lacertid hemi­
penes are surprisingly rare, limiting comparisons within Lacertidae and between lacertids 
and other squamates. Lacertids generally are reported to have slightly to moderately 
bilobed hemipenes that may be complexly folded while inverted [39, 77]. Lobes are covered 
radially by ‘plicae’ (stiffened flanges) bearing microornamentation in the form of spinulate 
tubercles of varied shapes forming a spiky or spiny, keratinized epithelium [33, 47, 51, 78]. 
The tips of the lobes in Gallotia are also covered by a series of large fleshy papillae [33] (the 
hemipenis in Fig. 16.2E is only partially everted distally, and the papillae remain inverted 
inside the organ). Plicae may extend in coverage to the distal region of the hemipenial body 
([77]; Fig. 16.2E), though it is difficult to precisely define their extent based on the available 
descriptions from dissected inverted organs [39, 51]. The rest of the hemipenial body is 
naked [51]. The sulcus is usually described as bifurcate, being generally bordered by well- 
developed, flapped lips [33: fig. 5]. Inner and outer lip prominence and form varies 
substantially, with inner lips being sometimes poorly defined and barely visible (e.g., 
Fig. 16.2E). Flappy lips on the lobular region are characteristic of lacertids, though in 
Takydromus the branches of the sulcus are absent or highly reduced with small lips [51]. 
Reduction of the size of the lobes and their ornamentation outside breeding seasons has 
been reported for some lacertids [39, 50, 51]. Some groups, such as Zootoca (Lacertini) and 
Eremiadini, bear an internal, cartilaginous ‘armature’ - a plate-like structure embedded in 
the dorsal surface of the retractor magnus muscle, that also becomes filled, providing 
additional support for the everted organ [50, 51].
The vast majority of published information on amphisbaenian hemipenes is for 
Amphisbaenidae (183 species). Hemipenial morphology of amphisbaenids is generally 
relatively simple compared to other lacertibaenians and other squamates [14, 29, 30]. The 
hemipenis is deeply bilobed, with the lobes sometimes disposed perpendicular to the 
animal’s body. The sulcus is typically bifurcate, extending to (or close to) the tips of the 
lobes. In that respect it is superficially snake like, though the lips are generally much less 
well defined. The sulcus is centripetal in amphisbaenids (Fig. 16.2F). The hemipenis can be 
free of ornaments (e.g., Amphisbaena carli: [79]), or bear regularly spaced, low transverse 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 365
ridges (with a ‘pleated, accordion-like appearance’ [80]) on at least the lateral surfaces of the 
body and on the lobes, asin species of Amphisbaena, Chirindia, Leposternon, and Monopeltis 
[9, 10, 30]. Mineralized ornamentation is not reported for any amphisbaenian. In most 
amphisbaenids the tips of the lobes bear a discrete apical complex of tightly packed (appar­
ently keratinized: [30]) lamellae or plates, as in some species of Amphisbaena, Leposternon, 
and Monopeltis [30, 80] (Fig. 16.2F). The hemipenis in Trogonophiidae (six species), at least 
in Trogonophis [29], is deeply bilobed with densely packed, low lamellar ridges ornamenting 
the asulcate and lateral surfaces of the lobes - these are extremely similar to the keratinized 
apical disc lamellae of amphisbaenids other than not being associated with the branches of 
the sulcus. In contrast, the very scant information available for Bipedidae (three species) and 
Blanidae (seven species) suggests a hemipenis that might not be bilobed (at least not deeply), 
and that might lack transverse body or lobe ornamentation, and have a simple, flared (rather 
than bifurcate) sulcus (Bipes and Blanus: [29]). We are unaware of descriptions or images of 
the hemipenes of Cadeidae (two species) or of Rhineuridae (one species). Thus, plesio- 
morphic states of hemipenial characters for Amphisbaenia are unclear.
16.3.6 Toxicofera
Toxicofera unites snakes with anguiforms and iguanians, a clade with strong support in 
recent molecular phylogenetic analyses (see Chapter 10). Here we summarize hemipenial 
morphology within the three major toxicoferan lineages, Iguania (ca 1,970 species), 
Anguiformes (ca 240 species) and Serpentes (ca 3,870 species).
Iguania
Iguania comprises two major clades, Acrodonta and Pleurodonta. Acrodonta comprises 
Chamaeleonidae (217 species) and Agamidae (534), while Pleurodonta (ca 1,000 species) 
comprises a diverse group of 11 New World, Fijian, and Malagasy iguanian families (e.g., 
[23]). Chamaeleonid hemipenes have been relatively well studied [10, 27, 81-86]. They are 
unilobed or slightly bilobed and conical, though more strongly expanded and slightly 
clavate in at least some brookesiines. The body and base of the lobes in at least most 
chamaeleonines is ornamented by calyces (or combinations of calyces and flounce-like 
ornamentations) varying in size and shape [27] (Fig. 16.3C). The lobes (except for the tips) 
and body of the hemipenes of brookesiines are typically naked [27, 82, 83]. The chamae- 
leonid sulcus spermaticus is simple and mostly greatly expanded, with outer lips sometimes 
asymmetrically developed and/or flap like [10]. The expanded outer lips delimit a differen­
tiated apical region that is naked except for various unique, generally bilateral projections 
(Fig. 16.3C) termed rotulae, papillary fields, crests, horns, pedunculi, auriculae, and papil­
lae in elongate pairs or tufts [10, 27, 81]. Agamids generally have stout, clavate, slightly to 
moderately bilobed hemipenes (Fig. 16.3D, E; Supplementary Figure 16.S1b). The lobes 
bear calyculate ornamentation, though this may grade into papillae and/or ‘flounces’ 
towards the bases of lobes [87, 88]. Some Calotes bear a median fleshy projection at the 
asulcate base of the lobular region [88]. The hemipenial body, often short, typically lacks 
differentiated ornamentation. At least some species of Draco have notably spinose ridges 
[10]. The sulcus is often bifurcate [10, 87-89] but some appear to be simple, flaring 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

366 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
centrolineally onto the lobes with a large, well-defined naked (or finely calyculate [10]) 
region formed between the outer sulcal lips (Fig. 16.3D). In many species, the sulcal lips are 
strongly asymmetrical, with one a prominent flap that may overlie the sulcus (e.g., Sitana 
gokakensis: [87]; Fig. 16.3D, E). Some species lack discernable, raised lips (e.g., 
Lyriocephalus scutatus, Ceratophora stoddarti: [10]). The calyculate distal end of the organ 
has been described as having four segments or bulges [10, 88] because the two lobes are 
often subdivided along their lengths by the outer margins of the substantially flared, 
centripetal, or centrolineal sulcus spermaticus.
Information on pleurodont hemipenes is very uneven for this speciose clade, with 
relatively little data (and very few images) available for some large groups. Pleurodont 
hemipenes are mostly slightly to moderately bilobed, with deeply bilobed organs (probably 
apomorphic [10]) restricted to a few families that neither subtend the pleurodont tree 
basally nor which are closely related (Tropiduridae, Polychrotidae, Leiosauridae [10], some 
Dactyloidae [90]). Unilobed hemipenes appear to be rare within Pleurodonta (e.g., Anolis 
gaigei: [91]). The sulcus spermaticus can be simple and centrolineally flared (e.g., Iguana: 
[10]; Oplurus: [92]), though is typically bifurcate and centripetal in members of the families 
having moderately to deeply bilobed hemipenes (e.g., the leiosaurids Diplolaemus and 
Pristidactylus: [10]; tropidurids: [48, 93]). The sulcus bifurcates at the base of the lobular 
region before flaring substantially on each lobe in many dactyloids [90, 91]. Sulcal lips vary 
in prominence and can be strongly asymmetric (e.g., Iguanidae: [10]), those in 
Brachylophus form a tube-like sulcus [40]. The sulcus typically reaches the tips of the lobes 
or close to them [10, 48, 90, 94]. Pleurodont hemipenes are rarely unornamented (e.g., 
Anolis gaigei: [91]), most commonly the lobes and (mostly the distal part of the) body bear 
calyces (perhaps absent only in Polychrotidae: [10]), sometimes grading proximally into 
transverse lamellae or flounces [9, 10, 40, 48, 94]. Calyces are sometimes restricted to tips of 
lobes (e.g., Crotaphytus: [9]) or occur only on the asulcate surface and/or more proximally 
(e.g., [94]). In Polychrus marmoratus, the lobes bear spinose papillae [10]. Lobes of some 
iguanids (e.g., Iguana iguana) have stiffened ridges (welts of [9]; Stutzsaume of [10]). 
Mineralized ornaments have not been reported. Lobes in some taxa bear fleshy apical 
projections that seem to be expanded from the distal tips of the sulcal lips (e.g., [94]), 
reminiscent of gymnophthalmid hemipenes. Species in multiple families have a median 
projection in the crotch [10]. A slightly to moderately bilobed hemipenis with a flared sulcus 
(whether simple or bifurcate) and largely calyculate lobes is similar to that of agamids, and 
thus some or all of these features might be plesiomorphic for Iguania.
Anguiformes
The basal divergence within Anguiformes is between Neoanguimorpha (Helodermatidae, 
Xenosauridae, Diploglossidae, Anniellidae and Anguidae: 5, 12, 51, 6, and 80 extant species, 
respectively) and Paleoanguimorpha (Shinisauridae, Lanthanotidae and Varanidae: 1, 1, 
and 83 species) [23]. A major feature of anguiform hemipenes is the presence of paryphas- 
mata [10] (Figs. 16.3F and 16.4A, B) - transverse, flounce-like ornaments on the body and 
lobes that are distinctively ribbed with longitudinal ridges of denser connective tissue [41]. 
Many anguiforms have an apical projection at the extremity of each lobe, but only in 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 367
Varanidae are these mineralized to form hemibacula [31, 81] (Fig. 16.4B). Most anguiform 
hemipenes are slightly to deeply bilobed (with the slightly bilobed forms accentuated by 
substantial and often rigid apical projections), with a simple, flared sulcus spermaticus [10, 
18, 31]. Helodermatids depart from this in having unilobed organs (and undivided retractor 
muscles) lacking apical projections [18, 31]. Additionally, helodermatids have a wide sulcus, 
and paryphasmata that are asymmetrically disposed on both the proximal and more distal 
parts of the body [31]. Xenosaurids lack paryphasmata, but have denticulate sulcal lips and 
a denticulate apical process [10, 31]. Within Diploglossidae, Diploglossus spp. and Ophiodes 
spp. have a moderately to deeply bilobed hemipenis, with the lobes (and distal body in 
Diploglossus) ornamented by paryphasmata (‘pleated flounces’ of [14, 95]). The longitu­
dinal ridges on the flounces of the paryphasmata of diploglossids are often prominent, with 
paryphasmata superficially appearing calyculate [14, 95]. At least D. nigropunctatus pos­
sesses a ‘solid awn’ [95] projecting from each apex - though it is unknown if these are 
mineralized (= hemibacula). The centrolineal sulcus spermaticus of diploglossids is not 
bifurcate, it expands below the lobular division where each outer lip runs along the 
respective lobe, the inner surfaces of which are naked [95]. Anguids have generally similar 
hemipenes, though the free edges of the paryphasmata are spinose in some taxa (Anguis 
and some Ophisaurus: [81]; Figs. 16.3F and 16.4A), but without evidence of mineralization 
[14] and perhaps likely to be extensions of the denser ridges of connective tissue sequen­
tially arranged in paryphasmata. Hemipenes of the limbless Anniellidae have been 
described only very briefly, as undivided organs ornamented with transverse and wrinkled 
folds or flounces [9: p. 466], lacking mineralized structures [14].
Within Paleoanguimorpha, Shinisaurus has papillate paryphasmata and fleshy apical 
horns. Lanthanotus (Supplementary Figure 16.S1d) and Varanus (Fig. 16.4B) have very 
slightly bilobed (possibly unilobed in some Varanus) hemipenes with often elongate bodies, 
a simple sulcus, and naked tips of the lobes. However, there are several differences between 
species of the two genera. Apical projections are mineralized only in Varanus - earlier 
suggestions of mineralized elements in Lanthanotus [10, 18] having been subsequently 
questioned or rejected [31, 96]. Additionally, Varanus hemipenes have more or less asym­
metrical lobes, ornamentation, and path of the sulcus, whereas Lanthanotus hemipenes are 
symmetrical. The naked tips of the lobes in many Varanus form a more or less well-defined 
apical platform, the border of which is continuous with the flared sulcal lips. Among Varanus 
there is variation in features such as the form of the hemibacular elements (shaft and cusps, 
degree of asymmetry, and number of mineralized elements), the form of the apical platform, 
prominence and symmetry of the sulcal lips, and the disposition and form of paryphasmata 
(e.g., [10, 18, 31, 96]). Varanus indicus and V. prasinus and close relatives have particularly 
strongly asymmetrical hemipenes, including a sulcus that extends to the tip of only that lobe 
bearing paryphasmata and a smaller hemibaculum, instead of flaring at the base of the 
lobular region and/or terminating at an apical disc [31, 97].
Serpentes
Relationships among major lineages of extant snakes have long been debated on the basis 
of morphological and molecular data (see Chapter 10). The traditional basal division into 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

368 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
Scolecophidia and Alethinophidia has come under substantial pressure, with most recent 
molecular analyses supporting scolecophidian paraphyly. Although alethinophidian mono- 
phyly is not controversial, Macrostomata (‘wide-gaped’ alethinophidians; see Chapters 9 
and 19) is considered para- or polyphyletic, with the non-macrostomatan Aniliidae and 
Uropeltoidea being the sister groups of Tropidophiidae and either Pythonoidea or all other 
afrophidians, respectively [23, 98, 99].
‘Scolecophidia’ - Here we treat this putatively paraphyletic group of mostly small and 
highly fossorial snakes as three main lineages: Typhlopoidea, Leptotyphlopidae, and 
Anomalepididae. In recent molecular phylogenies, the former two are sister taxa, together 
sister of all other extant snakes, with Anomalepididae the sister of Alethinophidia. Until 
recently, only a limited number of scolecophidian hemipenial descriptions were available 
[17, 100-106], more becoming available in the last decade [45, 107-114] though information 
remains scattered. Many published descriptions are of incompletely everted and/or inflated 
organs (e.g., [17, 102, 110]), an expected outcome due to small absolute size, acknowledged by 
most authors. Although the morphology of partially everted and inflated organs should be 
interpreted carefully, the available information is generally informative ([11, 13]; this chapter). 
In general, scolecophidian hemipenes are unilobed with a simple sulcus spermaticus. The 
sulcus typically appears to flare distally before reaching the lobular tip (in those taxa without 
filiform hemipenes) which is a lizard-like condition not seen in the vast majority of other extant 
snakes (Figs. 16.4C-F and 16.5A, B) except for some derived and obviously convergent cases 
(e.g., Phyllorhynchus: [37]). The hemipenial body tends to be naked or ornamented with large 
and well-spaced flounces. Calyces, papillae and spines occur in a few taxa.
For Leptotyphlopidae (ca 140 species) hemipenes have been described mainly for 
species of the Neotropical Epictinae (e.g., [102, 106, 108-111, 113], and a few species of 
the African and Arabian Leptotyphlops and Myriopholis [17, 107]. Leptotyphlopid hemi­
penes are unilobed with a simple sulcus (Fig. 16.5B). The organ can be somewhat tubular 
throughout or have a bulbous basal region from which extends a long and thin distal 
needle-like portion with no observable lobular region or apical specializations [106, 108, 
111], or finger-like with a sulcus flaring distally on a slightly expanded tip sometimes 
ornamented by a fleshy papilla (‘awn’ of [17]). When the distal region is not needle- or 
finger-like, the sulcus can flare to drain on fleshy walls interconnected by a series of septa 
well below the tip (Trilepida macrolepis; Fig. 16.5B) or flare at an apical disc or a central 
mound ornamented with papillae, without reaching the distal tip of the organ. The body is 
naked (e.g., Epictia munoai, Rena segrega: [109]) or ornamented with fleshy transverse 
flanges, papillae, and/or sometimes spinose calyces (Trilepida brasiliensis, Epictia spp.: 
[109, 111]). It is unclear whether microscopic spines or spinules described for some 
leptotyphlopids (e.g., [103, 111] are mineralized. The apical disc or central mound can be 
surrounded by feebly developed fleshy flounces, papillae or calyces.
Typhlopoidea comprises Gerrhopilidae (21 species), Xenotyphlopidae (one species) and 
Typhlopidae (ca 420 species). As far as we are aware, there is no published information on 
hemipenial morphology in the former two families. Typhlopid hemipenes are known 
mainly from species of Typhlopinae [45, 115-117], Afrotyphlopinae [17, 115] and 
Asiatyphlopinae [100, 104, 105, 112, 115, 118]. Typhlopid hemipenes are of two main types
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 369
Figure 16.5 Hemipenes of (A) Afrotyphlops lineolatus (Typhlopidae); (B) Trilepida macrolepis 
(Leptotyphlopidae: Reprinted from Martins et al. with permission from © 2019 Blackwell Verlag 
GmbH [109); (C) Cylindrophis melanotus (Cylindrophiidae; possibly incompletely everted); (D) 
Trachyboa boulengeri (Tropidophiidae); (E) Tropidophis paucisquamis (Tropidophiidae: Reprinted 
from Curcio et al. with permission from © 2012 by The Herpetologists’ League, Inc. from fig. 12 of 
[120]); (F) Anilius scytale (Aniliidae; courtesy A. Prudente). Sulcate (left) and asulcate (right) views. 
See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1 for colour version, and Box 16.1 for abbreviations.
(e.g., [100, 115]), ‘eversible’, as in other squamates, and ‘protrusible’, characteristic of 
Oceanian asiatyphlopines. Protrusible hemipenes comprise a permanently everted, stif­
fened awn that is sheathed helically within an eversible, fleshy hemipenial body [104]. The 
rigid awn is formed by stiffened connective tissue capable of bending at its extremity when 
retracted [104, 105]. Protrusible hemipenes are generally very long and slender (<1.0 mm 
diameter), with awns that taper gradually to pointed or slightly expanded tips [112]. The 
awn is shallowly excavated externally by the sulcus spermaticus. Protrusible hemipenes are 
invariably present in species of Ramphotyphlops, Acutotyphlops, and Anilios, and variably 
present in Indotyphlops, possibly representing a synapomorphy of that larger group (being 
secondarily lost within Indotyphlops).
Afrotyphlopines and typhlopines retain the typical eversible organ of other squamates 
[115]. The hemipenes of the afrotyphlopines Afrotyphlops and Rhinotyphlops are known 
from only a few partially everted and inflated organs that are likely unilobed with a simple 
sulcus, a mostly naked body or with two large fleshy basal papillae, and low, loosely spaced 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

370 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
calycal flanges on the lobes [17]. A flap-like expanded part of the sulcal lip may occur in 
R. lalandei [17], but confirmation requires examination of fully everted and inflated organs. 
The fully everted and partially expanded organ of Afrotyphlops lineolatus available to us 
(Fig. 16.5A) is unilobed with a simple sulcus terminating proximal to the tip, flaring into a 
domed naked apical area that is longitudinally wrinkled and bordered proximally by three 
or four flounces; the hemipenial body is naked. Typhlopine hemipenes occur in four main 
shapes: (1) distally expanded (conical or trumpet shaped), (2) uniformly cylindrical, (3) 
attenuate and tapering distally, (4) oblique [45, 117]. Oblique hemipenes are reported only 
in Antillean species [117]. Typhlopines have a similar overall hemipenial morphology, with 
a unilobed hemipenis and simple sulcus that ends proximal to the apex (Amerotyphlops 
reticulatus; Figs. 16.4F) or drains into a terminal depression - the apical disc or distal cap 
(Fig. 16.4C-E). The distal end of the sulcus of A. reticulatus is unusual, curving on the 
lobular region and slightly flaring into a region of densely packed irregular flanges and 
calyces. The typhlopine hemipenial body is usually naked or bears irregular and weakly 
defined flounces. Within typhlopines, only A. minuisquamus (Fig. 16.4C) and A. reticulatus 
(Fig. 16.4F) are known to exhibit relatively large, mineralized spines, the former bearing a 
pair of spines projecting distally from the apical disc and the latter a row of large curved 
spines arranged longitudinally on the distal half of the organ [45, 119]. The spines of 
A. reticulatus are similar to the hemipenial body spines of alethinophidians, but the pair 
of mineralized apical spines of A. minuisquamus resemble the hemibacula projecting from 
the apical platform of anguiforms - compare, for example, Fig. 16.4C with Varanus niloticus 
(fig. 3 of [18]) and V. mitchelli (fig. 46 of [31]). Amerotyphlops brongersmianus and 
A. paucisquamus have a small apical cup, the figured example of the latter species 
(Fig. 16.4D) is probably not fully inflated distally.
Knowledge of hemipenial morphology in anomalepidids (20 extant species) is restricted 
to the description of an everted (and likely fully inflated) organ of Liotyphlops albirostris 
[101]. The hemipenis is unilobed, bulbous, and ‘capitate’, bearing irregular spines on the 
asulcate side and on the tip. The sulcate surface is mainly unornamented, except for a 
small region of spinules at the base of the ‘capitulum’. The sulcus spermaticus is simple 
and distally flared. The expanded, subcircular intrasulcular area was possibly damaged 
but based on the only available figure [101] it resembles the naked, apical disc of 
some other scolecophidians and some lizards. Branch [17: p. 295] added that spines are 
‘papillose and appear non-ossified (pers. obs.) although they may have subsequently 
decalcified’.
Tropidophiidae - Hemipenes in Tropidophiidae (35 species) are deeply bilobed with a 
centripetal (Tropidophis) to slightly centrolineal (Trachyboa) bifurcate sulcus spermaticus 
dividing at or just below the lobular crotch and running on the internal surface of the lobes 
to reach their tip (Fig. 16.5D, E: the sulcus is mistakenly described as centrifugal by [120]). 
Tropidophis and Trachyboa have a largely naked hemipenial body, and lobes ornamented 
by subtransverse, more or less papillate, flounces. Unlike Trachyboa, the hemipenis of 
Tropidophis spp. is described as ‘quadrifurcate’ with the main (‘primary’) lobes each 
bearing a pair of apical projections (‘secondary lobes’), and the retractor muscle also being 
quadrifurcate [120, 121]. The sulcus tip drains at the base of the ‘secondary lobes’. In 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 371
Tropidophis paucisquamis (Fig. 16.5E), the inner surface of each lobe also bears a substan­
tial, ‘wing-like fold’ [120] ornamented with papillae.
Aniliidae - The hemipenis of the sole extant aniliid, Anilius scytale [21,122] (Fig. 16.5F) is 
similar to those of tropidophiids. The organ is deeply bilobed, with lobes about the same 
size as the body, with a centripetally bifurcate sulcus extending to the tip of each lobe 
(Fig. 16.5F). The hemipenial body is largely devoid of ornaments. Differently from its extant 
sister, Tropidophiidae, Anilius has flounces that become irregularly calyculate at the lobe 
tips (particularly on the asulcate side), and lacks notable apical projections, and chevron­
shaped and somewhat papillate flounces.
Uropeltoidea - Uropeltoidea comprises Cylindrophiidae (15 species), Anomochilidae 
(three species) and Uropeltidae (ca 60 species). Most of the scarce information available is 
for partially everted hemipenes of uropeltids, which have a unilobed, stout 
(Melanophidium) or slender, subcylindrical to slightly tapering (Rhinophis spp., Uropeltis 
grandis) hemipenis, with a simple sulcus spermaticus that has closely juxtaposed lips and 
extends to the tip without flaring or bifurcating [123-126]. Rhinophis melanoleucus has an 
additional basal, medial lobe-like process with irregular longitudinal folds but no evidence 
of a sulcus [125]. A spineless hemipenis with convoluted folds has been reported for 
M. punctatum, and a spinose hemipenis occurs in Rhinophis and Uropeltis species (at 
least R. dorsimaculatus, R. lineatus, U. grandis), with spines varying in size and distribution 
[123-126]. An illustration of perhaps the only fully everted hemipenis thus far documented 
for uropeltoids shows small spines throughout its length (U. grandis: [21: fig.106.1]); spines 
are also widely dispersed in R. melanoleucus [125]; R. lineatus has curved and closely- 
spaced spines on the distal one-third of the organ [127]; R. dorsimaculatus has fine spines 
along most of the organ’s length [124].
Among cylindrophiids, Cylindrophis engkariensis has been described as having a unilobed, 
naked, coniform hemipenis [128]. Cylindrophis aruensis has a short hemipenis without 
ornamentation and with prominent sulcal lips [122]. Our preparation of the hemipenes of 
two C. melanotus (Fig. 16.5C) largely agrees with these descriptions, the organ is unilobed, 
columnar, smooth, and lacks spines, and the simple sulcus is bordered by fleshy, well- 
developed lips that become increasingly prominent distally. However, the distal end of the 
organ bears a single wing-like projection. The sulcus appears to flare on the terminus of the 
organ, though very few cylindrophiid hemipenes have been described thus far and further 
work is clearly needed to establish hemipenial features for this family. We know of no 
published information on the hemipenis of Anomochilus, the only extant anomochilid genus.
Bolyeriidae - For the monotypic, possibly recently extinct, Mauritius endemic Bolyeria, 
the only available information regarding the hemipenis is given by Underwood [129], who 
described it as ‘very deeply divided’. This is suggestive of a bifurcate sulcus spermaticus, 
but nothing further can be concluded. We are unaware of hemipenis data for the other 
extant bolyeriid, Casarea dussumieri.
Pythonoidea - Pythonoidea comprises Xenopeltidae (two species), Loxocemidae (one 
species) and Pythonidae (38 species) (e.g., [23, 99, 130]). Their hemipenes are slightly to 
deeply bilobed with a centrolineal, bifurcate sulcus spermaticus, ornamented by large 
fleshy calyces and flounces but lacking spines or spinules (Fig. 16.6A, B). The hemipenes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

372 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
Figure 16.6 Hemipenes of (A) Morelia spilota (Pythonidae); (B) Xenopeltis unicolor (Xenopeltidae); 
(C) Epicrates cenchria (Boidae; courtesy P. Passos); (D) Charina bottae (Charinaidae); (E) Candoia 
bibroni (Candoiidae); (F) Calabaria reinhardtii (Calabariidae). Sulcate (left) and asulcate (right) 
views, except left of (F), an apical view of the sulcate surface. See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1 for 
colour version, and Box 16.1 for abbreviations.
of Loxocemus and Xenopeltis are similar in shape and ornamentation. Both have a deeply 
bilobed organ, with a centrolineal sulcus bifurcating below the crotch and extending distally 
to a broad apical disc delimited by a broad fleshy fringe; the body is naked proximally but 
otherwise ornamented by a few large flounces; the lobes tend to bear large and shallow 
calyces [17, 122, 131] (Fig. 16.6B).
Pythonids have unilobed (Morelia viridis: Supplementary Figure 16.S1e), slightly bilobed 
(e.g., Python anchietae), or deeply bilobed hemipenes (e.g., Python sebae) [17, 132], with a 
centrolineally (rarely centrifugally, e.g., P. curtus: [122]) bifurcate sulcus, and ornamenta­
tion in the form of calyces and/or often substantial flounces. The lobes can bear papillate 
terminal awns (e.g., P. curtus, Liasis olivaceus: [17, 131, 133]) carrying the end of the 
branches of the sulcus, and with a subterminal region of calyces grading into flounces 
[122]. Different pythonid groups have different patterns of flounces and/or calyces [122], 
and the body may also bear isolated papillae [123].
Booidea - Booidea comprises Calabariidae (one species), Sanziniidae (four species), 
Charinaidae (four species), Ungaliophiidae (three species), Erycidae (13 species), 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 373
Candoiidae (five species), and Boidae (65 species). Hemipenes within this group are 
unilobed [17, 21, 131, 134-136] (Fig. 16.6F) to feebly, moderately or deeply bilobed [21, 
137-139] (Fig. 16.6C-E; Supplementary Figure 16.S1f). Unilobed organs occur convergently 
in Eryx and Calabaria [17, 136] (Fig. 16.6F). The sulcus spermaticus generally bifurcates to 
reach the lobular tips and is centrolineal or slightly centrifugal. In Calabaria reinhardtii and 
Eryx jaculus the sulcus is simple and unflared [131, 136, 140]. In some candoids and in 
sanziniids, the branches of the bifurcate sulcus do not extend to the lobe tips [137]. Spines 
or other mineralized structures are absent and the hemipenial body is typically ornamented 
with large flounces often extending onto the lobes. The lobes can be ornamented with 
calyces and papillae, and the tip(s) may bear apical discs or awns [129, 137, 138]. Lobes are 
mainly calyculate in Boa, and are papillate in Corallus, Epicrates, and Eunectes [137-139] 
(Fig. 16.6C). Apical discs are domed in erycids [131], and concave in charinaids with 
shallow lateral (Lichanura) or deep cup-like structures (Charina) [131, 136, 137] 
(Fig. 16.6D). In C. bottae (Fig. 16.6D), the sulcus is simple, its lips flaring distally in a naked 
area between the laterodistal cups. Confirmation is needed of whether the sulcus is 
bifurcate or simply flared in particular species. The hemipenes of ungaliophiids have been 
briefly described (Ungaliophis: [141]) and illustrated (Exiliboa: [131]), being long, bilobed 
and with a bifurcate sulcus. Ungaliophiids typically retain large transverse flounces around 
the distal half of the hemipenial body and proximal region of the lobes, with the more distal 
parts of the lobes bearing calyces [131, 141]. A small distal awn at the tip of the lobes in 
Exiliboa [131] is not confirmed in Ungaliophis due to the partially everted condition of the 
only hemipenis described [141].
Caenophidia - Spinules on the lobes is considered a synapomorphy of Caenophidia, and 
spinules and spines extending proximally onto the hemipenial body as a synapomorphy of 
Colubroides [11, 24]. Hemipenes of non-endoglyptodont caenophidians (ca 66 extant 
species: Acrochordidae, Xenodermidae, and Pareidae [including Xylophiinae: [142]) retain 
the plesiomorphic hemipenial characteristics of very long, cylindrical lobes, and naked 
bodies (e.g., [143]). The presence of well-defined calyces arranged in rows on the lobes is 
considered a synapomorphy of Colubroides [24, 143]. The most pronounced hemipenial 
variation in caenophidians occurs in the diverse Endoglyptodonta (ca 3,140 species: 
Viperidae, Homalopsidae, Elapoidea, Colubroidea: [143]), a well-supported clade charac­
terized by hemipenial bodies bearing mineralized, pointed to hooked spines, and 
shortened lobes (with some exceptions, e.g., Pseudaspis cana) [143]. Body spines vary 
considerably in shape and number and can be reduced or absent in some groups (e.g., 
Psammophiidae; [143]). In viperids, spines often occur on the lobes. In homalopsids and 
some pseudoxyrhophiids, bulbous lobes are uniquely covered with densely disposed 
spinules [143].
Hemipenes in Colubroides are typically deeply bilobed. Unilobed hemipenes occur only in 
lineages deeply phylogenetically nested within Endoglyptodonta. The sulcus spermaticus is 
invariably bifurcate in many endoglyptodont lineages, including Viperidae, Homalopsidae, 
Pseudaspididae, Lamprophiidae, and Pseudoxenodontidae. Within Elapoidea, the sulcus of 
Prosymnidae and Psammophiidae is likely apomorphically simple, associated with a sec­
ondarily unilobed hemipenis. Colubroidea includes taxa with a bifurcate or simple sulcus 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

374 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
spermaticus - the bifurcate form characterizing Dipsadidae (with rare exceptions, such as 
Amnesteophis melanauchen; see [144], for discussion), Pseudoxenodontidae, Calamariidae, 
and Grayiidae, and the simple sulcus characterizing Sibynophiidae and Colubridae. Both a 
simple and centripetally bifurcate sulcus occur in Natricidae [11, 37, 145, 146], though 
instances of a simple sulcus in natricids are considered non-homologous to those of 
Colubridae or Sibynophiidae, instead resulting from the loss of the right branch of the bifurcate 
sulcus spermaticus ([11, 146]; see [37] and references therein for a detailed review of natricid 
hemipenial morphology). Colubridae is diagnosed by a simple sulcus derived from the loss of 
the left branch of a bifurcate sulcus [11, 37, 145, 146]. Sibynophiids bear a simple sharply 
curved, U-shaped convolution of the sulcus [147].
16.4 Discussion
Despite the paucity of hemipenial information for some major squamate lineages (e.g., 
Dibamidae, Scincomorpha, Cordyloidea, Anomalepididae) some inferences about major 
patterns in squamate hemipenial evolution can be made. Some external features vary 
substantially within as well as among major squamate clades, and/or vary in ways that 
make homology determination or identification of discrete states particularly challenging. 
Such features include absolute size, the form and distribution of many types of ornamen­
tation, the orientation of the sulcus spermaticus on the body, the relative lengths of lobes, 
and the distance between and prominence of sulcal lips. This is sometimes compounded by 
deficiencies in terminology that can be readily applied across Squamata. Several features 
can be difficult to assess from published descriptions and 2D images and illustrations, 
especially if comparisons include dissected (inverted) and (possibly incompletely) everted 
and inflated hemipenes. Lack of histological data also limits thorough homology assess­
ments for several features, especially ornamentations. Finally, determining patterns of 
variation across Squamata would benefit in future from more thorough considerations of 
phylogenetic uncertainty and more explicit ancestral-state estimations within as well as 
among major lineages. Such work, beyond the scope of this chapter, would help test some 
of our assumptions about what constitutes relatively ‘minor’ and ‘major’ variation within 
and among major squamate lineages, and about character-state polarities across the tree.
Because our knowledge of hemipenial variation in major squamate groups is very patchy, 
hemipenial features that seemingly vary substantially within as well as among major 
lineages are largely excluded from further discussion here. Instead, we focus on major 
evolutionary patterns for states of characters that can be traced with more confidence, with 
particular attention paid to features inferred for the ancestral snake and early crown snakes. 
States for these characters are plotted for terminal taxa in Figure 16.1.
16.4.1 Hemipenial Shape
Slightly to moderately bilobed hemipenes (and bifurcate retractor muscles) seem to be the 
dominant condition in squamates, occurring in most gekkotans, scincomorphs, lateratans, 
iguanians, anguiforms, and snakes for which we have information, suggesting that this 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 375
morphology arose early within squamates and was possibly present in their most recent 
common ancestor. However, the lobular condition is not clear in the basally diverging 
Dibamidae, for which only the partially everted organ of Dibamus greeri is known so far (see 
§ 16.3.1), and the plesiomorphic condition in some major lineages is not well established. 
Instances of unilobed hemipenes occur within all major lineages of lizards and snakes, 
seemingly as independently derived states (though interpreted as plesiomorphic for some 
major lineages: e.g., [81]). Where they occur, deeply bilobed hemipenes also appear to have 
evolved independently in several main lineages, within scincomorphs (e.g., 
sphenomorphines), iguanians (tropidurids), amphisbaenians (amphisbaenids), and snakes 
(alethinophidians). If scolecophidians are paraphyletic then the unilobed condition was 
either acquired independently in both major lineages (Anomalepididae and 
Leptotyphlopidae + Typhlopoidea) or the bilobed condition is a secondarily derived syna- 
pomorphy of Alethinophidia. With bilobed hemipenes being the likely ancestral condition 
of Alethinophidia, the unilobed hemipenes of uropeltoids (and some caenophidians) are 
interpreted as apomorphic.
16.4.2 Sulcus Spermaticus
A distally bifurcate or flared (expanded) sulcus spermaticus occurs in most major squamate 
lineages (e.g., Figs. 16.2C, E and 16.3C, D). In the flared condition, the sulcus spermaticus 
widens distally at or towards the apex of a typically unilobed or slightly bilobed organ. This 
occurs in most gekkotans, scincomorphs, lateratans, and iguanians (except those with 
deeply bilobed hemipenes), and perhaps all anguiforms and scolecophidians. Teiioids, 
amphisbaenians, and alethinophidians are exceptions, in which the sulcus spermaticus 
tends to retain parallel lips throughout its length (with rare exceptions), likely representing 
a synapomorphy of Teiioidea and evolving independently in the other two groups. 
Amphisbaenians and alethinophidians (except e.g., Cylindrophis) are similar in having 
narrow sulci that extend to the extremities of the lobes without opening or broadening 
into a naked region. In amphisbaenian, teiioid, and snake bilobed hemipenes, the sulcus 
may bifurcate in the crotch (centripetally) to form two distinct branches that reach (or 
almost reach) each lobular extremity. In alethinophidians, the sulcus may also divide on the 
sulcate surface of the hemipenial body to reach the distal extremity of the lobe or lobes 
centrifugally or centrolineally.
The section of the sulcus spermaticus on the hemipenial body tends to form a broader 
gutter with often flap-like lips in limbed squamates (e.g., Figs. 16.2E and 16.3D, E) while in 
limb-reduced, serpentiform groups that section of the sulcus is often more tightly enclosed 
by less flap-like outer lips (e.g., Figs. 16.2F and 16.3F). Formulating and plotting discrete 
character states describing variation in the sulcal lips, such as the spacing between the 
outer lips (on at least the hemipenial body), the extent to which they protrude, and their 
thickness, is difficult. However, closely spaced, well-defined lips (and a relatively narrow, 
clearly demarcated, regular sulcus) throughout the hemipenial body might be a 
synapomorphy of snakes, with lizard sulci typically having more widely spaced and/or 
less-well defined lips (with a few, moderate exceptions: e.g., Fig. 16.3A). This condition 
seems to be present (convergently) also in amphisbaenians.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

376 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
Within snakes, a bilobed hemipenis with a narrow sulcus spermaticus that bifurcates 
centripetally with branches ending at the tips of lobes is considered the likely ancestral 
condition of Alethinophidia (e.g., Fig. 16.5F). Scolecophidians (and possibly Cylindrophis) 
have a lizard-like sulcus spermaticus that flares near the tip of the hemipenis (e.g., 
Liotyphlops albirostris, Amerotyphlops reticulatus, Afrotyphlops lineolatus: § 16.3.6; Figs. 
16.4C-F and 16.5A, B), sometimes into an apical cup that resembles the condition present 
in varanids (e.g., Amerotyphlops spp.; Fig. 16.4C, E). Although proximally the sulcal lips are 
closely spaced and never flap like (as also occurs in other snakes, unlike the condition in 
many lizards), none of the described scolecophidian sulci maintain closely juxtaposed lips 
reaching the distal extremity of the lobular region, unlike the condition in (almost all) 
alethinophidian snakes (exceptions being within booids and colubroideans and possibly 
Cylindrophis).
Among alethinophidians, a centripetal sulcus spermaticus occurs in the basally diverging 
clade Amerophidia while the remaining non-caenophidian alethinophidians have a sulcus 
(where bifurcate) that is more centrifugal. Tropidophiids and Anilius share a similar, deeply 
bifurcated hemipenis, a sulcus that runs throughout a mainly naked hemipenial body and 
bifurcates centripetally, and lobes covered with flounces. This combination of characters is 
not known in other non-caenophidian clades, with densely disposed flounces on the lobes 
possibly representing a hemipenial synapomorphy of Amerophidia (appearing 
convergently within Caenophidia). In the remaining alethinophidians, centripetally bifur­
cating sulci appear in only a few endoglyptodont groups (e.g., Homalopsidae, Elapidae, 
Natricidae, Atractaspididae, and a single dipsadid).
Among snakes a simple sulcus spermaticus occurs in scolecophidians, uropeltoids, 
calabariids, cyclocorids, psammophiids, sibynophiids, colubrids, and within natricids and 
dipsadids [8, 11]. Except for scolecophidians that likely retained a plesiomorphic lizard 
condition, a simple sulcus in snakes probably evolved multiple times independently from a 
bifurcate condition.
16.4.3 Lobular Apical Ornamentations Intimately Associated with the Distal 
Extremity of the Sulcus Spermaticus
In lizards, the extremity of sulcal branches is sometimes closely associated with substantial 
distal lobular projections. Alethinophidians lack such projections at the extremity of the 
sulci, except for rare, convergently derived instances (e.g., Tropidophis, Python, Exiliboa, 
Xenochrophis, Aspidura). As far as we know, substantial apical lobular projections are 
absent also in pleurodonts, lacertids, most gekkotans and scincomorphs. Specialized lobu­
lar projections (often associated with the end of the sulcus) occur in some anguiforms, 
some gekkotans and some scolecophidians in the form of mineralized hemibacula, in 
chamaeleonids in the form of unique unmineralized ornaments [31], and in teiioids in 
the form of fleshy awns [28] and papillae [35]. These features are likely synapomorphies of 
their respective groups, except for scolecophidians, where hemibacula are currently known 
in only a single species. Interestingly, Amerotyphlops minuisquamus (Fig. 16.4C) has a 
hemipenial morphology that is very similar to some varanids (compare with Varanus 
mitchelli; [31]), including a pair of mineralized, hemibacula-like projections from within 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 377
the space of the apical cup flanking the flared sulcal lips. Amphisbaenids present serially 
lamelate lobular tips forming a discrete patch around each sulcal branch extremity that are 
unique to the group (e.g., [30]). Although this lamellar region of amphisbaenids lacks 
substantial apical projections, these apical ornamentations are closely associated with the 
distal extremity of the sulcus. More investigation of scolecophidian hemipenes is required, 
but our current interpretation is that the most recent common ancestors of extant snakes, of 
extant alethinophidians and of extant caenophidians lacked notable lobular apical orna­
mentation associated with the distal end(s) of the sulcus spermaticus.
16.4.4 Well-Developed Spines on the Hemipenial Body
In general, lizard hemipenial bodies are not ornamented with mineralized spines, except 
for gymnophthalmids in which they occur in at least 21 genera (see [14] and references 
therein). Mineralized spines are also present in snakes, presumably convergently - the 
hemipenial body spines of gymnophthalmids differ from those of snakes in being more 
regularly arranged and typically associated with (embedded within) approximately trans­
verse, laminar bands of soft tissue (see § 16.3.4). Among non-caenophidian snakes, sub­
stantial spiny structures on the hemipenial body are known in at least one anomalepidid (in 
the only hemipenis documented for the family - unclear whether these structures are 
mineralized), a single typhlopid, and perhaps in most uropeltids, being absent in 
Amerophidia, Cylindrophiidae, Pythonoidea and Booidea. Hemipenial spines on at least 
the lobes are a putative synapomorphy for Caenophidia, being secondarily lost independ­
ently in Pareidae, Psammophiidae and Calamariidae [11]. Spines extend onto the hemi- 
penal body in viperids, homalopsids, colubroids and elapoids, being a synapomorphy of 
Endoglyptodonta (excepting rare cases of secondary loss; see § 16.3.6 Caenophidia). Given 
the absence of mineralized body spines in toxicoferan lizards and almost all scolecophi- 
dians, we consider it likely that the spiny body considered typical of snakes is a synapo- 
morphy of Caenophidia that is present convergently in some scolecophidians 
and uropeltids.
16.4.5 Soft-Tissue Ornamental Ridges and Lamellae on the Hemipenial Body 
and Lobes
This section addresses soft-tissue ornamentations excluding the bulbous folds of 
scincomorphs and papillae (other than instances of papillate flanges). Many squamate 
hemipenes are ornamented with raised, predominantly transversely oriented soft-tissue 
structures organized serially on the body and lobes. These have been described in lizards 
using a plethora of terms, but in snakes have been described primarily with the single term 
‘flounce’ despite their great diversity in that group. Although exceptions can often be found, 
and variation is somewhat continuous, we recognize two main morphotypes of predomin­
antly transversely oriented soft-tissue ornaments in squamates: relatively thin and limp 
(soft) versus more stout and stiffened. In addition, we perceive major axes of variation in 
these structures in terms of how closely and regularly they are arranged, how prominent 
they are, and whether or not they bear mineralized spines. If we provisionally assume that 
these structures are homologous across Squamata to some extent (though see e.g., [10] for a 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

378 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
different view), then what term(s) is (are) best to apply? We consider crease to be best used 
to describe a rather superficial, perhaps somewhat irregular groove or ridge. The terms fold 
and plica might be appropriate but we lack sufficient histological data to understand the 
extent to which these features are genuinely folded. Thus, we prefer terms such as flounce, 
lamella, lamina, or welt to more neutrally describe a projecting ridge or flap that may or 
may not be formed of folded tissue. Flounce and especially frill might be best restricted to 
describe a flange with a longer free than attached edge. While recognizing the stability of 
the use of flounce as a general term in snake hemipenial literature, we here use ‘flange’ as a 
general term for all similar structures across Squamata.
In snakes, flounces can be short (low) or long (prominent) and more or less frilly, but are 
typically limp (soft), and often disposed in somewhat irregularly and/or relatively widely 
spaced series. The same general form (relatively prominent and often not tightly packed 
flanges) occurs in many non-agamid toxicoferan lizards (Chamaeleonidae, Pleurodonta, 
and Anguiformes). Among toxicoferan lizards paryphasmata (flounces stiffened with longi­
tudinal ridges) are a synapomorphy of Anguiformes. In Laterata, flanges are generally 
disposed in highly regular and densely spaced series, with each flange typically short (not 
prominent), forming a stiff ridge or lamina (often with a transverse, distal band of denser 
tissue) that may be fringed with embedded mineralized spines (Gymnophthalmidae) or 
microscopic spinules (Teiidae) in highly regular series. Data are scant for Scincomorpha 
and interpretation of homology is complicated by the disparate and obviously derived 
bulbous folds of scincids, but there is evidence of densely spaced series of flanges (some­
what like those of lateratans) in at least cordylids. Non-unidentatan squamates (dibamids 
and gekkotans) lack flanges on the hemipenial body. Thus, ornamental flanges on the 
hemipenial body are likely a synapomorphy of Unidentata. Within snakes, booids and 
pythonoids share a synapomorphy of large, fleshy and smooth flounces on the distal half 
of the hemipenial body and proximal region of the lobes - a condition also seen in some 
scolecophidians and higher caenophidians, but absent in most snakes. Regular fields of 
calyces, with their bounding flanges sometimes bearing projecting and seemingly mineral­
ized spinules, occur on mostly the lobes in representatives of Serpentes, Gekkota, and 
Iguania. Although being a synapomorphy of each of these major lineages (or subsets 
thereof), homology of these structures among these major lineages is doubtful (though 
calyces have been considered homologous across lizards and convergently acquired in 
snakes: [10]).
16.4.6 The Hemipenis of the Ancestral Snake
As summarized above, lizard and snake hemipenes are similar in many ways, but with 
notable differences in gross morphology and apparent evolutionary trends. Lizards exhibit 
several features that are absent in snakes, including: flap-like and sometimes notably 
asymmetric sulcal lips, sulcus wide on body, densely spaced series of stout or stiffened 
flanges, flanges fringed with embedded mineralized spines, and inflated, bulbous folds. 
However, summarizing general conditions for lizards and for snakes (or other major 
squamate groups) is challenging because there are almost always exceptions, and because 
plesio- and apomorphic conditions are not yet clearly established for many lineages.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 379
Based on the preceding sections of this Discussion and the ten traits summarized in 
Figure 16.1, we propose that the most-recent common ancestor of alethinophidians had a 
moderately to deeply bilobed hemipenis with lobular flounces, lacking spines, and a sulcus 
spermaticus bifurcating centripetally and reaching the distal tip of the lobes, with closely 
spaced and symmetrical lips. Most or all of these traits might be synapomorphies of 
Alethinophidia. Deeper in the squamate tree, the ancestral toxicoferan likely had slightly 
bilobed hemipenes lacking spines and with a simple, distally flared sulcus. The ancestral 
toxicoferan possibly also had flounce-like flanges on the distal part of the body, that were 
lost in agamids and reduced in some pleurodonts - this interpretation would receive further 
support if anguiforms were the extant sister group of snakes (relationships among Iguania, 
Anguiformes and Serpentes are not yet compellingly resolved: e.g., [23]). Thus, notable 
changes in hemipenial morphology occurred between the basal divergence within 
Toxicofera and the basal divergence within Alethinophidia. Clarifying precisely where in 
the tree these changes occurred, and inferring with confidence the form of the hemipenis in 
the most recent common ancestor of extant snakes is more challenging. However, all 
described scolecophidians resemble the inferred ancestral toxicoferan in having a simple, 
flared sulcus, and thus this is likely the plesiomorphic condition for snakes. Given scole- 
cophidian paraphyly, the most parsimonious interpretation is also that the ancestral snake 
had a unilobed hemipenis (and a weakly differentiated lobular region) lacking spines or 
regular fields of calyces and with a simple sulcus spermaticus that flared distally into a 
naked apical region - though this is only minimally more parsimonious that the ancestral 
snake having a somewhat bilobed hemipenis and two main extant scolecophidian lineages 
acquiring their unilobed hemipenes independently.
Patchy morphological data make it particularly challenging to interpret the evolution of 
three major hemipenial features in the early history of snakes. Given the phylogenetic 
framework considered here [23], it is most parsimonious to interpret: (1) hemipenial body 
spines of caenophidians, some uropeltids, anomalepidids, and Amerotyphlops reticulatus, 
(2) hemibacula of anguiforms and A. minuisquamus, and (3) distally flared sulci of 
toxicoferan lizards, scolecophidians, and Cylindrophis melanotus as non-homologous, but 
they remain curious and striking instances of morphological similarity relatively close to the 
base of the snake tree. Given the patchy taxonomic sampling thus far, there remains great 
scope to further investigate these features. Phylogenetic uncertainty also plays a role. The 
(im)probabilities of these three homologies change if, for example, Anguiformes is the 
extant sister to snakes, if scolecophidians are monophyletic, or if uropeltoids are the extant 
sister to all other extant afrophidians - though we note that some of these contentious 
hypotheses about long-debated regions of the squamate tree are not strongly supported by 
the most recent analyses of large molecular data sets (Chapter 10).
16.4.7 Future Directions
There remains much to learn about the anatomy, function, diversity, and evolution of 
squamate hemipenes. Anatomical descriptions and/or illustrations are lacking or superfi­
cial for many species. Special attention should be given to particularly poorly sampled 
major lineages, especially gekkotans, dibamids, scincoids, cordyloids, pleurodonts, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

380 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
scolecophidians, bolyeriids, and uropeltoids. As a rule, descriptions should state the extent 
to which hemipenes are fully everted and fully inflated. It is challenging to formulate 
discrete character states for some hemipenial features, but it would be a step forwards to 
compile databases and map character states onto detailed phylogenies to more rigorously 
estimate ancestral states - something beyond the scope of this study.
The focus of this article has been the gross anatomy of the external surfaces of the 
hemipenis, but studies of tissue anatomy and of structures such as retractor and propulsor 
muscles will likely help to resolve outstanding issues about the homology (and effective 
terminology) and function of hemipenial traits. In pursuing this, modern imaging tech­
niques such as DiceCT can complement more traditional approaches such as histology. In 
terms of testing hypotheses that explain the taxonomic patterns of traits, improved and/or 
more densely sampled phylogenies will be needed in addition to unambiguously formu­
lated characters and states - not only for hemipenial features, but also for a broader suite of 
ecomorphological traits encompassing female reproductive tract anatomy (see e.g., 
Chapter 17), tail morphology, and reproductive behaviour and ecology.
Acknowledgements
See Supplementary Appendix 16.S1. In addition, we thank V. Deepak, Pedro M. S. Nunes 
and Ana L. C. Prudente for constructive reviews of the submitted manuscript.
References
1. M. L. Gredler, C. E. Larkins, F. Leal , et al., 
Evolution of external genitalia: insights 
from reptilian development. Sexual 
Development, 8 (2014), 3113-3126.
2. M. L. Gredler, Developmental and 
Evolutionary origins of the amniote 
phallus. Integrative and Comparative 
Biology, 56 (2016), 694-704.
3. T. J. Sanger, M. L. Gredler, and M. J. Cohn, 
Resurrecting embryos of the tuatara, 
Sphenodon punctatus, to resolve vertebrate 
phallus evolution. Biology Letters, 11 
(2015), 20150694.
4. H. G. Dowling and D. E. Savage, A guide to 
the snake hemipenis: a survey of basic 
structure and systematic characteristics. 
Zoologica, 45 (1960), 17-28.
5. F. Leal and M. J. Cohn, Development of 
hemipenes in the Ball Python snake 
Python regius. Sexual Development, 9 
(2014), 6-20.
6. A. Raynaud and C. Pieau. Embryonic 
development of the genital system. In 
C. Gans, F. Billett, eds., Biology of the 
Reptilia (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
1985), pp. 149-300.
7. E. N. Arnold. Variation in the cloacal and 
hemipenial muscles of lizards and its 
bearing on their relationships. In M.
W. J. Ferguson, ed., The Structure, 
Development and Evolution of Reptiles 
(Symposium of the Zoological Society of 
London 52) (London: Academic Press, 
1984), pp. 47-85.
8. E. D. Cope, The classification of the 
Ophidia. Transactions of the American 
Philosophical Society, 18 (1895), 
186-219.
9. E. D. Cope, On the hemipenes of the 
Sauria. Proceedings of the Academy of 
Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, 48 (1896), 
461-467.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 381
10. W. Bohme, Zur Genitalmorphologie der 
Sauria: funktionelle un 
stammesgeschichtliche Aspekte. Bonner 
Zoologische Monographien, 27 (1988), 
1-176.
11. H. Zaher, Hemipenial morphology of the 
South American xenodontine snakes, with 
a proposal for a monophyletic 
Xenodontinae and a reappraisal of 
colubroid hemipenes. Bulletin of the 
American Museum of Natural History, 
(1999), 1-168.
12. C. W. Myers and J. E. Cadle, On the snake 
hemipenis, with notes on Psomophis and 
techniques of eversion: a response to 
Dowling. Herpetological Review, 34 (2003), 
295-302.
13. H. Zaher and A. L. C. Prudente, Hemipenes 
of Siphlophis (Serpentes, Xenodontinae) 
and techniques of hemipenial preparation 
in snakes: a response to Dowling.
Herpetological Review, 34 (2003), 302-307.
14. P. M. Nunes, F. F. Curcio, J. G. Roscito, and 
M. T. Rodrigues, Are hemipenial spines 
related to limb reduction? A spiny 
discussion focused on gymnophthalmid 
lizards (Squamata: Gymnophthalmidae). 
Anatomical Record, 297 (2014), 482-495.
15. P. R. Manzani and A. S. Abe, Sobre dois 
metodos de preparo do hemipenis de 
serpentes. Memorias do institute Butantan, 
50 (1988), 15-20.
16. O. S. Pesantes, A method for preparing the 
hemipenis of preserved snakes. Journal of 
Herpetology, 28 (1994), 93-95.
17. W. R. Branch, Hemipenial morphology of 
african snakes: a taxonomic review. Part 1. 
Scolecophidia and Boidae. Journal of 
Herpetology, 20 (1986), 185-299.
18. W. R. Branch, Hemipeneal morphology of 
platynotan lizards. Journal of Herpetology, 
16 (1982), 16-38.
19. F. Zhang, Studies on morphological 
characters of hemipenes of the Chinese 
lizards [in Chinese]. Acta Herpetologica 
Sinica, 5 (1986), 254-259.
20. F. Zhang, S. Q. Hu, and E. M. Zhao, 
Comparative studies and phylogenetic 
discussions on hemipenial morphology of 
the Chinese Colubrinae (Colubridae). Acta 
Herpetologica Sinica, 3 (1984), 23-44.
21. H. G. Dowling and W. E. Duellman, 
Systematic Herpetology: A Synopsis of 
Families and Higher Categories (New York: 
HISS Publications, 1978).
22. C. McCann, The hemipenis in reptiles. 
Journal of the Bombay Natural History 
Society, 46 (1946), 347-368.
23. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
24. H. Zaher, F. G. Grazziotin, J. E. Cadle, et al., 
Molecular phylogeny of advanced snakes 
(Serpentes, Caenophidia) with an 
emphasis on South American 
xenodontines: a revised classification and 
descriptions of new taxa. Pap6is Avulsos de 
Zoologia (Sao Paulo), 49 (2009), 115-153.
25. P. Uetz, P. Freed, R. Aguilar, and J. Hosek. 
The Reptile Database. 
 
(accessed 1 May 2021)
www.reptile-
database.org2021 
26. J. M. Savage, On terminology for the 
description of the hemipenes of squamate 
reptiles. Herpetological Journal, 7 (1997), 
23-25.
27. C. Klaver and W. Bohme, Phylogeny and 
classification of the Chamaeleonidae 
(Sauria) with special reference to 
hemipenis morphology. Bonner 
Zoologische Monographien, 22 (1986), 1-64.
28. M. B. Harvey, G. N. Ugueto, and 
R. L. Gutberlet, Review of teiid morphology 
with a revised taxonomy and phylogeny of 
the Teiidae (Lepidosauria: Squamata). 
Zootaxa, 3459 (2012), 1-156.
29. W. Bohme, Zur systematischen Stellung der 
Amphisbanen (Reptilia: Squamata), mit 
besonderer BerUcksichtigung der 
Morphologie des Hemipenis. Journal of 
Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary 
Research, 27 (1989), 330-337.
30. H. I. Rosenberg, M. J. Cavey, and C. Gans, 
Morphology of the hemipenes of some
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

382 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
Amphisbaenia (Reptilia: Squamata). 
Canadian Journal of Zoology, 69 (1991), 
359-368.
31. T. Ziegler and W. Bohme, 
Genitalstrukturenund Paarungsbiologie bei 
squamaten Reptilien, speziell den 
Platynota, mit Bemerkungen zur 
Systematik. Mertensiella, 8 (1997), 1-210.
32. V. Parra, P. M. Nunes, and O. Torres- 
Carvajal, Systematics of Pholidobolus 
lizards (Squamata, Gymnophthalmidae) 
from southern Ecuador, with descriptions 
of four new species. ZooKeys, 954 (2020), 
109-156.
33. E. N. Arnold, Relationships of the 
Palaearctic lizards assigned to the genera 
Lacerta, Algyroides and Psammodromus 
(Reptilia: Lacertidae). Bulletin of the British 
Museum (Natural History), Zoology, 25 
(1973), 289-366.
34. I. G. Brennan and A. M. Bauer, Notes on 
hemipenial morphology and its 
phylogenetic implications in the 
Pygopodidae Boulenger, 1884. Bonn 
Zoological Bulletin, 66 (2017), 15-28.
35. C. W. Myers, G. Rivas Fuenmayor, and 
R. C. Jadin, New species of lizards from 
Auyantepui and La Escalera in the 
Venezuelan Guayana, with notes on 
‘microteiid’ hemipenes (Squamata: 
Gymnophthalmidae). American Museum 
Novitates, 3660 (2009), 1-31.
36. P. M. Sanchez-Martinez, M. P. Ramirez- 
Pinilla, E. Meneses-Pelayo, and 
P. M. Nunes, Hemipenial morphology of 
nine South American species of Mabuya 
(Scincidae: Lygosominae) with comments 
on the morphology of the family.
Anatomical Record, 11 (2020), 2917-2930.
37. J. E. Cadle, Hemipenial morphology in the 
North American snake genus 
Phyllorhynchus (Serpentes: Colubridae), 
with a review of and comparisons with 
natricid hemipenes. Zootaxa, 3092 (2011), 
1-25.
38. C. W. Myers and J. A. Campbell, A new 
genus and species of colubrid snake from 
the Sierra Madre del Sur of Guerrero,
Mexico. American Museum Novitates, 2708 
(1981), 1-20.
39. E. N. Arnold, The hemipenis of lacertid 
lizards (Reptilia: Lacertidae): structure, 
variation and systematic implications. 
Journal of Natural History, 20 (1986), 
1221-1257.
40. D. F. Avery and W. W. Tanner, Evolution of 
the iguanine lizards (Sauria, Iguanidae) as 
determined by osteological and myological 
characters. Science Bulletin, Brigham Young 
University, 12 (1971), 1-79.
41. A. Y. Al-ma’Ruf, R. P. Sari, I. Mostofa, et al., 
Morphology and histology of paryphasmata 
and hemibaculum of Varanus salvator 
based on sexual maturity. Open Veterinary 
Journal, 11 (2021), 330-336.
42. M. A. Smith, The Fauna of British India, 
including Ceylon and Burma. Reptilia and 
Amphibia. Vol. II. Sauria. (London: Taylor 
and Francis, 1935).
43. G. M. Shea and G. L. Reddacliff, 
Ossifications in the hemipenes of varanids. 
Journal of Herpetology, 20 (1986), 566-568.
44. Y. L. Werner, Are hemipenial ‘ossifications’ 
of Gekkonidae and Varanidae ossified? 
Israel Journal of Zoology, 35 (1988), 99-100.
45. R. Graboski, J. C. Arredondo, 
F. G. Grazziotin, et al., Molecular 
phylogeny and hemipenial diversity of 
South American species of Amerotyphlops 
(Typhlopidae, Scolecophidia). Zoologica 
Scripta, 48 (2019), 139-156.
46. R. C. Jadin and R. B. King, Ontogenetic 
effects on snake hemipenial morphology. 
Journal of Herpetology, 46 (2012), 
393-395.
47. W. Bohme, Uber das Stachelepithel am 
Hemipenis lacertider Eidechsen und seine 
systematische Bedeutung. Journal of 
Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary 
Research, 9 (1971), 187-223.
48. A. K. S. De-Lima, I. P. Paschoaletto, 
L. O. Pinho, et al., Are hemipenial traits 
under sexual selection in Tropidurus 
lizards? Hemipenial development, male 
and female genital morphology, allometry 
and coevolution in Tropidurus torquatus
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 383
(Squamata: Tropiduridae). PLoS ONE, 14 
(2019), e0219053.
49. H. Zaher and A. L. C. Prudente, 
Intraspecific variation of the hemipenis in 
Siphlophis and Tripanurgos. Journal of 
Herpetology, 33 (1999), 698-702.
50. E. N. Arnold, Why copulatory organs 
provide so many useful taxonomic 
characters: the origin and maintenance of 
hemipenial differences in lacertid lizards 
(Reptilia: Lacertidae). Biological Journal of 
the Linnean Society, 29 (1986), 263-281.
51. E. N. Arnold, O. Arribas, and S. Carranza, 
Systematics of the palaearctic and oriental 
lizard tribe Lacertini (Squamata: 
Lacertidae: Lacertinae), with descriptions 
of eight new genera. Zootaxa, 1430 (2007), 
1-86.
52. F. Glaw, J. Kosuch, F.-W. Henkel, et al., 
Genetic and morphological variation of the 
leaf-tailed gecko Uroplatus fimbriatus from 
Madagascar, with description of a new 
giant species. Salamandra, 42 (2006), 
129-144.
53. A. E. Greer, The relationships of the lizard 
genera Anelytropsis and Dibamus. Journal 
of Herpetology, 19 (1985), 116-156.
54. J. W. Streicher and J. J. Wiens, 
Phylogenomic analyses of more than 
4000 loci resolve the origin of snakes 
among lizard families. Biology Letters, 13 
(2017), 20170393.
55. I. S. Darevsky, Two new species of the 
worm-like lizard Dibamus (Sauria: 
Dibamidae) with remarks on the 
distribution and ecology of Dibamus in 
Vietnam. Asiatic Herpetological Research, 4 
(1992), 1-12.
56. M. Das and J. Purkayastha, Insight into the 
hemipnenial morphology of five species of 
Hemidactylus Oken, 1817 (Reptilia: 
Gekkonidae) of Guwahati, Assam, India. 
Hamadryad, 36 (2012), 32-37.
57. Z.-T. Lyu, C.-Y. Lin, J.-L. Ren, et al., Review 
of the Gekko (Japonigekko) subpalmatus 
complex (Squamata, Sauria, Gekkonidae), 
with description of a new species from 
China. Zootaxa, 4951 (2021), 236-258.
58. H. G. Dowling and F. W. Gibson, The 
hemipenis of the Onion-Tail gecko 
Thecadactylus rapicaudus (Houttuyn). 
Herpetological Review, 3 (1971), 110.
59. J. Purkayastha, M. Das, A. M. Bauer, et al., 
Notes on the Hemidactylus bowringii 
complex (Reptilia: Gekkonidae) in India, 
and a change to the national herpetofaunal 
list. Hamadryad, 35 (2010), 20-27.
60. H. Rosler and W. Bohme, Peculiarities of 
the hemipenes of the gekkonid lizard 
genera Aristelliger Cope, 1861 and 
Uroplatus Dumeril, 1806. Proceedings of 
the 13th Congress of the Societas Europaea 
Herpetologica (Bonn: SEH, 2006).
61. H. Rosler, A. Bauer, M. P. Heinicke, et al., 
Phylogeny, taxonomy, and zoogrography of 
the genus Gekko Laurenti, 1768 with the 
revalidation of G. reevesii Gray, 1831 (Sauria: 
Gekkonidae). Zootaxa, 2989 (2011), 1-50.
62. C. W. Linkem, A. C. Diesmos, and 
R. M. Brown, Molecular systematics of the 
Philippine forest skinks (Squamata: 
Scincidae: Sphenomorphus): testing 
morphological hypotheses of interspecific 
relationships. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 163 (2011), 1217-1243.
63. V. S. Vergilov, B. Zlatkov, and
N. D. Tzankov, Hemipenial differentiation 
in the closely related congeners Ablepharus 
kitaibelii (Bibron & Bory de Saint-Vincent, 
1833) and Ablepharus budaki Go^men, 
Kumlutas & Tosunoglu, 1996. Herpetozoa, 
30 (2017), 39-48.
64. A. K. Bhilala, K. Ashaharraza, M. Ingle, 
et al., Records of GUnther’s gracile skink, 
Riopa guentheri (Peters, 1879) (Reptilia: 
Scincidae: Lygosominae) from Central 
India. Records of the Zoological Survey of 
India, 121 (2021), 47-53.
65. A. E. Greer, A phylogenetic subdivision of 
Australian skinks. Records of the Australian 
Museum, 32 (1979), 339-371.
66. G. K. Noble and H. T. Bradley, The mating 
behavior of lizards; its bearing on the 
theory of sexual selection. Annals of the 
New York Academy of Sciences, 35 (1933), 
25-100.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

384 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
67. A. E. Greer, The Biology and 
Evolution of Scincid lizards. 
 
 
: 
Academia (2007).
www
.academia.edu/35305801/The_Biology_
and_Evolution_of_Scincid_Lizards.doc
68. C. A. Domergue, Observations sur les 
hemipenis des ophidiens et sauriens de 
Madagascar (1). Bulletin de l'Acad6mie 
Malgache, [1963] (1963), 21-33.
69. M. Lang, Generic relationships within 
Cordyliformes (Reptilia : Squamata). 
Bulletin de l’Institut Royal des Sciences 
Naturelles de Belgique, 61 (1991), 121-188.
70. W. Presch, Descriptions of the hemipenial 
morphology in eight species of microteiid 
lizards (Family Teiidae, Subfamily 
Gymnophthalmidae). Herpetologica, 34 
(1978), 108-112.
71. M. T. Rodrigues, R. Recoder, M. Teixeira Jr., 
et al., A morphological and molecular study 
of Psilops, a replacement name for the 
Brazilian microteiid lizard genus 
Psilophthalmus Rodrigues 1991 (Squamata, 
Gymnophthalmidae), with the description 
of two new species. Zootaxa, 4286 (2017), 
451-482.
72. C. W. Myers and M. A. Donnelly, The 
summit herpetofauna of Auyantepui, 
Venezuela: report from the Robert 
G. Goelet American Museum-Terramar 
expedition. Bulletin of the American 
Museum of Natural History, 308 (2008), 
1-147.
73. M. B. da Silva, G. R. de Lima-Filho, A.
A. Cronemberger, et al., Description of the 
hemipenial morphology of Tupinambis 
quadrilineatus Manzani and Abe, 1997 
(Squamata, Teiidae) and new records from 
Piaui, Brazil. ZooKeys, 361 (2013), 61-72.
74. P. M. Nunes. Morfologia hemipeniana dos 
lagartos microteideos e suas implicates 
nas relates filogeneticas da famflia 
Gymnophthalmidae (Teiioidea: 
Squamata). Vols. I and II. (Sao Paulo, 
Universidade de Sao Paulo, 2011).
75. M. A. Ribeiro-Jdnior, P. M. Sanchez- 
Martinez, L. J. C. de Lima Moraes, et al., 
Uncovering hidden species diversity of 
alopoglossid lizards in Amazonia, with the 
description of three new species of 
Alopoglossus (Squamata: 
Gymnophthalmoidea). Journal of 
Zoological Systematics and Evolutionary 
Research, 59 (2021), 1322-1356.
76. C. Hernandez Morales, M. J. Sturaro, 
P. M. Nunes, et al., A species-level total 
evidence phylogeny of the microteiid lizard 
family Alopoglossidae (Squamata: 
Gymnophthalmoidea). Cladistics, 36 
(2020), 301-321.
77. O. J. Arribas, Hemipenial morphology and 
microornamentation in Iberolacerta 
Arribas, 1997 (Squamata: Lacertidae). 
Butlletf de la Societat Catalana 
d’herpetologia, 24 (2017), 12-23.
78. K. Klemmer, Untersuchungen zur 
Osteologie und Taxonomie der 
europaischen Mauereidechsen. 
Abhandlungen der Senckenberg Gesellschaft 
fur Naturforschung, 496 (1957), 1-56.
79. P. H. Pinna, A. F. Mendonca, 
A. Bocchiglieri, and D. S. Fernandes, A new 
two-pored Amphisbaena Linnaeus from 
the endangered Brazilian Cerrado biome 
(Squamata: Amphisbaenidae). Zootaxa, 
2569 (2010), 44-54.
80. R. Thomas and S. B. Hedges, Two new 
species of Amphisbaena (Reptilia: 
Squamata: Amphisbaenidae) from the 
Tiburon Peninsula of Haiti. Caribbean 
Journal of Science, 42 (2006), 208-219.
81. W. Bohme and T. Ziegler, A review of 
iguanian and anguimorph lizard genitalia 
(Squamata: Chamaeleonidae; Varanoidea, 
Shinisauridae, Xenosauridae, Anguidae) 
and their phylogenetic significance: 
comparisons with molecular data sets. 
Journal of Zoological Systematics and 
Evolutionary Research, 47 (2009), 189-202.
82. F. Glaw, J. Kohler, O. Hawlitschek, et al., 
Extreme miniaturization of a new amniote 
vertebrate and insights into the evolution of 
genital size in chameleons. Scientific 
Reports, 11 (2021), 2522.
83. F. Glaw, M. Vences, T. Ziegler, et al., 
Species distinctness and biogeography of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 385
the dwarf chameleons Brookesia minima, 
B. peyrierasi and B. tuberculata (Reptilia: 
Chamaeleonidae): evidence from 
hemipenial and external morphology. 
Journal of Zoology, London, 247 (1999), 
225-238.
84. D. F. Hughes, C. Kusamba, M. Behangana, 
and E. Greenbaum, Integrative taxonomy 
of the Central African forest chameleon, 
Kinyongia adolfifriderici (Sauria: 
Chamaeleonidae), reveals underestimated 
species diversity in the Albertine Rift. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
181 (2017), 400-438.
85. C. J. Raxworthy and R. A. Nussbaum, 
Systematics, speciation and biogeography 
of the dwarf chameleons (Brookesia; 
Reptilia, Squamata, Chamaeleontidae) of 
northern Madagascar. Journal of Zoology, 
London, 235 (1995), 525-558.
86. H. I. Rosenberg, A. M. Bauer, and
A. P. Russell, External morphology of the 
developing hemipenes of the dwarf 
chameleon, Bradypodion pumilum 
(Reptilia: Chamaeleonidae). Canadian 
Journal of Zoology, 67 (1989), 
884-890.
87. V. Deepak, A. Khandekar, R. Chaitanya, 
and P. Karanth, Descriptions of two new 
endemic and cryptic species of Sitana 
Cuvier, 1829 from peninsular India. 
Zootaxa, 4434 (2018), 327-365.
88. K. Maduwage and A. Silva, Hemipeneal 
morphology of Sri Lankan dragon lizards 
(Sauria: Agamidae). Ceylon Journal of 
Science (Biological Sciences), 41 (2012), 
111-123.
89. V. Deepak, F. Tillack, N. B. Kar, et al., A new 
species of Sitana (Squamata: Agamidae) 
from the Deccan Peninsula Biogeographic 
Zone of India. Zootaxa, 4948 (2021), 
261-274.
90. A. B. D’Angiolella, J. Klaczko,
M. T. Rodrigues, and L. J. Avila-Pires, 
Hemipenial morphology and diversity in 
South American anoles (Squamata: 
Dactyloidae). Canadian Journal of Zoology, 
94 (2016), 251-256.
91. G. Kohler, A. Batista, M. Vesely, et al., 
Evidence for the recognition of two species 
of Anolis formerly referred to as A. 
tropidogaster (Squamata: Dactyloidae). 
Zootaxa, 3348 (2012), 1-23.
92. C.-P. Blanc, Reptiles Sauriens Iguanidae. 
Faune de Madagascar, 45 (1977), 1-195.
93. H. G. Dowling, T. C. Majupuria, and
F. W. Gibson, Hemipenial morphology of 
the tree lizard, Plica plica (Linnaeus). 
Herpetological Review, 3 (1971), 91-92.
94. M. Quipildor, A. S. Quinteros, and F. Lobo, 
Structure, variation, and systematic 
implications of the hemipenes of liolaemid 
lizards (Reptilia: Liolaemidae). Canadian 
Journal of Zoology, 96 (2018), 987-995.
95. R. Thomas and S. B. Hedges, New anguid 
lizard (Diploglossus) from Cuba. Copeia, 
1998 (1998), 97-103.
96. W. Card and A. G. Kluge, Hemipeneal 
skeleton and varanid lizard systematics. 
Journal of Herpetology, 29 (1995), 275-280.
97. V. Weijola, S. C. Donnellan, and
C. Lindqvist, A new blue-tailed Monitor 
lizard (Reptilia, Squamata, Varanus) of the 
Varanus indicus group from Mussau 
Island, Papua New Guinea. ZooKeys, 568 
(2016), 129-154.
98. S. M. Harrington and T. W. Reeder, 
Phylogenetic inference and divergence 
dating of snakes using molecules, 
morphology and fossils: new insights into 
convergent evolution of feeding 
morphology and limb reduction. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 121 (2017), 
379-394.
99. H. Zaher and K. T. Smith, Pythons in the 
Eocene of Europe reveal a much older 
divergence of the group in sympatry with 
boas. Biology Letters, 16 (2020), 20200735.
100. S. B. McDowell, A catalogue of the snakes 
of New Guinea and the Solomons, with 
special reference to those in the Bernice 
P. Bishop Museum, Part I. Scolecophidia. 
Journal of Herpetology, 8 (1974), 1-57.
101. C. W. Myers and L. Trueb, The hemipenis 
of an anomalepidid snake. Herpetologica, 
23 (1967), 235-238.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

386 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
102. M. Fabrezi, A. Marcus, and G. Scrocchi, 
Contribution al conocimiento de los 
Leptotyphlopidae de Argentina.
I. Leptotyphlops weyrauchi y Leptotyphlops 
albipuncta. Cuadernos de Herpetolog^a, 1 
(1985), 1-20.
103. B. R. Orejas-Miranda, Descripcion del 
hemipenis de Leptotyphlops munoai 
Orejas-Miranda, 1961. Comunicaciones 
Zoologicas del Museo de Historia Natural de 
Montevideo, 97 (1962), 1-9.
104. J. Robb, The internal anatomy of Typhlops 
Schneider (Reptilia). Australian Journal of 
Zoology, 8 (1960), 181-216.
105. J. Robb, The generic status of the 
Australasian typhlopids (Reptilia: 
Squamata). Annals and Magazine of 
Natural History, 13 (1966), 106-108.
106. J. A. Peters and B. R. Orejas-Miranda, Notes 
on the hemipenis of several taxa in the 
family Leptotyphlopidae. Herpetologica, 26 
(1970), 320-324.
107. D. G. Broadley and V. Wallach, A revision 
of the genus Leptotyphlops in northeastern 
Africa and southwestern Arabia (Serpentes: 
Leptotyphlopidae). Zootaxa, 1408 (2007), 
1-78.
108. A. C. Ferreira, J. Klaczko, and A. Martins, 
Hemipenial morphology of Epictia vellardi 
(Laurent, 1984) (Leptotyphlopidae, 
Serpentes) with the proposition and 
discussion of two general hemipenial 
patterns within the genus Epictia. 
Zoomorphology, 140 (2020), 143-150.
109. A. Martins, C. Koch, R. Pinto, et al., From 
the inside out: Discovery of a new genus of 
threadsnakes based on anatomical and 
molecular data, with discussion of the 
leptotyphlopid hemipenial morphology. 
Journal of Zoological Systematics and 
Evolutionary Research, 57 (2019), 
840-863.
110. R. Pinto and F. F. Curcio, On the generic 
identity of Siagonodon brasiliensis, with the 
description of a new leptotyphlopid from 
central Brazil (Serpentes: 
Leptotyphlopidae). Copeia, 2011 (2011), 
53-63.
111. V. Wallach, Morphological review and 
taxonomic status of the Epictia phenops 
species group of Mesoamerica, with 
description of six new species and 
discussion of South American Epictia 
albifrons, E. goudotii, and E. tenella 
(Serpentes: Leptotyphlopidae: Epictinae). 
Mesoamerican Herpetology, 3 (2016), 
216-374.
112. A. H. Wynn, R. P. Reynolds, D. W. Buden, 
et al., The unexpected discovery of blind 
snakes (Serpentes: Typhlopidae) in 
Micronesia: two new species of 
Ramphotyphlops from the Caroline Islands. 
Zootaxa, 3172 (2012), 39-54.
113. P. Passos, U. Caramaschi, and R. R. Pinto, 
Redescription of Leptotyphlops koppesi 
Amaral, 1954, and description of a new 
species of the Leptotyphlops dulcis group 
from Central Brazil (Serpentes: 
Leptotyphlopidae). Amphibia-Reptilia, 27 
(2006), 347-357.
114. P. Passos, U. Caramaschi, and R. R. Pinto, 
Rediscovery and redescription of 
Leptotyphlops salgueiroi Amaral, 1954 
(Squamata, Serpentes, Leptotyphlopidae). 
Boletim do Museu Nacional, 520 (2005), 
1-10.
115. R. A. Pyron and V. Wallach, Systematics of 
the blindsnakes (Serpentes: Scolecophidia: 
Typhlopoidea) based on molecular and 
morphological evidence. Zootaxa, 3829 
(2014), 1-81.
116. R. Thomas, The relationships of Antillean 
Typhlops (Serpentes: Typhlopidae) and the 
description of three new Hispaniolan 
species. Biogeography of the West Indies, 
1989 (1989), 409-432.
117. R. Thomas. Systematics of the Antillean 
Blind Snakes of the Genus Typhlops 
(Serpentes: Typhlopidae). (LSU Historical 
Dissertations and Theses 1976).
118. A. H. Wynn and A. E. Leviton, Two new 
species of blind snake, genus Typhlops 
(Reptilia: Typhlopidae), from the 
Philippine archipelago. Proceedings of the 
Biological Society of Washington, 106 
(1993), 34-45.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

diversity and evolution of squamate hemipenes 387
119. J. Dixon and F. S. Hendricks, The 
wormsnakes (family Typhlopidae) of the 
Neotropics, exclusive of the Antilles. 
Zoologische Verhandelungen, 173 (1979), 
1-39.
120. F. F. Curcio, P. M. Nunes, A. J. S. Argolo, 
et al., Taxonomy of the South American 
dwarf boas of the genus Tropidophis 
Bibron, 1840, with the description of two 
new species from the Atlantic forest 
(Serpentes: Tropidophiidae). 
Herpetological Monographs, 26 (2012), 
80-121.
121. F. W. Gibson, The ‘quadrifurcate’ 
hemipenis of Tropidophis. Herpetological 
Review, 2 (1970), 29-30.
122. S. B. McDowell, A catalogue of the snakes 
of New Guinea and the Solomons, with 
special reference to those in the Bernice 
P. Bishop Museum. Part II. Anilioidea and 
Pythoninae. Journal of Herpetology, 9 
(1975), 1-79.
123. M. A. Smith, The fauna of British India, 
Ceylon and Burma, including the whole of 
the Indo-Chinese sub-region. Reptilia and 
Amphibia. Vol III. - Serpentes. (London: 
Taylor and Francis, 1943).
124. D. J. Gower and J. L. M. Wickramasinghe, 
Recharacterization of Rhinophis 
dorsimaculatus Deraniyagala, 1941 
(Serpentes: Uropeltidae), including 
description of new material. Zootaxa, 4158 
(2016), 203-212.
125. V. P. Cyriac, S. Narayanan, F. L. Sampaio, 
et al., A new species of Rhinophis 
Hemprich, 1820 (Serpentes: Uropeltidae) 
from the Wayanad region of peninsular 
India. Zootaxa, 4778 (2020), 329-342.
126. R. A. Pyron, S. R. Ganesh, A. Sayyed, et al., 
A catalogue and systematic overview of the 
shield-tailed snakes (Serpentes: Uropeltidae). 
Zoosystema, 38 (2016), 453-506.
127. D. J. Gower and K. Maduwage, Two new 
species of Rhinophis Hemprich (Serpentes: 
Uropeltidae) from Sri Lanka. Zootaxa, 2881 
(2011), 51-68.
128. R. Stuebing, A new species of Cylindrophis 
(Serpentes: Cylindrophiidae) from
Sarawak, Western Borneo. Raffles Bulletin 
of Zoology, 42 (1994), 967-73.
129. G. Underwood, A Contribution to the 
Classification of Snakes (London: British 
Museum of Natural History, 1967).
130. N. Vidal, A.-S. Delmas, and S. B. Hedges. 
The higher-level relationships of 
alethinophidian snakes inferred from seven 
nuclear and mitochondrial genes. In 
R. W. Henderson, R. Powell, eds., Biology of 
the Boas and Pythons (Eagle Mountain, 
Utah: Eagle Mountain Publishing, 2007), 
pp. 27-33.
131. H. G. Dowling. The Neartic snake fauna. In 
H. G. Dowling, ed., 1974 Yearbook of 
Herpetology (New York: HISS Publications, 
1974), pp. 191-202.
132. W. Bohme and U. Sieling, Zum 
Zusammenhang zwischen Genital Struktur, 
Paarungsverhalten und 
Fortpflanzungserfolg bei squamaten 
Reptilien: erste Ergehnisse. Herpetofauna, 
15 (1993), 15-23.
133. A. G. Kluge, Aspidites and the phylogeny of 
pythonine snakes. Records of the Australian 
Museum, 19 (1993), 1-77.
134. C. A. Domergue, Observations sur les penis 
des ophidiens (deuxieme partie). Bulletin 
de la Socidtd des Sciences Naturelles et 
Physiques du Maroc, 42 (1962), 87-105.
135. A. R. Hoge, A new genus and species of 
Boinae from Brazil. Xenoboa cropanii, gen. 
nov., sp. nov. Memorias do Instituto 
Butantan, 25 (1953), 27-34.
136. A. G. Kluge, Calabaria and the phylogeny 
of erycine snakes. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 107 (1993), 293-351.
137. W. R. Branch, Hemipenes of the 
Madagascan boas Acrantophis and 
Sanzinia, with a review of hemipenial 
morphology in the Boinae. Journal of 
Herpetology, 15 (1981), 91-99.
138. S. B. McDowell, A catalogue of the snakes 
of New Guinea and the Solomons, with 
special reference to those in the Bernice 
P. Bishop Museum. Part III. Boinae and 
Acrochordoidea (Reptilia, Serpentes). 
Journal of Herpetology, 13 (1979), 1-92.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

388 giovanna G. montingelli, david J. gower, and H ussam zah er
139. P. Passos and R. Fernandes, Revision of the 
Epicrates cenchria complex (Serpentes: 
Boidae). Herpetological Monographs, 22 
(2008), 1-30.
140. K. Andonov, N. Natchev, Y. V. Kornilev, and 
N. Tzankov, Does sexual selection 
influence ornamentation of hemipenes in 
Old World snakes? Anatomical Record, 300 
(2017), 1680-1694.
141. C. M. Bogert, The variations and affinities 
of the dwarf boas of the genus Ungaliophis. 
American Museum Novitates, 2340 (1968), 
1-26.
142. V. Deepak, S. Ruane, and D. J. Gower, 
A new subfamily of colubroid fossorial 
snakes from the Western Ghats of 
peninsular India. Journal of Natural 
History, 52 (2019), 2919-2934.
143. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata:
Serpentes). PLoS ONE, 14 (2019), 
e0216148.
144. C. W. Myers, A new genus and new tribe for 
Enicognathus melanauchen Jan, 1863, a 
neglected South American snake 
(Colubridae: Xenodontinae), with taxonomic 
notes on some Dipsadinae. American 
Museum Novitates, 3715 (2011), 1-33.
145. D. A. Rossman and W. G. Eberle, Partition 
of the genus Natrix, with preliminary 
observations on evolutionary trends in 
natricine snakes. Herpetologica, 33 (1977), 
34-43.
146. S. B. McDowell, [Review of] Systematic 
division and evolution of the colubrid 
snake genus Natrix, with comments on the 
subfamily Natricinae, by Edmond 
V. Malnate. Copeia, 1961 (1961), 502-506.
147. H. Zaher, F. G. Grazziotin, R. Graboski, 
et al., Phylogenetic relationships of the 
genus Sibynophis (Serpentes: Colubroidea). 
Pap6is Avulsos de Zoologia (Sao Paulo), 52 
(2012), 141-149.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.022 Published online by Cambridge University Press

17
The Evolution of Sperm-Storage Location in 
Squamata with Particular Reference to Snakes
Henrique B. Braz and Selma M. Almeida-Santos
17.1 Introduction
Female sperm storage is characterized by a temporary maintenance of viable sperm 
between insemination and oocyte fertilization [1]. Sperm storage provides various advan­
tages for female squamate reptiles, such as decreased copulation frequency and costs, 
fertilization assurance in cases of not finding a mate, production of multiple clutches, 
enhancement of offspring quality through sperm competition, and synchronization of 
sperm release and fertilization with optimal periods [1-5]. Therefore, female sperm storage 
has clear implications for the evolution of squamates by dramatically influencing the 
evolution of life histories, mating systems, post-copulatory sexual selection (e.g., cryptic 
female choice and sperm competition), and sexual conflict [1]. Importantly, sperm must 
remain viable in the female reproductive tract during the storage period, until ovulation 
and fertilization [1]. Accordingly, sperm-storage sites and structures should be under 
strong selection.
The anatomy and evolution of sperm storage in female squamates have been periodically 
reviewed [6-14]. The occurrence of female sperm storage is conserved across squamate 
phylogeny, but the sites of sperm storage in the oviduct vary considerably among lineages, 
with multiple evolutionary transitions between character states [11]. In the last decade, 
numerous studies addressing the anatomy of female sperm storage have been conducted in 
various squamate lineages, particularly in snakes [15-39]. This increased number of studies, 
combined with improved understanding of squamate phylogeny [40-42], creates a great 
opportunity to reassess the diversity and evolution of sperm storage in squamates.
Our major aim here is to provide insights into the evolution of female sperm storage in 
squamates, with particular consideration to the origin and early evolution of snakes. For 
this, we summarize the literature on the anatomy of female sperm storage and reconstruct
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

390 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
Figure 17.1 (A) Reproductive system of female lancehead snake (the crotaline viperid Bothrops 
jararaca). Three general oviductal regions are recognized in the squamate oviduct: the posterior
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 391
the evolution of sperm-storage location. We then propose a scenario for the evolution of 
female sperm storage in snakes. Higher-level snake classification follows Zaher et al. [41] 
and Burbrink et al. [42].
17.2 Sites and Structures for Sperm Storage
Oviductal morphology and sperm storage have been reported for at least 111 squamate 
species (70 lizards and 41 snakes) from various lineages (Supplementary Table 17.S1). 
Oviductal morphology is rather conserved among squamates (reviewed in [6, 7, 9, 10, 
13]). Histologically, the oviduct is formed by three tissue layers: (1) an inner mucosa, 
formed by a luminal epithelium with ciliated and/or nonciliated cells and an underlying 
lamina propria, which may contain glands; (2) a middle muscularis, consisting of inner 
circular and/or outer longitudinal muscle layers; and (3) an outer serosa (reviewed in [6, 7, 
9, 10, 13]). These layers vary widely in thickness and function throughout the oviduct. Three 
general regions are recognized grossly. The posterior oviduct is a thick-walled portion that 
contains a region referred to as the nonglandular uterus or uterovaginal junction, with a 
deeply folded mucosa. The middle oviduct, which contains the glandular uterus (where 
eggs reside), is the longest portion and is often slightly folded. The anterior oviduct can be 
divided into two regions: the posterior infundibulum (a folded and opaque region) and the 
anterior infundibulum (a less folded, translucent, and funnel-shaped region; Fig. 17.1).
Sperm storage occurs in the posterior oviduct, anterior oviduct, or both [8-10] (Fig. 17.1). 
In the posterior oviduct (hereafter: posterior sperm storage), sperm are stored in deep 
furrows formed by longitudinal projections of the lamina propria, in crypts in the furrows, 
or in tubules formed by invaginations of the luminal epithelium [8-10] (Fig. 17.1). In the 
anterior oviduct (hereafter: anterior sperm storage), sperm are typically stored in tubules 
formed by invaginations of the luminal epithelium [8, 9, 43, 44] (Fig. 17.1). The tubules of 
both the posterior and anterior oviduct have been given various terms such as sperm­
storage tubules, sperm-storage receptacles, seminal receptacles, or ‘fausses glandes de la 
trompe’ [9]. It is unclear whether these terms reflect any morphological or functional 
difference. For consistency with previous reviews [8, 11], we use the term sperm-storage 
tubules (SSTs), even in the absence of spermatozoa.
In lizards, posterior sperm storage occurs in tubules in iguanians [8, 43, 45] and in crypts 
in other groups [46-49]. In snakes, however, posterior sperm storage occurs mostly in crypts
Figure 17.1 (cont.) oviduct, the middle oviduct, and the anterior oviduct. Sperm storage in 
squamates occurs in the posterior oviduct, anterior oviduct, or both. (B) Histological section 
(haematoxylin-eosin) of the anterior oviduct (posterior infundibulum) of the dipsadid snake 
Apostolepis gaboi showing sperm stored in infundibular glands (sperm receptacles). Note the parallel 
alignment of the spermatozoa in the sperm receptacles. (C) Histological section (haematoxylin-eosin) 
of the posterior oviduct of B. jararaca showing sperm stored in the furrows. f: furrows, l: lamina 
propria, r: sperm receptacle, s: spermatozoa. Photomicrographs: Karina N. Kasperoviczus. See 
Supplementary Figure 17.S1 for colour version.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

392 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
or furrows [22, 36, 38, 50, 51] (see also Supplementary Table 17.S1). Exceptions include the 
natricid Liodytes pygaea [52, 53] and the elapids Micrurus corallinus and M. frontalis [17] in 
which posterior sperm storage occurs in tubules. These tubules are undifferentiated from 
the epithelium in L. pygaea [52, 53] but differentiated in Micrurus spp. [17]. In the typhlopid 
scolecophidian Amerotyphlops brongersmianus and the leptotyphlopid scolecophidian 
Trilepida koppesi, no crypts or SSTs have been observed in the posterior oviduct [25, 32]. 
The extent to which the absence of crypts and SSTs in the posterior oviduct is widespread in 
scolecophidians remains to be determined via investigation of more species. Therefore, 
most snake species examined so far either have unspecialized (i.e., undifferentiated from 
the epithelium) or lack sperm-storage structures in the posterior oviduct. However, the lack 
of specialized structures does not mean that the posterior oviduct is unfit for sperm storage, 
because sperm may reside in this region for prolonged periods in various snakes [50, 54].
Some snakes have evolved morphological adaptations to hold sperm in the posterior 
oviduct. In many viperids, the posterior oviduct is convoluted and contracted in newly mated 
females. This convolution was initially described as a region of prolonged sperm storage in 
the crotaline Crotalus viridis viridis [55], but later interpreted as a mechanism preventing 
additional inseminations in the viperine Vipera berus [56]. A subsequent study of the crota- 
line Crotalus durissus corroborated that the posterior oviduct becomes convoluted soon after 
autumnal mating [54]. This convolution has subsequently been termed ‘uterine muscular 
twisting’ and reported in various crotalines [15, 19, 23, 27, 30, 33, 35, 57-59]. A recent 
anatomical study has shown that, in C. durissus, this convolution is formed by a coiling 
(rather than a twisting) of the inner layers of the posterior oviduct [24]. Because oviductal 
morphology is very conserved in snakes [6, 9], we expect that the coiling pattern described in 
C. durissus likely occurs also in other viperids previously reported to exhibit uterine muscular 
twisting. Thus, we apply the term ‘uterine muscular coiling’ (UMC) rather than ‘uterine 
muscular twisting’. In C. durissus, UMC persists until spring, when the oviduct relaxes and 
releases sperm to migrate up the oviduct and fertilize the oocytes [54]. Thus, UMC functions 
as a mechanism of long-term sperm storage by keeping sperm alive and viable in the 
posterior oviduct for at least five months. The formation and maintenance of UMC in C. 
durissus may be related to an oestradiol/progesterone balance with a possible participation 
of arginine vasotocin [60, 61]. However, nothing is known about the hormonal control of 
UMC in other crotalines. The question remains as to the effectiveness of UMC in preventing 
spermatozoa from additional inseminations from entering the posterior oviduct and/or 
keeping them confined to this region [62, 63]. In V. berus, UMC apparently decreases but 
does not prevent sperm from other copulations to penetrate the coiled region [62, 64]. In 
some lanceheads (Bothrops), sperm have been observed in the infundibular SSTs during the 
mating season, suggesting that some spermatozoa are able to escape the trap created by 
UMC and ascend the infundibulum long before ovulation [19, 23, 33] or remain stored there 
for successive breeding seasons. Even if UMC does not completely block sperm, it is likely 
relevant in controlling the movement of sperm in and out of the posterior oviduct.
Unlike the posterior oviduct, SSTs in the anterior oviduct (infundibulum) are often 
differentiated (as uniformly ciliated or uniformly secretory) from the surrounding epithe­
lium in most squamates [9, 10, 17, 19, 36, 37]. Infundibular SSTs vary morphologically 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 393
across species, appearing as branched tubular, simple to branched alveolar, or branched to 
compound alveolar glands, and their distal portions function as sperm receptacles [9, 43, 
65]. In lizards, infundibular SSTs occur in most gekkotans and the few lacertids and anguids 
examined but are absent in the iguanians, amphisbaenians, and scincids studied thus far 
(Supplementary Table 17.S1). In contrast, infundibular SSTs are almost ubiquitous in 
snakes (Supplementary Table 17.S1). The only known exception is the colubrid Boiga 
irregularis [66]. A recent study has also reported the absence of infundibular SSTs in the 
homalopsid Cerberus rynchops collected in January [67]. Because infundibular SSTs are 
formed seasonally in some snake species [25, 68, 69], the lack of these structures in 
C. rynchops requires confirmation.
17.3 Sperm Transit in the Oviduct
Sperm aggregations in the posterior oviduct are suggested to reflect the large amount of 
ejaculate released into the contiguous pouch in recent matings and/or the bottleneck 
created by the luminal narrowing between the pouch and oviducts [9]. Indeed, abundant 
sperm may be seen in the lumen of the posterior oviduct within 24 hours after mating [50, 
56, 68]. Sperm initially fill the lumen and crypts or furrows of the posterior oviduct but are 
later seen only in the crypts or furrows and tubules, where they reside for varied periods in 
different species [28, 36, 43].
In various squamates, males deposit a gelatinous copulatory plug in the female cloaca 
[70-75]. Although copulatory plugs are commonly interpreted as a paternity assurance 
mechanism [76, 77], they may also play a role in sperm transfer and transit in the oviduct. 
In the natricid Thamnophis sirtalis, copulatory plugs reduce sperm leakage from the 
female cloaca and function as a spermatophore that release sperm gradually [78]. 
Whether copulatory plugs exhibit similar functions in other squamates has yet to be 
demonstrated.
Sperm later migrate up to the anterior oviduct, apparently attracted by chemotactic 
stimulation and/or ciliary beating of cells lining the infundibulum and SSTs epithelium 
[9, 65, 79]. Additional factors that may contribute to attracting sperm to the infundibulum 
and SSTs include intrinsic sperm motility, mobilization by carrier matrices, contractions of 
the oviduct smooth muscle, or some combination thereof [6, 50, 65, 80, 81]. In species 
exhibiting only anterior sperm storage, sperm migrate promptly to the posterior oviduct 
(e.g., the dipsadid Erythrolamprus miliaris [37]). As sperm reach the anterior oviduct 
(infundibulum), they usually fill the most posterior receptacles first so that the most 
anterior receptacles may never be filled, as observed in the natricid Thamnophis [65, 79]. 
It is unclear how widespread this pattern of SST filling is in squamates. Devine [76] 
suggested that if a female mated multiple times, sperm from a second (or a third) mating 
might fill the most anterior SSTs, thus taking precedence to fertilize the eggs. From the 
female perspective, this strategy may be advantageous by promoting sperm competition 
and cryptic choice. A female would have the potential to ensure that a subsequent preferred 
male was more likely to sire her offspring, thus benefiting from multiple matings.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

394 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
In some squamates, sperm reach the posterior infundibulum but have never been observed 
within the SSTs. Examples include the lacertid Podarcis muralis [70] and the viperid Lachesis 
muta [30]. In other squamates, despite the existence of infundibular SSTs, sperm have been 
found only in the posterior oviduct, as in some leptotyphlopid and typhlopid scolecophidians 
[82], the elapids Micrurus spp. [17], the viperid Crotalus durissus (S. M. Almeida-Santos, pers. 
obs.), and the dipsadids Atractus pantostictus [34] and Tomodon dorsatus [21]. The non­
detection of sperm in the infundibulum or infundibular SSTs may obviously reflect a failure 
to find sperm in these species. However, except for the scolecophidians, the above species have 
been reasonably well investigated. Thus, the observations reported above suggest that if sperm 
do enter the infundibular SSTs in these species, they apparently remain there for a very brief 
period. Infundibular SSTs would then function as a site for short-term sperm storage in these 
species. Some authors have suggested that infundibular SSTs function to attract sperm and 
then provide mechanical protection during ovulation [9, 65].
Sperm can reside in the oviduct for up to two months from mating to fertilization (i.e., 
short-term sperm storage) or for longer periods (i.e., long-term sperm storage) [2, 50]. 
Eckstut et al. [11] suggested that sperm-storage duration is correlated with sperm-storage 
location based on the observation of sperm storage lasting up to four months in three taxa 
exhibiting posterior sperm storage and more than six months in three taxa exhibiting 
anterior sperm storage. However, it should be noted that long-term (> 2 months) sperm 
storage has also been observed in the posterior oviduct of some squamates [50, 54, 83], and 
short-term sperm storage has also been observed or suggested in the anterior oviduct of 
others (e.g., [18, 25, 34]). Although the hypothesis of association between sperm-storage 
location and sperm-storage duration is plausible, many more species need to be investi­
gated before this can be adequately tested.
Little is known of the underlying mechanisms that sustain sperm in the oviduct for 
prolonged periods, but it certainly involves biochemical, physiological, and anatomical 
specializations of the oviduct and the sperm [7, 9, 65]. The synthesis of neutral carbohydrate 
secretions in the infundibular SSTs increases during mating season or in the presence of 
sperm in some species, suggesting that these components might play some role in main­
taining sperm [36, 37, 50]. Similarly, the luminal epithelium of the UMC region in viperids 
secretes substances that may help to maintain sperm viability during the storage period 
[19, 84]. Sperm sustenance may also be influenced by secretions deposited in the seminal 
fluid by males [85], because secretory material of putatively male origin has been observed 
in the posterior oviduct (e.g., [86]). However, male contribution is likely to aid only in short­
term sperm storage. For example, in the viperid Crotalus durissus, the composition of the 
seminal fluid changes after it reaches the posterior oviduct [84], suggesting no lasting 
contribution from male-produced components.
Sperm often appear as unordered masses in the lumen of the posterior and anterior 
oviduct but as packed, parallel bundles with their heads aligned and oriented toward the 
epithelial cells of the crypts and SSTs [18, 43, 50, 65]. This ordered arrangement is suggested 
to reduce sperm metabolism and thus conserve energy [65]. In various snake species, long­
term sperm storage occurs during winter [50, 54, 57], and lower body temperatures and 
metabolic rates might also facilitate prolonged sperm storage [87].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 395
17.4 Historical Overview of the Evolution of Sperm-Storage 
Location in Squamata
The evolution of sperm-storage location and structures in squamates was previously 
addressed by some authors. Sever and Hamlett [8] reviewed the anatomy of sperm-storage 
structures and phylogenetically estimated ancestral sperm-storage location. They inferred 
that the ancestral squamate had infundibular SSTs and stored sperm in the anterior 
oviduct, with posterior sperm storage evolving once, in the ancestor of Iguania. Their 
ancestral-state estimations also indicated that the ancestral snake had infundibular sperm 
storage structures and stored sperm in the anterior oviduct.
Eckstut et al. [11] inferred the evolution of sperm-storage traits of approximately 30 squa- 
mate species (27 lizards and 3 snakes) on three competing phylogenies. Regardless of the 
phylogeny used, most characters investigated showed strong phylogenetic conservatism, 
including occurrence of sperm storage, presence and structure of SSTs, embedding of 
sperm within the sperm-storage structures, and sperm storage during gravidity or preg­
nancy. However, the location of sperm-storage structures, location of secretory cells in 
sperm-storage structures, and sperm-storage duration varied greatly [11], and different 
scenarios for the evolution of sperm-storage location in squamates were recovered. 
Assuming the posterior oviduct as the ancestral location of sperm storage in reptiles, this 
condition was also inferred in the ancestral squamate. However, anterior sperm storage was 
inferred to have evolved once and posterior sperm storage to have re-evolved once on the 
morphological phylogeny, whereas anterior sperm storage evolved independently three 
times on the molecular phylogeny [11]. Moreover, one evolutionary origin of posterior 
sperm storage (while retaining anterior storage) and one of anterior storage (while retaining 
posterior storage) were also inferred on the morphological and molecular phylogenies. 
Assuming instead anterior sperm storage as the ancestral sperm-storage location in reptiles, 
this state was also inferred in the ancestral squamate, with multiple independent origins of 
posterior sperm storage. Regardless of the phylogeny and outgroup, the ancestral site of 
sperm storage in snakes was inferred to be the anterior oviduct, as proposed by Sever and 
Hamlett [8].
In their review of female sperm storage, Siegel et al. [9] considered that both the Eckstut 
et al. and Sever and Hamlett studies had limitations because they considered only the site 
where sperm-storage structures occur and not whether such sites had prolonged sperm 
aggregations. They hypothesized that posterior sperm storage was the ancestral condition 
in Lepidosauria and that sperm-storage structures likely evolved independently in the 
major squamate lineages. They also noticed that all snakes that had been examined by 
that time (except the colubrid Boiga irregularis) had infundibular SSTs, but that they also 
retained the plesiomorphic condition of posterior sperm storage.
The evolution of UMC and sperm-storage location in viperids has also been discussed 
repeatedly in the literature. Due to the occurrence of UMC in various crotalines and one 
viperine, this mechanism has been suggested as an ancestral strategy in viperids, used to 
retain sperm in the posterior oviduct from autumn mating to spring ovulation [30, 57, 60].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

396 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
However, other authors have suggested instead that the anterior oviduct is the ancestral site 
of sperm storage in viperids [63].
17.5 A Revised Perspective on the Evolution 
of Sperm-Storage Location in Squamata
To provide fresh insight into the evolution of female sperm storage in squamates, we 
estimated ancestral states of infundibular SSTs and sperm-storage location. We also 
mapped potential origins of SSTs in the posterior oviduct. We used mostly species for 
which the two sperm-storage regions were examined for most of the annual cycle. We did 
not consider the mere presence of sperm in the lumen of the female reproductive tract as 
evidence of sperm storage. Strong evidence that sperm are being stored (and are not only in 
transit) includes one or more of the following conditions: (1) sperm aggregations occurring 
in specialized structures; (2) consistent finding of sperm in pre-existing sites (if modified 
structures are lacking); and (3) an organized sperm arrangement, suggesting interaction 
with the epithelial cells of the female reproductive tract [1]. We formulated two states for the 
character ‘infundibular SSTs’ (present or absent) and four states for the character ‘sperm 
storage location’ (posterior oviduct, anterior oviduct, both regions, and none). Thus, for 
posterior sperm storage, we did not distinguish between anterior and posterior nongland- 
ular uterus, although this distinction may be worth examining in future studies. We 
reconstructed character states using maximum parsimony with ‘unordered’ states in 
Mesquite, version 3.61 [88]. We used the phylogeny of Burbrink et al. [42] as a backbone 
topology and positioned Phyllodactylidae (absent in their tree) as the sister group of 
Gekkonidae, as recovered in various studies (e.g., [40, 89]). Relationships among genera 
and species followed Zaher et al. [41] for Colubroidea, Alencar et al. [90] for Viperidae, and 
Pyron et al. [40] for Gekkonidae, Scincidae, and Lacertidae. As outgroup, we used the 
tuatara, Sphenodon punctatus, the only living representative of Rhynchocephalia, the only 
extant non-squamatan member of Lepidosauria. In previous reviews, S. punctatus was 
judged to exhibit long-term sperm storage because of the long dissociation between mating 
in autumn and egg-laying in spring [81, 91]. No specialized sperm-storage structures have 
been found in the posterior and anterior oviduct of female tuatara [92]. In view of this, it has 
been hypothesized that long-term sperm storage would occur in the lumen of the posterior 
oviduct [81, 91]. However, female S. punctatus actually ovulate 1-2 months after mating, 
and embryos enter preovipositional arrest during winter until oviposition [93]. Thus, there 
is no evidence of long-term sperm storage, although sperm still may reside in the female 
reproductive tract for a short period (1-2 months) until ovulation [93]. We then recon­
structed the evolution of sperm storage location considering two possibilities 
for Sphenodon: (1) no sperm storage and (2) posterior sperm storage. Assuming that 
S. punctatus lacks sperm storage, parsimony reconstruction required 21 steps and retrieved 
ambiguous ancestral states for most major clades (Lepidosauria, Squamata, Unidentata, 
Episquamata, Toxicofera, Anguidae + Iguania, Serpentes, and Endoglyptodonta;
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 397
Supplementary Figure 17.S2). The assumption that S. punctatus has posterior sperm 
storage retrieved a slightly more parsimonious solution (20 steps) and retrieved unambigu­
ous states for most major lepidosaurian clades. Accordingly, we describe the results of the 
reconstruction following Saint Girons’ [81, 91] suggestion of posterior sperm storage in 
S. punctatus pending confirmation as to whether true sperm storage occurs and where.
As previously noted [11], sperm-storage location varies considerably across squamate 
phylogeny (Fig. 17.2B). Parsimoniously, the ancestor of both Lepidosauria and Squamata 
lacked infundibular SSTs and stored sperm in the posterior oviduct (Fig. 17.2A, B), an 
inference that disagrees with Sever and Hamlett [8], partially agrees with Eckstut et al. [11], 
and fully agrees with Siegel et al. [9]. Various major clades of Squamata (Unidentata, 
Episquamata, Scincomorpha, and Laterata) are inferred as retaining the plesiomorphic 
absence of infundibular SSTs and presence of posterior sperm storage (Fig. 17.2A, B). 
Absence of infundibular SSs and presence of posterior sperm storage are also inferred as 
plesiomorphic for Iguania, though it is ambiguous whether the lack of infundibular SSTs in 
this clade is a retention of a squamatan plesiomorphy or loss of these structures that might 
have evolved in the ancestor of Toxicofera and been present in the ancestor of Iguania + 
Anguidae (Fig. 17.2A, B).
Infundibular SSTs appear to have evolved independently multiple times (at least 3-4 
origins) among the sampled squamates (Fig. 17.2A). SSTs in the posterior oviduct appar­
ently appeared only in iguanians, Micrurus, and Liodytes pygaea (Fig. 17.2A). In most 
sperm-storing lizards, storage occurs either in the anterior or posterior oviduct. In the 
ancestor of Gekkota, the origin of infundibular SSTs was accompanied by a shift from 
posterior to anterior sperm storage (Fig. 17.2A, B). Some gekkotan lineages (the 
diplodactylid Woodworthia maculata and the gekkonid Heteronotia binoei) apparently re­
evolved posterior sperm storage while retaining anterior sperm storage. It is unclear 
whether the same occurred in the gekkonid Christinus marmoratus (which has at least 
posterior sperm storage) because it is unknown whether this species has infundibular SSTs 
(Fig. 17.2A, B). A second origin of infundibular SSTs occurred in the ancestor of Lacertidae, 
but only Acanthodactylus hardyi has been shown thus far to store sperm in these structures 
(Fig. 17.2A, B). Most Laterata and the scincids Eutropis carinata, Trachylepis atlantica, and 
Mabuya spp., which lack infundibular SSTs, lost posterior sperm storage (Fig. 17.2A, B). An 
additional evolutionary origin of infundibular SSTs is inferred to have occurred either in the 
ancestor of Toxicofera (and retained in Anguidae), or there were two separate origins in 
Anguidae and in Serpentes (Fig. 17.2A).
Based on our analyses of available data, the ancestral snake unequivocally had infun­
dibular SSTs, as previously proposed [9, 82]. However, the reconstruction of sperm-storage 
location recovered three equally parsimonious solutions for the ancestral snake. Scenario 
1 suggests that the ancestral snake stored sperm only in the posterior oviduct (Fig. 17.2B). 
This scenario seems unlikely given that the ancestral snake unequivocally possessed 
infundibular SSTs (Fig. 17.2A), and presumably anterior sperm storage. Scenario 2 suggests 
that anterior sperm storage (with retention of posterior storage) occurred in the ancestral 
snake, posterior storage was lost in typhlopoid + leptotyphlopid scolecophidians, and 
anterior and posterior storage was retained in Endoglyptodonta (Fig. 17.2C). Under this
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

398 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
(A)
a :. ancestral 
c*  ancestral
Infundibular SSTs 
Sperm-storage location
squamate 
snake
Sphenodon punctatus аикшшиквквка^шкшлкиив
(B)
Eublepharidae 
Diplodactylidae 
Phyllodactylidae
Christinus marmoratus 
Hemidactylus spp. 
Nactus multicarinatus 
Heteronotia binoei
Xantusia vigilis 
Plestiodon egregius 
Scincella lateralis 
Niveoscincus ocellatus
Eutropis carinata 
Trachylepis atlantica
Mabuya spp.
Teiidae 
Blanidae
Trogonophiidae
Acanthodactylus hardyi 
Phoenicolacerta laevis 
Podarcis muralis
Episquamata
Iguania
Infundibular SSTs
absent
| present
IIJI unknown
SS SSTs in posterior oviduct
Anguidae 
Chamaeleonidae
Agamidae 
Phrynosomatidae 
lguanidae 
Dactyloidae 
Tropiduridae 
Crotaphytidae 
Leiosauridae
Trilepida koppesi 
Rena dulcis
Rena humilis 
merotyphlops brongersmianus 
lndotyphlops braminus 
Afrotyphlops angolensis
Vipera aspis 
Cerastes cerastes
Trimeresurus stejnegeri 
Protobothrops flavoviridis 
Lachesis muta
Agkistrodon piscivorus 
Crotalus durissus
Bothrops alternatus 
Bothrops jararaca
Bothrops atrox 
Bothrops jararacussu 
Micrurus corallinus
Micrurus frontalis 
Boiga irregularis 
Tantilla coronata 
Lidytes pygaea 
Nerodia sipedon
Thamnophis elegans 
Thamnophis sirtalis
Diadophis punctatus 
Atractus marthae
Atractus pantostictus 
Erythrolamprus miliaris 
Hellcops carinicaudus
Oxyrhopus guibei 
Tomodon dorsatus 
Apostolepis gaboi 
Phiiodryas patagoniensis
Toxicofera
Sperm storage location
| posterior
| anterior
Ц posterior+anterior
no storage
HU unknown
lguania+Anguidae
Typhlopidae + Leptotyphlopidae 
Viperidae 
Elapidae 
Colubroidea
Toxicofera (C)
Serpentes
Endoglyptodonta
lguania+Anguidae
Typhlopidae + Leptotyphlopidae
Viperidae
Elapidae 
Colubroidea
Serpentes
Endoglyptodonta
(D)
Figure 17.2 Parsimony reconstruction of the evolution of sperm storage in squamate reptiles with 
particular focus on snakes. (A) Ancestral-state reconstruction of the presence or absence of 
infundibular glands (sperm-storage tubules, SSTs). (B) Ancestral-state reconstruction of sperm­
storage location. Terminal taxon names and branching order are identical in both trees. (C-D) 
Alternative solutions for the evolution of sperm-storage location in the ancestral snake considering 
(C) posterior + anterior sperm storage and (D) anterior sperm storage. (A black and white version of 
this figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section). 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 399
scenario, the apparent loss of posterior oviduct crypts in typhlopoid + leptotyphlopid 
scolecophidians (as discussed in § 17.2) accompanied the transition from posterior to 
anterior storage. Scenario 3 suggests that a shift from posterior to anterior sperm storage 
occurred in the ancestral snake, this condition was retained in typhlopoid + leptotyphlopid 
scolecophidians, and posterior storage (while retaining anterior storage) re-evolved in the 
ancestor of Endoglyptodonta (Fig. 17.2D). Under this scenario, the loss of posterior oviduct 
crypts in typhlopoid + leptotyphlopid scolecophidians occurred subsequently to the transi­
tion from posterior to anterior sperm storage. A subsequent loss of infundibular SSTs 
occurred unequivocally in the colubrid Boiga irregularis. Data for anomalepidid scoleco- 
phidians might help to discriminate among the three scenarios outlined here.
Posterior + anterior sperm storage was unambiguously inferred as the ancestral state of 
both Viperidae and Colubroidea (and for the ancestral state of the constituent families of 
the latter clade, i.e., Natricidae, Dipsadidae, and Colubridae), and this condition was 
conserved in most of the viperids and some of the colubroids examined so far 
(Fig. 17.2B). Loss of posterior sperm storage (and retention of anterior sperm storage) is 
unequivocally inferred to have originated at least twice in Endoglyptodonta; once in the 
viperid Protobothrops flavoviridis and once in the ancestral xenodontine dipsadid 
(Fig. 17.2A). Because of the uncertainty that infundibular SSTs are used to store sperm in 
some species (as discussed in § 17.3), we refrain from interpreting the occurrence of sperm 
storage exclusively in the posterior oviduct in some endoglyptodonts (Fig. 17.2B) as a result 
of either the loss of anterior storage or a shift to posterior storage.
Unlike previous suggestions that the ancestral viperid stored sperm in the posterior [57] 
or anterior oviduct [63], our parsimony reconstruction infers that the ancestral viperid 
stored sperm in both oviductal regions (Fig. 17.2B). The assumption that UMC is a 
plesiomorphic mechanism for sperm storage in viperids [57] requires confirmation. 
Viperidae contains three subfamilies, with Viperinae being sister to Azemiopinae + 
Crotalinae [90]. Thus far, UMC has been described only in some crotalines (Agkistrodon, 
Bothrops, Crotalus, and Lachesis) and one viperine (Vipera berus), but most genera have yet 
to be examined (Fig. 17.3).
17.6 Sperm Storage and the Early Evolution of Snakes
The most parsimonious evolutionary scenario suggests that the ancestral squamate lacked 
SSTs in the anterior oviduct (infundibulum) and thus stored sperm in the posterior oviduct 
only (in crypts or furrows). Moreover, parsimony analysis also suggests that infundibular 
SSTs evolved 3-4 times within Squamata, and these origins are associated with either a shift 
from posterior to anterior sperm storage or the maintenance of the two sperm storage sites. 
An interesting pattern emerging from our reconstructions is that sperm-storage location 
differs between lizards and snakes. While most lizards store sperm either in the posterior or 
anterior oviduct, most snakes store (or potentially store) sperm in both oviductal regions 
(Fig. 17.2). What can our findings tell us about the origin and early evolution of snakes?
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

400 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
Viperinae
Azemiopinae
Crotalinae
Figure 17.3 Genus-level cladogram adapted from Alencar et al. [90] showing the phylogenetic 
distribution of uterine muscular coiling (UMC) in the family Viperidae.
Based on parsimonious estimation of ancestral states for current data, the ancestral snake 
unequivocally had infundibular SSTs, but it may have stored sperm only in the anterior 
oviduct or in the anterior + posterior oviduct, because both hypotheses are equally parsi­
monious. Recent molecular phylogenies have found Scolecophidia to be paraphyletic, with 
anomalepidids recovered as sister to alethinophidians, and leptotyphlopids + typhlopoids 
as sister to all other snakes ([42, 94, 95], see also Ruane and Streicher, Chapter 10). 
Scolecophidians share many morphological and ecological traits associated with profound 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 401
fossoriality, such that their paraphyly suggests that many traits of extant scolecophidians 
were already present in the ancestral snake ([95]; but see [96] and Gower et al., Chapter 15). 
In keeping with this interpretation, the scenario proposing that the ancestral snake stored 
sperm only in infundibular SSTs of the anterior oviduct (Fig. 17.2D), which is the 
plesiomorphic condition for typhlopoid + leptotyphlopid scolecophidians, seems more 
plausible, as opposed to anterior + posterior storage (Fig. 17.2C). We emphasize that sperm 
storage has thus far been studied among scolecophidians only for typhlopids and lepto- 
typhlopids, but not anomalepidids.
Profound fossoriality imposes constraints on morphology, physiology, and life history 
[97, 98]. Fossoriality may also constrain activity and, indeed, various scolecophidians are 
highly seasonal, synchronizing their (surface) activity and food intake with the warmest 
(spring-summer) seasons [32, 99-102]. Accordingly, reproductive phenology also seems to 
be constrained. At least one anomalepidid (Liotyphlops beui) and virtually all typhlopids 
and leptotyphlopids studied thus far exhibit highly seasonal reproductive cycles, with 
mating and vitellogenesis concentrated in spring, and egg-laying occurring up to mid­
summer [25, 32, 99, 100, 103, 104]. A major advantage of long-term female sperm storage 
is that it allows mating and fertilization to be temporally dissociated [2-4]. The narrow 
activity window and the association between the mating season and vitellogenesis may 
have made long-term sperm storage (i.e., sperm retention in the posterior oviduct) 
unnecessary in scolecophidians, requiring that sperm migrate up to the infundibulum 
immediately after mating and SSTs offer, at a minimum, physical protection at ovulation. 
If the ancestral snake was fossorial, re-invasion of surface habitats and the subsequent 
occupation of different substrates by early alethinophidians possibly created opportunities 
for the timing of mating to evolve separately from the timing of vitellogenesis. Indeed, 
mating and fertilization are often largely asynchronous in Endoglyptodonta, and females of 
this group often exhibit long-term sperm storage, including some of the longest recorded 
sperm storage in squamates [54, 57, 105, 106]. This scenario may have favoured the re­
evolution of posterior sperm storage (while retaining anterior storage) and the evolution of 
reproductive specializations, such as UMC and copulatory plugs.
17.7 Future Directions
Our major aim here was to provide insights into the evolution of sperm-storage location in 
female squamates, with particular attention to the origin and early evolution of snakes. 
Testing the scenario outlined above requires investigating female sperm storage in add­
itional squamate lineages. Despite the recent increase in anatomical studies on squamate 
sperm storage (particularly in snakes; Supplementary Table 17.S1), the number of species 
investigated relative to squamate diversity remains low. Many diverse and speciose squa- 
mate families are still poorly studied (e.g., Gekkonidae, Scincidae, Lacertidae, Elapidae, 
Colubridae, Dipsadidae), and many others are completely unstudied (e.g., Dibamidae, 
Teiidae, Amphisbaenidae, Varanidae, Liolaemidae, Boidae, Pythonidae). Based on the 
temporal dissociation between mating and ovulation, female sperm storage (short- or 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

402 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
long-term) probably occurs in some of these families, such as scincids [107], boids [108], 
dipsadids [109], colubrids [110], and elapids [111, 112]. We strongly recommend that future 
studies on the anatomy of female sperm storage address these poorly or unstudied major 
lineages. In snakes, particularly, we emphasize the need to study groups that will allow for a 
substantially expanded phylogenetic sampling to improve ancestral state reconstructions 
for sperm-storage location for the earliest divergences among snakes. Priority lineages 
include more scolecophidians (especially the main lineage not yet sampled, 
Anomalepididae - key for establishing states in the ancestral snake, especially if 
‘Scolecophidia’ is paraphyletic), Aniliidae, Tropidophiidae, Uropeltoidea, Booidea, 
Pythonidae, Loxocemidae, Xenopeltidae, Acrochordidae, Xenodermidae, Pareidae, and 
Homalopsidae. Similarly, more viper species need to be studied to adequately test the 
hypothesis that UMC is plesiomorphic in Viperidae (Fig. 17.3). Of particular priority are 
more viperines, Azemiops, less deeply phylogenetically nested crotalines, and species that 
are reported to lack long-term sperm storage (e.g., Protobothrops flavoviridis: [113]). 
Anatomical studies of the oviduct of other snake families are also needed to verify whether 
UMC is indeed restricted to viperids.
Identifying sperm-storage sites in squamates is relatively straightforward using standard 
microscopic techniques (e.g., histology and electron microscopy), and future studies 
should be designed to assess the entire oviduct throughout the annual cycle. These studies 
may shed light on the diversity of sperm-storage sites and sperm-storage duration. As 
knowledge of sperm storage accumulates, future studies should also investigate ancestral­
state estimations using other methods (e.g., Likelihood and Bayesian approaches). Ideally, 
studies of reproductive ecology and phenology of poorly studied lineages should also be 
conducted so that a wider range of reproductive traits can be recorded, which allow richer 
ancestral-state reconstructions and more thorough testing of causal hypotheses. Lastly, 
many physiological and functional questions on female sperm storage deserve further 
investigation, such as the underlying mechanisms that sustain sperm in the oviduct and 
the function of UMC and copulatory plugs.
Acknowledgements
We are thankful to David Gower and Hussam Zaher for inviting us to contribute this 
chapter and for their kindness and patience during the process. We also thank all the 
members of the Squamata Reproduction Research Group for all the productive discussions 
on sperm storage over the years. For this chapter, we are particularly grateful to Erick Bassi, 
Karina Kasperoviczus, Rebeca Khouri, and Eletra de Souza for discussions on female sperm 
storage in their study systems. We also thank Christopher Friesen, Martha Ramirez-Pinilla, 
and David Gower for their reviews that substantially improved the manuscript, Livia Santos, 
Leonardo de Oliveira, Daniel Blackburn, and Lorenzo Alibardi for sharing difficult-to- 
access literature, and Karina Kasperoviczus for kindly providing us photomicrographs of 
sperm storage.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 403
References
1. T. J. Orr and P. L. R. Brennan, Sperm 
storage: distinguishing selective processes 
and evaluating criteria. Trends in Ecology 
and Evolution, 30 (2015), 261-272.
2. G. W. Schuett, Is long-term sperm storage 
an important component of the 
reproductive biology of temperate 
pitvipers? In J. A. Campbell and 
E. D. Brodie, eds., Biology of the Pitvipers 
(Tyler: Selva Publishing, 1992), 
pp. 169-184.
3. R. D. Aldridge and D. Duvall, Evolution of 
the mating season in the pitvipers of North 
America. Herpetolological Monographs, 16 
(2002), 1-25.
4. T. R. Birkhead and A. P. M0ller, Sexual 
selection and the temporal separation of 
reproductive events: sperm storage data 
from reptiles, birds and mammals.
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 50 
(1993), 295-311.
5. C. R. Friesen, A. F. Kahrl, and M. Olsson, 
Sperm competition in squamate reptiles. 
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society, B Biological Sciences, 375 (2020), 
20200079.
6. D. G. Blackburn, Structure, function, and 
evolution of the oviducts of squamate 
reptiles, with special reference to viviparity 
and placentation. Journal of Experimental 
Zoology, 282 (1998), 560-617.
7. J. E. Girling, The reptilian oviduct: a review 
of structure and function and directions for 
future research. Journal of Experimental 
Zoology, 293 (2002), 141-170.
8. D. M. Sever and W. C. Hamlett, Female 
sperm storage in reptiles. Journal of 
Experimental Zoology, 292 (2002), 187-199.
9. D. S. Siegel, A. Miralles, R. E. Chabarria, 
and R. D. Aldridge, Female reproductive 
anatomy: cloaca, oviduct, and sperm 
storage. In R. D. Aldridge and D. M. Sever, 
eds., Reproductive Biology and Phylogeny of 
Snakes (Enfield: Science Publishers, 2011), 
pp. 347-409.
10. D. S. Siegel, A. Miralles, J. L. Rheubert, and 
D. M. Sever, Female reproductive anatomy: 
cloaca, oviduct and sperm storage. In 
J. L. Rheubert, D. S. Siegel, and
S. E. Thauth, eds., Reproductive Biology and 
Phylogeny of Lizards and Tuatara (Boca 
Raton: CRC Press, 2014), pp. 144-195.
11. M. E. Eckstut, D. M. Sever, M. E. White, and 
B. I. Crother, Phylogenetic analysis of sperm 
storage in female squamates. InL. T. Dahnof, 
ed., Animal Reproduction: New Research 
Developments (New York: Nova Science 
Publishers, 2009), pp. 185-218.
12. B. Howarth, Sperm storage: as a function of 
the female reporductive tract. In 
A. D. Johnson and C. W. Foley, eds., The 
Oviduct and Its Functions (New York: 
Academic Press, 1974), pp. 237-270.
13. H. Fox, Urinogenital System. In C. Gans 
and T. S. Parsons, eds., Biology of the 
Reptilia, Vol. 6. Morphology (London and 
New York: Academic Press, 1977), 
pp. 81-96.
14. D. H. Gist and J. M. Jones, Storage of sperm 
in the reptilian oviduct. Scanning 
Microscopy, 1 (1987), 1839-1849.
15. V. A. Barros, L. R. Sueiro, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Reproductive 
biology of the neotropical rattlesnake 
Crotalus durissus from northeastern Brazil: 
a test of phylogenetic conservatism of 
reproductive patterns. Herpetological 
Journal, 22 (2012), 97-104.
16. V. A. Barros, C. A. Rojas, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Reproductive 
biology of Bothrops erythromelas from the 
Brazilian Caatinga. Advances in Zoology, 
2014 (2014), 1-11.
17. E. A. Bassi, R. Z. Coeti, and S. M. Almeida- 
Santos, Reproductive cycle and sperm 
storage of female coral snakes, Micrurus 
corallinus and Micrurus frontalis. 
Amphibia-Reptilia, 41 (2019), 1-15.
18. H. B. Braz, K. N. Kasperoviczus, and 
T. B. Guedes, Reproductive biology of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

404 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
fossorial snake Apostolepis gaboi 
(Elapomorphini): a threatened and poorly 
known species from the Caatinga region. 
South American Journal of Herpetology, 14 
(2019), 37-47.
19. K. M. P. Silva,V. A. Barros, C. A. Rojas, and 
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Infundibular sperm 
storage and uterine muscular twisting in 
the Amazonian lancehead, Bothrops atrox. 
Anatomical Record, 303 (2020), 3145-3154.
20. K. M. P. Silva, K. B. Silva, L. R. Sueiro, M. 
E. E. S. Oliveira, and S. M. Almeida-Santos, 
Reproductive biology of Bothrops atrox 
(Serpentes, Viperidae, Crotalinae) from the 
Brazilian Amazon. Herpetologica, 74 (2019), 
198-207.
21. L. Loebens, S. M. Almeida-Santos, and 
S. Z. Cechin, Reproductive biology of the 
sword snake Tomodon dorsatus (Serpentes: 
Dipsadidae) in South Brazil: comparisons 
within the tribe Tachymenini. Amphibia- 
Reptilia, 41 (2020), 1-15.
22. L. E. Gualdron-Duran, M. F. Calvo- 
Castellanos, and M. P. Ramirez-Pinilla, 
Annual reproductive activity and 
morphology of the reproductive system of 
an Andean population of Atractus 
(Serpentes, Colubridae). South American 
Journal of Herpetology, 14 (2019), 
58-70.
23. K. M. P. Silva, H. B. Braz, 
K. N. Kasperoviczus, O. A. V. Marques, and 
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Reproduction in the 
pitviper Bothrops jararacussu: large females 
increase their reproductive output while 
small males increase their potential to 
mate. Zoology, 142 (2020), 125816.
24. D. F. Muniz-da-Silva, J. Passos, D. S. Siegel, 
and S. M. Santos-Almeida, Caudal oviduct 
coiling in a viperid snake, Crotalus durissus. 
Acta Zoologica, 101 (2020), 69-77.
25. R. S. Khouri, S. M. Almeida-Santos, and 
D. S. Fernandes, Anatomy of the 
reproductive system of a population of 
Amerotyphlops brongersmianus from 
southeastern Brazil (Serpentes: 
Scolecophidia). Anatomical Record, 303 
(2020), 2485-2496.
26. M. Villagran-Santa, E. Mendoza-Cruz, 
G. Granados-Gonzalez, J. L. Rheubert, 
and O. Hernandez-Gallegos, Sperm storage 
in the viviparous lizard Sceloporus 
bicanthalis (Squamata: Phrynosomatidae), 
a species with continuous 
spermatogenesis. Zoomorphology, 136 
(2017), 85-93.
27. V. A. Barros, C. A. Rojas, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Is rainfall seasonality 
important for reproductive strategies in 
viviparous Neotropical pitvipers? A case 
study with Bothrops leucurus from the 
Brazilian Atlantic Forest. Herpetological 
Journal, 24 (2014), 69-77.
28. G. C. Melo, L. B. Nascimento, and C. 
A. B. Galdino, Lizard reproductive biology 
beyond the gonads: an investigation of 
sperm storage structures and renal sexual 
segments. Zoology, 135 (2019), 125690.
29. S. N. Migliore, Biologia reprodutiva de 
Enyalius perditus (Jackson, 1978) e Enyalius 
iheringii Boulenger, 1885 (Squamata: 
Leiosauridae). Unpublished Masters 
dissertation, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 
2016.
30. E. Souza and S. M. Almeida-Santos, 
Reproduction in the bushmaster (Lachesis 
muta): Uterine muscular coiling and 
female sperm storage. Acta Zoologica, 2020.
31. S. N. Migliore, Estrategias reprodutivas de 
lagartos Mabuyinae do Brasil. Unpublished 
PhD thesis, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 2021.
32. R. S. Khouri, B. F. Fiorillo, H. B. Braz, et al., 
Reproductive ecology of the Amaral’s Blind 
Snake Trilepida koppesi in an area of 
Cerrado in south-eastern Brazil. 
Herpetological Journal, 32 (2022), 70-79.
33. Kasperoviczus KN. Evolu^ao das estrategias 
reprodutivas de Bothrops jararaca 
(Serpentes: Viperidae). Unpubished PhD 
thesis, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 2013.
34. F. C. de Resende and L. B. Nascimento, The 
female reproductive cycle of the 
Neotropical snake Atractus pantostictus 
(Fernandes and Puorto, 1993) from south­
eastern Brazil. Anatomia Histologia 
Embryologia, 44 (2015), 225-235.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 405
35. F. M. Amaral, Estrategias reprodutivas da 
serpente Bothrops alternatus: influencia de 
fatores ambientais. Unpublished Masters 
dissertation, Universidade de Sao Paulo, 
2015.
36. C. A. Rojas, V. A. Barros, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Sperm storage and 
morphofunctional bases of the female 
reproductive tract of the snake Philodryas 
patagoniensis from southeastern Brazil. 
Zoomorphology, 134 (2015), 577-586.
37. C. A. Rojas, V. A. Barros, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, A histological and 
ultrastructural investigation of the female 
reproductive system of the water snake 
(Erythrolamprus miliaris): Oviductal cycle 
and sperm storage. Acta Zoologica, 100 
(2019), 69-80.
38. S. M. Almeida-Santos, V. A. Barros, 
C. A. Rojas, L. R. Sueiro, and R.
H. C. Nomura, Reproductive biology of the 
Brazilian lancehead, Bothrops moojeni 
(Serpentes, Viperidae), from the state of 
Sao Paulo, southeastern Brazil. South 
American Journal of Herpetology, 12 (2017), 
174-181.
39. L. Loebens, C. A. Rojas, S. M. Almeida- 
Santos, and S. Z. Cechin, Reproductive 
biology of Philodryas patagoniensis 
(Snakes: Dipsadidae) in south Brazil: 
Female reproductive cycle. Acta Zoologica, 
99 (2018), 105-114.
40. R. A. Pyron, F. T. Burbrink, and J. J. Wiens, 
A phylogeny and revised classification of 
Squamata, including 4161 species of lizards 
and snakes. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 13 
(2013), 93.
41. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PLoS ONE, 14 (2019), 
e0216148.
42. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
43. O. Cuellar, Oviducal anatomy and sperm 
storage structures in lizards. Journal of 
Morphology, 119 (1966), 7-19.
44. W. Fox, Special tubules for sperm storage in 
female lizards. Nature, 198 (1963), 500-501.
45. T. R. Shantakumari, H. B. D. Sarkar, and 
T. Shivanandappa, Histology and 
histochemistry of the oviductal sperm 
storage pockets of the agamid lizard Calotes 
versicolor. Journal of Morphology, 203 
(1990), 97-106.
46. A. P. Amey and J. M. Whittier, The annual 
reproductive cycle and sperm storage in 
the bearded dragon, Pogona barbata. 
Australian Journal of Zoology, 48 (2000), 
411.
47. M. C. A. Uribe, S. R. Velasco, L. J. Guillette, 
and E. F. Estrada, Oviduct histology of the 
lizard, Ctenosaura pectinata. Copeia, 1988 
(1988), 1035-1042.
48. L. J. Guillette and R. E. Jones. Ovarian, 
oviductal, and placental morphology of the 
reproductively bimodal lizard, Sceloporus 
aeneus. Journal of Morphology, 184 (1985), 
85-98.
49. Z. Yaron, Effects of ovariectomy and steroid 
replacement on the genital tract of the 
viviparous lizard, Xantusia vigilis. Journal 
of Morphology, 136 (1972), 313-325.
50. A. P. Halpert, W. R. Garstka, and D. Crews, 
Sperm transport and storage and its 
relation to the annual sexual cycle of the 
female red-sided garter snake, Thamnophis 
sirtalis parietalis. Journal of Morphology, 
174 (1982), 149-159.
51. R. D. Aldridge, Oviductal anatomy and 
seasonal sperm storage in the southeastern 
crowned snake (Tantilla coronata). Copeia, 
1992 (1992), 1103-1106.
52. D. M. Sever and T. J. Ryan, Ultrastructure of 
the reproductive system of the black 
swamp snake (Seminatrix pygaea): Part 
I. Evidence for oviducal sperm storage. 
Journal of Morphology, 241 (1999), 1-18.
53. D. M. Sever, T. J. Ryan, T. Morris, D. Patton, 
and S. Swafford, Ultrastructure of the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

406 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
reproductive system of the black swamp 
snake (Seminatrix pygaea). II. Annual 
oviducal cycle. Journal of Morphology, 245 
(2000), 146-160.
54. S. M. Almeida-Santos and M. G. Salomao, 
Long-term sperm storage in the female 
Neotropical rattlesnake Crotalus durissus 
terrificus (Viperidae: Crotalinae).
Japanese Journal of Herpetology, 17 (1997), 
46-52.
55. M. Ludwig and H. Rahn, Sperm storage and 
copulatory adjustment in the prairie 
rattlesnake. Copeia, 1943 (1943), 
15-18.
56. G. Nilson and C. Andren, Function of renal 
sex secretion and male hierarchy in the 
adder, Vipera berus, during reproduction. 
Hormones and Behavior, 16 (1982), 
404-413.
57. S. M. Almeida-Santos and M. G. Salomao, 
Reproduction in Neotropical pitvipers, with 
emphasis on species of the genus Bothrops. 
In G. W. Schuett, M. Hoggren, 
M. E. Douglas, et al., eds., Biology of the 
Vipers (Carmel: Eagle Mountain 
Publishing, 2002), pp. 445-462.
58. S. F. Nunes, I. L. Kaefer, P. T. Leite, and 
S. Z. Cechin, Reproductive and feeding 
biology of the pitviper Rhinocerophis 
alternatus from subtropical Brazil. 
Herpetological Journal, 20 (2010), 31-39.
59. K. N. Kasperoviczus, Biologia reprodutiva 
da jararaca ilhoa, Bothrops insularis 
(Serpentes: Viperidae), da Ilha da 
Queimada Grande, Sao Paulo. 
Unpublished Masters dissertation, 
Universidade de Sao Paulo, 2009.
60. N. Yamanouye, P. F. Silveira, F.
M. F. Abdalla, et al., Reproductive cycle of 
the Neotropical Crotalus durissus terrificus: 
II. Establishment and maintenance of the 
uterine muscular twisting, a strategy for 
long-term sperm storage. General and 
Comparative Endocrinology, 139 (2004), 
151-157.
61. S. M. Almeida-Santos, F. M. F Abdalla, 
P. F. Silveira, et al., Reproductive cycle of 
the Neotropical Crotalus durissus terrificus:
I. Seasonal levels and interplay between 
steroid hormones and vasotocinase.
General and Comparative Endocrinology, 
139 (2004), 143-150.
62. B. Stille, T. Madsen, and M. Niklasson, 
Multiple paternity in the adder, Vipera 
berus. Oikos, 47 (1986), 173-175.
63. D. S. Siegel and D. M. Sever, Utero- 
muscular twisting and sperm storage in 
viperids. Herpetological Conservation and 
Biology, 1 (2006), 87-92.
64. C. Andren and G. Nilson, The copulatory 
plug of the adder, Vipera berus: Does it 
keep sperm in or out? Oikos, 49 (1987), 230.
65. W. Fox, Seminal receptacles of snakes. 
Anatomical Record, 124 (1956), 519-539.
66. K. H. Bull, R. T. Mason, and J. Whittier, 
Seasonal testicular development and sperm 
storage in tropical and subtropical 
populations of the brown tree snake (Boiga 
irregularis). Australian Journal of Zoology, 
45 (1997), 479.
67. L. Thongboon, S. Senarat, J. Kettratad, 
et al., Morphology and histology of female 
reproductive tract of the dog-faced water 
snake Cerberus rynchops (Schneider, 1799). 
Maejo Internation Journal of Science and 
Technology, 14 (2020), 11-26.
68. H. Saint Girons, Le cycle sexuel chez Vipera 
aspis (L.) dans l’ouest de la France. Bulletin 
Biologique de la France et de la Belgique, 91 
(1957), 284-350.
69. H. Saint Girons, Le cycle reproducteur de la 
Vipere a cornes Cerastes cerastes (L.) dans 
la nature et en captivite. Bulletin de la 
Sociёtё Zoologique de France, 87 (1962), 
41-51.
70. H. Saint Girons and R. Duguy, Le cycle 
sexuel de Lacerta muralis L. en plaine et en 
montagne. Bulletin du Мизёит National 
d’Histoire Naturelle, 42 (1970), 690-695.
71. M. Devine, Copulatory plugs in snakes: 
enforced chastity. Science, 187 (1975), 
844-845.
72. M. C. Uribe, G. Gonzalez-Porter, 
B. D. Palmer, and L. J. Guilette, Cyclic 
histological changes of the oviductal- 
cloacal junction in the viviparous snake
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 407
Toluca lineata. Journal of Morphology, 237 
(1998), 91-100.
73. V. A. Barros, C. A. Rojas, and
S. M. Almeida-Santos, Mating plugs and 
male sperm storage in Bothrops cotiara 
(Serpentes, Viperidae). Herpetological 
Journal, 27 (2017), 63-67.
74. H. A. J in den Bosch, First record of mating 
plugs in lizards. Amphibia-Reptilia, 15 
(1994), 89-93.
75. K. N. Kasperoviczus and S. M. Almeida- 
Santos, Copulatory plugs in Neotropical 
viperid snakes. 7th World Congress of 
Herpetology, Vancouver, abstracts (2012), 
11-12.
76. M. C. Devine, Potential for sperm 
competition in reptiles: behavioral and 
physiological consequences. In R. L. Smith, 
ed., Sperm Competition and the Evolution 
of Animal Mating Systems (Orlando: 
Academic Press, 1984), pp. 509-521.
77. R. Shine, M. Olsson, and R. Mason, Chastity 
belts in gartersnakes: the functional 
significance of mating plugs. Biological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 70 (2000), 
377-390.
78. C. R. Friesen, R. Shine, R. W. Krohmer, and 
R. T. Mason, Not just a chastity belt: the 
functional significance of mating plugs in 
garter snakes, revisited. Biological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 109 (2013), 893-907.
79. L. H. Hoffman and W. A. Wimsatt, 
Histochemical and electron microscopic 
observations on the sperm receptacles in 
the garter snake oviduct. American Journal 
of Anatomy, 134 (1972), 71-95.
80. L. Jacobi, Ovoviviparie bei einheimischen 
Eidechsen. Zeitschriftfur wissenschaftliche 
Zoologie, 148 (1936), 401-464.
81. H. Saint Girons, Sperm survival and 
transport in the female genital tract of 
reptiles. In E. S. E. Hafez and C. G. Thibault, 
eds., The Biology of Spermatozoa (Basel: 
Karger, 1975), pp. 105-113.
82. W. Fox and H. C. Dessauer, The single right 
oviduct and other urogenital structures of 
female Typhlops and Leptotyphlops.
Copeia, 1962 (1962), 590-597.
83. S. R. Srinivas, S. N. Hegde, H. B. D. Sarkar, 
and T. Shivanandappa, Sperm storage 
in the oviduct of the tropical rock 
lizard, Psammophilus dorsalis. Journal 
of Morphology, 224 (1995), 
293-301.
84. C. E. Marinho, S. M. Almeida-Santos, 
S. C. Yamasaki, and P. F. Silveira, Peptidase 
activities in the semen from the ductus 
deferens and uterus of the neotropical 
rattlesnake Crotalus durissus terrificus. 
Journal of Comparative Physiology B, 179 
(2009), 635-642.
85. R. D. Aldridge, B. C. Jellen, D. S. Siegel, and 
S. S. Wisniewski, The sexual segment of the 
kidney. In R. D. Aldridge and D. M. Sever, 
eds., Reproductive Biology and Phylogeny of 
Snakes (Enfield: Science Publishers, 2011), 
pp. 477-509.
86. D. S. Siegel and D. M. Sever, Sperm 
aggregations in female Agkistrodon 
piscivorus (Reptilia: Squamata): 
A histological and ultrastructural 
investigation. Journal of Morphology 269 
(2008), 189-206.
87. H. Rahn, Sperm viability in the uterus of 
the garter snake, Thamnophis. Copeia, 1940 
(1940), 109-115.
88. W. P. Maddison and D. R. Maddison, 
Mesquite: A modular system for 
evolutionary analysis. Version 3.61, 
 
 (2019).
http://
mesquiteproject.org
89. Y. Zheng and J. J. Wiens, Combining 
phylogenomic and supermatrix 
approaches, and a time-calibrated 
phylogeny for squamate reptiles (lizards 
and snakes) based on 52 genes and 4162 
species. Molecular Phylogenetics and 
Evolution, 94 (2016), 537-547.
90. L. R. V. Alencar, T. B. Quental,
F. G. Grazziotin, et al., Diversification in 
vipers: Phylogenetic relationships, time of 
divergence and shifts in speciation rates. 
Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution, 105 
(2016), 50-62.
91. H. Saint Girons, Deplacements et survie 
des spermatozoides chez les reptiles. 
Colloques de l'Institut National de la Sante 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

408 henrique B. braz and selma M. almeida-santos
et de la Recherche M6dicale, 26 (1973), 
259-282.
92. M. Gabe and H. Saint Girons, Contribution 
a l’histologie de Sphenodon punctatus Gray 
(Paris: Editions du Centre National de la 
Recherche Scientifique, 1964).
93. A. Cree, J. F. Cockrem, and L. J. Guillette, 
Reproductive cycles of male and female 
tuatara (Sphenodon punctatus) on 
Stephens Island, New Zealand. Journal of 
Zoology 226 (1992), 199-217.
94. J. J. Wiens, C. R. Hutter, D. G. Mulcahy, 
et al., Resolving the phylogeny of lizards 
and snakes (Squamata) with extensive 
sampling of genes and species. Biology 
Letters, 8 (2012), 1043-1046.
95. A. Miralles, J. Marin, D. Markus, et al., 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
96. B. F. Simoes, F. L. Sampaio, C. Jared., et al., 
Visual system evolution and the nature of 
the ancestral snake. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 28 (2015), 1309-1320.
97. P. C. Withers, Physiological correlates of 
limblessness and fossoriality in scincid 
lizards. Copeia, 1981 (1981), 197-204.
98. C. Gans, Studies on amphisbaenids 
(Amphisbaenia, Reptilia). 1. A taxonomic 
revision of the Trogonophinae, and a 
functional interpretation of the 
amphisbaenid adaptive pattern. Bulletin of 
the American Museum of Natural History, 
119 (1960), 129-204.
99. J. K. Webb, R. Shine, W. R. Branch, and 
P. S. Harlow, Life-history strategies in basal 
snakes: reproduction and dietary habits of 
the African thread snake Leptotyphlops 
scutifrons (Serpentes: Leptotyphlopidae). 
Journal of Zoology, 250 (2000), 
321-327.
100. J. K. Webb, W. R. Branch, and R. Shine, 
Dietary habits and reproductive biology of 
typhlopid snakes from southern Africa. 
Journal of Herpetology 35 (2001), 558-567.
101. R. J. Sawaya, O. A. V. Marques, and 
M. Martins, Composi^ao e historia natural 
das serpentes de Cerrado de Itirapina, Sao 
Paulo, sudeste do Brasil. Biota Neotropica, 
8 (2008), 127-149.
102. L. Parpinelli and O. A. V. Marques, 
Seasonal and daily activity in the pale­
headed blindsnake Liotyphlops beui 
(Serpentes: Anomalepidae) in southeastern 
Brazil. South American Journal of 
Herpetology, 3 (2008), 207-212.
103. R. Shine and J. K. Webb, Natural history of 
Australian typhlopid snakes. Journal of 
Herpetology, 24 (1990), 357-363.
104. L. Parpinelli and O. A. V. Marques, 
Reproductive biology and food habits of the 
blindsnake Liotyphlops beui 
(Scolecophidia: Anomalepididae). South 
American Journal of Herpetology, 10 (2015), 
205-210.
105. H. Saint Girons, Reproductive cycles of 
male snakes and their relationships with 
climate and female reproductive cycles. 
Herpetologica, 38 (1982), 5-16.
106. R. D. Aldridge, S. R. Goldberg,
S. S. Wisniewski, A. P. Bufalino, and
C. B. Dillman, The reproductive cycle and 
estrus in the colubrid snakes of temperate 
North America. Contemporary Herpetology, 
2009 (2009), 1-31.
107. M. Smyth and M. J. Smith, Obligatory 
sperm storage in the skink Hemiergis 
peronii. Science, 161 (1968), 575-576.
108. M. Bertona and M. Chiaraviglio, 
Reproductive biology, mating aggregations, 
and sexual dimorphism of the Argentine 
boa constrictor (Boa constrictor 
occidentalis). Journal of Herpetology, 37 
(2003), 510-516.
109. S. Z. Cechin and J. L. Oliveira, 
Sibynomorphus ventrimaculatus (Southern 
Snail-eater). Mating. Herpetological Review, 
34 (2003), 73.
110. O. A. V. Marques, D. F. Muniz-Da-Silva, 
F. E. Barbo, et al., Ecology of the colubrid 
snake Spilotes pullatus from the Atlantic 
Forest of southeastern Brazil.
Herpetologica, 70 (2014), 407-416.
111. R. Shine, Comparative ecology of three 
Australian snake species of the genus
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

sperm-storage location in squamata 409
Cacophis (Serpentes: Elapidae). Copeia, 
1980 (1980), 831-838.
112. R. Shine, G. V. Haagner, W. R. Branch, 
P. S. Harlow, and J. K. Webb, Natural 
history of the African shieldnose snake 
Aspidelaps scutatus (Serpentes, Elapidae).
Journal of Herpetology, 30 (1996), 
361-366.
113. F. Yokoyama and H. Yoshida, The 
reproductive cycle of the female habu, 
Trimeresurus flavoviridis. Journal of 
Herpetology, 28 (1994), 54-59.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.023 Published online by Cambridge University Press

18
An Overview of the Morphology of Oral 
Glands in Snakes
Leonardo de Oliveira and Hussam Zaher
18.1 Introduction
The oral cavity of snakes receives secretions from eight distinct cephalic glands traditionally 
referred to as oral glands: the labial (supra- and infralabial), temporomandibular, rictal, 
sublingual, premaxillary, accessory, and dental glands (the latter also known as venom and 
Duvernoy’s glands). Oral glands and their venom production have undergone substantial 
modification in snakes, most notably in association with the diversification of feeding 
strategies [1, 2]. Their variable morphology provides a rich source of data for systematics 
and is believed to be responsible for an increase in prey-handling efficiency, a potential key 
innovation underpinning the adaptive radiation of the group [3-5]. Recently, several 
important contributions have focused on the oral glands of snakes, and more specifically 
on the origin and diversification of venom delivery systems, which include the venom 
glands, differentiated maxillary teeth and associated adductor musculature [e.g., 6, 7].
Among the glands that release their secretions into the oral cavity, the most studied are the 
venom, sublingual, and supra- and infralabial glands [8]. As in other reptiles, the oral glands 
of snakes are usually classified by their histochemical properties and the ultrastructure of 
their secretory granules. Kochva [3] used their histochemical reactions to recognize three 
types of secretory cells in oral glands: serous cells with protein-rich and Periodic Acid-Schiff 
(PAS) negative secretions, serous cells with PAS-positive secretions, and mucous cells with 
little or no protein and acidic mucosubstances. Underwood [5] differentiated oral glands into 
mucous and serous categories - or equivalent - and indicated that mucous cells secrete only 
mucus while venom glands always contain some type of serous cells. Here, we follow 
Underwood [5] and classify the different cell types of oral glands as mucous or serous.
In this chapter, we review historical and recent developments, synthesize data, and 
present a perspective on the potential and limitations of oral-gland anatomy for snake
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 411
Table 18.1 List of specimens used in this study.
Specimens belong to the following collections: IBSP: Colegao Herpetologica ‘Alphonse Richard Hoge’, 
Instituto Butantan; MNHNCU: Museo Nacional de Historia Natural, Havana, Cuba; MZUSP: Museu de 
Zoologia da Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo, Brazil; NHM, UK: The Natural History Museum, 
London, UK.
Family
Species
Adult/
Embryo
Technique
Collection 
numbers
Colubridae
Pantherophis guttatus
Embryo
Histology
MZUSP 22481
Dibamidae
Dibamus 
novaeguineae
Adult
Tomography
NHM, UK 
1998.621
Diploglossidae
Ophiodes striatus
Adult
Histology
MZUSP 97009
Dipsadidae
Helicops modestus
Adult
Histology
IBSP 76610
Imantodes cenchoa
Adult
Histology, 
dissection
MZUSP 15944
Leptodeira annulata
Adult
Histology
MZUSP 16958;
16948
Sibynomorphus mikanii
Embryo
Histology
MZUSP 18716;
18717
Sibynomorphus 
neuwiedi
Embryo
Histology
MZUSP 22458
Elapidae
Hydrophis 
cyanocinctus
Adult
Tomography
NHM, UK
1956.1.13.16
Micrurus corallinus
Adult
Tomography, 
dissection
MZUSP 11060
Gekkonidae
Hemidactylus mabouia
Adult
Histology
MZUSP 49310
Gymnophthalmidae
Colobosaura modesta
Adult
Histology
MZUSP 39165
Leptotyphlopidae
Leptotyphlops 
fuliginosus
Adult
Tomography
MZUSP 11513
Scincidae
Varzea bistriata
Adult
Histology
MZUSP 89405
Tropidophiidae
Tropidophis melanurus
Adult
Tomography
MNHNCU 5107
Typhlopidae
Amerotyphlops
Adult
Tomography
MZUSP 14674
brongersmianus
systematics, in addition to trying to assess interpretations of the ancestral snake. We also 
conducted some new histological sections of the entire heads of adults and embryos of 
snakes (Table 18.1) in order to describe and illustrate oral glands and associated structures. 
For general structure, we stained paraffin histological sections with hematoxylin-eosin
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

412 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Figure 18.1 Embryonic development of oral glands in snakes. (A) Transverse section of head of 
Pantherophis guttatus (embryo, 22 days after oviposition) at the post-ocular level showing dental and 
glandular laminae. (B) Detail of the previous figure showing the joint origin of the venom gland 
primordium (vgp) and maxillary dental lamina (mdl). (C) Transverse section of head of 
Sibynomorphus mikanii (embryo, 41 days) at the level of the corner of the mouth, showing the 
invagination corresponding to the upper rictal gland (sr) in a more medial region than the supralabial 
gland (sl). (D) Transverse section of head of Sibynomorphus mikanii (embryo, 32 days) at the level 
of the eyes showing the invagination of the supralabial gland (sl) spatially separate from the 
maxillary dental lamina (mdl). (E) Sagittal section of head of Sibynomorphus mikanii (embryo, 32 
days) showing the invagination of the anterior and posterior parts of the sublingual gland (respectively, 
a-slg and p-slg). Histochemical reactions of PAS and AA. (F) Sagittal section of head of embryo of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 413
(H&E). Sections were also stained using combined alcian blue (pH 2.5) and PAS [9, 10]. PAS 
and alcian blue were used for identification of neutral and acid mucosubstances, respect­
ively. Moreover, we examined the heads of some species (Table 18.1) using high-resolution 
tomography (X-ray micro CT scan). For this, entire heads were stained with a 1 per cent 
iodine-ethanol solution for about one week to increase tissue X-ray contrast [11]. The 
studied specimens were scanned using a Phoenix v|tome|x m tomography (General 
Electric Company) at the Microtomography Laboratory of the Museum of Zoology of the 
University of Sao Paulo (Brazil) and an X-Tek HMXST 225 X-ray tomography (Nikon 
Metrology) at the Natural History Museum, London (UK).
Terminology of the oral glands follows Taub [8], Kochva [3], Underwood [12], and 
terminology of the adductor muscles follows Zaher [13]. Although the venom and 
Duvernoy’s glands are homologues [1, 3, 5], they exhibit notable morphological differ­
ences and their nomenclature has been intensely debated (see [14, 15] for details). In a 
traditional view, venom glands occur only in front-fanged snakes (some atractaspidids, all 
viperids and elapids), while Duvernoy’s glands occur in a range of Endoglyptodonta 
(sensu [16, 17]) with or without rear fangs - or simply in non-front-fanged snakes [18­
21]. However, considering the homology of these glands and regardless of their 
morphofunctional differences, some authors have proposed to synonymize the terms 
‘Duvernoy’s glands’ and ‘venom glands’ [15, 22]. Here, we follow this proposal and use 
the term ‘venom gland’ to refer to all oral glands that develop from a single invagination 
on the caudal portion of the dental lamina of the maxillary bone. Phylogenetic relation­
ships and classification follows the recent proposals by Zaher et al. [17] for Caenophidia 
and Burbrink et al. [23] for Squamata.
18.2 Labial Glands
Labial glands have been found in the upper and lower jaws (supra- and infralabial glands, 
respectively) of all snakes studied so far [3, 24]. These glands develop from various serial 
and non-compound epithelial thickenings, followed by the invagination of the epithelial 
laminae into the mesenchyme (Fig. 18.1, [25, 26]). The pattern of embryonic development 
and location of the duct opening distinguish the labial from the dental glands. While labial 
glands have multiple ducts (polystomatic) opening along the margins of the lips, the ducts 
of the dental glands open at the bases of the teeth (Fig. 18.1, [5, 27]). The epithelium of 
labial glands is usually composed of mucous cells, although mixed and serous cells have 
also been described in many species [3, 18]. The cell types of supra- and infralabial glands
Figure 18.1 (cont.) Sibynomorphus neuwiedi showing the serial and non-compound invaginations of 
the supralabial gland (sl). Sections a, b, c, d, and f were stained with H&E. Abbreviations: ect, 
ectopterygoid; il, invagination of the infralabial gland; Mc, Meckel’s cartilage; pdl, pterygoid dental 
lamina; pt, pterygoid; t, tongue; tc, trabecula. The panel in the upper left corner denotes the position 
of the sections. Figures (C) and (D) modified from [26]. (A black and white version of this figure will 
appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

414 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
are often similar. Labial glands usually include several rows of small glands with short ducts 
arranged along the lips and separated from each other by connective tissue septa [3]. 
However, some variation can be observed in their organization, as detailed below.
18.2.1 Supralabial Glands
Supralabial glands are located along the lateral margin of the maxilla, underneath the labial 
scales [8]. In the paraphyletic assemblage ‘scolecophidians’, two groups of supralabial 
glands have been described in the rostral region of two typhlopids (Afrotyphlops and 
Indotyphlops) and in Rena dulcis (Leptotyphlopidae), and a third gland located at the level 
of the eye only in typhlopids [28]. In Afrotyphlops punctatus and Indotyphlops braminus, 
mucous and seromucous cells are grouped into different lobules [28]. An additional 
‘accessory supralabial’ gland with a single duct has been described in Liotyphlops albirostris 
(Anomalepididae) [29]. Saint-Girons [30] proposed that Typhlopidae could be differenti­
ated from other ‘scolecophidians’ by the existence of deep folds in the oral epithelium filled 
with large mucous crypts. We confirm the presence of deep folds in the oral epithelium of 
the typhlopid Amerotyphlops brongersmianus (Fig. 18.2B). We also show that, anteriorly in 
the mouth, the supralabial gland is composed of two cell types grouped into different 
lobules, which are seen on the computed tomography slides in two shades of grey 
(Fig. 18.2A, B).
Underwood [12] described some structural variation in the supra- and infralabial glands 
of some ‘henophidian’ snakes. He argued that although most of these glands are largely (if 
not entirely) mucous, a few species have serous tubules leading to mucous, as in Casarea 
dussumieri and Tropidophis haetianus. In Cylindrophis ruffus, he also reported serous cells 
opening into mucous tubules, and described an extensive supralabial gland extending back 
to the corner of the mouth and separated from the anterior part by a curtain of horizontal 
smooth-muscle fibres. In Boidae, supra- and infralabial glands are composed of mixed cells 
containing only a small amount of proteins [30, 31].
In Caenophidia, Taub [18, 32] described substantial variation in the upper jaw glands of 
non-front-fanged snakes [18, 32]. Taub recognized six glandular patterns, ranging from a 
single and purely mucous supralabial gland to two separated glands composed of a mucous 
supralabial gland and a serous tubuloacinous venom gland. In an intermediate category, 
Taub included xenodermids (Fimbrios, Achalinus, and Xenodermus), which have labial 
glands formed by alternating lobules of serous and mucous cells along the supralabial 
ridge. However, subsequent studies found no evidence of alternating mucous and serous 
cells in the supralabial gland, but identified supralabial serous tubules leading to mucous 
tubules [12]. In Acrochordus, supralabial glands are mucous [12, 15, 28]. In Pareidae, the 
condition of the supralabial gland is unclear because it presents a group of serous cells in its 
posterior portion. According to Fry et al. [33], Pareas carinatus has a greatly atrophied 
venom gland, while Taub [18] reported that P. stanleyi has venom glands composed of 
mucous cells intermingled with serous cells. In contrast, Underwood and Kochva [34] found 
neither venom glands nor quadrato-maxillary ligaments in several species of Pareas 
(including P. stanleyi), but they recognized a horizontal gland that appears to open 
backwards into the long rictal groove. Underwood [12] also described supralabial glands
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 415
Figure 18.2 High-resolution computed tomography of the head of snakes. (A) Sagittal slice of 
Amerotyphlops brongersmianus showing the position of the supralabial gland (sl) consisting of two 
types of cells (1 and 2) that may be distinguished by the different shades of grey and the 
temporomandibular gland (tm) below the eye. Note the presence of ducts (d-tm) in the anteroinferior 
part of the gland. (B) Transverse slice of A. brongersmianus in the anterior part of the head showing 
the position of the supralabial gland (sl) composed of two different cell types and the presence of 
ducts (d-sl) opening into the mouth. Note the existence of deep folds (*) in the oral epithelium. (C) 
Sagittal slice of Leptotyphlops fuliginosus showing the position of the supralabial (sl) and infralabial 
glands (il). (D) Transverse slice of L. fuliginosus at the level of the corner of the mouth showing the 
position of the infralabial gland (il) lateral to the dentary (d) and the presence of an upper rictal gland 
(sr) with a duct opening into the mouth. Abbreviations: a-slg, anterior sublingual gland; f, frontal; hg, 
harderian gland; p, parietal. The panel in the upper left corner denotes the position of the sections.
constituted by branched serous tubules passing into branched mucous tubules with col­
umnar epithelium, and suggested that a double-row portion of the supralabial gland might 
be the Duvernoy’s glands (venom glands) reported by Taub [18]; however, he concluded 
that there is no evidence of a venom gland in Pareas.
In Viperidae, the supralabial gland seems to occupy the entire region of the upper jaw. 
The infra and supralabial glands of Bothrops jararaca are reportedly formed by secretory 
tubules composed of mucous and mucous-serous cells [35]. In Echis, an external upper 
labial gland that opens at the lower half of the last supralabial scale has been described 
[36, 37]. However, this supralabial gland does not appear to be homologous with typical 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

416 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
supralabial glands but rather corresponds to an epidermoid labial gland, due to the duct 
that opens out of the mouth [37]. Many elapid species have supralabial glands divided in 
the anterior and posterior parts of the mouth, which is particularly observed in coral snakes, 
which exhibit ample morphological variation in the supralabial gland (Fig. 18.4C; [38]). In 
Micrurus corallinus, the supralabial gland is essentially composed of mucous cells, but it 
also has some serous cells [39]. A few elapids have a small supralabial gland restricted to the 
anteriormost part of the mouth, including the sea krait Laticauda colubrina, in which the 
supralabial gland reaches only the infraorbital region [40]. Reduction in the size of the 
typical labial glands in L. colubrina and other species may be related to their aquatic 
lifestyle [30].
Gabe and Saint-Girons [28] noted that serous cells, when present, occupy the bottom of 
the secretory units of the labial glands of most species. This seems to occur in the dipsadid 
Helicops modestus, in which the upper part of the supralabial gland is formed by serous 
cells, whereas the ventral part of the gland and its ducts are mucous (Fig. 18.4E, F). In non­
front-fanged snakes with venom glands, these glands often overlap the posterior third of the 
supralabial gland, reducing or altering it locally (Fig. 18.4A; [3]). In some dipsadines, the 
posterior portion of the subralabial glands is substantially enlarged below the orbit (e.g., 
Sibynomorphus and Geophis), but no venom glands have been observed [41, 42]. 
Additionally, a (presumably juxtanarinal) gland lies adjacent to the supralabial gland that 
borders posteroventrally each external nostril in the dipsadines Chersodromus, Ninia, and 
Nothopsis [43]. It is unclear whether a similar structure in Plesiodipsas perijanensis [44] is 
novel or part of the supralabial gland.
18.2.2 Infralabial Glands
Infralabial glands are located laterally to the dentary and are usually composed of mucous 
cells [8]. The infralabial gland consists of a series of lobules that usually open directly by 
short ducts along the margin of the lip, but which can also open obliquely forwards [12]. In 
non-caenophidian snakes, the infralabial glands are often more developed than the supra­
labial glands [24, 45]. Accessory infralabial glands have been observed in the 
‘scolecophidian’ Liotyphlops albirostris [29]. In Typhlopidae and Leptotyphlopidae, the 
infralabial glands increase in size posteriorly, forming a temporomandibular gland [3, 24]. 
In Xerotyphlops vermicularis, this accessory infralabial gland has not been confirmed [8]. 
Infra and supralabial glands apparently composed of mucous and serous cells have been 
reported in Anomalepis aspinosus [46]. Recently, a double infralabial accessory gland has 
been described in Mitophis leptepileptus, and single infralabial accessory glands have been 
reported in some species of Trilepida, both genera belonging to the Leptotyphlopidae [47]. 
However, no information on cell types has been provided. Underwood [12] reported that 
infralabial glands divided into two parts in Cylindrophis ruffus (Cylindrophiidae); the 
second infralabial part lacked associated muscles, and was interpreted as unlikely to be a 
mandibular gland. In Pareas, a caenophidian genus of snakes, the muscle levator anguli 
oris originates from the external surface of the maxillary and covers the infralabial glands 
[48, 49]. Moreover, this muscle always inserts directly on the infralabial gland and acts as a 
compressor muscle [50, 51]. Underwood [12] reported that supra- and infralabial glands of
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 417
Pareas carinata and P. monticola consist of branched serous tubules passing into branched 
mucous tubules, with columnar epithelium.
In elapids, infralabial glands have a sac-like structure lined by mucous cells in the 
anterior portion (Fig. 18.4C; [39]). Although there is little information about this structure, 
it apparently accommodates the fangs when the mouth closes [3]. The sac-like structure 
also occurs in the front-fanged atractaspidid Homoroselaps lacteus (L. Oliveira, pers. obs.), 
which seems to reinforce the morphological similarities of the venom delivery system 
components between the genus Homoroselaps and the elapids [34, 60, 82]. In M. corallinus, 
the infralabial glands are composed of mucous cells and a smaller number of serous 
cells [39].
In ‘goo-eater’ dipsadines, infralalabial glands are highly developed and predominantly 
composed of serous cells [42]. Some authors have suggested that these glands participate in 
the peculiar feeding mechanism of these snakes, which are specialist in preying on soft- 
bodied invertebrates, particularly slugs, snails, and annelids [8, 52]. In Sibynomorphus 
neuwiedi, the infralabial glands show a higher protein content than the supralabial and 
venom glands, and the infralabial extract causes paralysis and death in slugs [53]. In the 
congeneric S. mikanii, the infralabial glands also show a higher protein content than the 
supralabial and venom glands [54]. However, the extract of these three glands causes 
intense mucus release, body contortions, and immobilization in slugs, and these reactions 
are more intense in topical than injected applications [54]. In this species, however, the 
venom gland extract causes a longer immobilization time, whereas secretions from the 
supra- and infralabial glands cause more intense local effects [54]. Thus, Salomao and 
Laporta-Ferreira [54] suggested that, in S. mikanii, the venom gland secretion acts mainly to 
immobilize slugs, whereas the supra- and infralabial secretions act in the beginning of the 
digestive process. More recently, Oliveira et al. [55] demonstrated that the infralabial glands 
of S. mikanii and Dipsas indica are predominantly composed of serous cells, and the 
infralabial glands of Atractus reticulatus (a goo-eater specialist preying on earthworms) 
are formed by mixed acini composed of mucous and serous cells.
In Dipsas and Sibynomorphus, infralabial glands are highly modified and composed of 
two parts. The thinnest, most dorsolateral part of the infralabial (il1) is arranged along the 
labial region and consists of several short ducts that open along the margin of the lower lip. 
The most hypertrophied part of the infralabial (il2) is located in the ventromedial portion of 
the mandible and has a single large duct that opens in the epithelium of the mouth floor, 
level with the intermandibular raphe [42]. In Sibynomorphus, il2 develops independently 
from il1 and derives from a hypertrophied invagination, whereas il1 derives from several 
small invaginations [26]. In Geophis, the infralabial glands are also highly modified, but 
their condition differs greatly from that of Dipsas and Sibynomorphus [41]. Although the 
infralabial glands are also divided into two different portions (il1 and il2) in Geophis, these 
portions are compressed by different muscles and have a large lumen within il2 where 
secretion is stored [41]. Enulius and Enuliophis share with Geophis the condition of the 
infralabial glands associated with the adductor muscles [51].
Although the pattern of typical infralabial glands is largely derived in goo-eaters, little is 
known about the function of these glands in these snakes. In addition to lubrication, their 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

418 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
infralabial glands may produce toxins that act specifically on ingested prey (as detailed 
above) or function as a protein-secreting system that controls mucous secretion and helps 
to ingest elongated, flexible, and highly viscous prey [41, 42, 55]. Preliminary transcriptomic 
results indicate that the infralabial glands of S. mikanii have a ‘non-front-fanged venom 
gland-like’ protein profile dominated by metalloproteinases and C-type lectins, whereas the 
infralabial glands of D. indica have a low expression of venom components, consisting of 
only 9 per cent of typical toxins [56], suggesting that their secretions might not have a 
primary envenomation function. The fact that the secretion is carried out and empties in 
the mouth through a duct that is not associated with a tooth position supports this 
hypothesis [42]. However, further research is needed on these highly specialized lower 
jaw systems to understand their structure and function, particularly the high-pressure 
system of Geophis.
18.3 Temporomandibular Glands
Phisalix [57] described the ‘glande temporo-mandibulaire’ in Afrotyphlops punctatus 
(Typhlopidae) and considered it as different from the labial, rictal, and venom glands. 
Smith and Bellairs [24] did not recognize this gland in Argyrophis diardi and considered it a 
posterior prolongation of the inferior labial, which extends backwards and upwards in the 
temporal region. Gabe and Saint-Girons [28] argued that typhlopids are characterized by 
the presence of a temporomandibular gland that represents the well-developed caudal part 
of the infralabial mass. They also argued that the temporomandibular gland of Typhlopidae 
represents only the posterior, undifferentiated part of the infralabial mass and its classifica­
tion as a distinct gland is unjustified, as previously noticed by Smith and Bellairs [24]. Haas 
[29] found an accessory supralabial gland in the anomalepidid Liotyphlops albirostris but 
was unsure whether this gland is comparable to the temporomandibular gland described 
by Phisalix. Kochva [3] argued that the posterior region of the infralabial glands of typhlo- 
pids and Leptotyphlops increases in size to form the temporomandibular gland. Taub [8] 
followed Phisalix’s [57] proposal and recognized the temporomandibular glands as indi­
vidualized glands. More recently, Jackson et al. [15] reported a large gland below the eyes of 
the typhlopid Anilios guentheri, which presumably is the Phisalix’s temporomandibular 
gland. In addition, the authors suggested that this gland might be a dental gland and 
compared it with the accessory supralabial gland of Liotyphlops albirostris described by 
Haas [29]. Our preliminary tomographic images of Amerotyphlops brongersmianus indicate 
a large gland located below the eyes, posteriorly in the infralabial glands. Although this 
gland has some (approximately four) duct openings at the back of the mouth (Fig. 18.2A), 
their small size precluded us from identifying their exact location or from identifying the 
infralabial or rictal glands. However, the duct openings do not appear to be close to the 
bases of the maxillary teeth, indicating that this gland is not a dental gland. Further 
investigations are needed to better understand the identity and the morphological diversity 
of the temporomandibular glands of ‘scolecophidians’.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 419
18.4 Rictal Glands
Phisalix and Caius [57, 58] described a ‘glande temporale anterieure’ (= rictal gland) in 
Anilius scytale, Eryx johnii, and Platyplectrurus, and listed it as present in other species. 
They also noted that this gland occurs only in the ‘primitive’ snake families: Boidae, 
Aniliidae, and Uropeltidae. Haas [48] described the rictal gland in some species of 
Uropeltis and Xenopeltis. Smith and Bellairs [24] found this gland in representatives of 
‘primitive’ families, such as Uropeltis ceylanica and Cylindrophis ruffus, and some 
caenophidian snakes of the family Colubridae. Moreover, they [24] presented serial sections 
showing where the ducts of the rictal glands open into the mouth, and highlighted two 
important conditions of these glands: they are often difficult to visualize by dissection and 
appear to vary considerably within genera. Gabe and Saint-Girons [28] described rictal 
glands in other caenophidians, emphasizing their broad taxonomic distribution. Kochva 
([59]; see also Fig. 18.1C) illustrated the primordium of the rictal gland (initially named by 
Kochva as posterior gland) of Telescopus fallax developing mesially to the quadrato- 
maxillary ligament. McDowell [60] proposed the term rictal gland and provided significant 
comparative observations, describing these glands in a range of caenophidians. McDowell 
also proposed homology of the rictal gland of snakes and the rictal fold of lizards (not 
followed by subsequent studies) and suggested that rictal glands were precursors of venom 
glands in front-fanged snakes. This was rejected by Wollberg et al. [61]. Underwood and 
Kochva [5, 34] and Cundall and Rossman [62] reported new observations about rictal glands 
of caenophidian and non-caenophidian (‘primitive’) snakes made mainly by dissections. 
Underwood [5] argued that rictal glands may rise mesially or laterally to the quadrato- 
maxillary ligament and that they are serous, with some mucous cells in the ducts, that open 
into the corner of the mouth. He also demonstrated substantial morphological variation in 
rictal glands that may occur exclusively on the upper jaw (superior rictal gland), lower jaw 
(inferior rictal gland), in both jaws, or neither. Wollberg et al. [61] provided the first 
histological evidence of the inferior rictal glands, mainly in atractaspidid snakes. 
Underwood [12] studied a large number of ‘henophidians’ preserved in museums and 
provided detailed descriptions of the dissections and histology of their rictal glands. This 
was Underwood’s last article in life and, although it focused on ‘henophidians’, it remains 
possibly the most comprehensive study of rictal glands.
More recently, Jackson et al. [15] reviewed the morphology of the oral glands of snakes 
and provided some data on the superior rictal glands of elapids as determined by dissec­
tions. These authors reported considerable variation, but did not investigate the inferior 
rictal glands. Oliveira et al. [63] described infralabial glands divided into two distinct regions 
(anterior and posterior) in the elapids Micrurus corallinus and M. lemniscatus. The poster­
ior region of the infralabial gland was later interpreted as the inferior rictal gland ([39]; see 
also Fig. 18.4C), evidencing considerable morphological variation in the lower jaw glands of 
elapids. Previous descriptions had already shown infralabial glands divided into two 
regions in M. mosquitensis [64]. Moreover, the extract from the posterior region of the 
infralabial gland (properly inferior rictal gland) is toxic in mice, producing typical 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

420 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
symptoms of coral snake envenomation and death when injected intraperitoneally [64]. 
These results possibly represent the first evidence on the function of the inferior rictal gland 
of snakes and, added to Phisalix and Caius’ [58] report on toxicity in the rictal glands of 
‘Erycinae’ and Uropeltidae (and the fact that the rictal glands of Cylindrophis ruffus exhibit 
the same pattern of gene expression as the venom glands: [65]), constitute the limited 
information available thus far on the function of the rictal glands in snakes.
Although rictal glands have been reported in ‘henophidians’ and caenophidians, their 
presence and form in the paraphyletic ‘scolecophidians’ is poorly established. Haas [46] 
described an infralabial gland with ducts concentrated at the lip commissure in Anomalepis 
aspinosus (Anomalepididae), and Underwood [12] suggested that this part appears to have 
the anatomical relationships of an inferior rictal gland. Martins et al. [47] identified for the 
first time the presence of rictal glands in the leptotyphlopids Epictia tenella and Trilepida 
bilineatum, located posteriorly to the rictal plate and the supralabial gland and recognized 
by their location, texture, and colour differences in relation to the supralabials. However, no 
histological or microanatomical evidence was provided, nor a report of where the ducts 
open into the mouth, an important characteristic to identify rictal glands. However, our 
preliminary tomographic observations of some ‘scolecophidians’ reveal the presence of a 
gland clearly separated from the labial glands that opens through a single duct in the corner 
of the mouth in Leptotyphlops fuliginosus (Fig. 18.2C), suggesting that it is a superior rictal 
gland. This preliminary observation requires further confirmation, but it may be additional 
evidence for the presence of upper rictal glands in ‘scolecophidians’, particularly 
in leptotyphlopids.
18.5 Sublingual Glands
Sublingual glands occur on the floor of the mouth and are composed of two distinct parts. 
The anterior part has been found in all snakes studied thus far and consists of paired, pear­
shaped, paramedian structures at the front of the lower jaws. Each pair of the anterior part 
of the sublingual gland contains a series of short ducts that open in the midline of the floor 
of the mouth, and its posterior portion lies more deeply in the jaw tissues and is almost 
entirely surrounded by muscles (see Fig. 18.3; [24]). The posterior part of the sublingual 
gland has been found only in Caenophidia. It consists of a single, elongated structure in the 
medial region of the floor of the mouth, from the anterior region of the mandible to the 
posterior region of the glottis [3, 24, 30]. The posterior part of the sublingual gland can also 
be divided into two regions: rostral and caudal. The rostral portion is composed of large 
tubules that open anteriorly, and the caudal portion is broader and contains small tubules 
that open in two parasagittal rows [3]. The posterior part of the sublingual gland has 
evolved three times independently into salt glands, in three lineages that underwent an 
evolutionary transition to marine life: in Acrochordidae, and in hydrophiine and laticaudine 
elapids [66]. In these taxa, sublingual gland secretions contain sodium chloride in higher 
concentrations than in seawater [3, 67, 68].
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 421
Figure 18.3 High-resolution computed tomography of the heads of various snakes showing the 
position of the sublingual and premaxillary glands. (A) Frontal slice showing the position of the 
anterior sublingual gland (a-slg) of Amerotyphlops brongersmianus. (B) Frontal slice showing the 
position of the anterior sublingual gland (a-slg) of Tropidophis melanurus. (C) Frontal slice showing 
the position of the anterior (a-slg) and posterior part of the sublingual gland (p-slg) of Micrurus 
corallinus. (D) Sagittal slice showing the position of the anterior sublingual gland (a-slg) of 
Amerotyphlops brongersmianus. (E) Transverse slice of the rostral region of Tropidophis melanurus 
showing the triangular-shaped premaxillary gland (pm) located between the anterior portion of the 
nasal cavity (nc), and (F), the opening of its ducts (d-pm) in a more posterior region. (G) Sagittal slice 
of Hydrophis cyanocinctus showing the enlarged posterior sublingual gland (p-slg) completely 
surrounding the tongue. Abbreviations: f, frontal; il, infralabial gland; ir, inferior rictal gland; sl, 
supralabial gland; t, tongue. The panel in the upper left corner denotes the position of the sections.
Almost no studies of the development of snake sublingual glands have been conducted. 
Taub [8] reported that the correct identification of the homologies of these glands remains a 
problem, because some authors consider them as two separate glands with a paired 
anterior gland and a single posterior gland. The anterior and posterior parts of the sublin­
gual gland seem to develop simultaneously, but both portions are divided from each other 
from the beginning of their development. The anterior part of the sublingual gland shows 
diverse and short invaginations, the posterior part shows a more developed invagination 
(Fig. 18.1E).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

422 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Amerotyphlops brongersmianus and Tropidophis melanurus have a pair of long anterior 
sublingual glands (Fig. 18.3A, B). In Micrurus corallinus, the anterior part of the sublingual 
gland is formed by serous cells arranged in tubules, while the posterior part is composed of 
serous and mucous cells. As the posterior part of the sublingual extends towards the back of 
the mouth, the mucous cells become scarce, and only serous cells are seen in these glands 
([39]; see Fig. 18.3C). As in other hydrophiine elapids (see [40]), the posterior sublingual 
gland in Hydrophis cyanocinctus is well-developed and surrounds the tongue, forming the 
‘supralingual gland’ (Fig. 18.3G). In addition to several sea snakes, this gland also occurs in 
some species of Vipera and may be interpreted as an extension of the posterior part of the 
sublingual gland [3].
18.6 Premaxillary Glands
Premaxillary glands are located at the junction of the maxilla and premaxilla and are 
composed of mucous cells [8]. According to Taub [8], the structure, position, and embry­
ology of the premaxillary glands suggests that they are an anterior expansion of the 
supralabial glands. Smith and Bellairs [24] agree that this gland may merely be a rostral 
expansion of the supralabial gland, although in some species it appears during dissection to 
be separate from the supralabial glands. Smith and Bellairs indicated that the ducts of these 
glands open inside the labial margin external to the anterior teeth. Burns and Pickwell [40] 
reported that some elapids (Laticauda colubrina, Hydrophis ornatus, and H. platurus) 
exhibit a dorsomedial extension of the premaxillary region of the supralabial gland ending 
beneath the anterior margins of the nasal scales. In the marine homalopsid Cerberus 
rhynchops, a premaxillary salt gland distinct from that of the supralabial gland is docu­
mented [69], representing a fourth independent evolutionary origin of salt glands in snakes 
(see [66]).
In ‘scolecophidians’, the supralabial gland is often well-developed in the rostral region, 
and no anterior expansion or any other differentiation between the ‘typical’ supralabial 
gland and the premaxillary gland has been observed (Fig. 18.2). In many other snakes, the 
single triangular-shaped premaxillary gland lies beneath the rostral scale, superficially to 
the premaxillary bone, but can reach the tip of the nasal bone and cover part of the nasal 
capsule (see Fig. 18.3E, [15, 31]). In Tropidophis melanurus, approximately ten premaxillary 
gland ducts open in the anteriormost region of the mouth (Fig. 18.3F); and in Micrurus 
corallinus, only six ducts occur in the same position. However, apart from the anterior 
expansion, no other difference between the supralabial and premaxillary glands is recog­
nizable in our tomographic images.
18.7 Dental Glands
Dental glands differ from labial glands by having ducts that open at the base of the teeth 
instead of the margins of the lips [5, 27]. Because dental glands are found in some groups of 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 423
lizards and snakes, these glands are at the centre of the discussion on the origin and 
evolution of the venom function in reptiles (see also Chapter 12) and are considered an 
anatomical synapomorphy of Toxicofera [7, 15]. Although the embryonic origin of lizard and 
snake dental glands appears remarkably similar (see Fig. 18.1; [72]), insufficient comparative 
developmental information is available to test the homology of this gland across Squamata. 
In snakes, dental glands occur in the upper jaw (venom glands) of Endoglyptodonta [17]. In 
lizards, they occur as upper and lower jaw glands in Iguania and as specialized lower jaw 
glands (also named mandibular glands) in Anguiformes (= Anguimorpha), with a notable 
exception in Pseudopus apodus, which has glands in the lower and upper jaws [70]. In 
helodermatid and varanid anguiforms, the lower jaw system is formed by two individualized 
glands: a typical infralabial gland and a specialized dental gland. In anguid anguiforms, there 
is no separation between the two glandular types, and these glands have been interpreted as 
typical infralabials by some authors (e.g., [28, 30]), but as dental glands by others (e.g., [70, 
71]). These glands are usually mixed, with a serous portion occupying the bottom of the 
gland, and a mucous portion occupying the part above (see Fig. 18.6; [3, 7, 70, 71]. In the 
anguid Ophiodes striatus, the infralabial gland opens close to but not at the base of the 
dentary teeth, precluding its interpretation as a typical dental gland (Fig. 18.5E).
In non-toxicoferan lizards, only typical infralabial glands have been observed in the lower 
jaw, while, with some rare exceptions, supralabial glands are absent (see Fig. 18.5; [3, 7, 28, 
30]). In Dibamus novaeguineae, we initially observed what appears to be a thin, tubular, 
unbranched gland in the lower jaw (Fig. 18.5A). This extends along the entire length of the 
mandible, but openings of the ducts were not visible in the tomographic images. In 
addition, a second gland unconnected to the infralabial was seen in the most posterior 
part of the lower jaw, but its identity was not determined. Further investigation is necessary 
to fully document oral glands in this group of lizards.
Dental glands are the most studied cephalic glands in snakes, particularly in front-fanged 
species [1, 21, 22, 73]. These glands are located along the caudal portion of the maxilla and are 
primarily serous, developing from a single invagination on the caudal portion of the dental 
lamina of the maxillary bone (see Fig. 18.1A, B). The concomitant origin of venom glands and 
fangs has been demonstrated in various snake lineages, including viperids, elapids, and non­
front-fanged species [25, 74-76). Thus, some authors prefer the term dental glands to 
designate all of them [5]. Recent studies suggest that these glands have evolved once in 
Caenophidia as a morpho-functional adaptive novelty that facilitated the great radiation of 
this group, currently comprising approximately 2,500 extant species [6, 19, 76].
The front-fanged system is suggested to have evolved independently at least four times in 
snakes, two at the family level (Viperidae and Elapidae), and two at the genus level 
(Atractaspis and Homoroselaps) within the family Atractaspididae [60, 73]. As suggested 
earlier (e.g., [77]), recent studies have corroborated that the front-fanged system is derived 
from a rear-fanged condition [76].
In Viperidae, the venom gland is large and generally triangular-shaped in lateral view, 
with the longest side of the triangle along the upper lip and a rounded dorsal apex [6]. 
Viperid venom glands are composed of four distinct portions: the venom gland (the 
posterior and largest part); the primary duct; the accessory gland (the anterior and
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

424 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Figure 18.4 (A) Schematic drawing of skinned head of Imantodes cenchoa showing the location of 
the oral glands, the harderian gland (hg), and the adductor mandibulae externus superficialis 
(mames). (B) Transverse section of the head of I. cenchoa at the level of the corner of the mouth 
showing the superior rictal gland (sr) medial to the quadrato-maxillary ligament (qml) and the 
supralabial gland (sl) lateral to the ligament. (C) Schematic drawing of skinned head of Micrurus 
corallinus showing the location of the oral glands, the harderian gland (hg), and the adductor 
mandibularis externus superficialis (mames). (D) Frontal slice of head of Leptodeira annulata showing the 
position of the supralabial gland (sl) and its ducts (d-sl) and the position of the venom gland (vg) and the 
opening of its single duct (d-vg) close to the base of the posterior maxillary teeth (pmxt). (E) Frontal
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 425
narrowest part); and the secondary duct connecting to the fang sheath [3]. The main venom 
gland has a complex tubular structure and is divided into several lobules by infoldings of 
the outer sheath. The lumen of the main venom gland is large and stores a large amount of 
venom. The accessory gland is globular and is located anteriorly on the venom gland duct 
[34]. Both the main venom gland and the accessory gland are formed by several cell types 
[78, 79]. The viperid venom gland is compressed by muscle fibres derived from the 
adductor externus medialis [6, 74], although some fibres of the adductor externus profundus 
and a branch of the pterygoideus are also associated with different parts of the gland [3]. 
Elongated venom glands occur in species of Causus [80].
The general pattern of elapid venom glands has been described by numerous authors 
[40, 81-84]. Generally, these glands are ovoid or pear-shaped in lateral view and occupy 
practically the entire postocular region, extending from the posterior edge of the eyes to the 
level of the corner of the mouth (Fig. 18.4C). As in viperids, the venom glands of elapids are 
composed of two portions, the venom and accessory gland [1]. Unlike viperids, however, 
the duct that drains the venom gland passes through the accessory gland and opens into 
the sheath of the fang [80]. The central lumen is relatively small, and the secretion is stored 
mainly in the secretion granules inside the cells [1]. The elapid venom gland is compressed 
by the fibres derived from the adductor externus superficialis, which in most elapids has a 
dorsal and a ventral branch [13, 60, 83]. Elongated venom glands evolved at least twice in 
elapids, occurring in some coral snake species of the genus Calliophis (specifically in the 
bivirgatus group) and species of Toxicocalamus [15, 85].
The venom glands of Atractaspis differ from those of elapids and viperids [1], being 
cylindrical with secretory tubules arranged around an elongated main lumen [86]. There is 
no distinctive mucous accessory gland, but mucous cells are found in each secretion tubule 
near the central lumen [34]. The Atractaspis venom gland is compressed by a long arc of 
muscle fibres that seem to derive from the adductor externus medialis [6]. Like other groups 
of venomous snakes, some species of Atractaspis have elongated venom glands extending 
into the neck [34]. The venom glands of Homoroselaps are similar to those of elapids, being 
composed of two parts: the main venom gland and the accessory gland. In addition, the 
venom gland of Homoroselaps is compressed by the fibres derived from the adductor 
externus superficialis [34, 60, 83]. Although the phylogenetic position of Homoroselaps has 
been intensely debated (see [34, 60, 83]), recent molecular phylogenies have indicated that 
it is an atractaspidid [17], indicating an independent derivation of its glandular morphology.
Within the diverse and polyphyletic assemblage of non-front-fanged snakes, venom 
glands show great structural variability, including examples of all transitional forms
Figure 18.4 (cont.) slice of head of Helicops modestus showing the upper part of the supralabial gland 
(sl) composed mostly of serous cells (s). (F) Frontal slice of head ofH. modestus showing the ventral part 
of the supralabial gland (sl) composed mostly of mucous cells and the opening of the ducts (d-sl).
Sections b, d, e, and f were stained with H&E. Abbreviations: ag, accessory gland; amxt, anterior maxillary 
teeth; fp, fang pocket; il, infralabial gland; ir, inferior rictal gland; m, mucous cells; pt, pterygoid. The 
panel in the upper left corner denotes the position of the sections. (A black and white version of this 
figure will appear in some formats. For the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

426 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Figure 18.5 Morphology of the oral glands in lizards. (A) High-resolution computed tomography of 
the head of Dibamus novaeguineae (Dibamidae) in sagittal section showing the position of the tubular 
infralabial gland (il) and the second gland (*) unconnected to the infralabial gland in the posterior 
portion of the lower jaw. (B) Transverse slice of the head of Varzea bistriata (Scincidae) at the nostril 
level showing the position of the infralabial gland (il) and the opening of its duct (d-il). (C) Transverse 
slice of the lower jaw of Hemidactylus mabouia (Gekkonidae) at the anterior level showing the 
position of the infralabial gland (il) and the opening of its duct (d-il). (D) Transverse slice of the head 
of Colobosaura modesta (Gymnophthalmidae) at the anterior level of the eyes showing the position of 
the infralabial gland (il) and the opening of its duct (d-il). (E) Transverse slice of the head of Ophiodes 
striatus (Diploglossidae) at the nostril level showing the position of the infralabial gland (il) and the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 427
between the complete absence of a venom gland and the presence of a purely serous and 
well-differentiated venom gland [1, 18, 19, 32, 33]. Extensive morphological variation is also 
observed in the posterior maxillary teeth associated with the venom glands [6, 19, 87]. 
These glands are located in the postocular region and frequently reach the angle of the 
mouth posteriorly, displacing or reducing the supralabial locally (see Fig. 18.4A; [3]). As 
described in § 18.2.1, there is no evidence of venom glands in acrochordids, xenodermids 
or pareids [12, 34]. Moreover, the absence of anterior and posterior ridges on the posterior 
maxillary teeth in these three families (see [17]) suggests that the major modifications 
related to the acquisition of the venom system (i.e., venom glands and differentiated 
maxillary teeth) are restricted to Endoglyptodonta rather than Colubroides, with secondary 
losses occurring many times in elapoids and colubroids.
Saint-Girons [27] noted that in non-front-fanged snakes, the venom gland may occur or not 
at subfamilial, tribal, and even genus levels. He also suggested that the absence of the gland in 
many species probably results from secondary regression. The secondary loss or reduction of 
venom delivery system components is often associated with a few front-fanged and several 
non-front-fanged lineages in which constriction has evolved as a strategy for prey capture, or 
the diet has shifted to eggs or molluscs [33]. In front-fanged snakes, only the lizard egg-eating 
Brachyurophis, and fish-egg-eating Aipysurus eydouxii and Emydocephalus have substantially 
reduced venom systems [15, 33, 83, 84]. In non-front-fanged snakes, 30 to 40 per cent of the 
species have venom glands [20]. Examples of non-front-fanged snakes with reduced or absent 
components of the venom delivery system include the egg-eating Dasypeltis scabra, some 
constrictor colubrids (sensu [17]) of the genera Pantherophis, Elaphe, Lampropeltis, 
Rhinocheilus, Spilotes, and Pituophis, and the ‘goo-eaters’, a Neotropical lineage of dipsadids 
that feed exclusively on soft-bodied invertebrates [18, 19, 32, 33, 41, 42, 52].
Muscle fibres insert into the venom glands of some non-front-fanged snakes (e.g., 
Dispholidus typus, Mehelya poensis, and Brachyophis revoili), and may act as a rudimentary 
compressor muscle [1, 15, 34]. Muscle fibres also exhibit some association with the venom 
glands of some elapomorphine and tachymenine dipsadids [16, 38, 61]. A central lumen has 
been preliminarily reported in the venom gland of some Apostolepis [88], in addition to that 
previously reported in M. poensis, D. typus, and Gonionotophis capensis (see [15, 82]).
18.8 Summary and Conclusions
Snakes exhibit a wide variety of oral glands whose functions remain poorly known. The 
taxonomic distribution of various oral glands in snakes, other toxicoferans and other lizards 
is summarized in Table 18.2 (and Supplementary Table 18.S1). Rictal glands are particularly
Figure 18.5 (cont.) opening of its duct (d-il) close to the dentary tooth (dt). Sections b, c, d, and e 
were stained with H&E. Note that none of these species have supralabial glands. Abbreviations: a-slg, 
anterior sublingual gland; d, dentary; dt, dentary tooth; hg, harderian gland; mx, maxilla; mxt, 
maxillary tooth; vno, vomeronasal organ. The panel in the upper left corner denotes the position of 
the sections. See Supplementary Figure 18.S1 for colour version.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

428 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Iguania
Helodermatidae
Anguidae
Varanidae
Leptotyphlopidae
Typhlopoidea
Anomalepididae
Amerophidia
Pythonoidea
Booidea
Uropeltoidea
Acrochordidae
Xenodermidae
Pareidae
Colubroides
Figure 18.6 Summary phylogenetic tree (based on [23]) showing the condition of the dental glands 
in Toxicofera. In snakes, the dental glands are represented by the upper jaw glands (venom glands) 
present in Endoglyptodonta (which includes the major lineages viperids, elapids, atractaspidids, 
colubrids, dipsadids). In lizards, the dental glands are represented by the upper and lower jaw glands 
present in Iguania and the specialized lower jaw glands present in Anguiformes (see text for more 
details). In the head drawings, the dental glands are depicted in black and the typical labial glands in 
grey. Abbreviations: Dent, dental gland; Lab, labial gland; 000, absence of labial or dental glands. 
Circles denote clades referenced in the text as ‘scolecophidians’; diamonds denote clades referenced 
in the text as ‘henophidians’. Figure modified from [1, 3] and [7, 70, 71].
___ Lab+Dent
La b+Dent
Endoglyptodonta
poorly known in terms of diversity and function. Their presence in leptotyphlopids indi­
cates that they are more widely distributed in snakes than previously expected, and were 
possibly present in the ancestral snake. The sublingual glands are composed of two distinct 
(anterior and posterior) parts. The anterior part occurs in all snakes studied so far, but the 
posterior part is restricted to Caenophidia, where it has evolved into salt glands three times
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press
Table 18.2 Summary of the general condition of oral glands in some lineages of lizards and snakes.
yes = present; no = absent; ? = condition unknown and/or unclear; ant. = anterior part of gland; post. = posterior part of gland. Notes: 1. With some rare 
exceptions; 2. With a notable exception in Pseudopus apodus, which has glands in upper and lower jaws; 3. Preliminary observation indicates infralabial glands 
are also present in Dibamidae; 4. Bolyeriids appear to have lost rictal structures, including glands and rictal pockets; 5. Rictal glands have been described in 
Viperinae, but they are virtually unknown in Crotalinae and Azemiopinae; 6. Clearly documented only in Dipsadidae and Colubridae; 7. Known only in Dipsadidae; 
8. Clearly documented only in Boidae; 9. Clearly documented only in Elapidae; 10. Some argue these are simply infralabial glands. A single species has been 
described with upper and lower jaw dental glands; 11. Only in elapids and the atractaspidids Homoroselaps spp. An expanded version of this table with finer-scale 
taxonomic subdivisions is available as Supplementary Table 18.S1.
Supralabial
(SL)
Infralabial
(IL)
Temporo­
mandibular
Superior 
rictal
Inferior 
rictal
Sublingual
Premaxillary
Dental
Accessory
References
Other lizards
no1
yes3
no
no
no
ant.
no
no
no
[3, 28, 30;
present study]
TOXICOFERA
Iguania
yes
yes
no
no
no
ant.
?
upper + 
lower jaw
no
[3, 7, 28, 30]
Helodermatidae
no
yes
no
no
no
ant.
no
lower jaw
no
[3, 30, 70, 71]
Anguidae
no 2
yes
no
no
no
ant.
no
lower jaw10
no
[28, 30, 70, 71]
Varanidae
no
yes
no
no
no
ant.
no
lower jaw
no
[3, 28, 30, 70, 
71]
SERPENTES
‘scolecophidians’ 
...............................................................
Leptotyphlopidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
no
ant.
not distinct 
from SL
no
no
[28, 47;
present study]
Typhlopidae
Yes
yes
yes
no
no
ant.
not distinct 
from SL
no
no
[3, 8, 57;
present study]
Anomalepididae
Yes
yes
no
no
possibly
ant.
not distinct 
from SL
no
no
[12, 29, 46]

https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press
‘henophidians’ 
....................................................
Table 18.2 (cont.)
Anomochilidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
?
ant.
distinct from
SL
no
no
[62]
Tropidophiidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
?
ant.
distinct from
SL
no
no
[12, 60;
present study]
Aniliidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
yes
ant.
?
no
no
[12, 57, 58]
Pythonoidea
Yes
yes
no
_4 
yes4
no
ant.
?
no
no
[5, 12, 48]
Booidea
yes
yes
no
yes
?
ant.
distinct from 
SL8
no
no
[12, 31, 48, 57, 
58]
Cylindrophiidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
yes
ant.
?
no
no
[12, 15, 24, 65]
Uropeltidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
no
ant.
?
no
no
[12, 24, 48, 57,
58]
CAENOPHIDIA
Acrochordidae
Yes
yes
no
?
no
ant.+post.
?
no
no
[12]
Xenodermidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
no
ant.+post.
?
no
no
[5, 45, 60]
Pareidae
Yes
yes
no
yes
no
ant.+post.
?
no
no
[12, 34, 50, 51]
ENDOGLYPTODONTA
Viperidae
Yes
yes
no
yes5
yes5
ant.+post.
distinct from
SL
upper jaw
yes
[1, 3, 5, 15, 18]
Homalopsidae
Yes
yes
no
possibly
?
ant.+post.
distinct from
SL
upper jaw
no
[18, 60, 69]
Elapoidea
Yes
yes
no
yes
yes
ant.+post.
distinct from
SL9
upper jaw
_ii 
yes11
[15, 61, 63, 66, 
81-84]
Colubroidea
Yes
yes
no
yes6
yes7
ant.+post.
distinct from
SL
upper jaw
no
[5, 18, 31, 41, 
42, 60, 80]

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 431
independently in lineages that underwent an evolutionary transition to marine life. The 
homology of the premaxillary gland remains poorly resolved. In ‘scolecophidians’, premaxil­
lary glands are indistinct from the supralabial glands, whereas in many other snakes they are 
visibly differentiated. The homology of dental glands in lizards and snakes has not been 
adequately tested. Although the development of dental glands seems similar in snakes and 
Iguania, almost no comparative studies have studied their development in Anguiformes. 
Moreover, the lack of dental glands in non-caenophidian snakes does not support the 
hypothesis that these glands evolved only once in Toxicofera. In snakes, dental glands appear 
restricted to Endoglyptodonta, because Xenodermidae and Pareidae also lack such glands. 
Dental glands are highly derived in front-fanged species and present little evidence of 
secondary reduction. In non-front-fanged snakes, dental glands have been secondarily lost 
several times and show a wide morphological variation, with species showing glands associ­
ated with muscles and lumens for secretion storage. The cellular composition of labial glands 
(serous, mucous, or mixed) seems to be independent of the presence or absence of dental 
and/or rictal glands. It is also not a good basis for homology, but it may have some relevance 
for inferring function. The location of the opening of the ducts (and, the embryonic origin) of 
the labial glands are a better basis for distinguishing labial from dental and rictal glands. The 
presence of typical toxins in oral glands other than dental glands (e.g., rictal and infralabial) 
suggests that venom function may not be restricted to the homologous dental gland tissues, 
but is instead more broadly dispersed in other glandular tissues.
Acknowledgements
We thank Patrick Campbell (NHM, UK), Francisco Franco (IBSP), and Luis Diaz (MNKNC) for 
allowing and facilitating the study and preparation of specimens under their care and Alberto 
B. Carvalho, Vanessa Yamamoto, and Rosely Rodrigues da Silva (Laboratory of 
Microtomography of the Museum of Zoology, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil), Mark 
Wilkinson (NHM, UK), and Vincent Fernandez and Brett Clark (Imaging and Analysis 
Centre, NHM, UK) for helping to acquire and process CT images. We also thank Marcelo 
Garrone for providing slides of the heads of some species of snakes and lizards, Roberta 
Graboski for helping with the tomography of some species, and Henrique Braz, Abigail 
Tucker, Timothy Jackson and David Gower for constructive reviews. This research was sup­
ported by grants from Fundagao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado de Sao Paulo (FAPESP) to LO 
(FAPESP 2014/14364-7 and 2018/09301-7) and HZ (BIOTA/FAPESP 2011/50206-9).
References
1. E. Kochva, The origin of snakes and 
evolution of the venom apparatus. Toxicon, 
25 (1987), 65-106.
snakes with focus on the poststrike prey 
release behavior. Zoologischer Anzeiger, 245 
(2006), 249-267.
2. A. Deufel and D. Cundall, Functional 
plasticity of the venom delivery system in
3. E. Kochva, Oral glands of the reptilia. In C. K. 
Gans and A. Gans, eds., Biology of the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

432 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
Reptilia, Vol. 8 (London and New York: 
Academic Press, 1978), pp. 43-162.
4. D. Cundall, Functional morphology. In R. A. 
Siegel, J. T. Collins, and S. S. Novak, eds., 
Snakes, Ecology and Evolutionary Biology 
(New York: MacMillan, 1987), pp. 106-140.
5. G. Underwood, An overview of venomous 
snake evolution. In R. S. Thorpe, W. WUster, 
and A. Malhotra, eds., Venomous Snakes. 
Ecology, Evolution and Snakebite, n. 70 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997), pp. 1-13.
6. K. Jackson, The evolution of venom-delivery 
systems in snakes. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 137 (2003), 227-354.
7. B. G. Fry, N. Vidal, J. A. Norman, et al., Early 
evolution of the venom system in lizards and 
snakes. Nature, 439 (2006), 584-588.
8. A. M. Taub, Ophidian cephalic glands. 
Journal of Morphology, 118 (1966), 
529-542.
9. A. G. Pearse, Histochemistry: Theoretical and 
Applied. Volume 2. 4th ed. (Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone, 1985).
10. J. A. Kiernan, Histological and Histochemical 
Methods: Theory and Practice. 3rd ed. 
(London: Oxford University Press, 2001).
11. B. D. Metscher, MicroCT for comparative 
morphology: simple staining methods allow 
high-contrast 3D imaging of diverse non­
mineralized animal tissues. BMC Physiology, 
9 (2009), 1-14.
12. G. Underwood, On the rictal structures of 
some snakes. Herpetologica, 58 (2002), 1-17.
13. H. Zaher, Comments on the evolution of the 
jaw adductor musculature of snakes. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
111 (1994), 339-384.
14. S. A. Weinstein, ‘Venomous’ bites from non- 
venomous snakes: a critical analysis of risk 
and management of ‘colubrid’ snake bites. 
(Waltham, MA: Elsevier, 2011).
15. T. N. W. Jackson, B. Young, G. Underwood, 
et al., Endless form most beautiful: the 
evolution of ophidian oral glands, including 
the venom system, and the use of 
appropriate terminology for homologous 
structures. Zoomorphology, 136 (2017), 
107-130.
16. H. Zaher, F. G. Grazziotin, J. E. Cadle, et al., 
Molecular phylogeny of advanced snakes 
(Serpentes, Caenophidia) with an emphasis 
South American Xenodontines: a revised 
classification and description of new taxa. 
Pap6is Avulso de Zoologia, 49 (2009), 
115-153.
17. H. Zaher, R. W. Murphy, J. C. Arredondo, 
et al., Large-scale molecular phylogeny, 
morphology, divergence-time estimation, 
and the fossil record of advanced 
caenophidian snakes (Squamata: 
Serpentes). PLoS ONE, 14 (2019), e0216148.
18. A. M. Taub, Comparative studies on 
Duvernoy’s gland of colubrid snakes. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 138 (1967), 1-50.
19. N. Vidal, Colubroid systematics: evidence for 
an early appearance of the venom apparatus 
followed by extensive evolutionary tinkering. 
Journal of Toxinology: Toxin Review, 21 
(2002), 21-41.
20. K. V. Kardong, Colubrid snakes and 
Duvernoy’s ‘venom’ glands. Journal of 
Toxicology: Toxin Reviews, 21 (2002), 1-19.
21. S. A. Weinstein, T. L. Smith, and K. Kardong, 
Reptile venom glands form, function, and 
future. In S. P. Mackessy, ed., Handbook 
of Venoms and Toxin of Reptiles (Boca 
Raton, NY: CRC Taylor & Francis, 2010), 
pp. 65-91.
22. B. G. Fry, N. R. Casewell, W. WUster, et al., 
The structural and functional diversification 
of the Toxicofera reptile venom system. 
Toxicon, 60 (2012), 434-448.
23. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
24. M. Smith and A. A. Bellairs, The head glands 
of snakes, with remarks on the evolution of 
the parotid gland and teeth of the 
Opisthoglypha. Zoological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 41 (1947), 353-368.
25. P. Gygax, Entwicklung, Bau und Funktion 
der GiftdrUse (Duvernoy’s gland) von Natrix 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 433
tessellata. Acta Tropica, Zoology, 28 (1971), 
225-274.
26. L. Oliveira, R. A. Guerra-Fuentes, and H. 
Zaher, Embryological evidence of a new type 
of seromucous labial gland in neotropical 
snail-eating snakes of the genus 
Sibynomorphus. Zoologischer Anzeiger, 266 
(2017), 89-94.
27. H. Saint-Girons, Evolution de la function 
venimeuse chez les reptiles. In Compte- 
rendu du colloque organis6 a la Facult6 
Catholique des Sciences (Lyon: Societe 
Herpetologique de France & Fondation 
Marcel Merieuse, 1987), pp. 9-22.
28. M. Gabe and H. Saint-Girons, Donnees 
histologiques sur les glandes salivaires des 
lepidosauriens. Memoires du Museum 
National d’Histoire Naturelle, 58 (1969), 
3-116.
29. G. Haas, Anatomical observations on the 
head of Liotyphlops albirostris (Typhlopidae, 
Ophdia). Acta Zoologica, 1964 (1964), 1-62.
30. H. Saint-Girons, Les glandes cephaliques 
exocrines des Reptiles. II. - Considerations 
fonctionnelles et evolutives. Annales des 
Sciences Naturelles, Zoologie, 10 (1989), 1-17.
31. D. C. Penteado, Estudos histologicos das 
glandulas da cabe^a dos ofideos brasileiros. 
Memorias do Instituto Butantan, 1 (1918), 
27-57.
32. A. M. Taub, Systematic implications from 
the labial glands of the Colubridae. 
Herpetologica, 23 (1967), 145-148.
33. B. G. Fry, H. Scheib, L. van der Weerd, et al., 
Evolution of an arsenal: structural and 
functional diversification of the venom 
system in the advanced snakes 
(Caenophidia). Molecular and Cellular 
Proteomics, 7 (2008), 215-46.
34. G. Underwood and E. Kochva, On the 
affinities of the burrowing asps Atractaspis 
(Serpentes: Atractaspididae). Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 107 (1993), 
3-64.
35. R. A. Lopes, C. de Oliveira, M. N. M. 
Campos, S. M. Campos, and E. G. Birman, 
Morphological and histochemical study of 
cephalic glands of Bothrops jararaca
(Ophidia, Viperidae). Acta Zoologica, 55 
(1974), 17-24.
36. I. Ineich and J. M. Tellier, Une glande 
supralabiale a debouche externe chez le 
genre Echis (Reptilia, Viperidae), cas unique 
chez les serpents. Comptes Rendus de 
l'Acad6mie des Sciences Paris, 315 (1992), 
49-53.
37. H. Saint-Girons and I. Ineich. Donnes 
histologiques sur la glande labiale 
superieure externe des Viperidae du genre 
Echis. Amphibia-Reptilia, 14 (1993), 
315-319.
38. A. H. Savitzky, The origin of the New World 
proteroglyphous snakes and its bearing on 
the study of venom delivery systems in 
snakes. Unpublished PhD dissertation, 
University of Kansas, Lawrence, United 
States, 1979.
39. L. Oliveira, M. A. Buononato, and H. Zaher, 
Chapter 12 - The cephalic glands and venom 
apparatus of coralsnakes. In N. J. Silva Jr., L. 
W. Porras, S. T. Aird, and A. L. C. Prudente, 
eds., Advances in coralsnake biology: with 
an emphasis on South America. (Eagle 
Mountain, Utah: Eagle Mountain Publishing, 
LC, Utah, USA, 2021), pp. 371-390.
40. B. Burns and G. V. Pickwell, Cephalic glands 
in sea snakes (Pelamis, Hydrophis and 
Laticauda). Copeia, 1972 (1972), 547-559.
41. L. Oliveira, A. L. C. Prudente, and H. Zaher, 
H. Unusual labial glands in snakes of the 
genus Geophis Wagler, 1830 (Serpentes: 
Dipsadinae). Journal of Morphology, 275 
(2014), 87-99.
42. H. Zaher, L. Oliveira, F. G. Grazziotin, et al., 
Consuming viscous prey: a novel protein­
secreting delivery system in Neotropical 
snail-eating snakes. BMC Evolutionary 
Biology, 14 (2014), 58.
43. A. H. Savitzky, The relationship of the 
xenodontine colubrid snakes related to 
Ninia. Unpublished Masters dissertation, 
University of Kansas, United States, 1972.
44. M. B. Harvey, G. R. Fuenmayor, J. C. R. 
Portilla, and J. V. Rueda-Almonacid, 
Systematics of the enigmatic dipsadinae 
snake Tropidophis perijanensis Aleman
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

434 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
(Serpentes: Colubridae) and review of 
morphological characters of Dipsadini. 
Herpetological Monographs, 22 (2008), 
106-132.
45. G. Underwood, A Contribution to the 
Classification of Snakes. (London: British 
Museum (Natural History), 1967).
46. G. Haas, Anatomical observations on the 
head of Anomalepis aspinosus (Typhlopidae, 
Ophidia). Acta Zoologica, 49 (1967), 
63-139.
47. A. Martins, P. Passos, and R. Pinto, Unveiling 
diversity under the skin: comparative 
morphology study of the cephalic glands in 
threadsnakes (Serpentes: Leptotyphlopidae: 
Epictinae). Zoomorphology, 137 (2018), 
433-443.
48. G. Haas, Uber die Kaumuskulatur und die 
Schadelmechanik einiger WUhlschlangen. 
Zoologische Jahrbucher (Anatomie), 52 
(1930), 95-218.
49. L. D. Brongersma, Some features of the 
Dipsadinae and Pareinae (Serpentes, 
Colubridae). Proceedings van de Koninklijke 
Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen 
Section C, 61, (1958), 7-12.
50. G. Haas, A note on the origin of solenoglyph 
snakes. Copeia, 1938 (1938), 73-78.
51. H. Zaher, Hemipenial morphology of the 
South American xenodontine snakes, with a 
proposal for a monophyletic Xenodontinae 
and a reappraisal of colubroid hemipenes. 
Bulletin of the American Museum of Natural 
History, 240 (1999), 1-168.
52. J. E. Cadle and H. W. Greene, Phylogenetic 
patterns, biogeography, and the ecological 
structure of Neotropical snake assemblages. 
In R. E Ricklefs and D. Schluter, eds., Species 
Diversity in Ecological Communities: 
Historical and Geographical Perspective 
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993), 
pp. 281-293.
53. I. L. Laporta-Ferreira and M. G. Salomao, 
Morphology, physiology and toxicology of 
the oral glands of a tropical cochleophagous 
snake, Sibynomorphus neuwiedi 
(Colubridae - Dipsadinae). Zoologischer 
Anzeiger, 27 (1991), 198-208.
54. M. G. Salomao and I. L. Laporta-Ferreira, 
The role of secretions from the supralabial, 
infralabial, and Duvernoy’s glands of the 
slug-eating snake Sibynomorphus mikanii 
(Colubridae: Dipsadinae) in the 
immobilization of molluscan prey. Journal of 
Herpetology, 28 (1994), 369-371.
55. L. Oliveira, C. Jared, and A. L. C. Prudente, 
Oral glands in dipsadinae ‘goo-eater’ snakes: 
Morphology and histochemistry of the 
infralabial glands in Atractus reticulatus, 
Dipsas indica, and Sibynomorphus mikanii. 
Toxicon, 51 (2008), 898-913.
56. P. F. Campos, L. Oliveira, F. G. Grazziotin, 
et al., Transcriptomic analysis of snake 
infralabial glands highlights a plasticity in 
the site of expression of venom genes. 
Toxicon, 158 (2019), pp. S48.
57. M. Phisalix, Animaux venimeux et venins, 
Vol. 2 (Paris: Masson & Cie, 1922).
58. M. Phisalix and R. Caius. L’extension de la 
fonction venimeuse dans l’ordre entiere des 
ophidiens et son existence chez des familles 
ou elle n’avait pas ete soup^onnee jusqu’i^i. 
Journal de Physiologie et de Pathologie 
Gtofrale, 17 (1918), 923-964.
59. E. Kochva, The development of the venom 
gland in the opisthoglyph snake Telescopus 
fallax with remarks on Thamnophis sirtalis 
(Colubridae, Reptilia). Copeia, 1965 (1965), 
147-154.
60. S. B. McDowell, The architecture of the 
corner of the mouth of colubroid snakes. 
Journal of Herpetology, 20 (1986), 353-407.
61. M. Wollberg, E. Kochva, and G. Underwood, 
On the rictal glands of some atractaspid 
snakes. Herpetological Journal, 8 (1998), 
137-143.
62. D. Cundall and D. A. Rossman, Cephalic 
anatomy of the rare Indonesian snake 
Anomochilus weberi. Zoological Journal 
of the Linnean Society, 109 (1993), 
235-273.
63. L. Oliveira, M. A. Buononato, and H. Zaher, 
Glandulas cefalicas e aparato de veneno das 
cobras-corais. In N. J. Silva Jr., ed., As cobras- 
corais do Brasil: Biologia, taxonomica, 
venenos e envenamentos (Goiania: Editoria 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

DIVERSITY AND EVOLUTION OF SNAKE ORAL GLANDS 435
de Pontifica Universidade Catolica de Goias, 
Brasil, 2016), pp. 217-241.
64. M. W. Dix, A venom gland in the lower jaw 
of the coral snake (Micrurus nigrocinctus 
mosquitensis Schmidt). In P. Rosenberg, ed., 
Toxins. Animal, Plant and Microbial 
(Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1978), pp. 16-28.
65. B. G. Fry, E. A. B. Undheim, S. A. Ali, et al., 
Squeezers and leaf-cutters: differential 
diversification and degeneration of the 
venom system in toxicoferan reptiles.
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 12 (2013), 
1881-1899.
66. L. S. Babonis and F. Brischoux, Perspectives 
on the convergent evolution of tetrapod salt 
glands. Integrative and Comparative Biology, 
52 (2012), 245-56.
67. W. A. Dunson, R. K. Packer, and M. K. 
Dunson, Sea snakes: an unusual salt gland 
under the tongue. Science, 173 (1971), 
437-441.
68. W. A. Dunson and M. K. Dunson, 
Convergent evolution of sublingual salt 
glands in the marine file snake and true sea 
snakes. Journal of Comparative Physiology, 
86 (1973), 193-208.
69. W. A. Dunson and M. K. Dunson, Possible 
new salt gland in a marine homalopsid 
snake (Cerberus rhynchops). Copeia, (1979), 
661-673.
70. B. G. Fry, Venomous Reptiles and Their 
Toxins: Evolution, Pathophysiology and 
Biodiscovery (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2015).
71. B. G. Fry, K. Winter, J. A. Norman, et al., 
Functional and structural diversification of 
the Anguimorpha lizard venom system. 
Molecular and Cellular Proteomics, 9 (2010), 
2369-2390.
72. A. S. Tucker, Salivary gland adaptations: 
modification of the glands for novel uses. In 
A. S. Tucker and I. Miletich, eds., Salivary 
Glands. Development, Adaptations and 
Disease. Frontiers of Oral Biology, Vol. 14 
(Basel: Karger, 2010), pp. 21-31.
73. H. M. I. Kerkkamp, N. R. Casewell, and F. J. 
Vonk, Evolution of the snake venom delivery 
system. In. P. Gopalakrishnakone and A.
Malhotra, eds., Evolution of Venomous 
Animals and Their Toxins, Toxinology 
(Berlin: Springer, 2017), pp. 303-315.
74. E. Kochva, Development of the venom gland 
and trigeminal muscles in Vipera 
palaestinae, Acta Anatomica, 52 (1963), 
49-89.
75. M. Shayer-Wollberg and E. Kochva, 
Embryonic development of the venom 
apparatus in Causus rhombeatus (Viperidae, 
Ophidia). Herpetologica, 23 (1967), 249-259.
76. F. J. Vonk, J. R. Admiraal, K. Jackson, et al., 
Evolutionary origin and development of 
snakes fangs. Nature, 454 (2008), 630-633.
77. G. A. Boulenger, Remarks on the dentition of 
snakes and on the evolution of the poison­
fangs. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of 
London, 64 (1896), 614-618.
78. S. P. Mackessy, Morphology and 
ultrastructure of the venom gland of the 
Northern Pacific Rattlesnake Crotalus viridis 
oreganus. Journal of Morphology, 208 (1991), 
109-128.
79. F. Sakai, S. M. Carneiro, and N. Yamanouye, 
Morphological study of accessory gland of 
Bothrops jararaca and its secretory cycle. 
Toxicon, 59 (2012), 393-401.
80. E. Kochva and C. Gans, Salivary glands of 
snakes. Clinical Toxicology, 3 (1970), 
363-387.
81. H. I. Rosenberg, Histology, histochemistry, 
and emptying mechanism of the venom 
glands of some elapid snakes. Journal of 
Morphology, 123 (1967), 133-156.
82. E. Kochva and M. Wollberg, The salivary 
glands of Aparallactinae (Colubridae) and 
the venom glands of Elaps (Elapidae) in 
relation to the taxonomic status of this 
genus. Zoological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 49 (1970), 217-224.
83. C. J. McCarthy, Morphology of elapid snakes 
(Serpentes: Elapidae). An assessment of the 
evidence. Zoological Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 83 (1985), 79-93.
84. P. Gopalakrishnakone and E. Kochva, 
Venom glands and some associated muscles 
in sea snakes. Journal of Morphology, 205 
(1990), 85-96.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

436 LEONARDO DE OLIVEIRA AND HUSSAM ZAHER
85. P. Gopalakrishnakone, Structure of the 
venom gland of the Malayan Banded Snake 
Maticora intestinalis. Snake, 18 (1986), 
19-26.
86. E. Kochva, Atractaspis (Serpentes, 
Atractaspididae) the burrowing asp; a 
multidisciplinary minireview. Bulletin of the 
Natural History Museum of London 
(Zoology), 68 (2002), 91-99.
87. B. A. Young and K. V. Kardong, Dentitional 
surface features in snakes (Reptilia:
Serpentes). Amphibia-Reptilia, 17 (1996), 
261-276.
88. M. G. Salomao and H. Ferrarezzi, 
A morphological, histochemical and 
ultrastructural analysis of the Duvernoy’s 
glands of elapomorphine snakes: the evolution 
of their venom apparatus and phylogenetic 
implications. Abstract (Campinas: III 
Congresso Latino Americano de Herpetologia, 
43, Institute de Biociencias da Universidade 
Estadual de Campinas, 1993).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.024 Published online by Cambridge University Press

19
Macrostomy, Macrophagy, 
and Snake Phylogeny
David Cundall and Frances Irish
19.1 Introduction
Snakes are limbless animals that generally ingest prey whole using ratcheting movements 
of their jaws achieved by a variety of different mechanisms [1-3]. All are carnivorous and 
none uses the tongue or inertial acceleration of the whole head to move their prey through 
the oral cavity. The clade includes many species capable of swallowing prey much larger 
than their heads, correlated in most to an increase in relative length of the mandibles. 
Among living snakes, however, the most ‘basal’ members of the clade have tiny gapes and 
eat large numbers of tiny prey [4]. Following a review of snake apomorphies, Rieppel [5] 
resurrected Muller’s Macrostomata [6] for a clade of snakes essentially defined by features 
allowing swallowing of prey large in relative cross-sectional area and that appeared to have 
evolved from ancestors lacking this ability. Recent analyses of molecular sequence data 
[7, 8] and Cretaceous fossils [9] do not support the monophyly of Macrostomata and 
provide equivocal support for an origin of large-gaped snakes from small-gaped ancestors. 
Given that macrostomy characterizes many extant snakes, understanding its morphological 
correlates and taxonomic distribution are critical to unravelling the origins of macrostomy. 
We reconsider the structures and functions of the trunks and heads of extant macrostomous 
snakes to determine (1) which features correlate most closely with macrostomy, and (2) 
how these features inform hypotheses about snake origins.
19.2 Defining Macrostomy
What macrostomy means in a broad sense is large hole, or large mouth, i.e., large in relative 
cross-sectional area, as distinct from macrophagy, eating a large food item - which might be 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

438 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
large in relative mass, large in relative diameter, or both [1, 10]. The application of the term 
macrostomy should require an objective definition, but that does not appear to exist. 
Diverse interpretations of fossils regarded as snakes have added to the complexity of the 
problem [9, 11]. It is useful to begin by emphasizing that macrostomy is conferred by a 
snake’s structural and functional attributes. Snakes possessing the attributes are macro- 
stomous, whereas Macrostomata is a taxon name that corresponds to a clade in which all 
members may or may not exhibit these phenotypic attributes. Taxa included within the 
clade are macrostomatans. Our focus is on how macrostomy relates to Macrostomata.
One reason that snakes are interesting is because the macrostomy of some critical clades 
is not a permanent structural condition that could be measured at any time. Despite a 
common assumption that macrostomy derives primarily from increased lengths of the 
mandibles and their suspensorial elements (e.g., [12]) in many taxa it depends on move­
ment potentials of soft tissue assemblages. If macrostomy was defined solely by structures 
of fixed sizes, it could be quantified and analysed relatively simply. Snakes turn out to be 
excellent examples of the diversity of evolutionary solutions to two problems - catching and 
subduing prey nearly as heavy as, or heavier than themselves, and then enlarging gape 
sufficiently to engulf the prey whole. The success of snakes in achieving both increased the 
diversity of prey that could be consumed and, because heavier prey provide more nutrition, 
decreased the time spent searching or waiting for it [3, 4, 11]. The evolution of macrostomy 
was contingent on the prior availability of larger (heavier, bulkier, or both) prey that could 
be caught and restrained without undue risk of severe injury. Hence, macrostomy presum­
ably co-evolved with the mechanisms to catch and restrain those prey. But most snakes, 
macrostomous and non-macrostomous, swallow prey whole using jaws with recurved teeth 
that move like a ratchet, a toothed device allowing movement in one direction only. The 
problem becomes one of upper and lower jaw ratchets and how prey size, macrostomy, and 
ratcheting mechanisms are interrelated.
19.3 Methodological Foundations
Our views of macrostomy have developed from observations of feeding behaviour and of 
head and trunk anatomy in several hundred extant species of snakes (Supplementary 
Appendix 19.S1). Although we have examined thousands of skeletons and dissected parts 
of hundreds of specimens representing most major alethinophidian snake clades, the sum 
of our observations convinces us that the rare, observed event in the field (e.g., Fig. 19.1, 
showing both macrostomy and macrophagy, and [13, 14] showing macrophagy without 
macrostomy) can recast the nature of the problem [15, 16]. A brief review of Figure 19.1, 
showing a python swallowing a duiker, and some attendant details of that event provided 
by B. Maritz (pers. comm.) may help to clarify how snakes achieved macrostomy. After the 
python started swallowing, it took it more than three and a half hours to reach the stage 
shown in the figure, but intraoral transport [17] finished approximately 30 minutes later. 
The snake swallowed the duiker and crawled away, suggesting that the body wall and gut 
suffered no irreparable damage from the degree of distension demanded by this prey item.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 439
Figure 19.1 Southern African Python (Python natalensis), approximately 3 m long and an estimated 
mass of approximately 15+ kg swallowing a Common Duiker (Sylvicapra grimmia), also with 
estimated mass of 15+ kg. Photo taken at 15:30 on February 16, 2014 near Mbombela, eastern 
Mpumalanga Province, South Africa (photo and details courtesy of Bryan Maritz, University of the 
Western Cape, South Africa). See Supplementary Appendix 19.S2 for colour version.
It is clear in this case that the length of the mandibles has little direct correlation to gape 
size, which must be defined by the viscoelastic properties and folding patterns of all the 
intermandibular tissues, only a few of which have been tested [18, 19] or described at any 
level [20, 21]. During swallowing, the duiker maintained its position relative to the back­
ground - the snake’s head moved over it, and the snake passed body coils forward, over and 
under the duiker’s head and down its body continuously, expressing gas from the prey, and 
possibly aiding lower jaw progression under it.
Many examples like the case in Figure 19.1 have been witnessed but they are rarely 
accompanied by prolonged recording to allow proof that the snake successfully swallowed 
the prey item and moved away. Even this extraordinary record has one weakness - the 
snake could not be found the following day (B. Maritz, pers. comm.), so there is no 
evidence of its long-term survival after this event. Many critical snake clades remain 
virtually unexplored behaviourally and anatomically. Most of our behavioural data have 
come from captive individuals, but we have incorporated examples and records of extreme 
performance from the literature and the web.
Studies of gape size and feeding performance in snakes, based on various behavioural 
and morphological measures, have flowered over the last 20 years and have been thor­
oughly reviewed [3]. Most studies have focused on caenophidian species and suggest that 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

440 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
features of head size and shape correlate only loosely to some measures of 
feeding performance.
The process of ingesting prey with relatively large cross-sectional areas stretches critical 
soft tissues of the lower jaw and body wall cranial to the pylorus to levels beyond experi­
mentally predicted extension limits of epithelia, muscles, and most other soft tissues, with 
the possible exception of elastin [16]. Unfortunately, detailed histological studies of critical 
joints and soft tissues in regions of the body of snakes that experience extraordinary 
distension are rare [20-24]. None has recorded the condition of most soft tissues near 
known maximum distensions and only one [21] employed both light and electron micro­
scopy to examine limited cellular details.
We gained information on jaw and soft-tissue behaviour from cine and video records of 
feeding in approximately 190 species of captive snakes (Supplementary Appendix 19.S1) 
recorded over 40 years with a range of temporal (18-2000 fps) and visual (8 and 16 mm 
cine, 220 X 292 - 840 X 1084 pixel) resolutions. Apart from a few records made in the field 
[25], most records were of snakes in a glass-fronted wooden arena striking at live prey and 
then restraining and eating them. The majority of sampled viperid species were recorded in 
zoos [26]. The research was done under a number of approved IACUC protocols. In 
addition, a few species (Cylindrophis ruffus, Xenopeltis unicolor, Calabaria reinhardtii) 
were tested for potential palatomaxillary mobility by manipulating anesthetized individuals. 
To gain some idea of the potential movements of individual bones, shortly following the 
natural deaths of four snakes (Boa constrictor, Python brongersmai, Nerodia rhombifer, 
Ahaetulla nasuta) we protracted one palatomaxillary arch and held it in place while fixing 
the snake in 10% buffered formalin. MicroCT scans of these heads provided a better 
understanding of the elements contributing to motion of the upper jaws.
We use as foundations for our discussion recently published phylogenies derived from 
many characters in both extinct and extant squamates on which macrostomy is explicitly 
mapped [7, 8]. To begin, however, we explore traits of the anterior trunk and head in snakes 
that affect their functions. Then we consider previous hypotheses of the sequence of events 
giving rise to macrostomy in snakes.
19.4 Basic Snake Features: The Trunk
The evidence from extant snakes and available fossils suggests that the earliest animals that 
could be called snakes had achieved a critical feature of the snake body - namely, trunk 
elongation through increased numbers of precloacal segments combined with the loss of 
the pectoral girdle and all pregastric ventral skeletal elements connected in any way to the 
vertebral column [27]. In all extant snakes, there is complete loss of pectoral remnants, 
except possible superficial pectoral muscle homologues [28-31]. Associated with the loss of 
the pectoral girdle is the loss of the sternum and all costal cartilage connections between 
the sternum and ribs. Reducing skeletal constraints allowed selection to act on all soft 
tissues surrounding the gut lumen, including the tissues connecting the tips of the 
mandibles, to permit elastic expansion in circumference. Apart from all the tissues in the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 441
gut wall, these include tissues forming the body wall ventral to the axial musculoskeletal 
system anterior to the intestine - skin, the skeletal muscles associated with the skin, and 
their associated connective tissues, blood vessels, and nerves [16, 20, 32]. The skin in most 
snakes varies considerably in histological and functional properties depending on the 
position along the trunk and the distance from the middorsal line [33]. The skin of the 
gastric and pregastric trunk appears to have greater folding of interscalar skin. Complex 
arrangements of intrinsic cutaneous muscles become associated with the ventral scales 
(scutes) and the more ventral of the dorsal scale rows [34]. Three layers of hypaxial muscles 
surround the gut ventral to the tips of the costal cartilages, a superficial layer formed by 
caudally directed superior and cranially directed inferior costocutaneous muscles that 
attach to the dermis of the ventral scale rows and to the lateral edges of the scutes, and 
the internal oblique and transverse abdominal muscles that attach to a midventral 
thickening of the dermis of the scutal and interscutal skin (Fig. 19.2). In addition to the 
skin, the gut wall, nerves and blood vessels, the hypaxial muscles, and the intersquamal and 
costocutaneous muscles must all stretch in macrostomous snakes during ingestion of very 
large prey.
In summary, the critical developmental and structural changes associated with macro- 
stomy in snakes are loss of abaxial skeletal elements of the anterior trunk [39] and 
acquisition of novel tissue capabilities. Head and Polly [40] noted regional differences in 
the axial skeletons of snakes that correlate loosely to those in other tetrapods and even 
more loosely to skeletal muscle patterns [32, 41]. In our view, a critical feature of axial 
muscles in snakes is the extension of the internal oblique and transverse abdominal 
muscles to the anteriormost or near-anteriormost rib accompanied by coelomic and 
lymphatic sinus extensions into the anterior trunk and lower jaw [42, 43]. We agree with 
the profusion of past literature suggesting that, like modifications of the eye and multiple 
vision genes (Chapter 15), and the vestibule of the ear (Chapter 13, [44]), the loss of 
anterior abaxial skeletal derivatives was plausibly driven by mechanical and environmen­
tal demands of burrowing (see [9] for citations and robust disagreement). As a result of 
these changes, snakes appear to be tetrapods without a neck or the region of anterior 
thorax associated with pectoral limbs.
19.5 Basic Snake Features: The Head
Compared to lizards, crown-clade snakes display numerous derived differences in skull 
form that converge on features seen in a number of fossorial lizard clades (e.g., [2, 6, 27, 45, 
46]). These include loss of some of the dermal posterior circumorbital bones, jugal, and 
squamosal, and the endochondral epipterygoid. In snakes, unlike all fossorial lizards except 
amphisbaenians, downgrowths of the dermal parietals and frontals meet the 
parabasisphenoid and the anterior edge of the prootic, removing potential motion at both 
meso- and metakinetic cranial joints. Apart from an optic fenestra and foramina for blood 
vessels and nerves, the orbital and postorbital braincase in crown-clade snakes completely 
encloses the brain and olfactory bulbs except in some small leptotyphlopids in which the
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

442 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
Figure 19.2 Diagrammatic views of the anterior trunk of a macrostomous snake in resting (A) and 
expanded (B) conditions, showing some structures and tissues that must extend to encompass large 
prey. Scale and interscale regions of the epidermis and dermis (C, D) differ in keratin deposition, 
folding, and collagen and elastin arrangements [20] that allow extensive unfolding of interscale 
epidermis and extension of dermal collagen and elastin in manners that allow passive recovery of 
folded form after stretching. The distal ends of segmental anterior and posterior nerves of the medial 
branch of the ventral ramus [35] have large folds ventral to the rib tips with elastin oriented along the 
long axis of the nerve in the peri- and epineurium and axonal bundles secondarily folded within (E) in 
a manner similar to that of the ventral grooved blubber nerves of rorqual whales [36]. The nerves are 
typically accompanied by arteries and veins shown as a single vessel in the diagram. The lining of the 
oesophagus appears as a typical simple or pseudostratified columnar epithelium of mucus and 
ciliated cells (F). What happens to this critical boundary layer epithelium during distension beyond 
levels allowed by unfolding remains unknown but the apical junctional rings of adjacent cells [16, 20] 
are assumed (G) to behave in a manner similar in cellular details to that of umbrella cells of the 
mammalian urothelium [37, 38] but on a longer timescale. What happens to the connective tissues,
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 443
roof of the dermal braincase does not develop [47-49]. If derived from one of the extant 
lizard lineages, one would expect the walls of the braincase in snakes (absent in lizards 
except amphisbaenians) to be developmental additions to the intramembranous frontals 
and parietals that arise dorsal to the brain in lizards. Instead, the lateral regions develop first 
in snakes [50-53], one of many changes in developmental timing differentiating snakes 
from lizards [2, 54, 55]. The resulting braincase, apart from providing solid attachment 
surfaces for all the muscles moving the upper jaws, also prevents compression of the brain 
in macrostomous taxa when swallowing very large prey.
Among many other novelties, snakes have exploited antero-posterior movement 
potentials of the jaw apparatus made possible by the loss of both temporal arches to 
evolve a number of ratcheting mechanisms linked to the kinds of prey available. 
Recurved pointed teeth on right and left jaws with independent mobility made ratchet 
mechanisms possible but limited snakes to ingesting most prey whole. A possible 
scenario during the Mesozoic could have been the early appearance of a lower jaw 
ratchet allowed by loss of the mandibular symphysis. Availability of small arthropod 
prey evidently drove selection for short, transversely oriented upper jaws in typhlopoids 
and anomalepidids and for transversely oriented tooth-bearing dentaries in the lower 
jaws of leptotyphlopids. Longer invertebrate or vertebrate prey would have driven 
selection for longitudinally oriented tooth rows with varyingly effective ratchet mechan­
isms dependent on the degree of jaw kinesis and undoubtedly correlated with prey type. 
Such mechanisms may have characterized pachyophiids and occur in various extant 
snakes, including leptotyphlopids [56] and distantly related Calabaria, Dipsas (unpub­
lished data), and probably many others. In taxa with lower jaw ratchets, as the relative 
size of prey increases and the angle of the lower jaw to the braincase increases, the teeth 
become increasingly ineffective and the jaw adductor muscles stretched to extents 
permitting little force generation. Hence, as far as we know, there are no living macro- 
stomous taxa utilizing lower jaw ratchets alone.
Exploitation of left-right lower jaw independence in snakes evolved in apparent hap­
hazard fashion. Loss of the mandibular symphysis may have occurred early, but the 
structures connecting the tips of the dentaries vary considerably among snakes [23, 24, 
57], restricting independent antero-posterior movements of the mandibular tips in some 
[58, 59]. Taxa lacking freedom of movement of the mandibular tips could not be macro- 
stomous, regardless of the length of the mandible, unless another ratcheting mechanism 
was available.
The mechanical ability of a lower-jaw ratchet decreases with increasing gape angle, thus 
limiting the cross-sectional diameter of a prey item that can be effectively transported. This
Figure 19.2 (cont.) vasculature, smooth muscle layers, and enteric nerves remains unknown. Muscle 
layers surrounding the expanded gut wall are (1) ventral oblique and transverse muscles, (2) superior 
costocutaneous, and (3) inferior costocutaneous muscles. Label 4 points to intrinsic intersquamal 
muscles between scale rows. (A black and white version of this figure will appear in some formats. For 
the colour version, please refer to the plate section).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

444 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
limitation was overcome through the evolution of upper jaw ratchets of varying mechan­
isms and capabilities linked to a variety of skeletal modifications of the lower jaws, the latter 
achieved in most taxa after birth or hatching [12]. These skeletal modifications must have 
co-evolved with soft-tissue modifications of the prepyloric trunk. Transversely oriented 
upper and lower jaw ratchets work by powering movement of prey through the oral cavity, 
whereas longitudinally oriented upper jaw ratchets can work by powering movement of 
either the prey or the snake’s head over the prey. The transverse arrangement works with 
prey small enough to be moved by muscle-powered rotations of the maxillary (typhlopoids, 
anomalepidids) or dentary teeth (leptotyphlopids [59]). Prey size for longitudinal tooth 
arrangements (alethinophidians) is potentially limited only by abaxial adaptations 
allowing distension.
19.6 Macrostomy and Its Morphological Correlates
We have argued that macrostomy is dependent on an effective upper jaw ratchet, which is 
dependent on upper jaw mobility. This is because once the lower jaw nears maximum 
abduction and intermandibular soft tissues are distended, the head advances over the prey 
primarily or entirely by upper jaw ratcheting. The morphological innovations that underlie 
palatomaxillary mobility in alethinophidian snakes are essentially similar to those in 
typhlopoid and anomalepidid snakes - loss of direct bony contact between the dermal 
upper jaw bones (maxilla, palatine, pterygoid, and ectopterygoid) and the braincase and 
snout. Potential kinematic effects of these changes are remarkable (Fig. 19.3). Recognizing 
the patterns and potentials of upper jaw motion makes the search for its structural basis 
more focused and imposes limits on interpretations drawn from fossils [9].
Release of the caudal ends of the upper jaws and its relation to streptostyly have been 
dealt with in many publications (e.g., [1, 3, 60] and references therein). Movements of the 
pterygoid and quadrate appear in many lizards powered by dorsal constrictor muscles 
innervated by the V4 branch of the trigeminal nerve. In lizards, these muscles effect 
dorsoventral movement of the facial skull anterior to the orbits. The key to liberation of 
the upper jaws in snakes lies in the erosion of dermal bones in the preorbital skull. Frazzetta 
[61, 62] redefined prokinesis as a movable cranial joint anterior to the orbit, essentially a 
joint between the snout and the braincase. Cundall and Shardo [63] coined the term 
‘rhinokinesis’ to name the complex movements possible among so-called snout bones 
(premaxilla, nasals, septomaxilla, and vomers). Lost in this simple two-term dichotomy is 
the fact that what actually becomes movable is all of the upper toothed bones - maxillae, 
palatines, and pterygoids. How this was achieved is partially reflected in living taxa, but the 
details of most remain undescribed. The following is a brief account of our 
current understanding.
If early snakes were fossorial and exploited burrowing prey in the Jurassic or early 
Cretaceous, there is little fossil evidence of a diverse soil fauna of a size suitable as prey 
for fossorial snakes, for which there is also no fossil evidence. However, sophisticated 
exploration techniques are greatly increasing the rate at which new fossil discoveries are
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 445
Figure 19.3 Four views of an unusual strike by a Boa constrictor during which its prey retreated and 
the snake continued its strike in a ‘searching’ mode with full protraction of both upper jaws. Image 
resolution is compromised by cropping from original video frames and movement of the snake and 
mouse during the 1/1000 s exposure of each frame. (A) 20 ms after beginning of strike, arrows at tips 
of maxillae; (B) 70 ms after beginning with upper jaws near maximum protraction, long arrows at tips 
of maxillae, short arrows at tips of palatines; (C) 158 ms after beginning - left dentary teeth in contact 
with the mouse’s nose; (D) 304 ms after the beginning, showing the extraordinary flexibility of the 
snout, black line showing the plane of the interorbital braincase and white line showing the plane of 
the premaxilla as the snake protracts and elevates the anterior end of its right maxilla to contact a 
mouse partially snared by the left dentary. The anterior snout has rotated approximately 45“ around 
its long axis.
made (e.g., [64]). Caldwell’s [9] prediction that snakes (his snake-lizards) appeared in the 
Permian or Triassic may yet be supported by fossils. Available Mesozoic fossils (Chapters 2 
and 3) provide tantalizing but sometimes confusing evidence of snakes or snake-like 
organisms from aquatic and terrestrial sites. One of the largest (Dinilysia) has otic vestibuli 
like those of extant fossorial snakes (Chapter 13; [44]). On the basis of living scolecophidians 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

446 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
and many non-caenophidian alethinophidians (uropeltids, Anomochilus, Anilius, 
Xenopeltis, Calabaria), some fossorial snakes retained or regained maxillary-premaxillary 
contact, robust nasal bones firmly connected to the frontals, and palatines intimately 
associated with the vomers but, unlike Dinilysia [65] and Calabaria [2], lost the postorbital 
bar supporting the rear end of the maxilla.
Of the extant snakes listed above, we know little of the feeding behaviour and move­
ments of the jaw bones of all except Xenopeltis and Calabaria (unpublished data) and 
three scolecophidian species [59]. Collectively, studies of these taxa suggest that effective 
upper jaw ratcheting mechanisms in extant non-caenophidian snakes with longitudinal 
maxillary tooth rows correlate loosely with the presence of teeth on the palatine. On these 
grounds, all phylogenetic analyses suggest that Melanophidium, which has small palatine 
teeth (in at least some species) and separated premaxillae and maxillae [66], is sister to all 
other extant uropeltids and hence that most uropeltids, although still far outside 
Caenophidia, are likely secondarily specialized for fossoriality. If booid, pythonid, 
madtsoiid, and pachyophiid snakes appeared in the Jurassic or Cretaceous, available 
evidence [9] fails to confirm that either madtsoiids or pachyophiids were macrostomous 
although their recurved tooth form suggests that all used a ratchet mechanism of some 
kind to transport prey. In booids and pythonids, release of the anterior ends of both the 
maxillae and the palatines from the snout co-evolved with rhinokinesis, prokinesis, and 
kinesis of both the prefrontal and postorbital to allow independent anteroposterior move­
ment of right and left palatomaxillary arches. Simple lateromedial movements of the rear 
ends of each palatomaxillary arch do allow ratcheting, but become progressively more 
limited as the relative cross-sectional area of prey increases [1]. The pterygoid walk of 
Boltt and Ewer [67], used by all macrostomous snakes for intraoral prey transport, was 
built on rhino-, pro-, and prefrontal kinesis.
Independence of right and left upper jaws in Boa constrictor is clear (Fig. 19.3B-D). 
Unfortunately, we have the technical capabilities to visualize these skeletal movements 
only in large living snakes. However, some approximation can be gained from microCT 
scans of heads of recently dead snakes whose jaws have been manipulated using thread 
to protract one upper jaw and hold it in place during fixation (Fig. 19.4). 
A palatomaxillary arch cannot be both protracted and elevated by this method (pulling 
on palatine or pterygoid teeth usually depresses the arch) but it allows some estimation 
of the range of motion permitted by soft tissues at the various movable joints in the 
head. Histological studies of other species have revealed that many of the ligaments 
connecting most movable bones are complex arrays of collagen and elastin [22]. Hence, 
extensive sliding occurs at ‘joints’ among the maxilla, palatine, and prefrontal and 
between the prefrontal and frontal bones. Ligamentous connections between the maxilla 
and premaxilla and between the palatine and vomer are complexed with other tissues 
(skin, buccal lining, vomeronasal cartilages) to make their viscoelastic mechanical 
properties difficult to predict [19, 20]. What is clear, however, is that in macrostomous 
snakes, a range of suspensorial arrangements evolved affecting relations of the upper 
jaw to the braincase, lower jaw and its suspensorium, circumorbital bones, snout, and 
dorsal constrictor muscles.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 447
Figure 19.4 Head of Python brongersmai preserved with left upper jaw protracted (A) and three 
microCT images of the same specimen showing (B) extent of left prefrontal rotation, (C) protraction of 
the left maxilla, palatine, and vomer, and (D) rotation of the snout, elevation of the postorbital, and 
depression of the quadrate: the posterior roof of the braincase is horizontal and oriented 
perpendicular to the plane of the image - hence, the anterior snout is rotated to the right of the mid­
line and 36“ around the long axis. 1 = dorsal edge of right quadrate, 2 = anterior tip of left prefrontal 
(dorsal edge of left quadrate is just visible below the number 2), 3 = edge of left postorbital, 4 = edge of 
right postorbital, 5 = anterior tip of right nasal. See Supplementary Appendix 19.S2 for colour version.
19.7 Macrostomy and Macrostomata
It has been clear for some time that skeletal morphology alone often does not allow 
accurate inferences of behaviour. This is particularly true for snakes. The evolution of 
pterygoid-walk capability allowed the exploitation of an extraordinary range of prey [10], 
but macrostomy became evolutionarily relevant only after the appearance of restraint 
mechanisms for immobilizing or killing large prey before ingestion. Current evidence 
[8, 68] suggests that constriction preceded envenomation in snakes. We are aware that 
genes associated with venom production occur in clades currently thought to have evolved 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

448 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
much earlier than snakes (Suranse et al., this volume), but no fossil evidence of venomous 
snakes has been found prior to the Neogene [69]. Clade names such as Macrostomata and 
Toxicofera [70] are useful hypotheses of the appearance of novel synapomorphies. 
However, the actual terms intimate far more than a node or stem in a tree. Because 
Toxicofera implies the use of toxins in prey restraint or defensive behaviour, its application 
has been questioned because many toxicoferan taxa show none of the morphological, 
functional, ecological, or behavioural properties associated with the supposed synapomor- 
phy [7, 70, 71]. In the case of Macrostomata, the collection of traits required to engulf 
animals with cross-sectional areas much larger than the resting cross-sectional areas of a 
snake’s head and anterior trunk appear to relate to ventral soft tissues in the lower jaw and 
trunk, and an upper jaw ratchet. However, exploiting large, live prey also required rapid 
restraint mechanisms.
For snakes attempting to engulf vertebrate prey, constriction can restrain many 
ectotherms [68], including elongate, snake-like ectotherms such as eels and elongate 
amphibians, but may not kill them. Although macrostomy is not necessarily required to 
ingest many elongate prey, some apparently non-macrostomous dipsadid snakes (e.g., 
Farancia) use constriction to restrain large Amphiuma and ingest them using the pterygoid 
walk alone (pers. obs.). On the other hand, Cylindrophis, a non-macrostomous non­
macrostomatan, ingests elongate prey faster using snout shifting and trunk compression 
[13, 58]. Records of uropeltids swallowing worms and of laticaudines transporting eels in 
seconds [72] suggest that there remain very poorly known behavioural capabilities in 
many snakes.
There is good reason to think that macrostomy co-evolved with the appearance of bulky 
(large cross-sectional area relative to mass) endothermic prey. Whereas bulky ectothermic 
prey can be difficult to kill by constriction, bulky endotherms die quickly when constricted. 
For animals incapable of ripping apart or chewing vertebrate prey prior to ingestion, 
however, exploiting bulky prey depended on the evolution of a mouth capable of ingesting 
the prey whole and of a body capable of transporting it to the stomach, a suite of characteris­
tics that may have evolved once (tentatively supported by some molecular analyses [73]) or 
independently a number of times, as suggested by most recent analyses [7-9, 74]. 
Macrostomy solved only part of the problem. But constricting snakes presumably coevolved 
with diverse endothermic clades in the late Mesozoic and Palaeogene. Those with an 
effective upper jaw ratchet could potentially exploit a wide diversity of prey if ventral soft 
tissues and/or the mandibles and their suspensoria adapted to allow macrostomy.
The evolution of dental glands capable of releasing venoms (Chapter 18) and the co­
evolution of a variety of dental and palatomaxillary innovations to increase the efficacy of 
venom effects on internal tissues of prey made possible the killing of large prey by small 
snakes, but ‘large prey’ is a relative term and really refers only to prey mass. A number of 
snake species are known to ingest prey with a mass equal to or even slightly larger than 
their own but for some, the prey are elongate vertebrates that do not demand macrostomy. 
However, most require some type of restraint prior to ingestion and hence both macro- 
stomy and macrophagy entailed evolutionary adaptations of the trunk for striking or 
constricting or both. Macrostomy required adaptations for trunk distension as well, and 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 449
these involved abaxial extensions of nervous and vascular tissues, whereas striking and 
constriction primarily entailed adaptations of primaxial tissues [40].
Current fossil evidence supports phylogenetic analyses of behavioural variation [66] 
suggesting that the evolution of macrostomy was initially driven by constriction. 
Cretaceous booid and pythonid fossils, unfortunately based primarily on vertebrae [75, 76] 
presumably lacked the pachyostotic vertebral and rib regions of Cretaceous pachyophiids 
[77]. Our lack of useful functional-morphological data on the feeding mechanics of most 
rear-fanged caenophidians and the absence of Mesozoic fossils of rear-fanged 
caenophidians or front-fanged viperids or elapids limits conjectures on the primacy of 
constriction or envenomation for prey restraint. However, the striking behaviour of some 
extant booids and pythonids matches the neurophysiological capabilities of living viperids 
specialized for releasing prey after envenomation [26], suggesting that the ability to capture 
large, elusive prey could have evolved in the Mesozoic. To demonstrate that an extinct snake­
like organism was capable of macrostomy, however, requires evidence of palatomaxillary 
mobility. For this, palatine and maxillary associations with the snout and prefrontal, and the 
latter’s relation to the frontal, are useful indicators. Complete postorbital bars and prefrontal- 
frontal joints that are oriented longitudinally suggest very limited upper jaw mobility and 
unlikely potential for macrostomy. Available data on the cranial anatomy of Najash suggests 
that mandibular suspensorial adaptations associated with aquatic or fossorial living may 
have evolved earlier than liberation of the palatomaxillary arch [78, 79]. Whether the aquatic 
lineages of snake-like squamates survived the K-Pg extinction remains unclear. Inasmuch as 
extant snakes display collections of features most parsimoniously explained by a fossorial 
ancestry [80], fitting the Mesozoic fossils into the story really requires more fossil data, not 
rewriting everything we know about the snakes from which we can directly acquire 
behavioural and soft-tissue data [9].
We contributed to one of the recent molecular studies showing Macrostomata is not 
monophyletic [8], and agree with that interpretation, but we note that branch lengths 
separating critical ‘basal’ alethinophidian clades are very short, and so may be particularly 
sensitive to input data and analytical parameters. Although little effort has been expended 
on defining the anatomical and physiological foundations of macrostomy, we know that 
some of the morphological and functional features defining ‘basal’ macrostomous taxa 
(e.g., nature of intermandibular soft tissues, mobility of the snout and palatomaxillary 
arches) are not expressed in some caenophidian lineages. Hence, the problem is distin­
guishing reversals from plesiomorphies - a common problem in studies of possibly rapidly 
radiating clades. Like lizard feeding and phylogeny [81], we hope the challenges of recon­
ciling genomic and more-broadly based data sets will ultimately allow us to understand 
how macrostomy evolved in snakes.
Acknowledgements
We thank the editors for inviting us to contribute to this volume. Harry Greene and Tom 
LaDuke provided critical perspectives underlying the ultimate phrasing of relationships 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

450 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
between macrostomy and prey size. We thank David Gower, Kurt Schwenk and Alan 
Savitzky for providing additional critical reviews of a penultimate draft that helped us to 
recast some important elements of our argument. We have been recording feeding behav­
iour in snakes since 1978 and have been helped by many people, most acknowledged in 
prior publications. For help with the figures in this chapter we thank Gillian Cundall and 
Alan Savitzky for help with Figure 19.2 and Morgan Hill Chase and Andrew Smith at the 
Microscopy and Imaging Facility, AMNH, for the microCT scan images in Figure 19.4.
References
1. D. Cundall and H. W. Greene, Feeding in 
snakes. In K. Schwenk, ed., Feeding: Form, 
Function, and Evolution in Tetrapod 
Vertebrates (San Diego, CA: Academic Press, 
2000), pp. 293-333.
2. D. Cundall and F. Irish, The snake skull. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 20, Morphology 
H. (Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of 
Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008), 
pp. 349-692.
3. B. R. Moon, D. A. Penning, M. Segall, and A. 
Herrel, Feeding in snakes: Form, function, 
and evolution of the feeding system. In V. 
Bels and I. Q. Whishaw, eds., Feeding in 
Vertebrates: Evolution, Morphology, 
Behaviour, Biomechanics (Switzerland: 
Springer Nature, 2019), pp. 527-574.
4. H. W. Greene, Snakes: The Evolution of 
Mystery in Nature (Berkeley, CA: University 
of California Press, 1997).
5. O. Rieppel, A review of the origin of snakes. 
Evolutionary Biology, 22 (1988), 37-130.
6. J. MUller, Beitrage zur Anatomie und 
Naturgeschichtte der Amphibien. Zeitschrift 
fur Physiologie, 4 (1832), 190-275.
7. S. Harrington and T. Reeder, Phylogenetic 
inference and divergence dating of snakes 
using molecules, morphology and fossils: 
new insights into convergent evolution of 
feeding morphology and limb reduction. 
Biological Journal of the Linnean Society, 121 
(2017), 379-394.
8. F. T. Burbrink, F. G. Grazziotin, R. A. Pyron, 
et al., Interrogating genomic-scale data for 
Squamata (lizards, snakes, and 
amphisbaenians) shows no support for key 
traditional morphological relationships. 
Systematic Biology, 69 (2020), 502-520.
9. M. W. Caldwell, The Origin of Snakes: 
Morphology and the Fossil Record (Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2020).
10. H. W. Greene, Dietary correlates of the 
origin and radiation of snakes. American 
Zoologist, 23 (1983), 431-441.
11. A. Y. Hsiang, D. J. Field, T. H. Webster, et al., 
The origin of snakes: revealing the ecology, 
behaviour, and evolutionary history of early 
snakes using genomics, phenomics, and the 
fossil record. BMC Evolutionary Biology, 15 
(2015), 87.
12. A. Scanferla, Post-natal ontogeny and the 
evolution of macrostomy in snakes. Royal 
Society Open Science, 3 (2016), 160612.
13. M. R. Bezuijen, Field observation of a large prey 
item consumed by a small Cylindrophis ruffus 
(Laurenti, 1768) (Serpentes: Cylindrophiidae). 
Hamadryad, 34 (2009), 185-187.
14. C. Kusamba, A. Resetar, V. Wallach, K. 
Lulengo, and Z. T. Nagy, Mouthful of snake: 
An African snake-eater’s (Polemon fulvicollis 
graueri) large typhlopid prey. Herpetology 
Notes, 6 (2013), 235-237.
15. K. Jackson, N. J. Kley, and E. L. Brainerd, 
How snakes eat snakes: the biomechanical 
challenges of ophiophagy for the California 
kingsnake, Lampropeltis getula californiae 
(Serpentes: Colubridae). Zoology, 107 
(2004), 191-200.
16. D. Cundall, A few puzzles in the evolution of 
feeding mechanisms in snakes. 
Herpetologica, 75 (2019), 99-107.
17. K. Schwenk and M. Rubega, Diversity of 
vertebrate feeding systems. In J. M. Stark 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 451
and T. Wang, eds., Physiological and 
ecological adaptations to feeding in 
vertebrates (Enfield, NH: Science Publishers, 
2005), pp. 1-41.
18. B. C. Jayne, H. K. Voris, and P. K. L. Ng, How 
big is too big? Using crustacean-eating 
snakes (Homalopsidae) to test how anatomy 
and behavior affect prey size and feeding 
performance. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 123 (2018), 636-650.
19. N. H. Gripshover and B. C. Jayne, Crayfish 
eating in snakes: testing how anatomy and 
behavior affect prey size and feeding 
performance. Integrative Organismal 
Biology, 3 (2021), obab001.
20. M. Close and D. Cundall, Snake lower jaw 
skin: Extension and recovery of a 
hyperextensible keratinized integument. 
Journal of Experimental Zoology, 321A 
(2014), 78-97.
21. M. Close, S. Perni, C. Franzini-Armstrong,, 
and D. Cundall, Highly extensible skeletal 
muscle in snakes. Journal of Experimental 
Biology, 217 (2014), 2445-2448.
22. B. A. Young, The arthrology of the head of 
the Red-sided Garter snake, Thamnophis 
sirtalis parietalis. Netherlands Journal of 
Zoology, 38 (1988), 166-205.
23. B. A. Young, The comparative morphology 
of the intermandibular connective tissue in 
snakes (Reptilia: Squamata). Zoologischer 
Anzeiger, 237 (1998), 59-84.
24. B. A. Young The comparative morphology of 
the mandibular midline raphe in snakes 
(Reptilia: Squamata). Zoologischer Anzeiger, 
237 (1998-1999), 217-241.
25. D. Cundall and S. J. Beaupre, Field records 
of predatory strike kinematics in 
rattlesnakes, Crotalus horridus. Amphibia- 
Reptilia, 22 (2001), 492-498.
26. D. Cundall, Viper fangs: Functional 
limitations of extreme teeth, Physiological 
and Biochemical Zoology: Ecological and 
Evolutionary Approaches, 82 (2009), 63-79.
27. J. A. Gauthier, M. Kearney, J. A. Maisano, 
O. Rieppel, and D. B. Behlke, Assembling the 
squamate tree of life: Perspectives from the 
phenotype and the fossil record. Bulletin of 
the Peabody Museum of Natural History, 53 
(2012), 3-308.
28. A. E. Greer, Limb reduction in squamates: 
Identification of the lineages and discussion 
of the trends. Journal of Herpetology, 25 
(1991), 166-173.
29. T. Tsuihiji, M. Kearney, and O. Rieppel, First 
report of a pectoral girdle muscle in snakes, 
with comments on the snake cervico-dorsal 
boundary. Copeia, 2006 (2006), 206-215.
30. T. Tsuihiji, M. Kearney, and O. Rieppel, 
Finding the neck-trunk boundary in snakes: 
Anteroposterior dissociation of myological 
characteristics in snakes and its implications 
for their neck and trunk body 
regionalization. Journal of Morphology, 273 
(2012), 992-1009.
31. F. Leal and M. J. Cohn, Developmental, 
genetic, and genomic insights into the 
evolutionary loss of limbs in snakes. Genesis: 
The Journal of Genetics and Development, 56 
(2018), e23077.
32. J.-P. Gasc, Axial musculature. In C. Gans and 
T. S. Parsons, eds., Biology of the Reptilia, 
Vol. 11, Morphology F (London: Academic 
Press, 1981), pp. 355-435.
33. G. Rivera, A. H. Savitzky, and J. A. Hinkley, 
Mechanical properties of the integument of 
the common gartersnake, Thamnophis 
sirtalis (Serpentes: Colubridae). Journal of 
Experimental Biology, 208 (2005), 
2913-2922.
34. P. Buffa, Ricerche sulla muscolatura cutanea 
dei serpenti e considerazioni sulla 
locomozione di questi animali. Atti della 
Accademia scientifica veneto-trentino- 
istriana, 1 (1904), 145-237.
35. J. R. Fetcho, The organization of motor 
neurons innervating the axial musculature 
of vertebrates. II. Florida water snakes 
(Nerodia fasciata pictiventris). Journal of 
Comparative Neurology, 249 (1986), 
551-563.
36. A. W. Vogl, M. A. Lillie, M. A. Piscitelli, et al., 
Stretchy nerves are an essential component 
of the extreme feeding mechanism of 
rorqual whales. Current Biology, 25 (2015), 
R345-R361.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

452 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
37. G. Apodaca, The uroepithelium: Not just a 
passive barrier. Traffic, 5 (2004), 117-128.
38. A. F. Eaton, D. R. Clayton, W. G. Ruiz, et al., 
Expansion and contraction of the umbrella 
cell apical junctional ring in response to 
bladder filling and voiding. Molecular 
Biology of the Cell, 30 (2019), 2037-2052.
39. A. C. Burke and J. L. Nowicki, A new view of 
patterning domains in the vertebrate 
mesoderm. Developmental Cell, 4 (2003), 
159-165.
40. J. J. Head and P. D. Polly, Evolution of the 
snake body form reveals homoplasy in 
amniote Hox gene function. Nature, 520 
(2015), 86-89.
41. W. Mosauer, The myology of the trunk 
region of snakes and its significance for 
ophidian taxonomy and phylogeny.
Publications of the University of California at 
Los Angeles in Biological Sciences, 1 (1935), 
81-120.
42. G. Ottaviani and A. Tazzi, The lymphatic 
system. In C. Gans and T. S. Parsons, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 6, Morphology E 
(London: Academic Press, 1977), 
pp. 315-464.
43. D. Cundall, C. Tuttman, and M. Close, 
A model of the anterior esophagus in snakes, 
with functional and developmental 
implications. Anatomical Record, 297 (2014), 
586-598.
44. H. Yi and M. A. Norell, The burrowing origin 
of modern snakes. Science Advances, 1 
(2015), e1500743.
45. M. S. Y. Lee, Convergent evolution and 
character correlation in burrowing reptiles: 
towards a resolution of squamate 
relationships. Biological Journal of the 
Linnean Society, 65 (1998), 369-453.
46. S. B. McDowell, Jr., The skull of Serpentes. In 
C. Gans, A. S. Gaunt, and K. Adler, eds., 
Biology of the Reptilia, Vol. 21, Morphology I. 
(Ithaca, NY: Society for the Study of 
Amphibians and Reptiles, 2008), 
pp. 467-620.
47. A. M. Abdeen, A. M. Abo-Taira, and M.
M Zaher, Further studies on the ophidian 
cranial osteology: the skull of the Egyptian 
blind snake Leptotyphlops cairi 
(Leptotyphlopidae). I. The cranium. A - The 
median dorsal bones, bones of the upper 
jaw, circumorbital bone and occipital ring. 
Journal of the Egyptian-German Society of 
Zoology, 5 (1991), 417-437.
48. A. M. Abdeen, A. M. Abo-Taira, and M.
M Zaher, Further studies on the ophidian 
cranial osteology: The skull of the Egyptian 
blind snake Leptotyphlops cairi 
(Leptotyphlopidae). I. The cranium. B - The 
otic capsule, palate and temporal bones. 
Journal of the Egyptian-German Society of 
Zoology, 5 (1991), 439-455.
49. D. G. Broadley and S. Broadley, A review of 
the African worm snakes from south of 
latitude 12“S (Serpentes: Leptotyphlopidae). 
Syntarsus, 5 (1999), 1-36.
50. J. C. Boughner, M. Buchtova, K. Fu, et al., 
Embryonic development of Python sebae.
I. Staging criteria and macroscopic skeletal 
morphogenesis of the head and limbs.
Zoology, 110 (2007), 212-230.
51. S. M. Boback, E. K. Dichter, and H. L. Mistry, 
A developmental staging series for the 
African house snake, Boaedon (Lamprophis) 
fuliginosus. Zoology, 115 (2012), 38-46.
52. K. M. Polachowski and I. Werneburg, Late 
embryos and bony skull development in 
Bothropoides jararaca (Serpentes, 
Viperidae). Zoology, 116 (2013), 36-63.
53. E. R. Khannoon and S. E. Evans, The 
development of the skull of the Egyptian 
cobra Naja h. haje (Squamata: Serpentes: 
Elapidae). PLoS ONE, 10 (2015), e0122185.
54. F. J. Irish, The role of heterochrony in the 
origin of a novel bauplan: evolution of the 
ophidian skull. Geobios, M6moires Special, 
12 (1989), 227-233.
55. I. Werneburg, K. M. Polachowski, and
M. N. Hutchinson, Bony skull development 
in the Argus Monitor (Squamata, Varanidae, 
Varanus panoptes) with comments on 
developmental timing and adult anatomy. 
Zoology, 118 (2015), 255-280.
56. N. J. Kley and E. L. Brainerd, Post-cranial 
prey transport mechanisms in the black 
pinesnake, Pituophis melanoleucus lodingi: 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

macrostomy, macrophagy, and snake phylogeny 453
an x-ray videographic study. Zoology, 105 
(2002), 153-164.
57. U. Kiran, A new structure in the lower jaw of 
colubrid snakes. Snake, 13 (1981), 131-133.
58. D. Cundall, Feeding behaviour in 
Cylindrophis and its bearing on the 
evolution of alethinophidian snakes. Journal 
of Zoology, London, 237 (1995), 353-376.
59. N. J. Kley, Prey transport mechanisms in 
blindsnakes and the evolution of unilateral 
feeding systems in snakes. American 
Zoologist, 41 (2001), 1321-1337.
60. K. Schwenk, Feeding in lepidosaurs. In 
K. Schwenk, ed., Feeding: Form, Function, 
and Evolution in Tetrapod Vertebrates (San 
Diego, CA: Academic Press, 2000), 
pp. 175-291.
61. T. H. Frazzetta, A functional consideration of 
cranial kinesis in lizards. Journal of 
Morphology, 111 (1962), 287-320.
62. T. H. Frazzetta, Morphology and function of 
the jaw apparatus in Python sebae and 
Python molurus. Journal of Morphology, 118 
(1966), 217-296.
63. D. Cundall and J. Shardo, Rhinokinetic snout 
of thamnophiine snakes. Journal of 
Morphology, 225 (1995), 31-50.
64. D. E. Shcherbakov, T. Tim, A. B. Tzetlin, 
O. Vinn, and A. Y. Zhuravlev, A probable 
oligochaete from an Early Triassic Lagerstatte 
of the southern Cis-Urals and its evolutionary 
implications. Acta Palaeontologica Polonica, 
65 (2020), 219-233.
65. H. Zaher and C. A. Scanferla, The skull of the 
Upper Cretaceous snake Dinilysia 
patagonica Smith-Woodward, 1901, and its 
phylogenetic position revisited. Zoological 
Journal of the Linnean Society, 164 (2012), 
194-238.
66. D. J. Gower, V. Giri, A. Captain, , and 
M. Wilkinson, A reassessment of 
Melanophium GUnther, 1864 (Squamata: 
Serpentes: Uropeltidae) from the Western 
Ghats of peninsular India, with description 
of a new species. Zootaxa, 4085 (2016), 
481-503.
67. R. E. Boltt and R. F. Ewer, The functional 
anatomy of the head of the puff adder, Bitis 
arietans (Merr.). Journal of Morphology, 114 
(1964), 83-106.
68. H. W. Greene and G. M. Burghardt, 
Behaviour and phylogeny: Constriction in 
ancient and modern snakes. Science, 200 
(1978), 74-77.
69. J. J. Head, K. Mahlow, and J. MUller, Fossil 
calibration dates for molecular phylogenetic 
analysis of snakes 2: Caneophidia, 
Colubroidea, Elapoidea, Colubridae. 
Palaeontologia Electronica 19.2.2FC (2016), 
1-21.
70. A. D. Hargreaves, M. T. Swain, D. W. Logan, 
and J. F. Mulley, Testing the Toxicofera: 
Comparative transcriptomics casts doubt on 
the single, early evolution of the reptile 
venom system. Toxicon, 92 (2015), 140-156.
71. S. S. Sweet, Chasing flamingos: Toxicofera 
and the misinterpretation of venom in 
varanid lizards. In M. Cota, ed., Proceedings 
of the 2015 Interdisciplinary World 
Conference on Monitor Lizards (Bangkok, 
Thailand: Institute for Research and 
Development, Suan Sunandha Rajhabat 
University, 2016), pp. 123-149.
72. C. W. Radcliffe and D. A. Chiszar, 
A descriptive analysis of predatory behavior 
in the yellow-lipped sea krait (Laticauda 
colubrina). Journal of Herpetology, 14 (1980), 
422-424.
73. A. Miralles, J. Marin, D. Markus, et al., 
Molecular evidence for the paraphyly of 
Scolecophidia and its evolutionary 
implications. Journal of Evolutionary 
Biology, 31 (2018), 1782-1793.
74. H. Zaher, and K. T. Smith, Pythons in the 
Eocene of Europe reveal a much older 
divergence of the group in sympatry 
with boas. Biology Letters, 16 (2020), 
20200735.
75. J.-C. Rage, Serpentes, In P. Wellnhofer, ed., 
Handbuch der Palaoherpetologie/ 
Encyclopedia of Paleontology, Part 11. 
(Stuttgart: Gustav Fischer, 1984), pp. 1-80.
76. J.-C. Rage, Fossil snakes. In R. A. Seigel, 
J. T. Collins, and S. S. Novak, eds., Snakes: 
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology (New York: 
Macmillan, 1987), pp. 51-76.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

454 DAVI D CUNDALL AND FRANCES IRISH
77. O. Rieppel, H., Zaher, E. Tchernov,, and 
M. J. Polcyn, The anatomy and relationships 
of Haasiophis terrasanctus, a fossil snake 
with well-developed hind limbs from the 
mid-Cretaceous of the Middle East. Journal 
of Paleontology, 77 (2003), 536-558.
78. H., Zaher, S. Apesteguia, and C. A. Scanferla, 
The anatomy of the upper cretaceous snake 
Najash rionegrina Apesteguia & Zaher, 2006, 
and the evolution of limblessness in snakes. 
Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society, 
156 (2009), 801-826.
79. F. F. Garberoglio, S. Apesteguia,
T. R. Simoes, et al., New skulls and skeletons 
of the Cretaceous legged snake Najash, and 
the evolution of the modern snake body 
plan. Science Advances, 5 (2019), 
eaax5833.
80. D. Cundall, Review of M. W. Caldwell, the 
origin of snakes: morphology and the fossil 
record. Herpetological Review, 51 (2020), 
364-368.
81. N. M. Koch and J. A. Gauthier, Noise and 
biases in genomic data may underlie 
radically different hypotheses for the 
position of Iguania within Squamata. PLoS 
ONE, 13 (2018), e0202729.
82. P. Uetz, P. Freed, and J. Hosek, eds., The 
Reptile Database. 
 
(accessed 1 February 2021).
www.reptile-database.org
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.025 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Index
Acanthodactylus
hardyi, 397
Achalinus, 414
spinalis, 279-280, 308
Acontidae, 26
Acrochordidae, 57, 70-71, 87, 98, 214, 277, 373, 402, 
420, 427
Acrochordus, 70, 98, 414
dehmi, 87, 89, 98, 100
javanicus, 279, 336
Acrodonta, 365
Acteosaurinae, 168
Acteosaurus, 151, 161
crassicostatus, 158, 161
tommasinii, 161
Acutotyphlops, 369
adaptation, 131, 135, 144-145, 151, 153, 242-243, 251,
255, 257, 271, 273, 275, 334, 336, 392, 444, 448-449
Adriatic Sea, 168, 181
Adriosaurus, 139, 151, 161-163, 171
microbrachis, 162
skrbinensis, 162
suessi, 158, 161, 163, 165, 172
Africa, 10, 15-16, 32, 34, 37, 42-43, 57, 67, 69, 74-75,
87, 93, 97-98, 100, 102-103, 368
Afrophidia, 242-243, 329, 338, 368, 379
Afrotyphlopinae, 368
Afrotyphlops, 369, 414
lineolatus, 369, 370, 376
punctatus, 414, 418
Agama
paragama, 356
Agamidae, 101, 237, 241, 365, 378-379
Agkistrodon, 212, 399
contortrix, 333
piscivorus, 337
Ahaetulla, 327
nasuta, 440
perroteti, 336
Aigialosauridae, 14, 125-126, 133, 149, 151, 157-173, 
181-182
Aigialosaurus, 150, 161, 168 
dalmaticus, 161, 172
Aiolosaurus, 167
Aipysurus, 280
eydouxii, 427
Albaneryx, 87, 96, 98
depereti, 95, 96, 98
volynicus, 89, 96, 98
Albian, 11-15, 32, 36, 42
Alethinophidia, 28, 30, 34, 36, 39-40, 44, 55-57, 67, 
76, 120, 145, 181, 190-191, 193-195, 198-200, 226, 
273, 275, 279-280, 287, 294, 297, 300, 302-304, 
310, 317, 333, 337, 339, 368, 375-377, 379, 
400-401, 438, 444, 446, 449
Alexandresaurus, 363
Algeria, 15, 32
alignment, 209, 217, 237, 241
Alligator, 330
Alopoglossidae, 364
amber, 11, 13-14, 32
America, 10
North, 10, 12-13, 15, 31-32, 34, 36, 42-43, 64, 66, 
69, 74-76, 85, 97, 99, 158
South, 32, 34, 42-44, 64, 66-67, 71, 74-75, 116
Amerophidia, 36, 43, 56, 87, 91, 226-227, 242-243, 
329, 338, 340, 376-377
Amerotyphlops, 376 
brongersmianus, 357, 370, 392, 414, 418, 421, 
421
minuisquamus, 357, 370, 376, 379
paucisquamus, 357, 370 
reticulatus, 357, 370, 376, 379
amino acid, 210, 256, 331-333, 336
Amnesteophis
melanauchen, 374
Amniota, 151, 182, 242, 324, 351
amphibian, 14, 44, 87, 212, 321, 448
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

456 INDEX
Amphisbaena, 365 
brasiliana, 355 
carli, 364
Amphisbaenia, 7, 11-13, 15, 26, 101, 170, 282, 285, 
352, 364, 375, 393, 441
Amphisbaenidae, 356, 364, 375, 377, 401
anatomy, 1-2, 4, 26, 56, 131, 152, 159, 169, 180, 182, 
189, 199, 202, 235, 244, 258, 260, 263, 282, 294, 
296-297, 306-307, 310-311, 316, 321, 327, 337, 
379-380, 389, 394-395, 401-402, 410, 420, 423, 
438-439, 449
ancestral-state estimation, 1, 327, 329, 332-333, 
338-339, 341, 380, 396, 399-400, 402
Anelytropsis, 11, 360
Angiostomata, 181
Anguidae, 15, 101, 162, 170, 366, 393, 396-397, 423
Anguiformes, 353, 359, 365-367, 374-376, 378-379, 
423, 431
Anguimorpha, 7, 12-16, 26, 30, 41, 64, 120, 122, 125, 
138, 152, 159, 162, 164, 168, 173, 181, 199, 226, 
249, 258-260, 282, 285, 423
Anguioidea, 138, 150, 152
Anguis
fragilis, 356
angular, 145, 147, 153, 198
Aniliidae, 36, 43-44, 87, 91, 226, 275, 279, 288, 331, 
338, 368, 371, 402, 419
Anilioidea, 56, 67, 70
Anilios, 334, 369
guentheri, 418
Anilius, 56, 67, 263, 322, 331, 371, 376, 446
scytale, 275, 298-299, 302, 304, 306, 336, 369, 419
Anniella, 275, 285
pulchra, 170, 282
Anniellidae, 366-367
Anolis
carolinensis, 221, 237-238, 241-242
gaigei, 366
lineatopis, 324
Anomalepididae, 34, 44, 226, 243, 273, 275, 331, 368, 
370, 374-375, 377, 379, 399-402, 414, 418, 420, 
443-444
Anomalepis
aspinosus, 416, 420
Anomalophiidae, 85
Anomalophis, 71
bolcensis, 70
Anomochilidae, 275, 371
Anomochilus, 67, 306, 371, 446
Antarctica, 34, 65, 67
Aphanizocnemus, 162-164, 167
libanensis, 161, 165
Apostolepis, 427
gaboi, 391
Aprasia, 361
pulchella, 282
Aptian, 11-13, 15, 42
aquatic, 15-16, 42-44, 57, 66, 69-71, 98, 151, 168, 
180-181, 271, 277, 279-280, 282, 287, 307, 316, 
321, 323, 416, 445, 449
Aquitanian, 87, 91, 95
arboreal, 70, 98, 277, 280, 282, 286, 307, 323, 329
Arcanosaurus
ibericus, 13
Archaeophiinae, 71-72
Archaeophis, 56, 181
proavus, 70, 72
turkmenicus, 57, 72
Archosauria, 212, 351
Arctic Ocean, 168
Ardeosaurus, 11-12
Argentina, 16, 32, 34, 36, 43
Argyrophis
diardi, 418
Aristelliger, 361
Arthrosaura
montigena, 363
articular, 149, 167, 198
Asagaolacerta, 9
tricuspidens, 13
Asia, 10, 32, 34, 42-43, 57, 67, 69, 74-75, 87, 91, 93-94, 
97-98, 100, 102, 158
Asiatyphlopinae, 368
Aspidura, 376
brachyorrhos, 301
Atlantic Ocean, 168
Atractaspididae, 376, 413, 417, 419, 425
Atractaspidinae, 251
Atractaspis, 214, 423, 425
Atractus, 329
pantostictus, 394
reticulatus, 417
auditory system, 26, 294, 309
Australia, 15, 34, 40, 64, 69, 74-75, 168, 200, 362
Australophis, 36, 43
anilioides, 36
Austria, 94, 97, 100
Autarchoglossa, 7, 226
axial regionalization, 2, 120
Azemiopinae, 399
Azemiops, 402
Badenian, 94-95, 97
Balnealacerta, 10, 12
Barlochersaurus
winhtini, 13
Barremian, 12-15, 31, 42
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 457
basicranium, 31
basioccipital, 142, 193-194 
basisphenoid, 142, 192, 194, 200
Bathonian, 9, 13
Bavarioboa, 72, 87, 89, 92, 93, 96, 102
crocheti, 72
hermi, 92, 93, 95, 96
ultima, 95, 96
Bavarisaurus, 11
Bayesian inference, 163, 338, 402
behaviour, 2, 45, 282, 287, 310-311, 329, 337-338, 
341, 383, 438-439, 446-449
Bellairsia, 10
Berriasian, 10, 13, 42, 157
Bharatagama
rebbanensis, 9
biochemistry, 209, 248, 255, 263, 394
biogeography, 17, 28, 38, 42-43, 67, 69, 100, 214
bioinformatics, 215, 227
biostratigraphy, 36-37, 92
Bipedidae, 365
Bipes, 285, 365 
canaliculatus, 282
birds, 44, 215, 250, 258, 271, 338
Blanidae, 365
Blanus, 365
blood, 210, 212, 248, 251, 254, 323, 352, 441
Boa, 331, 373
constrictor, 29, 217, 277, 440, 445, 446
imperator, 303
body form
snake, 1, 26, 28-30, 41-42, 44, 120, 181
Boidae, 36, 71, 91, 93-95, 102, 213, 221, 236, 254, 277, 
288, 324, 328, 373, 401, 414, 419
Boiga
irregularis, 250, 282, 393, 395, 399
Boipeba, 40-41, 44
tayasuensis, 36
Bolyeria, 371
Bolyeriidae, 69, 215, 371, 380
Booidea, 36, 67, 69, 72, 87, 91, 93-95, 98, 100, 102, 
195, 215, 277, 294, 309, 311, 338, 372-373, 
376-378, 402, 446, 449
Bosnia-Herzegovina, 15, 32, 180, 205
Bothrops, 392, 399
jararaca, 390, 415
Brachylophus, 366
Brachyophis
revoili, 427
Brachyorrhos, 225
Brachyurophis, 427
australis, 280
brackish water, 70-71
brain, 2, 199, 294-312, 316-317, 441 
braincase, 10, 31, 139-142, 183, 190-194, 202, 258, 
287, 296, 306, 311, 339, 441, 443-444, 446
Bransateryx, 91
vireti, 91
Brazil, 12, 14-16, 31-32, 121
Brookesiinae, 365
Bungarus, 89, 92, 100
fasciatus, 256
buoyancy, 70
Burdigalian, 87, 93-94, 102
burrowing, 120, 122, 273, 275, 277, 279-280, 282, 
285-286, 289, 294, 307, 311, 316, 441, 444, See also 
fossorial
Cadeidae, 365
Caenophidia, 36-38, 43-44, 57, 69, 71, 87, 95, 101, 
249-251, 254-255, 257-261, 263, 275, 294, 300, 
304, 307, 317, 323, 327-330, 338, 340-341, 
373-379, 413-414, 416, 419-420, 423, 428, 446, 449
Calabaria, 69, 373, 443, 446
reinhardtii, 372, 373, 440
Calabariidae, 372, 376
Calamariidae, 374, 377
Calanguban
alamoi, 12
Calliophis, 93, 99
bivirgatus, 93, 425
Callopistes
flavopunctatus, 358
Callovian, 10
Calotes, 365
Camp, Charles L., 7, 126, 158, 161, 181, 200
Campanian, 13-14, 38, 42-43, 162
Candoia, 69
bibroni, 372
Candoiidae, 373
Carentonosaurus
mineaui, 161
Caribbean, 67
Carphodactylidae, 361
carpus, 151, 167
Carsosaurus
marchesetti, 161
cartilage, 121, 279, 440, 446
Casarea
dussumieri, 371, 414
Causus, 425
Cenomanian, 10-11, 13-16, 34, 39, 41-42, 125-126, 
152, 157-158, 161, 180-182
Cenozoic, 28, 31, 40, 44, 55, 67, 71, 85, 181, 200
Ceratophora
stoddarti, 366
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

458 INDEX
Cerberophis
rex, 36
Cerberus
rhynchops, 393, 422
Chamaeleo, 356
Chamaeleonidae, 360, 365, 378
Chamaeleoninae, 365
chameleon, 14, 98
Changetisaurus, 13
estesi, 10
characters
apomorphic (derived), 14, 17, 26, 31, 36-38, 40, 
56-57, 68-69, 126, 135, 137-139, 142, 152, 164, 
167-168, 171, 182, 199-200, 259-260, 263, 338, 
340, 352, 363, 369, 373, 375-379, 423, 437, 448
ordering or weighting, 17, 163, 167, 219 
plesiomorphic (primitive), 14, 37, 39-41, 56, 126, 
131, 143, 152, 170, 192, 199-200, 258, 338, 340, 
366, 373, 375-376, 378, 397, 401-402, 449
sampling, definition or formulation, 17, 126, 131, 
152, 159, 163-164, 215, 217, 224, 374, 380
Charina, 373
bottae, 372, 373
Charinaidae, 372
Charinainae, 69
Chattian, 87
chemosensory, 135, 307, 337
Chersodromus, 416
chimaera, 16, 39
China, 10, 12-14, 87, 95
Chirindia, 365
chitinase, 236-244
Cholophidia, 181
Chotaophis
padhriensis, 89, 100
Christinus
marmoratus, 397
chronostratigraphy, 85
Chrysopelea
ornata, 280
taprobanica, 336
Chubutophis
grandis, 71
circulatory system, 28, 30
cladistics, 7, 15, 152, 159
classification, 58, 135, 159, 161, 181, 214, 237, 273,
317, 353, 391, 410, 413
clavicle, 167
Clidastes, 141
propython, 141
Clidastidae, 119, 181
climate, 69, 85, 87, 91, 93-95, 98-103
climbing, 10, 273, 275
Cnemidophorus, 363
cochlea, 271, 275, 289
Colobosaura
modesta, 426
Colombia, 36, 43
colour vision, 235, 317, 337
Coluber, 92, 96, 99, 212, 214
cadurci, 92
caspioides, 92, 94, 96, 97
constrictor, 115-116, 298, 301, 308
dolnicensis, 92, 94, 96, 99
hungaricus, 98
pouchetii, 92, 96, 97, 99-100
suevicus, 92, 94, 96, 99
Colubridae, 87, 94-95, 98, 212, 214, 237, 243, 279, 282, 
328, 331, 374, 376, 393, 395, 399, 401, 419
Colubriformes, 69, 76, 214
Colubrinae, 97, 99-100, 212, 214
Colubroidea, 30, 36-38, 43-44, 93-95, 97-101, 221, 
226, 236, 243, 280, 317, 328, 330, 332, 338, 373, 
376-377, 396, 399
Colubroides, 30, 373, 427
competition, 250, 389, 393
compound bone, 149, 198
Coniacian, 34, 36-37, 42
Coniasaurus, 133, 133, 144, 149, 149, 151, 170
crassidens, 139, 145, 149, 150, 161, 170 
gracilodens, 133-134, 135, 137-139, 143, 148, 150, 
161, 164
Coniophis, 9, 15, 32, 34, 36, 39, 41, 43, 200
dabiebus, 37
precedens, 34, 35, 36, 39, 43
constraint
molecular, 12, 17, 168
constriction, 235, 254, 310, 447-449
Constrictores, 36, 43-44, 68, 72, 74, 76 
convergence, 15, 141, 153, 171, 182, 202, 248, 251, 
263, 368, 375-378, 441
Cope, Edward D., 14, 66, 119-120, 125, 131, 138, 
143-145, 149, 158-159, 181, 352, 362-363
copulation, 351, 389, 392-393, 401-402
coracoid, 158
Corallus, 373
caninus, 277
hortulanus, 336
Cordylidae, 94, 101, 361-362, 378
Cordyliformes, 7, 12
Cordyloidea, 374, 379
Coronella, 97
miocaenica, 96-97, 99, 101
coronoid, 143-145, 147, 153, 183, 191-192, 198, 200 
cranium, 2, 12, 31, 34, 39-41, 70, 72, 74, 77, 164, 171, 
186, 200, 289, 297, 339, 449, See also skull
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 459
Cretaceogekko 
burmae, 11
Cretaceous, 2, 11, 16, 28, 34, 36, 38, 40, 42-44, 55, 57, 
71, 119-120, 157-158, 161, 181-182, 200, 243, 284, 
287, 296, 310-311, 437, 444, 446, 449
Early, 10-11, 13-14, 16-17, 32, 42, 121
Late, 13-14, 26, 31, 38, 41-44, 57, 118
Lower, 11-16
Middle, 10
Upper, 1, 44
Croatia, 15, 162
crocodylians, 71, 94, 98, 125, 212, 334
Crotalinae, 95, 98, 103, 212-213, 328, 392, 395, 399, 
402
Crotalus, 212, 399
durissus, 392, 394
viridis, 237, 392
Crotaphytus, 366
cryptozoic, 294, 297, 300, 302, 304, 306-307, 309-310
Crythiosaurus 
mongoliensis, 74
CT scan, 17, 70, 126, 135, 142, 159, 173, 182, 189-190, 
202, 271, 273, 279, 287, 289, 294, 297, 304, 312, 
380, 413, 440, 446
Cyclocoridae, 376
Cylindrophiidae, 56, 275, 285, 371, 377, 416
Cylindrophis, 67, 143, 149, 263, 275, 285, 303, 
375-376, 448 
aruensis, 371 
engkariensis, 371 
maculatus, 275 
melanotus, 369, 371, 379
ruffus, 147, 414, 416, 419-420, 440
Czechia, 93, 95, 97, 100
Daboia, 95, 96
Dactyloidae, 237, 366
Dalinghosaurus, 9
longidigitus, 13
Dallasaurus, 126, 133, 168
Dasypeltis
scabra, 427
Delma, 361
inornata, 355
dentary, 11, 14, 16, 39, 119, 143-145, 147, 149, 186, 
190, 194, 198, 423, 443
dentition, 12-13, 39, 144-145, 149-150, 170-171, 194, 
263
acrodont, 9, 13
pleurodont, 9, 13, 135, 145, 170
depositional environments, 26, 42, 70
development (ontogeny), 4, 17, 56, 120-121, 151, 171, 
227, 250, 258, 263, 289, 311, 336, 341, 351, 413, 
423, 431, 441, 443
Diablophis 
gilmorei, 16, 31
Diadophis, 212
Dibamia, 162
Dibamidae, 7, 11, 15, 26, 122, 152, 162, 170, 282, 285, 
358, 360, 374-375, 378-379, 401
Dibamus, 11, 275, 285, 360
greeri, 375
novaeguineae, 282, 423, 426
diet, 2, 7, 235-236, 238, 242, 250, 427
carnivory, 235-236, 243, 251, 437
chitinophagy, 243
eggs, 427
faunivory, 236
goo eater, 417, 427
herbivory, 10, 236, 243, 259-260
insectivory, 236, 243, 259-260 
invertebrates, 235, 279, 417, 427, 443 
myrmecophagy, 235
piscivory, 279
vertebrates, 235, 243, 258, 443
Dinilysia, 34, 35, 38, 40-41, 152, 191, 193, 200, 202, 445 
patagonica, 3, 27, 34, 172, 287, 288, 289, 296, 
304-306, 310-311
Diplocynodon, 94
Diplodactylidae, 361, 397
Diploglossidae, 366
Diploglossus, 367
nigropunctatus, 367
Diplolaemus, 366
Dipsadidae, 102, 214, 235, 280, 328-329, 331-332, 
360, 374, 376, 393-394, 399, 401, 416, 427, 448
Dipsadinae, 416-417
Dipsas, 329, 417, 443
indica, 417-418
dispersal, 42, 44, 64, 69, 87, 93, 102
Dispholidus
typus, 251, 427
distribution, 16
spatial (geographic), 16, 26, 43, 56, 69-70, 102
temporal (stratigraphic), 28, 56, 69
diurnal, 321, 323, 327-330, 340
diversification, 2, 7, 16, 34, 42, 44-45, 76, 85, 87, 180, 
242, 244, 249, 254-256, 258, 260, 263, 410
diversity, 2, 4, 7, 55-56, 67, 72, 74, 76, 94, 98, 101, 
255-256, 263, 279, 296, 300, 312, 341, 352, 
360-361, 377, 379, 401, 428, 438
DNA, 209-210, 214, 217, 333-334, 339
Dolichophis, 96
Dolichosauridae, 14, 125-126, 131, 138-139, 143, 
149-153, 155, 157-173, 181-182
Dolichosaurinae, 168
Dolichosaurus, 142, 144-145, 149-150
longicollis, 134, 141, 142, 146, 161
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

460 INDEX
Dorsetisauridae, 16
Dorsetisaurus, 9, 30
purbeckensis, 13
Dracaena, 143
Draco, 365
Dracomorpha, 199
duct
cochlear, 271
lacrimal, 196
oral-gland, 259, 413-414, 416-425
semicircular-canal, 273, 275
Dunnophis, 70
ear, 2, 193, 271-289, 311, 441
inner, 3, 41, 70, 271-289, 296, 306, 310
Early Eocene Climatic Optimum, 85
Echinosaura, 363
Echiopsis, 280
Echis, 250, 415
coloratus, 262, 326
ecology, 2-4, 11, 16-17, 26, 28, 38, 40, 44-45, 71, 
249-251, 257, 259, 261, 263, 279, 284, 287, 289, 
296, 310, 312, 316, 321, 327, 329-330, 336, 339, 
341, 380, 400, 402, 448
ecomorphology, 28, 34, 311, 380
ectopterygoid, 131, 138-139, 152, 171, 193-194, 200, 
202, 444
ectothermic, 71
Ecuador, 67
Egernia, 361
eggs, 13, 117, 391, 393, 401
Egypt, 15, 32, 37, 180, 183
Eichstaettisaurus, 8, 11, 16
Eidolosaurus, 163-164
trauthi, 161, 165, 167
Eirenis, 243
Elaphe, 89, 92, 96-97, 97, 99, 337, 427
dione, 89, 98
kormosi, 96, 101
Elapidae, 93, 95, 97, 99-100, 102, 212, 214, 221, 226, 
236-237, 243, 250-251, 256, 258, 260, 280, 285, 
289, 307, 327, 331-332, 337, 376, 392, 394, 401, 
413, 417, 419-420, 422-423, 425, 449
Elapoidea, 92-93, 99-100, 102, 226, 373, 377, 427
Elapomorphinae, 427
elongation, 3, 31, 440
body, 1, 10, 12, 14, 28, 41, 120, 271, 287
neck, 14, 158, 171
embryos, 13, 121, 411
Emydocephalus, 427
ijimae, 332
Endoglyptodonta, 340, 353, 373, 377, 396-397, 399, 
401, 413, 423, 427, 431
England, 12-13, 161
Enuliophis, 417
Enulius, 417
Eoanilius, 67, 71, 91, 92, 96
oligocenicus, 87, 89, 91, 92
Eocene, 43-44, 55, 57, 64, 69, 72, 85
Eoconstrictor, 70-71
Eonatator, 168
coellensis, 133
sternbergi, 133
Eophis
underwoodi, 16
Epicrates, 373
cenchria, 372
Epictia, 368
albipuncta, 299
munoai, 368
tenella, 420
Epictinae, 368
epipterygoid, 10, 441
Episquamata, 396
Eremiadini, 364
Erpeton
tentaculatum, 280, 304, 309
Erycidae, 69, 91, 95, 98, 100, 277, 372
Erycinae, 69-70, 72, 91, 420
Erythrolamprus
miliaris, 393
Eryx, 89, 92, 95, 96, 98, 100, 373
colubrinus, 277, 280
jaculus, 96, 373
johnii, 419
primitivus, 102
Estesia, 167
mongoliensis, 151, 170
Eublepharidae, 361
Eublepharis
macularius, 262
Eugogylinae, 361
Eunectes, 287, 373
murinus, 277
Eupodophis, 120, 152, 180, 182-202
descouensi, 15, 27, 32, 180, 183, 184-185, 189
Eurasia, 16, 85-103, 158
Europe, 10, 15, 31-32, 34, 64, 66, 68-69, 74-76,
85-103, 113, 158, 164
Eutropis
carinata, 397
evolution, 1, 3, 7, 28, 41, 44, 120, 125, 209, 236, 243, 
248-249, 251, 254-255, 257-258, 271, 289, 294, 
296, 311, 316, 329, 336, 339, 341, 352, 374, 379, 
389, 395-396, 401, 431, 438, 444, 448-449 
regressive, 236, 243, 337
evolutionary developmental biology (‘evo-devo’), 
1-2
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 461
Exiliboa, 373, 376
placata, 277
exoccipital, 193
extinction, 3, 44, 72, 76, 85, 95
mass, 43-44
eye, 2, 248, 273, 296, 300, 302, 304, 309, 311, 316-341, 
418, 425, 441
Falseryx, 68, 87, 91, 92, 93, 95, 96, 102
petersbuchi, 92, 93
fangs, 92, 214, 248, 257, 263, 413, 417, 423, 425, 427, 
431
Farancia, 212, 448
feeding, 2, 131, 199, 248, 259, 273, 279, 311, 410, 417,
438-439, 446, 449
femur, 121, 151
fenestra
ovalis, 193, 275, 280, 287
rotunda, 193
suborbital, 131, 139, 171
fertilization, 351, 389, 392-394, 401
Feyliniidae, 26
fibula, 121
Fiji, 365
Fimbrios, 414
fishes, 31, 37, 44, 71, 118, 125, 448
foramen
infraorbital, 138, 152
lacrimal, 138
magnum, 193
optic, 191-192, 441
parietal, 14, 16
trigeminal, 39, 193
Fordonia, 287
leucobalia, 280, 287
forest
dry deciduous, 94
oak-laurel, 94
subtropical semi-deciduous, 94
temperate evergreen, 100
tropical, 11
Formation
Adamantina, 36
Anacleto, 34
Bahariya, 32
Bajo de la Carpa, 34
Bet-Meir, 32
Candeleros, 32
Cedar Mountain, 32
Cerrejon, 36
Crato, 12, 31
Hell Creek, 34, 36
Ifezouane, 32
In Beceten, 34
Kababish, 37
Kaiparowits, 36, 44
Kamlial, 87
Karabastau, 10
Kharinadi, 87
Kirkwood, 31
Kota, 9
La Luna, 32
Lameta, 34
Lance, 34, 36
Mizdah, 32
Morrison, 10, 12-13, 16
Nsungwe, 97
Shendi, 37
Tendaguru, 10
Tetori, 13
Wadi Milk, 36-37, 44
fossil calibration, 44
fossil record, 1, 9-10, 16, 26, 28, 30, 38, 42-44, 56, 69, 
125, 210, 339
fossilization, 2, 273, 287, 339
fossils, 1-2, 15-16, 42, 45, 55, 67, 69-70, 74, 76, 87, 
119, 121, 151, 157, 180, 182, 228, 243, 271, 287, 
294, 338-339, 437-438, 440, 444-445, 449 
discovery, 4, 26, 31, 56, 173, 202, 289, 339, 444
fossorial, 1, 26, 28, 34, 41-42, 44, 56, 67, 70, 271, 273, 
275, 277, 279-280, 282, 285-287, 289, 297, 300, 
302, 304, 307, 309-311, 316, 321, 323, 327, 329, 
331, 334, 337-341, 360, 364, 368, 401, 441, 
444-445, 449, See also burrowing
France, 10, 15-16, 32, 71, 91, 93, 95, 97-99, 161, 180, 
182
freshwater, 15, 17, 71, 279, 332
frontal, 16, 133, 163, 168, 171, 183, 190, 192, 196-197, 
200, 202, 441, 443, 446, 449
function, 1, 17, 143, 202, 238, 242, 248, 255-256, 
259-260, 263, 279, 316, 321, 327, 330, 336, 
338-339, 341, 352, 379-380, 391-392, 394, 402, 
413, 423, 427, 431, 440-441, 448-449
Gallotia, 364
stehlini, 355
Gansophis
potwarensis, 89, 100
Gekko
japonicus, 221, 237, 241-242
Gekkonidae, 237-238, 241, 360-361, 396-397, 401
Gekkonomorpha, 162, 181
Gekkota, 7, 11-12, 16, 162, 226, 282, 353, 360-361, 
374-376, 378-379, 393, 397
gene, 214, 217, 251, 316, 336, 447
duplication, 244, 255, 321, 336, 340
expression, 121, 243, 255, 260-261, 328, 334, 336 
Hox, 121
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

462 INDEX
gene (cont.)
loss, 324, 336, 338-339
opsin, 321, 331, 333-334, 336, 338-339
toxin-encoding, 250, 255, 257, 260-261, 263
visual-system, 318, 324, 333-337, 339-340, 441
genetics, 4
genome
mitochondrial, 214
nuclear, 209-210, 215, 217, 219, 224, 227
size, 217, 221
whole (complete), 209, 217, 227, 237, 263, 333-334 
genomics, 1, 4, 45, 122, 210, 215, 226-227, 235, 243, 
264, 336, 341, 449
genotype, 4, 316, 338, 340-341
geometric morphometrics, 2, 284, 312
Geophis, 416-418
Germany, 9-12, 15, 91, 93, 95, 97, 168
Gerrhopilidae, 275, 368
Gerrhosauridae, 361-362
Gerrhosaurus, 362
flavigularis, 362
gland, 418-419
dental, 254, 258-260, 263, 427-428, 448
Duvernoy’s, 258, 413, 415
labial, 258-259, 413-418, 428, 431
oral, 2, 254-255, 258-260, 410-429
pituitary, 298, 302, 304, 306, 309-310
premaxillary, 422, 428
rictal, 258, 419-420, 427, 431
salivary, 259
salt, 420, 422, 428
sublingual, 420-422, 427
venom, 248, 255, 257, 261, 263, 413, 415, 423-427
gliding, 10, 14, 280
Gloydius, 89, 98
Gobiderma, 167
pulchrum, 151
Gondwana, 10, 12, 16, 42-43, 56-57, 69, 180
Gongylophis, 95
Gonionotophis
capensis, 427
Grande Coupure, 72, 85, 87
Grayiidae, 226, 374
Greece, 93-94, 98-101
ground dwelling, 70, 282, 294, 300, 302, 309-311, 323, 
329, 401
Gueragama
sudamerica, 14
gut contents, 13, 71, 243
Gymnophthalmidae, 12, 359, 363-364, 366, 377-378
Haasiasaurus, 144-145, 149-151
gittelmani, 150, 161
Haasiophis, 120, 152, 180, 182-202
terrasanctus, 15, 27, 32, 180, 186, 189
Hainosaurus
bernardi, 157
Halisaurinae, 126, 133, 141-143, 151, 157
Halisaurus, 141
hard tissue, 2
Hauterivian, 42, 157
head, 307, 322, 411, 437-444, 446, 448
hearing. See auditory system
Helicops
modestus, 332, 416, 425
Heloderma, 137, 162, 167, 282
horridum, 254
suspectum, 29, 254
Helodermatidae, 150, 243, 249, 254, 259, 263, 366, 423
Hemidactylus
mabouia, 426
hemipenis, 2, 351-380
Henophidia, 76, 251, 254, 258, 317, 327, 329, 340, 414, 
419-420
Heterodactylus
imbricatus, 356
Heterodon, 212, 214
platirhinos, 280
Heteronotia
binoei, 397
Hierophis, 98
hungaricus, 89, 92, 96, 99-101
Hispanophis
coronolloideus, 97
histology, 300, 303, 312, 325, 327-328, 330, 359, 374, 
378, 380, 391, 402, 411, 419-420, 440-441, 446
history of science, 1, 66, 70, 125, 210, 316
Hoburogekko, 9
suchanovi, 11
Hodzhakulia
magna, 13
Hoeckosaurus
mongoliensis, 11
holotype, 9, 16, 142, 150, 152, 164, 183, 186, 190-191, 
193, 195-198
Homalopsidae, 214, 235, 280, 304, 309, 373, 376-377, 
393, 402, 422
homology, 38, 126, 145, 147, 151, 209, 217, 236, 
254-255, 258-261, 263, 329, 332, 334, 339, 341, 
358-360, 374, 377-380, 413, 415, 421, 423, 428, 
431, 440
homoplasy, 31, 34, 39, 151-152, 210
Homoroselaps, 417, 423, 425
lacteus, 417
Hoyalacerta, 9, 17
sanzi, 14
Huehuecuetzpalli, 17
mixtecus, 14
Hungary, 97, 99-101, 116
Hydrophiinae, 280, 332, 420
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 463
Hydrophis, 280, 332
caerulencens, 279
cyanocinctus, 421, 422
ornatus, 332, 422
platurus, 422
Hydrosaurus, 161
Hypsirhynchus 
callilaemus, 324
identification, 10-11, 37, 168
Iguana, 200, 366
iguana, 366
Iguania, 7, 9, 12, 14-16, 26, 30, 41, 122, 125, 158, 162, 
199, 226, 249, 254, 258-260, 285, 353, 359, 
365-366, 374-375, 378-379, 393, 395-396, 423, 431
Iguanidae, 150, 214, 366
Imantodes
cenchoa, 424
India, 9, 34, 44, 69, 87, 337
Indotyphlops, 336, 369, 414
braminus, 414
Indrasaurus
wangi, 13
infrared, 71, 294, 309, 338
innovation, 250, 410, 444, 448
intercentra, 14
interclavicle, 167, 171
Introrsisaurus
pollicidens, 158
Iran, 100
Israel, 161, 180
Italy, 9, 11, 91, 162
Japan, 13, 15, 95, 157
jaw, 9, 11, 13-14, 16, 119, 145, 167, 186, 198, 202, 
259-260, 413-415, 418-420, 423, 437-440, 
443-444, 446, 448-449
Jeddaherdan 
aleadonta, 14 
joint 
costovertebral, 28, 41 
epipterygoid-pterygoid, 10, 72 
intervertebral, 29 
intramandibular, 31, 119, 145-147, 170, 198 
syndesmotic, 139
Judeasaurus, 144, 149
tchernovi, 143, 161, 170
jugal, 138-139, 186, 191-192, 194, 196-197, 200, 
441
Jurassic, 11, 14, 16-17, 30, 32, 41-42, 181, 444, 446
Early, 10
Late, 11, 13, 16
Lower, 9
Middle, 2, 10, 12-13, 16
Upper, 10-13, 16
Kaganaias, 9, 15
Karpatian, 94, 102
Kataria, 69
Kazakhstan, 10, 12, 15, 95, 98-99, 103
Kentropyx, 363
Kimmeridgian, 10, 12-13
kinesis, 133, 141, 145, 191, 200, 441, 443-444, 446
Komensaurus, 168
carrolli, 161, 172
K-Pg (extinction event), 44, 76, 157, 449
Krebsophis, 37, 43
thobanus, 38
Kuwajimalla, 9
kagaensis, 13
Kyrgyzstan, 10, 13
Lacerta
agilis, 237
Lacertibaenia, 353, 364-365
Lacertidae, 7, 12-13, 237-238, 241, 244, 360, 364, 376,
393-394, 396-397, 401
Lacertilia, 119, 125, 158, 161, 181
Lacertini, 364
Lacertoidea, 7, 11-13
Lachesis, 399
muta, 394
lacrimal, 138, 152-153
Lagerstatten, 32, 66, 71, 339
Lampropeltini, 212
Lampropeltis, 212, 427
getulus, 282
Lamprophiidae, 102, 226, 236, 373
Lamprophis
lineatus, 280
Langhian, 91, 97-98, 102
Lanthanotidae, 14-15, 167, 254, 366
Lanthanotus, 137, 142-143, 147, 162, 259, 367
borneensis, 158
Lapemis, 212
Lapparentophiidae, 37
Lapparentophis, 32, 37, 41
defrennei, 32, 37
ragei, 32
Laterata, 7, 374-375, 378, 397
Laticauda, 64, 280
colubrina, 300, 416, 422
laticaudata, 237
semifasciata, 332
Laticaudinae, 332, 420, 448
Laurasia, 10, 43, 57, 69
Lebanon, 15, 32, 161, 180, 183
Leiosauridae, 366
Lepidosauria, 9, 351, 395-396
Lepidosauromorpha, 10
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

464 INDEX
Leposternon, 365
Leptodeira
annulata, 336, 424
Leptotyphlopidae, 34, 44, 243, 275, 368, 375, 392, 394, 
397, 400-401, 414, 416, 420, 428, 441, 443
Leptotyphlops, 368, 418
fuliginosus, 415, 420
koppesi, 170
Liasis
olivaceus, 372
Libya, 32
Lichanura, 373
limbs, 31, 151, 167-168, 171, 186, 199-200, 441 
elongate, 10
loss or absence (limblessness), 1-3, 15, 41, 120, 162, 
171, 235, 271, 287, 306-307, 310, 321, 361, 437
reduction, 7, 10-11, 13, 28, 41, 120-121, 170-171, 
271, 310, 321, 375
short, 14
Liodytes
pygaea, 392, 397
Liolaemidae, 401
Liotyphlops
albirostris, 370, 376, 414, 416, 418
argaleus, 275
lizards, 7, 10-14, 16, 29, 64, 71, 94, 101, 119, 125, 144, 
158, 168, 181, 236, 242, 249-250, 254, 258-260, 
273, 275, 282, 285-287, 289, 296, 303-304, 
306-307, 309-311, 317, 321, 334, 336, 340-341, 
351-353, 357-359, 363, 375-379, 391, 393, 395, 
397, 399, 419, 423, 427, 441, 443-444
lizard-snake transition, 2, 352
locomotion, 7, 28-29, 41, 70, 167, 280, 284-286, 289, 
310
Loxocemidae, 44, 277, 371, 402
Loxocemus, 69, 275, 279, 372
bicolor, 277, 280, 296
Lunaophis, 40
aquaticus, 15, 32, 182
lungs, 352
ventilation, 28
Lycognathophis
seychellensis, 336
Lygosominae, 361
lymphatic system, 30, 41, 352
Lyriocephalus
scutatus, 366
Maastrichtian, 34, 38-39, 42-43, 157, 162
Mabuya, 355, 397
altamazonica, 358
Mabuyinae, 361
macrophagy, 120, 122, 202, 437-449
Macrostomata, 36, 38, 40, 199, 226, 368, 437-438, 
448-449
macrostomy, 199, 338, 437-449
Macrovipera, 96, 99, 101-102
gedulyi, 96, 100-101
kuchurganica, 101
lebetina, 101
sarmatica, 96, 99
schweizeri, 101
ukrainica, 96, 99
Madagascar, 34, 362, 365
Madtsoia, 34
Madtsoiidae, 31-32, 34, 37, 39-40, 43, 55-56, 71, 200, 
446
Maeotian, 98
Malpolon, 96
mlynarskii, 102
mammals, 44, 57, 67, 118-119, 215, 236, 238, 241-243, 
248, 250, 258, 286, 334, 351
mandible, 119, 143-149, 167, 171, 198-199, 202, 417, 
420, 423, 437-440, 443, 448-449
marine, 14-15, 26, 31-32, 42-44, 57, 66, 70-71, 
117-118, 120, 131, 151, 153, 157-158, 180-183, 
186, 202, 273, 282, 285-286, 289, 311, 339, 431
Marmoretta, 9-10
oxoniensis, 9
Masticophis, 212
maxilla, 16, 31, 39, 99, 131, 133, 137-139, 142, 152, 
163, 167, 171, 190-191, 194-196, 200, 258, 410, 
413-414, 418, 422-423, 444, 446, 449
Maximum Likelihood, 163, 238, 338, 402
Megachirella, 9
wachtleri, 9
Megophias
megophias, 118
Mehelya
poensis, 427
Melanophidium, 371, 446
Mesoleptos, 161
zendrinii, 161
Mesophis, 180, 182-202
nopcsai, 32, 186
Mesozoic, 9, 11, 17, 28, 38, 43-44, 180, 443, 445, 
448-449
Messel, 66, 69-71
Messelophis
variatus, 70
Messelopython
freyi, 69
Messinian, 100-101
metotic fissure, 10
Mexico, 11, 14, 116, 162
Meyasaurus, 12
Micrurus, 93, 96, 99-100, 102, 392, 394, 397
corallinus, 392, 416-417, 419, 421, 422, 424
frontalis, 392
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 465
gallicus, 92, 96, 97, 99 
lemniscatus, 419 
mosquitensis, 419 
pyrrhocryptus, 300
Middle East, 10, 32, 87, 120, 157
Middle Eocene Climatic Optimum, 85 
miniaturization, 273, 275, 307, 361
Miocene, 64, 85-103
Miocene Climatic Optimum, 94, 98, 102
Mionatrix
diatomus, 89, 95
missing data, 38, 173
Mitophis
leptepileptus, 416
molecular dating, 13, 16, 44, 69, 97, 99
molecular divergence estimation. See molecular 
dating
molecular genetics, 2-3, 316, 337
Mongolia, 11, 13, 57, 100
Monopeltis, 365
Monstersauria, 13
Montivipera, 99, 101
xanthina, 95
Morelia
spilota, 372
viridis, 372
Morocco, 9-10, 12, 14-15, 32, 34
morphology, 1-3, 26, 56, 126, 133, 145, 147, 151, 164, 
171, 181-182, 190, 192, 196, 199, 217, 271, 273, 
275, 287, 289, 294, 300, 329-330, 336, 352-353, 
360, 362-364, 368, 375, 379, 391, 400-401, 410, 
419, 425, 439, 444, 447-449
morphospace, 285-286
Mosasauria, 13, 15, 17, 118, 125-153, 157-173, 
181-182, 200, 202, 282, 285-286
Mosasauridae, 119, 126, 131, 133, 135, 138-139, 
141-142, 144-145, 149-152, 157-158, 161, 168, 
170, 181
Mosasaurinae, 126, 138, 141, 157
Mosasauroidea, 14, 26, 40, 42, 120, 158-159, 161, 169, 
171, 173, 181
Mosasaurus, 145
hoffmannii, 119, 139, 157
maximus, 119
mouth, 410-429, 437, 448
muscle, 167, 192, 214, 352, 391-393, 414, 416-417, 
420, 427, 431, 440-441, 443-444, 446 
adductor, 410, 413, 417, 425, 443
adductor externus, 258
interarticulares, 29, 41
levator costae, 29, 41
multifidus, 30, 41
propulsor, 352, 380
pterygoideus, 425
retractor penis, 352, 364, 374, 380 
transversospinalis, 30
musculoskeletal system, 28, 42, 70, 116, 441
mutation, 214, 251, 333
Myanmar, 11, 13-14, 16
Myriopholis, 368
Myron
richardsonii, 287
Naja, 89, 92-93, 92, 95, 96, 97, 100, 102, 212
annulifera, 323
haje, 97
iberica, 96, 102
naja, 237
nigricollis, 97
romani, 92, 96, 97, 99-100
Najash, 35, 38-41, 135, 137-139, 141, 143, 147, 152,
191, 193, 200, 202, 449
rionegrina, 16, 32, 172, 310
nares, 133, 137, 416
retraction, 14, 126, 131-135, 137, 153, 167
nasal, 133, 153, 190-191, 200, 422, 444, 446
nasal capsule, 137, 153, 422
Natricidae, 92, 94, 97-101, 212, 226, 235, 237, 
328-329, 331, 374, 376, 392-393, 399
Natricinae, 100
Natrix, 92, 93, 96, 99
astreptohora, 101
europaea, 97
longivertebrata, 96, 99, 101
merkurensis, 92, 94, 97
natricoides, 92, 96
natrix, 101
rudabanyaensis, 96, 99-101
sansaniensis, 92, 94, 96, 97, 99
natural history, 3
Neoanguimorpha, 162, 366
Neogene, 44, 85, 91, 448
Neonatrix, 92, 93, 96, 97, 99-100
crassa, 96, 99
elongata, 97
europaea, 92, 96, 97, 99
nova, 92, 97
neontology, 2
Neotethys, 57, 71
Nepal, 91
Nerodia, 212, 337
rhombifer, 440
nerve
facial, 171, 193
optic, 304, 317, 330, 441
trigeminal, 138, 192, 444
vestibulocochlear, 273
the Netherlands, 119
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

466 INDEX
neurocranium, 31
New Guinea, 11
New Zealand, 9
Niger, 34, 37
Nigerophiidae, 32, 34, 37, 40, 43, 55-56, 69-72, 85
Nigerophis, 57
mirus, 70
Ninia, 416
nocturnal, 279, 311, 316, 321, 324, 327-330, 334, 341
Norellius
nyctisaurops, 11
Norisophis, 39-41
begaa, 16, 32
Norway, 113-114, 118
nostrils. See nares
Notechis
scutatus, 237, 241, 337
Nothopsis, 416
Nubianophis
afaahus, 37
olfactory, 191, 235, 296, 298, 300, 304, 307, 310, 341, 
441
Oligocene, 11, 55, 57, 64, 69, 72, 85, 87-93, 97, 102
Olindalacerta
brasiliensis, 12
Opetiosaurus, 144-145, 149, 161, 168
bucchichi, 149, 161, 170
Opheodrys, 212, 244
aestivus, 262
Ophidia, 100, 117, 119, 125, 163, 181
Ophidiomorpha, 14, 171
Ophiodes, 367
striatus, 423, 426
Ophiophagus, 89
hannah, 237, 333
Ophisaurus
gracilis, 221
Oplurus, 366
opsin, 317, 328, 331-333, 336-337, 340
orbit, 164, 171, 192, 194, 196-197, 287, 339, 444
origin of snakes, See also snakes, origins
aquatic, 316, 321
biogeography, 43
burrowing or fossorial, 310, 316, 321, 327, 337, 
339, 341
Marine-Origin Hypothesis, 2, 14, 40, 126, 181 
nocturnal, 316, 321, 327, 337, 341
Ophidiomorph Hypothesis, 159, 162, 173
Pythonomorph(a) Hypothesis, 126, 147, 152, 159, 
164, 168, 173, 182
Stem-scleroglossan Hypothesis, 159
Varanoid Hypothesis, 159
orthology, 238, 261
ossification, 4, 151, 273, 296, 304, 339
osteoderm, 10-12, 131
osteological correlates, 28, 30, 41, 339
osteosclerosis. See pachyosteosclerosis
otic capsule, 202, 287, 297
otooccipital, 142, 193, 197, 200
Ottnangian, 93-94, 102
Oxfordian, 10-11, 13
Oxiella, 10
Pachyophiidae, 15, 55, 120, 152, 180-202, 443, 446, 449
Pachyophis, 34, 180, 182-202
woodwardi, 15, 27, 32, 181, 186, 189
pachyosteosclerosis, 40, 70
pachyostosis, 40, 168, 182, 186, 194, 449
Pachyrhachis, 40, 120, 152, 180-202
problematicus, 15, 27, 32, 180, 186, 187, 189, 243
paedomorphosis, 151
Paikasisaurus
indicus, 9
Pakistan, 87, 98, 100
palaeobiology, 1, 3, 339
palaeobotany, 87, 94
Palaeocene, 13, 34, 36, 43, 55, 66, 69
Palaeogene, 43-45, 55-76, 85, 91, 448
palaeogeography, 85, 102
Palaeolacerta, 11
Palaeonatrix, 92
lehmani, 92, 96
silesiaca, 96
palaeontology, 1-3, 55, 66, 69-70, 228, 339
Palaeophiidae, 34, 37, 40, 43, 55-56, 70-71, 85
Palaeophiinae, 71
Palaeophis, 56, 70-71, 181
africanus, 71
maghrebianus, 70
Palaeopython
cadurcensis, 71
palate, 131, 135
palatine, 16, 131, 137-139, 153, 164, 171, 183,
193-195, 200, 202, 444, 446, 449
Paleoanguimorpha, 162, 168, 366-367
Paleoheterodon
arcuatus, 96, 99
paleontology, 217
Palestine. See Palestinian Territories
Palestinian Territories, 15, 32, 186
palynology, 36
Pangea, 42
Pannonian, 102
Pantherophis, 212, 427
guttatus, 237, 262, 412
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 467
parabasisphenoid, 31, 101, 139, 192-194, 302, 441
Paradorsetisaurus
postumus, 13
paralogy, 238, 241-242, 244
Paramacellodidae, 10-12, 16
parasphenoid, 142, 191, 194
Paratethys, 87, 93-94, 102
Paraxenophis, 103
spanios, 97, 101
Pareas, 414, 416
carinatus, 414, 417
hamptoni, 279, 282
monticola, 417
stanleyi, 414
Pareidae, 235, 282, 291, 373, 377, 402, 414, 427, 431 
parietal, 11, 14, 16, 31, 139-143, 167-168, 191-193, 
196-197, 441, 443
paroccipital, 142, 193, 200
Paroedura
picta, 237, 241
parsimony, 152, 163, 169, 199, 214, 338, 379, 396-397, 
399, 449
Parviraptor, 10, 16-17
Parviraptoridae, 13, 16, 31, 39, 41-42, 181
pectoral girdle, 121, 440
pelvic girdle, 31, 120, 168, 171, 186, 199-200
Periergophis, 103
micros, 97, 101
Permian, 445
phenotype, 4, 15, 17, 45, 55, 316, 338, 340-341, 438
Philippines, 11
Philodryas, 329
olfersii, 329
patagoniensis, 329
Phosphorosaurus
ponpetelegans, 141
Phyllodactylidae, 361, 396
Phyllorhynchus, 368
phylogenetic data and/or trees, 14, 17
combined (morphological and molecular), 9, 12, 
14-15, 26, 40, 168, 182, 199, 273
molecular, 7, 11, 15-16, 26, 56, 93, 97, 125, 162, 
199, 210, 215, 226, 259-260, 273, 338, 364, 367, 
379, 395, 425, 437, 449
morphological, 9-10, 12, 28, 40, 125, 159, 162, 182, 
199, 227, 273, 321, 367, 395
phylogenetic signal, 159, 168, 210, 217, 224, 227, 285, 
296
phylogeny (phylogenetics), 1-4, 11, 16-17, 26, 31, 38, 
40-41, 55-56, 71-72, 76, 122, 125-126, 131, 
151-152, 157, 163-164, 168, 173, 180, 182, 189, 
209, 212, 214, 217, 224, 227, 238, 259-260, 263, 
284-286, 309, 321, 328-329, 338-340, 353, 374, 
379-380, 389, 395-397, 413, 425, 440, 446, 449
physiology, 1-2, 235, 244, 248, 255, 259-261, 263, 316, 
318, 329, 332, 336-337, 394, 401-402, 449
Pinoyscincus, 362
pit organs. See infrared
Pituophis, 212, 214, 427
melanoleucus, 332
Platecarpus, 282
tympaniticus, 139
Platyceps, 101
planicarinatus, 96, 101
Platynota, 159, 200
Platyplectrurus, 419
Platysaurus, 355, 362
Platyspondylia, 68, 72
Pleistocene, 101-102
Plesiodipsas
perijanensis, 416
Plesiosauria, 161
Pleurodonta, 365-366, 376, 378-379
plicidentine, 149-150, 152, 194
Pliocene, 99-102
Plioplatecarpinae, 126, 131, 133, 141, 143, 157
Plioplatecarpus, 286
Plotosaurus, 135
bennisoni, 172
Podarcis
muralis, 237, 394
Pogona
vitticeps, 221, 237-238, 241-242
Poland, 9, 99
Polychrotidae, 366
Polychrus
marmoratus, 366
Polyglyphanodontia, 9, 12
Pontosaurus, 144, 150, 161-162
kornhuberi, 132, 139, 152, 161, 172
lesinensis, 133, 152, 161
Portugal, 10-11, 13, 15-16, 32
Portugalophis
lignites, 16
Portunatasaurus
krambergeri, 162
postcranium, 14, 31, 41, 120, 150-152, 161, 164, 
200
postfrontal, 192, 196, 202
postorbital, 192, 196, 446
postorbitofrontal, 163, 192, 196
Pouitella, 39
pervetus, 16, 32
prearticular, 144, 149, 167
prefrontal, 133, 138, 152, 191, 194-195, 200, 446, 449
premaxilla, 131, 133, 137, 163, 171, 190, 194, 202, 422, 
444, 446
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

468 INDEX
preservation, 10-13, 26, 37, 69, 74, 126, 139, 142, 144, 
151-152, 163-164, 167-168, 173, 180, 186, 195, 
197-200, 338-339
Primaderma, 9
Primitivus
manduriensis, 152, 162, 167
Pristidactylus, 366
Procerophis, 69
process
basipterygoid, 139, 141-143, 192, 194-195, 200
suprastapedial, 143, 158, 171, 197
Prognathodon, 139
saturator, 141
prootic, 31, 141-142, 171, 192-193, 441
Prosymnidae, 373
protein, 121, 212, 215, 236, 238, 251, 254-256, 
258-261, 316-317, 328, 331-334, 336-337, 340, 
410, 414, 417-418
Protobothrops
flavoviridis, 256, 399, 402
mucrosquamatus, 237
Psammophiidae, 102-103, 331, 373, 376-377
Psammophis, 96, 102
Pseudaspididae, 373
Pseudaspis
cana, 373
pseudogene, 237, 241, 243, 255
Pseudonaja
textilis, 237
Pseudopus, 101
apodus, 259, 357, 423
Pseudoxenodontidae, 373
Pseudoxyrhophiidae, 373
Psilops, 363
Pterosphenus, 56, 70-71
pterygoid, 10, 138-139, 192-195, 200, 202, 444,
446-448
Ptyas
mucosa, 237, 272, 277, 279, 282
pulmonary ventilation. See lungs, ventilation
Purbicella, 9
ragei, 12
Pygomeles, 362
braconnieri, 355
Pygopodidae, 358-359, 361
Pygopus
nigriceps, 361
Python, 89, 92, 93-95, 96, 98, 100, 102, 331, 376
anchietae, 372
bivittatus, 237, 255, 333
brongersmai, 440, 447
curtus, 372
europaeus, 92, 95, 96
molurus, 277, 277, 298, 303-304, 306
natalensis, 439
regius, 262, 333
sebae, 372
Pythonidae, 44, 69, 93-95, 98, 102, 221, 237, 243, 277, 
294, 324, 328, 333, 371, 401-402, 446, 449
Pythonoidea, 36, 69, 98, 215, 254, 277, 303, 309, 311, 
338, 368, 371-372, 377-378
Pythonomorpha, 14, 119, 125-153, 158, 168, 171, 
181-182
quadrate, 10, 70, 139, 143-144, 158, 171, 192, 195, 
197, 200, 202, 279, 444
quadratojugal, 10
radiation, 26, 43-44, 76, 169, 180, 209-210, 227, 279, 
423, 449
adaptive, 44, 71, 410
radiometric dates, 32, 37, 64
Rage, Jean-Claude, 3, 69, 85, 92
Rageryx, 70
Ramphotyphlops, 369
recruitment, 250, 255, 259-260, 324
Rena
dulcis, 275, 414
segrega, 368
reproduction, 7, 338, 351, 380
reproductive biology, 2
reptile, 7, 9, 87, 94, 98, 118-120, 212, 217, 228, 248, 
261, 263, 294, 306, 311, 316, 321, 327, 337, 389, 
395, 410, 423
respiration, 29, 153
retina, 317, 322, 327-331, 333-334, 336-340
Rhabdophis, 251
Rhineuridae, 365
Rhinobothryum
lentiginosum, 282
Rhinocheilus, 212, 427
Rhinophis, 371
dorsimaculatus, 371
lineatus, 371
melanoleucus, 371
Rhinotyphlops, 369
lalandei, 370
Rhynchocephalia, 9, 351, 396
ribcage, 29, 186
ribs, 28-29, 41, 70, 150-152, 182, 186, 440-441, 
449
Riopa
guentheri, 361
RNA, 210, 250, 333
Romania, 99
Russellophiidae, 37-38, 56-57, 70-71, 85
Russellophis, 38, 57
tenuis, 70
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

I NDEX 469
Russellosaurus, 126, 141, 168
Russia, 9, 12, 102, 119
Sanajeh, 39
indicus, 27, 34, 39
Saniwa
ensidens, 151
Santonian, 13, 32, 36, 42
Sanziniidae, 69, 372
Sarmatian, 99
Saudi Arabia, 94
Sauria, 181
Saurillodon, 9, 10-11
henkeli, 11
proraformis, 11
Sauropterygia, 125
scapula, 158
scapulocoracoid, 171
Scincidae, 7, 11, 15, 170, 361, 378, 393, 396-397, 401
Scinciformata, 7
Scincinae, 361
Scincogekkonomorpha, 167
Scincoidea, 7, 11-12, 14, 16, 379
Scincomorpha, 7, 10-11, 162, 282, 353, 361-363, 
374-377, 397
Scleroglossa, 7, 12, 159, 162, 164, 226
Scolecophidia, 34, 36, 38, 40-41, 44, 55-56, 67, 71, 76, 
95, 100, 202, 225-227, 235, 242-243, 263, 273, 294, 
317, 322, 327-329, 331, 334, 338-340, 368, 
375-376, 378-380, 392, 394, 397, 400-402, 414, 
416, 418, 420, 422, 428, 445
Scoliophis
atlanticus, 116-117
Scotland, 10, 118
sea serpent, 113-122
secondary evolution, 31, 131, 151, 243, 369, 377, 427, 
431
secretion, 248, 254, 258-261, 263, 392, 394-395, 410, 
415-418, 420, 425, 431
Seismophis, 39-41
septentrionalis, 16, 32
selection, 209, 248, 254-257, 289, 316, 336-337, 339, 
389, 443
Selmasaurus, 145
semiaquatic, 157-158, 161, 277, 280, 286-287, 327 
semicircular canals, 193, 271, 275-289 
semifossorial, 277, 279, 282, 286-287, 289
sensory biology, 1-2, 26, 135, 271, 294, 310-311, 337 
septomaxilla, 135-138, 444
Serpentes, 7, 15-16, 30-31, 36, 40, 125, 167, 181, 
199-200, 225-227, 235-236, 243, 249, 259-260, 
273, 317, 352, 359, 365, 367-374, 378-379, 396-397 
Pan-Serpentes, 12-15
Serravallian, 95, 98
Sharovisaurus, 12
Shinisauridae, 13, 366
Shinisaurus, 138, 167-168, 367
Siberia, 10
Sibynomorphus, 416-417
mikanii, 412, 417
neuwiedi, 413, 417
Sibynophiidae, 374, 376
Simoliophiidae, 15, 32, 38, 40-41, 180, 311
Simoliophis, 15, 32, 34, 37, 181-202
libycus, 32, 183
rochebrunei, 32, 181-182, 189
Simoselaps, 285, 287
bertholdi, 279, 280
Sineoamphisbaena 
hexatabularis, 13, 170
Sinomicrurus
japonicus boettgeri, 332
Sistrurus, 212
Sitana
gokakensis, 366
Sivaophis
downsi, 89, 98, 100
Siwalik Group, 87, 94, 98, 100
size
body, 7, 37, 43-44, 67, 71, 94, 100, 119, 183, 277, 
309, 311, 339, 360, 368, 445, 448
skeleton, 15, 121, 438
appendicular, 28, 31
axial, 28, 30
skin, 29, 441, 446
skinks, 26
skull, 13-14, 31, 34, 56, 70, 72, 74, 163, 173, 180, 183, 
186, 190, 195, 199, 202, 273, 285-287, 296-297, 
304, 310-311, 444, See also cranium
Slavoia
darevskii, 13
Slovakia, 99
Slovenia, 15, 161
snakes
ancestral snake, 2, 289, 311, 316, 324, 332-334, 
339-340, 353, 374, 379, 395, 397, 401, 411, 427
crown, 3-4, 30-31, 34, 36, 38, 40, 43, 56, 193, 287, 
317, 441
early history, 2, 56, 180, 236, 311, 334, 379, 389 
extant, 2, 4, 28-29, 31, 34, 41, 76, 181, 199, 235, 271, 
287, 304, 306, 368, 377, 437-438, 440, 443, 446
extinct, 56, 289, 339
legged (limbed), 1, 120, 152, 159, 180
non-caenophidian, 4
origins, 2, 26, 38, 40, 42, 122, 159, 180, 225, 227, 
244, 296, 311, 316, 321, 339-341, 389, 399, 437, 
See also origin of snakes
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

470 INDEX
snakes (cont.)
sister group of, 15, 17, 26, 40-41, 159, 379 
stem, 3-4, 16-17, 30-32, 34, 37, 39, 41, 56, 135, 
137-138, 141, 143, 181, 193, 202, 243, 273, 296, 
334, 339
snout, 131-135, 200, 444, 446, 448-449 
soft tissue, 2, 4, 11, 41, 339, 359, 363, 377, 438, 440, 
444, 446, 448-449
Sonora 
semiannulata, 282
Sophineta, 9 
cracoviensis, 9
South Africa, 31
Spain, 11-15, 31-32, 95
Spalerosophis
diadema, 327
speciation, 75-76 
sperm, 351, 389-402 
storage, 2, 389-402
Sphaerodactylidae, 361
Sphenodon, 9, 396
punctatus, 396-397
Sphenomorphinae, 361, 375
Spilotes, 427
splenial, 31, 145, 147, 153, 167, 198
Squamata, 1-3, 7, 9, 125, 151-152, 159, 162, 169, 212, 
226, 236, 248, 259, 263, 285, 316, 321, 351-352, 
359-360, 374, 377-379, 389, 393-396, 399, 413, 423 
ancestral squamate, 11, 236, 321, 324, 334, 353, 
395, 397, 399 
crown, 10, 12, 16, 242 
extant, 7, 287, 360 
non-snake, 31, 39, 151, 235, 316, 322, 353 
origin, 9 
primitive, 7 
snake-like, 26, 125, 449 
stem, 14, 16
squamosal, 10, 143, 167-168, 441
stapes, 39, 41, 142, 193, 197, 271, 275, 277, 279-280, 
282, 287
Stenorrhina, 244
stratigraphy, 37, 43, 163
Sudan, 36, 43 
supraoccipital, 141, 192-193 
supratemporal, 141, 143, 163, 168, 183, 192-193, 197, 
200, 202 
surangular, 149, 167 
surface dwelling. See ground dwelling 
survival (survivorship), 3, 28, 43-45, 76, 91 
suspensorium, 143-144 
Sweden, 113 
swimming, 119, 151, 168, 273, 277, 282, 285, 287, 289 
symphysis, 16, 119, 140-144, 198, 443 
synapomorphies. See characters
Synchrotron, 182-183, 189, 191, 202
synteny, 237-238, 241, 243, 264
systematics, 1, 28, 30, 40, 55, 72, 125, 131, 159, 
163-164, 173, 210, 214-215, 225-226, 352, 410-411
Szyndlaria, 68
Tachymeninae, 427
tail, 120, 158, 168, 186, 280, 351, 380
Takydromus, 364
Tantilla, 243
gracilis, 301
Tanzania, 10, 69, 97
taphonomy, 152, 164, 182
Tarratosaurus
anoualensis, 12
tarsus, 14, 151
taxonomy, 34, 37, 55, 76, 85, 157, 181, 210, 214
teeth, 9, 11, 13-14, 31, 135, 138, 144, 149-150, 158,
167, 170, 182, 190, 194, 198, 235, 243, 258-259, 
410, 418, 422-423, 427, 438, 443, 446 
replacement, 150, 152, 170
Teiidae, 12, 14, 143, 199, 363-364, 378, 401
Teiioidea, 7, 12, 353, 363-364, 375
Teius
teyou, 356
Telescopus, 92, 96-97
bolkayi, 97, 100
fallax, 419
Telmasaurus
grangeri, 151
Tepexisaurus
tepexii, 12
Teretrurus
sanguineus, 298
terrestrial, 15-16, 41-44, 57, 66, 70, 167, 180, 242, 273, 
277, 279-280, 282, 285-286, 307, 321, 332, 339, 445
Testudines, 212
Tethys, 15-16, 161, 180, 182-183, 199
Tethysaurus, 126, 133, 135, 137, 139, 141, 145,
149-150, 168
nopcsai, 126, 133, 135, 135, 138, 140
Tetrapodophis, 31, 121, 144, 200
amplectus, 15, 31, 243
Texasophis, 87, 96, 97
bohemiacus, 89, 92, 98
meini, 92, 96, 97, 99
Thailand, 13, 91, 98
Thamnophis, 212, 242, 328, 331, 337, 393
elegans, 237-238, 242
marcianus, 301
proximus, 325, 332
sirtalis, 237, 329, 337, 393
Thaumastophis, 69
Thelotornis, 251
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

INDEX 471
tibia, 121, 151
Tijubina
pontei, 12
Tikiguana
estesi, 9
Titanoboa, 43
cerrejonensis, 36, 71
Tithonian, 10
Tomodon
dorsatus, 394
tongue, 235, 422, 437
tooth implantation. See dentition
Torrejonian, 43
tortoises, 98
Tortonian, 98, 101
Toxicocalamus, 425
Toxicofera, 7, 15-17, 125, 162, 199, 226, 243, 249, 
259-260, 263, 365-374, 377-379, 396-397, 423, 
427, 448
Toxicofera Hypothesis of origin of venom, 249, 
259-263
toxin, 250-251, 254-261, 418, 431, 448
Tracheloptychus, 362
Trachyboa, 67, 370
boulengeri, 369
Trachylepis
atlantica, 397
transcriptome, 254, 256, 259-260, 264, 334, 341, 418 
transmutation, 317, 327-328, 330-332, 336, 338, 
340-341
Trans-Saharan Seaway, 57
trend, 133, 135, 145, 235, 286, 296, 307, 353, 378
Triassic, 445
Early, 2, 9, 16
Lower, 9
Upper, 9
Trilepida, 416
bilineatum, 420
brasiliensis, 368
koppesi, 392
macrolepis, 368, 369
Trimeresurus, 89, 95
macrolepis, 336
stejnegeri, 279, 282
Trogonophis, 365
Tropidophiidae, 56, 67, 87, 91, 93, 95, 102, 227, 338, 
368, 370-371, 376, 402
Tropidophis, 67, 370, 376
haetianus, 298, 414
melanurus, 421, 422
paucisquamis, 369, 371
Tropidoscincus, 362
Tropiduridae, 366, 375
Tupinambis, 143
Turkey, 87, 94, 101
Turolian, 100
Turonian, 14, 34, 126, 133, 143, 158, 161
turtles, 71, 117, 212, 351
Tylosaurinae, 126, 157
Tylosaurus, 145
Typhlopidae, 181, 275, 368, 377, 392, 394, 401, 414, 
416, 418
Typhlopinae, 368, 370
Typhlopoidea, 34, 36, 40, 44, 243, 368, 375, 397, 400, 
443-444
Typhlops
jamaicensis, 277, 298
Typhlosaurus 
lineatus, 282
UK (United Kingdom), 12-13, 15-16
Ukraine, 99, 101
ulna, 167
Underwood, Garth L., 3, 214, 316, 321, 327-328, 330, 
410, 414, 416, 419-420
Ungaliophiidae, 277, 372
Ungaliophiinae, 68
Ungaliophis, 373
Unidentata, 162, 378, 396
Uromastyx
aegyptia, 356
Uropeltidae, 56, 67, 235, 275, 279, 285, 297, 300, 
303-304, 371, 377, 379, 419-420, 446
Uropeltis, 279, 285, 287, 371, 419
ceylanica, 275, 280, 419
grandis, 371
woodmasoni, 296
Uropeltoidea, 44, 215, 227, 254, 303, 322, 338, 340, 
368, 371, 375-376, 379, 402
Uroplatus 
lineatus, 361
USA (United States of America), 13, 16, 71
Uzbekistan, 13
Valanginian, 12, 31
Vallecillosaurus
donrobertoi, 162
Vallesian, 100
Varanidae, 14-15, 26, 101, 126, 131, 133, 138, 150, 
158, 161, 167-169, 196, 199, 243, 254, 285, 358, 
360, 366, 376, 401, 423
Varanoidea, 13, 120, 125, 131, 133, 137, 139, 142-143, 
151-152, 158, 161-162, 164, 167-168, 170-171, 
173, 356
Varanus, 137-139, 141-144, 141, 147, 149, 162, 200, 
259, 282, 367 
dumerilii, 137 
exanthematicus, 143, 151
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

472 INDEX
Varanus (cont.)
flavescens, 295
indicus, 272, 282, 367
komodoensis, 139, 143, 147, 221, 254
mitchelli, 376
niloticus, 137, 141, 370
prasinus, 357, 367
rudicollis, 137, 170
salvator, 167
variation
geographical, 360
individual, 30, 360
intracolumnar, 30, 55, 76
intraspecific, 55, 360
ontogenetic, 30, 55, 360
population, 56
seasonal, 360
Varzea
bistriata, 426
Venezuela, 15, 32
venom, 2, 214, 248-264, 447-448
delivery, 214, 248, 250, 257-259, 263, 410, 417, 427 
envenomation, 1, 235, 254, 261, 418, 420, 447, 449 
specificity, 250
venomics, 2
vertebrae, 2-3, 11-12, 14-16, 28-32, 34, 36-41, 55-56, 
70, 72, 74, 76, 91-93, 95, 97-98, 116-117, 121, 
151-152, 158, 164, 168, 171, 182-183, 186, 200, 
287, 440, 449
vestibule, 41, 271, 275-289, 441, 445
vicariance, 42, 64
Vipera, 89, 92, 96, 422
aegertica, 96
antiqua, 92, 92
aspis, 89, 92, 92, 95, 96, 98, 101
berus, 96, 101, 330, 392, 399
burgenlandica, 100
meotica, 96, 101
platyspondyla, 92
ursinii, 101
Viperidae, 92, 94-95, 98, 100, 102, 214, 221, 236-237, 
243, 250-251, 258, 260, 279, 282, 328, 331, 373, 
377, 392, 394-395, 399, 402, 413, 415, 423, 440, 449
Viperinae, 95, 99, 101, 328, 392, 395, 399, 402
visual pigment, 317, 320, 324, 328-334, 336-337, 340
visual system, 2, 26, 294, 311, 316-341
viviparity, 10
vomer, 135-138, 164, 167, 190, 195, 200, 202, 444, 
446
vomeronasal, 195, 202, 235, 294, 300, 307, 339, 446
Western Interior Seaway, 15, 168
whales, 125, 236, 243, 271
Wonambi, 287
barriei, 64
naracoortensis, 288
Woodworthia
maculata, 397
Xantusia
henshawi, 363
Xantusiidae, 7, 361, 363
Xenochrophis, 376
Xenodermidae, 98, 277, 279, 373, 402, 414, 427, 431
Xenodermus, 414
Xenodontinae, 214, 399
Xenopeltidae, 44, 277, 279, 285, 288, 360, 371, 402
Xenopeltis, 36, 69, 275, 279, 285, 287, 296, 303, 372,
419, 446
unicolor, 277, 287, 295, 298, 306, 331, 333, 372, 440
Xenophidion, 69, 225
Xenosauridae, 13, 162, 366
Xenosaurus, 167
Xenostius, 9
futilis, 13
Xenotyphlopidae, 226, 368
Xerotyphlops
vermicularis, 416
Xianglong
zhaoi, 14
Xiaophis, 41
myanmarensis, 16, 32
Xylophiinae, 373
Xylophis, 225
Yabeinosaurus, 11
Yaguarasaurus, 126, 133
columbianus, 133
Yurlunggur, 64, 287, 288
camfieldensis, 64
Zamenis, 96, 97, 99, 103
algorensis, 96
kohfidischi, 96, 97, 101
praelongissimus, 96, 101
szyndlari, 96, 101
Zonosaurus, 362
quadrilineatus, 362
Zootoca, 364
vivipara, 237, 241-242
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.026 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Systematics Association Special Volumes
1. 
The New Systematics (1940)a
Edited by J. S. Huxley (reprinted 1971)
2. Chemotaxonomy and Serotaxonomy (1968)
*
Edited by J. C. Hawkes
3. Data Processing in Biology and Geology (1971)
*
Edited by J. L. Cutbill
4. Scanning Electron Microscopy (1971)
*
Edited by V. H. Heywood
5. 
Taxonomy and Ecology (1973)
*
Edited by V. H. Heywood
6. 
The Changing Flora and Fauna of Britain (1974)
*
Edited by D. L. Hawksworth
7. 
Biological Identification with Computers (1975)
*
Edited by R. J. Pankhurst
8. 
Lichenology: Progress and Problems (1976)
*
Edited by D. H. Brown, D. L. Hawksworth and R. H. Bailey
9. 
KeyWorks to the Fauna and Flora of the British Isles and Northwestern Europe, fourth edition (1978)
*
Edited by G. J. Kerrich, D. L. Hawksworth and R. W. Sims
10. Modern Approaches to the Taxonomy of Red and Brown Algae (1978)
*
Edited by D. E. G. Irvine and J. H. Price
11. 
Biology and Systematics of Colonial Organisms (1979)
*
Edited by C. Larwood and B. R. Rosen
12. 
The Origin of Major Invertebrate Groups (1979)
*
Edited by M. R. House
13. 
Advances in Bryozoology (1979)
*
Edited by G. P. Larwood and M. B. Abbott
14. 
Bryophyte Systematics (1979)
*
Edited by G. C. S. Clarke and J. G. Duckett
15. 
The Terrestrial Environment and the Origin of Land Vertebrates (1980)
*
Edited by A. L. Panchen
16. 
Chemosystematics: Principles and Practice (1980)
*
Edited by F. A. Bisby, J. G. Vaughan and C. A. Wright
17. 
The Shore Environment: Methods and Ecosystems (two volumes) (1980)
*
Edited by J. H. Price, D. E. C. Irvine and W. F. Farnham
18. 
The Ammonoidea (1981)
*
Edited by M. R. House and J. R. Senior
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press

19. 
Biosystematics of Social Insects (1981)
*
Edited by P. E. House and J.-L. Clement
20. Genome Evolution (1982)
*
Edited by G. A. Dover and R. B. Flavell
21. Problems of Phylogenetic Reconstruction (1982)
*
Edited by K. A. Joysey and A. E. Friday
22. 
Concepts in Nematode Systematics (1983)
*
Edited by A. R. Stone, H. M. Platt and L. F. Khalil
23. 
Evolution, Time and Space: The Emergence of the Biosphere (1983)
*
Edited by R. W. Sims, J. H. Price and P. E. S. Whalley
24. Protein Polymorphism: Adaptive and Taxonomic Significance (1983)
*
Edited by G. S. Oxford and D. Rollinson
25. Current Concepts in Plant Taxonomy (1983)
*
Edited by V. H. Heywood and D. M. Moore
26. Databases in Systematics (1984)
*
Edited by R. Allkin and F. A. Bisby
27. 
Systematics of the Green Algae (1984)
*
Edited by D. E. G. Irvine and D. M. John
28. 
The Origins and Relationships of Lower Invertebrates (1985){
Edited by S. Conway Morris, J. D. George, R. Gibson and H. M. Platt
29. 
Infraspecific Classification of Wild and Cultivated Plants (1986){
Edited by B. T. Styles
30. Biomineralization in Lower Plants and Animals (1986){
Edited by B. S. C. Leadbeater and R. Riding
31. 
Systematic and Taxonomic Approaches in Palaeobotany (1986){
Edited by R. A. Spicer and B. A. Thomas
32. 
Coevolution and Systematics (1986){
Edited by A. R. Stone and D. L. Hawksworth
33. 
Key Works to the Fauna and Flora of the British Isles and Northwestern Europe, fifth edition 
(1988){
Edited by R. W. Sims, P. Freeman and D. L. Hawksworth
34. 
Extinction and Survival in the Fossil Record (1988){
Edited by G. P. Larwood
35. 
The Phylogeny and Classification of the Tetrapods (two volumes) (1988){
Edited by M. J. Benton
36. Prospects in Systematics (1988){
Edited by J. L. Hawksworth
37. 
Biosystematics of Haematophagous Insects (1988){
Edited by M. W. Service
38. 
The Chromophyte Algae: Problems and Perspective (1989){
Edited by J. C. Green, B. S.C. Leadbeater and W. L. Diver
39. Electrophoretic Studies on Agricultural Pests (1989){
Edited by H. D. Loxdale and J. den Hollander
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press

40. 
Evolution, Systematics and Fossil History of the Hamamelidae (two volumes) (1989){ 
Edited by P. R. Crane and S. Blackmore
41. 
Scanning Electron Microscopy in Taxonomy and Functional Morphology (1990){ 
Edited by D. Claugher
42. 
Major Evolutionary Radiations (1990){
Edited by P. D. Taylor and G. P. Larwood
43. 
Tropical Lichens: Their Systematics, Conservation and Ecology (1991){
Edited by G. J. Galloway
44. 
Pollen and Spores: Patterns and Diversification (1991){
Edited by S. Blackmore and S. H. Barnes
45. 
The Biology of Free-Living Heterotrophic Flagellates (1991){
Edited by D. J. Patterson and J. Larsen
46. Plant-Animal Interactions in the Marine Benthos (1992){
Edited by D. M. John, S. J. Hawkins and J. H. Price
47. 
The Ammonoidea: Environment, Ecology and Evolutionary Change (1993){
Edited by M. R. House
48. 
Designs for a Global Plant Species Information System (1993){
Edited by F. A. Bisby, G. F. Russell and R. J. Pankhurst
49. Plant Galls: Organisms, Interactions, Populations (1994){
Edited by M. A. J. Williams
50. 
Systematics and Conservation Evaluation (1994){
Edited by P. L. Forey, C. J. Humphries and R. I. Vane-Wright
51. 
The Haptophyte Algae (1994){
Edited by J. C. Green and B. S. C. Leadbeater
52. 
Models in Phylogeny Reconstruction (1994){
Edited by R. Scotland, D. I. Siebert and D. M. Williams
53. 
The Ecology of Agricultural Pests: Biochemical Approaches (1996)**
Edited by W. O. C. Symondson and J. E. Liddell
54. 
Species: The Units of Diversity (1997)
**
Edited by M. F. Claridge, H. A. Dawah and M. R. Wilson
55. Arthropod Relationships (1998)
**
Edited by R. A. Fortey and R. H. Thomas
56. 
Evolutionary Relationships among Protozoa (1998)
**
Edited by G. H. Coombs, K. Vickerman, M. A. Sleigh and A. Warren
57. 
Molecular Systematics and Plant Evolution (1999){{
Edited by P. M. Hollingsworth, R. M. Bateman and R. J. Gornall
58. 
Homology and Systematics (2000){{
Edited by R. Scotland and R. T. Pennington
59. 
The Flagellates: Unity, Diversity and Evolution (2000){{
Edited by B. S. C. Leadbeater and J. C. Green
60. Interrelationships of the Platyhelminthes (2001){{
Edited by D. T. J. Littlewood and R. A. Bray
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press

61. 
Major Events in Early Vertebrate Evolution (2001){{
Edited by P. E. Ahlberg
62. 
The Changing Wildlife of Great Britain and Ireland (2001){{
Edited by D. L. Hawksworth
63. Brachiopods Past and Present (2001){{
Edited by H. Brunton, L. R. M. Cocks and S. L. Long
64. 
Morphology, Shape and Phylogeny (2002){{
Edited by N. MacLeod and P. L. Forey
65. Developmental Genetics and Plant Evolution (2002){{
Edited by Q. C. B. Cronk, R. M. Bateman and J. A. Hawkins
66. 
Telling the Evolutionary Time: Molecular Clocks and the Fossil Record (2003){{
Edited by P. C. J. Donoghue and M. P. Smith
67. 
Milestones in Systematics (2004){{
Edited by D. M. Williams and P. L. Forey
68. 
Organelles, Genomes and Eukaryote Phylogeny (2004){{
Edited by R. P. Hirt and D. S. Horner
69. Neotropical Savannas and Seasonally Dry Forests: Plant Diversity, Biogeography and 
Conservation (2006) {{
Edited by R. T. Pennington, G. P. Lewis and J. A. Rattan
70. 
Biogeography in a Changing World (2006){{
Edited by M. C. Ebach and R. S. Tangney
71. Pleurocarpous Mosses: Systematics and Evolution (2006){{
Edited by A. E. Newton and R. S. Tangney
72. Reconstructing the Tree of Life: Taxonomy and Systematics of Species Rich Taxa (2006){{
Edited by T. R. Hodkinson and J. A. N. Parnell
73. 
Biodiversity Databases: Techniques, Politics, and Applications (2007){{
Edited by G. B. Curry and C. J. Humphries
74. Automated Taxon Identification in Systematics: Theory, Approaches and Applications (2007){{
Edited by N. MacLeod
75. 
Unravelling the Algae: The Past, Present, and Future of Algal Systematics (2008){{
Edited by J. Brodie and J. Lewis
76. 
The New Taxonomy (2008){{
Edited by Q. D. Wheeler
77. Palaeogeography and Palaeobiogeography: Biodiversity in Space and Time (2011){{
Edited by P. Upchurch, A. McGowan and C. Slater
aPublished by Clarendon Press for the Systematics Association
*Published by Academic Press for the Systematics Association
{Published by Oxford University Press for the Systematics Association
**Published by Chapman & Hall for the Systematics Association
{{Published by CRC Press for the Systematics Association
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781108938891.027 Published online by Cambridge University Press

