
CBMS-NSF REGIONAL CONFERENCE SERIES
IN APPLIED MATHEMATICS
A series of lectures on topics of current research interest in applied mathematics under the direction of
the Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences, supported by the National Science Foundation and
published by SIAM.
GARRETT BIRKHOFF, The Numerical Solution of Elliptic Equations
D. V. LINDLEY, Bayesian Statistics, A Review
R. S. VARGA, Functional Analysis and Approximation Theory in Numerical Analysis
R. R. BAHADUR, Some Limit Theorems in Statistics
PATRICK BILLINGSLEY, Weak Convergence of Measures: Applications in Probability
J. L. LIONS, Some Aspects of the Optimal Control of Distributed Parameter Systems
ROGER PENROSE, Techniques of Differential Topology in Relativity
HERMAN CHERNOFF, Sequential Analysis and Optimal Design
J. DURBIN, Distribution Theory for Tests Based on the Sample Distribution Function
SOL I. RUBINOW, Mathematical Problems in the Biological Sciences
P. D. LAX, Hyperbolic Systems of Conservation Laws and the Mathematical Theory of Shock Waves
I. J. SCHOENBERG, Cardinal Spline Interpolation
IVAN SINGER, The Theory of Best Approximation and Functional Analysis
WERNER C. RHEINBOLDT, Methods of Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations
HANS F. WEINBERGER, Variational Methods for Eigenvalue Approximation
R. TYRRELL ROCKAFELLAR, Conjugate Duality and Optimization
SIR JAMES LIGHTHILL, Mathematical Biofluiddynamics
GERARD SALTON, Theory of Indexing
CATHLEEN S. MORAWETZ, Notes on Time Decay and Scattering for Some Hyperbolic Problems
F. HOPPENSTEADT, Mathematical Theories of Populations: Demographics, Genetics and Epidemics
RICHARD ASKEY, Orthogonal Polynomials and Special Functions
L. E. PAYNE, Improperly Posed Problems in Partial Differential Equations
S. ROSEN, Lectures on the Measurement and Evaluation of the Performance of Computing Systems
HERBERT B. KELLER, Numerical Solution of Two Point Boundary Value Problems
J. P. LASALLE, The Stability of Dynamical Systems - Z. ARTSTEIN, Appendix A: Limiting Equations
and Stability of Nonautonomous Ordinary Differential Equations
D. GOTTLIEB AND S. A. ORSZAG, Numerical Analysis of Spectral Methods: Theory and Applications
PETER J. HUBER, Robust Statistical Procedures
HERBERT SOLOMON, Geometric Probability
FRED S. ROBERTS, Graph Theory and Its Applications to Problems of Society
JURIS HARTMANIS, Feasible Computations and Provable Complexity Properties
ZOHAR MANNA, Lectures on the Logic of Computer Programming
ELLIS L. JOHNSON, Integer Programming: Facets, Subadditivity, and Duality for Group and Semi-
Group Problems
SHMUEL WINOGRAD, Arithmetic Complexity of Computations
J. F. C. KINGMAN, Mathematics of Genetic Diversity
MORTON E. GURTIN, Topics in Finite Elasticity
THOMAS G. KURTZ, Approximation of Population Processes
(continued on inside back cover)

Graph Theory
and Its Applications
to Problems of Society

This page intentionally left blank 

Fred S. Roberts
Rutgers University
Graph Theory
and Its Applications
to Problems of Society
SOCIETY FOR INDUSTRIAL AND APPLIED MATHEMATICS
PHILADELPHIA

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored, or transmitted
in any manner without the written permission of the publisher. For information,
write to the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 3600 University City
Science Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104-2688.
ISBN 0-89871-026-X
Printed by Odyssey Press, Dover, New Hampshire
Copyright © 1978 by the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Roberts, Fred S
Graph theory and its application to problems of society.
(Regional conference series in applied mathematics; 29)
"Based on a series of ten lectures delivered at a regional conference...held
at Colby College on June 20-24, 1977."
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Social sciences—Mathematical models—Congresses. 2. Graph theory—
Congresses. 3. Social problems—Mathematical models—Congresses. I. Title.
II. Series.
H61.R59 
300'.1'51 
78-6277
is a registered trademark.

Contents
Preface 
vii
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION
1.1. The scope of the work 
1
1.2. Digraphs and graphs 
3
1.3. Reaching and joining 
4
1.4. Connectedness 
5
Chapter 2
THE ONE-WAY STREET PROBLEM
2.1. Robbins' theorem 
7
2.2. Some streets two-way 
8
2.3. Algorithms for one-way street assignments 
9
2.4. Efficiency 
11
2.5. Inefficiency 
13
Chapter 3
INTERSECTION GRAPHS
3.1. Transitive orientations 
15
3.2. Intersection graphs 
16
3.3. Interval graphs and their applications 
17
3.4. Characterization of interval graphs 
18
3.5. Circular arc graphs 
22
3.6. Phasing traffic lights 
22
3.7. The mobile radio frequency assignment problem 
25
Chapter-4
INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION
4.1. Indifference graphs 
27
4.2. Seriation 
31
4.3. Trees 
34
4.4. Uniqueness 
36
Chapter 5
FOOD WEBS, NICHE OVERLAP GRAPHS, AND THE
BOXICITY OF ECOLOGICAL PHASE SPACE
5.1. Boxicity 
39
5.2. The boxicity of ecological phase space 
41
5.3. The properties of niche overlap graphs 
43
5.4. Community food webs, sink food webs, and source food webs 
. . 
46
Chapter 6
COLORABILITY
6.1. Applications of graph coloring 
49
6.2. Calculating the chromatic number 
50
V

vi 
CONTENTS
6.3. Clique number 
51
6.4. 7-perfect graphs 
52
6.5. Multicolorings 
53
6.6. Multichromatic number 
56
Chapter 7
INDEPENDENCE AND DOMINATION
7.1. The normal product 
57
7.2. The capacity of a noisy channel 
57
7.3. Dominating sets 
62
7.4. Stable sets 
63
Chapter 8
APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS
8.1. Existence theorems 
65
8.2. The transportation problem 
66
8.3. Street sweeping 
67
8.4. RNA chains 
70
8.5. More on eulerian closed paths, DNA, and coding 
73
8.6. Telecommunications 
75
Chapter 9
BALANCE THEORY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES
9.1. The theory of balance 
79
9.2. Balance in signed digraphs 
81
9.3. Degree of balance 
82
9.4. Distributive justice 
83
9.5. Status organizing processes and social inequalities 
86
9.6. Strengths of likes and dislikes 
86
Chapter 10
PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
10.1. Structural modeling 
89
10.2. Energy and food 
90
10.3. Pulse processes 
93
10.4. Structure and stability 
95
10.5. Integer weights 
98
10.6. Stability and signs 
99
Chapter 11
QUALITATIVE MATRICES
11.1. Sign solvability 
101
11.2. Sign stability 
103
11.3. GM matrices 
105
References 
109
Index 
116

This monograph is based on a series of ten lectures delivered at a regional
conference on Graph Theory and its Applications to Problems of Society held at
Colby College on June 20-24, 1977. The conference was sponsored by the
Conference Board of the Mathematical Sciences and the National Science
Foundation.
I wish to thank everyone at Colby College for their hospitality, and especially
Professor Lucille Zukowski who planned and organized the conference and
persevered until her goals became a reality. My special thanks go to Lynn Braun,
who nobly typed the notes for the conference on short notice, and to Robert
Opsut, who proofread them. I also wish to thank the National Science Foun-
dation for support of the research on which parts of these lectures were based.
Finally. I wish to thank my wife Helen, not only for her insightful professional
assistance, but for her unselfish personal encouragement, and my new-born
daughter Sarah, who is probably the only one who learned more during the time
these lectures were prepared than 1 did.
FRED S. ROBERTS
vii
Preface

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 1
Introduction
1.1. The scope of the work. Sometimes it seems that our society faces over-
whelmingly difficult problems, problems involving energy, transportation,
pollution, perturbed ecosystems, urban services, the economy, genetic changes,
social inequalities, and so on. Increasingly, mathematics is being used, at least in
small ways, to tackle these problems. In these lectures we shall examine the role
of one branch of mathematics, graph theory, in applications to such problems of
society.
We have chosen to present mathematical topics from the field of graph theory
because graphs have wide-ranging applicability and because it is possible in
graph theory to bring a previously unfamiliar scientist to the frontiers of research
rather quickly. The choice of topics from within graph theory and even more so
the order of presentation of these topics is not typical of the graph theory
literature. Rather, the topics were chosen to best illustrate the applications, and
to lead into them as quickly as possible. Some of the more traditional topics of
graph theory, such as colorability, independence, and eulerian chains, are not
covered until fairly late. Then, they are presented with an emphasis on results of
applied interest.
We have tried to be self-contained in preparing these notes. However, they
are written on a research level, with the goal being to present results at the
frontiers of current graph-theoretical work. The reader will find some of these
same topics discussed at a more leisurely pace in Roberts (1976a). These lectures
are in some sense a continuation of the topics presented in Chapters 3 and 4 of
that book. They go beyond the results stated there, present more recent work,
and introduce a variety of additional applied and graph-theoretical topics.
The problems of society with which we are concerned are extremely complex
and wide-ranging. At the outset, let us put into perspective the role of graph
theory in particular and mathematics in general vis-a-vis these problems. We will
not claim that graph theory alone can solve these problems. Nor will we argue
that they cannot be solved without graph theory. Rather, we hope to demon-
strate that the use of precise, graph-theoretical reasoning can cast light on such
problems, provide tools to help in making decisions about them, and help in
finding answers to a variety of specific questions which arise in the attempt to
tackle the broader issues.
Graph theory is a tool for formulating problems, making them precise, and
defining fundamental interrelationships. Sometimes, as we shall see, simply
formulating a problem precisely helps us to understand it better. The very act of
formulation is an aid to understanding. In this way, graph theory plays the role of
l

2 
CHAPTER 1
a learning device, which we can use as an aid in pinpointing future directions and
approaches. We shall see this role for graph theory, for example, in our dis-
cussion of energy modeling. Once a problem has been formulated in graph-
theoretical language, the concepts of graph theory can be used to define concepts
which are useful in analyzing the problem. Also, as we shall see for example in
our discussion of balance theory and social inequalities, graph theory can lead to
new theoretical concepts which can be used to build theories about social
problems. Often, formulation of the problem precisely is enough to give us
insight on why the problem is hard. For example, formulation of a problem
posed by the New York City Department of Sanitation as a graph coloring
problem suggests why the problem is difficult: coloring of graphs is a hard
problem in a precise sense.
Of course, graph theory has uses beyond simple problem formulation. Some-
times a part of a large problem corresponds exactly to a graph-theoretic prob-
lem, and that problem can be completely solved. We shall see this with a
certain telecommunications problem, for example. We shall also see it with
problems of sedation and measurement. Here, solution to the graph-theoretic
problem posed provides tools for organization of data in archaeology, psy-
chology, and in decision and policy problems. Sometimes, once a problem is
formulated in graph-theoretical language, we will discover that the problem is
hard to solve. We will discover this, for example, when we discuss how to orient
streets so as to move traffic efficiently, and when we discuss the dimensionality o
ecological phase space using graph theory. In both cases, even when enough
simplifying assumptions are made to state a problem graph-theoretically, that
problem has not been solved and is at the frontiers of current mathematical
research. Thus, surprisingly, sometimes it is the lack of mathematical knowledg
which is a limiting factor.
Usually if a problem is formulated graph-theoretically, it is done so as the
result of simplifications, for example, the omission of important aspects such as
changing relationships over time or strengths of effects. Sometimes these
simplifications are not significant. We shall see this, for example, with problems
of traffic light phasing, street sweeping, committee scheduling, and the assign-
ment of mobile radio frequencies. In all of these cases, the solutions to the
corresponding graph-theoretical problem are rather quickly amenable to prac-
tical application. In other cases, because of the significance of the simplifying
assumptions, the conclusions from solution of a graph-theoretic problem can
only be taken as tentative and suggestive. However, these solutions can suggest
useful strategies to consider and future directions in which to investigate.
Moreover, graph-theoretical analysis can help to pinpoint the simplifying
assumptions and suggest promising directions which can remove these.
If all of this seems to suggest that graph theory is a panacea and by itself can
solve a large number of problems, let us quickly disclaim that suggestion. Graph
theory is just one tool, which sometimes solves problems and sometimes gives us
insights. It usually has to be used along with many other tools, mathematical and
otherwise. Hopefully, the use of graph theory can help us to understand in small

INTRODUCTION 
3
ways the large problems which face our society, and some of their possible
solutions.
Finally, let us remember that applied mathematics develops in close contact
with applications. Many of the results stated in the following as purely mathe-
matical results were motivated by specific applied questions. Problems of society
have been a stimulus to the development of new mathematics, and should
continue to be one in the future.
1.2. Digraphs and graphs. We shall adopt the terminology and notation of
Roberts (1976a). In particular, a directed graph or digraph will consist of a finite
set V of vertices and a set A of ordered pairs of vertices called arcs. We shall
represent a digraph (V, A) by drawing the vertices as points and drawing an
arrow from x to y if and only if the ordered pair (x, y) is an arc. We shall usually
not allow loops, arcs of the form (x, x). However, there are several places where
loops will be a convenience, and we shall explicitly allow them there. If a digraph
is symmetric in the sense that (x, y) e A if and only if (y, jc) e A, then we shall
usually replace the two arrows between x and y with an undirected line. We may
think of a symmetric digraph as a set V of vertices together with a set E of
unordered pairs of vertices, the elements of E being called edges. The pair
(V, E) will be called a graph.
Let us give some examples.
Example 1. Suppose we let the vertices be locations in a city and draw an arc
from x to y if there is a street leading from x to y. Then we obtain a digraph,
which may or may not be symmetric. We shall be interested in various rear-
rangements of directions on streets which might allow traffic to move more
efficiently and hence cut down on air pollution.
Example 2. In Example 1, let certain of the arcs be designated as streets to be
cleaned during a given time period. We shall be interested in finding a route for a
street cleaner which cleans all of the designated streets in the shortest amount of
time.
Example 3. Let the vertices be species in an ecosystem. Draw an arc from x to
y if species jc preys on species y. The resulting food webs are digraphs. Similarly,
we can obtain a graph from the species by joining two species with an edge if and
only if they compete for a common prey. We shall be interested in what we can
learn about the relation between the food web and the competition graph; the
results will tell us something about the number of factors required to understand
competition or niche overlap in ecosystems.
Example 4. Let the vertices of a digraph be locations in a nuclear power plant.
Draw an arc from location x to location y if it is possible for a watchman at x to
see a warning light at y. We shall be interested in finding a minimal number of
watchmen who can oversee all the locations.
Example 5. Let various traffic streams or directions of traffic be vertices of a
graph and draw an edge from x to y if the two traffic streams x and y are
compatible. We shall use this compatibility graph to phase traffic lights.

CHAPTER 1
Example 6. Let the vertices be factors relevant to energy demand, and draw
an arc from x to y if a change in x has a significant effect on y. By considering the
direction of the effect (increasing or decreasing), we shall try to make qualitative
forecasts of future levels of variables such as energy demand.
Example- 7. Let the vertices of a graph be alternatives among which an
individual is expressing his preferences, and draw an edge between two vertices
if and only if the individual is indifferent between the two alternatives. We shall
use this indifference graph to measure the individual's opinions.
Example 8. Let the vertices of a graph be possible codewords for a rapid
communication system, and draw an edge between two codewords if it is possi-
ble to confuse them. This confusion graph will be used to find codes with large
capacity.
Example 9. Let the vertices of a digraph be certain "extended bases" from an
RNA chain. Draw an arc from extended base x to extended base y if in a
complete digest of the chain, there is a fragment of the chain beginning in x and
ending in y. The resulting digraph will be used in recovering information about
the structure of the chain.
1.3. Reaching and joining. Let D = (V, A) be a digraph. We shall be con-
cerned with ways to reach one vertex from another. We shall adopt the
following terminology about reachability. A path in D is a sequence
MI, fli, M2, a 2 , - - - , U t , «„ H,+I, where each M, is a vertex, each a, is an arc, and a,
is the arc («,-, u,+1). The path has length t. For example, in the digraph Dl of Fig.
1.1, a, (a, b), b, (b, c), c, (c, e), e, (e, b), b is a path of length 4, which is
unambiguously abbreviated as a, b, c, e, b. A path is simple if it has no repeated
vertices. It is closed if u,+ i = MI. It is a cycle if it is closed and u\, M2, • • • , u, are
FIG. 1.1. Two digraphs.
4

INTRODUCTION
distinct. In digraph DI of Fig. 1.1, a, 6, c, e, b is not a simple path, while e, a, b, c,
is; c, 6, c, e, 6, c is a closed path which is not a cycle; and b, c, d, e, b is a cycle (of
length 4).
There are analogous notions for a graph G = (V, E). A chain in G is a
sequence ut, e\, u2, e 2,"" ' •>
 ut> e* ut+\, where each ut is a vertex, each e, is an
edge, and e^ is the edge {M,, «,+i}. The length of the chain is t. A chain is simple if
it has no repeated vertices. It is closed if u(+i = MI. Finally, it is a circuit if it is
closed, if MI, M2, • • • , M, are distinct, and if €1, e2, • • -, et are distinct.1 In the
graph G] of Fig. 1.2, a, {a, 6}, 6, {6, e}, e, {e, c}, c, {c, b}, b, {b, e}, e is a chain of
length 5, which can be unambiguously written as a, b, e, c, b, e. This chain is not
simple. An example of a closed chain which is not a circuit is b, c, e, d, c, e, b and
an example of a circuit is b, c, d, e, b. Notice that a, 6, a is not a circuit, even
though MI, M2, • • • , M, are distinct.
FIG. 1.2. Two graphs.
1.4. Connectedness. We shall say a digraph is strongly connected if for every
pair of vertices x and y, there is a path from x to y and a path from y to x. We say
a graph is connected if between every pair of vertices there is a chain. In Fig. 1.1,
digraph D\ is strongly connected, while digraph D2 is not, since, for example,
there is no path from d to c. In Fig. 1.2, graph GI is connected and graph G2 is
not, since, for example, there is no chain from a to d.
The relation defined by xSy if x is reachable from y by a path and y is
reachable from x by a path is an equivalence relation. Hence, the vertices of a
digraph are split under this relation into equivalence classes, called strong
components. Similarly, in a graph, the equivalence classes under the relation "are
joined by a chain" form what are called components or connected components.
In digraph D2 of Fig. 1.1, {a, b, c}, {d, /}, {e}, and {g, h, i,/} form the strong
components. In graph G2 of Fig. 1.2, {a, b, c}, {d, e}, and {/, g, /i, i} form the
components.
1 In a digraph, distinctness of the arcs al5 a2, • • • , a, in a cycle follows from distinctness of the
vertices u\, u2, • • • , ut.
5

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 2
The One-Way Street Problem
2.1. Robbins' theorem. The first problem we consider has to do with move-
ment of traffic. If traffic were to move more rapidly and with fewer delays in our
cities, this would alleviate wasted energy and air pollution (from idling or stop
and go driving). It has sometimes been argued that making certain streets
one-way would move traffic more efficiently. In this section, we consider the
problem of whether or not it is possible to make certain designated streets
one-way and, if so, how to do it.
Of course, it is always possible to make certain streets in a city one-way.
Simply put up a one-way street sign! What is desired is to do so in such a way
that it is still possible to get from any place to any other place. Let us begin with
the simplified problem where every street is currently two-way and it is desired
to make every street one-way in the future. We can formulate this problem
graph-theoretically by taking the street corners as the vertices of a graph, and
drawing an edge between two street corners if and only if these corners are
currently joined by a two-way street. We wish to place a direction on each edge
of this graph—we speak of orienting each edge—so that in the resulting digraph,
it is possible to go from any place to any other place, i.e., so that the resulting
digraph is strongly connected.
Does every graph G have a strongly connected orientation? Of course, G
must be connected to start with—there must be a chain from any vertex to any
other. But is that the only condition required? The answer is no. The graphs of
Fig. 2.1 are all connected, but none have a strongly connected orientation. For,
FIG. 2.1. Connected graphs with no strongly connected orientation.
1

8
CHAPTER 2
in each case, there is a problem with an orientation of the edge labeled a. If this
edge is oriented from a to b, then there is no path from b to a; and if the edge is
oriented from b to a, then there is no path from a to b.
We say an edge a in a connected graph G is a bridge if removal of a, but not
its end vertices, results in a disconnected graph. All of the edges a in the graphs
of Fig. 2.1 are bridges. It is easy to see that if a connected graph has a strongly
connected orientation, then it cannot have any bridges. The converse of this
result is true as well, and this will be proved in the next section.
THEOREM 2.1 (Robbins (1939)). A graph G has a strongly connected orien-
tation if and only if G is connected and has no bridges.
2.2. Some streets two-toay. Let us now consider the case where some streets
are to be made one-way, while others remain two-way. Let D be a digraph with
vertex set a set of street corners and an arc from x to y if there is a street joining
x and y and it is permissible to drive from x to y. It will be convenient to replace
the two arcs on a two-way street with one undirected edge. The resulting object,
consisting of a set of vertices, some joined by one-way arcs and some joined by
undirected edges, will be called a mixed graph G. The digraph D will be called
the digraph underlying G, and will be denoted D(G). We say a mixed graph is
strongly connected if D(G] is strongly connected. We say a mixed graph G is
connected if, when we disregard direction on arcs, we obtain a connected graph.
An undirected edge a in a mixed graph is a bridge if removal of a but not its end
vertices results in a mixed graph which is not connected. For example, in Fig.
2.2, mixed graphs GI, G2 and G3 are all connected, but G2 is not strongly
connected. Edge a in G3 is a bridge.
THEOREM 2.2 (Boesch and Tindell (1977)). Suppose G is a strongly con-
nected mixed graph. Then for every edge {u, v} of G which is not a bridge, there
is an orientation of {u, v} so that the resulting mixed graph is still strongly
connected.
The proof depends on a lemma.
LEMMA. Suppose G is a strongly connected mixed graph and {u, v} is an edge
of G. Let D' be the digraph obtained from D(G) by omitting arcs (u, v) and (v, u)
but not vertices u and v. Let A be the set of all vertices reachable from u by a path in
D', less the vertex u. Let B be defined similarly from v. Suppose u is not in B and v is
not in A. Then the edge {u, v} must be a bridge of G.
FIG. 2.2. Mixed graphs Glf G2 and G3 are connected, but G2 is not strongly connected. Edge a in
G3 is a bridge.

THE ONE-WAY STREET PROBLEM 
9
Proof. Let us observe first of all that every vertex of G is in A or in B. For if w
is not in A or in B, then in D(G) there could be no paths from u to w or v to w,
and hence G is not strongly connected. Next, A and B must be disjoint. For,
suppose we are given w in A fl B. By definition of A and B, w ^ «, t>. By strong
connectedness, there is in D(G) a path from w to u and a path from w to a It
follows that there is a path from w to M in D' or there is a path from w to u in D
In the former case, there is a path from v to w to u in D'; hence M is in B. In th
latter case, v is in A. Finally, we observe that in G less the edge (M, v}, there
could be no arc or edge joining vertices of A and of B. For, if there were such an
arc or edge, there would be an arc in D' of the form («', v') or (v', u'), for u' in A
and v' in B. In the former case, v' would have to be in A, contradicting the fact
that A and B are disjoint. In the latter case, we get a similar contradiction. Now,
we have shown that A and B partition the vertices of G and in G less the edge
{u, v} there is no arc or edge joining vertices of these two sets. Hence, G less
{u, v} is not connected, and so {«, v} is a bridge. Q.E.D.
Having proved this lemma, we now prove Theorem 2.2. By the lemma, either
M is in B or v is in A. If the former, then orienting {u, v} from u to v results in
strong connectedness, and in the latter, orienting {«, v} from D to M results in
strong connectedness. If both, either orientation works. This proves the
theorem. A proof of the missing direction of Theorem 2.1 follows by orienting
one edge at a time, and noting that at each stage, if {u, v} is not a bridge, it could
not become one after the orientation.
2.3. Algorithms for one-way street assignments. Theorem 2.1 is not a very
practical result unless it is accompanied by an algorithm for obtaining a one-way
street assignment. Our proof of Theorem 2.1, however, suggests that we may
carry out the orientation one step at a time. This procedure is carried out in Fig.
2.3. Note that the first two choices of orientation were arbitrary. However, the
third choice was forced, as once these two orientations are chosen as shown,
there is no path in the mixed graph from b to a once the edge between a and b is
deleted. Similarly, all subsequent choices of orientation are forced.
An alternative algorithm for obtaining a strongly connected orientation is
based on the method of depth first search. The procedure is to label vertices with
the integers 1, 2, • • • , n, where n is the number of vertices of the original
connected, bridgeless graph. Start by picking a vertex at random and labeling it
1. Pick any (unlabeled) vertex joined to the vertex labeled 1 by an edge, and
label it 2. In general, having labeled vertices with the labels 1, 2, • • • , k, search
through all vertices one step away from that vertex labeled k. If there is such a
vertex which is unlabeled, pick one and label it k +1. Otherwise, find the highest
label j so that there is an unlabeled vertex one step from y, pick such a vertex,
and label it k + l. This labeling procedure is carried out in Fig. 2.4. Note that
after the label 4 has been used, we must return to the vertex labeled 2 before
being able to find an unlabeled vertex. Note that the labeling procedure can be
completed if and only if one starts with a connected graph. After the labeling has
been carried out, a strongly connected orientation is obtained by orienting an

10
CHAPTER 2
FIG. 2.3. The construction of a strongly connected orientation using the Boesch-Tindell procedure.
Steps (D and (2) are arbitrary and the remaining steps are forced.
edge from lower number to higher number if it was used in the labeling pro-
cedure, and otherwise orienting from higher number to lower number. This
orientation corresponding to the labeling shown in Fig. 2.4 is illustrated in Fig.
2.5. See Roberts (1976a) for a proof that this orientation will always be strongly
connected if one starts with a connected, bridgeless graph.
The second algorithm appears to be faster than the first. In depth first search,
we have j V(G)| steps, one corresponding to each assignment of label. At each
step, we investigate a certain number of edges. Since we can be sure that no edge
previously investigated is again investigated, the total number of investigations
of edges is |E(G)|. Thus, the labeling procedure takes on the order of | V(G)\ +
FIG. 2.4. A labeling of vertices using the depth first search labeling procedure.

THE ONE-WAY STREET PROBLEM
11
FIG. 2.5. A strongly connected orientation from the depth first search labeling.
\E(G)\ steps. By way of comparison, the first algorithm requires us to determine
at the very first step whether or not u reaches v in D', a digraph with | V(G)\
vertices. This requires on the order of |V(G)|3 computations (see Reingold,
Nievergelt, and Deo (1977, p. 341)). Since \E(G)\ is on the order of | V(G)\ , the
first algorithm certainly is likely to be slower.
2.4. Efficiency. One of the problems with our discussion about moving traffic
efficiently is that we have only been concerned with finding orientations which
make it possible to get from one place to another, but have not been concerned
with the possibility that it might become necessary to take long detours to do so.
To make this discussion precise, let us define the distance dG(x, y) between two
vertices x and y of a connected graph G to be the length of the shortest chain
between them, and the distance dD(x, y) from vertex x to vertex y in a strongly
connected digraph D to be the length of the shortest path from x to y. Note that
do(x, y) may not be the same as dD(y, x). Figure 2.6 shows two strongly connect-
ed orientations D and D' of a graph G. Notice that dD(a, b)=l\, while
dD>(a, b) = 3. From the point of view of a person trying to get from a to b, D' is a
much more efficient orientation. In general, one would like to obtain a strongly
connected orientation of a graph G in which "on the whole," distances traveled
are not too great. There are several ways to formulate this problem. Here are
four formulations:
1) Find that strongly connected orientation D of G in which the average
distance dD(a, b) over all a, b is as small as possible.
2) Find that strongly connected orientation D of G in which the maximum
distance dD(a, b} over all a, b is minimized.
FIG. 2.6. Two different strongly connected orientations of G in which the distance from atob differs.

12 
CHAPTER 2
3) Find that strongly connected orientation D of G in which the difference
between the distances dc,(a, b} and dD(a, b) is on the average as small as
possible.
4) Find that strongly connected orientation D of G in which the maximum of
the differences between the distances dG(a, b) and dD(a, b) is as small as
possible.
Chvatal and Thomassen (to appear) have recently obtained some very inter-
esting (and somewhat discouraging) results about these problems. We define the
diameter of a connected graph (strongly connected digraph) as the maximum
distance between any two vertices. In particular, Chvatal and Thomassen prove
that every connected, bridgeless graph of diameter d has a strongly connected
orientation of diameter at most 2d2 + 2d. However, they show that the problem
of finding that strongly connected orientation which minimizes diameter (prob-
lem 2)) is probably very difficult.
Let us be precise about that. Every finite problem has an algorithm for its
solution: simply try all cases. However, beginning with the work of Edmonds
(1965), algorists have searched for "good" procedures, i.e., procedures which
will terminate in no more than p ( n ) steps, where n is the size of the "input"
and p(n) is a polynomial. In studying such procedures, we shall distinguish
between deterministic algorithms and nondeterministic algorithms. We shall
make this distinction very informally. An algorithm can be thought of as passing
from state to state. A deterministic algorithm may move to only one new state at
a time, while a nondeterministic one may move to several new states at once.
That is, a nondeterministic algorithm can explore several possibilities simultaneously.
The class of problems for which there is a deterministic algorithm which terminates
in polynominal time is called P. The class of problems for which there is a nondeter-
ministic algorithm which terminates in polynomial time is called NP. An example of
a problem we shall encounter which is in the class NP is the problem of determining
whether a graph is colorable using a given number of colors. Now all problems in
P are in NP, but it is not known whether there is a problem in NP which is not in P.
We shall say a problem L is NP-hard if L has the following property: if L can be solved
by a deterministic polynomial algorithm, then so can every problem in NP. A prob-
lem is NP-complete if it is NP-hard and it is in the class NP. Cook (1971) proved that
there were NP-hard and NP-complete problems, and in particular his work implies
that one problem we shall encounter below, that of finding the largest clique in a graph,
is NP-hard. Karp (1972) showed that there were a great many NP-complete problems.
For a good recent discussion of these notions, see Reingold, Nievergelt, and Deo (1977).
Now many people doubt that every problem in the class NP can be solved by a poly-
nomial deterministic algorithm, and hence doubt that NP-hard problems can be solved
by such algorithms. Chvatal and Thomassen prove that problem 2) above is NP-hard.
Thus, there is good reason to doubt that there will ever be a "good" deterministic
algorithm for solving this problem in the Edmonds sense. Not much is known about
problems 1), 3), and 4).

THE ONE-WAY STREET PROBLEM 
13
2.5. Inefficiency. Sometimes it is desirable to find a strongly connected
orientation of a graph, but not to find one which is efficient in any of the
distance-minimizing senses of the previous section. To give an example, the
National Park Service has begun to take measures to discourage people from
driving in the more heavily traveled sections of the park system. One approach
has been to make (many) roads one way, but to do it inefficiently, i.e., so that
long distances must be traveled to get from place to place. The reasoning is that
if it is hard to get from place to place by car, people will consider other modes of
transportation, such as bicycling, walking, or taking a bus. Roberts (1976a)
discusses the one-way street network for the Yosemite Valley section of Yose-
mite National Park. Here, the diameter is much larger than the undirected
diameter. In general, the problems of finding efficient orientations of a graph
formulated in § 2.4 all have analogues for inefficient orientations. Good
algorithms for finding such orientations are not known.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 3
Intersection Graphs
3.1. Transitive orientations. In what follows, it will be convenient to study
types of orientations of a graph other than strongly connected ones. In partic-
ular, we shall be interested in orientations which lead to a transitive digraph and
we shall ask what graphs have transitive orientations.
We say that a digraph D without loops is transitive if whenever there is an arc
from u to v and an arc from v to w, and u ^ w, then there is an arc from u to w.
In Fig. 3.1, digraphs D\ and D2 are transitive, while digraphs Z>3 and £>4 are not,
since the arc (u, w) is missing in the latter two cases. Digraph D\ is a transitive
FIG. 3.1. Digraphs D\ and D2 are transitive while DT, and D4 are not.
orientation for the circuit of length 3, and digraph D2 is a transitive orientation
for the circuit of length 4. In general, let us ask whether the graph Zn, the circuit
of length n, has a transitive orientation. It is easy enough to see that Z5 does not
have such an orientation. For, if there were such an orientation, then by sym-
metry we could in Fig. 3.2 orient from a to b. Since there could be no arc from a
to c after the orientation, edge {b, c] would have to be oriented from c to b.
FIG. 3.2. The graph Z5.
Similarly, edge {c, d] would have to be oriented from c to d, edge {d, e] from e to
d, and edge {a, e} from e to a. But now there would be arcs (e, a) and (a, b), and
transitivity would imply the existence of an arc (e, b). This line of reasoning
15

16 
CHAPTER 3
shows that Z5 could have no transitive orientation. A similar argument shows
that Zn, for n odd and greater than 3, could have no such orientation. However,
Zn, for n even, does, in analogy to Z4.
Another graph without a transitive orientation is the graph of Fig. 3.3. If there
is such an orientation, then by symmetry we may assume that it goes from a
to b. Transitivity now forces the following conclusions in the following order:
edge {b, e} is oriented from e to b (or else there would
have to be an arc from a to e),
edge {b, c] is oriented from c to b,
edge {c, /} is oriented from c to /,
edge {a, c} is oriented from c to a.
Now, neither orientation on edge {a, d} will suffice. For if the orientation goes
from a to d, then we have arcs (c, a) and (a, d\ but there could be no arc (c, d).
If the orientation goes from d to a, then we have arcs (d, a) and (a, b}, but there
could be no arc (d, b).
FlG. 3.3. A graph which is not transitively orientable and not an interval graph but is a rigid circuit
graph.
Transitively orientable graphs were characterized by Ghouila-Houri (1962)
and Gilmore and Hoffman (1964). Since we shall not need the characterization,
we refer the reader to the literature for a discussion. We discuss the uniqueness
of a transitive orientation in § 4.4.
3.2. Intersection graphs. Suppose 9f — {S\, 52, • • • , Sp} is a family of sets.2
We can associate a graph with ^called the intersection graph of &, as follows.
The vertices of this graph are the sets in ^ and there is an edge between two sets
5, and S/ if and only if they have a nonempty intersection. (We shall as a general
rule omit the loop from a set to itself, though in Chapter 4 it will be useful for us
to include that loop.) Figure 3.4 shows a family of sets and its intersection graph.
Intersection graphs arise in a large number of applications. A recent one is the
following. Consider a collection of large corporations, for example the "Fortune
800." For the ith corporation, let Si be the set consisting of members of the
Board of Directors of this corporation. Levine (1976) and others study the
' We shall not find it necessary to require that the sets 5, be distinct.

18 
CHAPTER 3
FIG. 3.5. An interval graph.
two subsets of the fine structure inside the gene overlap. Is this overlap informa-
tion consistent with the hypothesis that the fine structure inside the gene is
linear? It is if the graph defined by the overlap information is an interval graph.
(For a more detailed discussion, see Roberts (1976a).)
Interval graphs also arise in the measurement of preference and indifference.
Suppose we have a range of possible values of an item. If we are trying to decide
between two different items, we might reasonably be expected to prefer item u
to item v if and only if the interval of values J ( u ) of item u is strictly to the right
of the corresponding interval J(v), i.e., if and only if every element of J ( u ) is
larger than every element of J(v). Similarly, we might reasonably be expected to
be indifferent between u and v if and only if the intervals J ( u ) and J ( v ) overlap.
If this is the case, indifference should define an interval graph. We shall return to
the study of indifference in § 4.1.
In seriation in the social sciences, we try to put a collection of items or objects
in some serial order or sequence. For example, in archaeology we are interested
in sequence dating a collection of artifacts. In psychology, we want to put some
traits in a developmental order, or order individuals according to their opinions.
In political science, we sometimes wish to order political candidates from liberal
to conservative. One approach to seriation is to start with overlap information.
For example, we ask in archaeology whether or not the time intervals during
which two artifacts existed overlapped. We obtain this information from obser-
vation of graves. We seek an assignment of time intervals so that artifact a and
artifact b were found in common in some grave if and only if the time interval
associated with a overlaps with the time interval associated with b. Such an
assignment can be obtained if and only if the "found in common in some grave"
graph is an interval graph. The intervals are a possible chronological order. They
can, unfortunately, differ significantly from the "real chronological order." We
shall discuss how in some detail in §4.4. This approach to seriation in
archaeology is carried out in Kendall (1963), (1969a,b). A similar approach in
developmental psychology is carried out by Coombs and Smith (1973). We shall
return to a discussion of seriation in §4.2.
We shall also discuss applications of interval graphs to the phasing of traffic
lights, to the assignment of mobile radio telephone frequencies, and to the study
of ecological phase space. For now, we turn to the problem of characterizing
interval graphs.
3.4. Characterization of interval graphs. Let us begin by observing that Z3,
the circuit of length 3, is an interval graph, but that Zn for n ^4 is not. The

INTERSECTION GRAPHS
19
former we leave to the reader. To see the latter, let us consider the case of Z4.
Let the vertices of Z4 be labeled as in Fig. 3.6. If there were an interval
assignment / satisfying (3.1), then J(a) and J(b) would have to overlap, since
there is an edge between a and b. Without loss of generality, J(b) is a bit to the
right of /(a). (J(b) cannot completely lie inside J(a) for otherwise we could not
have J(c) overlapping J(b) without overlapping J(a\ as is required. Similarly,
/(a) cannot lie inside J(b).) Now J(c) overlaps J(b) but not /(a), so J(c) must
be as pictured in Fig. 3.6. Finally, J(d) must overlap both /(a) and J(c), but not
J(b). Where could J(d) be? A similar argument holds for any n ^4.
FIG. 3.6. The argument that Z4 is not an interval graph.
A graph H = (W, F) is a subgraph of a graph G = (V, E) if W c V and F c E.
(Notice that by saying H is a graph, we imply that F is a set of pairs from W.) H
is a generated subgraph if F consists of all edges from E joining vertices in W. It
is easy to see that if G is an interval graph, then every generated subgraph must
also be an interval graph. However, this is not the case for every subgraph. Thus,
if G is an interval graph, it has the property that no graph Zn, n ^ 4, is a
generated subgraph. A graph G with this property is called a rigid circuit graph,
or a triangulated graph. Rigid circuit graphs have the property that whenever
jci, *2, • • • , xt, x\ is a circuit of length t =^4, then there is in the graph a chord, an
edge of the form {*,, */}, where /V / ± 1 and addition is considered modulo /. The
graph of Fig. 3.7 is an example of a rigid circuit graph. Although there are
circuits of length 4 or greater, every such circuit has a chord. This graph is also an
example of a rigid circuit graph which is not an interval graph. To see that, note
that if there were an interval assignment /, then /(a), J(c\ and J(e) would have
FIG. 3.7. A rigid circuit graph which is not an interval graph.

20
CHAPTER 3
to be pairwise disjoint intervals. One of them, say J(c) without loss, of generality,
would have to be in between the other two. Then /(/) would have to overlap
/(a) and J(e) but not J(c\ which is impossible. The graph of Fig. 3.3 is another
example of a graph which is a rigid circuit graph but not an interval graph.
Verification of this fact is left to the reader.
What these two examples of noninterval graph rigid circuit graphs have in
common is a triple of vertices ;c, y, and z with the property that there are chains
Cxy between x and y, Cxz between x and z, and Cy2 between y and z with jc not
adjacent (joined by an edge) to any vertex of Cy2, y not adjacent to any vertex of
Cxz, and z not adjacent to any vertex of Cxy. For example, in the graph of Fig.
3.7, the three vertices are a, c, and e, and the chains in question are a, b, c, and a,
/, e, and c, d, e. In Fig. 3.3, the three vertices are d, e, and /, and the three chains
in question are d, a, b, e and d, a, c, f and e, b, c, /. A triple of vertices with the
property in question is called asteroidal.
THEOREM 3.2 (Lekkerkerker and Boland (1962)). A graph is an interval graph
if and only if it is a rigid circuit graph and it has no asteroidal triple.
To give yet a second characterization of interval graphs, let us define the
complement Gc of the graph G to be a graph with the same vertex set as G, but
with an edge between x ^ y if and only if there is no edge between x and y in G.
Now suppose G is an interval graph and / is an interval assignment for G. Then
we can define an orientation on Gc as follows: orient the edge {x, y} of Gc from x
to y if and only if J(x) is strictly to the right of /(y). This orientation is well
defined because the intervals J(x) and /(y) corresponding to the vertices x and y
do not overlap. It is clear that the orientation so defined must be transitive, for
the relation "strictly to the right of" on a set of intervals is transitive. Hence, we
have shown that if G is an interval graph, then Gc is transitively orientable.
THEOREM 3.3 (Gilmore and Hoffman (1964)). A graph G is an interval graph
if and only if Z* is not a generated subgraph and Gc is transitively orientable.
To illustrate this theorem, we observe that the graph of Fig. 3.5 does not have
Z4 as a generated subgraph. Moreover, the complementary graph, which is
shown in Fig. 3.8, is transitively orientable. A transitive orientation is also shown
in that figure.
We have already seen the necessity of the conditions in Theorem 3.3. We
briefly sketch a proof of sufficiency. A complete graph is a graph in which every
vertex is joined to every other vertex, and a clique in a graph is a subgraph which
is complete. A clique is called dominant if it is maximal, i.e., if it is not contained
FIG. 3.8. The complement of the graph of Figure 3.5 and a transitive orientation for the complement.

INTERSECTION GRAPHS 
21
(when considered as a set of vertices) in any larger clique. Suppose we are given
a graph G which does not have Z4 as a generated subgraph and suppose we are
given a transitive orientation for Gc. Let <# be the collection of dominant cliques
of G.5 We can use the orientation of Gc to order the cliques in c€. In particular,
we take a clique K before a clique L if whenever u is in K and v is in L and
{«, v}&E(G), then the edge {u, v} of Gc is oriented from u to v. One needs to
prove that this ordering of dominant cliques is well defined, by first showing that
there always are such u and v for every K ^ L and then showing that a different
u' from K and v' from L cannot lead to the opposite ordering. The details are
left to the reader. The proof uses the hypothesis that G does not have Z4 as a
generated subgraph. To illustrate the procedure, consider the graph G of Fig.
3.5 and the transitive orientation of the complement which is shown in Fig. 3.8.
The dominant cliques of G are K = {a, b, c}, L = {b, c, d} and M = {c, d, e}. Since
a e K and d e L and there is no edge in G between a and d, the orientation a to
d in Gc tells us to take K before L. Similarly using vertices b and e, we see that L
comes before M, and using vertices a and e, we see that K comes before M, so
the ordering of dominant cliques is K, L, M. It is not hard to show, using the
transitivity of the orientation of Gc, that one always gets a linear ordering
ATi, K2, • • • , Kp of dominant cliques. Moreover, one sees that this ordering of
the dominant cliques has the following property P: if a < (3 < y and a vertex a
belongs to Ka and Ky, then it also must belong to K0. Hence, we may take J(a)
to be the interval [a, y], where Ka is the first dominant clique in the ordering to
which a belongs, and Ky is the last dominant clique in the ordering to which a
belongs. In our example, K = KI, L = K2, and M = K3. Since a belongs only to
KI, we obtain /(«)=[!, 1], an interval consisting of a single point. Similarly,
J(b) = [l, 2], J(c) = [1, 3], J(d) = [2, 3] and /(<?)= [3, 3]. It is easy to see that this
assignment of intervals satisfies (3.1). For a more detailed discussion of why this
procedure works in general, see Roberts (1976a).
An ordering of dominant cliques which satisfies property P above is called
consecutive. G is an interval graph if and only if there is an ordering of the
dominant cliques of G which is consecutive. For if there is such an ordering, then
the above assignment / shows that G is an interval graph. Conversely, if G is an
interval graph, then G does not have Z4 as a generated subgraph and Gc has a
transitive orientation, so the above construction using <# shows that there is an
ordering of the dominant cliques of G which is consecutive. It is convenient to
restate this result in terms of matrices. If G is any graph, its dominant clique-
vertex incidence matrix M is defined as follows. The rows of M correspond to the
dominant cliques, and the columns to the vertices. The entry m,/ is 1 if the /th
vertex belongs to the /th dominant clique, and it is 0 otherwise. If there is an
ordering of dominant cliques which is consecutive, the corresponding ordering of
rows of M gives rise to a matrix with the 1's in each column appearing consecu-
tively. We say that a matrix A of O's and 1's has the consecutive 1's property (for
5 Of course, as we have observed, even identification of the largest clique of a graph is an TVP-hard
problem. Hence, it is not in general easy to identify the collection (€.

22 
CHAPTER 3
columns) if it is possible to permute the rows so that the 1's in each column
appear consecutively.
THEOREM 3.4 (Fulkerson and Gross (1965)). A graph G is an interval graph if
and only if its dominant clique-vertex incidence matrix M has the consecutive Vs
property.
To illustrate this theorem, let us note that the following matrix is the dominant
clique-vertex incidence matrix for the graph Z4 with the vertex labeling of Fig.
3.6. There is no permutation of the rows so that the 1's in each column appear
consecutively.
3.5 Circular arc graphs. Various families of geometric interest give rise to useful
classes of intersection graphs. In § 5.1, we shall consider rectangles in the plane, and
more generally "boxes" in n-space. In this section, let us briefly consider the graphs
which are intersection graphs of arcs on a given circle, the so-called circular arc graphs.
It is easy to see that every interval graph is a circular arc graph, but that the converse
is false: Z4 is a counterexample. However, Z4 together with an isolated additional vertex
is not a circular arc graph as the reader can readily verify. "A graph G is a circular
arc graph if its dominant clique-vertex incidence matrix has the circular Ys property,
i.e., there is a permutation of the rows so that the 1's in each column appear consecu-
tively if 1's are allowed to continue from bottom to top. The converse holds if G is
the intersection graph of circular arcs satisfying a Helly property: all arcs of a given
clique have a common point." Circular arc graphs have been studied in Tucker (1970),
(1971).
3.6. Phasing traffic lights. In this section we shall discuss the application of
interval graphs and circular arc graphs to the phasing of traffic lights. The goals
of traffic light phasing are to have traffic move safely and efficiently. With
increasing concern about energy use, the latter goal is becoming of increased
importance. Consider a traffic intersection at which we wish to install a new
traffic light. Approaching the traffic intersection are various traffic 
streams,
patterns or routes through the intersection which traffic takes. Figure 3.9 shows a
traffic intersection with several traffic streams labeled with the letters a through
/. The intersection has a two-way street meeting a one-way street. Certain traffic
streams are judged to be compatible with each other, in the sense that they can
be moving at the same time without dangerous consequences. The decision
about compatibility is made ahead of time, by a traffic engineer, and may be
based on estimated volume of traffic in a stream as well as the traffic pattern. The
compatibility information can be summarized in a graph G, the compatibility
graph. The vertices of G are the traffic streams, and two streams are joined by an

INTERSECTION GRAPHS 
23
edge if and only if they are judged compatible. Figure 3.9 shows such a compat-
ibility graph for the traffic intersection in question. Notice that, for example,
stream c, the left-turning traffic, is judged compatible with stream /, the straight
and right-turning traffic in the other street, but not with stream e, the left-turning
traffic in the other street. In traffic light phasing, we wish to assign a period of
time -to each stream during which it receives a green light, and to do it in such a
way that only compatible traffic streams can get green lights at the same time.
There is a cycle of green and red lights, and then after the cycle is finished, it
begins again, over and over.
We may think of the time during the cycle as being kept on a large clock, and
the time during which a given traffic stream gets a green light corresponds to an
arc on the circumference of the clock circle. (We assume that a given stream
receives only one continuous green light during each cycle.) Then a feasible green
light assignment consists of an assignment of an arc of the circle to each traffic
stream so that only compatible traffic streams are allowed to receive overlapping
arcs. In terms of the compatibility graph, only vertices joined by an edge are
allowed to receive overlapping arcs. This is not the same as the intersection
graph idea, as we are not forcing compatible vertices to get overlapping arcs.
However, if we look at the intersection graph corresponding to any feasible
green light assignment, this will be a subgraph of the compatibility graph. It is
not necessarily a generated subgraph. Indeed, it corresponds to a subgraph with
the same vertex set as the compatibility graph, but one with perhaps some of the
edges deleted, a so-called spanning subgraph. Figure 3.9 shows such a feasible
green light assignment and its corresponding intersection graph H. Note that H
must be a circular arc graph. Thus, feasible green light assignments correspond
to spanning subgraphs of G which are circular arc graphs. It is not necessarily the
case that G itself is a circular arc graph, although in this case it is. If we require
that no green light time period overlap a starting time, i.e., that a cycle begins
with all red lights, then the intersection graph corresponding to a feasible green
light assignment is a spanning subgraph of G which is an interval graph. Notice
that the compatibility graph G of Fig. 3.9 is not an interval graph, since the
subgraph generated by vertices b, c, e, and / is Z4. However, the spanning
subgraph H is an interval graph.
Some feasible green light assignments are very uninteresting. For example, we
can assign to each traffic stream an empty green arc and obtain a feasible
assignment. What makes one feasible assignment better than another? We
usually have in mind some criterion. For example, we might wish to minimize the
total amount of waiting time, i.e., the total amount of red light time in a cycle. Or
we might wish to minimize a weighted sum of red light times by weighting more
heavily the red light time for heavily traveled traffic streams. Or, as Stoffers
(1968) points out, we might have some information about expected arrival times
of different traffic streams, and we might wish to penalize starting times for being
far from the traffic stream's expected arrival time and minimize the penalties.
Let us illustrate the procedure for finding an optimal green light assignment if
the criterion is to minimize the total red light times. We shall also make the

24
CHAPTER 3
FIG. 3.9. A traffic intersection, its compatibility graph, a feasible green light assignment, and the
corresponding intersection graph.
assumption that each green light arc must be a certain minimal length. We then
follow Stoffers' (1968) procedure. For each circular arc graph spanning subgraph
of G, or for each interval graph spanning subgraph if we are willing to make the
special assumption about all red lights at the starting time, let us generate
corresponding feasible green light assignments by considering orderings of
dominant cliques which are consecutive. For concreteness, we handle the inter-
val graph case. Let X"i, K2, • • - , Kp be a consecutive ordering of dominant
cliques of interval graph spanning subgraph H. Each clique Kt corresponds to a
phase during which all streams in that clique get green lights. We then start a
given traffic stream off with green during the first phase in which it appears, and
keep it green until the last phase in which it appears. By consecutiveness of the
ordering, this leads to an arc of the clock circle. In our example, the graph H has
as one consecutive ordering of dominant cliques the ordering K\ = (e, b}, K2 =
{b, a, d}, K3 = {d, c}, K4 = {c, /}. Thus, there are four phases. In phase 1, traffic
streams e and b get green lights (the one-way street turns left and one right-turn
light is on), then in phase 2 streams b, a, d get green lights (the left-turn light is
turned off, and the north-south traffic starts up), and so on. Suppose we assign to
each clique Ki a duration dt. What should the durations di be so that the sum of
the red light times is as small as possible? The answer is obtained by observing
the following: a gets a red light during phases KI, K3, and K4, so a's total red
light time is d^ + d3 + d4. Similarly, 6's red light time is d3 + d4. The total red light

INTERSECTION GRAPHS 
25
time for all traffic streams is given by
which equals
If the minimum green light time for a stream is 20 seconds, and the total cycle is
120 seconds, we wish to minimize (3.2) subject to the constraints that each dt ^ 0
and
Constraints (3.3) through (3.8) correspond to the statements that a through /
respectively, receive green light times of at least 20 seconds. The solution to our
linear programming problem is easy in our case. By (3.9), minimizing (3.2) is
equivalent to minimizing di + d3 + d4. Since d\ and d4 must be at least 20 and d3
at least 0, it is clear that (3.2) is minimized by taking d\ = d4 = 20, d3 = 0, and
^2 = 80.
To find an optimal feasible green light assignment, we must identify each
interval graph (or circular arc graph) spanning subgraph H of G. For each, we
must find all the different consecutive (circular) orderings of dominant cliques
and for each such ordering, we must find an optimal solution of phase durations.6
Then we can put all this together to find an optimal solution for the entire graph.
The reader might find it enlightening to consider in our example or examples of
his own choosing alternative interval graph spanning subgraphs and alternative
phasings which arise from different consecutive orderings of their dominant
cliques.
3.7. The mobile radio frequency assignment problem. Mobile radio tele-
phone systems, such as those assigned to police cruisers, operate in different
zones. Each zone receives a band of frequencies which can be used within it.
These bands are often intervals, though more generally they are unions of
intervals. The mobile telephones in one zone can cause interference with those
in another zone. In that case, their bands of frequencies should not overlap. In
In general, as we have remarked, even identifying all the dominant cliques involves a lengthy
computation for larger graphs. However, we are here dealing with relatively small graphs.

26 
CHAPTER 3
assigning bands to zones, one wants to take these conflicts into account, and also
meet certain requirements on minimal bandwidth for given zones.
Following Gilbert (1972), we can formulate this problem graph-theoretically.
The vertices of a conflict graph are the zones, and two zones are adjacent if and
only if they conflict. Then, we wish to assign to each zone / a band £?(/)—let us
say an interval—so that if there is an edge between zones / and /, then we have
B(i)r\B(j) = 0. Moreover, we wish to do this so that each B(j) has certain
minimal length.
Looked at this way, we see that this problem is reducible to the traffic light
phasing problem. We simply consider the feasible green light assignment prob-
lem on the complementary graph of the conflict graph. We shall have more to
say about the mobile radio frequency assignment problem in § 6.5.
Notes added in press. Both the radio frequency assignment problem and the
traffic light phasing problem are of interest for unions of intervals, not just for
intervals. Recent work on intersection graphs of unions of intervals can be found
in Griggs and West (1977) and Trotter and Harary (1977). Recent results on the
radio frequency assignment and traffic light phasing problems for sets other than
intervals and unions of intervals and on the duality between these two problems
can be found in Roberts (to appear).

CHAPTER 4
Indifference, Measurement, and Seriation
4.1. Indifference graphs. Many decisions to be made by individuals, groups,
or by society as a whole require the ability to measure variables which are not as
easy to measure as physical variables like temperature or mass. The need to
measure such things as preference, aesthetic appeal, agreement, and so on has
given rise to a theory of measurement which covers social scientific variables as
well as physical variables. One of the goals of measurement is to organize data
into some coherent structure, so that the underlying patterns can be pinpointed.
Techniques of measurement and scaling are used often in this way in the social
sciences, in particular in trying to understand opinions, viewpoints, and the like.
The resulting scales have uses in a variety of decisions which need to be made by
individuals, groups, or societies. In this section, we shall discuss the use of
graph-theoretical tools in one measurement problem, the measurement of
indifference. We then turn to a related problem, that of seriation of data, and
show the connection with the results on indifference measurement.
Suppose an individual expresses preference among alternatives in a set V. We
write xPy to mean that x is preferred to y. If an individual is not forced to choose
between x and y, he is allowed to be indifferent. (He is indifferent between x and
y if and only if he prefers neither.) We write xly to mean that he is indifferent
between x and y. Measurement of preference corresponds to the assignment of
numbers which "preserve" the expressed preferences. In particular, the goal is
to assign a real number /(jc) to each x in V so that for all x, y,
i.e., x is preferred to y if and only if x receives a higher number than y. If it is
possible to obtain such a function /, then indifference corresponds to equality:
Equation (4.2) implies that indifference is transitive. The economist Armstron
(1939), (1948), (1950), (1951) was among the first to argue that indifference is
not transitive. (Menger (1951) claims that such arguments go back at least to
Poincare.) One argument against the transitivity of indifference is the following
argument of Luce (1956). We are almost certainly not indifferent between a cup
of coffee with no sugar and a cup with five spoons of sugar. However, if we add
sugar to the first cup one grain at a time, we will almost certainly be indifferent
between successive cups. Transitivity of indifference would imply that we are
indifferent between the cup without sugar and the cup with five spoons of sugar.
27

28 
CHAPTER 4
Examples such as this suggest that indifference does not correspond to equal-
ity, but rather to closeness. Speaking precisely, suppose 8 is a positive number
measuring closeness. Then we might seek an assignment of numbers f(x) to
elements of V so that for all x, y in V,
Under what circumstances does there exist such an assignment? The answer to
this question is important in measurement, because it tells us when a particular
way of measuring or scaling data (judgments of indifference) can be carried out.
To answer this question, we translate it into a graph-theoretic one. We let V
be the set of vertices of a graph G, and we draw an edge between x and y if and
only if xly. Notice that the resulting graph has a loop at each vertex. In the rest
of this chapter, it will be convenient to allow loops in our graphs. In this section,
we will assume that every graph has a loop at each vertex. We would like to
assign a number f(x) to each vertex of the graph G so that vertices joined by an
edge get numbers which are close (within 5) and vertices not joined by an edge
get numbers which are not close (not within 8). If there is such an assignment of
numbers, we say that G is an indifference graph. It is easy to give examples of
indifference graphs. Consider for instance the graph of Fig. 4.1.7 If 8 = 1, an
assignment of numbers satisfying (4.3) is given by /(a) = 0, f(b) = .3, f(c) = .7,
f(d)= 1.1, and f(e}— 1.4. (Incidentally, it is clear that there is an assignment /
with 8 = 1 if and only if there is an assignment / for any positive 8.) To give an
example of a graph which is not an indifference graph, consider Z4 with the
labeling of vertices given in Fig. 4.2.8 If there is a function / satisfying (4.3), then
without loss of generality f ( b ) ^ f ( a ) . Now since a and b are joined by an edge
and similarly b and c, the numbers f(a) and f(b) must be within 8 and so must
the numbers f(b) and f(c). However, a and c are not joined by an edge, so the
FlG. 4.1. An indifference graph.
FlG. 4.2. The graph Z4.
7 We shall suppress the loop at each vertex in this and all graphs of this section.
Again, there is a (suppressed) loop at each vertex.

INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION 
29
numbers f(a) and f(c) must be at least «5 apart. It follows that these numbers are
FIG. 4.3. The argument that Z4 is not an indifference graph.
arranged as in Fig. 4.3. Now f(d) must be within 8 of /(a) and /(c), but not
within S of f(b). This is impossible. Thus, Z4 is not an indifference graph.
Neither is Zn, any n ^4.
It is also easy to see that Zn, n ^ 4, is not an indifference graph by considering
the intervals
Now, if/satisfies (4.3), then
Hence, the graph of indifferences is an interval graph.9 In particular, the graph of
indifferences cannot be Zn, n ^ 4, or indeed have such a Zn as a generated
subgraph. The noninterval graphs of Figs. 3.3 and 3.7, which are repeated in
Figs. 4.4 and 4.5, give other examples of nonindifference graphs. It is instructive
for the reader to try to argue this directly. Not every interval graph is an
indifference graph. Consider the graph of Fig. 4.6. Suppose there were a
function / satisfying (4.3). Without loss of generality we have 
f(a)<f(b}<f(c).
Since there are no edges among a, b, and c, we have /(a) and f(c) at least 28
apart. However, f(d) must be within 8 of both /(a) and /(c), which is
impossible.10
It is easy to show that if G is an indifference graph, then so is every generated
subgraph. Hence, we have shown one direction of the following theorem.
FIG. 4.4. A graph which is not an indifference graph.
9 Every interval /(a) in (4.4) has the same length. We say G is a unit interval graph if it is the
intersection graph of a family of (open) intervals of the same length (without loss of generality unity).
The indifference graphs are exactly the unit interval graphs.
10 In a sense, the graph of Fig. 4.6 is the only interval graph which is not an indifference graph. In
Roberts (1969a), it is shown that if G is an interval graph, then G is an indifference graph if and only
if the graph of Fig. 4.6 is not a generated subgraph of G.

30 
CHAPTER 4
FIG. 4.5. A graph which is not an indifference 
graph.
FIG. 4.6. An interval graph which is not an indifference 
graph.
THEOREM 4.1 (Roberts (1969a)). A graph G (with a loop at each vertex} is an
indifference graph if and only if it is a rigid circuit graph and it does not have any of
the graphs of Figs. 4.4, 4.5, and 4.6 as a generated subgraph.
This theorem is an example of a forbidden subgraph characterization, a
theorem which characterizes a class of graphs by telling which configurations
cannot appear as generated subgraphs.
To gain a little more insight into indifference graphs, let us define a relation ~
on the set of vertices of a graph by taking x = y if and only if x and y are joined
by edges to exactly the same vertices. In particular, if the graph of Fig. 4.6 is
considered a graph without loops, then a ~ b. However, if we consider it a graph
with a loop at each vertex, then it is not the case that a = b, since a is joined to a
by an edge while b is not joined to a. In graphs with a loop at each vertex, x ~ y
implies that there is an edge between x and y. It is easy to show that = is an
equivalence relation. We can define a new graph Gf « as follows. The vertices
are the equivalence classes under «, and the equivalence class containing x is
joined by an edge to the equivalence class containing y if and only if x is joined
to y. This is clearly well defined. We say that G is reduced if G is isomorphic to
G/ ~. We shall use this notion of equivalence and the idea of reduction to give
another characterization of the indifference graphs.
Consider a finite set of points on the real line. There are two end points. We
shall try to capture by the following definition what vertices of a graph can be
mapped into end points under a function / satisfying (4.3). We say that vertex x
of graph G is an extreme vertex if whenever there are edges from x to y and to z,

INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION
31
then y and z are joined by an edge and, moreover, there is a vertex w so that y
and z are joined to w but x is not joined to w. In the graph of Fig. 4.5, vertex a is
an extreme vertex. For the only pair of vertices to which it is joined are b and /, b
and / are joined to each other, and there is a vertex d joined to b and / but not to
a. Similarly, c and e are extreme vertices here. In the graph of Fig. 4.4, vertices
labeled d, e, and / are vacuously extreme vertices. In the graph of Fig. 4.6,
vertices a, b, and c are extreme vertices. However, in the graph Zn, n ^ 4, there
are no extreme vertices. For every vertex is joined to two others which are not
joined.
THEOREM 4.2 (Roberts (1969a)). A graph G (with a loop at each vertex) is an
indifference graph if and only if for every connected generated subgraph H of G,
Hj ~ * * is either a single vertex or has exactly two extreme vertices.
This theorem explains why the graphs Zn, n^4, and the graphs of Figs. 4.4,
4.5, and 4.6 are not indifference graphs. If each of these is considered a graph
with loops at each vertex, then they are each connected, each is already reduced,
and each has either too few or too many extreme vertices. It is necessary to deal
with the reduction, because if there are equivalent vertices, then a connected
indifference graph can have fewer than two extreme vertices if our present
definition of extreme vertex is used—consider the complete graph on 3 vertices.
Also, it is not sufficient to state Theorem 4.2 in terms of connected components
H. The graph of Fig. 4.7 shows why. It is connected and reduced and has just two
extreme vertices (a and e). However, the subgraph generated by vertices x, a, c,
and e is connected and reduced and has three extreme vertices (a, c, and e)—
this subgraph is isomorphic to the graph of Fig. 4.6.
FIG. 4.7. A connected, reduced graph which is not an indifference graph but has only two extreme
vertices, a and e.
4.2. Sedation. An important problem of data analysis in the social sciences
involves the sequencing of objects in some order. As we have pointed out
earlier, archaeologists try to order artifacts by age, psychologists try to order
subjects along steps of development or shades of opinion, and political scientists
try to order politicians from liberal to conservative. In making decisions, we
The relation = is the one defined from H.
11

32
CHAPTER 4
sometimes like to order alternatives from least risky to most risky, from least
conservative to most conservative, etc. One approach to sedation begins with a
measure /-,, of the similarity of alternatives / and /', with /-,/ higher than rk{ if /' and /
are more similar than k and /. We shall assume that R - (/•//) is a symmetric
matrix and discuss how to obtain sequences of objects from R.
We say that matrix R is in strong Robinson form if whenever i^j^k^l, then
rik ^ ru. This means that if j and k are between / and /, then / and k are at least as
similar as / and /.
In general (Hubert (1974)), the goal of seriation in this context is to find an
ordering or permutation of the objects being sequenced so that if this permu-
tation is applied simultaneously to both rows and columns of the similarity
matrix R, the resulting matrix is in strong Robinson form. The ordering is
thought of as the natural order determined by the similarity data. The obvious
question to ask is: when does there exist such a permutation and how does one
find it? This question and this general approach to seriation is based on the work
of Kendall (1963), (1969a,b), (1971a,b,c).
A square symmetric matrix is in weak Robinson form if the entries in any row
do not decrease as the main diagonal is approached. This concept is due to
Kendall (1969a) and is named after W. S. Robinson who used essentially this
idea in sequence dating in archaeology (Robinson (1951)). It is easier to check
whether a matrix has the weak Robinson form than it is to check for the strong
Robinson form. Fortunately, it is not hard to show that for square symmetric
matrices, the weak and strong notions of Robinson form coincide. For example,
weak implies strong since i^j^k^l implies rik ^ rik =s rit. Henceforth, we shall
use the term Robinson form for both the weak and strong notions.
We shall ask when there is a permutation putting a matrix in Robinson form.
To give an example, let
Then R does not have the Robinson form, because 1 ^2^=3^3, but
This can also be seen because the entries in the third row decrease as the
diagonal is approached. However, if we switch the first two rows and first two
columns, we obtain the following matrix, which is in Robinson form:
Let e be an arbitrary positive number, representing a threshold. Define a
graph GE from R as follows. The vertices of Ge are the numbers 1, 2, • • • , n,
where n is the number of rows of R. There is an edge from / to j if and only if
r,-/=e. If R is in Robinson form, then it is easy to see that Ge satisfies the
following condition: whenever /' ^/ ^ k ^ / and there is an edge in GE between /

INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION 
33
and /, then there is an edge in Ge between / and k. Conversely, if we can verify
this condition for every Ge, then it follows that R is in Robinson form.
Speaking more generally, suppose G is an arbitrary graph and :< is an
ordering of the vertices of G. We say that < is compatible with G if whenever
/ ^ / ^ k ^ / and there is an edge in G between / and /, then there is an edge in
G between / and k. For example, in the graph of Fig. 4.8., if we assume a loop at
each vertex, then a compatible ordering of the vertices is given by c, b, e, a, d.
The ordering c, b, a, e, d is not compatible since b :< b ^ a ^ e and there is an
edge between b and e, but no edge between b and a.
FIG. 4.8. A compatible ordering for the graph G is given by c, b, e, a, d.
THEOREM 4.3 (Roberts (1971b)). A graph G (with a loop at each vertex} has
some compatible ordering of the vertices if and only if G is an indifference graph.
We shall use this result to get a complete characterization of the matrices
permutable into Robinson form. The basic ideas behind this argument are
contained in Hubert (1974). Let R' be obtained from R by replacing each
diagonal element by oo, or by a sufficiently high number. Then clearly R is
permutable to Robinson form if and only if the diagonal elements of R are each
maximal in their row and R' is permutable to Robinson form. Let G'E be defined
from R' as was Ge from R. Then clearly each G'E has a loop at each vertex.
Hence, by Theorem 4.3, G'e has a compatible vertex ordering if and only if G'e is
an indifference graph. We notice that if R' is permutable to Robinson form, then
the same ordering of vertices is compatible with each G'e. In such a case, we say
that the family of indifference graphs {G'e} is homogeneous. (A similar idea arises
in the study of probabilistic consistency—see Roberts (197la).)
THEOREM 4.4. R is permutable to Robinson form if and only if the diagonal
elements of R are each maximal in their row and {G'E} is a homogeneous family of
indifference graphs.
Notice that there are really only finitely many different graphs in the family
{G'E}, so the criterion in the theorem is usable.
It is interesting to notice the connection between the ideas of this section and
the notion of the consecutive 1's property defined in § 3.4. If G is a graph with n
vertices, its adjacency matrix is an n x n matrix whose /, / entry is 1 if there is an
edge between vertices / and /, and 0 if there is no such edge.
THEOREM 4.5 (Roberts (1968)). Suppose G is a graph (with a loop at each
vertex) and A is its adjacency matrix. Then G is an indifference graph if and only
if A has the consecutive 1's property.

34
CHAPTER 4
THEOREM 4.6 (Kendall (1969a)). Suppose K is any matrix of O's and 1's which
has the consecutive Vs property. Then the permutations of the rows of K which
produce consecutive 1's correspond exactly to those permutations which when
applied simultaneously to both rows and columns put KKT into Robinson form.
COROLLARY 1. // G is an interval graph and M is its dominant clique-vertex
incidence matrix, then MM 
is permutable to Robinson form.
Proof. This follows by Theorem 3.4.
COROLLARY 2. If G is an indifference graph and A is its adjacency matrix,
then AA 
is permutable to Robinson form.
4.3. Trees. In this section, we give one more necessary condition for the
existence of a permutation to the Robinson form. A graph G is called a tree if G
is connected but has no circuits. Figure 4.9 shows a variety of trees.
FIG . 4.9. A va riety of trees.
THEOREM 4.7. A graph is connected if and only if it has a spanning subgraph
which is a tree.
Proof. Clearly every graph which has a spanning subgraph which is a tree—we
shall refer to a spanning tree—is connected. Conversely, suppose G is connect-
ed. Since the graph consisting of one vertex is a tree, certainly G has a subgraph
which is a tree. Let H be a subgraph which is a tree and which has as many
vertices as possible. If there are vertices in G but not in H, then by connected-
ness of G there must be an edge from some one of these vertices u to a vertex v
of H. Adding the vertex u and the edge {u, v} gives rise to a subgraph of G which
is a tree and has more vertices than H, which is a contradiction. Hence, we
conclude that every vertex of G is in H and H is spanning. Q.E.D.
Remark. In the depth first search procedure described in § 2.3, the edges used
in labeling define a spanning tree.
Suppose we place a weight or real number on each edge of a connected graph.
It is often important to find a maximal (or minimal) spanning tree, i.e., a
spanning tree so that the sum of the weights of its edges is as large (as small) as
possible. A large number of operations research problems boil down to the
determination of maximal (or minimal) spanning trees. One algorithm for

INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION
35
finding a maximal spanning tree is the greedy algorithm: initially pick any edge of
largest weight; once k — 1 edges have been chosen forming a tree Tk-\, add an
edge of largest weight between a vertex of Tk-i and a vertex not in Tk-\. This
forms the tree Tk. Once each vertex has been included, we have a maximal
spanning tree. For example, in the graph of Fig. 4.10 (ignoring loops), we would
first choose edge {2,3}, then edge {3,4}, and finally edge {1,2} to obtain a
maximal spanning tree.
FIG. 4.10. A maximal spanning tree is given by edges {2, 3}, {3, 4}, and {I, 2}.
Suppose R is a square symmetric matrix of n rows. Let G(R) be a graph with
vertices 1, 2, • • • , « , an edge between / and /' if and only if r./^O, and a
weight of r,/ on the edge {/, /}.
THEOREM 4.8 (Wilkinson (1971)). If R is permutable to Robinson form, then
some maximal spanning tree of G(R) is a chain and the ordering of rows and
columns putting R into Robinson form corresponds to the ordering of vertices in a
maximal spanning tree which is a chain.
To illustrate this theorem, we show in Fig. 4.11 the graph G(R) obtained from
the matrix R of (4.5). The permutation 2, 1, 3 which puts R into Robinson form
corresponds to a maximal spanning tree consisting of edges {1, 2} and {1, 3}. The
FIG. 4.11. The graph G(R) corresponding to the matrix R of (4.5).

36 
CHAPTER 4
converse of Wilkinson's theorem is false. Suppose the graph of Fig. 4.10 is
thought of as the graph G(R) for a matrix R. Then R is the following matrix:
Note that the chain 1, 2, 3, 4 defines the only maximal spanning tree in G(R).
Hence, if R were permutable to Robinson form, it would already be in Robinson
form. However, ri4>/"i3.
It is not hard to supply a proof of Theorem 4.8. If 1, 2, • • • , n is a permutation
which puts R into Robinson form, one argues that the chain 1, 2, • • • , n defines
a maximal spanning tree. In particular, one argues that in applying the greedy
algorithm, it is always best to add an edge of the form {/, / +1}. Details are left to
the reader.
In practice, even if R cannot be permuted into Robinson form, one tries to get
"close." One often begins by finding a maximal spanning tree in G(R) and
working from there. See Hubert (1974) for details.
4.4. Uniqueness. In seriation, it is possible to end up with more than one
proper serial order. For example, a graph may have more than one compatible
vertex ordering. Or, if we perform seriation using interval assignments as
described in § 3.3, there may be two essentially different interval assignments.
Here, we shall comment briefly on the uniqueness of these sedations.
If 1, 2, • • • , n is a compatible vertex ordering for a graph, then n, n - 1, • • • , 1
is another such ordering. Thus, every graph of more than one vertex always has
at least two compatible orderings. It is easy to show that if two vertices x and y
are equivalent in the sense of the equivalence relation defined in § 4.1, then their
places in the ordering may be interchanged. Moreover, vertices in a connected
component must appear together, but the order in which components appear
may change. However, up to complete reversal of the ordering, these are the
only kinds of changes possible.
THEOREM 4.9 (Roberts (1971b)). An indifference graph G (with a loop at each
vertex) having more than two vertices has exactly two compatible vertex orderings
(one the reverse of the other) if and only if G is connected and reduced.
In the case of an interval assignment, the uniqueness question is a little
trickier. Two interval assignments may differ in several ways. First, on nonover-
lapping intervals, the interval assigned to jc, /(*), may strictly follow the interval
assigned to y, /(y), in one interval assignment, but not in the other. Second, on
overlapping intervals, J(x) may be contained in J(y) in one assignment, but
simply overlap without containment in another, or contain J(y) in still another,
etc. The question of uniqueness in the strict following sense may be looked at as
follows. The relation "/(*) strictly follows /(y)" defines a transitive orientation
on the complement Gc of an interval graph. A graph with at least one edge
which has a transitive orientation always has at least two: simply reverse all the

INDIFFERENCE, MEASUREMENT, AND SERIATION 
37
directions in the orientation. Every transitive orientation of Gc gives rise to an
interval assignment if G is an interval graph, through the procedure outlined in
§ 3.4. Hence, every interval graph with an edge always has at least two interval
assignments which differ on strict following. Golumbic (1977) has recently found
methods for identifying the number of different transitive orientations of a
graph, and these methods allow the computation of the number of interval
assignments which differ on strict following. Shevrin and Filippov (1970) and
Trotter et al. (1976) have independently given a criterion for a graph to have
exactly two transitive orientations, one obtained from the other by reversing
directions. We shall present their result. If G is a disconnected, transitively
orientable graph in which at least two different components each have an edge,
then there are at least two distinct transitive orientations of each component
with an edge. Two such orientations can be combined arbitrarily, producing at
least four transitive orientations for G. Thus, we may restrict ourselves to
connected transitively orientable graphs. A set K of vertices of a graph is called
partitive if for every x, y in K and every u not in K, there is an edge from x to u
if and only if there is an edge from y to u. A set of vertices is independent if there
are no edges joining any of the vertices in the set.
THEOREM 4.10 (Shevrin and Filippov, Trotter, Moore, and Sumner). A
connected transitively orientable graph G with n vertices and at least one edge has
exactly two transitive orientations (one obtained from the other by reversing direc -
tions} if and only if every partitive set K with at least two vertices but fewer than n
vertices is independent.
To illustrate this theorem, note that the complete graph on 3 vertices has three
transitive orientations. Any two vertices form a partitive set which is not
independent.
Two interval assignments can differ in more than just strict following. The
problem of uniqueness of interval assignments still requires a treatment of the
uniqueness of the relations among overlapping intervals. For example, when is
J(x) always contained in /(y) in every interval assignment? This problem has
not yet been worked out.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 5
Food Webs, Niche Overlap Graphs, and the
Boxicity of Ecological Phase Space
5.1. Boxicity. A very interesting class of intersection graphs is that class
arising from the boxes in Euclidean n-space. A box is just a generalized rec-
tangle with sides parallel to the coordinate axes, for example a rectangle in
2-space. We shall show below that every graph G is the intersection graph of
boxes in some n-space. The smallest such n is called the boxicity of G, and is
abbreviated box (G). It is convenient to think of complete graphs as being
intersection graphs of boxes in 0-space (each box here is a single point12), and
hence having boxicity 0. The interval graphs are exactly the graphs of boxicity
=il.
Let us calculate the boxicity of various graphs. The graph Z4 is not an interval
graph, and hence has boxicity larger than 1. It is easy to show that Z4 is the
intersection graph of boxes in 2-space (see Fig. 5.1) and hence that box (Z4) = 2.
Indeed, box (Zn) = 2, all n ^ 4.
Another class of graphs for which it is not hard to calculate the boxicity is the
class of complete p-partite graphs. A graph G is complete p-partite if the vertices
are partitioned into classes Ni,N2,---,Np and for every /, / there is an
edge joining vertex x of TV, and vertex y of N,- iff / ^ /. If N( has n, vertices, we
denote the corresponding graph K(n\, n2, • • • , np). The graph AT(2, 2) is really
Z4, with the vertices a and c (as labeled in Fig. 5.1) forming one class an
the remaining vertices the other class. The graph K(3, 3) is the famous water-
light-gas graph: there are three houses and three utilities, and each house is
hooked up to each utility. The graph K(l, 1, • • • , 1) with p classes is the
complete graph with p vertices, which is usually denoted Kp. It is easy to see that
box K ( n ^ , n2, • • • , np)^p. A construction for AT(3, 3) is shown in Fig. 5.2, and it
is easy to see how this generalizes. In general, box K(n\, n2, • • • , n^ 1) =
box K(rii, n2, • • • , np). 
For, having 
obtained 
a 
representation 
for
K(ni, n2, • • • , np) 
with 
boxes 
in 
n-space, 
one 
obtains 
one 
for
K(ni, n2, • • • , rip, 1) with boxes in n-space by adding one huge box which
contains all of the others.
THEOREM 5.1 (Roberts (1969b)). If G = K(n^ n2, • • • , np), then box (G) =
the number of n, which are greater than 1.
As a special case, we note that since the complete graph Kp is K(l, !,•••,!),
with p classes, Theorem 5.1 gives us box (Kp) — 0.
In general, it is hard to compute the boxicity of a graph. It is an unsolved
problem to find a procedure for calculating boxicity. It is also an unsolved
We do not require the boxes corresponding to distinct vertices to be distinct.
39
12

40
CHAPTER 5
FIG. 5.1. The boxicity ofZ4 is 2.
FIG. 5.2. The boxicity of K(3, 3) is at most 2.
problem to characterize the graphs of given boxicity, for example 2. We shall
see-below why these two problems are important. Recently, Gabai (1974) has
obtained some results on boxicity. To present them, we say that a set of edges in
a graph is independent if no two edges in the set have a vertex in common.
THEOREM 5.2 (Gabai (1974)). // the maximum cardinality of a set of
independent edges of Gc is m, then box(G)^m. Moreover, if Gc has a
generated subgraph of k independent edges, then box (G)> k - 1.
The second statement in Theorem 5.2 simply says that if G has K(2, 2, • • • , 2)
with k classes as a generated subgraph, then box (G )>&-!. This follows
immediately from Theorem 5.1 since the boxicity of a graph is at least as great as
the boxicity of any generated subgraph. The first part of the theorem shows that
box(Z4)^=2. For, using the labeling of vertices in Fig. 5.1, we note that the
maximum independent set of edges in Gc consists of the two independent edges
{a, c] and {b, d}. The second part of Gabai's result shows that box (Z4)> 1, for
Z4 is a graph consisting of 2 independent edges. Hence, box (Z4) = 2, as we have
already observed.
THEOREM 5.3 (Roberts (1969b)). Every graph G of n vertices is the intersection
graph of boxes in n-space.

FOOD WEBS, NICHE OVERLAP GRAPHS, AND BOXICITY 
41
Proof. Note that every box in n-space is defined by giving n intervals,
Ji^ /2>' ' ' » J m the projections of the box onto the different coordinate axes. In
particular, if B' is another box with corresponding intervals J ( , J'2, • • •, /'„, then
5.2. The boxicity of ecological phase space. Ecologists study the relationships
among organisms in communities. From the point of view of biology, this study is
a crucial step in the understanding of the "web of nature." From the point of
view of society, this study is important to understand how social endeavors
would perturb ecosystems. In ecology, a species13 is sometimes characterized
by the ranges of all of the different environmental factors which define its normal
healthy environment. For example, the normal healthy environment is deter-
mined by a range of values of temperature, of light, of pH, of moisture, and so
on. If there are n factors in all, and each defines an interval of values, then the
corresponding region in n-space is a box. This box corresponds to what is
frequently called in ecology the ecological niche of the species. Hutchinson
(1944), for example, defines the ecological niche as "the sum of all the
environmental factors acting on an organism; the niche thus defined is a region
of n -dimensional hyper-space, comparable to the phase-space of statistical
mechanics." For this reason, the n-dimensional Euclidean space defined by the n
factors is sometimes called ecological phase space. Recent reviews of the concept
of ecological niche are by Miller (1967), Vandermeer (1972), and Pianka (1976).
Suppose we have some independent information about when different species'
niches overlap. We can then ask how many dimensions are required of an
ecological phase space so that we can represent each species by a niche or box in
this space and so that the niches overlap if and only if the independent informa-
tion tells us they should. This question can be formulated graph-theoretically.
Draw a niche overlap graph whose vertices are a collection of species from an
ecosystem, and which has an edge between two species if and only if their
ecological niches overlap. We wish to determine the smallest n so that the niche
We use this term loosely.

42 
CHAPTER 5
overlap graph is the intersection graph of boxes in n-space, i.e., we wish to
determine the boxicity of the niche overlap graph.
How do we define the niche overlap graph? One way is to use the notion of
competition. For it is an old ecological principle that two species compete if and
only if their ecological niches overlap. By studying the species in an ecosystem,
we can obtain information about which species prey on which others. We can
represent this information in a digraph, whose vertices are the species in ques-
tion and which has an arc from species x to species y if and only if x preys on y.
This digraph is called a food web. Given a food web, we shall assume, following
Cohen (1978), that two species have overlapping niches (at least along trophic or
"feeding" dimensions) if and only if they have a common prey. That is, niche
overlap occurs if and only if the species compete for food. Figures 5.3 and 5.4
show two food webs and their corresponding niche overlap graphs. Note, for
example, that in Fig. 5.3, species 1 and 4 both prey on species 5; hence there is
an edge between vertices 1 and 4 in the niche overlap graph.14
The niche overlap graph of Fig. 5.3 is a rather simple graph, and it is easy to
see that it is an interval graph which is incomplete. Hence, its boxicity is 1. The
conclusion is that one dimension suffices to account for niche overlap in this
ecosystem. However, the nature of this dimension, i.e., its environmental
significance, is not determined. The niche overlap graph of Fig. 5.4 is a little
more complicated. However, surprisingly, it too is an interval graph. Figure 5.5
shows an interval assignment. Hence, the boxicity is again 1.
The idea of studying the dimensionality or boxicity of the ecological phase
space needed to account for observed niche overlaps was developed by Joel
Cohen in an unpublished document in 1968. After examining a number of real
food webs, Cohen discovered that all of them gave rise to niche overlap graphs
which were interval graphs. He asked whether this was always true, and Klee
(1969) published the question. Should every niche overlap graph be an interval
graph, then one dimension would suffice to account for niche overlap, a very
surprising development. This dimension, though not defined, might have great
ecological significance, and might help in understanding perturbations in
ecosystems. Until recently, the evidence mounted in favor of the conjecture that
every niche overlap graph obtained from a real food web is an interval graph.
However, in Cohen (1978), a number of counterexamples are finally given. In
that monograph, a large number of food webs are examined, and the evidence
seems to suggest that food webs corresponding to habitats of a certain limited
physical and temporal heterogeneity do give rise to niche overlap graphs which
are interval graphs. Cohen also develops statistical profiles of food webs, with
the aim of generating hypothetical food webs at random in order to generate
their corresponding niche overlap graphs. These graphs can then be used to
study various claims about dimensionality of niche overlap. In order to study
14 In his early work, Cohen identified niche overlap with competition and called the niche overlap
graph the competition graph. In Cohen (1978), he argues that competition may occur for resources
other than food and hence the term niche overlap graph is more appropriate.

FOOD WEBS, NICHE OVERLAP GRAPHS, AND BOXICITY
43
niche overlap further, it would be nice to have techniques for calculating boxi-
city. Unfortunately, as pointed out above, such techniques are lacking.
Key
1. Juvenile pink salmon
2. P. Minutus
3. Calanus and Euphausiid Burcillia
4. Euphausiid Eggs
5. Euphausiids
6. Chaetoceros Socialis and
Debilis
7. Mu-Flagellates
FIG. 5.3. Food web and niche overlap graph for the Strait of Georgia, British Columbia. From data
of Parsons and LeBrasseur (1970), as adapted by Cohen (1978).
5.3. The properties of niche overlap graphs. It seems natural to ask whether
we can explain structurally the empirical results described in the previous
section. Is it so surprising that so many real niche overlap graphs are interval
graphs, or are almost all possible niche overlap graphs interval graphs? To make
this question precise, let us assume that a food web F corresponds to an acyclic
digraph, i.e., a digraph with no cycles. This is a special assumption, but one which
is commonly made in ecology. The corresponding niche overlap graph G is
defined as follows: the vertices of G are the vertices of F and there is an edge
from species x to species y if and only if for some z, there are arcs (x, z) and
(y, z} in F.1 Given an arbitrary graph G, we say it is a niche overlap graph if it
comes from an acyclic digraph (or food web) in this way. What graphs are niche
overlap graphs? Are almost all niche overlap graphs interval graphs?
To answer these questions, let us first observe that not every graph is a niche
overlap graph. For, it is easy to see that every acyclic digraph F must have a
vertex with no outgoing arcs. This vertex corresponds to an isolated vertex in the
niche overlap graph of F, i.e., to a vertex with no adjacent vertices. Hence, every
niche overlap graph has an isolated vertex. Let Ip be the graph of p isolated
vertices. We next observe that if G is any graph at all, and G has e edges, then
G(JIe is a niche overlap graph, where G U Ie is the graph obtained by adding e
isolated vertices to G. To see this, we build a food web F as follows. We start by
putting into F the vertices of G. For every edge a = {a, b} of G, we add a vertex
xa to F. In F, we include arcs from a and b to xa. It is clear that GUIe is the
niche overlap graph of F. This result shows that essentially every graph is a niche
overlap graph. In particular, there are niche overlap graphs of arbitrarily high
boxicity. For example, take K(2, 2, • • •, 2) U Ie. Hence, it is surprising, given
that almost every possible graph is potentially a niche overlap graph, that

1 . Canopy — leaves, fruits, flowers
2. Canopy animals — birds, fruit-bats, and other mammals
3. Upper air animals — birds and bats, insectivorous
4. Insects
5. Large ground animals — large mammals and birds
6. Trunk, fruit, flowers
1 . Middle- zone scansorial animals — mammals in both canopy and ground zones
8. Middle -zone fly ing animals — birds and insectivorous bats
9. Ground — roots, fallen fruit, leaves and trunks
10. Small ground animals — birds and small mammals
11. Fungi
FIG. 5.4. Food web and niche overlap graph for Malaysian Rain Forest, from data of Harrison
(1962), as adapted by Cohen (1978).
real-world niche overlap graphs tend to have such low boxicity, and usually
boxicity 1.
The niche overlap number (or competition number) k(G) is the least number k
so that G U Ik is a competition graph. Characterization of niche overlap graphs is
equivalent to the problem of computing k(G). We shall present some results on
For the rest of this section e(G) will denote the number of edges of G and
n(G) the number of vertices.
THEOREM 5.4 (Roberts (1978)). // G has no triangles, then k(G)^
e(G)-n(G) + 2.
Proof. Let n = n(G), e = e(G), and k = k(G). Suppose G(JIk is a niche
overlap graph for food web F. For every edge a = {u, v} of G, there is a vertex aa
FlG. 5.5. Interval assignment for the niche overlap graph of Fig. 5.4.
44
CHAPTER5

FOOD WEBS, NICHE OVERLAP GRAPHS, AND BOXICITY 
45
in F so that u and v prey on aa. Moreover, since G has no triangles, the aa's are
distinct. Hence, it follows that the number of vertices of F, namely n + k, is at
least e. Now every aa has at least two incoming arcs, and it is not hard to show
that every acyclic digraph has at least two vertices with fewer than two incoming
arcs. For, by a variant of an earlier observation, every such digraphD has a
vertex x with no incoming arcs. The digraph D' obtained by removing x and all
outgoing arcs from x is acyclic and hence has a vertex y with no incoming arcs.
Hence, x and y have fewer than 2 incoming arcs in D. In any case, these two
vertices cannot be used for aa 's, and so we conclude that n + k — 2 ^ e. Q.E.D.
The bound in Theorem 5.4 is not sharp. The graph /3 has no triangles, yet
k = 0 while e-n + 2 = -l. However, we have the following theorem.
THEOREM 5.5 (Roberts (1978)). // G is connected, n(G)> 1, and G has no
triangles, then k(G) - e(G)- n(G] + 2.
We shall give a hint of the method of proof of this theorem below. Note that
by Theorem 5.5, k(Zn) -2 if n^4, since e = n.
THEOREM 5.6 (Roberts (1978)). For every k, there is a graph G with k(G) > k.
Proof. Let k ^ 4, and let G consist of two copies of Zk with vertices in one
copy joined to corresponding vertices in the other copy. Then G has no tri
angles, e(G) = 3k, n(G) = 2k, and so k(G)^3k-2k +2= k+2. Q.E.D.
If a is a vertex of a graph, the open neighborhood of a, N(a), is the collection of
all vertices adjacent to a. The vertex is called simplicial if N(a) is a clique. (The
extreme vertices of a graph which we encountered in §4.1 are simplicial
vertices.)
THEOREM 5.7 (Dirac (1961)). Every rigid circuit graph has a simplicial vertex.
THEOREM 5.8 (Roberts (1978)). // G is a rigid circuit graph, then k(G) ^ 1.
Proof. Find a sequence of vertices a\, a2, • • • , an-i, where n = n(G), as
follows. Vertex a^ is a simplicial vertex of G\ = G. Vertex a2 is a simplicial
vertex of G2=Gi~ai, the graph generated by vertices of G\ other than a\.
(Note that a2 exists since every generated subgraph of a rigid circuit graph is
rigid circuit.) Vertex <23 is a simplicial vertex of G3 = G2-a2. And so on. Build a
sequence of food webs F{, F2, • • • , Fn_! as follows. Food web F, for all i has
vertex set V(G) plus one additional vertex x. Food web F! has arcs from a\ and
all vertices in N(a}) to x. Thus, a\ and all vertices in N(ai) are all adjacent to
each other in the niche overlap graph corresponding to Fl. F2 is obtained from
F! by adding arcs from a2 and all vertices of N(a2) to a\. Thus, the niche overlap
graph of F2 is obtained from that of Fj by joining a2 and all its neighbors to each
other. In general, Fl+1 is obtained from F, by adding arcs from ai+i and all
vertices of N(ai+i) to a,. It is now easy to see that food web Fn-l is acyclic and its
niche overlap graph is GU/i, where vertex x corresponds to the isolated
vertex. Q.E.D.
The procedure of proof of this theorem is carried out on an example in Fig.
5.6.
COROLLARY. // G is an interval graph, then k(G)^l.
The construction of the proof of Theorem 5.8 depends on an ordering of
vertices. For each possible ordering of vertices of any graph, we can carry out a

46
CHAPTER 5
similar construction, if we are careful to divide up N(aj into cliques, and if we
allow ourselves to add more than one additional isolated vertex. In this way, one
obtains an estimate for k(G}. This procedure leads to the result of Theorem 5.5
for connected, triangle-free graphs, and to estimates of k(G] for other graphs.
The reader is referred to Roberts (1978) for details.
FIG. 5.6. Constructing a food web for G U /i if G is a rigid circuit graph.
5.4. Community food webs, sink food webs, and source food webs. Certain
food webs include the predation relations between all pairs of species. These
food webs Cohen (1978) calls community food webs. Suppose F is a community
food web, and W is a set of species from F. Let X be the set of all species which
are reachable from vertices of W by a path, and Y the set of all species which
reach vertices of W by a path. The subgraph (subdigraph) of F generated by
vertices of X is called a sink food web corresponding to W and the subgraph
generated by vertices of Y is called a source food web. The food web of Fig. 5.3 is
a sink food web obtained from some larger food web, while that of Fig. 5.4 is a
community food web. In the latter food web, if W = {1,4, 10}, then X =
{1,4,9, 10, II}15 and Y = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 10}.
 Every vertex x is reachable from itself since x alone is a path.
15

FOOD WEBS, NICHE OVERLAP GRAPHS, AND BOXICITY
47
THEOREM 5.9 (Cohen (1978)). A community food web has a niche overlap
graph which is an interval graph if and only if every sink food web contained in it
does.
Proof. Every community food web is a sink food web: take W= V. Thus, it is
only necessary to prove that if F is a community food web and its niche overlap
graph G is an interval graph, then for every set W of vertices of F, if H is the
niche overlap graph of the sink food web corresponding to W, then H is an
interval graph. Let x and y be vertices in the set X of vertices reachable from
vertices of W. Then x and y have a common prey in F if and only if they have a
common prey in the sink food web generated by W. It follows that H is a
generated subgraph of G. The theorem follows since every generated subgraph
of an interval graph is an interval graph. Q.E.D.
It is possible for a community food web to have a niche overlap graph which is
an interval graph while some source food web contained in it has a niche overlap
graph which is not an interval graph. To give an example, consider the (com-
munity) food web of Fig. 5.7. The corresponding niche overlap graph, also
shown in the figure, is an interval graph. The source food web corresponding to
the vertices jc, y, z, / has the niche overlap graph shown in the figure. This graph
is not an interval graph, since Z4 is a generated subgraph. In general, source food
webs cannot be expected to tell us much of interest about the dimensionality of
the ecological phase space required to represent niche overlap. Hence, we must
be careful, in gathering empirical data, to be sure not to use source food webs.
Food web 
Niche overlap graph correspond -
Niche overlap graph 
ing to source food web obtained
from W = {x, y, z, f}.
FIG. 5.7. A community food web, its niche overlap graph which is an interval graph, and a niche
overlap graph of a source food web which is not an interval graph.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 6
Colorability
6.1. Applications of graph coloring. Suppose G is a graph. Let us try to color
the vertices of G, each vertex receiving exactly one color, in such a way that if
two vertices are joined by an edge, they get different colors. If such a vertex
coloring can be carried out using k (or fewer) colors, we say that G is k-
colorable. The smallest k so that G is k -colorable is called the chromatic number
of G, and is denoted ;f(G). It is obvious that x(Kn) = n (each vertex must receive
a different color). Moreover, if n is even, then \(Zn) = 2: alternate colors around
the circuit. However, if n is odd, then x(Zn] - 3. (A coloring of Z5 in 3 colors is
shown in Fig. 6.1; no 2-coloring exists, as is easy to see.) Graph coloring
problems arise in a variety of applications. We shall mention several of these
here.
FIG. 6.1. A coloring of Z5 in 3 colors.
6.1.1. Tour graphs. A tour of a garbage truck is a schedule of sites it visits in a
given day. The following problem arose (Beltrami and Bodin (1973), Tucker
(1973)) from a problem posed by the New York City Department of Sanitation.
Given a collection of tours of garbage trucks, is it possible to assign each tour to
a day of the week (other than Sunday) so that if two tours visit a common site,
they get a different day? A similar problem can be posed for other service
schedules, for example milk or newspaper deliveries, street cleaning schedules,
and so on. To formulate this problem graph-theoretically, let G be the tour
graph, the graph whose vertices are the tours, and which has an edge between
two tours if and only if they visit a common site. The problem is equivalent to the
following: is it possible to assign to each vertex (tour) one of six colors (days) so
that if two tours are joined by an edge (visit a common site) they get a different
color? Thus the question becomes: is the tour graph 6-colorable?
49

50 
CHAPTER 6
6.1.2. Committee schedules. Each member of one house of a state legislature
belongs to several committees. A schedule of committee meetings is to be drawn
up during a weekly period. Each committee is to meet exactly once, but two
committees with a common member cannot meet at the same time. How many
meeting times are required? To answer this question, we form a graph G with
vertices the committees, and an edge between two committees if and only if their
members overlap (this is the intersection graph of the committees, to use the
terminology of § 3.2). We wish to assign to each vertex (committee) a color
(meeting time) so that if two vertices are joined by an edge (have a member in
common), they get different meeting times. The smallest number of meeting
times required is the chromatic number of the graph G. A similar problem
obviously arises in planning final examination schedules at a university. Here,
the committees correspond to classes.
6.1.3. Map coloring. Given a map, we wish to use a variety of colors to color
the countries, and we insist only that if two countries have a common boundary,
they get different colors. We can translate a map into a graph by letting each
country be represented by a vertex, and joining two vertices with an edge if and
only if the corresponding countries have a common boundary. Then the problem
of coloring the map is equivalent to the problem of coloring its graph. In
particular, a famous question asked whether every map could be colored using
four or fewer colors. This question, which was recently answered in the affirma-
tive (Appel and Haken (1977), Appel, Haken and Koch (1977)), was equivalent
to the question: could every graph which arises from a map be colored in four
colors? (The graphs which arise from maps are called planar, as they are, unde
some reasonable assumptions about maps, exactly the graphs which can be
drawn in the plane without edges crossing.)
6.2. Calculating the chromatic number. In general, it is a hard problem to
calculate the chromatic number of a graph. In fact, it is not known whether there
is a polynomial (deterministic) algorithm for computing \(G). The problem of
computing x(G) is in the class NP which we defined in § 2.4. Stockmeyer (1973)
shows that the problem of determining whether a planar graph is 3-colorable is
NP-complete (and hence, of course, so is the problem of determining ^(G)).
Garey, Johnson and Stockmeyer (1976) have recently shown that even the
problem of determining 3-colorability in planar graphs each of whose vertices
has at most four adjacent vertices is NP-complete. These results show why
such problems as routing of garbage trucks and scheduling of committee meet-
ings are hard problems, for they correspond to coloring problems which are hard
in a very precise way. It is interesting to note how translation of a problem into a
precise mathematical one can cast light on why the problem is difficult.
It is easy to discover deterministically in polynomial time whether or not a
graph is 2-colorable. For a graph is 2-colorable if and only if it is bipartite, i.e.,
the vertices can be partitioned into two classes, so that all edges in the graph go
between classes. The depth-first search procedure described in §2.3 can be used
to find a polynomial deterministic algorithm for testing bipartiteness (Reingold,
Nievergelt and Deo (1977, pp. 399, 400)).

COLORABILITY 
51
The following theorem characterizes 2-colorable graphs.
THEOREM 6.1 (Konig (1936)). A graph is 2-colorable if and only if it has no
circuits of odd length.
Proof. If G is 2-colorable, then every circuit must alternate between the two
colors, and hence can only have even length. Conversely, suppose every circuit
of G is even. We may assume without loss of generality that G is connected, for
otherwise, we perform the 2-coloring separately on each component. If G is
connected, we let d(u, v) be the length of the shortest chain between u and v.
Picking an arbitrary u in V(G), we let
Notice that u is in A, since d(u, u) = 0. It is easy to show that there are no edges
between vertices within class A or between vertices within class B. The
argument proceeds by showing that if there were such an edge, then there would
be an odd length closed chain in G. If there were an odd length closed chain, a
shortest such would have to be an odd circuit. A similar argument shows that A
and B are disjoint, and hence they can form the two classes of vertices in a
2-coloring. Q.E.D.
6.3. Clique number. The chromatic number is closely related to another
number associated with a graph, the clique number w(G), which is defined to be
the size of the largest clique. The clique number arises in a number of appli-
cations. It is important in present day sociology, for example, where finding
cliques in sociograms, graphs representing some relation among members in a
group, is an important procedure. It is easy to see that x(G) =5 w(G), since every
vertex of a clique must get a different color. It is also easy to see that x may be
larger than cu. For example, x(Zs) — 3 while o>(Z5) = 2. A graph is called weakly
y-perfect if \(G) = cu(G). Thus, Z5, or indeed Zn, n odd and greater than 3, is
not weakly y-perfect. (These graphs Zn are sometimes called odd holes.) The
term y-perfect arises from the fact that y(G) is sometimes used to denote the
minimum number of independent sets which partition the vertices of G. It is easy
to see that x(G) = y(G). The vertices of a given color form the independent sets.
If a graph is weakly y-perfect, then of course its chromatic number can be
calculated from its clique number. Although on the surface this seems like an
easier problem, we have remarked earlier that the problem of finding the clique
number is NP-hard. However, within the contexts of certain algorithms, it is
easier to calculate clique number than chromatic number. In particular, in
procedures for solving the tour graph problem described in §6.1.1, deter-
mination of chromatic number must be done over and over for a continually
changing set of tours. Since the set of tours is changed bit by bit, the tour graph
gets changed only locally. This makes it easy to calculate clique number for
subsequent graphs from previous ones by making only local searches, while it is
not possible to calculate chromatic number of subsequent graphs by making only
local searches. For this reason, Tucker (1973) suggests using clique number to

52 
CHAPTER 6
calculate chromatic number. The procedure works only if there is a method of
determining whether or not these two numbers are the same, i.e., whether or not
a given graph is weakly y-perfect. We shall discuss such a method.
We say that a graph is y-perfect 
if every generated subgraph is weakly
y-perfect. The notion of y-perfectness might seem rather restrictive, but we
shall see that a large class of graphs are y-perfect. The concept of y-perfect is
due to Berge (1961), (1962), who conjectured that a graph G is y-perfect if and
only if its complement is y-perfect. This conjecture, known as the weak Berge
conjecture, or weak perfect graph conjecture, was proved by Lovasz.
THEOREM 6.2 (Lovasz (1972a,b)). A graph G is y-perfect if and only if its
complementary graph is y-perfect.
Since no odd hole is weakly y-perfect, a y-perfect graph cannot contain an
odd hole as a generated subgraph, and neither, by Lovasz' result, can its
complementary graph. The converse of this statement was suggested by the work
of Berge (1963), (1967), (1969), and is called the strong Berge conjecture or the
strong perfect graph conjecture. It says that if neither G nor Gc contains an odd
hole as a generated subgraph, then G is y-perfect.
Tucker's (1973) idea is to use the strong Berge conjecture to determine
whether or not x(G) = o>(G). If the answer is affirmative, then one can use the
improved local procedure for finding w(G) and use the result to calculate #(G).
As Tucker points out, the worst possible situation which could arise from the use
of the Berge conjecture in sanitation scheduling is to obtain a set of tours which
is supposedly assignable to the six days of the week, but which in fact cannot be
so assigned. Then, one would have found a counterexample to the Berge
conjecture! Note: use of the Berge conjecture involves determining the exis-
tence of odd holes. There can be exponentially many circuits in a graph (consider
Kn, which has I .](/ — !)! circuits of length i). However, we only need to identify
circuits in a graph after local changes have been made in previous graphs.
6.4. y-perfect graphs. Among the interesting classes of graphs which are
y-perfect are the bipartite graphs, the transitively orientable graphs, and the
rigid circuit graphs (and hence the interval graphs and indifference graphs). We
shall sketch a proof that every rigid circuit graph is y-perfect. A cutset or an
articulation set in a connected graph G is a set of vertices U such that the
subgraph generated by V(G)— U is disconnected. The vertices a and c form an
articulation set in the graph of Fig. 6.2.
FIG. 6.2. Vertices a and c form an articulation set.

COLORABILITY 
53
THEOREM 6.3 (Hajnal and Suranyi (1958)). In a connected rigid circuit graph
G, every minimal articulation set is a clique.
Proof. Let U be a minimal articulation set and H be the subgraph generated
by V(G) — U. Then H has connected components KI, K2, • • • , Kp, with p = 2.
Given u and v in U, we shall show they are joined by an edge in G. Now every
vertex a in U has an edge to each Kh otherwise U — {a} would be an articulation
set contained in U. Hence there must be x and y in Kl so that {u, x} and {v, y}
are edges of G. Since KI is connected, there is a chain x\, x2, • • • , xr from x to y
in KI. Thus, there is a chain u, x\, JC2, • • • , xr, v with xt, x2,---,xr in KI. Let C
be such a chain of minimal length. Let C' be a similar minimal length chain
«» yi, yi, • • • , ys, u with yi, y2, • • • , ys in K2. Then C followed by C' is a circuit
in G. Since G is a rigid circuit graph, this cannot be a generated subgraph, and
hence there must be some edge joining two vertices in this circuit. By minimality
of C and C', there are no edges joining vertices on C except possibly u to v, and
similarly for C'. Moreover, since KI and K2 are different components of H, there
are no edges joining any xt to any y/. Thus, the only possible edge in this circuit is
the edge {u, v}. 
Q.E.D.
COROLLARY (Berge). Every rigid circuit graph G is y-perfect.
Proof. It is sufficient to show that G is weakly y-perfect, since every generated
subgraph of a rigid circuit graph is also rigid circuit. It is also sufficient to assume
that G is connected. The proof is by induction on the number of vertices of G.
The case where G has one vertex is trivial. Assume the result is true for graphs
with fewer vertices than G. If G is complete, the result is trivial. If G is not
complete, there is a pair of vertices a and b not joined by an edge, and so all
remaining vertices form an articulation set. Let U be a minimal articulation set.
Let KI, K2, • • • , Kp be the connected components in the subgraph generated by
V(G) - U, and let d be the graph generated by vertices of U and Kt. Using the
fact that U is a clique, one shows that *(G) = max x(&i) and w(G) = max w(G,).
Since by inductive assumption x(Gt) = a}(Gi) for all i, ^(G) must equal
w(G). Q.E.D.
COROLLARY. Every interval graph is y-perfect.
6.5. Multicolorings. An n-tuple coloring of a graph G is an assignment of a
set S(x) of n different colors to each vertex of G so that if (jc, y} is an edge of G,
then S(x) and S(y) are disjoint. If U S(x) is a set of k elements, we say that the
n-tuple coloring uses k colors. Given n, the smallest k so that G has an n-tuple
coloring using k colors is called the n-chromatic number of G, and is denoted
Xn(G). This notion has been studied by, among others, Clarke and Jamison
(1976), Garey and Johnson (1976), Scott (1975), Stahl (1976), and Chvatal,
Garey and Johnson (1976). To give an example, if Ip is the graph consisting of p
isolated vertices, then xn(Ip) - n. For each vertex can receive the same set of n
colors. If G is bipartite and has at least one edge, then Xn(G) = 2n, for each
vertex in the same class can receive the same n colors, but the two vertices
joined by an edge must receive disjoint sets of colors. To give one final example,
Fig. 6.3 shows a 2-tuple coloring of Z5 using 5 colors.

54
CHAPTER 6
FIG. 6.3. A 2-tuple coloring of Z5 using 5 colors.
The idea of n-tuple coloring arises in the problem of assignment of mobile
radio telephone frequencies, which we discussed in § 3.7. We start with a conflict
graph whose vertices are zones and whose edges represent conflict between the
zones. We wish to assign a band of frequencies B(i) to each zone / so that if there
is an edge between i and y, then B(i) f l B ( j } = 0. In § 3.7, we thought of these
bands as intervals or unions of intervals, and we restricted them to having a
certain minimal length. If we think of them all as having the same length or sum
of lengths, we may treat them as discrete sets, say of n integers. Then, an
assignment of bands which does not cause conflicts corresponds to an n-tuple
coloring of the conflict graph. For a further discussion, see Roberts (to appear).
It is interesting to relate the n-chromatic number to the chromatic number.
To do so, we follow Harary (1959b) and define a notion of lexicographic
product G[H] of two graphs. The vertex set of this new graph is the Cartesian
product V(G)x V(H), and there is an edge from (a, b) to (c, d) if and only if
either (i) (a, c} is an edge of G or (ii) a = c and {b, d} is an edge of H. Figure 6.4
gives an example of a lexicographic product of two graphs. As Stahl (1976)
observes,
FIG. 6.4. The lexicographic product of two graphs.

COLORABILITY 
55
It will be helpful to make several observations about G[H], some of which will
be useful here and some of which will be useful in the next chapter. We shall use
the notation a(G) for the size of the largest independent set of vertices in G.
THEOREM 6.4.
Proof. Part 1) is easily verified from the definition and part 3) follows from
parts 1) and 2) given the observation that for any graph F, a(F) = cu(Fc). To
prove part 2), we observe that if K is a maximal clique in G and L is a maximal
clique in H, then KxL is a clique in G[//], and so 
a)(G[H])^aj(G)<i)(H).
Conversely, suppose C is a clique of G[H]. Let
Then if a ^ c belong to K, there are b and d so that (a, 6) and (c, d) belong to C.
Since C is a clique, it follows that {a, c} is an edge of G. Hence, K is a clique of
G. For each a in K, the number of times a pair of the form (a, x) occurs in C is at
most a)(H}. Hence,
Finally, we prove part 4). We shall use the fact that x = 7 an^ show the result
for y. Suppose 7l5 /2, • • • , Ip and J\,Ji,---,Jq are independent sets which
partition V(G) and V(ff) respectively, and so that p = y(G), q = y(H). Then
the 
sets 
/„ x J^ 
are 
clearly 
independent 
in 
G[H] 
and 
partition
V(G[H]). 
Q.E.D.
Note that strict inequality may hold in part 4). It is easy to show, for example,
that if G is Z5 and H is K2, then ^(G[//]) = 5, which is smaller than
THEOREM 6.5. // G /s weakly y-perfect, then Xn(G} — nx(G).
Proof. By Theorem 6.4, part 2),
By Theorem 6.4, part 4)
Since G is weakly y-perfect, x(G) = o)(G). Thus, (6.2) and (6.3) imply that
Since for any graph, x = w, the theorem follows from (6.1). Q.E.D.
COROLLARY. If G is weakly y-perfect, then so is G[Kn].

56 
CHAPTER 6
The first interesting graph which is not y-perfect, and hence for which the
n-chromatic number is not covered by Theorem 6.5, is Z5. Stahl (1976) shows
that Xn(Z2p+i) is 2/i + 1 +[(n - 0/p], where [x] is the greatest integer less than or
equal to x.
6.6. Multichromatic number. Hilton, Rado, and Scott (1973) define the
multichromatic number x*(G) as follows:
Of course, we have
Stahl (1976) defines an /7-tuple coloring of G with k colors to be efficient if
A coloring is efficient if the ratio of the number of colors used to the number of
colors used per vertex is as small as possible. It is clear that for an efficient
coloring, k/n = x*(G). Clarke and Jamison (1976) show that there always is an
efficient coloring, i.e., the infimum in (6.5) is always reached. The next theorem
follows from Theorem 6.5.
THEOREM 6.6. // G is weakly y-perfect, then x*(G) = x(G) and G has an
efficient 
{-tuple coloring.
We shall present an analogous result, which has applications to coding pro-
blems, in Chapter 7.

CHAPTER 7
Independence and Domination
In this chapter, we shall discuss applications of the independence number
defined briefly in § 6.5 and of another number cal-ed the domination number.
7.1. The normal product. Suppose G and H are graphs. Analogous to the
lexicographic product defined in § 6.5, we define the normal product G • H as
follows. The vertices are the pairs in the Cartesian product V(G) x V(H). There
is an edge between (a, b) and (c, d) if and only if one of the following holds:
(i) {a, c} e E(G) and {b, d] e £(//),
(ii) a = cand{fc, d}eE(H),
(iii) b = dand{a, c}eE(G).
(The term normal product is used by Berge (1973); another term in use for this is
strong product.) Figure 7.1 shows a normal product. Notice that it differs from the
lexicographic product because the lexicographic product allows edges between
(a, b) and (c, d) whenever {a, c}e E(G), even if b * d and {b, d}£ E(H).
FIG. 7.1. The normal product of two graphs.
7.2. The capacity of a noisy channel. In communication theory, a noisy
channel consists of a transmission alphabet T, a receiving alphabet R, and
information about what letters of T can be received as what letters of R. To give
an example, suppose a transmitter can emit five signals, a, b, c, d, and e. These
letters form the set T. A receiver receives signals a, /3, y, 6, and e. Unfortunately,
because of the noise, confusion is possible: a can be received as either a or /3, b
as either /3 or y, c as either -y or 8, d as either 5 or e, and <? as either e or a. We
57

58 
CHAPTER 7
may summarize this situation by a "receivable as" digraph D, as shown in Fig.
7.2. Corresponding to D is a confusion graph G, whose vertices are elements of
T and which has an edge between two letters of T if and only if they can be
received as the same letter. The confusion graph corresponding to the digraph of
Fig. 7.2 is shown in Fig. 7.3. (The reader might wish to compare the confusion
graphs to the niche overlap graphs of Chapter 5.)
FIG. 7.2. A "receivable as" digraph.
FlG. 7.3. Confusion graph corresponding to digraph of Fig. 7.2.
THEOREM 7.1. Every graph is the confusion graph of some noisy channel.
Proof. For every edge a = {a, b} of graph G, include a vertex jc« in the
receiving alphabet and include arcs from a and b to xa in the "receivable as"
digraph D. Q.E.D.
Given a noisy channel, we would like to make errors impossible by choosing a
set of signals which can be unambiguously received, i.e., so that no signal in the
set is confusable with another signal in the set. This corresponds to choosing an
independent set in the confusion graph G. In the graph G of Fig. 7.3, the largest
independent set consists of two vertices. Thus, we may choose two such letters,
say a and c, and use these as an unambiguous code alphabet for sending
messages.
Given a fixed noisy channel, we might ask if it is possible to find a larger
unambiguous code alphabet. We can find such an alphabet by allowing

INDEPENDENCE AND DOMINATION 
59
combinations of letters from the transmission alphabet to form the code
alphabet. For example, suppose we consider all possible ordered pairs of ele-
ments from T, or strings of two elements from T. Then we can find four such
ordered pairs, aa, ac, ca, and cc, none of which can be confused with any of the
others. In general, two strings of letters from the transmission alphabet can be
confused if and only if they can be received as the same string. In this sense,
strings aa and ac cannot be confused, since the only possible strings aa can be
received as are aa, aft, pa, and /3/3, while the only possible strings ac can be
received as are ay, aB, (5y, and (38. We can draw a new confusion graph whose
vertices are strings of length two from T. This graph has the following property:
strings xy and uv can be confused if and only if one of the following holds:
(i) x and u can be confused and y and v can be confused,
(ii) x ~ u and y and v can be confused,
(iii) y = v and x and u can be confused.
In terms of the original confusion graph G, the new confusion graph is the
normal product G • G. (In general, if we have two noisy channels, and consider
strings of length two with the first element coming from the first transmission
alphabet and the second element from the second transmission alphabet, and if
we send the first element of a string over the first channel and the second element
over the second, then the resulting confusion graph is the normal product of the
two confusion graphs of the two channels.)
If G is the confusion graph of Fig. 7.3, we have already observed that one
independent set or unambiguous code alphabet in G • G may be found by using
the strings aa, ac, ca, and cc. However, there is a larger independent set, that
consisting of the strings aa, be, ce, db, and ed. In general, if we consider strings of
length k from the transmission alphabet of a fixed noisy channel, the confusion
graph is the normal product Gk = G • G ..... G, with k terms. We search for
an independent set in Gk. As before, we let a(G) be the size of the largest
independent set in G. We shall study a(Gk).
LEMMA!. a(G • H)^a(G)a(H}.
Proof. If / and J are independent sets in G and H respectively, then the
Cartesian product / x / is independent in G • H. Q.E.D.
According to this lemma, a(Gk)^a(G)k. The cost of obtaining a larger
independent set in Gk, and hence a larger unambiguous code alphabet, is
inefficiency, for the strings in this alphabet are longer. This observation led
Shannon (1956) to compensate by considering the number kVa(Gfc) as a
measure of the capacity of the channel to build an unambiguous code alphabet of
strings of length /c, and to consider the number
The number a*(G) is called the capacity of the graph or the zero-error capacity
of the channel, and is usually denoted c(G) in the literature. However, we shall
denote it a*(G) for reasons of comparison with earlier results. If a*(G) — ot(G),
then the code cannot be improved by using longer words.

60
CHAPTER 7
Computation of the capacity of a graph, and determination of graphs whose
capacity equals their independence number are both difficult problems, neither
of which has been solved. Indeed, even the capacity of the graph G = Z5 which
we discussed above was not known precisely until Lovasz (1977) showed that it
equals Vs, i.e., that
Meanwhile, as of this writing, c(Z7) remains unknown. A general upper bound
for capacity of an arbitrary graph is given by Rosenfeld (1967).
We shall give some sufficient conditions for a*(G) to equal a(G). Let 0(G) be
the minimum number of (not necessarily dominant) cliques which partition
V(G). For example, in the graph of Fig. 7.4, 0(G) — 2 and two cliques which
suffice are {a, b, c] and {d, e}. Note that in this example, a(G) = B(G).
FIG. 7.4. A graph with 9(G) = 2.
LEMMA 2.
Proof. If / is an independent set of G, each vertex must be in a different clique
in any partition. Q.E.D.
Of course, it is easy to give examples where a < 6. The graph Z5 has a — 2
while 6 = 3 (two edges and a single vertex are required). We shall show that the
condition a = B is sufficient for the conclusion that a* = a.
LEMMA 3. 0(G • H) ^ 0(G)6(H).
Proof. Suppose K\, K2, • • • , Kr 
are 
cliques 
partitioning 
V(G) 
and
LI, L2, • • • , Ls are cliques partitioning V(H). Then (K, x L;} is a set of cliques of
G • H partitioning V(G • H). 
Q.E.D.
We shall call a graph G weakly a -perfect if a(G) = 0(G) and a- perfect if every
generated subgraph of G is weakly a -perfect.
THEOREM 7.2 (Shannon (1956)). If G is weakly ex-perfect, then a*(G) = a(G).
Proof. By Lemmas 1, 2, and 3,
Since G is weakly a-perfect, the first and last terms are equal. Q.E.D.
Let us now observe that there are many examples of weakly a-perfect graphs.
For, by Lovasz' theorem (Theorem 6.2), a graph G is y-perfect if and only if its
complement is y-perfect. Now it is clear that

INDEPENDENCE AND DOMINATION 
61
Moreover,
for the chromatic number is the smallest number of independent sets which
partition the vertices of a graph. It follows from Lovasz' theorem that for every
graph G, G is a -perfect if and only if G is -y-perfect. In particular, we conclude
that all rigid circuit graphs, and hence all interval graphs, being y-perfect, have
a* -a. Thus, channels whose confusion graphs are rigid circuit graphs, in
particular interval graphs, cannot be improved by using longer strings. Channels
with interval graph confusion graphs arise when a signal is determined by its
modulation frequency and two signals are confusable if and only if their cor-
responding intervals overlap. This is the situation called linear noise. Hence, if
noise is linear, then, as Berge (1973) points out, a code cannot be improved by
using longer strings.
We should also note that Theorem 7.2 is analogous to the result (Theorem
6.6) which says that if G is weakly y-perfect, then #*(G) = *(G).
We conclude this section by showing that for every positive number k, there is
a graph Gk so that a*(Gk) = ka(Gk). Thus, capacity can be arbitrarily larger
than the largest independent set. We follow Rosenfeld (1970). A graph G is said
to be self- complemented if G is isomorphic to Gc. Z5 is an example of such a
graph. The isomorphism is shown in Fig. 7.5.
FIG. 7.5. Z5 is self-complemented, 
with the isomorphism from Z5 to ZC
5 given by a -> a, b -» c, c -» e,
^b, e -> d.
LEMMA 4. // G is self-complemented, then a(G2) ^ | V(G)\.
Proof. Let
Then / is independent in G • Gc. Since G • G is isomorphic to G • Gc, there is an
independent set in G2 of at least |/| elements. 
Q.E.D.
It is interesting to note that for Z5, the independent set / of the proof of
Lemma 4 corresponds to the independent set aa, be, ce, db, and ed in G • G

62 
CHAPTER 7
under the isomorphism of Fig. 7.5. This independent set is exactly the one w
identified earlier.
The next lemma concerns the lexicographic product G[H] defined in § 6.5
LEMMA 5. If G and H are self-complemented, then G[H] is self-comple-
mented.
Proof. Use Theorem 6.4, part 1). Q.E.D.
Now let GO be a self-complemented graph with a(G0)~<\V(Go)\ = n, for
example, G0 = Z5. Given k, there is an m >0 so that
and hence
Let Gfc = GO[GO[GO • • •]], where the lexicographic product is taken m times.
By Lemma 5, Gfc is self-complemented. Hence, by Lemma 4,
By Theorem 6.4, part 3),
Now
Thus, we have proven
THEOREM 7.3 (Rosenfeld (1970)). For every k>0, there is a graph Gk so that
7.3. Dominating sets. Before returning to independent sets, let us consider
another type of set. Let D be a digraph. A set B of vertices is called a dominating
set if whenever x is not in B, there is some y in B so that (y, x) is an arc of D. To
give an example, in the digraph of Fig. 7.6, the set {a, c} is a dominating set. Th
domination number of a digraph is the size of the smallest dominating set
FIG. 7.6. The set [a, c j ;j> a dominating set and a stable set.

INDEPENDENCE AND DOMINATION 
63
Dominating sets arise in a number of related problems. Berge (1973) talks
about the problem of locating radar stations. A number of strategic locations are
to be kept under observation. However, it is desired to put radar for the
observation process at as few of these locations as possible. How can we
determine a set of locations in which to place the radar stations? We draw a
digraph D with vertex set the locations in question. We draw an arc from x to y
if it is possible to observe y from a radar station at x. An acceptable set of
locations in which to place radar stations corresponds to a dominating set in this
digraph, and we wish to find such a set of minimum size.
A similar problem arises in nuclear power plants. Here, we have various
locations, and we draw an arc from location x to location y if it is possible for a
watchman stationed at x to observe a warning light located at y. How many
guards are needed to observe all of the warning lights, and where should they be
located? The answer again corresponds to a minimum dominating set.
Similarly, suppose we have communication links in existence between cities,
and we want to set up transmitting stations at some of the cities so that every city
can receive a message from at least one of the transmitting stations. Again, as
Liu (1968) points out, we are searching for a dominating set.
Finally, dominating sets have an interesting application in voting situations, as
pointed out by Harary, Norman and Cartwright (1965). Suppose a group is
trying to form a responsive committee to represent it. Let each member of the
group designate that individual who he feels best understands his needs and
would best represent his views. Let the group members be vertices of a digraph
and draw an arc from vertex x to vertex y if x was designated by y. Then a
minimum dominating set would make a representative committee.
The notion of dominating set can be modified in various ways. For example,
we might be willing to find a k-dominating set, or a k-cover, a set C of vertices in
a digraph D so that every vertex of D can be reached by a path of length at most
k from a vertex of C. Or, we might have a designated subset 5 of V(D), and
search for a set of vertices which dominates every vertex of S. The latter problem
is clearly of importance in modifications of the radar station and nuclear power
plant observation problems. The former problem might be important if the
vertices are locations in a city and the fe-cover we seek is a set of locations in
which to put emergency services such as police stations or fire stations. A famous
result about tournaments, (due to Landau (1955)) says that if * is a winner of a
round-robin tournament, a player having a maximum number of victories,
then {jc} is a 2-dominating set in the digraph which has an arc from player a to
player b if a beats b.
7.4. Stable sets. The notion of independent set makes sense for a digraph as
well as a graph: a set of vertices in a digraph D is called independent if there is no
arc joining any two vertices in the set. A set of vertices which is at the same time
an independent set and a dominating set is called a stable set or a kernel of the
digraph. The set {a, c} in the digraph of Fig. 7.6 is an example of a stable set.
Stable sets were introduced into the theory of games by von Neumann and
Morgenstefn (1944), where they were used to define possible solutions to a

64 
CHAPTER 7
game. In particular, suppose the vertices of a digraph represent possible
outcomes of a game, and we draw an arc from vertex x to vertex y if and only if
some group of players effectively prefers x to y, i.e., not only prefers x to y, but
has sufficient power to make its preference effective (this term is defined more
precisely in game theory). Then von Neumann and Morgenstern seek a set of
outcomes which has the properties that no outcome in the set is effectively
preferred to any other outcome in the set (independence) and that for every
outcome y not in the set there is an outcome x in the set so that x is effectively
preferred to y (domination). Modern-day game theorists apply stable sets as
"solutions" to games representing bargaining situations such as in voting, in the
economic marketplace, and in international relations (oil cartels, deterrence,
disarmament, etc.).
Liu (1968) points out that stable sets are also of interest in cross-referencing in
computerized automatic library systems. Draw a digraph which has as vertex set
the books in the system, and include an arc from book x to book y if x refers to
y. A stable set in this digraph corresponds to a set of books from which it is
possible to branch out to all other books in the library, and which has the
property that no book in the set refers to any other book in the set.
Unfortunately, not every digraph has a stable set. For example, a cycle of
length 3 does not have such a set. Other digraphs, such as that of Fig. 7.6, have
more than one stable set. Thus, there has been considerable interest in studying
the existence and uniqueness of stable sets. We shall state some results here,
following Berge (1973) for those theorems for which credit is not given. See also
Roberts (1976a) for a discussion of stable sets and their applications to game
theory.
THEOREM 7.4. Every stable set is a maximal independent set and a minimal
dominating set.
THEOREM 7.5. Every symmetric digraph has a stable set, and in such a digraph
a set is stable if and only if it is a maximal independent set.
THEOREM 7.6 (von Neumann and Morgenstern (1944)). Every acyclic digraph
has a unique stable set.
THEOREM 7.7 (Harary, Norman and Cartwright (1965)). Every strongly
connected digraph D consisting of more than one vertex and having no odd cycles
has at least two stable sets.
THEOREM 7.8 (Richardson (1946)). Every digraph with no odd cycles has a
stable set.
To illustrate some of these results, let us note that the set {a, b, c, d, e] is the
unique stable set in the digraph of Fig. 7.2. It is clearly a maximal independent
set and a minimal dominating set. This illustrates Theorems 7.4 and 7.6. If the
graph G of Fig. 7.4 is considered a symmetric digraph, then the sets {a,d}, {b, d},
{b, e}, and {c} are the maximal independent sets. These are also all the stable
sets, thus illustrating Theorem 7.5. The digraph of Fig. 7.6 illustrates Theorem
7.7, for there are two stable sets, the sets {a, c} and {b, d}.

CHAPTER 8
Applications of Eulerian Chains and Paths
8.1 Existence theorems. A chain (path) in a graph G (digraph £>) is called eulerian
if it uses every edge of G (arc of D) once and only once. Eulerian chains arose from
the Konigsberg bridge problem, which asked whether the townspeople in Konigsberg
could traverse a series of bridges, going over each once and only once, and returning
to the starting point. In the course of showing this was impossible, Euler produced
techniques which gave birth to graph theory. In today's world, the notions of eulerian
chain and path are applied to such problems as routing street-sweeping and snow-
removal vehicles, untangling genetic information, and designing telecommunications
systems. We shall investigate these applications in this chapter.
It will be useful in this chapter to allow a graph or digraph to have more than one
edge or arc between vertices. We shall use the terms multigraph and multidigraph to
make it clear that multiple edges and arcs are allowed. Loops will also be allowed.
The notions of chain, path, etc. are unchanged (though the definition now sometimes
allows a, b, a as a circuit). We still define a chain or path as eulerian if it goes through
each edge or arc once and only once.
If a multigraph has an eulerian closed chain, then it must be connected up to
isolated vertices. Moreover, since an eulerian closed chain must leave every
'vertex as often as it enters, each vertex must have even degree, where the degree
of a vertex is the number of edges joining it.
THEOREM 8.1. A multigraph G has an eulerian closed chain if and only if G is
connected up to isolated vertices and every vertex has even degree.
Figure 8.1 illustrates this theorem. Every vertex of the multigraph G has even
degree. An eulerian closed chain is the following: a, b, c, b, c, d, a, e, d, /, a. For
a proof of Theorem 8.1, see for example Harary (1969).
THEOREM 8.2. A multigraph G has an eulerian chain if and only if G is
connected up to isolated vertices and the number of vertices of odd degree is either 0
or 2.
To illustrate this theorem, note that the multigraph of Fig. 8.2 has an eulerian
chain a, b, c, d, a, c, d, but no eulerian closed chain since vertices a and d have
odd degree.
If D is a multidigraph the outdegree and indegree of a vertex are defined to be
the number of outgoing and incoming arcs respectively. We abbreviate these
notions by od and id respectively. If a multidigraph has an eulerian closed path,
it must up to isolated vertices be weakly connected, i.e., if direction is dis-
regarded, each vertex is reachable from each other vertex.
THEOREM 8.3 (Good (1947)). A multidigraph D has an eulerian closed path if
65

66
CHAPTER 8
and only if D is weakly connected up to isolated vertices and for every vertex, the
indegree equals the outdegree.
THEOREM 8.4 (Good (1947)). A multidigraph D has an eulerian path if and
only if D is weakly connected up to isolated vertices and for all vertices with the
possible exception of two, the indegree equals the outdegree, and for at most two
vertices, the indegree and outdegree differ by one.
The first multidigraph of Fig. 8.3 does not have an eulerian path since there
are vertices where the indegree and outdegree differ by two. The second multi-
digraph does not have an eulerian path because there are four vertices where
the indegree and outdegree differ by one. Notice that since the sum of the
indegrees equals the sum of the outdegrees, it follows from Theorem 8.4 that if
there is one exceptional vertex, there will be two, and one will have id = od+ 1,
while the other has id = od- 1. Note that these theorems hold if there are loops.
A loop will contribute indegree and outdegree of 1 to the given vertex, and so
loops make no difference as to existence of eulerian chains, paths, closed chains,
and closed paths.
8.2. The transportation problem. The following problem arises in a variety of
applications, and is called the transportation problem. We shall refer to it in
applications of eulerian paths. Let there be a certain number of warehouses and
a certain number of markets. Let a^ be the cost of transporting one unit of a
commodity from warehouse / to market /. Let xt be the number of units of the
commodity at warehouse i and yy be the number of units of the commodity
required at market /. Determine how much of the stock at each warehouse
should be shipped to each market so as to minimize the total transportation cost.
This problem has been extensively studied, and there are very practical
algorithms for its solution. We shall not present any such algorithm here, but
simply refer the reader to such texts as Hillier and Lieberman (1974) or Wagner
(1975). In the next section, we shall show how to make use of algorithms for
solving the transportation problem in finding certain kinds of eulerian closed
paths.
FIG. 8.1. A multigraph with an eulerian closed chain.

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS
67
FIG. 8.2. A muhigraph with an eulerian chain but no eulerian closed chain.
FIG. 8.3. Two multidigraphs without eulerian paths.
8.3. Street-sweeping. Millions of dollars are spent each year by municipali-
ties in performing services such as street-sweeping, snow-removal, etc. We shall
show how the notion of eulerian closed path enters into the determination of
optimal routes for street-sweepers and snow-removers. Our discussion follows
Tucker and Bodin (1976). For a similar discussion, with examples from the city
of Zurich, see Liebling (1970). We shall speak in the language of street-sweeping
for concreteness.
In general, we shall draw a multidigraph, the curb multidigraph, to correspond
to the streets of a city. The vertices are street corners, and the arcs correspond to
curbs. Thus, there is an arc from street corner x to street corner y if there is a
curb which can be traveled along from x to y. We obtain a multidigraph because
in a one-way street, there are two curbs which can only be swept by going in the
same direction along the street. Each arc of this multidigraph has two numbers
associated with it, one giving the amount of time required to sweep the cor-
responding curb and the other giving the amount of time required to follow
along the arc without sweeping, the so-called deadheading time.
Now in any given period of the day in large cities such as New York, certain
curbs are kept free of parked cars in order to allow for street sweeping. The
curbs which are free during a given period of time define a subgraph (sub-
digraph) of the curb multidigraph. This subgraph is called the sweep subgraph. (It
is an interesting question in its own right to determine how to choose these

68
CHAPTER 8
subgraphs so as to save money on street sweeping. However, we shall not discuss
that problem.) We would like to find a way of sweeping every curb in the sweep
subgraph and completing the job in the shortest possible time. We wish to start
out from a garage and return to there. Thus, we seek a closed path in the curb
multidigraph. The time associated with this path is the sum of the sweeping times
over arcs swept plus the sum of the deadheading times over arcs traversed but
not swept. If an arc is used several times in the path, it is considered to be swept
the first time (if it is swept at all), and after that the deadheading time is used.
Figure 8.4 gives an example of a curb multidigraph. The arcs in the designated
subgraph to be swept are shown as solid arcs, the other arcs as dashed. The
sweeping time is shown in a circle next to each arc, and the deadheading time in
a square. (We show sweeping times only for solid arcs.)1
FIG. 8.4. A curb multidigraph, with solid arcs representing the sweep subgraph, sweeping times given
in circles, and deadheading times given in squares. Also shown are the degrees of vertices in the sweep
subgraph and the transportation problem whose solution gives rise to an optimal eulerian path.
16 Our discussion omits time delays associated with turns—some turns may take longer tha
others—and other delays. These delays can be introduced by defining a system of penalties for turns
and other delays as well as for time spent sweeping or deadheading. See Tucker and Bodin (1976) for
details.

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS
69
FIG. 8.5. A multidigraph with an eulerian closed path obtained by adding dashed arcs to the sweep
subgraph of Fig. 8.4.
FIG. 8.6. A multidigraph obtained from the sweep subgraph of Fig. 8.4 by adding paths
corresponding to the solution of the transportation problem.
Notice that if there is an eulerian closed path in the sweep subgraph, then that
closed path must be an optimal solution. The problem is to handle the situation
where there is no such path. In our example, there are four vertices where the
indegrees and outdegrees (shown in Fig. 8.4) are unequal in the sweep subgraph.
Hence, there is no eulerian closed path.
Any closed path of the curb multidigraph which uses each arc of the sweep
subgraph at least once can be looked at as obtained from the sweep subgraph by
adding arcs to obtain a multidigraph with an eulerian closed path. The added
arcs may be arcs in the curb multidigraph not in the sweep subgraph, or arcs in
the sweep subgraph which are used again. A given arc may be added more than
once. To give an example, consider in Fig. 8.4 the closed path /, e, b, a, /, e, d, c,
d, c, b, a, /. This corresponds to an eulerian closed path in the multidigraph
shown in Fig. 8.5. The arcs added (deadheading arcs) are dashed. We would like
to add arcs to the sweep subgraph so that in the resulting multidigraph, every
vertex has outdegree equal to indegree. We would also like to do this so that the
sum of the deadheading times on the arcs added is minimized. Tucker and Bodin

70 
CHAPTER 8
(1976) show that the problem can be solved as follows. Let d(i) be the outdegree
of vertex i in the sweep subgraph minus the indegree of / in this subgraph.
Formulate a transportation problem as follows. The warehouses are the vertices
of the sweep subgraph with negative d(i) and the markets are the vertices with
positive d(i}. The. amount jc, of commodity at warehouse / is \d(i}\ and the
amount y, for market / is d(j). The transportation cost ati is the length of the
shortest path in the curb multidigraph from i to /', where length of path is taken
to mean the sum of the deadheading times on the path. The deadheading arcs
which need to be added to obtain an optimal street-sweeping route correspond
to the solution to this transportation problem in the sense that if 6,7 units of
commodity are shipped from / to / in the solution, then the shortest path from i
to / is included 6iy times.
In our example, the degrees d(i) are shown in Fig. 8.4, as are the matrix (ai;)
and the amounts jc, and yy. An optimal solution is to send one unit of commodity
from b to c, one from d to e, and one from d to c. The corresponding shortest
paths are b, c; d, e; and d, e, b, c. Hence we add each path once, obtaining the
multidigraph of Fig. 8.6, with deadheading arcs indicated using dashed lines. An
eulerian closed path in this multidigraph is the path a, /, e, d, e, b, c, b, c, d, e, b, a.
The sum of the deadheading times on the deadheading arcs in this path is 10.
By way of comparison, in the eulerian closed path of Fig. 8.5, this sum is 24.
8.4. RNA chains. DNA is the basic building block of inheritance. DNA is a
chain consisting of bases, each link of which is one of four possible chemical
compounds: Thymine (T), Cytosine (C), Adenine (A), and Guanine (G). RNA is
a messenger molecule whose links are defined from DNA. The possible bases
are the same except that the base Uracil (U) replaces the base Thymine. A
sequence of bases encodes certain genetic information. It is an elementary
problem of combinatorics to count the number of possible RNA chains with
certain link makeup. For example, the number of such chains with 3 C's, 2 U's
and 2 A's is obtained as follows. We have seven positions, and we choose 3 of
these for C. This can be done in ( j ways. We choose 2 of the remaining 4
/4\
positions for U. This can be done in I 1 ways. Finally, we use the remaining
positions for A. Altogether, we have
such chains. One such chain is CUACUAC. In general, the number of chains
with ki C's, fc2 U's, &3 A's, and k4 G's is given by
This can be quite a large number of chains.

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS 
71
Sometimes we can learn much more about what an RNA chain looks like by
considering the break-up of the chain after certain enzymes are applied. Our
discussion will follow Mosimann (1968) and Hutchinson (1969). Some enzymes
break up an RNA chain after each G link and others break up the chain after
each U link and each C link. For example, suppose we have the chain
GAUGGACC.
Applying (8.1), we see that there are 8!/(2!l!2!3!) = 1680 chains with the sam
link makeup. Digest by the G and U, C enzymes leads to the following frag-
ments:
G: G, AUG, G, ACC
U, C: GAU, GGAC, C.
How many RNA chains are there with the given U, C fragments, if we don't
know the order in which the fragments occur? The answer is that there are 3!
such chains, for the fragments may occur in any order. As for the G fragments,
there are not 4! distinguishable chains with the given fragments, since there are
two indistinguishable fragments. The number of chains with these fragments is
therefore 41/21— 12. In fact, there are fewer chains with these G fragments,
since we can pick out which fragment came last. The fragment ACC could be a G
fragment only if it ended up the chain. Thus, the chain can only start with the
three G fragments G, AUG, and G. There are now only 3!/2! = 3 possible ways
to order these beginning fragments and hence only 3 possible chains with the
given G fragments:
GAUGGACC
GGAUGACC
AUGGGACC.
Thus, knowing either the U, C fragments or the G fragments significantly lowers
the number of possible chains. However, we know both sets of fragments. Of the
possible chains we have identified as having the proper G fragments, it is easy to
check that only the first has the proper U, C fragments. For the second has
GGAU as a U, C fragment and the third has AU, neither of which appear
among the given U, C fragments. Thus we have been able to uncover the
original RNA chain from all 1680 chains with the given link makeup by applyin
appropriate enzymes. We shall see how to perform this procedure using eulerian
closed paths in a certain multidigraph.
Let us illustrate the procedure by starting with an example of an unknown
RNA chain. Suppose after application of the G and U, C enzymes, we find the
following fragments:
G: AUCG, G, CCG, AG, UAC
U, C: C, C, C, GAU, GGAGU, AC.

72 
CHAPTER 8
Let us begin by further breaking down each fragment, after each G, U, or C. For
example, the fragment AUCG gets broken into AU • C • G. Each piece is called
an extended base, and all but the first and last extended bases are called interior
extended bases. We will first see how to discover both the beginning and end of
the chain. We make two lists, one giving all interior extended bases of all
fragments of both digests, and one giving all fragments consisting of one extend-
ed base. We obtain the following:
Interior extended bases: C, C, G, AG
Fragments consisting of one extended base: G, AG, C, C, C, AC.
Note that the last two interior extended bases come from the fragment GGAGU.
By comparing our two lists, we observe that there are two bases on the second
list which are not on the first, namely C and AC. This will always be the case.
Moreover, it is not hard to prove that one of these will be the first extended base
of the RNA chain and the other will be the last. How do we tell which is last?
The answer is that one of these will always be from an abnormal fragment,
namely, it will be the last extended base of a G fragment not ending in G or a
U, C fragment not ending in U or C. In this case, AC is the last extended base of
the abnormal G fragment UAC. Hence, we know that the chain begins in C and
ends in AC.
We now build a multidigraph as follows. Whenever there is a normal fragment
with more than one extended base, we use the first and last extended bases of the
fragment as vertices and we draw an arc from the first to the last, labeled with the
name of the corresponding fragment. Figure 8.7 illustrates this procedure. For
example, we have included an arc from AU to G labeled with the name of the
corresponding fragment AUCG. Notice that there might be several arcs from a
given extended base to another if there are several fragments beginning and
ending with the given extended bases. For example, if there were fragments
AUCG and AUAUG, we would put two arcs from vertex AU to vertex G, one
labeled with each fragment. Finally, we add one additional arc to this
multidigraph. This arc is obtained by identifying the longest abnormal frag-
ment—here there is just one, namely UAC—and drawing an arc from the first
extended base in this abnormal fragment to the first extended base in the chain.
Here, we add an arc from U to C. We label this arc differently, by marking it
X* Y, where X is the longest abnormal fragment, * is a symbol marking this as a
special fragment, and Y is the first extended base in the chain. Hence, in our
example, we label the arc from U to C by UAC*C. Every possible RNA chain
with the given C and U, C fragments can now be identified from this multi-
digraph. Each such chain corresponds to an eulerian closed path which ends
with the special fragment X* Y. In our example, the only such eulerian closed
path goes from C to G to AU to G to U to C. By using the corresponding arc
labeling, we obtain the chain
CCGAUCGGAGUAC.
The reader can check that this chain has the proper G and U, C fragments.

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS 
73
Notice that we are not claiming that there is a unique eulerian closed path in
the multidigraph, or that there is a unique RNA chain with the given G and U, C
fragments. Indeed, it is easy to give examples of RNA chains with ambiguous
digests, i.e., so that it is impossible to recover the chain uniquely from its G and
U, C fragments. For further information on the theory of digests by enzymes,
mostly from an algebraic point of view, see for,example Mosimann, et al. (1966).
It should be remarked that current work of great societal import is based on
the idea of breaking up DNA chains with enzymes and splicing together frag-
ments from different species, e.g., from humans and bacteria. This work on
recombinant DNA opens up great possibilities such as in the production of
insulin. However, it opens up the possibility of grave danger from the creation of
potentially harmful individuals of previously unknown genetic makeup. Tech-
niques of the type discussed above allow for the possibility of identifying all
potential recombinants after a given enzyme break-up.
FIG. 8.7. A multidigraph from a complete digest by G and U, C enzymes.
8.5. More on eulerian closed paths, DNA, and coding. Hutchinson and Wilf
(1975) treat a DNA or RNA molecule as a word, with bases (not extended
bases) as the letters. They make the simplifying assumption that all of the
information is carried only in the number of letters of each type and in the
frequency of ordered pairs of letters, i.e., the frequency with which one letter
follows a second. They then ask the following question: given nonnegative
integers u,, t>iy-, i, / = 1, 2, • • • , n, can a word be made from an alphabet of n
letters with the rth letter occurring t>, times and with / followed by j vtj times'? If
so, what are all such words? This question is of general interest in the con-
struction of codes. We follow Hutchinson and Wilf's solution.
To give an example, suppose v\ = 2, v2 = v^ = 1 and vtj is given by the follow-
ing matrix
Then one word which has the prescribed pattern is ABC4, if A corresponds to
the first letter, B to the second, and C to the third. To give a second example,

74 
CHAPTER  8
suppose
One word which has the prescribed pattern is BBCBACBAC.
To analyze our problem, let us draw a multidigraph D with vertices the n
letters AI, A2, • • - , An, and with vtj arcs from A, to Af. Loops are allowed. The
multidigraphs corresponding to the matrices of (8.2) and (8.3) are shown in Figs.
8.8 and 8.9 respectively. Let us suppose w = A(I, A,2, • • • , Aitt is a solution word.
Then it is clear that w corresponds to an eulerian path in the multidigraph D
which begins at A,t and ends at A,q. It is easy to see this for the two solution
words we have given for our two examples. It follows that if there is a solution
word, then D must be weakly connected up to isolated vertices. We consider first
the case where i\^iq. For every i^i\,iq, we have indegree at A, equal to
outdegree. For / = /i, we have outdegree one higher than indegree and for / = iq,
we have indegree one higher than outdegree. Thus, using 8 to be the Kronecker
delta, we have
This condition says that in the matrix (u^), the row sums equal the corresponding
column sums, except in two places where they are off by one in the indicated
manner. We also have a consistency condition, which relates the vt to the uiy:
FlG. 8.8. Multidigraph corresponding to (8.2).
FIG. 8.9. Multidigraph corresponding to (8.3).

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS 
75
It is easy to see, using Theorem 8.4, that if conditions (8.4) and (8.5) hold for
some /i and /«,, i\ ^ iq, and if D is weakly connected up to isolated vertices, then
there is a solution word, and every solution word corresponds to an eulerian path
which begins in Ait and ends in Aift. In our second example, conditions (8.4) and
(8.5) hold with /\ = 2, iq = 3. There are a number of eulerian paths from B - Afl
to C = Ai(t, each giving rise to a solution word. A second example is
BACBBCBAC.
What if the solution word begins and ends in the same letter, i.e., if i\ = iql
Then there is an eulerian closed path, and we have
Also, (8.5) holds for ij. Condition (8.6) says that in (t>iy), every row sum equals its
corresponding column sum. Conversely, if (8.6) holds and (8.5) holds for /i, and
D is weakly connected up to isolated vertices, then there is a solution and every
solution word corresponds to an eulerian closed path in the multidigraph D,
beginning and ending at A,r This is the situation in our first example with /i = 1.
In sum, if there is a solution word, then D is weakly connected up to isolated
vertices and (8.5) holds for some /i. Moreover, either (8.6) holds, or for /i and
some iq, i\ ^ iq, (8.4) holds. Conversely, suppose D is weakly connected up to
isolated vertices. If (8.5) holds for some i\ and (8.4) holds for i\ and some iq,
ii^iq, then there is a solution and all solution words correspond to eulerian
paths beginning at Aiv and ending at Aifi. If (8.5) holds for some i\ and (8.6)
holds, then there is a solution and all solution words correspond to eulerian
closed paths beginning and ending at Atl.
8.6. Telecommunications. The following problem arises in telecommuni-
cations, and is discussed in Liu (1968). We follow that discussion. A rotating
drum has 8 different sectors. The question is: can we tell the position of the drum
without looking at it? One approach is by putting conducting material in some of
the sectors and nonconducting material in others of the sectors. Place three
terminals adjacent to the drum so that in any position of the drum, the terminals
adjoin three consecutive sectors, as shown in Fig. 8.10. A terminal will be
activated if it adjoins a sector with conducting material. If we are clever, then the
pattern of conducting and nonconducting material will be so chosen that the
pattern of activated and nonactivated terminals will tell us the position of the
drum.
We can reformulate this as follows. Let each sector receive a 1 or a 0. We wish
to arrange 8 O's and 1 's around a circle so that every sequence of three consecu
tive digits is different. More generally, we wish to arrange 2" O's and 1's around a
circle so that every sequence of n consecutive digits is different. Can this be
done? If so, how? To see the solution, let us define a digraph D as follows. The
vertices are strings of O's and 1's of length n — \. There is an arc from string
' ' fln-i to the two strings #2^3' • ' #n-iO and #2^3 ' ' ' #n-il- Label each

76
CHAPTER 8
FIG. 8.10. A rotating drum with 8 sectors and 3 adjacent terminals.
FIG. 8.11. Digraph for solution of rotating drum problem.
FIG. 8.12. Arrangement of O's and I's which solves the rotating drum problem.

APPLICATIONS OF EULERIAN CHAINS AND PATHS 
77
arc with the new digit added. The resulting digraph with n = 3 is shown in Fig.
8.11. It is easy to see that every vertex of the digraph D has indegree equal to
outdegree, and hence there is an eulerian closed path. Any such path gives the
desired solution, if we use the sequence of arc labels. In our example, one such
eulerian closed path is 00 to 00 to 01 to 11 to 11 to 10 to 01 to 10 to 00. The
corresponding arrangement of arc labels is
0 1 1 1 0 1 0 0 .
If we arrange these around a circle as shown in Fig. 8.12, the following
sequences of consecutive digits occur going counterclockwise beginning from the
arrow: Oil, 111, 110, 101, 010, 100, 000, 001. These are all distinct, as desired.
Thus, each position of the drum can be uniquely encoded.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 9
Balance Theory and Social Inequalities
We shall turn in the remainder of these notes to applications of signed and
weighted graphs and digraphs. A graph or digraph is signed if there is a sign (+
or -) on each edge or arc. It is called weighted if there is a real number on each
edge or arc. We shall sometimes consider signed graphs or digraphs as special
cases of weighted graphs or digraphs, by replacing a sign + or - by a weight + 1
or -1. In a signed graph or digraph, we shall associate a sign with a chain or
path. The sign will be + if the number of - signs on the chain or path is even,
and — otherwise.
In this chapter, we shall consider some problems of interest to social scientists.
One main thrust of the work is the attempt to understand social inequalities.
What is it about such characteristics as sex, race, occupation, education, and so
on that leads to inequalities in social interaction? We shall begin with the theory
of balance, which is a forerunner for much of the work on social interaction.
9.1. The theory of balance. A great deal of work in twentieth century
sociology has concerned itself with the behavior of small groups of individuals.
Perhaps the simplest approach to studying such a group is to draw a digraph in
which the individuals are the vertices, and in which there is an arc from vertex x
to vertex y if x is in some relation to y, for example, if x likes y, x associates with
y, x chooses y for a business partner, etc. Such a digraph is sometimes called a
sociogram. Many of the relationships of interest have natural opposites, for
example likes/dislikes, associates with/avoids, and so on. In that case, we can
include two different relations in one digraph by using two different kinds of arc,
or by using signs to distinguish them. Then, the presence of an arc means that
one of the relationships is present, and the + indicates one of the relationships,
the positive one, while the — indicates the other relationship. For example, we
might let an arc from jc to y mean that x has strong feelings toward y, and put
a + if these feelings are liking, a - if they are disliking. We obtain a signed
digraph.
Let us for the sake of discussion deal with the concrete relation liking/dislik-
ing and let us assume that it is symmetric, so that we can summarize the
information in a signed graph. The possible signed graphs if there are three
individuals all of whom have strong feelings toward each other are shown in Fig.
9.1. Going back to the work of Heider (1946), it has been observed that groups
of types I and III tend to work well together, work without tension, and so on.
Groups of types II and IV do not. For example, in a group of type II, b likes both
a and c, and would like to cooperate with them, but a and c dislike each other.
79

80 
CHAPTER 9
FIG. 9.1. The possible signed graphs if there are 3 individuals all of whom have strong feelings
toward each other.
This causes tension. The same kind of tension does not appear in a group of type
III, where a and b like each other, and both dislike c. They are perfectly content
to let c work on his own, and c is quite satisfied with this arrangement.
Sociologists have used the imprecise term balance to describe groups which
work well together, lack tension, etc. In general, groups of types I and III tend to
be balanced, while groups of types II and IV do not. But what about groups
whose signed graphs are more complicated? The signed graphs of types I and III
can be distinguished from those of types II and IV because the former form
circuits of positive sign (an even number of - signs) while the latter form circuits
of negative sign. This observation led Cartwright and Harary (1956) to suggest
calling a signed graph and hence its underlying group of individuals balanced if
every circuit was positive. In this sense, the signed graph of Fig. 9.2 is balanced,
for the circuits are a, b, d, a; b, c, d, b', d, e, /, e; and a, b, c, d, a, and each of
these has exactly two — signs. The following theorem characterizes balanced
signed graphs.
THEOREM 9.1 (Harary (1954)). A signed graph is balanced if and only if the
vertices can be partitioned into two classes so that every edge joining vertices within
a class is + and every edge joining vertices between classes is —.
To illustrate this theorem, we observe that two classes which provide such a
partition for the signed graph of Fig. 9.2 are {a, c, d, /} and {b, e}. It is
easy to see why the existence of such a partition implies balance. For every
circuit must begin in one of the classes and end there, and so has only an even
number of crossings between classes, and hence only an even number of — signs.
The converse is also easy to prove. One shows without loss of generality that the
signed graph is connected. Then, choosing a vertex u at random, one defines one
class to be all the vertices joined to u by a positive chain, and the other class to
be all remaining vertices. The balance hypothesis is exactly what is needed to
prove that this partition has the desired properties.
Theorem 9.1 can be considered a generalization of Konig's theorem (Theorem
6.1), which says that a graph is bipartite if and only if it has no odd circuits. We
may obtain Konig's theorem from Harary's by taking all edges to be —.
The theory of balance suggests that groups with balanced signed graphs will
exhibit lack of tension, work well together, and so on. For a discussion of tests of
this theory, the reader is referred to Taylor (1970).
Balance theory has been applied to a variety of problems outside of sociology.
In particular, it has been applied to the study of international relations, where

BALANCE THEORY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES
81
the vertices become nations and the relation is allied with/allied against. It has
been applied to political science, where the vertices are politicians and the
relation is agrees with/disagrees with. It has been applied to the analysis of
literature, where the vertices are characters in a novel, play, or short story, and
the relation is liking/disliking. It is hypothesized that at a stage of tension in such
a piece of work, the main characters will exhibit an unbalanced signed graph.
Later, the tension will be resolved by changing a sign of a major relationship to
obtain balance.
For a more detailed discussion of balance theory, with many references, see
Taylor (1970). See also Roberts (1976a, § 3.1).
FIG. 9.2. A balanced signed graph.
9.2. Balance in signed digraphs. Let us briefly discuss how the notion of
balance generalizes to a signed digraph. It is natural to try to call a signed
digraph balanced if every cycle is positive. However, this makes the signed
digraph of Fig. 9.3 vacuously balanced, while there is tension in this situation: a
likes both b and c, and would like to work with them both, but c dislikes b.
An appropriate generalization of the balance concept is obtained by dis-
regarding direction of arcs. To be precise, we say that a semipath in a (signed)
digraph is a sequence MI} a\, u2, a2, • ' • , uh at, u,+i, where the ut are vertices, the
a, are arcs, and at is the arc (w,, «1+1) or the arc (u,+1, Uj). That is, in a semipath,
arcs may be traversed in either direction. The length of the semipath is t. In Fig.
9.4, a, (a, c), c, (d, c), d is a semipath of length 2. A semicycle is a semipath in
which HI = w,+ 1 and all the vertices ul5 u2, • • • , u, are distinct and all the arcs
#!, a2, • • • , at are distinct. Thus, for example, in Fig. 9.4, a, (a, b}, b, (c, b), c,
(a, c), a is a semicycle. So is a, (b, a), b, (c, b), c, (a, c), a. These are different as
the first arc used differs in the two cases. The sign of a semipath is defined
analogously to the sign of a path. We say a signed digraph is balanced if and only
FIG. 9.3. An unbalanced signed digraph with no negative cycles.

82
FIG. 9.4. A signed digraph.
if every semicycle is positive, i.e., has an even number of - signs. This definition
seems to be an appropriate generalization of the definition in the symmetric
case.
9.3. Degree of balance. It is a little simplistic to say that every group is either
completely balanced or completely unbalanced. Rather, it probably makes more
sense to speak of degrees of balance.
Let us discuss briefly some ways of measuring balance in a signed graph or
digraph. One natural way to measure balance is to use the ratio p/t of the
number of positive circuits (semicycles) to the total number of circuits (semicy-
cles). An alternative is to use the ratio p/n, where n is the number of negative
circuits (semicycles). Variants on this approach take account of the length of a
circuit (semicycle), counting shorter circuits (semicycles) as being at least as
important, and possibly more important, than longer ones. One way of taking
account of length is the following. Let pm be the number of positive circuits
(semicycles) of length m, nm the number of negative circuits (semicycles) of
length m, and tm = pm + nm. Then if /(ra) is a measure of the relative importance
of circuits (semicycles) of length m, we might use
or
The function /(m) might be monotone nondecreasing, and might be something
like /(m) = 1/m, /(m) = 1/m2, /(m) = 1/2"1, etc. The function f ( m ) = 1 gives the
measures p/t and p/n. For a discussion of the measures p/t and p/n, see Harary
(1959c). For a discussion of the measures (9.1) and (9.2), and an axiomatic
derivation of them, see Norman and Roberts (1972a,b).
CHAPTER 9

BALANCE THEORY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES 
83
An alternative is to count the smallest number of signs whose negation would
result in balance. This count is called the line index for balance. Harary (1959c)
proves that in a signed graph (digraph) the line index is the same as the smallest
number of edges (arcs) whose removal results in balance.
The measures (9.1) and (9.2) are equivalent in the sense that once /(m) has
been determined, one signed graph (digraph) is more balanced than another
under (9.1) if and only if this is also the case under (9.2). However, the measure
(9.1) and the line index for balance are not equivalent, i.e., there are simple
examples of signed graphs (digraphs) GI and G2 so that G\ is more balanced
under the line index than G2 but less balanced under measure (9.1). For a
discussion of other measures of balance, see Taylor (1970).
9.4. Distributive justice. So far, we have dealt with the situation where the
vertices of a signed graph or digraph are individuals in a group. Interesting
results are obtained if we allow the vertices to be other variables as well. In this
section we shall use this idea to discuss the theory of distributive justice in
sociology. This theory is concerned with the relation between such characteristics
as sex, race, hair color, etc., and such goal objects or rewards as salaries,
promotions, privileges, etc. The key idea is one of expectation: an individual
compares his characteristics and rewards to those of others, and wants to see if
justice has been done.
A theory of distributive justice is sketched out in Zelditch, Berger, and Cohen
(1966) and Berger, Zelditch, Anderson and Cohen (1972). To treat the simplest
case of this theory graph-theoretically, we follow Norman and Roberts (1972b).
Let P and O be two individuals, and let P' be P considered as a referrent for
evaluation by P. (P' can be thought of as the image P has of himself.) We study
the situation from the point of view of P. We study one characteristic and one
goal object, assume that the characteristic is relevant to the goal object, and that
the characteristic and goal object can each have one of two states, high or low.
Let GO(P) and GO(O) denote the states of the goal objects possessed by P and
by O respectively. We build a signed digraph as follows. The vertices are P, P'
O, GO(P), and GO(O). We draw an arc from P to GO(P) and to GO(O). On
each of these arcs, we put a sign indicating the evaluation by P of the state, + for
the high state, — for the low state. We draw arcs from P to P' and P to O. On
each of these arcs, we put a sign indicating the evaluation by P, + if the
individual in question (P1 or O) possesses the high state of the characteristic,   if
he possesses the low state of the characteristic. Finally, we draw arcs from P' to
GO(P) and O to GO(O) with + signs indicating possession. The signed digraph
obtained is shown in Fig. 9.5. For example, the characteristic might be education
and the goal object salary. We feel education is relevant to salary. An individual
is positively evaluated if he has a high level of education. A salary is positively
evaluated if it is high.
Under the assumption that the parameter /(m) is positive, we have calculated
the balance measure (9.1) for each choice of sign in this digraph. The results are
shown in Table 9.1 below. Cases 1, 4, 13, and 16 correspond to what Berger et

84 
CHAPTER 9
al. (1972) call Justice. In each case, the state of the characteristic matches the
state of the reward. In Cases 6, 7, 10, and 11, both individuals are unjustly
rewarded. In Case 10, for example, P is over-rewarded (he has a low level of
education and a high salary) while O is under-rewarded. This is a situation of
Guilt. The remaining cases have one individual justly rewarded, but the other
not. The balance measure indicates that the situations of Justice are perfectly
balanced, the situations where both individuals are unjustly rewarded are per-
fectly unbalanced, and the situations where one individual is unjustly rewarded
are in between. By adding more information to this signed digraph, Norman and
Roberts (1972b) show how further distinctions among the different cases can be
made.
For example, we can study coalition formation to distinguish the four cases
where both individuals are unjustly rewarded. We draw an arc from P' to O
representing attraction/repulsion and ask whether the arc should receive a + or
— sign, + for attraction, — for repulsion. We obtain the signed digraph of Fig.
9.6. We have calculated the numerator of the balance measure (9.1) for the two
choices of sign on this arc in each of the cases 6, 7, 10, and 1 1 . (The denominat
is always the same in all cases, since all have the same semicycles.) The results
are shown in Table 9.2. Suppose we assume that P' and O form a coalition if and
only if the signed digraph is more balanced with attraction than with repulsion.
Now coalition formation occurs in Cases 6 and 1 1 if and only if
and in Cases 7 and 10 if and only if
Hence, we conclude that either there is no coalition formation (/(3)+/(5) =
2/(4)), or it takes place only in situations where both individuals are treated with
equal injustice (Cases 6 and 11), or it takes place only where the two individuals
are treated with opposite injustice (Cases 7 and 10). Notice that this conclusion
follows independently of the specific value of the parameter /. Adding more
FIG. 9.5. Signed digraph for the distributive justice situation.

BALANCE THEORY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES
85
FIG. 9.6. Signed digraph for the distributive justice situation with attraction/repulsion between P' and
O added.
information to the digraph allows the conclusion that coalition formation will
take place in situations of equal injustice. We shall not go into further detail
here. Rather, we simply mentioned this example to illustrate the kind of analysis
which is sometimes made using signed digraphs where the vertices are other than
just individuals and where the arcs represent different kinds of relationships.
TABLE 9.1
Relative balance in 16 cases of signed digraph of Fig. 9.5.
Case
Number
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
PP 
PGO(P) 
PO 
POO(O) 
Balance
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1
+ 
+ 
+ 
- 
3
+ 
+ 
- 
+ 
1
+ 
+ 
1
+ 
- 
+ 
4- 
3
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
0
+ 
- 
- 
+ 
0
+ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
I
+ 
+ 
+ 
1
+ 
+ 
- 
0
+ 
- 
+ 
0
+ 
_ 
_ 
1
+ 
+ 
1
- 
- 
+
 
A
, 
I
"
^
2
1
Description
Justice
Other unjustly rewarded
(under-reward)
Other unjustly rewarded
(over-reward)
Justice
Self unjustly rewarded
(under-reward)
Both unjustly rewarded
Both unjustly rewarded
Self unjustly rewarded
(under-reward)
Self unjustly rewarded
(over-reward)
Both unjustly rewarded
Both unjustly rewarded
Self unjustly rewarded
(over-reward)
Justice
Other unjustly rewarded
(under-reward)
Other unjustly rewarded
(over-reward)
Justice

86
CHAPTER 9
TABLE 9.2
Relative balance of attraction and repulsion in cases where both individuals are unjustly
rewarded.
Case Number
6, with +
6, with —
7, with +
7, with -
10, with +
10, with -
11, with +
11, with -
Numerator of Balance Measure
/(3)+/(5)
2/(4)
2/(4)
/(3)+/(5)
2/(4)
/(3) + /(5)
/(3) + /(5)
2/(4)
Description
Both under-rewarded
Self under, other over
Self over, other under
Both over-rewarded
9.5. Status organizing processes and social inequalities. Since the early twen-
tieth century, sociologists have been concerned with status-organizing processes,
processes by which differences in evaluations and expectations of individuals
affect social interactions. A major goal of studying such processes is the
explanation of social inequalities. The theory of distributive justice was an early
theory in the work of Berger and his colleagues, which tried to explain the
tension resulting from violation of expectations by showing that certain signed
digraphs were unbalanced, or relatively unbalanced. In Berger et al. (1977),
chains in a signed graph are used to study induced expectations. The basic idea is
that the variables are individuals, goal objects, states, and so on, much as in our
discussion of § 9.4, except that direction of relationships is disregarded. In the
resulting signed graphs, if there is a chain from an individual P to a goal object
G, the sign of this chain indicates whether the individual is expected to be
rewarded with the high or the low state of the goal object. If there are several
chains from P to G of the same sign, this leads to stronger expectations, while i
there are chains of opposite sign, this leads to inconsistent expectations (there is
imbalance). The expectations are calculated quantitatively using a parameter
much like /(m), and are used to predict reactions of one individual to another
when they disagree.
9.6. Strengths of likes and dislikes. One of the weaknesses of the signed
graph approach to balance is that it omits strengths of likes and dislikes. One
approach which attempts to use such strengths is due to Hubbell, Johnson, and
Marcus (1978). Let the individuals in a group be labeled as 1, 2, • • • , « . Let s^
be the sentiment of / for j at time t. How do sentiments change over time?
Hubbell et al. assume changes take place only at discrete times t =
0, 1, 2, • • • and make the following assumption. The sentiment sik of / for k can
be changed by sentiments of / for / and / for k—this is called an inductive
change—and by sentiments of / for / and k for /—this is called a comparative

BALANCE THEORY AND SOCIAL INEQUALITIES 
87
change. Assuming these effects take place equally, Hubbell et al. specify that
In terms of matrices, if S, = (sjf), then (9.3) becomes
where S7 is the transpose of St.
Given a matrix S, we can associate a sign pattern with it. For example, the
matrix
has the sign pattern
The sign pattern defines a signed digraph in a natural way. Under the assumption
(9.4), the sequence of matrices might or might not approach a limit. (Hubbell et
al. discuss this problem matrix-theoretically.) Of more interest to us is the
corresponding sequence of sign patterns. Does this approach a limit, i.e., is there
some point beyond which all of the sign patterns are the same? If so, does this
sign pattern correspond to a balanced signed digraph? How can we tell if a given
matrix S = Si gives rise to a sequence of sign patterns which eventually stabi-
lizes? How can we tell if the sequence eventually stabilizes to a pattern cor-
responding to a balanced signed digraph? Does the answer depend on the
specific numbers in S?
We have asked lots of questions. Let us give an example. The matrix S of (9.5)
has the property that if 5 = Si, then all matrices St defined by (9.4) have the
same sign pattern (9.6). The corresponding signed digraph is balanced. Thus, we
know that if the initial sentiments of the individuals are given by (9.5), and if
they change according to the Hubbell et al. model (9.4), then the group will
always be balanced. The conclusion depends only on the sign pattern of S, and
not on the specific entries. The advantage of the model we have discussed over
those using only signs is that in the latter, changes of sign can take place only
abruptly, while here sentiments can change gradually.
The questions we have raised (which are also raised by Hubbell et al.) seem to
be difficult ones, and to our knowledge, no one has made progress on them.

88 
CHAPTER 9
However, we shall see in the next two chapters that one can answer a large
number of similar questions which arise in public policy situations, economic
analysis, applied ecology, and the like. These questions deal with matrices whose
elements are known only up to sign. The questions then ask: can we draw
various conclusions about such things as systems of linear equations or systems
of differential equations which use these matrices for coefficients, if we know the
entries in the matrices only up to sign? We shall see that we can draw many such
conclusions, by making use of the signed digraph corresponding to the sign
pattern.

CHAPTER 10
Pulse Processes and their Applications
10.1. Structural modeling. Many mathematical approaches to the study of
complex systems emphasize a careful study of their numerical properties. These
often end up with an optimization problem, or otherwise deal with matters which
are closely tied to specific numbers. Kane (Kane (1973), Kane et al. (1973)) calls
such approaches arithmetic, in contrast to the approaches which emphasize
structure, pattern, shape, or general tendency, with little emphasis on specific
values. The latter approaches Kane calls geometric. The very complexity of
real-world systems involving energy, food, transportation, communications, and
the like makes it very difficult to get precise enough information to approach
them arithmetically. This has given rise to an increasingly widespread effort to
develop techniques for studying systems geometrically. One general geometric
approach, which relates geometric properties of complex systems to certain
structural properties of these systems, is coming to be known as structural
modeling. Surveys of structural modeling techniques have recently been carried
out by a number of authors. For information, see Cearlock (1977) and Lendaris
and Wakeland (1977).
Most structural modeling techniques start out by identifying variables relevant
to a problem being studied. It is usually assumed that more complicated inter-
relations among these variables are captured by their pairwise interactions. A
digraph is constructed with vertices the variables and with an arc from variable x
to variable y if x is in some strong relation to y, commonly the relation "causes"
or "effects." Loops are allowed. Usually, as in our discussion of the previous
chapter, the relation in question is treated as "signed," and the sign of the effect
of x on y is identified. Thus, a signed digraph is constructed. Beyond that,
strength of effect is sometimes taken into account, and a real number or weight
measuring the strength of the effect of x on y is obtained. The resulting digraph
with a real number w(x, y) on each arc (x, y) is called a weighted digraph, and
sometimes a structural model. The exact procedures for constructing the struc-
tural model, for obtaining and interpreting the arcs, signs, or weights, and for
analyzing the structural model, vary from methodology to methodology. We
shall present just one such approach in the following sections, and apply it to the
relationship between energy use and food production. The method we discuss
has been applied to energy use, air pollution, and transportation systems
(Roberts (1971c), (1973), (1974), (1975), (1976a), (1976b), Roberts and Brown
(1975)). Other structural modeling approaches have been applied to the analysis
of coastal resources (Coady et al. (1973)), health care delivery in British
Columbia (Kane, Thompson and Vertinsky (1972)), Naval manpower (Kruzic
(1973a)), Canadian water policy (Kane, Vertinsky and Thompson (1972), Kane
89

90 
CHAPTER 10
(1973)), Canadian environmental policy (Kane (1973)), transportation problems
(Kane (1972)), U.S. energy policy (Kruzic (1973b)), the use of coal in inland
waterways (Antle and Johnson (1973)), the study of ecosystems (Levins
(1974a,b)), the deliberations of governmental bodies and historical personages
(Axelrod (1976)), and so on. Variants of the method we discuss have been
developed by McLean (1976) and McLean and Shepherd (1976), (1978a,b).
10.2. Energy and food. As world population continues to grow, there is
increasing concern about mankind's ability to feed itself. Although we have
begun to see famine in parts of the world, more serious starvation has been
avoided so far by the tremendous productivity of modern agricultural systems.
Unfortunately, this productivity has come at a price: the use of vast amounts of
energy. Energy is used in modern agriculture in the form of fossil fuel to run
farm machines, in irrigation, in the production and application of chemical
fertilizers and pesticides, and so on. Yields of food on a particular field have
risen dramatically; for example, Pimentel et al. (1973) and Pimentel et al. (1974)
report that yields of corn increased from about 85 bushels per hectare in 1945 to
about 203 in 1970, or almost two and one half times as much. However, during
the same time span, total energy input into a one hectare corn field essentially
tripled. With the increasing scarcity of energy, it might not be possible to
continue the pace of production of modern agriculture, let alone to expand this
pace.
For the sake of discussion, we construct a small talking-purpose example of a
structural model to discuss this problem. We shall consider world food pro-
duction under U.S. style agriculture (a highly productive, highly energy-
intensive kind of agriculture). We assume that population is not curtailed, and
continues to expand as food becomes available. We shall use five variables in our
simple example. These are population (P), demand for food (D), food yield (Y),
cost of food (R), and energy input into food production (£"). The units we shall
use are identified in Table 10.1 and the current (as of 1970) values of these
variables are estimated there.
TABLE 10.1
Variable 
Unit 
Current Value*
Population (P)
Demand for food (D)
Food yield (Y)
Cost of food (R)
Energy input into
food production (E)
billions of people
1015 kcal (kilocalories)
per year
millions of kcal/hectare/
year
dollars per person per year
millions of kcal/hectare/
year
4
4
17.9
$700
7.1
* The values of Y and E are based on data for corn production in the U.S. and are obtained from
Pimentel et al. (1973) or Pimentel et al. (1974). Cost of food is estimated from U.S. figures obtained
from an almanac. Demand for food is calculated under the assumption that one person requires
approximately 3000 kcal per day and there are 4 billion people.

PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
91
We shall use these variables as vertices of a signed digraph. We draw an arc from
variable x to variable y if a change in x has a significant effect on y. Although
loops are allowed, we choose to treat them as insignificant in our example. We
put a + sign on the arc (x, y) if, all other things being equal, a change in x
augments y, and a - sign if, all other things being equal, the change inhibits y.
(The effect is said to be augmenting if whatever happens at x is reflected by a
change in the same direction at y, i.e., increase leads to increase, decrease to
decrease, and the effect is said to be inhibiting if whatever happens at x is
reversed in y, i.e., increase leads to decrease and decrease to increase.) Figure
10.1 shows such a signed digraph obtained from the five variables we have
identified. Note that one could argue that other arcs should be included, but we
have included only those which seem most important. In particular, we have
chosen to disregard the effect of demand on price, but t-o include the inhibiting
effect of price on demand. In this structural model, supply (yield) and energy use
are the primary direct influences on price.
Certain things can be learned about the food-energy system without knowing
any more information about it than what is contained in a signed digraph like
that of Fig. 10.1. For example, we note that there are three cycles in this digraph,
D, E, /?, £>; P, D, E, Y, P\ and D, E, Y, R, D. The latter two are positive cycles
(the number of — signs is even), while the former is negative. Cycles correspond
to feedback processes, and positive cycles, it is easy to see, to positive feedback.
Hence, we see two important processes which lead to positive feedback, and
tend to put pressures on the system to continue changing in the direction of an
initial change. One such process starts with increasing population, which leads to
more demand for food, which leads to increased use of energy in food pro-
duction, which leads to more food yield, which makes it possible for population
to grow further. We also see one important negative feedback process, that
operating through the increase in price of food when more energy is used in food
production.
The signed digraph makes certain omissions and certain simplifications. The
simplifications include the tacit assumption that two variables are always related
in the same way (in an augmenting or inhibiting relationship), independent of
their levels. The omissions include no discussion of strength of effect and no
discussion of the time it takes for an effect to take place. We shall discuss the
addition of strength of effect, but not the time lag problem.
We can include strengths of effects by adding weights to a signed digraph.
The weight w(x, y) on the arc (x, y) will have in our approach the following
specific interpretation: whenever variable x increases by u units, then variable y
increases by u • w(x, y) units. This is a very special linear assumption, and most
variables are not related in quite so simple a way. However, we shall use this
assumption to gather weights, understanding that the use of the same weight
independent of time and of the levels of the variables in question is a rather
serious simplifying assumption. Weights with the stated interpretation have been
obtained for the signed digraph in Fig. 10.1. They are included as weights in a
weighted digraph in Fig. 10.2. We shall not discuss how these weights were

92
CHAPTER 10
obtained, except to say that the procedure was, as is usually the case, a subjective
one, and involved some use of real data (for example that of Pimentel et al.
(1973) and Pimentel et al. (1974)), and some guesswork. Note that, for example,
the weight —1.4 on the arc (Y, R) means that every time food yield increases by
1 unit, i.e., 1 million kcal/hectare/year, then food cost goes down by $1.40 per
person per year. This is assumed true independent of the level of yield or the
current price—undoubtedly a somewhat faulty assumption.
Under the stated interpretation of weights, it makes sense to associate a
weight with a cycle as well as with an arc, and to do so by multiplying the weights
of the arcs on that cycle. If this is done, we note that the cycle P, D, E, Y, P has
weight 1.613 and the cycle Z>, E, Y, R, D has weight .025. This suggests that the
former cycle will correspond to increasingly larger augmentations (since its
weight is greater than 1), while the latter cycle will correspond to increasingly
smaller augmentations. In the next few sections, we shall analyze the use of the
weighted digraph to predict future levels of the different variables, and we shall
ask to what extent the corresponding signed digraph can help us in making such
predictions.
Even without further analysis, the signed and weighted digraphs constructed
have given us certain insights into the food-energy system. Indeed, the very
FlG. 10.1. Signed digraph for the food-energy system.
FlG. 10.2. Weighted digraph for the food-energy system.

PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
93
process of constructing them has forced us to concentrate on the basic variables
in question and on the fundamental interrelations among these variables.
Analysis of these digraphs has helped us to identify basic sources of feedback,
and has helped us to begin to understand the dynamic relationships among the
variables in question. In this sense, the tools of graph theory are to be regarded
as learning devices, used to help us understand complex systems. The more
quantitative models we shall discuss in the next few sections also play primarily
the role of a learning device, in helping us to identify basic processes, understand
basic interrelationships, and pinpoint possible strategies to analyze further.
10.3. Pulse processes. Let us suppose D is a weighted digraph and
MI, «2, • • • , un are its vertices. We shall assume that each vertex ut attains a
value or level v t(t) at each time t, and that time takes on discrete values,
/ = 0, 1, 2, • • • . We shall be interested in the change in value or the pulse at
vertex «, at time t. This will be denoted p,(0 and will be obtained by
For f = 0, p,-(0 and t?,-(0 must be given as initial conditions. Then, our inter-
pretation of the weight w(x, y) gives rise to the following rule for change of
values:
It follows from (10.1) and (10.2) that
We shall say that the initial conditions p,(0) and u,(0) and the rule (10.2) define
an autonomous pulse process. For example, in the weighted digraph of Fig. 10.2,
suppose y,(0) = 0, all /, and pi(0) = 1, p2(0) = 2, p3(0) = 5, p4(0) = - 3, and ps(0) =
- 2, where P = u\, D = w2, Y — "3, R = "4, and E = u5. Then, for example, using
(10.3), we obtain
That is, at time 1, variable 4 decreases by 47 units. Hence,
In an autonomous pulse process, we make some initial changes, and trace them
out over time. It is easy enough to forecast future values u,(f). Suppose we let
and

94 
CHAPTER 10
Let A be the weighted adjacency matrix of the weighted digraph D, the n x n
matrix with /, / entry equal to w(uf, «/) if there is an arc from ut to «/ and equal to
0 otherwise. Equation (10.3) then says that
and hence we see that
It follows that
From (10.5), forecasts of future values can be made."
We shall be interested not so much in the specific values which come out of
such forecasts, but, in the spirit of structural modeling, in the general question of
the behavior of the sequences of values or pulses. In particular, we say that a
vertex w, is pulse stable under an autonomous pulse process if the sequence
is bounded, and w, is value stable under the pulse process if the sequence
is bounded. It is easy to show from (10.1) that value stability implies pulse
stability. However, the converse is false. We say a weighted digraph is pulse or
value stable under an autonomous pulse process if every vertex of the digraph is.
If a digraph is pulse or value stable under all autonomous pulse processes, then
its structure is such that the system is not liable to "blow up" after it is initially
perturbed, no matter what the nature of the initial perturbation.
The following theorems about pulse and value stability follow from results in
Roberts and Brown (1975).
THEOREM 10.1. Suppose D is a weighted digraph and A is its weighted
adjacency matrix. If D is pulse stable under all autonomous pulse processes, then
every eigenvalue of A has magnitude less than or equal to one.
THEOREM 10.2. Suppose D is a weighted digraph and A is its weighted
adjacency matrix. If every eigenvalue of A has magnitude less than one, then D is
pulse stable under all autonomous pulse processes.
THEOREM 10.3. Suppose D is a weighted digraph and A is its weighted
adjacency matrix. Then D is value stable under all autonomous pulse processes if
and only if D is pulse stable under all autonomous pulse processes and 1 is not an
eigenvalue of D.
To illustrate these theorems, we note that for the weighted digraph of Fig.
10.2, the characteristic polynomial is given by
17 Conditions both necessary and sufficient for pulse stability under all autonomous pulse proc-
esses are also given in Roberts and Brown (1975).

PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
95
We shall see below why this is true. In any case, since the product of the roots of
the polynomial in parentheses in (10.6) is plus or minus the constant term
— 1.638, we observe that there must be a root of magnitude larger than one.
Hence, Theorem 10.1 implies that the system (weighted digraph) is pulse
unstable under some autonomous pulse process and Theorem 10.3 implies that
the system will therefore be value unstable under some such process. The
interpretation of this result is as follows. There is some way of introducing a
perturbation or change in the energy-food system which will lead to both
increasing changes and values elsewhere, for example in population, energy use,
or price of food. It is easy enough to see that most changes in this particular system
will have this property, and in particular that any initial increase in population will.
For other applications of Theorems 10.1 to 10.3, see Roberts (1976a, Chap. 4).
10.4. Structure and stability. A major problem with the eigenvalue theorems
stated in the previous section is that they do not explain why instabilities occur.
In this section, we shall discuss methods of determining the source of instabilities
from the structure of the digraph. Once one has such methods, they can be used to
find ways of changing the system which will avoid instabilities.
In particular, the kinds of results we shall describe relate the eigenvalues and
characteristic polynomial of a weighted digraph (of its weighted adjacency
matrix) to the structural properties of the digraphs. An early result along these
lines is due to Harary. In § 1.4 we defined a strong component of a digraph to be
an equivalence class of vertices under the equivalence relation where two
vertices are equivalent if and only if each is reachable from the other by a path. It
is easy to see that a strong component corresponds to a maximal, strongly
connected, generated subgraph. The strong components partition the vertices of
a digraph. Figure 10.3 shows a weighted digraph and its strong components, and
FIG. 10.3. Use of strong components to calculate eigenvalues.

96
CHAPTER 10
the computation there illustrates the following results. (These results can also be
turned around and used to calculate eigenvalues of an arbitrary matrix.)
THEOREM 10.4 (Harary (1959a)). The characteristic polynomial of a weighted
digraph is the product of the characteristic polynomials of its strong components.
COROLLARY. The set of eigenvalues of a weighted digraph is the union (count-
ing multiplicity) of the sets of eigenvalues of its strong components.
To state a second result along these lines, we define a digraph to be a I-factor
if every vertex has indegree one and outdegree one. It is easy to show that a
1-factor is a union of disjoint cycles. A 1-factor in a digraph is a spanning
subgraph which is a 1-factor. The weight w(H) of a 1-factor H in a weighted
digraph D is the product of the weights of the arcs of H. For example, in the
weighted digraph of Fig. 10.4, the cycles a, b, c, a and d, e, d define a 1-factor.
Its weight is (l)(-5)(-l)(2)(l)= 10.
THEOREM 10.5 (Chen (1967), (1971)). Suppose D is a weighted digraph and
is its characteristic polynomial. Then
where Gk is a k- vertex generated subgraph of D, Hu is the u-th I- factor in Gk, Lfl
is the number of cycles in Hu, and w(Hu) is the weight of Hu.
Let us apply this theorem to the weighted digraph of Fig. 10.2. We already
observed that there are only three cycles, D,E,R,D, P,D,E,Y,P; and
D, E, Y, R, D. Since each pair of these cycles has a common vertex, these
cycles also form the only 1 -factors in generated subgraphs. Their weights ar
respectively -.128, 1.613, and .025. Hence,
and
It is now easy to show that C(A) is given by (10.6) above.
FIG. 10.4. A \-factor consists of the cycles a, b, c, a and d, e, d.

PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
97
The weighted digraph of Fig. 10.5 presents a slightly more difficult example.
Using the identification of 1 -factors shown in this figure, we have
Hence,
Theorem 10.5 gives us some hope of relating instability to structure. For, if s is
the highest number so that the coefficient bs is nonzero, then C(A) factors as
and hence bs is plus or minus the product of the nonzero eigenvalues. By
Theorem 10.1, the only hope for pulse stability is to have \bs\^ 1. We see in our
example of Fig. 10.2 that s is 4 and bs - — 1.638. Hence, we know immediately
that the system will be pulse unstable under some autonomous pulse process. We
also observe that the cycle with highest (absolute) weight is P, D, E, Y, P. If we
could somehow break up this cycle, we might drive bs down below 1 in magni-
tude, and have a chance at having created a pulse stable system. We can
accomplish this in a variety of ways. In particular, eliminating the arc (Y, P)
eliminates this cycle. This change corresponds to eliminating the assumption that
population will be allowed to increase to the available food supply. It cor-
responds to some form of population control. If this arc (Y, P) is deleted in the
weighted digraph of Fig. 10.2, then, using Theorem 10.5, one obtains the
following characteristic polynomial:
It is easy enough to show that all of the roots of this polynomial have magnitude
less than one.18 Hence, by Theorem 10.2, the new weighted digraph is pulse
stable under all autonomous pulse processes. Since 1 is not a root, Theorem 10.3
implies that it is also value stable. The control on population has cut down on
unbounded increases in changes or in values in the system.
'The roots are approximately 0, .19, -.56, .19±.46/'.

98
CHAPTER 10
FIG. 10.5. A weighted digraph and its I-factors.
10.5. Integer weights. Theorem 10.5 leads to some interesting results about
stability if we are willing to assume that all the weights of a weighted digraph are
integers. In this case, we say the digraph is integer-weighted.
THEOREM 10.6. Suppose D is an integer-weighted digraph and
is its characteristic polynomial. Suppose some b^ ^ 0 and let s be the highest
subscript so that bs ^ 0. If D is pulse stable under all autonomous processes, then
THEOREM 10.7. Under the hypotheses of Theorem 10.6, D is value stable
under all autonomous pulse processes if and only if D is pulse stable under all
autonomous pulse processes and £)=] bt ^ -1.
To illustrate these theorems, consider the integer-weighted digraph of Fig.
10.6. Using Theorem 10.5 we have b2 = -5, 63 - -1 and b$ — 1. Since s - 5 and
and

PULSE PROCESSES AND THEIR APPLICATIONS 
99
bs = 1, the first condition of Theorem 10.6 is satisfied. However, b2 ^ £563, and so
the second condition is violated, and we conclude that the digraph is pulse
unstable under some autonomous pulse process. Theorems 10.6 and 10.7 are
proved in exactly the same way that Theorems 7 and 8 of Roberts and Brown
(1975) are proved in the special case called in that paper advanced rosettes.19 One
simply substitutes our bk for — ak as used by Roberts and Brown.
FIG. 10.6. An integer-weighted digraph.
10.6. Stability and signs. At the end of Chapter 9, we asked a general
question, namely, what can one learn about properties of a system knowing only
signs? As far as stability is concerned, the answer is very little. For, suppose D is
a weighted digraph and D' is the corresponding signed digraph, i.e., a signed
digraph with the same set of vertices and arcs, but signs replacing weights. Let D'
be considered a weighted digraph with weights +1 and -1. Can we infer from
the pulse or value stability or instability of D' any results about the stability of
D? The answer is: almost never. For, given a signed digraph which has at least
one cycle, it is easy to find an assignment of weights having the given signs for
which the highest nonzero coefficient bs in Theorem 10.5 is greater than 1.
Hence, the product of the nonzero eigenvalues is larger than 1, and Theorem
10.1 implies the corresponding weighted digraph is pulse and value unstable
under some autonomous pulse process. On the other hand, it is easy to show that
there is always some assignment of weights having the given signs under which
the resulting weighted digraph is pulse and value stable. For, let A be any real
matrix. If a is any real number, the eigenvalues of a A are a-multiples of the
eigenvalues of A. Hence, a can be picked small enough that all eigenvalues of
aA have magnitude less than 1, and hence, by Theorems 10.2 and 10.3, aA
gives rise to a pulse and value stable weighted digraph for sufficiently small a.
In the next chapter, we shall see that, in contrast to these negative results, we
can sometimes learn a great deal from the sign pattern.
19 The author thanks Professor Philip Straffin for suggesting these ideas.

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 11
Qualitative Matrices
In this chapter, we shall study properties of a matrix or, equivalently, of a
weighted digraph, which depend only on the sign of the entries or weights. In
general, if D is a weighted digraph (with loops allowed), and A is its weighted
adjacency matrix, we shall study the class of all real matrices of the same size as
A and with entries having the same signs as the corresponding entries of A (and
having O's in the same places as A}. This class will be denoted QA. The classes
QA will be called qualitative matrices, to use the terminology of Maybee and
Quirk (1969). We shall be interested in those properties which, if they hold for
one matrix in a class QA, hold for all matrices in this class.
We have already mentioned a number of questions which can be formulated in
this language. In particular, in Chapter 9 we talked about the eventual stability
of sequences of matrices representing sentiments of members of a small group,
and asked when eventual stability was a property of sign pattern alone. In
Chapter 10, we asked when pulse or value stability was a property of sign pattern
alone. Similar questions arise in economics (Quirk and Ruppert (1965),
Samuelson (1947)), in ecology (Jeffries (1974), Levins (1974a,b), May
(1973a,b)) and in chemistry (Clarke (1975), Tyson (1975)).
Corresponding to the class QA will be a signed digraph DA. This signed
digraph has vertices the rows of A, an arc from row i to row / if and only if the
(/, /) entry of A is nonzero, and a sign + on the arc (/, /) if and only if this entry is
positive. We shall usually study the class QA by using the digraph DA.
11.1. Sign solvability. A common problem encountered in social or biological
contexts is to solve a system of linear equations
where A is a square matrix and b is a vector. In many situations, the entries of
the matrix A and of the vector b are known only qualitatively, i.e., up to sign.
Suppose we know that the system (11.1) has a solution. Is the sign pattern of the
solution determined from the sign patterns of A and b! If not, when is it so
determined? Apparently Samuelson (1947) was the first to propose this question
in an economic context. Using the notation defined above, we ask the following:
if Ax = b, if A e QA, if b' £ Ob, and if Ax' = b', is x' necessarily in Qx? If so, we
say that the system (11.1) is sign solvable.
The problem of characterizing sign solvable systems was discussed at length by
Lancaster (1962), (1964), (1965) and by Gorman (1964), and was solved by
101

102 
CHAPTER 11
Bassett, Maybee and Quirk (1968). Our discussion follows the latter and also
Maybee and Quirk (1969).
We begin with two examples. Suppose
Then Ax = b is sign solvable. For if A' e QA and b' e Qh, then
for a, (3, y, 8, e positive. The equation A'x' = b' can be written as
Thus,
and
Both x{ and Jt2 are negative, independent of the values of a, (3, y, 8, and e. We
conclude that Ax — b is sign solvable.
To give a second example, let
Then x = ( 
^ j is a solution to Ax -b. If A' = A and />' - (6, 2), then A' e QA,
b' £ Ob, and *' = ( 
j is a solution to A'x' = b'. However, x' & Qx.
To state a characterization of sign solvability, let us first observe that if
detA^O, then one can show that the system is not sign solvable. Next, we
observe that renumbering of equations or variables or multiplying equations and
or variables by - 1 does not affect sign solvability. Hence, if del A ^ 0, one can
show that the problem can be reduced to the case where alt < 0, all /, .r, ^ 0, all /,
and 6/^0, all /. The characterization of sign solvability can now be stated in
terms of the signed digraph DA defined above.
THEOREM 11.1 (Bassett, Maybee and Quirk (1968)). Suppose a,,<0, all
/, Xj g 0, all /', and bj ^ 0, all j. Then the equation Ax — b is sign solvable if and
only if
1) every cycle of the signed digraph DA is negative
and
2) whenever bf > 0, then every simple path from k ^ j to j in DA is positive.
To illustrate Theorem 11.1, let us consider A and b of (11.3). The diagonal
entries of A are negative, b, ^0, each /, and x = ( 
J is a solution with x, ^ 0,

QUALITATIVE MATRICES 
103
all/. Hence, Theorem 11.1 applies. The signed digraph DA is shown in Fig. 11.1.
Every cycle of DA is negative. However, b\ >0 and 2, 1 is a negative path into
vertex 1. Thus, condition 2) of the theorem is violated.
FlG. 11.1. Signed digraph DA corresponding to matrix A of (11.3).
11.2. Sign stability. Another system of equations which arises with great
frequency in economic and biological applications is the system of linear
differential equations
We call an equilibrium x - 0 of the system (11.4) stable if for every e > 0, there is
a 8 > 0 with the property that every positive half-trajectory starting within 8 of
the origin lies eventually within e of the origin. A well-known result states that
the equilibrium x = 0 is stable if and only if every eigenvalue of A has negative
real part. (See for example Cesari (1971) or Hahn (1967).) We call the matrix A
stable if the equilibrium x — Q of the system (11.4) is stable, i.e., if every
eigenvalue of A has negative real part. We shall be interested in whether
stability (in this sense, not in the sense of Chapter 10) can be inferred simply
from the sign pattern, i.e., if stability is a property of the qualitative matrix. More
generally, we shall be interested in a characterization of the sign stable matrices,
the matrices A with the property that all matrices in QA are stable.
To give an example of a sign stable matrix, consider
If A'eQA, then
where a, (3, y, and 8 are positive. The characteristic polynomial of A' is
Using the quadratic formula, we see that if b2-4ac §0, then each eigenvalue
has real part - (a + 8)/2, a negative number. Similarly, since ac > 0, it is easy to
verify that the real part is negative even if b2 — 4ac >0. Hence, each A' in QA is
stable, and A is sign stable.
Quirk and Ruppert (1965) characterize sign stability if a,, ^ 0, all /. A charac-
terization in the general case was discovered by Jeffries (1974) and is discussed

104
CHAPTER 11
in Jeffries, Klee and van den Driessche (1977) and in Klee and van den Driessche
(1977). We present Jeffries' result.20
To state this result, let us associate with the matrix A a graph GA. The vertices
of GA are the rows of A, and there is an edge between rows / and / if and only if
i^j and both a,, ^0 and a/, ^ 0. For example, let us consider the matrix
The signed digraph DA and graph GA corresponding to A are shown in Fig.
11.2. Let
In our example, the set RA consists of the vertex 3 alone.
We shall try to color the vertices of GA using two colors, white and black, in
such a way that the following conditions are satisfied:
1) every vertex of RA is black;
2) no black vertex has precisely one white neighbor;
3) every white vertex has at least one white neighbor.
Such a coloring, if it exists, is called an RA-coloring of GA. An RA -coloring of
GA in our example is obtained by coloring vertex 3 black and all other vertices
white, as shown in Fig. 11.2.
A matching of a graph is a set of pairwise disjoint edges of the graph. If 5 is a
set of vertices in a graph G, an S-complete matching is a set M of pairwise
disjoint edges of G such that all vertices not covered by the edges in M are
outside 5. For example, if 5 = V — RA, then an S-complete matching in the
graph GA of Fig. 11.2 is given by the edges {1, 2}, {4, 5} and {6, 7}.
THEOREM 11.2 (Jeffries). An n X n real matrix A is sign stable if and only if the
following conditions hold:
1 ) Each loop of the signed digraph DA is negative.
2) Each cycle of length 2 in DA is negative.
3) DA has no cycles of lengths larger than 2.
4) In every RA-coloring of the graph GA, all vertices are black.
5) GA has a (V — RA)- complete matching.
20 Earlier results claimed in the general case by Quirk and Ruppert (] 965) and Maybee and Quirk
(1969) were shown to be incorrect in Jeffries, Klee and van den Driessche (1977).

QUALITATIVE MATRICES
105
The matrix A of (11.6) satisfies conditions 1), 2), 3), and 5), but violates
condition 4), and hence we see that it is not sign stable. As a further illustration
of this theorem, it is easy to check that if A is the matrix of (11.5), then all five
conditions of Theorem 11.2 are satisfied.
FIG. 11.2. Signed digraph DA and graph GA corresponding to matrix A of (11.6), and an
RA-coloring of GA.
11.3. GM Matrices. A real n x n matrix A is called perfectly stable, or Hicks
stable, or H-stable, if each principal minor Ap of order p satisfies (— 1)PAP >0.
This notion was introduced in a famous book on economic theory by Hicks
(1939). Since then, there has been a considerable body of literature devoted to
the study of the relationship between H-stability and the notion of stability
defined in the previous section. (This literature owes-much of its impetus to a
paper by Samuelson (1944) which argued that Hicks' notion of stability was not
as relevant to economics as the notion of stability of § 11.2.) In particular, a
number of authors have considered the problem of characterizing those matrices
A for which the two notions of stability are equivalent. We shall discuss this
problem, following the development of Maybee and Quirk (1973).
We shall discuss conditions on the signed digraph DA which are sufficient to
conclude that the two notions of stability are equivalent.
THEOREM 11.3 (Metzler (1945)). Suppose that the signed digraph DA satisfies
the following conditions:
1) There is a negative loop at each vertex (i.e., an < 0 for all i).
2) There are no other negative arcs (i.e., a,, ^ 0 for all i ^ /.)
3) DA is strongly connected (A is "indecomposable").
Then A is stable if and only if A is H-stable.
A matrix A such that DA satisfies conditions 1) and 2) of Theorem 11.3 is
called Metzlerian. The next class of matrices of interest generalizes the
Metzlerian ones. We say that a real n x n matrix A is a Morishima matrix if for

106 
CHAPTER 11
some permutation matrix P,
where An and A22 are Metzlerian matrices and all entries of A}2 and A 21 are
nonpositive. When is a matrix Morishima? To use the terminology of Chapter 9,
it is easy to see that a matrix A whose diagonal entries are negative is a
Morishima matrix if and only if DA (with loops deleted) is balanced. This follows
from a digraph version of the Harary structure theorem for balance (Theorem
9.1).
THEOREM 11.4 (Morishima (1952), Bassett, Maybee and Quirk (1968)). 21 //
A is an indecomposable Morishima matrix, then A is stable if and only if A is
H-stable.
Current work on the relationship between stability and H-stability centers on
the generalized Metzlerian matrices, or GM matrices. A GM matrix is a real n x n
matrix whose corresponding signed digraph DA has the following properties:
1) Each vertex has a negative loop.
2) If 7 is a negative cycle of length greater than 1 and / is a positive cycle,
then either / and / consist of disjoint sets of vertices or the vertices of / form
a subset of the vertices of J.
It is easy to see that every Metzlerian matrix and every Morishima matrix is a GM
matrix. The latter follows since DA less loops is balanced and so has no negative
cycles. It is easy to give examples of GM matrices which are not Morishima
matrices. Maybee and Quirk (1973) show that for indecomposable GM matrices
with all cycles negative, stability implies H-stability. Now if A is an indecompos-
able GM matrix with all cycles negative, then every B e QA has these properties.
Hence, for indecomposable GM matrices A with all cycles negative, stability
implies H-stability for all B e QA. Maybee and Quirk also show that if A is an
indecomposable matrix with negative elements on the principal diagonal, then, if
A is not a GM matrix, it must be the case that for some B e QA, B is stable but not
H-stable. This suggests the conjecture, made by Maybee and Quirk, that among
qualitatively specified real matrices A, stability implies H-stability if and only if A
is a GM matrix. That is, stability implies H-stability for all B e QA if and only if A
is a GM matrix. Our major reason for stating this conjecture here is that it suggests
questions of graph-theoretic interest. Namely, what are the properties of the
signed digraphs DA corresponding to GM matrices? Such signed digraphs are
called GM digraphs. Figure 11.3 shows an example of such a digraph. Verification
of properties 1) and 2) is left to the reader. Maybee and Quirk (1973) obtain a
variety of results about GM digraphs, of which a typical result says the following: if
D is a strongly connected GM digraph with a positive and negative cycle going
through the same vertex set, then every positive cycle goes through all the vertices.
This result is illustrated by the GM digraph of Fig. 11.3. To the author's
knowledge, no nice characterization of GM digraphs has been obtained. Such a
Morishima's proof requires an additional hypothesis, namely that a,, ^ 0, all /', /.
21

QUALITATIVE MATRICES
107
characterization might help in the solution of a long-standing problem in
economics, namely the problem of determining the relationship between stability
and H-stability.
FIG. 11.3. A GMdigraph.

This page intentionally left blank 

References
L. G. ANTLE AND G. P. JOHNSON (1973), Integration of policy simulation, decision analysis, and
information systems: Implications of energy conservation and fuel substitution measures on
inland waterway traffic. Proceedings of Computer Science and Statistics: Seventh Annual
Symposium on the Interface, Iowa State University, Ames.
K. APPEL AND W. HAKEN (1977), Every planar map is four colorable. Part I: Discharging, Illinois J.
Math., 21, pp. 429-490.
K. APPEL, W. HAKEN AND J. KOCH (1977), Every planar map is four colorable. Part II: Reducibility,
Ibid., 21, pp. 491-567.
W. E. ARMSTRONG (1939), The determinateness of the utility function, Econom. J., 49, pp. 453-467.
(1948), Uncertainty and the utility function, Ibid., 58, pp. 1-10.
(1950), A note on the theory of consumer's behavior, Oxford Economic Papers, 2, pp.
119-122.
(1951), Utility and the theory of welfare, Ibid., 3, pp. 259-271.
R. M. AXELROD, ED. (1976), Structure of Decision, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
L. BASSETT, J. MAYBEE AND J. QUIRK (1968), Qualitative economics and the scope of the
correspondence principle, Econometrica, 36, pp. 544-563.
E. BELTRAMI AND L. BODIN (1973), Networks and vehicle routing for municipal waste collection,
Networks, 4, pp. 65-94.
S. BENZER (1959), On the topology of the genetic fine structure, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, 45, pp.
1607-1620.
(1962), The fine structure of the genet Sci. Amer., 206, pp. 70-84.
C. BERGE (1961), Fdrbung von Graphen, deren sdmtliche bzw. deren ungerade Kreise starr sind,
Wiss. Z. Martin-Luther-Univ. Halle-Wittenberg, Math-Wiss. Reihe, 114.
(1962), Sur une conjecture relative au probleme des codes optimaux, Comm. 13eme assemblee
generate de 1'URSI, Tokyo, International Scientific Radio Union.
(1963), Perfect graphs, I. Six Papers on Graph Theory, Indian Statistical Institute, Calcutta.
(1967), Some classes of perfect graphs, Graph Theory and Theoretical Physics, F. Harary, ed.,
Academic Press, New York.
(1969), The rank of a family of sets and some applications to graph theory, Recent Progress in
Combinatorics, W. T. Tutte, ed., Academic Press, New York, pp. 49-57.
(1973), Graphs and Hypergraphs, American Elsevier, New York.
J. BERGER, M. H. FISEK, R. Z. NORMAN AND M. ZELDITCH (1977), Status Characteristics and
Social Interaction, Elsevier, New York.
J. BERGER, M. ZELDITCH, B. ANDERSON AND B. P. COHEN (1972), Structural aspects of
distributive justice: A status value formulation, Sociological Theories in Progress, II,
J. Berger, M. Zelditch, and B. Anderson, eds., Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, pp. 119-146.
F. BOESCH AND R. TINDELL (1977), Rabbins' Theorem for mixed graphs, unpublished manuscript,
Bell Telephone Laboratories, Holmdel, New Jersey (submitted to Amer. Math. Monthly).
D. CARTWRIGHT AND F. HARARY (1956), Structural balance: A generalization ofHeider's theory,
Psych. Rev., 63, pp. 277-293.
D. B. CEARLOCK (1977), Common properties and limitations of some structural modeling techniques,
Doctoral dissertation, Univ. of Washington, Seattle.
L. CESARI (1971), Asymptotic Behavior and Stability Problems in Ordinary Differential 
Equations,
Springer-Verlag, New York-Heidelberg-Berlin.
109

110 
REFERENCES
W. K. CHEN (1967), On directed graph solutions of linear algebraic equations, SIAM Rev., 9, pp.
692-707.
(1971), Applied Graph Theory, American Elsevier, New York.
V. CHVATAL, M. R. GAREY AND D. S. JOHNSON (1976), Two results concerning multicoloring,
Rep. STAN-CS-76-582, Computer Science Dept., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA,
December.
V. CHVATAL AND C. THOMASSEN (to appear). Distances in orientations of graphs, J. Combina-
torial Theory Ser. B.
B. L. CLARKE (1975), Theorems on chemical network stability, J. Chem. Phys., 72, pp. 773-775.
F. H. CLARKE AND R. E. JAMISON (1976), Multicolorings, measures and games on graphs, Discrete
Math., 4, pp. 241-246.
S. K. COADY, G. P. JOHNSON AND J. M. JOHNSON (1973), Effectively conveying results: A key to
the usefulness of technology assessment, paper delivered at the First International Congress
on Technology Assessment, The Hague, May 31, Institute for Water Resources, Corps of
Engineers, Fort Belvoir, VA.
J. E. COHEN (1978), Food Webs and Niche Space, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
S. A. COOK (1971), The complexity of theorem-proving procedures, Proc. Third ACM Symposium on
the Theory of Computing, Assoc. Comput. Mach., New York, pp. 151-158.
C. H. COOMBS AND J. E. K. SMITH (1973), On the detection of structures in attitudes and
developmental processes, Psych. Rev., 80, pp. 337-351.
G. A. DIRAC (1961), On rigid circuit graphs, Abh. Math. Sem. Univ. Hamburg, 25, pp. 71-76.
J. EDMONDS (1965), Minimum partition of a matroid into independent subsets, J. Res. Nat. Bur.
Standards Sect. B, B69, pp. 67-72.
D. R. FULKERSON AND O. A. GROSS (1965), Incidence matrices and interval graphs. Pacific J.
Math., 15, pp. 835-855.
H. GABAI (1974), N-dimensional interval graphs, York College, City Univ. of New York, New
York.
M. R. GAREY AND D. S. JOHNSON (1976), The complexity of near-optimal graph coloring, J. Assoc.
Comput. Mach., 23, pp. 43-49.
M. R. GAREY, D. S. JOHNSON AND L. STOCKMEYER (1976), Some simplified 
NP-complete
problems, Theoret. Comput. Sci., 1, pp. 237-267.
A. GHOUILA-HOURI (1962), Caracterisation des graphes nonorientes dont on peut orienter les aretes
de maniere a obtenir le graphe d'une relation d'ordre, C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris Ser. A-B, 254,
pp. 1370-1371.
E. N. GILBERT (1972), Unpublished technical memorandum, Bell Telephone Laboratories, Murray
Hill, NJ.
P. C. GlLMORE AND A. J. HOFFMAN (1964), A characterization of comparability graphs and of
interval graphs, Canad. J. Math., 16, pp. 539-548.
M. C. GOLUMBIC (1977), Comparability graphs and a new matroid, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. B,
22B, pp. 68-90.
I. J, GOOD (1947), Normal recurring decimals, J. London Math. Soc., 22, pp. 167-169.
T. GORMAN (1964), More scope for qualitative economics, Rev. Economic Studies, 31, pp. 65-68.
J. GRIGGS AND D. B. WEST (1977), Extremal values of the interval number of a graph, California Ins.
of Tech., Pasadena, CA.
W. HAHN (1967), Stability of Motion, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York.
A. HAJNAL AND J. SURANYI (1958), Uberdie Auflosung von Graphen in Vollstdndige Teilgraphen,
Ann. Univ. Sci. Budapest. Eotvos Sect. Math., 1, pp. 113-121.
G. HAJOS (1957), Uber eine Art von Graphen, Internal. Math. Nachr., 47, p. 65.
F. HARARY (1954), On the notion of balance of a signed graph, Michigan Math. J., 2, pp. 143-146.
(1959a), A graph-theoretic method for the complete reduction of a matrix with a view toward
finding its eigenvalues, J. Math, and Physics, 38, pp. 104-111.
(1959b), On the group of the composition of two graphs, Duke Math. J., 26, pp. 29-34.
(1959c), On the measurement of structural balance, Behavioral Sci.. 4, pp. 316-323.
(1969), Graph Theory, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.

REFERENCES 
111
F. HARARY, R. Z. NORMAN AND D. CARTWRIGHT, (1965), Structural Models: An Introduction to
the Theory of Directed Graphs, John Wiley, New York.
J. L. HARRISON (1962), The distribution of feeding habits among animals in a tropical rain forest,
J. Animal Ecology, 31, pp. 53-63.
F. HEIDER (1946), Attitudes and cognitive organization, J. Psychology, 21, pp. 107-112.
J. HICKS (1939), Value.and Capital, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
F. S. HILLIER AND G. J. LIEBERMAN (1974), Introduction to Operations Research, Holden-Day,
San Francisco, 1st ed. 1967.
A. J. W. HILTON, R. RADO AND S. H. SCOTT (1973), A (<5)-colour theorem for planar graphs,
Bull. London Math. Soc., 5, pp. 302-306.
C. H. HUBBELL, E. C. JOHNSEN AND M. MARCUS (1978), Structural balance in group networks,
Handbook of Social Science Methods, B. Anderson and R. B. Smith, eds., Irvington
Publishers, distributed by Halsted Press, New York.
L. HUBERT (1974), Some applications of graph theory and related non-metric techniques to problems
of approximate seriation: The case of symmetric proximity measures, British J. Math. Statist.
Psychology, 27, pp. 133-153.
G. HUTCHINSON (1969), Evaluation of polymer sequence fragment data usinggraph theory, Bull Math.
Biophys., 31, pp. 541-562.
G. E. HUTCHINSON (1944), Limnological studies in Connecticut. VII. A critical examination of the
supposed relationship between phytoplankton periodicity and chemical changes in lake waters,
Ecology, 25, pp. 3-26.
J. P. HUTCHINSON AND H. S. WILF (1975), On eulerian circuits and words with prescribed
adjacency patterns, J. Combinatorial Theory Ser. A, A18, pp. 80-87.
C. JEFFRIES (1974), Qualitative stability and digraphs in model ecosystems. Ecology, 55, pp.
1415-1419.
C. JEFFRIES, V. KLEE AND P. VAN DEN DRIESSCHE (1977), When is a matrix sign stable ? Canad. J.
Math., 29, pp. 315-326.
J. KANE (1972), A primer for a new cross-impact language—KSIM, Tech. Forecasting and Social
Change, 4, pp. 129-142.
(1973), Intuition, policy and mathematical simulation, paper presented at International
Symposium on Uncertainties in Hydrologic and Water Resource Systems, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver.
J. KANE, W. THOMPSON AND I. VERTINSKY (1972), Health care delivery: A policy simulator,
Socio-Econ. Plan. Sci., 6, pp. 283-293.
J. KANE, I. VERTINSKY AND W. THOMPSON (1972), Environmental simulation and policy formu-
lation—methodology and example (water policy for British Columbia), International
Symposium on Modeling Techniques in Water Resources Systems, A. K. Biswas, ed.,
Environment, Ottawa, Canada.
(1973), KSIM: A methodology for interactive resource policy simulation, Water Resources
Research, 9, pp. 65-79.
R. M. KARP (1972), Reducibility among combinatorial problems, Complexity of Computer Compu-
tations, R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher, eds., Plenum Press, New York.
D. G. KENDALL (1963), A statistical approach to Flinders Petrie's sequence dating, Bull. Internal.
Statist. Inst., 40, pp. 657-680.
(1969a), Incidence matrices, interval graphs, and seriation in archaeology, Pacific J. Math., 28,
pp. 565-570.
(1969b), Some problems and methods in statistical archaeology, World Archaeology, 1, pp.
61-76.
(1971a), A Mathematical approach to seriation, Philos. Trans. Roy. Soc. London Ser. A, 269,
pp. 125-135.
(1971b), Abundance matrices and seriation in archaeology, Z. Wahrscheinlichkeitstheorie
und Verw. Gebiete, 17, pp. 104-112.
(1971c), Seriation from abundance matrices, Mathematics in the Archaeological and Histori-
cal Sciences, F. R. Hodson et al., eds., Edinburgh University Press, Edinburgh.

112 
REFERENCES
V. KLEE (1969), What are the intersection graphs of arcs in a circled, Amer. Math. Monthly, 76, pp.
810-813.
V. KLEE AND P. VAN DEN DRIESSCHE (1977), A linear-time test for the sign stability of a matrix,
Nutner. Math., 28, pp. 273-285.
D. KONIG (1936), Theorie des Endlichen und Unendlichen Graphen, Akademische Verlags-
gesellschaft M.B.H., Leipzig; reprinted, Chelsea, New York, 1950.
P. G. KRUZIC (1973a), A suggested paradigm for policy planning, Stanford Research Institute Tech.
Note TN-OED-016, Menlo Park, CA, June.
(1973b), Cross-impact analysis workshop, Stanford Research Institute Letter Rep., Menlo
Park, CA, June 23.
K. J. LANCASTER (1962), The scope of qualitative economics, Rev. Economic Studies, 29, pp.
99-123.
(1964), Pardonable systems and qualitative economics, Ibid., 31, pp. 69-72.
(1965), The theory of qualitative linear systems, Econometrica, 33, pp. 395-408.
H. G. LANDAU (1955), On dominance relations and the structure of animal societies: HI. The
condition for a score structure. Bull. Math. Biophys., 15, pp. 143-148.
C. B. LEKKERKERKER AND J. CH. BOLAND (1962), Representation of a finite graph by a set of
intervals on the real line, Fund. Math., 51, pp. 45-64.
G. G. LENDARIS AND W. W. WAKELAND (1977), Structural modeling—a bird's eye view. Systems
Science Ph.D. Program, Portland State Univ., Portland, OR, February.
J. H. LEVINE (1976), The network of corporate interlocks in the United States: An overview,
Dartmouth College, Hanover, NH.
R. LEVINS (1974a), Problems of signed digraphs in ecological theory, Ecosystem Analysis and
Prediction, S. Levin, ed., Soc. Indust. Appl. Math., Philadelphia, pp. 264-277.
,(1974b), The qualitative analysis of partially specified systems, Ann. New York Acad. Sci.,
231, pp. 123-138.
T. M. LIEBLING (1970), Graphentheorie in Planungs-und Tourenproblemen, Lecture Notes in
Operations Research and Mathematical Systems No. 21, Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidel-
berg-New York.
C. L. Liu (1968), Introduction to Combinatorial Mathematics, McGraw-Hill, New York.
(1972), Topics in Combinatorial Mathematics, Mathematical Association of America,
Washington, D.C.
L. LovAsz (1972a), Normal hypergraphs and the perfect graph conjecture. Discrete Math., 2, pp.
253-267.
(1972b), A characterization of perfect graphs, J. Combinatorial Theory, 13, pp. 95-98.
(1977), On the Shannon capacity of a graph, Preprint of the Mathematical Institute of the
Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest.
R. D. LUCE (1956), Semiorders and a theory of utility discrimination, Econometrica, 24, pp.
178-191.
E. MARCZEWSKI (1945), Sur deux proprietes des classes d'ensembles, Fund. Math., 33, pp. 303-307.
R. M. MAY (1973a), Qualitative stability in model ecosystems, Ecology, 54, pp. 638-641.
(1973b), Stability and Complexity in Model Ecosystems, Princeton University Press,
Princeton, N.J.
J. MAYBEE AND J. QUIRK (1969), Qualitative problems in matrix theory, SIAM Rev., 11, pp.
30-51.
(1973), The GM-matrix problem. Tech. Rep., Dept. of Computer Sci., Univ. of Colorado,
Boulder; Linear Algebra and Appl., to appear.
M. McLEAN (1976), Getting the problem right—the role for structural modeling, Science Policy
Research Unit, Univ. of Sussex, England.
M. MCLEAN AND P. SHEPHERD (1976), The importance of model structure, Futures, 8, pp. 40-51.
(1978a), Feedback processes in dynamic models. Tech. Forecasting and Social Change,
11, pp. 153-164.
(1978b), The United Kingdom private car model—an example of structural modeling,
Science Policy Research Unit, Univ. of Sussex, England (submitted to Tech. Forecasting
and Social Change).

REFERENCES 
113
K. MENGER (1951), Probabilistic theories of relations, Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci., 37, pp. 178-180.
L. METZLER (1945), Stability of multiple markets: The Hicks conditions, Econometrica, 13, pp.
277-292.
R. S. MILLER (1967), Pattern and process in competition, Advances in Ecological Research, Vol. 4,
J. B. Cragg, ed., Academic Press, London, pp. 1-74.
M. MORISHIMA (1952), On the laws of change of the price system in an economy which contains
complementary commodities, Osaka Economic Papers, 1, pp. 101-113.
J. MOSIMANN (1968), Elementary Probability for the Biological Sciences, Appleton-Century-Crofts,
New York.
J. E. MOSIMANN, M. B. SHAPIRO, C. R. MERRIL, D. F. BRADLEY AND J. E. VINTON (1966),
Reconstruction of protein and nucleic acid sequences: IV. The algebra of free monoids and the
fragmentation stratagem, Bull. Math. Biophys., 28, pp. 235-260.
R. Z. NORMAN AND F. S. ROBERTS (1972a), A derivation of a measure of relative balance for social
structures and a characterization of extensive ratio systems, J. Mathematical Psychology, 9,
pp. 66-91.
(1972b), A measure of relative balance for social structures, Sociological Theories in Progress,
II, J. Berger, M. Zelditch, and B. Anderson, eds., Houghton-Mifflin, New York, pp.
358-391.
T. R. PARSONS AND R. J. LEBRASSEUR (1970), The availability of food to different trophic levels in
the marine food chain, Marine Food Chains, J. H. Steele, ed., University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, pp. 325-343.
E. R. PIANKA (1976), Competition and niche theory, Theoretical Ecology: Principles and Appli-
cations, R. M. May, ed., Blackwell Scientific, Oxford, England, pp. 114-141.
D. PlMENTEL, L. E. HURD, A. C. BELLOTTI, M. J. FORSTER, I. N. OKA, O. D. SHOLES AND
R. J. WHITMAN (1973), Food production and the energy crisis, Science, 182, pp. 443-449.
D. PIMENTEL, W. R. LYNN, W. K. MACREYNOLDS, M. T. HEWES AND S. RUSH (1974),
Workshop on research methodologies for studies of energy, food, man and environment, phase
I, Tech. Rep., Cornell University Center for Environmental Quality Management, Ithaca,
New York, June.
J. QUIRK AND R. RUPPERT (1965), Qualitative economics and the stability of equilibrium, Rev.
Economic Studies, 32, pp. 311-326.
E. M. REINGOLD, J. NIEVERGELT AND N. DEO (1977), Combinatorial Algorithms: Theory and
Practice, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
M. RICHARDSON (1946), On weakly ordered systems, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 52, pp. 113-116.
H. E. ROBBINS (1939), A theorem on graphs, with an application to a problem of traffic control, Amer.
Math. Monthly, 46, pp. 281-283.
F. S. ROBERTS (1968), Representations of indifference 
relations, Ph.D. thesis, Department of
Mathematics, Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, January.
(1969a), Indifference 
graphs, Proof Techniques in Graph Theory, F. Harary, ed., Academic
Press, New York, pp. 139-146.
(1969b), On the boxicity and cubicity of a graph, Recent Progress in Combinatorics, W. T.
Tutte, ed., Academic Press, New York, pp. 301-310.
(197la), Homogeneous families of semiorders and the theory of probabilistic consistency, J.
Mathematical Psychology, 8, pp. 248-263.
(1971b), On the compatibility between a graph and a simple order, J. Combinatorial Theory,
II, pp. 28-38.
(1971c), Signed digraphs.and the growing demand for energy, Environment and Planning, 3,
pp. 395-410.
(1973), Building and analyzing an energy demand signed digraph, Ibid., 5, pp. 199-221.
(1974), Structural characterizations of stability of signed digraphs under pulse processes,
Graphs and Combinatorics, R. Bari and F. Harary, eds., Lecture Notes #406, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, pp. 330-338.

114 
REFERENCES
(1975), Weighted digraph models for the assessment of energy use and air pollution in
transportation systems, Environment and Planning, 7, pp. 703-724.
(1976a), Discrete Mathematical Models, with Applications to Social, Biological, and
Environmental Problems, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.
(1976b), Structural analysis of energy systems, Energy: Mathematics and Models, F. S.
Roberts, ed., Soc. Indust. Appl. Math., Philadelphia, pp. 84-101.
(1978), Food webs, competition graphs, and the boxicity of ecological phase space, Theory and
Applications of Graphs—in America's Bicentennial Year, Y. Alavi and D. Lick, eds.,
Springer-Verlag, New York.
(to appear), On the mobile radio frequency assignment problem and the traffic light phasing
problem, Proc. Second International Conference on Combinatorial Mathematics, New York
Academy of Sciences, New York, 1978.
F. S. ROBERTS AND T. A. BROWN (1975), Signed digraphs and the energy crisis, Amer. Math.
Monthly, 82, pp. 577-594.
W. S. ROBINSON (1951), A method for chronologically ordering archaeological deposits, American
Antiquity, 16, pp. 293-301.
M. ROSENFELD (1967), On a problem ofC. E. Shannon in graph theory, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 18,
pp. 315-319.
(1970), Graphs with a large capacity, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 26, pp. 57-59.
P. SAMUELSON (1944), The relation between Hicksian stability and true dynamic 
stability,
Econometrica, 12, pp. 256-257.
(1947), Foundations of Economic Analysis, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
2nd ed., 1955.
S. H. SCOTT (1975), Multiple node colorings of finite graphs, Ph.D. dissertation, Department of
Mathematics, Univ. of Reading, England, March.
C. E. SHANNON (1956), The zero-error capacity of a noisy channel, IRE Trans. Information Theory,
IT-2, pp. 8-19.
L. N. SHEVRIN AND N. D. FILIPPOV (1970), Partially ordered sets and their comparability graphs,
Siberian Math. J., 11, pp. 497-509.
S. STAHL (1976), n-tuple colorings and associated graphs, J. Combinatorial Theory, 20. pp. 185-
203.
L. STOCKMEYER (1973), Planar 3-colorability is polynomial complete, SIGACTNews, 5, pp. 19-25.
K. E. STOPPERS, (1968), Scheduling of traffic lights—A new approach, Transportation Research, 2,
pp.199-234.
H. F. TAYLOR (1970), Balance in Small Groups, Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
W. T. TROTTER AND F. HARARY (1977), On double and multiple interval graphs, Univ. of South
Carolina, Columbia (submitted to J. Graph Theory).
W. T. TROTTER, J. I. MOORE AND D. P. SUMNER (1976), The dimension of a comparability graph,
Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 60, pp. 35-38.
A. C. TUCKER (1970), Characterizing circular-arc graphs, Bull. Amer. Math. Soc., 75, pp. 1257-
1260.
(1971), Matrix characterizations of circular-arc graphs, Pacific J. Math., 39, pp. 535-545.
(1973), Perfect graphs and an application to optimizing municipal services, SI AM Rev., 15, pp.
585-590.
A. C. TUCKER AND L. BODIN (1976), A model for municipal street-sweeping operations, Case
Studies in Applied Mathematics, Committee on the Undergraduate Program in Mathema-
tics, Mathematical Association of America, Washington, D.C.
J. TYSON (1975), Classification of instabilities in chemical reaction systems, J. Chem. Phys., 62, pp.
1010-1015.
J. H. VANDERMEER (1972), Niche theory, Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, vol. 3, R. F.
Johnston, ed., Annual Reviews, Palo Alto, CA, pp. 107-132.
J. VON NEUMANN AND O. MORGENSTERN (1944), Theory of Games and Economic Behavior,
Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2nd ed. 1947, 3rd ed. 1953.

REFERENCES 
115
H. M. WAGNER (1975), Principles of Operations Research with Applications to Managerial
Decisions, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1st ed., 1969.
E. M. WILKINSON (1971), Archaeological seriation and the traveling salesman problem. Mathematics
in the Archaeological and Historical Sciences, F. R. Hodson, et al., eds., Edinburgh
University Press, Edinburgh.
M. ZELDITCH, J. BERGER AND B. P. COHEN (1966), Stability of organizational status structures,
Sociological Theories in Progress, I, J. Berger, M. Zelditch, and B. Anderson, eds.,
Houghton-Mifflin, Boston, pp. 269-294.

Subject Index
Acyclic digraph, 43, 64
Adjacency, 20
Adjacency matrix, 33
weighted, 94
Advanced rosette, 99
Air pollution, 3, 7, 89
Algorithm:
deterministic, 12
good, 12
greedy, 35
nondeterministic, 12
see also NP, depth first search
a(G), 55
a*(G), 59
a-perfect graph: see perfect graph
Arc, 3
Archaeology, 2, 18, 31
Arithmetic models, 89
Articulation set, 52
Asteroidal triple, 20
Augmenting effect, 91
Balance:
definition, 80
degree of, 82-83
measure of, 82-83
of signed digraph, 81-83, 87, 106
of signed graph, 80
theory of, 79-88
Bargaining, 64
Benzer's Problem, 17-18
Berge Conjecture:
strong, 52
weak, 52
Bipartite graph, 50, 52, 53, 80
Box, 39
Box (G), 39
Boxicity, 39-41
definition, 39
of ecological phase space, 41-44
of niche overlap graph, 42
Bridge, 8
in mixed graph, 8
British Columbia, 89
Canada, 89, 90
Capacity:
computation of, 60
of graph, 57-62
definition, 59
of noisy channel, 57-62
zero-error, 59
Chain, 5
closed, 5
length of, 5
simple, 5
Characteristic, 83
Characteristic polynomial of weighted di-
graph. 95-96
Chemistry, 101
x(G), 49
X*(G), 56
Xn(G), 53
Chord, 19
Chromatic number:
computation of, 12, 50-51
definition, 49
rc-chromatic number, 53
Chronological order, 18
Circuit, 5
Circular arc graph, 22, 23
Circular 1's property, 22
Clique:
consecutive ordering of dominant cliques,
21,24
definition, 20
dominant, 20, 21, 24
finding largest, 12, 25, 51
Clique number, 51-52
Coal, 90
Coalition formation, 84, 85
Coastal resources, 89
116

INDEX
117
Codes, 73-75
see also noisy channel
Code alphabet, unambiguous, 58
Codeword, 4
Coding: see codes
Colorability, 2, 49-56
Colorable:
^-colorable, 49
2-colorable, 50-51
see also bipartite
Coloring:
applications of, 49-50
N-tuple, 53
efficient, 56
-R.1-coloring, 104
Committee schedules, 50
Communication links, 63
see also codes, noisy channel, telecommu-
nications
Communication system, 4
see also codes, noisy channel, telecommu-
nications
Comparative change, 86-87
Compatibility graph, 3, 22
Compatible ordering, 33
uniqueness of, 36
Competition graph, 3, 42
see also niche overlap graph
Competition number, 44
Complement, 20
Complete graph, 20
Complete p-partite graph, 39
Component, 5
connected, 5
strong, 5, 95
Conflict graph, 26, 54
Confusion graph, 4, 58
Connected component, 5
Connected graph, 5
Connectedness, 5
Consecutive 1's property, 21-22, 33-34
Consecutive ordering of dominant cliques,
21, 24
Corporate interlocks, 16-17
Cover: see A:-cover
Cross-referencing system, 64
Curb multidigraph, 67
Cutset, 52
Cycle, 4
DA, 101
Deadheading time, 67
Delivery schedules, 49
Degree, 65
Depth first search, 9-11, 34, 50
Ecological niche, 41
Ecological phase space, 41-44
definition, 41
Ecology, 3,41, 101
Ecosystem, 3, 90
perturbation of, 41, 42
Economics, 64, 101, 103, 105, 107
Edge, 3
Effective preference, 64
Eigenvalues of a weighted digraph, computa-
tion of, 95-96
Emergency services, 63
Energy:
demand for, 4
and food production, 89, 90-93, 95, 97
policy, 90
use, 89
waste, 7
Environmental policy, 90
Enzyme:
digest by, 4, 71-73
ambiguous, 73
G, 71
U, C, 71
Equilibrium, stable, 103
Eulerian chain, 65-77
definition, 65
INDEX 
117
Codes, 73-75
see also noisy channel
Code alphabet, unambiguous, 58
Codeword, 4
Coding: see codes
Colorability, 2, 49-56
Colorable:
^-colorable, 49
2-colorable, 50-51
see also bipartite
Coloring:
applications of, 49-50
rt-tuple, 53
efficient, 56
.R.,-coloring, 104
Committee schedules, 50
Communication links, 63
see also codes, noisy channel, telecommu-
nications
Communication system, 4
see also codes, noisy channel, telecommu-
nications
Comparative change, 86-87
Compatibility graph, 3, 22
Compatible ordering, 33
uniqueness of, 36
Competition graph, 3, 42
see also niche overlap graph
Competition number, 44
Complement, 20
Complete graph, 20
Complete p-partite graph, 39
Component, 5
connected, 5
strong, 5, 95
Conflict graph, 26, 54
Confusion graph, 4, 58
Connected component, 5
Connected graph, 5
Connectedness, 5
Consecutive l's property, 21-22, 33-34
Consecutive ordering of dominant cliques,
21,24
Corporate interlocks, 16-17
Cover: see fc-cover
Cross-referencing system, 64
Curb multidigraph, 67
Cutset, 52
Cycle, 4
DA, 101
Deadheading time, 67
Delivery schedules, 49
Degree, 65
Depth first search, 9-11, 34, 50
Deterrence, 64
Developmental psychology, 18
D(G), 8
Diameter
of connected graph, 12
of strongly connected digraph, 12
Digest: see enzyme
ambiguous, 73
Digraph, 3
Digraph underlying a graph, 8
Directed graph: see digraph
Disarmament, 64
Distance:
in digraph, 11
in graph, 11
Distributive justice, 83-85, 86
DNA, 70
recombinant, 73
as a word, 73
Dominant clique, 20, 21, 24
Dominant clique-vertex incidence matrix, 21,
34
Domination, 62-63
Domination number, 62
Dominating set, 62-63
^-dominating set, 63
Ecological niche, 41
Ecological phase space, 41-44
definition, 41
Ecology, 3,41, 101
Ecosystem, 3, 90
perturbation of, 41, 42
Economics, 64, 101, 103, 105, 107
Edge, 3
Effective preference, 64
Eigenvalues of a weighted digraph, computa-
tion of, 95-96
Emergency services, 63
Energy:
demand for, 4
and food production, 89, 90-93, 95, 97
policy, 90
use, 89
waste, 7
Environmental policy, 90
Enzyme:
digest by, 4, 71-73
ambiguous, 73
G, 71
U, C, 71
Equilibrium, stable, 103
Eulerian chain, 65-77
definition, 65

118
INDEX
Eulerian chain—Cont.
existence of, 65
existence of closed, 65
Eulerian path, 65-67
definition, 65
existence of, 66
existence of closed, 65
Evaluation, 83
Examination schedules, 50
Expectation, 83, 86
Extended base, 4, 72
interior, 72
Extreme vertex, 30
Feedback, 91
Fire stations, location of, 63
Food production, 89, 90-93, 95, 97
Food web, 3, 42—47
community, 46-47
for Malaysian Rain Forest, 44
sink, 46-47
source, 46-47
for Strait of Georgia, British Columbia, 43
Forbidden subgraph characterization, 30
Forecasts, 93, 94
Four color problem, 50
Fragment, 71
abnormal, 72
GA, 104
Game theory, 63-64,
y(G), 51
y-perfect graph: see perfect graph
Garbage trucks, routing, 49, 50
see also street cleaning and sweeping
Gc, 20
Generalized Metzlerian matrix, 106
Genetics, 4, 17, 18, 65
see also DNA, RNA, Benzer's Problem
Geometric models, 89
G[H], 54
G-H, 57
GM digraph, 106
GM matrix, 105-107
definition, 106
Goal object, 83
Graph, 3
Greedy algorithm, 35
Green light assignment:
feasible, 23
optimal, 23-25
Guilt, 84
Health care delivery, 89
Hicks stable matrix, 105
relation to stable, 105-107
Historical personages, 90
//-stable matrix, 105
Indecomposable matrix, 105
Indegree, 65
Independence, 57-64
Independence number, 55, 57
see also a(G)
Independent set of edges, 40
Independent set of vertices: 57-64
in digraph, 63
in graph: 37, 55
largest, 55
Indifference, 4, 18
transitivity of, 27
Indifference graph, 27-31, 52
definition, 28
homogeneous family of indifference
graphs, 33
Inductive change, 86
Inhibiting effect, 91
Inland waterways, 90
Integer-weighted digraph, 98-99
International relations, 64, 80-81
Intersection graph: 15-26
of arbitrary family of sets, 16-17
of arcs on a circle: see circular arc graph
of boxes: see boxicity
and committee schedules, 50
definition, 16
of intervals: see interval graph
of unions of intervals, 26
of unit length intervals, 29
Interval assignment, 17
uniqueness of, 36-37
Interval graph, 17-26, 29, 52, 53, 61
characterization of, 18-22
definition, 17
niche overlap number of, 45
/P, 44, 53
Isolated vertex, 43
Isomorphism, 17
Joining, 4-5
Justice, 84, 85
A'-cover, 63
Kernel, 63
Konigsberg bridge problem, 65
Kf, 39
Lexicographic product, 54, 57, 62
Libraries, computerized, 64

INDEX
119
Linear differential equations, 103
Linear noise, 61
Line index for balance, 83
Literature, analysis of, 81
Loop, 3
Malaysian Rain Forest, food web, 44
Map coloring, 50
Matching, 104
S-complete, 104
Measurement, 18, 27
Metzlerian matrix, 105
generalized, 106
Mixed graph, 8
connected, 8
orientations of, 8-9
strongly connected, 8
Mobile radio frequency assignment problem,
25-26, 54
Morishima matrix, 105, 106
Multichromatic number, 56
Multicoloring, 53-56
Multidigraph, 65
Multigraph, 65
National Park Service, 13
Naval manpower, 89
Neighborhood, open, 45
New York City, 67
Department of Sanitation of, 2, 49
Niche overlap, 3, 41^47
Niche overlap graph, 41-47, 58
Niche overlap number, 44
Noisy channel, 57-62
Normal product, 57
NP, 12, 50
TVP-complete problem, 12, 50
WP-hard problem, 12, 51
Nuclear power plant, 3, 63
Odd hole, 51
u(G), 51
1-factor, 96
use in computation of characteristic poly-
nomial, 96-98
weight of, 96
One-way street problem, 7-13
algorithms for solving, 9-11
efficient solutions, 11-12
inefficient solutions, 13
some streets two-way, 8-9
Open neighborhood, 45
Operations research, 34
Orientation, 7
strongly connected, 7-13
transitive, 15-16, 20, 36-37, 52
uniqueness of, 37
Outdegree, 65
Over-reward, 84, 85
P, 12
Partitive set, 37
Path, 4
closed, 4
length of, 4
simple, 4
Perfect graph:
a-perfect, 60
y-perfect
classes of, 52-53
definition, 52
relation to a-perfect, 60-61
weakly «-perfect, 60
weakly y-perfect, 51, 52, 55, 56, 61
Perfect graph conjecture:
strong, 52
weak, 52
Perfectly stable matrix, 105
Phase, 24
Phasing traffic lights, 3, 22-25, 26
Pi(t), 93
Planar graph, 50
Police stations, location of, 63
Policy problems, 2, 88
Political science, 18, 31, 81
see also voting
Population control. 90, 97
Preference, 4, 18, 27
effective, 64
Psychology, 2, 18, 31
developmental, 18
Public policy, 2, 88
Pulse, 93
Pulse process, 89-99
definition, 93
autonomous, 93
Pulse stability
criterion for, 94, 98
of vertex, 94
of weighted digraph, 94, 101
Q.«, 101
Qualitative matrix, 101-107
see also sign pattern
Radar stations, 63
Reaching, 4-5
Receivable as digraph, 58
Receiving alphabet, 57

120
INDEX
Reduced graph, 30
Relevance, 83
Reward, 83
Rigid circuit graph, 19, 29, 45, 52, 53, 61
RNA chain, 4, 70-73
as a word, 73
Rohhins' Theorem, 7-8
Robinson form, 32-36
definition. 32
strong, 32
weak, 32
Rotating drum problem, 75-77
Self-complemented graph, 61
Semicycle, 81
Semipath, 81
length of, 81
Sequence dating, 18
Seriation, 18, 31-34, 36-37
Signed digraph, 79
Signed graph, 79
Sign:
of chain, 79
of path, 79
of semipath, 81
Sign pattern. 87-88, 99, 101, 103
Sign solvability, 101-103
Sign solvable system, 101
Sign stability, 103-105
Sign stable matrix, 103
Similarity, 32
Simplicial vertex, 45
Small groups: see balance
Snow removal, 65, 67
Social inequalities, 79, 86
Sociogram, 51, 79
Sociology, 51, 79, 80, 83, 86
see also balance, distributive justice
Stability:
and signs, 99
and structure, 95-98
see also pulse stability, value stability,
stable 
equilibrium, 
stable 
matrix,
stable set
Stable equilibrium, 103
Stable matrix, 103
Hicks stable, 105
//-stable, 105
perfectly stable, 105
relation between stable and //-stable, 105-
107
Stable set, 63-64
definition, 63
Status organizing processes, 86
Strait of Georgia, food web, 43
Street cleaning and sweeping, 3, 49, 65, 67-
70
Strengths of effects, 91
Strengths of likes and dislikes, 86-88
Strict following, 36
Strong component, 5, 95
Strongly connected digraph, 5, 64
see also orientation, strongly connected
Strong product, 57
Structural model, 89
Structural modeling, 89-90
Subgraph, 19
forbidden, 30
generated, 19
spanning, 23
Sweep subgraph, 67
Symmetric digraph, 3
Telecommunications, 65, 75-77
Tension, 79, 80. 81, 86
0(G), 60
Time lag, 91
Tour: see tour graph
Tour graph, 49, 51, 52
Tournament, 63
Traffic, flow of, 3
see also one-way street problem and phas-
ing of traffic lights
Traffic stream, 3, 22
Transitive digraph, 15
Transitively orientable graph, 15-16, 20, 36-
37,52
Transmission alphabet, 57
Transmitting stations, 63
Transportation problem, the, 66, 68, 70
Transportation problems, 90
Transportation systems, 89
Tree, 34
maximal spanning, 34-36
minimal spanning, 34
spanning, 34
Triangulated graph, 19
Trophic dimension, 42
Under-reward, 84, 85
Unit interval graph, 29
Value, 93
Value stability:
criterion for, 94, 98
of vertex, 94
of weighted digraph, 94, 101
Vertex, 3
v,(t), 93
Voting, 63, 64

INDEX
121
Water-light-gas graph, 39
Water policy, 90
Weakly a-perfect graph: see perfect graph
Weakly -/-perfect graph: see perfect graph
Weakly connected digraph (multidigraph), 65
Weight:
of arc, 89
of cycle, 92
of 1-factor, 96
Weighted digraph, 79, 89
integer-weighted, 98-99
Weighted graph, 79
Word:
code, 4
solution, 74-75
Yosemite National Park, 13
Zn, 15
Zurich, 67
X, 30
Author Index
Anderson, B., 83, 109
Antle, L. G., 90, 109
Appel, K., 50, 109
Armstrong, W. E., 27, 109
Axelrod, R. M., 90, 109
Bassett, L., 102, 106, 109
Bellotti, A. C, 113
Beltrami, E., 49, 109
Benzer, S., 17, 109
Berge, C, 52, 53, 57, 61, 63, 64, 109
Berger, J., 83, 86, 109, 115
Bodin, L., 49, 67, 68, 69, 109, 114
Boesch, F., 8, 10, 109
Boland, J. Ch., 20, 112
Bradley, D. F., 113
Brown, T. A., 89, 94, 99, 114
Cartwright, D., 63, 64, 80, 109, 111
Cearlock, D. B., 89, 109
Cesari, L., 103, 109
Chen, W. K., 96, 110
Chvatal, V., 12, 53, 110
Clarke, B. L., 101, 110
Clarke, F. H., 53, 56, 110
Coady, S. K., 89, 110
Cohen, B. P., 83, 109, 115
Cohen, J. E., 42, 43, 44, 46, 47, 110
Cook, S. A., 12, 110
Coombs, C. H., 18, 110
Deo, N., 11, 12, 50, 113
Dirac, G. A., 45, 110
Edmonds,!., 12, 110
Euler, L., 65
Filippov, N. D., 37, 114
Fisek, M. H., 109
Forster, M. J., 113
Fulkerson, D. R., 22, 110
Gabai, H., 40, 110
Garey, M. R., 50, 53, 110
Ghouila-Houri, A., 16, 110
Gilbert, E. N., 26, 110
Gilmore, P. C., 16, 20, 110
Golumbic, M. C., 37, 110
Good, I. J., 65,66, 110
Gorman, T., 101, 110
Griggs, J., 26, 110
Gross, O. A., 22, 110
Hahn, W., 103, 110
Hajnal, A., 53, 110
Hajos, G., 17, 110
Haken, W., 50, 109
Harary, F., 26, 54, 63, 64, 65, 80, 82, 83, 95,
96, 106, 109, 110, 111, 114
Harrison, J. L., 44, 111
Heider, F., 79, 111
Hewes, M. T., 113
Hicks, J., 105, 111
Hillier, F. S., 67, 111
Hilton, A. J. W., 56, 111
Hoffman, A. J., 16, 20, 110
Hubbell, C. H., 86, 87, 111
Hubert, L., 32,33, 36, 111
Hurd, L. E., 113
Hutchinson, G., 71, 111
Hutchinson, G. E., 41, 111
Hutchinson, J. P., 73, 111
Jamison, R. E., 53, 56, 110
Jeffries, C., 101, 103, 104, 111
Johnsen, E. C., 86, 87, 111

122
AUTHOR INDEX
Johnson, D. S., 50, 53, 110
Johnson, G. P., 90, 109, 110
Johnson, J. M., 110
Kane, J., 89, 90, 111
Karp, R. M., 12, 111
Kendall, D. G., 18, 32,34, 111
Klee, V., 42, 104, 112
Koch, J., 50, 109
Konig, D., 51, 80, 112
Kruzic, P. G., 89, 90, 112
Lancaster, K. J., 101, 112
Landau, H. G., 63, 112
LeBrasseur, R. J., 43, 113
Lekkerkerker, C. B., 20, 112
Lendaris, G. G., 89, 112
Levine, J. H., 16, 112
Levins, R., 90, 101, 112
Lieberman, G. J., 68, 111
Liebling, T. M., 67, 112
Liu, C. L., 63, 64, 75, 112
Lovasz, L., 52, 60, 61, 112
Luce, R. D., 27, 112
Lynn, W. R., 113
McLean, M., 90, 112
MacReynolds, W. K., 113
Marcus, M., 86, 87, 111
Marczewski, E., 17, 112
May, R. M., 101, 112
Maybee, J., 101, 102, 104, 105, 106, 109, 112
Menger, K., 27, 113
Merril, C. R., 113
Metzler, L., 105, 113
Miller, R. S., 41, 113
Moore, J., 114
Morgenstern, O., 63, 64, 114
Morishima, M., 106, 113
Mosimann, J., 71, 73, 113
Nievergelt, J., 11, 12, 50, 113
Norman, R. Z., 61, 62, 82, 83, 84, 109, 111,
113
Oka, J.N., 113
Parsons, T. R., 43, 113
Pianka, E. R., 41, 113
Pimentel, D., 80, 92. 113
Poincare, H., 27
Quirk, J., 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 109,
112, 113
Rado, R., 56, 111
Reingold, E. M., 11, 12,50, 113
Richardson, M., 64, 113
Robbins, H. E., 7, 8, 113
Roberts, F. S., 1, 3, 10, 13, 18, 21, 26, 29, 30,
31, 33, 36, 39, 40, 44, 45, 46, 54, 64, 81,
82, 83, 84, 89, 94, 95, 99, 113, 114
Robinson, W. S., 32, 114
Rosenfeld, M., 60, 61,62, 114
Ruppert, R., 101, 103, 104, 113
Rush, S., 113
Samuelson. P., 101, 105, 114
Scott, S. H., 53, 56, 111, 114
Shannon, C. E., 59, 60, 114
Shapiro, M. B., 113
Shepherd, P., 90, 112
Shevrin, L. N., 37, 114
Sholes, O. D., 113
Smith, J. E. K.. 18, 110
Stahl, S., 53, 54, 56, 114
Stockmeyer, L., 50, 110, 114
Stoffers, K. E., 23, 24, 114
Straffin, P., 99
Sumner, D. P., 114
Suranyi, J., 53, 110
Taylor, H. F., 80, 81, 83, 114
Thomassen, C., 12, 110
Thompson, W., 89, 90, 111
Tindell, R., 8, 10, 109
Trotter, W. T., 26, 37, 114
Tucker, A. C., 22, 49, 51, 52, 67, 68, 69, 114
Tyson, J., 101, 114
Van den Driessche, P., 104, 111, 112
Vandermeer, J. H., 41, 114
Vertinsky, L, 89, 90, 111
Vinton, J. E., 113
Von Neumann, J., 61, 62, 114
Wagner, H. M., 66, 115
Wakeland, W. W., 89, 112
West, D. B., 26, 110
Whitman, R. J., 113
Wilf, H. S., 73, 111
Wilkinson, E. M., 35,36, 115
Zelditch, M., 83, 109, 115

(continued from inside front cover)
JERROLD E. MARSDEN, Lectures on Geometric Methods in Mathematical Physics
BRADLEY EFRON, The Jackknife, the Bootstrap, and Other Resampling Plans
M. WOODROOFE, Nonlinear Renewal Theory in Sequential Analysis
D. H. SATTINGER, Branching in the Presence of Symmetry
R. TEMAM, Navier-Stokes Equations and Nonlinear Functional Analysis
MiKL6s CSORGO, Quantile Processes with Statistical Applications
J. D. BUCKMASTER AND G. S. S. LuDFORD, Lectures on Mathematical Combustion
R. E. TARJAN, Data Structures and Network Algorithms
PAUL WALTMAN, Competition Models in Population Biology
S. R. S. VARADHAN, Large Deviations and Applications
KIYOSI ITO, Foundations of Stochastic Differential Equations in Infinite Dimensional Spaces
ALAN C. NEWELL, Solitons in Mathematics and Physics
PRANAB KUMAR SEN, Theory and Applications of Sequential Nonparametrics
LASZLO LovAsz, An Algorithmic Theory of Numbers, Graphs and Convexity
E. W. CHENEY, Multivariate Approximation Theory: Selected Topics
JOEL SPENCER, Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method
PAUL C. FIFE, Dynamics of Internal Layers and Diffusive 
Interfaces
CHARLES K. CHUI, Multivariate Splines
HERBERT S. WILF, Combinatorial Algorithms: An Update
HENRY C. TUCKWELL, Stochastic Processes in the Neurosciences
FRANK H. CLARKE, Methods of Dynamic and Nonsmooth Optimization
ROBERT B. GARDNER, The Method of Equivalence and Its Applications
GRACE WAHBA, Spline Models for Observational Data
RICHARD S. VARGA, Scientific Computation on Mathematical Problems and Conjectures
INGRID DAUBECHIES, Ten Lectures on Wavelets
STEPHEN F. McCoRMiCK, Multilevel Projection Methods for Partial Differential Equations
HARALD NIEDERREITER, Random Number Generation and Quasi-Monte Carlo Methods
JOEL SPENCER, Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method, Second Edition
CHARLES A. MICCHELLI, Mathematical Aspects of Geometric Modeling
ROGER TEMAM, Navier-Stokes Equations and Nonlinear Functional Analysis, Second Edition
GLENN SHAFER, Probabilistic Expert Systems
PETER J. HUBER, Robust Statistical Procedures, Second Edition
J. MICHAEL STEELE, Probability Theory and Combinatorial Optimization
WERNER C. RHEINBOLDT, Methods for Solving Systems of Nonlinear Equations, Second Edition
J. M. GUSHING, An Introduction to Structured Population Dynamics

