h
r.
KONINGSt3ERGA

Graph Theory
1736-1936

Hamiltons Icosian Game (Chap. 2)

Graph Theory
1736-1936
NORMAN L. BIGGS
E. KEITH LLOYD
ROBIN J. WILSON
CLARENDON PRESS
OXFORD

Oxford University Press, Great Clarendon Street, Oxford OX2 6DP
Oxford New York
Athens Auckland Bangkok
Bogota
Buenos Aires
Calcutta
Cape Town
Chennai Dar es Salaam
Delhi
Florence Hong Kong
Istanbul
Karachi
Kuala Lumpur Madrid Melbourne
Mexico Cirv
Mumbai
Nairobi
Paris
Sdo Paulo
Singapore
Taipei
Tokyo
Toronto
Warsaw
and associated companies in
Berlin
Ibadan
Oxford is a trade mark of Oxford University Press
Published in the United States
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York
© Oxford University Press. 1976. 1986
First published 1976
Reprinted with corrections 1997
First published in paperback 1986
Reprinted with corrections 1998
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced.
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means,
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without
the prior permission of Oxford University Press.
This book is sold subject to the condition that it shall not, by way
of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise circulated
without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover
other than that in which it is published and without a similar condition
including this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Biggs, Norman L.
Graph theory, 1736-1916.
1. Graph theory-History-Sources
1. Title
IL Lloyd, E. Keith
11L Wilson, Robin J.
511'_5'0903
QA166
ISBN 0 19 853916 9
Printed and bound in
Great Britain by Biddies Ltd
Guildford and Kings Lynn

L. EULER (1707-83)
D. KONIG (1884-1944)
Preface
MATHEMATICIANS have often pursued their researches in an erratic and
intuitive way, rather than by the clear light of logic; consequently, the
historical development of the subject frequently differs considerably from
the systematic approach which one finds in most textbooks. In this book
we shall follow an historical approach, and give a self-contained introduc-
tion to the subject of graph theory. We hope that the reader will thereby
come to appreciate the complex web of ideas and influences which come
together to form a mathematical theory.
Our decision to cover the period 1736-1936 is the result of a conven-
ient historical accident. In 1736 the first article on a topic relating to
graph theory was written by the Swiss mathematician Leonhard Euler;
just two hundred years later, in 1936, the first full-length book on the
subject, written by Denes Konig, was published. Of course, graph theory
did not stop in 1936, and we have not felt obliged to exclude all reference
to later work in the subject.
The central feature of this book is a set of thirty-seven extracts taken
from the original writings of mathematicians who contributed to the
foundations of graph theory. Where necessary, these extracts have been
translated into English, and they have been edited by the omission of
certain sections, but no other significant changes have been made. A list
of these extracts may be found on pages (ix)-(x).
The book has ten chapters. Each chapter deals with a particular theme
in graph theory, and contains three or four main extracts; these extracts
are linked by a commentary which traces the historical development
of the theme. Superimposed on this structure is the framework of a
conventional textbook, wherein the relevant mathematical terminology
and notation are explained, in logical progression, as they are required.

Vi
PREFACE
There are a few conventions regarding the organization of this book
which may need some explanation. The references within each chapter
(including those references which occur in the extracts) are labelled in a
single numerical sequence, and they are listed at the end of the chapter.
The only exceptions to this rule are the extracts themselves, which are
referred to by their chapter and letter. The figures in each chapter are
similarly labelled in a single sequence. Terminology relating to graph
theory, defined in the commentary, is printed in bold type; definitions
which occur in the extracts, and those which occur in the commentary but
which are not directly relevant to graph theory, are printed in italics. The
omission of a section from an abstract is signified by a row of five
asterisks; there are also occasional omissions of words or phrases, and
these are indicated by five dots. Additions or alterations to the extracts
are enclosed in square brackets.
At the end of the book there are three appendices. The first of these
gives a brief account of the development of graph theory since 1936. The
second appendix contains biographical information about the main
characters in our story; the reader should note that capital letters are used
in the text for the first mention of all those whose biographies are given in
this appendix. The third appendix is a comprehensive bibliography of the
work on graph theory published in the period 1736-1936.
A book of this kind could not be written without help, in the form of
advice, criticism, and information, from many friends and colleagues. Our
special thanks are due to P. J. Federico. who has spent several years
working on the history of graph theory. He is preparing a book on the
subject which, however, will differ from ours, both in the period covered
and in the treatment of the material. Mr. Federico has been generous
enough to provide us with drafts of his work, and he has commented in
detail on our text. We have pleasure in thanking him for his assistance.
Our thanks are also due to many others who have assisted our work,
and especially to D. D. V. Morgan, G. de Barra. R. V. Turley, M. Askew
and the staffs of the various libraries who have unearthed a number of
obscure journals to meet our requests. We also thank the secretarial staffs
of the Mathematics Departments of Royal Holloway College and the
Open University for their help with typing the various drafts of the
manuscript.
In this reprint (1998) the text has been modified to take account of recent
historical scholarship. and the reference sections have been expanded and
updated.

Contents
1151 OF P%TRACTS
LIST OF F'I ATFS
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
1. PATHS
The problem of the Kbnigsberg bridges
Diagram-tracing puzzles
12
Mazes and labyrinths
16
2. CIRCUITS
21
The knight's tour
22
Kirkman and polyhedra
28
The Icosian Game
31
3. TREES
32
The first studies of trees
3-7
Counting unrooted trees
47
Counting labelled trees
51
4 CHFMICAI GRAPHS
55
Graphic formulae in chemistry
55
Isomerism
6SL
Clifford. Sylvester. and the term 'graph'
64
Enumeration. from Cayley to Pdlya
67
5 E 1
_ .R'
POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
74
The history of polyhedra
74
Planar graphs and maps
78
Generalizations of Euler's formula
R3
6. THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-
90
EARLY HISTORY
The origin of the four-colour problem
90
The 'proof'
94
Heawood and the five-colour theorem
105
2 COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
109
The chromatic number of a surface
109
Neighbouring regions
115
One-sided surfaces
1 24

viii
CONTENTS
8. IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
The algebra of circuits
Planar graphs
131
131
191
Planarity and Whitney duality
9. THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
148
148
The first attempts to reformulate the problem
Reducibility
164
Birkhoff, Whitney, and chromatic polynomials
1811
10. THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
181
Regular graphs and their factors
181
Petersen's theorem on trivalent graphs
195
An alternative view: correspondences
201
APPENDIX 1: Graph Theory since 1936
209
APPENDIX 2: Biographical Notes
213
APPENDIX 3: Bibliography: 1736-1936
223
INDEX OF NAMES
235
GENERAL INDEX
238

List of extracts
IA L. E U L E R
1736
Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs
pertinentis
iB C. HIERHOLZER
1873
Uber die Moglichkeit, einen Linienzug
ohne Wiederholung and ohne Unter-
brechnung zu umfahren
IC
J. B. LISTING
1847
Vorstudien zur Topologie
1D G. TARRY
1895
Le probl6me des labyrinthes
2A A.-T. VANDERMONDE
1771
Remarques sur les problemes de situa-
tion
2B T. P. K I R K M A N
1856 On the representation of polyedra
2C W. R. HAMILTON
1859
[Instructions for the Icosian Game]
3A A. C A Y L E Y
1857 On the theory of the analytical forms
called trees
3B C. JORDAN
1869
Sur les assemblages de lignes
3C A. CAYLEY
1881
On the analytical forms called trees
3D H. PRUFE:R
1918
Neuer Beweis eines Satzes fiber Per-
mutationen
4A E. FRANKLAND
1866
Graphic notation
4B A. CAYLEY
1874 On the mathematical theory of isomers
4C J. J. S Y L V ESTE R
1878
Chemistry and algebra
4D G. P6LYA
1935 Un probleme combinatoire g6n6ral sur
les groupes de permutations et le calcul
du nombre des isomeres des composes
organiques
5A L. EULER
1750
[Letter to Christian Goldbach]
5B
A.-L. CAUCHY
1813
Recherches sur les poly6dres-premier
m6moire
SC S.-A.-J. L H U I L I E R
1812
M6moire sur Ia poly6drom6trie
6A A. CAYLEY
1879 On the colouring of maps
6B A. B. KEMPE
1879 On the geographical problem of the four
colours
6C P. G. TAIT
1880 [Remarks on the colouring of maps]
6D P. J. H E A w OO D
1890
Map-colour theorem

7A P. J. HEAWOOD
7B L. HEFFTFR
7C H. TIFTZF
S
8A G. R. KIRC-HHOFF
8B O. VE.BLEN
8C K. KURATOWSKI
8D H. WHITNEY
9A 0. VEBLEN
9B G. D. BIRKHOFF
9C
P. FRANKLIN
9D H. WHITNEY
IOA J. PETERSEN
lOB
J. PETERSEN
IOC O. FRINK
IOD D. KONIG
LIST OF EXTRACTS
1890
Map-colour theorem
1891
Uber das Problem der Nachbargebiete
1910
Einige Bemerkungen fiber das Problem
des
Kartenfarbens
auf
einseitigen
Fliichen
1847
Ubcr die Auflosung der Gleichungen,
auf welche man bei der Untersuchung
der linearen Vertheilung galvanischer
StrOme gefilhrt wird
1922
Linear graphs
1930
Sur le probltme des courbes gauchcs en
topologic
1932
Non-separable and planar graphs
1912 An application of modular equations in
analysis situs
1912 A determinant formula for the number
of ways of coloring a map
1922 The four color problem
1932 A logical expansion in mathematics
1891
Die Theorie der reguliiren Graphs
1898
[Sur Ie tMortme de Tait]
1926 A proof of Petersen's theorem
1916
Ober Graphen and ihre Anwendung auf
Determinantentheorie and Mengenlehre

List of plates
FRo' nspn cE: Hamilton's Icosian Game.
Pi \ i i
I : W. R. Hamilton (180,;-65). P. G. Tait (1831-1901).
M.-E.-C. Jordan (1838-1922), 0. Veblen (1880-1960).
PLATE. 2: W. K. Clifford (1845-79), F. Guthrie (1831-99),
K. Kuratowski (1896-1980). H. Whitney (1907-89).
(The plates will be found between pages 208 and 209.)
Acknowledgements
We should like to express our thanks to the following for permission to use
copyright material:
Extracts: The Oxford University Press (6D. 7A), the American Mathematical
Society (8B. 8D, 9D). Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg (7B. 10D), B. G. Teubner,
Stuttgart (3D. 7C). Fundamenta Mathematicae. Warsaw (8C), the Princeton
University Press (9A. 9B, IOC), the Johns Hopkins University Press (90.
Photographs: The American Mathematical Society (photograph of G. D.
Birkhoff, from 'Collected Works. Vol. 1'). the Bolyai JAnos Mathematical Society
(photograph of D. KOnig). the Illustrated London News (photograph of Cayley),
Purnell and Sons. Cape Town (photograph of F. Guthrie from 'Ericas in Southern
Africa'). G. Heawood (photograph of P. J. Heawood). the British Museum (map
of Konigsberg).


1
Paths
J. B. LISTING(1808-82)
THE origins of graph theory are humble, even frivolous. Whereas many
branches of mathematics were motivated by fundamental problems of
calculation, motion, and measurement, the problems which led to the
development of graph theory were often little more than puzzles, de-
signed to test the ingenuity rather than to stimulate the imagination. But
despite the apparent triviality of such puzzles, they captured the interest
of mathematicians, with the result that graph theory has become a subject
rich in theoretical results of a surprising variety and depth.
In this chapter we shall be concerned mainly with the origin and
ramifications of one particular puzzle-the problem of the Konigsberg
bridges. The solution of this problem involves the formulation of several
of the basic concepts of graph theory.
The problem of the Konigsberg bridges
The map in Fig.
1.1 is taken from a book [1] published in the
seventeenth century.
It is an artist's impression of the old city of
Konigsberg in Eastern Prussia, showing the River Pregel which flows
through the city. As can be seen, the Pregel surrounds an island (called
Kneiphof), and, on the right of the map, it separates into two branches.
To enable the citizens of Konigsberg to travel easily from one part of the
city to another, the river was spanned by seven bridges, with such delight-
ful names as Honey Bridge and Blacksmith's Bridge.

2
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
It is said that the people of Konigsberg used to entertain themselves by
trying to devise a route around the city which would cross each of the
seven bridges just once. Since their attempts had always failed, many of
them believed that the task was impossible, but it was not until the 1730s
that the problem was treated from a mathematical point of view and the
KcNINCsf3ERGA
FIG. 1.1.
impossibility of finding such a route was proved. In 1736, one of the leading
mathematicians of the time, Leonhard EULER, communicated with other
mathematicians on the problem [16[, and wrote an article in which he dealt
with this particular problem and gave a general method for other problems
of the same type. His article was of considerable importance, both for graph
theory and for the development of mathematics as a whole, and we shall give
a translation of it in full [ IA). However, the reader may prefer to stop after
Paragraph 9, and go on to our commentary at the end of the article, since
Euler's main results will be proved more succinctly later in the chapter.

PATHS
3
1A
L. EULER
SOLL'TIO PROBLEMATIS AD GEOMETRIAM. SITUS PERTINENTIS
[The solution of a problem relating to the geometry of position]
Commentarii Academiae Scientiarum Imperialis Petropolitanae 8 (1736), 128-140.
(Based on a talk presented to the Academy on 26 August 1735.)
1.
In addition to that branch of geometry which is concerned with magnitudes,
and which has always received the greatest attention, there is another branch,
previously almost unknown, which Leibniz first mentioned, calling it the geometry
of position. This branch is concerned only with the determination of position and
its properties; it does not involve measurements, nor calculations made with them.
It has not yet been satisfactorily determined what kind of problems are relevant to
this geometry of position, or what methods should be used in solving them.
Hence, when a problem was recently mentioned, which seemed geometrical but
was so constructed that it did not require the measurement of distances, nor did
calculation help at all, I had no doubt that it was concerned with the geometry of
position-especially as its solution involved only position, and no calculation was
of any use. I have therefore decided to give here the method which I have found
for solving this kind of problem, as an example of the geometry of position.
2.
The problem. which I am told is widely known, is as follows: in Konigsberg in
Prussia. there is an island A. called the Kneiphof; the river which surrounds it is
divided into two branches, as can be seen in Fig. [1.2], and these branches are
crossed by seven bridges, a, b, c. it e. f and g. Concerning these bridges, it was
asked whether anyone could arrange a route in such a way that he would cross
each bridge once and only once. I was told that some people asserted that this was
impossible, while others were in doubt; but nobody would actually assert that it
could be done. From this, I have formulated the general problem: whatever be
the arrangement and division of the river into branches, and however many
bridges there be. can one find out whether or not it is possible to cross each bridge
exactly once?
3.
As far as the problem of the seven bridges of Konigsherg is concerned, it can
he solved by making an exhaustive list of all possible routes, and then finding

3
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
whether or not any route satisfies the conditions of the problem. Because of the
number of possibilities, this method of solution would be too difficult and
laborious, and in other problems with more bridges it would be impossible.
Moreover, if this method is followed to its conclusion. many irrelevant routes will
be found, which is the reason for the difficulty of this method. Hence I rejected it,
and looked for another method concerned only with the problem of whether or
not the specified route could be found; I considered that such a method would be
much simpler.
4.
My whole method relies on the particularly convenient way in which the
crossing of a bridge can be represented. For this I use the capital letters A, B, G
D, for each of the land areas separated by the river. If a traveller goes from A to
B over bridge a or b. I write this as AB-where the first letter refers to the area
the traveller is leaving, and the second refers to the area he arrives at after
crossing the bridge. Thus if the traveller leaves B and crosses into D over bridge
f. this crossing is represented by BD, and the two crossings AB and BD combined
I shall denote by the three letters ABD, where the middle letter B refers both to
the area which is entered in the first crossing and to the one which is left in the
second crossing.
5.
Similarly, if the traveller goes on from D to C over the bridge g. I shall
represent these three successive crossings by the four letters ABDG which should
be taken to mean that the traveller, starting in A, crosses to B, goes on to D, and
finally arrives in C. Since each land area is separated from every other by a branch
of the river, the traveller must have crossed three bridges. Similarly, the succes-
sive crossing of four bridges would be represented by five letters, and in general,
however many bridges the traveller crosses, his journey is denoted by a number of
letters one greater than the number of bridges. Thus the crossing of seven bridges
requires eight letters to represent it.
6.
In this method of representation. I take no account of the bridges by which
the crossing is made, but if the crossing from one area to another can be made by
several bridges, then any bridge can be used, so long as the required area is
reached. It follows that if a journey across the seven bridges [of Fig. 1.2] can be
arranged in such a way that each bridge is crossed once, but none twice, then the
route can be represented by eight letters which are arranged so that the letters A
and B are next to each other twice, since there are two bridges. a and b,
connecting the areas A and B; similarly. A and C must be adjacent twice in the
series of eight letters, and the pairs A and D, B and D, and C and D must occur
together once each.
7.
The problem is therefore reduced to finding a sequence of eight letters,
formed from the four letters A, B, C and D. in which the various pairs of letters
occur the required number of times. Before I turn to the problem of finding such
a sequence, it would be useful to find out whether or not it is even possible to
arrange the letters in this way. for if it were possible to show that there is no such
arrangement, then any work directed towards finding it would be wasted. I have
therefore tried to find a rule which will be useful in this case, and in others, for
determining whether or not such an arrangement can exist.
8.
In order to try to find such a rule, I consider a single area A, into which there
lead any number of bridges a, b. c, d. etc. (Fig. [1.3]). Let us take first the single
bridge a which leads into A: if a traveller crosses this bridge. he must either have

PATHS
Fio. 1.3.
been in A before crossing, or have come into A after crossing, so that in either
case the letter A will occur once in the representation described above. If three
bridges (a. b and c. say) lead to A, and if the traveller crosses all three, then in
the representation of his journey the letter A will occur twice, whether he starts
his journey from A or not. Similarly, if five bridges lead to A, the representation
of a journey across all of them would have three occurrences of the letter A. And
in general, if the number of bridges is any odd number, and if it is increased by
one, then the number of occurrences of A is half of the result.
9.
In the case of the Konigsberg bridges, therefore, there must be three
occurrences of the letter A in the representation of the route. since five bridges
(a, b, c, d, e) lead to the area A. Next, since three bridges lead to B. the letter B
must occur twice; similarly, D must occur twice, and C also. So in a series of eight
letters, representing the crossing of seven bridges. the letter A must occur three
times, and the letters B. C and D twice each-but this cannot happen in a
sequence of eight letters. It follows that such a journey cannot be undertaken
across the seven bridges of Konigsberg.
10.
It is similarly possible to tell whether a journey can be made crossing each
bridge once, for any arrangement of bridges, whenever the number of bridges
leading to each area is odd. For if the sum of the number of times each letter must
occur is one more than the number of bridges, then the journey can be made; if,
however, as happened in our example, the number of occurrences is greater than
one more than the number of bridges, then such a journey can never be
accomplished. The rule which I gave for finding the number of occurrences of the
letter A from the number of bridges leading to the area A holds equally whether
all of the bridges come from another area B. as shown in Fig. 11.3], or whether
they come from different areas, since I was considering the area A alone. and
trying to find out how many times the letter A must occur.
11.
If, however, the number of bridges leading to A is even, then in
describing the journey one must consider whether or not the traveller starts his
journey from A; for if two bridges lead to A. and the traveller starts from A. then
the letter A must occur twice, once to represent his leaving A by one bridge, and
once to represent his returning to A by the other. If. however, the traveller starts
his journey from another area, then the letter A will only occur once; for this one
occurrence will represent both his arrival in A and his departure from there.
according to my method of representation.
12.
If there are four bridges leading to A. and if the traveller starts from A. then
in the representation of the whole journey, the letter A must occur three times if
he is to cross each bridge once; if he begins his walk in another area, then the
letter .4 will occur twice. If there are six bridges leading to A, then the letter A
will occur four times if the journey starts from A. and if the traveller does not start
by leaving A, then it must occur three times. So. in general, if the number of
bridges is even, then the number of occurrences of A will be half of this number if

6
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
the journey is not started from A. and the number of occurrences will be one
greater than half the number of bridges if the journey does start at A.
13.
Since one can start from only one area in any journey, I shall define.
corresponding to the number of bridges leading to each area, the number of
occurrences of the letter denoting that area to be half the number of bridges plus
one, if the number of bridges is odd, and if the number of bridges is even, to be
half of it. Then, if the total of all the occurrences is equal to the number of bridges
plus one, the required journey will be possible, and will have to start from an area
with an odd number of bridges leading to it. If. however, the total number of
letters is one less than the number of bridges plus one, then the journey is
possible starting from an area with an even number of bridges leading to it, since
the number of letters will therefore be increased by one.
14.
So. whatever arrangement of water and bridges is given, the following
method will determine whether or not it is possible to cross each of the bridges:
I first denote by the letters A. B. C. etc. the various areas which are separated
from one another by the water. I then take the total number of bridges, add one.
and write the result above the working which follows. Thirdly. I write the letters
A. B. C. etc. in a column, and write next to each one the number of bridges leading
to it. Fourthly. I indicate with an asterisk those letters which have an even number
next to them. Fifthly, next to each even one I write halt the number, and next to
each odd one I write half the number increased by one. Sixthly, I add together
these last numbers, and if this sum is one less than, or equal to, the number
written above, which is the number of bridges plus one, I conclude that the
required journey is possible. It must be remembered that if the sum is one less
than the number written above, then the journey must begin from one of the
areas marked with an asterisk, and it must begin from an unmarked one if the
sum is equal.
Thus in the Konigsberg problem, I set out the working as follows:
Number of bridges 7. which gives K
Bridges
A.
5
3
B.
3
2
C
3
2
D.
3
2
Since this gives more than M. such a journey can never be made.
1)
h
>
Fic.. 1.4.

PATHS
7
15.
Suppose that there are two islands A and B surrounded by water which
leads to four rivers as shown in Fig. [1.4]. Fifteen bridges (a, b. c, d, etc.) cross the
rivers and the water surrounding the islands, and it is required to determine
whether one can arrange a journey which crosses each bridge exactly once. First,
therefore, I name all the areas separated by water as A, B, C D. E. F. so that
there are six of them. Next, I increase the number of bridges (15) by one, and
write the result (16) above the working which follows.
16
A*.
8
4
B*,
4
2
C.
4
2
D.
3
2
E.
5
3
F*,
6
3
16
Thirdly, I write the letters A, B, C, etc. in a column, and write next to each one the
number of bridges which lead to the corresponding area, so that eight bridges lead
to A. four to B, and so on. Fourthly, I indicate with an asterisk those letters which
have an even number next to them. Fifthly. I write in the third column half the
even numbers in the second column, and then I add one to the odd numbers and
write down half the result in each case. Sixthly. I add up all the numbers in the
third column in turn, and I get the sum 16. since this is equal to the number (16)
written above, it follows that the required journey can be made if it starts from
area D or E, since these are not marked with an asterisk. The journey can be
done as follows:
EaFbBcFd AeFfCgA h Ci Dk A m EnApBoE 1 D.
where I have written the bridges which are crossed between the corresponding
capital letters.
16.
In this way it will be easy. even in the most complicated cases, to determine
whether or not a journey can be made crossing each bridge once and once only. I
shall, however, describe a much simpler method for determining this which is not
difficult to derive from the present method, after
I have first made a few
preliminary observations. First, I observe that the numbers of bridges written next
to the letters A. B. C. etc. together add up to twice the total number of bridges. The
reason for this is that, in the calculation where every bridge leading to a given
area is counted. each bridge is counted twice, once for each of the two areas
which it joins.
17.
It follows that the total of the numbers of bridges leading to each area must
be an even number, since half of it is equal to the number of bridges. This is
impossible if only one of these numbers is odd. or if three are odd, or five, and so
on. Hence if some of the numbers of bridges attached to the letters A. B, C. etc.
are odd, then there must be an even number of these. Thus, in the Konigsberg
problem. there were odd numbers attached to the letters A. B. C and D. as can
be seen from Paragraph 14, and in the last example (in Paragraph 15). only two
numbers were odd, namely those attached to D and E.

8
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
18.
Since the total of the numbers attached to the letters A, B, C, etc. is equal to
twice the number of bridges, it is clear that if this sum is increased by 2 and then
divided by 2, then it will give the number which is written above the working. If,
therefore, all of the numbers attached to the letters A. B, C D. etc. are even, and
half of each of them is taken to obtain the numbers in the third column, then the
sum of these numbers will be one less than the number written above. Whatever
area marks the beginning of the journey, it will have an even number of bridges
leading to it, as required. This will happen in the Konigsberg problem if the
traveller crosses each bridge twice, since each bridge can be treated as if it were
split in two, and the number of bridges leading into each area will therefore be
even.
19.
Furthermore, if only two of the numbers attached to the letters A, B, C etc
arc odd, and the rest are even, then the journey specified will always be possible if
the journey starts from an area with an odd number of bridges leading to it. For, if
the even numbers are halved, and the odd ones are increased by one, as required,
the sum of their halves will be one greater than the number of bridges, and hence
equal to the number written above.
It can further be seen from this that if four, or six, or eight ... odd numbers
appear in the second column, then the sum of the numbers in the third column
will be greater by one, two, three ... than the number written above, and the
journey will be impossible.
20.
So whatever arrangement may be proposed, one can easily determine
whether or not a journey can be made, crossing each bridge once, by the
following rules:
If there are more than two areas to which an odd number of bridges lead then
such a journey is impossible.
If, however, the number of bridges is odd for exactly two areas, then the journey is
possible if it starts in either of these areas.
If, finally, there are no areas to which an odd number of bridges leads, then the
required journey can be accomplished starring from any area.
With these rules, the given problem can always be solved.
21.
When it has been determined that such a journey can be made, one still has
to find how it should be arranged. For this I use the following rule: let those pairs
of bridges which lead from one area to another be mentally removed, thereby
considerably reducing the number of bridges; it is then an easy task to construct
the required route across the remaining bridges, and the bridges which have been
removed will not significantly alter the route found, as will become clear after a
little thought I do not therefore think it worthwhile to give any further details
concerning the finding of the route.
Euler's treatment of the Konigsberg problem invoked two major steps.
First, in Fig. 1.2. he replaced the map of the city by a simple diagram
showing its main features, and then, in Paragraphs 4 and 7 of his article,
he formulated the problem in such a way that the diagram became

PATHS
U
Fic. 1.5.
9
unnecessary. He denoted the four land areas by the symbols A, B, C, D,
and the seven bridges by a, b, c, d, e, ,f, g, where the bridge a joins A and
B, e joins A and D, and so on. This is an example of what we now refer
to as a 'graph', and Euler's problem of finding a sequence of eight
symbols with a particular property (described in Paragraph 7) is related to
the existence of a special kind of 'path' in the graph.
To explain the exact meaning of these terms we must give some
definitions. A graph consists of a finite set of vertices, a finite set of edges,
and a rule which tells us which edges join which pairs of vertices.
Normally, an edge joins two distinct vertices, but exceptionally the two
vertices may coincide; in the latter case the edge is said to be a loop. In
our particular example there are four vertices, corresponding to the land
areas A, B, C, D, and seven edges, corresponding to the seven bridges;
the rule tells us that the edges a and b join the vertices A and B, the
edges c and d join the vertices A and C. and so on. We also define a path
in a graph to be a sequence of vertices and edges.
vo.el,v1.e2,v2, ,ur-),e,.v
in which each edge e, joins the vertices v, _ , and v, (1 _ i _ r).
It is helpful to illustrate these abstract definitions by representing a
graph pictorially. We depict a graph as a diagram of points and lines, in
which the points represent vertices and the lines represent edges; a
diagram for the Konigsberg graph is shown in Fig. 1.5. It should be noted
that this is merely a convenient way of describing the graph-we repeat
that the graph itself is an abstract entity consisting of the four vertices A,
B. C D. the seven edges a, b. c, d. e, f. g. and the rule which tells us
how the edges join the vertices. Nevertheless, the pictorial representation
of graphs is a very useful technique and we shall use it throughout this
book.
We may now formulate the problem of the Konigsberg bridges using
the terminology just introduced: the object of the problem is to find a
path which contains each edge of the graph once and only once. A path of
this kind is now called an Eulerian path. and Euler showed that the

It)
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Konigsberg graph has no such path. He also investigated the existence of
Eulerian paths in general graphs.
In order that a graph should contain an Eulerian path, it is clearly
necessary that the graph should be connected; this means that for any two
vertices v and w it is possible to find a path beginning at v and ending at
w, so that the graph is 'all in one piece'. Euler took this condition for
granted, since it was automatically satisfied in the examples he consid-
ered. A disconnected graph, that is, one which is not connected, splits up
into connected parts, called its components.
We need only one more definition at this stage. The valency (or degree)
of a vertex v is the number of edges which meet at v; for example, in the
Konigsberg graph, the valency of the vertex A is five, and the valencies of
B, C. and D are all three. (The reason for the name 'valency' will be
given in Chapter 4.) Notice that if we add the valencies of all the vertices
in a graph, then the sum is just twice the number of edges in the graph,
since each edge contributes twice to the sum. This fact was mentioned in
Paragraph 16 of Euler's article, and it yields the useful result (Paragraph
17) that, in any graph, the number of vertices with odd valency must be
even. This is sometimes referred to as the 'handshaking lemma', since it
tells us that if the guests at a party shake hands when they meet, then the
number of guests who have shaken hands an odd number of times must
necessarily be even.
We now have all the terminology we need to state Euler's main result,
given in lines 4 and 5 of Paragraph 20: if a connected graph has more than
two vertices of odd valency. then it cannot contain an Eulerian path. In the
same paragraph, Euler also stated the converse result: if a connected
graph has no vertices of odd valency, or two such vertices, then it contains
an Eulerian path. Unfortunately. Euler did not give a proof of the latter
result, presumably because he considered it to be self-evident. This lack
of precision was quite common among eighteenth-century mathemati-
cians. and occasionally it led them into the realm of fantasy, as when
Euler asserted the truth of the equation
I-1+1-1+1- ... =i.
Nevertheless, Euler's graph-theoretical intuition was correct, although
a complete proof of the converse result did not appear in print until 1873
[1131. The proof was due to a young German mathematician. Carl
HIERH0I.ZER, whose work was prepared for publication by a colleague, C.
Wiener. The tragic circumstances were explained in a footnote:
Privatdocent Dr. Hierholzer, unfortunately prematurely snatched away by
death from the service of scholarship (died 13 September 1871), reported
on the following investigation to a circle of mathematical friends. It was in

PATHS
II
order to save it from oblivion (and it had to be reconstructed without any
written record) that I sought to complete the following as accurately as
possible. with the help of my esteemed colleague Luroth.
1B
C. HIERHOLZER
OBER DIE MOGLICHKEIT. EINEN LINIENZUG OHNE
WIEDERHOLUNG UND OHNE UNTERBRECHNUNG ZU UMFAHREN
[On the possibility of traversing a line-system without repetition or discontinuity]
Mathematische Annalen 6 (1873). 30-32.
In an arbitrary system of interwoven lines, we can define the branches at a point
to be the distinct lines of the network along which it is possible to leave the point
in question. A point at which there are several branches is called a node, and is
termed as many-fold as the number of branches there, being called odd or even
according as this number is odd or even. Thus, an ordinary double point may be
called a four-fold node, an ordinary point is a two-fold node, and a free end may
be termed a one-fold node.
If a line-system can be traversed in one path without any section of line being
traversed more than once, then the number of odd nodes is either zero or two. If, in
carrying out this process, we pass through any node, then two of the branches at
that node are used, and since no line-segment may be traversed twice, a node
which we pass through n times must be a 2n-fold node. A point can therefore be
an odd node only if on one occasion we do not pass through it. that is, if it is an
initial or terminal point. If, on reaching the end of the journey, we return to the
starting point, then there can only be even nodes; if not, then the initial and
terminal points are odd nodes.
Conversely: if a connected line-system has either no odd nodes or two odd nodes,
then the system can be traversed in one path.
For (a) if only part of the line-system has been traversed, then every node in
the remaining part remains even or odd, just as it was in the original system; only
the initial and terminal nodes of the traversed part change their parity, unless they
coincide. This is because two branches are used in passing through a node, and
only one branch is used at the start and finish of the path.
(b) If we begin to traverse the system at an odd node, then we can finish only at
another odd node. This is because two branches are used each time we pass
through an even node, so that each time we arrive at such a node, there is at least
one other branch available to depart along. However, the initial node is converted
at the beginning to an even node, so that it is also impossible to stop there. On the
other hand, if we start to traverse the system at an even node, then we can also
terminate at the same node, since it is changed at the outset to an odd one.
(c) If. now, the system has two odd nodes, then a path beginning at one of them
necessarily terminates at the other. In this case the completed pan of the path is
open. If. on the other hand, the given system has no odd nodes, then a path
beginning at any node (which must be an even node) must necessarily terminate at
that same node. In this case the completed path is closed.

12
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
(d) If a part b remains untraversed, then it can contain only even nodes. since the
two odd nodes possibly available are used in the first part. and the remaining
nodes retain their parity. Similarly, b must meet the part a already traversed in at
least one common node, since otherwise the system would break up into several
separate pieces. If we proceed from the part a at such a node P into the part b,
we must necessarily terminate in b at P. and so we can continue from there to
traverse a, as we showed earlier. In this way, each part not yet traversed can be
attached to the part already traversed, and the whole system can be covered in
one path.
This also gives us the following theorem: A line-system contains an even
number of odd nodes. If we eliminate a path which begins at an odd node and
continues as far as possible until it can go no further (which again must happen at
an odd node), then two odd nodes are thereby removed. By repeating this
process, we can reduce the number of odd nodes to fewer than two. Now this
remainder cannot be one, but must be zero; this is because if a system contained
just one odd node and a path were to begin from it, then it would never end, since
this can happen only at an odd node. The number of nodes of the original system
is therefore even.
Editors' note. The essential content of the above, but in abbreviated form, and in
places with incomplete proof, is to be found in the unfortunately little-known
treatise of Listing, Vorstudien zur Topologie. Possibly the above exposition may
serve to guide the attention of geometers towards this work, important also in
several other connections.
Hierholzer himself was apparently unaware of Euler's work, and the
editorial note refers only to a treatise published in 1847 by Johann
Benedict LISTING, of which we shall have more to say shortly. Such
ignorance of earlier work is not surprising when one considers the
difficulties of all forms of communication in those times; clearly, much of
mathematical lore was transmitted orally or by private correspondence,
resulting in a certain lack of reliability. Fortunately, Euler's work had not
been completely forgotten, for in 1851 a French translation [2] by E.
Coupy was published in the Nouvelles Annales de Mathematiques, a
journal intended primarily for the students at the Ecole Polytechnique in
Paris. Coupy also applied the methods of Euler to the analogous problem
of the bridges over the River Seine. Nor was the problem forgotten in
Konigsberg; in 1875. L. Saalschiitz [3] reported that a new bridge had
been constructed there, joining the land areas denoted by B and C and
that the citizens' perambulation was now theoretically possible.
Diagram-tracing puzzles
Coupy's interest in the work of Euler stemmed from two references to
it in the early nineteenth century. The first of these occurred in a
textbook of algebra [4], written by the Swiss mathematician Simon-
Antoine-Jean LnuILIER in 1804, and the second appeared in a memoir on

PATHS
13
M
h
K
K
R
K
Fw. 1.6.
polygons and polyhedra [5], written by Louis POINSOT in 1809. The latter
work dealt with a variety of geometrical problems, one of which was the
following:
Given some points situated at random in space, it is required to arrange a
single flexible thread uniting them two by two in all possible ways, so that
finally the two ends of the thread join up, and so that the total length is
equal to the sum of all the mutual distances. As we shall see, the solution is
possible only for an odd number of points ...
The problem, expressed in modern terminology, concerns the existence
of an Eulerian path in a special class of graphs, known as the complete
graphs. For each natural number n, the complete graph K on n vertices
is constructed by joining each pair of vertices by an edge, so that there
are 2n(n-1) edges in all (see Fig. 1.6). Since each vertex is joined to all
the others, the graph K has n vertices of valency n - 1. Poinsot proved,
using arguments similar to those of Euler, that an Eulerian path in K. is
impossible when n = 4, 6, 8, ... , because in these cases there are more
than two vertices with odd valency. He also gave an ingenious method for
constructing an Eulerian path in K,,, when n is odd.
He went on to remark that such methods could be applied to
... a little positional puzzle which was spoken of a few years ago. It is
proposed to describe the four sides and the two diagonals of a quadrilateral
in a simple continuous stroke. It may he seen that this is impossible; for as
there are three adjacent lines at each angle, one of them is necessarily the
continuation of another; but as for the third, its extremity must be a point at
which the pen will stop or start: thus, there must be at least four points
where the pen is stationary; and so the figure cannot be drawn with fewer
than two separate strokes.
Problems of this kind may often be found in books of mathematical
puzzles. We are given a diagram, such as that shown in Fig. 1.7, and we
are asked to draw it using as few continuous pen-strokes as possible, and
without going over any part of it twice. For example, it is easily seen that
the diagram in Fig. 1.7 requires only two separate strokes. Clearly, a
diagram can be drawn with one stroke if and only if the corresponding
graph has an Eulerian path. Poinsot explained how such problems may be

14
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Fic. 1.7.
solved, and he gave some examples-for instance, he pointed out that
four separate strokes are required to cover the edges of a cube.
Another treatment of this theory appeared in 1847 in the important
treatise by Listing, mentioned in the editorial footnote to Hierholzer's
paper. Listing set out to investigate those aspects of geometry which
depend upon inherent positional relationships, rather than the measure-
ment of lengths and angles. He discussed such things as screws, knots, and
links, and he devoted a short section [1C] of his work to diagram-tracing
puzzles. It must be said that his account adds very little to those
previously given by Euler and Poinsot, but, in view of the historical
importance of his treatise, it merits the inclusion of an extract in this
book.
1C
J. B. LISTING
VORSTUDIEN ZUR TOPOLOGIE
[Introductory studies in topology]
Giittinger Studien (Abtheilung 1) 111847). 811-875.
s
s
s
s
s
Linear complexes-that is, any straight lines, curved lines, or any aggregate of
such lines-can either be contained in a surface (a plane or a spherical surface) or
else may twist through space in every direction. In both cases there can be an
arbitrary number of meeting-points or crossings. just as in the second case, if we
project onto a plane or spherical surface, there will also arise an arbitrary number
of 'crossing-over' points in addition to the intersections.
In the case of linear complexes in a surface, where consequently only meeting-
points or crossings occur, each point belonging to the linear complex can be
regarded as a place from which there are available a certain number of routes to
other points of the complex. For example. on a straight line drawn between two
points A and B. there is just one route available at each of the endpoints A and
B, whereas at each internal point C of the line there are two routes. If we now

PATHS
15
suppose that no route is covered more than once, then as before A and B must be
the endpoints of a continuous simple path, whereas we can arrive at the point C
from one direction and leave again in the other direction.
It is clear that if it is the number of routes at an intersection point, then the
point may be considered either as the crossing-point of in lines or as the
crossing-point of it n - 1) lines together with the endpoint of one line, according as
it is even or odd. From this it follows that a complete linear complex can be
regarded as the aggregate of a certain number of continuous strokes, each of which
has two boundary for end) points which lie on an intersection of odd-numbered
type. Thus, in every linear complex (and, likewise, in every union of mutually
disjoint complexes), there must occur an even number of intersections of odd
type, whereas there must be infinitely many points of even type, since each
internal point of any line is such a point. With the help of this result, it is easy to
find, in any given complex, the minimum number of continuous strokes in which
such a complex, however complicated, can be drawn without any pan of it being
covered more than once. In order to determine this minimum number of strokes,
we have accordingly to count the odd points of the complex. Let this number,
which must necessarily be even, be p; then #p is the least number of strokes in
which the configuration can be drawn. The actual construction, as well as the
determination of the number of possible solutions, would certainly entail more
complicated investigations than there is room for here.
It remains to be mentioned that if p = 0, the number of strokes is to be set
equal to one, rather than zero, and that these requirements may be applied
separately to each individual one of any given number of mutually disjoint
complexes. Thus, for example, in order to draw m mutually disjoint complexes in
which there are no points of odd type (as, for example, when the in parts lie
concentrically in one another like separate circuits), in strokes are required. The
same is true for drawing a complex with 2m intersections of odd type. or m
mutually disjoint complexes each of which contains two odd points: and further,
that the success of the actual construction when p 0 0 requires the condition that
the beginning and end of each stroke occur only at odd intersections.
I
Fig.
IS
In Fig. [1.8] there are eight odd points (each on three routes), so that this figure
cannot be drawn with fewer than four continuous strokes without covering some
pan more than once [6].
A square with a circumscribed circle and both diagonals included requires at
least two strokes, and the lattice of a chessboard with 64 squares requires at least
14. If each of the black squares of the chessboard is given one diagonal, all
sloping in the same direction, then the construction can be carried out in either 9
or 6 continuous strokes, depending on whether or not the diagonals of the black
corner squares lie in a direct line. If all of the squares are given such mutually
parallel diagonals, then one can complete the drawing of the figure in one single
stroke.

16
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Fic
1.9.
Fig. [1.91 can likewise be drawn in a single stroke, since it has only two points
of odd type. both five-fold, lying at the ends of the horizontal axis.
In 1849 a commentary on Poinsot's memoir appeared in the Nouvelles
Annales de Mathentatiques [7]. Among other things, it drew attention to
an interesting interpretation of Poinsot's rule for an Eulerian path in K7,
in terms of the game of dominoes. If we set aside the doubles (that is, the
dominoes 0-0,
6-6), the remaining twenty-one dominoes cor-
respond to the edges of K7, and an Eulerian path represents a sequence
of the twenty-one dominoes with all of the ends matching up, as required
by the rules. Since the doubles can be inserted at appropriate places once
the basic sequence is given, we have proved that a complete game of
dominoes is possible.
The question of finding the number of ways in which this can happen
became known as the 'domino problem'; it aroused a certain amount of
interest, but no solution appeared until 1871 [8]. A general method for
counting the number of Eulerian paths in a graph was later given by
Gaston TARRY in 1886 [9].
The simple theory of Euler, Poinsot, Listing, and Hierholzer has been
rediscovered many times. As late as 1905, John Cook Wilson, Wykeham
Professor of Logic at Oxford University, published an incredibly long-
winded treatise [10] on the subject; he made no reference whatever to
previous related work, of which he was apparently quite unaware.
Mazes and labyrinths
There is yet another problem which is related to those we have been
considering: it is the question of how to escape from a maze or labyrinth.
This problem and its solution are now quite well known, since they are
discussed in many books of mathematical puzzles, in particular, the three
'classics': E. Lucas' Recreations mathematiques [11], W. W. Rouse Ball's
Mathematical recreations and problems [12] (later entitled Mathematical

PATHS
17
FIG. 1.10.
recreations and essays), and W. Ahrens' Mathematische Unterhaltungen
and Spiele [13]. These books contain historical material which indicates
that the construction of mazes is an ancient art, but it seems that no
careful mathematical account of their properties was published before the
latter part of the nineteenth century.
In order to explain the mathematical content of the maze problem, let
us consider the famous maze at Hampton Court in England (Fig. 1.10).
The essential features of this maze are a number of passages or pathways,
separated by hedges, and meeting at a certain number of junctions. We
may represent any such maze by a graph in which the vertices correspond
to the junctions and the edges correspond to the passages, so that the
graph corresponding to the Hampton Court maze is as depicted in Fig.
1.11.
In graph-theoretical terms the maze problem requires a path, which
starts from some given vertex (the centre), and which ends at another
given vertex (the exit). In fact, it is sufficient to be less specific and merely
to ask for a path which contains every edge of the graph, since then both
the centre and the exit will be visited at some stage. This latter problem
always has a solution, provided that the graph is connected. To see this,
we replace every edge in the original graph by two edges joining the same
pair of vertices; the result is a new graph in which every vertex has even
valency, and which, consequently, must have an Eulerian path. In the
r
r
A
r,
!;
1)
1:
C
H
.1
M
Fic. 1.11.

18
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
original graph we obtain a path which contains each edge exactly twice,
and this is sufficient for our purposes.
Unfortunately, the preceding proof is merely a proof of the existence of
a path, and as such it affords but little solace to any one who is lost in a
maze without a plan of its layout. What one requires in those cir-
cumstances is a practical means of escaping-that is. a constructive proof
of the existence of the desired path. Mathematicians call such a plan of
campaign an `algorithm'; in this case the algorithm must take the form of
a rule which can be applied on arrival at each junction. We emphasize
that a map of the maze is not provided, but it is presumed that the route
can be marked as it is traversed, if this is desirable.
The first attempt to give an algorithm for the maze problem was
published in 1873 [14] by Wiener, in the same issue of Mathemarische
Annalen as Hierholzer's posthumous paper. Wiener's paper was unneces-
sarily complicated-for instance, he devoted a paragraph to proving that
after entering a maze one can always return to the entrance; as KONIG
later pointed out [15, p. 36], this limited objective can be achieved by a
somewhat simpler rule: don't go in! Wiener's rule for escaping from the
centre is also rather involved, and it may entail traversing a passage many
times. instead of just twice.
A more efficient algorithm was discovered by Tremaux and published
in the first volume of Lucas' book [11] in 1882; in this solution no
passage need be traversed more than twice. Regrettably, the proof given
by Lucas is seriously deficient, although the algorithm is correct. The
simplest. and best, algorithm was published by Tarry in 1895, and his
paper [ 1 D] is the last extract in this chapter.
ID
G. TARRY
LE PROBLEME DES LABYRINTHES
[The maze problem]
Noucelles Annales de Mathimatiques (3) 14 (1895), 187-190.
Any maze can be traversed in a single journey, passing twice (in opposite
directions) along each passage, without the necessity of knowing its plan.
To resolve this problem. it is enough to follow this single rule:
Do not return along the passage which has led to a junction for the first time unless
you cannot do otherwise.
We begin with some comments.
At any instant, before arriving at a junction or after having left it, every
junction other than the point of departure must have an even number of passages
which have been traversed just once; and the number of these passages traversed

PATHS
19
in the inward direction is equal to the number traversed in the outward direction.
This is clear, since the number of arrivals is equal to the number of departures,
and a passage can be traversed at most twice and in opposite directions. It follows
that at the instant of arrival at a junction, the number of passages traversed once
only, and in the inward direction, exceeds by one the number of passages
traversed once only in the outward direction. If there is only one passage which
has been used just once. then this must be the first passage. and all the other
passages must necessarily have remained unexplored, or have been traversed
twice in opposite directions. Thus one cannot be halted at this junction and one is
forced to return along the incoming passage only in the case when all other
passages have been traversed twice.
Thus, in following the rule, one can be stopped only at the point of departure,
and one returns along the incoming passage at a junction only after all the other
passages at that junction have been traversed twice.
Consider now the initial junction. At the instant of an arrival at this junction,
the number of passages traversed once in the inward direction is equal to the
number of passages traversed once in the outward direction. Consequently. one
can be halted only if there are no unexplored passages, and no passages traversed
once only. Thus when one is forced to step at the initial junction. all the passages
at that junction have been traversed twice.
Given this, let A. B. C, D, .... Z be the initial junction and the other junctions.
in the order in which they are visited on the route. If one has followed the single
rule strictly, all the passages meeting at the junctions B. C, D..... Z must have
been traversed twice, in opposite directions, as must the passages at the initial
junction A.
For, since the initial passage AB leading to the junction B from A has been
traversed twice in opposite directions, all the passages at the junction B have been
traversed twice in opposite directions. Similarly, all the passages at the junction C
have been traversed twice, since the incoming passage BC (or AC. if AB is an
impasse), which meets the junction B (or A). has been traversed twice. Finally,
any junction T. whose incoming passage must necessarily lead from a previous
junction (A. B. .... or S), has been completely explored, since its incoming
passage has been traversed twice. This is what was to be proved.
Suppose that on traversing a passage for the first time one leaves at the
entrance two markers, and at the exit one or three markers, depending upon
whether the passage leads to a junction already visited or to a new junction: and
suppose that on entering a passage where one finds one marker, and so traversing
it a second time in the opposite direction, one adds a second marker at the
entrance. Then, on arrival at a junction, one can always pick out the new passages
(which have no markers), the initial passage (which has three markers), and the
other passages traversed once only in the inward direction (which have one
marker). The single rule can be stated as follows:
On arriving at a junction, take at random any passage which has no markers or
any passage with one marker; if no such passage exists, take the passage with three
markers.
By following this practical method, anyone lost in a maze or catacombs must
return to the entrance before exploring all the passages and without traversing the
same passages more than twice. This shows that it is always possible to escape
from a maze, and that the best form of Ariadne's thread is the thread of reason.
Remark-The general rule allows one to retrace one's steps, when one arrives
by a new route at a junction which has already been visited. If this is made
obligatory, then on arrival at a junction by a path previously traversed, one will

20
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
find only a single passage used once, the initial one, and it will be permissible to
take this passage only when there are no unexplored passages. It is clear that in
this case it becomes unnecessary to distinguish the beginning of the initial passage
by a special marker. This particular solution has been found by Trvmaux [I i].
The problems discussed in this chapter have two desirable features:
they may be formulated within a precise mathematical framework, and
they admit neat and compact solutions. The framework will be enlarged
gradually throughout this book, in order to formulate a wide range of
problems from many different sources; but even using this larger vocabul-
ary, it will not be possible to solve all the problems that arise. For
example, in the next chapter we shall introduce a problem concerned with
the existence of a certain kind of 'circuit' in a graph. Although this
problem can be formulated exactly, it will become clear that it does not
admit a simple or concise solution. This is all the more surprising since it
is superficially very similar to the Eulerian problems discussed in this
chapter.
References
I. ZFILLER, M. Topographia Prussiae et Pomerelliae. Frankfurt, c.1650.
2. Coupy, . E. Solution d'un probleme appurtenant a la geometric de situation, par Euler.
Noun. Ann. Math. 10 (1851). 106-119.
3. SAALSCHOTZ. L. [Untitled). Schr. Phys.-Okon. Ges. K6nigsberg Prussia 16 (1876),
23-24.
4. LHUIUER. S.-A.-J. Elimens raisonnEs d'algibre. Geneve, 1804.
5. Pom so-r. L. Sur les polygons et les polvedres. J. Ecole Polyrech. 4 (Cah. 10) (1810),
16-18.
6. CLAUSEN. T. [Second postscript to:j De linearum tertii ordinis proprictatibus. Astron.
,Nachr. 21 (1844). col. 209-216.
7. TEROUEM, O. Sur les polygons et Ies polyedres etoiles, polygones funiculaires. Noun.
Ann. Math. 8 (1849). 68-74.
8. REtss. M. Evaluation du nombre de combvnuisons desquclles les 28 des d'un jeu du
domino sont susceptibles d'apres la regle de cc jeu. Ann. Mat. Pura Appl. (2) S (1871-3),
63-120.
9. TARRY, G. Nombre de mani2res distinctes de paroourir en une seule course toutes Its
allees d'un labyrinthe rentrant, en ne passant qu'une seule lois par chacune des allees.
CompL Rend. Ass Franc. Avance. Sci. 15 Pt. 2 (1886), 49-53.
10. WILsoN, J. C. On the traversing of geometrical figures Clarendon Press. Oxford, 1905.
11. LUCAS. E. Recreations mathimatiques, 4 vols. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1882-94.
12. RousE BALL, W. W. Mathematical recreations and problems of past and present times,
(1st edn.). Macmillan, London, 1892.
13. AHRENS, W. Mathematische Unterhaltungen and Spiele. Leipzig, 1901.
14. WIENER, C. Uber eine Aufgabe aus der Geometria situs. Math. Ann. 6 (1873). 29-30.
15. KONIG. D. Theorie der endlichen and unendlichen Graphen. Akademische Verlags-
gesellschaft. Leipzig, 1936. Reprinted: Chelsea, New York, 1950.
16. SACHS. H., SrlEBrrz., M. and WILSON, R. J. An historical note: Euler's KOnigsberg
letters. J. Graph Theory 12 (1988). 133-139.

2
Circuits
T. P. KIRKMAN (1806-95)
THE philosopher and mathematician G. W. Leibniz played an important,
and well-known, part in the discovery of the differential calculus. But it is
less widely known that to Leibniz should also go the distinction of
suggesting one of the most fertile fields of current mathematical research.
In a letter [1, pp. 18-19] to C. Huygens, written in 1679, he declared:
I am not content with algebra, in that it yields neither the shortest proofs
nor the most beautiful constructions of geometry. Consequently, in view of
this, I consider that we need yet another kind of analysis, geometric or
linear, which deals directly with position, as algebra deals with magnitude.
The study of position, which is closely linked with graph theory, is now
known by the name suggested by Listing; it is called 'topology'. The
subject was slow to capture the interest of mathematicians. Indeed, in
1833, C. F. Gauss wrote [2, p. 605]:
Of the geometry of position, which Leibniz initiated and to which only two
geometers, Euler and Vandermonde, have given a feeble glance, we know
and possess, after a century and a half, very little more than nothing.
Undeterred by Gauss' dismissive tone, we have decided to include in this
book articles by both Euler and the French mathematician Alexandre-
Theophile VANDERMONDE. There is some confusion as to which of Euler's
works Gauss intended to cite in his remarks. It is possible that he was
referring to the paper [IA] on the Konigsberg bridges, but some writers
(notably Listing, who had been a student of Gauss), thought that he
meant another article [3] whose subject we shall describe below. The

22
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
work of Vandermonde, although not so famous as that of Euler, is also of
considerable interest, and it is our first extract in this chapter.
The knight's tour
Vandermonde's article [2A] is mainly concerned with the problem
known as the 'knight's tour' on a chessboard. As is well known, a knight
must move two squares parallel to one side of the board, followed by one
square in a perpendicular direction; the problem is to find a sequence of
moves so that a knight may visit each square of the board just once and
finish on the same square as it began. The question has a long history,
accounts of which may be found in the books of Ahrens, Lucas, and
Rouse Ball listed in the references for Chapter 1. Both Euler and
Vandermonde gave systematic treatments of the problem, and Vander-
monde used it to illustrate his ideas on the geometry of position.
2A
A.-T. VAN DERMONDE
REMAROUES SUR LES PROBLEMES DE SITUATION
[Remarks on problems of position]
Memoires de l'Academie Royale des Sciences (Paris) (1771). 566-574.
Whatever the twists and turns of a system of threads in space, one can always
obtain an expression for the calculation of its dimensions, but this expression will
be of little use in practice. The craftsman who fashions a braid, a net, or some
knots will be concerned, not with questions of measurement, but with those of
position; what he sees there is the manner in which the threads are interlaced. It
would therefore be useful to have a system of calculation more relevant to the
worker's mode of operation. a notation which would represent his way of
thinking, and which could be used for the reproduction of similar objects for all
time.
My aim here is simply to demonstrate the possibility of such a notation, and to
demonstrate its use in questions concerning networks of threads. In order to
illustrate my ideas, I shall consider a well-known problem which belongs to this
category. that of the knight's tour in chess, solved by Euler in 1759 [3]. The
method of that great geometer presupposes that one has a chessboard to hand; I
have reduced the problem to simple arithmetic, using numbers which do not
represent quantities at all, but regions of space.
(1.)
1 consider space divided into arbitrary finite elements, distinguished by their
order; that is to say, (1) 1 consider a plane divided by parallel lines into a series of
strips, and then divided again by another set of parallels which cut the first set; I
distinguish the different strips by the designation first, second, third, fourth, etc.,
in both divisions. I can then describe a given point belonging to any one of the

CIRCUITS
a
4
4
4
1
2
'
r
1
3
J I J
r
3
J
3
-f
4
1
1
1
r
/
1
/
4
1
5
FIG. 2.1.
23
parallelograms formed by the double divisions, by simply writing two numbers,
one above the other, where one number is the order of the first division and the
other that of the second. Thus, for example, : belongs to the parallelogram which
is common to the fourth strip in the first division and the third in the second
division (see figure [2.1]). (2) I consider a solid space divided first by parallel
planes into a series of slices, then divided again by another series of parallel planes
which cut the first ones, and finally divided a third time by a new series of parallel
planes which cut both of the others. I can then describe by a symbol 123, for example,
a given point belonging to the parallelepiped common to the third slice in the first
division, the second slice in the second division, and the first in the third division
(see figure [2.2]).
(2.)
In general, if three numbers arranged as ca designate a certain region of
space confined between given limits, then a series of such expressions ca. c;.
ya, ... serves to describe a route in space or the path of a thread; and according
as one requires greater or lesser precision, one refines or relaxes the limits, and
specifies a greater or lesser number of crossings between neighbouring paral-
lelepipeds.
Thus, for example, supposing that the thread is flexible and free to move,
except at the points designated below, one has, it seems to me, an expression
sufficient for the plait (fig. [2.3]) by means of the sequence
2i, 133. 2:,11, 21,12, 21,13.25,13, 2;.1:...... .
Similarly, one has an expression for the system of stocking-stitches (fig. [2.4]) by
FIG. 2.2.

24
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
2
3
4
5
FIG. 2.3.
4
FIG. 2.4.
FIG. 2.5.

CIRCUITS
25
means of the sequences
3
2
2t
,
.
3
,
21, 1,. ti, ..t, _-, 1, 1i, 2z, 23. 13, i3, 2........
.
113.
2t3.
24.. 1a
273 .......
21,
&c.
(3.)
The problem of how a knight can visit all the squares of a chessboard,
without visiting the same one twice, reduces to the determination of a certain
route of the knight on the chessboard; or equally, if one supposes that a pin is
fixed in the centre of each square, the problem reduces to the determination of a
path taken by a thread passed once round each pin and following a rule whose
formulation we seek. See fig. [2.5].
(4.)
If ; denotes any square of the board, then a and b can be any of the numbers
1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Given two successive positions of a chess puce,
and
the move of that piece
represents a condition on a and a, b and b.
For example, if a rook is placed on the square
it can go from there to any
square .!, or ";', where m is a positive or negative integer such that neither
a + m nor b + m is less than 1 or greater than 8.
Similarly, if a bishop is placed on the square a, it can go to any square
A knight can go from ; to ;;:11, or to
and so on for the other pieces.
(5.)
The problem of how a knight can visit all the squares of the board, without
visiting the same one twice, thus becomes that of arranging the sixty-four terms
1
1
1
1
2 2 2
3 3
8
...
...
........
1234
123
12
8
in such a way that the following rule holds for every two adjacent terms: the
difference between the upper numbers is I and the difference between the lower
numbers is 2, or the difference between the upper numbers is 2 and the difference
between the lower ones is 1. (See the example in Section 11.)
(7.)
To simplify the solution, one can seek a symmetric route for the path of the
knight; it is from this viewpoint that I shall proceed.
The knight's path will be a symmetric figure if, when we interchange the
numbers 8 and I, 7 and 2, 6 and 3, 5 and 4. and vice versa, either in the upper
sequence, or in the lower, or in both at once, then there is no change in the path
as a whole.
(8.)
Thus it is required to find sixteen consecutive knight's moves, or sixteen
terms of the sequence, such that (see the example below, in Section 9) if one
interchanges 8 and 1, 7 and 2. 6 and 3, 5 and 4, and vice versa, in the lower
sequence, one gets no term already in the original sixteen, and the same is true if
one makes these changes in the upper sequence, or in both the upper and lower
sequences simultaneously. After making these transformations, one has four

26
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
sequences of knight's moves, covering the sixty-four squares of the board without
repetition, and forming a symmetric figure; in order to solve the given problem it
remains to join the four sequences into a single one, so that the rule holds at the
junctions.
(9.)
To obtain the desired sixteen terms, I begin by writing down all sixty-four
terms
1111
222
33
8
...
...
........
1234
123
12
8
in any order.
I then take one at random, say :. and write underneath the
three transforms s, ;, and :. Since these are of no further interest, I delete them
from the sixty-four. From the remaining sixty I take at random one which is
related to ; by a knight's move, for example ; (since the difference between the
upper numbers is 1, whereas the lower difference is 2). 1 write underneath ; the
three corresponding transforms ;, 6, 6, and delete them from the sixty, leaving
fifty-six with which I repeat the same process. In this way I obtain, for example,
the four symmetric sequences:
5421321312431243
5342131231245786
4578678687568756
5342131231245786
5 4 2
1
3 2 1 3
1 2 4 3
1 2 4 3
4657868768754213
4578678687568756
4 6 5 7 8 6 8 7 6 8 7 5 4 2
1
3.
(11.)
Of the four sequences in Section 9, the first may be joined to the fourth.
and consequently the second to the third. After this juxtaposition we have two
sequences:
54213213124312434578678687568756
5 3 4 2
1
3
1
2 3 1 2 4 5 7 8 6 4 6 5 7 8 6 8 7 6 8 7 5 4 2
1 3
45786786875687565421321312431243
5 3 4 2
1
3
1 2 3
1
2 4 5 7 8 6 4 6 5 7 8 6 8 7 6 8 7 5 4 2
1
3.
which are still symmetric, and re-entrant.
In order to join them, it is necessary to destroy the symmetry slightly; but if,
for example, we interpolate the second sequence between the terms : and I of the
first. then the whole sequence remains re-entrant, and can therefore start from
whichever square one wishes. See figure [2.5], which depicts the knight's path
determined by this sequence.

CIRCUITS
27
Fic. 2.6.
The knight's-tour problem is a special case of a quite general problem
about graphs, namely, the question of when it is possible, in a given
graph, to find a circuit which passes through each vertex just once. To be
precise, a circuit is a path with the additional property that all of its
vertices and all of its edges are distinct, with the exception of the first and
last vertices, which must coincide. In the graph depicted in Fig. 2.6, the
path v, b, w, c, z. g, u, f, v is an example of a circuit. (We remark in
passing that this graph exhibits two rather special kinds of circuit: the
circuit v, a. v consisting of the edge a joining v to itself, which is a loop;
and the circuit w, c, z, d, w containing the two edges c and d which both
join w and z-these two edges are said to be multiple edges. Many of the
graphs we discuss here have neither loops nor multiple edges, and are
said to be simple).
In the particular case of the knight's-tour problem, the corresponding
graph has sixty-four vertices, one for each square of the chessboard, and
two vertices are joined by an edge whenever a knight can legally move
from one to the other. We are asked to select sixty-four edges which form
a circuit passing through each vertex.
The question must be carefully distinguished from the Eulerian prob-
lems considered in the previous chapter. In those problems we had to use
every edge of the graph in turn, and so we may have to revisit a vertex
several times. Here, we use only some of the edges in order to visit each
vertex just once. The difference may be compared with the distinction
between an explorer and a traveller-the explorer examines all possible
routes, whereas the traveller simply wishes to visit each place of interest
once. We have already given a simple necessary and sufficient condition
for the explorer's problem to have a solution; unfortunately there is no
such straightforward test for the traveller's problem.

28
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Kirkman and polybedra
The first general discussion of the traveller's problem was given by
Thomas Penyngton KIRKMAN, who for over fifty years (1839-92) was
rector of the small parish of Croft with Southworth in the English county
of Lancashire. Despite his isolation and the time devoted to his religious
work, he made many contributions to mathematics and was elected a
Fellow of the Royal Society in 1857. One of his mathematical interests
was the study of polyhedra, that is, solids such as a cube or a pyramid
which are bounded by plane faces. The surface of a polyhedron contains
the lines of intersection of its faces and the points of intersection of these
lines, so that every polyhedron has a corresponding graph whose vertices
and edges correspond to these points and lines. A drawing of the graph is
often a convenient way of describing the polyhedron; for example, Fig.
2.7 depicts the graphs corresponding to a cube and a pentagonal pyramid.
(We shall have more to say about polyhedra and their graphs in Chapter
5.)
FIG. 2.7.
In a paper [2B] received by the Royal Society on 6 August 1855.
Kirkman considered the following question. Given the graph of a
polyhedron. can one always find a circuit which passes through each ver-
tex once and only once? He gave a complicated condition (his 'prop.A')
which he claimed to be sufficient to ensure that such a circuit can be
found, but unfortunately his claim is false. It is possible that he had in
mind some additional (even more complicated) restrictions, which he
omitted to state explicitly; the addition of such restrictions could easily
render the result trivial.
So Kirkman made no serious contribution to that aspect of the prob-
lem. His main achievement was to describe a general class of graphs
which do not possess a complete circuit of the required kind. This part of

CIRCUITS
29
his paper is reproduced below; it contains much florid and fanciful
terminology which, perhaps fortunately, has not become part of standard
mathematical language. To help the reader, we explain that: a 'q-acron' is
a polyhedron with q vertices; a 'q-gon' is a circuit with q edges; a 'summit'
is a vertex; and any face with a maximum number of edges surrounding it
may be designated as the 'base'. Kirkman's example involving 'the cell of
the bee' will be described at the end of the extract.
2B
T. P. KIRKMAN
ON THE REPRESENTATION OF POLYEDRA
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society, London 146 (1856). 413-418.
It is easy to prove that there are polyedra on which the closed polygons cannot
be drawn.
For suppose the q-gon of prop.A. drawn on a q-acron. In making the circuit of
any face G which we enter across an edge FG. which is not an edge of the
q-gon, we add to the number of summits counted in F and other faces, all the
summits of G. except two, these two having been enumerated in the circuit of F
from which we enter G. That is, counting first all the summits of the base, we add
to these for every m-gon whose circuit we proceed to make, nt-2 summits more.
The number of faces, connected with each other and with the base by edges, not
part of the closed q-gon. whose circuits the closed q-gon makes and includes, will
be a + a, + a, + ... + a, : where a,,, is the number of m-gons among them and
aA that of the k-gons, the base being one of these. The whole number of summits
will therefore be
a,+2a,+3a,+...+(k -2)ar +2 = q;
for we have counted all the summits of one k-gon, viz. of the base.
In order, then, that such a q-gon should be possible, it is necessary that among
the p faces of our p-edral q-acron, there should be a, triangles, a, quadrilaterals,
ati pentagons, &c., of which the above equation can be affirmed. Now if q should
be odd, and all the p faces even-angled, this equation becomes
2a4+4a6+6as+&c. = 2r+ 1,
which is impossible. Hence it appears, that if the number of summits of a q-acron
be odd, while the faces are all even-angled, the closed q-gon cannot be drawn
through its summits. 1 find exceedingly few polyedra on which the closed p-gon

30
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
and q-gon cannot be drawn. In fact. it is far from being necessary to their
existence. that all the conditions of the theorems A and B should be fulfilled.
If we cut in two the cell of the bee by a section of its six parallel edges, we have
a 13-acron. whose faces are one hexagon and nine quadrilaterals. The closed
13-gon cannot be drawn. But if a line be drawn from the triedral vertex to the
opposite angle of one of the quadrilaterals about that vertex, and this quadrila-
teral supposed broken into two triangles having that line for their common edge,
we shall then have a 13-acron whose faces are one hexagon, eight quadrilaterals.
and two triangles; and whose summits are nine triaces and [four] tessaraces. Of
this figure the paradigm can be constructed. Here I would fain beg the reader's
permission to call a 5-edral summit a pentace, a 6- or 7-edral summit a hexace or
a heptace. The words are at least convenient in speaking of the summits of
polvacra.
As authorities and analogy are alike divided about the spelling of the word
polyedron. I have pleased myself herein. Why polyhedron of necessity, and yet not
perihodic?
The graph of the polyhedron constructed by Kirkman in his penulti-
mate paragraph is shown in Fig. 2.8; the extra edge he mentioned would
join the vertices marked A and B. Kirkman gave a general proof of the
fact that, if a polyhedron has an odd number of vertices and each face has
an even number of edges, then there is no circuit which passes through all
the vertices. The graph in Fig. 2.8 is an example of this.
In fact there is a simpler and more comprehensive way to reach the
same conclusion. A graph is said to be bipartite if its vertices can be
partitioned into two disjoint sets V 1 and V2 in such a way that each edge
joins a vertex in V, to a vertex in V2. Kirkman's graph is bipartite; in Fig.
2.8, we have denoted the vertices in V, by circles and those in V2 by
FIG. 2.8.

CIRCUITS
31
squares. Since a path in a bipartite graph must visit V, and V2 alter-
nately, it follows that a circuit which begins and ends at the same vertex
must contain an even number of vertices. Consequently, if a bipartite
graph has an odd number of vertices then it cannot contain a circuit which
passes just once through every one of them. This result contains Kirk-
man's, since the graph of a polyhedron, all of whose faces have an even
number of edges, is bipartite.
A special case of the preceding argument was used by Euler [3, p. 332]
in a discussion of the knight's tour on a 'non-standard' chessboard-one
with n squares in each direction, instead of the usual eight. The chess-
board graph, with edges representing knight's moves, is bipartite, since
the knight must always move from a white square to a black one, or vice
versa. So if n = 5, for example. then the total number of squares is odd
and the knight cannot make a closed tour of the board.
The Icosian Game
It sometimes happens that the same mathematical idea is discovered by
two people independently, at about the same time. It was Kirkman's
misfortune to be upstaged by another, more famous, mathematician,
William Rowan HAMILTON.
Hamilton was appointed Astronomer Royal of Ireland at the age of
twenty-two, was knighted at thirty, and was generally recognized as a
leading mathematician of his time. One of his most significant discoveries
was the existence of non-commutative algebra, that is, algebra in which
multiplication does not necessarily satisfy the rule xy = yx. There are
many systems of non-commutative algebra, and one of these, which
Hamilton discovered and named `The Icosian Calculus', can be inter-
preted in terms of paths on the graph of the regular dodecahedron (see
below and [10] ). Hamilton first communicated this discovery in a letter
dated 7 October 1856 [4, p. 711, and subsequently developed it in pub-
lished articles [5]. [6]. Furthermore, he used the graphical interpretation
as the basis for a puzzle, which he called 'The Icosian Game' (see Frontis-
piece). He exhibited this game, of which he was inordinately proud, at the
meeting of the British Association in Dublin in 1857, and sold the idea
for £25 to a wholesale dealer in games and puzzles (see (11]). It was a bad
bargain-for the dealer.
The game was marketed in 1859, accompanied by a printed leaflet
[2C] of instructions, written mainly by Hamilton himself. The reader will
see that the object of the game was to find paths and circuits on the
dodecahedral graph, satisfying certain specified conditions. In particular,
the first problem was that of finding a circuit passing just once through
each vertex of the graph.

32
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
2C
THE ICOSIAN GAME.
$$
aftu aen RAIL
Rgiat,red
gnsb12 to
Act O. Ac YL vie. =IL 100.
LONDON:
PUBLISHED AND SOLD WHOLESALE BY JOHN JAQUES AND SON. 102 HATTON WIDEN;
AND TO It MAD AT HOST Of TRt LEADING FANCY IITOSITORIES
TDROVGNONT TNI RINODON,
In this new Game (invented by Sir WILLIAM ROWAN HAMILT._:', LL.D.,
&c., of Dublin. and by him named /cosian, from a Greek word signifying 'twenty')
a player is to place the whole or part of a set of twenty numbered pieces or men
upon the points or in the holes of a board, represented by the diagram above
drawn, in such a manner as always to proceed along the lines of the figure, and
also to fulfil certain other conditions, which may in various ways be assigned by
another player. Ingenuity and skill may thus be exercised in proposing as well as in
resolving problems of the game. For example, the first of the two players may
place the first five pieces in any five consecutive holes, and then require the
second player to place the remaining fifteen men consecutively in such a manner
that the succession may be cyclical, that is, so that No. 20 may be adjacent to No.
1; and it is always possible to answer any question of this kind. Thus, if B C D F
G be the five given initial points, it is allowed to complete the succession by
following the alphabetical order of the twenty consonants, as suggested by the
diagram itself; but after placing the piece No. 6 in the hole H, as before, it is also
allowed (by the supposed conditions) to put No. 7 in X instead of J, and then to
conclude with the succession, W R S T V J K L M N P Q Z. Other Examples of
Icosian Problems, with solutions of some of them, will be found in the following
page.

CIRCUITS
33
EXAMPLES OF ICOSIAN PROBLEMS
FIRST PROBLEM
Five initial points are given; cover the hoard, and finish cyclically. As hinted in
the preceding page. a succession is said to be cyclical when the last piece is
adjacent to the first.)
[This problem is always possible in at least two, and sometimes in four different
ways. Two examples have been assigned: the following are a few others.)
Example 3. Given B C P N M as initial: two solutions exist; one is the succession,
DFKLTSRQZXWVJHG;theotherisDFGHXWVJKLTSRQ
Z.
Example 4. Five initials, L T S R Q. Four solutions.
"
5. Five initials, J V T S R. Two solutions.
SECOND PROBLEM
Three initial points are given; cover the board non-cyclically, and end at a given
point. (A succession is said to be non-cyclical when the last piece is not adjacent
to the first.)
[This problem is sometimes soluble in only one way; sometimes in two ways;
sometimes in four ways; and sometimes it is not soluble at all, as will be seen by
the following Examples.]
Example 6. Three initial points, B C D; cover, and end with T. There is in this
case only one solution, namely, F G H X Z 0 P N M L K J V W R S T.
Example 7. Same initials; cover, and end with W. Two solutions.
8. Same initials; cover, and end with J. Two solutions.
[The same number of solutions exists, if it be required, having the same three
initials, to end with K, or L, or N, or V.]
Example
9. Same initials; cover, and end with R. Four solutions.
10. Same initials; cover the board, and end with M. Impossible.
[The same result, if it were required to end with F, or H. or P, or Q, or S. or X.]
THIRD PROBLEM
Certain initial points being given, to finish with a given number of additional
men. (A succession is said to be finished, when no additional piece can, consis-
tently with the rules, be placed upon the board.)
Example 11. Given the four initial points, B C D M; finish with piece No. 10.
Solution: L K J H G F.
Example 12. Given the four initials, T V W X; finish with No. 10. One solution.
13. Given the five initials, S N P Q R; finish cyclically with No. 16. One
solution.
FOURTH PROBLEM
A given hole being first stopped (as by a piece without a number), to cover the
rest of the board, in compliance with proposed conditions.
Example 14. Let B C D be given as the three first points, and let P be stopped: it
is required to cover all the other holes, and to end by placing the piece No. 19 at
F. Two solutions.
Example 15. Let B C D be still initial, but let L be the stopped hole: to cover the
board, and end by placing No. 19 in a hole not adjacent to L. Two solutions.

34
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
HINTS ON THE ICOSIAN CALCULUS,
OI WHICH THI2 ICOSIAN GAME IS DESIGNED TO BE AN ILLUSTRATION.
1.
In a "MI-SIOKANI)t M respecting a New System of Roots of Unity." which
appeared in the Philosophical,llagazine for December 1856, Sir W. R. Hamilton
expressed himself nearly as follows (a few words only being here omitted):
'I have lately been led to the conception of a new system, or rather family of
systems, of non-commutative roots of unity, which are entirely distinct from the i j
k of the quaternions, though having some general analogy thereto; and which
admit, even more easily than the quaternion symbols do, of geometrical interpre-
tation. In the system which seems at present to be the most interesting one among
those included in this new family, I assume three symbols, t, K, A, such that &'= 1,
K' = 1, A5 = 1, A = oK; where or must be distinguished from Kt, since otherwise we
should have A' = 1, A = 1. As a very simple specimen of the symbolical conclu-
sions deduced from these fundamental assumptions. 1 may mention that if we
make µ = lK= = ALA, we shall have also A'= 1, A = µaµ; so that µ is a new fifth
root of unity, connected with the former fifth root A by relations of perfect
reciprocity. A long train of such symbolical deductions is found to follow; and
every one of the results may be interpreted as having reference to the passage
from face to face (or from corner to corner) of the icosahedron (or of the
dodecahedron): on which account, I am at present disposed to give the name of the
'Icosian Calculus' to this new system of symbols. and of rules for their operations.'
lt.
In a
which was distributed in Section A of the British
Association, during its Meeting at Dublin in 1857. Sir W. R. H. pointed out a few
other symbolical results of the same kind: especially the equations ALA = µAµ
µA'µ = AµA. Aµ'A = µ', µA'µ = A': and the formula (A'µ'(Aµ)')' = 1, which
serves as a common mathematical type for the solution of all cases of the First
Problem of the Game. He also gave at the same time an oral (and hitherto
unprinted) account of his rules of interpretation of the principal symbols. which
rules, with reference to the present Icosian Diagram (or I(()siu'.1. may be
briefly stated as follows:
1. The operation L reverses (or reads backward) a line of the figure; changing,
for example, BC to CB.
2. The operation K causes a line to turn in a particular direction round its final
point; changing. for instance, BC to DC.
3. The operation A changes a line considered as a side of a pentagon to the
following side thereof, proceeding always right-handedly for every pentagon
except the large or outer one: thus A changes BC to CD, but SR to RW.
4. The operation µ is contrasted with A. and changes a line considered as a side
of a different pentagon, and in the opposite order of rotation, to the consecutive
side of that other pentagon; thus µ changes BC to CP. and SR to RO: but it
changes also RS to ST, whereas A would change RS to SN.
5. The only operations employed in the game are those marked A and µ; but
another operation. to = AµA1A = ,uAµAµ, having the property that w' = 1. was also
mentioned in the Lithograph above referred to: and to complete the present
statement of interpretations. it may be added that the effect of this operation w is
to change an edge of a pentagonal dodecahedron to the opposite edge of that
solid: for example, in the diagram. BC to TV.

CIRCUITS
35
The foregoing Examples. Hints, and Diagram have been supplied to us by the
Inventor.
May 1859.
JAQUES AND SON.
There was another version of Hamilton's game. involving a solid
dodecahedron (Fig. 2.9), and known as 'The Traveller's Dodecahedron', or
'A Voyage Round the World'. In this game, the vertices represented
twenty important places: Brussels, Canton, Delhi, and so on, ending with
Zanzibar. Each vertex was marked by a peg, and a thread could be
looped around these pegs to indicate a path or a circuit. A complete
circuit, passing through each place once only, was called a 'voyage round
the world'.
In modern terminology a circuit which passes through each vertex of a
graph exactly once is called a Hamiltonian circuit, and the graph itself is
said to be Hamiltonian. It should be apparent that this terminology is not
entirely justified. Hamilton, like Vandermonde over eighty years previ-
ously, was concerned with one special case, whereas Kirkman discussed a
general question; furthermore, although their work was done independ-
ently, Kirkman was clearly the first to publish. Nevertheless, the ter-
minology is now too standard to be changed, and we shall use it in the
rest of this book.
It is interesting to note that Hamilton visited Kirkman at Croft Rectory
during August 1861; from their subsequent letters [4, p. 136] we may
judge their mutual esteem at that time. Kirkman wrote that he wished for
'the good fortune to be nearer to such a mathematician as you', and
Hamilton replied that it would be very difficult for me to express,
without having the air of flattering, how much I admire your mathemati-
cal genius and discoveries'. However, Hamilton died in 1865, and by
1881 Kirkman [7] had become convinced that he himself had originated
FIG. 2.9.

36
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
the discussion of circuits on the dodecahedron, as well as the general
treatment of complete circuits. In this delusion he was aided and abetted
by Peter Guthrie TArr [8], a man whose aptitude for causing confusion
will be seen again in later chapters of this book. In fact, Kirkman had
mentioned the existence of Hamiltonian circuits on the dodecahedron,
but not until 1858 [9, p. 160].
Questions of priority are notoriously difficult to assess, since no idea is
ever wholly original. In this instance, it is fair to acknowledge that
Kirkman inaugurated the general study of complete circuits, while re-
marking that it was Hamilton's game which generated widespread interest
in the problem.
References
1. LEIBNIZ, G. W. Mathematische Schriften (1) Vol. 2. Berlin, 1850.
2. GAUSS, C. F. Werke. Vol. 5. Gbttingcn, 1867.
3. EULER. L. Solution d'une question curieuse qui ne paroit soumise it aucune analyse.
Mem. Acad. Sci. Berlin 15 (1759. published 1766),31G-337 = Opera Omnia (1). Vol. 7.
26-56.
4. GRAVES. R. P. Life of Sir William Rowan Hamilton. Vol. 3. Dublin University Press,
Dublin. 1889.
5. HAMILTON. W. R. Memorandum respecting a new system of roots of unity. Phil. Mag.
(4) 12 (1856). 446 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3.610.
6. HAMILTON. W. R. lAecount of the icosian calculus]. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 6 (1858),
415-416 = Math. Papers. Vol. 3.609.
7. KIRKMAN. T. P. Question 6610. solution by the proposer. Math. QuesL Solut Educ.
Tines. 35 (1991). 112-116.
8. TAIT, P. G. Listing's Topologie. Phil. Mag. (5) 17 (1884). 30-46 = Sci. Papers. Vol. 2,
85-98.
9. KIRKMAN, T. P. On the partitions of the R-pyramid, being the first class of R-gonous
X-edra. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London 148 (1858), 145-161.
10. BIGGS, N. L. The icosian calculus of today. Proc. Roy. Irish Acad. 95A (1995). 23-34.
11. HAWKINS, T. Sir William Hamilton. Johns Hopkins University Press, 1980.

3
Trees
A. CAYLEY (1821-95)
IN THE two preceding chapters we have explained how the study of
graphs arose from the consideration of various 'recreational' problems,
such as the problem of the Konigsberg bridges and the knight's tour. The
investigation of a special class of graphs, known as 'trees', arose in a
rather more mathematical way, from the study of operators in the
differential calculus. In this chapter we shall describe some of the early
work on the properties of trees, and in the following chapter we shall
trace the relationship between this work and some important develop-
ments in theoretical chemistry.
Chapters 3 and 4 together survey many of the basic techniques used in
the enumeration of graphs with specified properties; consequently, they
provide an introduction to the subject known as 'graphical enumeration',
an important part of modern graph theory. We shall begin with the work
of the nineteenth-century English mathematician Arthur CAYLEY, and
end by giving a brief introduction to the fundamental results of George
POLYA, which were published in the years 1935-1937.
The firm studies of trees
A tree is defined to be a connected graph which contains no circuits;
for example, in Fig. 3.1 we depict all the trees with at most five vertices.
It is easy to deduce some basic properties of trees directly from the
definition. In particular, since a tree has no circuits containing only one or
two edges, it must be a simple graph according to the definition in

38
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
u
Fir- 3.1.
Chapter 2. Another property, which may be proved by mathematical
induction, is that the number of edges is necessarily one less than the
number of vertices; conversely, a connected graph with this property must
be a tree.
The use of the word 'tree' in this context is presumably derived from
the diagrammatic form of these graphs, and is akin to the traditional use
of the word in describing genealogical or 'family' trees. The first
mathematician to use the term in print was Cayley, in 1857, although the
concept had been employed ten years earlier by G. K. C. von Staudt [1],
and by the physicist Gustav Robert KIRCHHOFF in his fundamental paper
on electrical networks [2]. Cayley pursued the botanical analogy by
referring to the vertices of a tree as its 'knots' and to the edges as its
'branches'. Also, in his first investigations he dealt only with trees in
which one particular vertex is specially designated as the root; this yields
what we shall call a rooted tree (Cayley later referred to it as a 'root-
tree'). For example, from the fourth tree in Fig. 3.1 we may obtain two
essentially different rooted trees, depending on whether we choose as the
root the central vertex or one of the outer vertices (see Fig. 3.2). A tree
with no specified root is sometimes, for emphasis, said to be uprooted.
Cayley's first paper on trees [3A] was inspired by some work of his
friend James Joseph SYLVESTER on what the latter called 'differential
transformation and the reversion of serieses' [3]. Sylvester was well
known for
his
imaginative
(and
occasionally
fantastic)
choice
of
terminology-in fact, as we shall see in the next chapter, he was the first
root
6
® root
FIG. 3.2.

TREES
39
person to use the word 'graph' in our sense. So it is not impossible that
Sylvester was responsible for some of the terminology used in [3A]. The
paper began with several paragraphs explaining its relationship with
differential operators: these paragraphs are included here mainly for
historical reasons, and the reader may be content to skim through them.
Cayley then considered the problem of finding the number A. of
rooted trees with n edges, and he solved this problem by using two
elementary techniques and one clever idea. The first technique is that of
replacing a sequence of numbers so. Si. s2, .
. . by a 'generating function'
S(x)= so+ six+ s2x2+. . .,
and working with this function. rather than with the sequence. The
second technique is based on the observation that if the root, and the
edges meeting it, are removed from a rooted tree, then the result is a
collection of rooted trees whose roots are the vertices adjacent to the
original root. Conversely, any collection of rooted trees may be united to
form a single rooted tree, by joining their roots to a new root vertex; for
the purpose of this exposition, we shall refer to this process as 'unifica-
tion'.
Suppose we take one particular rooted tree R with r edges, and list the
rooted trees which may be constructed by unification, using copies of R
only. First, using no copies of R, we obtain the tree with no edges; then,
using one copy of R, we obtain a tree with r+ I edges; using two copies of
R, we obtain a tree with 2(r+1) edges, and so on. So the generating
function for the numbers of rooted trees formed in this way is simply
I +x'''+x21'''+ ... =(1 -x'* I)--,
The result of multiplying together all the generating functions for rooted
trees is therefore
(I-x)-'(1-x2)-A.(I-x3)-A=(1-x')-`''....
Cayley's superb insight, allied with his knowledge of the methods used by
Euler in the theory of partitions, enabled him to see that the coefficients
of the powers of x in this product are formed from the coefficients in the
factors in exactly the same way as a rooted tree is constructed by
unification. In other words, the above product is equal to
1 +Aix+A2x2+A,x3+... ,
the generating function for the numbers of rooted trees.
The resulting equation may be used to calculate the numbers A,, A2.
A3.... in turn. Cayley tabulated the first few steps in this calculation.
making some errors, some of which he later corrected: we have incorpo-
rated these corrections, and also some further ones. The paper ends with

40
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
a discussion of a related problem involving the enumeration of trees with
a given number of 'free branches' (edges which meet vertices of valency
one).
A word of warning is necessary before embarking on this paper.
Cayley's style was somewhat terse; he tended to be rather free with such
phrases as 'it is easy to see that', 'a little consideration will show that', and
'the calculation may be effected very easily'. Furthermore, as the reader
will discover, his syntax and punctuation occasionally leave something to
be desired.
3A
A. CAYLEY
ON THE THEORY OF THE ANALYTICAL FORMS CALLED TREES
Philosophical Magazine (4) 13 (1857), 172-176.
A symbol such as Aa. + Ba, +..., where A, B. &c. contain the variables x, y,
&c. in respect to which the differentiation are to be performed, partakes of the
natures of an operand and operator, and may be therefore called an Operandator.
Let P, 0, P,... be any operandators, and let U be a symbol of the same kind, or
to fix the ideas, a mere operand; PU denotes the result of the operation P
performed on U. and QPU denotes the result of the operation 0 performed on
PU; and generally in such combinations of symbols, each operation is considered
as affecting the operand denoted by means of all the symbols on the right of the
operation in question. Now considering the expression QPU, it is easy to see that
we may write
QPU=(Qx P)U+(QP)U,
where on the right-hand side (Q x P) and (QP) signify as follows: viz. Q x P
denotes the mere algebraical product of Q and P, while QP (consistently with the
general notation as before explained) denotes the result of the operation Q
performed upon P as operand; and the two parts (Q x P) U and (QP) U denote
respectively the results of the operations (Q x P) and (QP) performed each of
them upon U as operand. It is proper to remark that (Ox P) and (Px 0) have
precisely the same meaning, and the symbol may be written in either form
indifferently. But without a more convenient notation, it would be difficult to find
the corresponding expressions for RQPU, &c. This, however, can be at once
effected by means of the analytical forms called trees (see figs. [3.3], [3.4], [3.5]),
which contain all the trees which can be formed with one branch, two branches,
and three branches respectively.
The inspection of these figures will at once show what is meant by the term in
question, and by the terms root, branches (which may be either main branches,
intermediate branches, or free branches), and knots (which may be either the root
itself, or proper knots, or the extremities of the free branches). To apply this to
the question in hand, PU consists of a single term represented by fig. [3.6]; QPU
consists, as above, of two terms represented by the two parts of fig. [3.7], viz. the
first part represents the term (Q x P)U, and the second part represents the term

TREES
41
FIG. 3.3.
Fio. 3.4.
FIG. 3.5.
(QP)U. And it is obvious that fig. [3.7] is at once formed from the figure [3.6] by
adding on a branch terminated by 0 at each of the knots of the single part of
fig. [3.6]. In like manner RQPU consists of six terms represented by the six parts
of fig. [3.8], and this figure is at once formed from fig. [3.7] by adding on a branch
terminated by R at each knot of each part of fig. [3.7]. It is hardly necessary to
remark that the first part of fig. [3.8] denotes what, in the notation first explained,
would be denoted by (R x Q x P) U, the second term what would in like manner
be denoted by (RQ x P) U. and so on. the last part being the term which would be
denoted by ((RQ)P)U; viz. R operates upon Q, giving the operandator RQ,
which operates upon P, giving the operandator (RQ)P, which finally operates
upon U.
The figures [3.6], [3.7], &c. contain the same trees as are contained in the
corresponding figures [3.3], [3.4], &c.; only, on account of the different modes of
filling up. trees are considered as so many distinct trees in a figure of the second
set which are considered as one and the same tree in the corresponding figure of
the first set. A difference in the number of trees first occurs in the figures [3.5] and
[3.8]. the first of which contains only four, while the latter contains six trees, viz.
the first tree, the second, third and fourth trees, the fifth tree and the sixth tree of
fig. [3.8] correspond respectively to the first tree, the second tree, the third tree,
and the fourth tree of fig. [3.5]. To derive fig. [3.8] from fig. [3.5], we must fill up
the trees of fig. [3.5] with U at the root and R, Q, P at the other knots in every
possible manner, subject only to the restriction, that, reckoning up from the
extremity of a free branch to the root, there must not be any transposition in the
order of the symbols RQP, and taking care to admit only distinct trees. Thus the
first tree of fig. [3.5] might be filled up in six ways; but the trees so obtained are
considered as one and the same tree, and we have only the first tree of fig. [3.8].
Again, on account of the restriction, the fourth tree of fig. [3.5] can be filled up in
one way only, and we have thus the sixth tree of fig. [3.8]. And thus, in general,
each figure of the second set can be formed at once from the corresponding figure
of the first set; or when the first set of figures is given, the expression for
P
Q
P
P
Q
UI
u
AV% 11
11
'J
U
Q P
R Q P
R
P
Q
R
R
Q
R
P
Q
Q
IR
Fro. 3.6.
FIG. 3.7.
Fro. 3.8.

42
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
YX...QPU can be formed directly without the assistance of the expression for
the preceding symbol X...QPU: the number of terms for the nth figure of the
second set is obviously 1.2.3...n, and consequently it is only necessary to count
the terms in order to ascertain that no admissible mode of filling up has been
omitted.
The number of parts in any one of the figures of the first set is much smaller
than the number of parts in the corresponding figure of the second set; and the
A,=
A2=
A3=
A, =
A, _
A,,=
A,=
A =
Av =
A, =
for r =
1
(1)
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
I
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
(2)
2
3
3
4
4
5
5
6
2
2
4
4
6
6
8
8
3
3
6
6
9
4
4
1
1
2
(4)
5
7
11
13
17
23
27
4
4
8
16
20
28
44
10
10
20
1
1
2
4
(9)
11
19
29
47
61
91
9
9
18
36
81
99
45
1
1
2
4
9
(20)
28
47
83
142
235
20
20
40
80
180
1
1
2
4
9
20
(48)
67
123
222
415
48
48
96
192
1
1
2
4
9
20
48
(115)
171
318
607
115
115
230
1
1
2
4
9
20
48
115
(286)
433
837
286
286
1
1
2
4
9
20
48
115
286
(719)
1123
719
1
2
4
9
20
48
115
286
719
1842
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
(1-x2)-'
(1 - x3)-2
(1- X T4
(1 - x s)-9
(1- x6)-2o
(1 - x'o)-7'9

TREES
43
law for the number of parts. i.e. for the number A. of the trees with it branches.
is a very singular one. To obtain this law, we must consider how the trees with n
branches can be formed by means of those of a smaller number of branches. A
tree with it branches has either a single main branch, or else two main branches.
three main branches. &c.... to n main branches. If the tree has one main branch, it
can only be formed by adding on to this main branch a tree with (n - 1) branches,
i.e. A. contains a part A.
If the tree has two main branches, then p + q being a
partition of n - 2. the tree can be formed b) adding on to one main branch a tree
of p branches, and to the other main branch a tree of q branches; the number of
trees so obtained is A,A,: this. however, assumes that the parts p and q are
unequal; if they are equal, it is easy to see that the number of trees is only
}A,,(A, + 1). Hence p + q being any partition of n - 2. A. contains the part A,A, if
p and q are unequal, and the pan IA,(A,+ 1) if p and q are equal. In like manner,
considering the trees with three main branches, then if p + q + r is any partition of
n - 3. A. contains the part A,A,A, if p. q, r are unequal; but if two of these
numbers, e.g. p and q. are equal, then the part LA,(A, + 1)A,; and if p. q, r are
all equal, then the part ,t,A,(A,+1)(A,+2); and so on, until lastly we have a
single tree with n main branches, or A. contains the part unity. A little
consideration will show that the preceding rule for the formation of the number
A. is completely expressed by the equation
(1-x)'(1-x'1_"4I-x') '1(1-x') A,...=1+A,x+A2x+A,x'*A.x'+&c.,
and consequently that we may. by means of this equation. calculate successively
for the different values of it the number A. of the trees with it branches. The
calculation may be effected very easily [as shown in the table opposite.)
I have had occasion, for another purpose. to consider the question of finding
the number of trees with a given number of free branches, bifurcations at least.
Thus when the number of free branches is three, the trees of the form in question
are those in the annexed figure, and the number is therefore two. It is not difficult
to see that we have in this case (B, being the number of such trees with r free
branches),
(1-x)-'(1-x') "'II-x) "'II-x") B'...= I-x_2B:r--'B:.r'-2B,x'+6:c.:
and a like process of dc%clopment gl%es:
B.=
I
2
5
12
33
90
for r=
2
3
4
5
6
7

44
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
I may mention, in conclusion, that I was led to the consideration of the
foregoing theory of trees by Professor Sylvester's researches on the change of the
independent variables in the differential calculus.
In 1859 Cayley wrote another paper concerned with the enumeration
of a special class of trees [4]. Roughly speaking, he considered rooted
trees in which each of the free branches is at the same distance from the
root. He showed that if p, denotes the number of such trees having it free
branches, then the 'exponential' generating function P, defined by
x
x2
x3
P(x) = P,+p_ 1+P3 2 +P. 3 +...
satisfies the equation
e`P(x) = 2P(x)- 1.
This simple equation may be solved for P(x) and the result yields the
coefficients p in terms of the familiar expansion of e'.
Despite his expertise in the techniques of enumeration, it was many
years before Cayley succeeded in solving the much harder problem of
counting unrooted trees-not until 1875, in fact. Before we discuss that
work, we shall describe a different approach to the study of trees, due to
the French mathematician Camille JORDAN in 1869 [3B].
Jordan considered 'assemblages' of lines intersecting at vertices, and he
used the term 'continuous' to signify that such an assemblage was
connected. He then defined the 'degree of continuity' of a continuous
assemblage to be n + 1, where n is the largest number of lines which can
be removed without disconnecting the system; in this terminology, a tree
is just an assemblage whose degree of continuity is one. Jordan proposed
to study connected graphs systematically, by discussing them in order of
their degree of continuity, beginning with trees, which have the least
continuity.
He began his paper by considering the important question of when two
graphs may be regarded as being the same. He observed that apparently
different graphs may be pared (translated here as 'similar'); that is, they
may be indistinguishable except for the names of their vertices and edges.
In modern terminology, two graphs are said to be isomorphic when there
is a one-to-one correspondence between their vertices, and a one-to-one
correspondence between their edges, with the property that correspond-
ing edges join corresponding vertices. An example is shown in Fig. 3.9,
where the vertex correspondence 1 H a, 2 4-I b, 3 *- c, 4 4-I d, and the
edge correspondence a
is H B, 'y - C 8 4-' D, E - E establish that
the two graphs are isomorphic. The graphs in this example are simple
(they have no loops or multiple edges) and in this situation it is clear that

TREES
45
1
4
2
d
3
Fic. 3.9.
the edge correspondence is determined by the vertex correspondence,
since there is at most one edge joining any pair of vertices. Consequently,
in the case of simple graphs, an isomorphism may be defined as a vertex
correspondence which preserves edges.
It may happen that a graph is isomorphic with itself, in the sense that a
relabelling of its vertices gives rise to an isomorphic graph. For example,
the relabelling 1 - 3, 2 - 4, 3 - 1, 4 -i 2 of the vertices of the first
graph in Fig. 3.9 is of this kind. An isomorphism of a graph with itself is
usually called an antomorphism of the graph. (In the case of a graph with
loops or multiple edges, the definition is slightly more complicated, since
a specific relabelling of the edges must be mentioned.) Of course, every
graph has the trivial automorphism which leaves all the labels of the
vertices unchanged, but there are many interesting graphs which have
non-trivial automorphisms. In the case of the complete graph K,,, every
permutation of the vertices is an automorphism, so that there are n!
automorphisms altogether. Jordan defined the 'order of symmetry' of a
graph to be the number of different automorphisms it has, and he gave
the orders of symmetry for various small graphs. He omitted to mention
the important fact that the automorphisms of a given graph form a group,
although he was one of the first mathematicians to give an account of the
theory of groups, and it is possible that the motivation for this paper
stemmed from his interest in that subject.
Jordan's main contribution to the theory of trees involved the notion of
a 'centre'. He showed that every tree has either one special vertex, or an
adjacent pair of special vertices, and that these vertices are, in a specific
sense, central. Furthermore, such vertices are useful when studying the
automorphisms of a tree, since any automorphism must preserve them.
3B
C. JORDAN
SUR LES ASSEMBLAGES DE LIGNES
[On assemblages of lines]
Journal jiir die Reine and Angewandte Mathematik 70 (1869), 185-190.
1. Let x, y, z, u, ... be any number of points, and xy, xz, yu, ... straight lines or
curves without self-intersections, such that each one joins just two of these points.
N

46
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
We shall call such a system an assemblage of lines, whose vertices are x, y, z,
u, .... Such an assemblage can be represented symbolically by the quadratic form
xv + xz + vu + ... , whose various terms represent the various lines of the assem-
blage. Furthermore. if a of these lines have the same ends x, y, then the form
representing the assemblage will contain the term xy a times.
Suppose now that xv. xz. ... are those terms of the quadratic form which
contains x; vu.... those which have one letter in common with one of the
former terms; uv.... those which have one letter in common with the preceding
ones, etc.... It is clear that the assemblage will be continuous if the set of terms
xy, xz..... vu, ... , uv, ... contains all the letters: if not, not. The assemblage will
be said to be (n+ 1)-fold continuous if it is possible to remove n of its lines
without destroying its continuity.
Two assemblages A and A' will be called similar if one can set up a
correspondence between their vertices and lines such that to each line xy in one
assemblage there corresponds a line x'y' in the other assemblage, where the
vertices x' and y' correspond respectively to x and y. In this case, if axy +
bxz + ... is the form representing A, then ax'y'+bx'z'+ ... will evidently be the
form representing A'.
An assemblage can be similar to itself from several points of view. In this case,
A' will be identified with A, and x', y', z', ... will be, in some order, identical
with
jr,
y,
z, .... Furthermore, the two forms axy+bxz+... and ax'y'+
bx'z'+... , representing the same network, will necessarily be equal. Thus the sub-
stitution which replaces x, y, z.... by x', y', z', ... does not change the form
axy + bxz +. . . . Conversely, let S be a substitution which leaves the form un-
changed, and suppose that it replaces x, y, z, ... by x', y', z', .... Let us assign to
the vertices x, y, z, ... the vertices x', y', z', ... . and to the a lines joining x to y
the corresponding lines joining the corresponding vertices x', y', these lines being
taken in any order; and so on ...; then the assemblage will be similar to itself.
The order of symmetry of the assemblage, that is the number of ways in which
it is similar to itself, is thus equal to 1.2...a.1.2...b...N. where N is the number of
substitutions like S.
2. Problem: What are the continuous assemblages, not similar to each other, which
can be constructed with m lines? What are the degree of continuity and the order of
symmetry of each one?
The following table gives the solution of this problem for m = 2, 3, or 4. Each
assemblage is described by its representative form. (The corresponding geometri-
cal figure is easily constructed.) We indicate the degree of continuity in Roman
numerals, and the order of symmetry in Arabic numerals.
m=2: {ah+ac
1:2
2ab
II;4
ab+bc+cd
f; 2
tab+bc
II; 2
m=3: ab+bc+bd
1: 6
3ab
111; 12
lab+bc+ca a
11:6
ah+hc+cd+de
1; 2
2abtbc+bd
11:4
ah+bc+cd+ce
1; 2
tab+hc+ad
11; 4
,n=4:, ah+hc+bd+be
1; 24 2ab+bc+ca
III; 4
ab+bc+cd+bd
11; 2
2ab+2bc
111; 8
ab+bc+cd+da 11:8
3ab+bc
111.6
2ab+bc+cd
II; 2
4ab
IV; 48

TREES
47
One could extend this table without difficulty to the case n = 5, and so on ... ,
but the difficulties quickly accumulate. It is easier to get general results, for
arbitrary in. by studying in turn assemblages of continuity one, two, three, ... .
3. Assemblages with continuity one. Let x be any vertex of the assemblage. One can
pick out various limbs in the assemblage, each one comprising one of the lines xy
xv..... meeting at the vertex x and those lines which can be reached from x by means
of that line. Let p,. p:.... denote the numbers of lines contained in the various
limbs, and let q denote the greatest of these numbers. The assemblage will
contain a vertex for which q lr #m or two vertices joined by a line for both of which
q = k( in + 1). For all other vertices in the assemblage we shall have q > }(m + 1).
For, let us suppose that x is chosen in such a way that q attains its minimum,
and, without loss of generality, take p, = q. Let xy,, x'y,, x"y,, ... be the lines
meeting at the vertex y,, and r, r', r', ... be the numbers of lines which can be
reached from y, by means of these lines: clearly we have
r=m-q+l,
r'+r'+...=q-1.
Thus q
j(m + 1). since otherwise each of r, r'. r".... would be strictly less than q,
contrary to hypothesis.
Having proved this, suppose first that q < in + 1). Let u be any vertex other
than x; xy,..... , zu the successive lines (k in number) by which u can be reached
from x. The number of lines which are reached from u via the line zu is clearly at
least k + in - p,., which is greater than #(m + 1), since k is at least 1 and p,. is at
most q.
If q = !(in + 1) the same proof applies, except that we may have both k = I and
p = q = J(m + 1), whence µ = 1, in which case the vertex u is just y,.
In the case when a tree has a single vertex satisfying Jordan's property
q -_ #m', we shall call this vertex the centroid of the tree; in the case when
there are two vertices satisfying 'q =
in + 1)'. we shall refer to them as
the bicentroid of the tree. Every tree has either a centroid or a bicentroid,
but not both.
In a subsequent section of his paper Jordan noticed a different proced-
ure which leads to a similar conclusion. For a given tree T, let r denote
the tree which results when all the free branches are removed from T;
repeating this process yields a sequence of trees T. T, T",... , which must
eventually reach either the tree with one vertex or the tree with two
vertices. These vertices are called the centre, or bicentre. of the original
tree T in the respective cases. To see that this construction is essentially
different from the preceding one, we may consider the tree in Fig. 3.10;
its centroid is the vertex A. whereas its centre is the vertex B.
Counting unrooted trees
Jordan's work was mentioned by Sylvester in an address [5] at the
Royal Institution of Great Britain on 23 January 1874. In addition to
stating that he had independently discovered the existence of the centre

48
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
B
FIG. 3.10.
and bicentre, he drew attention to a link between the study of trees and
some contemporary investigations in organic chemistry. Soon afterwards,
Cayley published a note [6] on this topic, which was followed by a long
paper presented to the meeting of the British Association in 1875 (7).
The latter paper contained a solution of the problem of counting un-
rooted trees, as well as some material dealing with applications to
chemistry (which we shall discuss in Chapter 4). The key to Cayley's
method of enumeration lay in the use of centres and bicentres.
Both Cayley and Sylvester made use of the work of Jordan, as may
be verified by reference to the pages of the Educational Times for 1877.
Since 1862 this journal had published a column of mathematical problems,
and among the contributors were many of the leading British mathemati-
cians of the day. Sometimes problems were posed in whimsical terms, and
occasionally the whimsy was compounded by being expressed in verse.
Some of the more important questions were collected, with additional
material, in a half-yearly publication entitled Mathematical questions, with
their solutions, from the "Educational Times". This publication is some-
times, misleadingly, referred to as the `Educational Times Reprints'.
Question 5208 [8] in the mathematical column of the Educational Times
was set by Sylvester, and it asked for a proof of the existence of Jordan's
centroid or bicentroid in a `ramification'-Sylvester's name for an un-
rooted tree. The editors appended some remarks by the author, to the
effect that
... this remarkable theorem in the pure theory of Colligation. or Cause
and Effect, is due to the transcendent genius of M. Camille Jordan; and that
it is worthy of notice that an infinite ramification serves to express the
possibility of Time, or the natural order of consecution of groups of
phenomena. being variable at will, by varying the position of the origin or
first cause; and thus greatly extends the common conception of time as a
determinate linear order of sequence of such groups.
Although the problem appeared on the first day of April, it is likely that
Sylvester's remarks were seriously intended, since he often wrote in a
similar vein. There followed a solution by Cayley, using a method rather
like that used by Jordan; he also remarked that the centroid and bicen-
troid are quite distinct from the centre and bicentre.
A few years later, in 1881, Cayley published a much shorter solution of

TREES
49
the problem of counting unrooted trees, in which he employed the
centroid and bicentroid, rather than the centre and bicentre. This paper is
reprinted here as extract [3C]. It will be seen that Cayley distinguished
the definitions by referring to them respectively as the `centre (or
bicentre) of length' and the `centre (or bicentre) of number'. It should
also be noted that Cayley here used 4 for what he termed A.,-, in [3A].
3C
A. CAYLEY
ON THE ANALYTICAL FORMS CALLED TREES
American Journal of Mathematics 4 (1881), 266-268.
In a tree of N knots, selecting any knot at pleasure as a root, the tree may be
regarded as springing from this root, and it is then called a root-tree. The same
tree thus presents itself in various forms as a root-tree; and if we consider the
different root-trees with N knots, these are not all of them distinct trees. We have
thus the two questions, to find the number of root-trees with N knots; and, to find
the number of distinct trees with N knots.
I have in my paper "On the Theory of the Analytical Forms called Trees" [3A],
given the solution of the first question; viz. if 4,. denotes the number of the
root-trees with N knots, then the successive numbers 01, 4%, 43, etc., are given by
the formula
461+x
+x203+...=(l-x)-°'(1-x2) 6:0-x3) *'..
viz. we thus find
suffix of m
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
0 = 1
1
2
4
9 20 48
115 286 719
1842
4766
12486.
And I have in the paper "On the analytical forms called Trees, with application
to the theory of chemical combinations" [7], also shown how by the consideration
of the centre or bicentre "of length" we can obtain formulae for the number of
central and bicentral trees, that is, for the number of distinct trees, with N knots:
the numerical result obtained for the total number of distinct trees with N knots is
given as follows:
No. of Knots
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
No. of Central Trees
1
0
1
1
2
3
7
12
27
55
127
284
682
- Bicentral
"
0
1
0
1
1
3
4
11
20
51
108
267
619
Total
1
1
1
2
3
6
11
23
47
106
235
551
1301.
But a more simple solution is obtained by the consideration of the centre or
bicentre "of number". A tree of an odd number N of knots has a centre of

50
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
number, and a tree of an even number N of knots has a centre or else a bicentre
of number. To explain this notion (due to M. Camille Jordan) we consider the
branches which proceed from any knot, and (excluding always this knot itself) we
count the number of the knots upon the several branches; say these numbers are
a, 0, y, S, e, etc., where of course a+(3+y+S+e+ etc.=N-1. If N is even we
may have, say a=§N; and then 19 +y+S+e+etc.=#N-1, viz. a is larger by
unity than the sum of the remaining numbers: the branch with a knots, or the
number a. is said to be "merely dominant". If N be odd, we cannot of course have
a = IN, but we may have a > 1N; here a exceeds by 2 at least the sum of the
other numbers; and the branch with a knots, or the number a, is said to be
"predominant". In every other case, viz. in the case where each number a is less
than IN, (and where consequently the largest number a does not exceed the sum
of the remaining numbers), the several branches, or the numbers a, 'S, y, etc., are
said to be subequal. And we have the theorem. First, when N is odd, there is
always one knot (and only one knot) for which the branches are subequal: such
knot is called the centre of number. Secondly, when N is even, either there is one
knot (and only one knot) for which the branches are subequal: and such knot is
then called the centre of number; or else there is no such knot, but there are two
adjacent knots (and no other knot) each having a merely-dominant branch: such
two knots are called the bicentre of number, and each of them separately is a
half-centre.
Considering now the trees with N knots as springing from a centre or a bicentre
of number, and writing ,ys for the whole number of distinct trees with N knots,
we readily obtain these in terms of the foregoing numbers fit. 42, 463, etc., viz. we
have
01=
1,
002=101(401 +1),
03=
coeff. x2 in (1-x)-'%
}02(4&2 +1)+coeff. x' in (1-xY".
coeff. x' in (1-x)-',(1-x) `_.
416=1-63(03+1)+coeff. x5 in (1-x)-',(1-x2)-'2,
07 =
coeff. x' in (1- x)-'%(1- x)-'2(1- x3)-'2,
and so on. the law being obvious. And the formulae are at once seen to be true.
Thus for N = 6, the formula is
Jp6= d+3(4i +1)+I4 (4
We have 4S, root-trees with 3 knots, and by simply joining together any two of
them, treating the two roots as a bicentre, we have all the bicentral trees with 6
knots: this accounts for the term f4+3(03+ 1). Again, we have 01 root-trees with I
knot, .02 root-trees with 2 knots; and with a given knot as centre, and the
partitions (2.2. 1), (2. 1. 1. 1). (1. 1, 1, 1. 1) successively, we build up the central
trees of 6 knots, viz. (1) we take as branches any two b2's and any one 0,; (2)
any one 12 and any three 41's; (3) any five l,'s; the partitions in question being
all the partitions of 5 with no part greater than 2. that is, all the partitions with
subequal parts. We easily obtain
suffix of 0
1 2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Jr = 1
1
1
2
3
6
11
23
47
106
235
551
1301

TREES
51
agreeing with the results obtained by the much more complicated formulae of the
paper of 1875.
Counting labelled trees
The last extract in this chapter is concerned with another tree-counting
problem. In this problem we are given in vertices, and we are asked to
find the number t" of ways of joining these vertices to form a tree; for
example, there are t4 = 16 trees on four given vertices (see Fig. 3.11).
As may be inferred from the example, two trees are now to be
regarded as distinct when their edges are different, even though they may
be isomorphic as abstract graphs. (In fact, there are only two non-
isomorphic kinds of tree shown in Fig. 3.11.) We emphasize this distinc-
tion by referring to the present problem as that of counting labelled trees.
S/IzNXszX
Fir. 3.11.
The solution was first given in 1889, once again by Cayley [9]; his
formula for t" is a very simple one, namely,
In = n"-'.
Calculations equivalent to a proof of this formula had been presented
some years earlier by C. W. Borchardt [10. p. 12 11 and Sylvester [11. p.
55], but neither of these authors was in any way concerned with the
problem in the particular guise considered here.
Cayley's proof of the formula for t" was somewhat less than complete.
His paper began as follows:
The number of trees which can be formed with n + 1 given knots a, S,
y, ... is = (n + 1)"_'; for instance n = 3, the number of trees with the 4 given
knots a. S, y, S is 42 = 16, for in the first form shown in the figure the a. S, y, S
may be arranged in 12 different orders (aSyS being regarded as equivalent
to Sypa ), and in the second form any one of the 4 knots a, S, y, S may
be in the place occupied by the a: the whole number is thus 12+4,= 16.
Considering for greater clearness a larger value of n, say it = 5, I state the
particular case of the theorem as follows:
No. of trees (a, S, y. S, e, ) = No. of terms of (a + S + y + S + e + 4)`aSy8r
.
= 6'. = 1296,

52
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
12-4
16
and it will be at once seen that the proof given for this particular case is
applicable for any value whatever of n.
Nevertheless,
it is not at all obvious how the proof which he then
proceeded to give for the case n = 5 can be extended to larger values of it,
and so we shall not reproduce it here. Instead, we shall present an
alternative proof given some years later by the German mathematician
Heinz PRUFER [3D]. Priifer's interest in the problem arose from a prob-
lem on permutations; the details of this need not concern us, and the
paper can be understood without knowing them. It should be noted that
Priifer was apparently quite unaware of the work of Cayley, and also of
the terminology of graph theory, which was by that time (1918) fairly
extensive.
The method described by Priifer depends on the construction of an
explicit one-to-one correspondence between the
set of sequences
{ a,, a2, ... , a,, _ 2}, in which each a, is one of the it given vertices, and the
set of trees which can be constructed on these vertices. Since there are
exactly n"-2 sequences of the type just described, the required result
follows immediately.
3D
H. PRUFER
NEUER BEWEIS EINES SATZES UBER PERMUTATIONEN
(A new proof of a theorem on permutations)
Archiv der Mathematik and Physik (3) 27 (1918). 142-144.
Herr Dziobek [ 121 has Lnnounced a theorem which can be formulated as
follows:
The number of ways of obtaining all possible permutations on n symbols using
n - I transpositions is exactly equal to n"-'.
Herr Dziobek proved his theorem by setting up a recursion formula for
calculating the required number. His proof that the number n"-' satisfies this
recursion formula is not particularly simple, and it is perhaps of interest to look at
another proof which depends entirely on combinatorial considerations. I shall
express it in an intuitive geometrical form, as suggested by Professor Schur in a
problem for the Mathematics Seminar at the University of Berlin.

TREES
53
Consider a country with n towns. These towns must be connected by a railway
network of n - I lines (the smallest possible number) in such a way that one can get
from each town to every other town. There are n' different railway networks of this
kind
By a line, we mean a stretch of railway which connects two towns.
The theorem can be proved by assigning to each railway network, in a unique
way, a symbol {a,, as, ... , a, z}. whose n - 2 elements can be selected independ-
ently from any of the numbers 1. 2..... n. There are n
such symbols, and
this fact, together with the one-to-one correspondence between networks and
symbols, will complete the proof.
In the case n = 2 we assign the empty symbol to the only possible network
connecting the two towns. If n > 2. we denote the towns by the numbers 1 . 2, ... ,
n and specify them in a fixed sequence. The towns at which only one line
terminates we call the endpoints of the network. In every net there are endpoints.
For otherwise there would be at least two lines terminating at each town; and
2n
there would be at least 2 = n lines.
In order to define, for n > 2, the symbol belonging to a given net, one proceeds
as follows:
Let b, be the first town which is an endpoint of the net, and a, the town which
is directly joined to b,. Then a, is the first element of the symbol. We now strike
out the town b, and the line a, b,. There remains a net containing n - 2 lines
which connect n -I towns in such a way that one can get from each town to any
other.
If also n - 1 > 2, then one determines the town a2 with which the first endpoint
b2 of the new net is directly connected. We take a2 as the next element of the
symbol. Then we strike out the town b2 and the line a2b2. We obtain a net with
n-3 lines and the same properties.
We continue this procedure until we finally obtain a net with only one line
joining 2 towns. The symbol is then complete.
For example:
Nets:
Svmbotc:
3. 3.3.3
12,3.4,90,
2.4.6.41
Each town at which m lines terminate occurs exactly m -1 times in the symbol.
For, in the formation of the symbol by successively removing lines, a town
appears in the symbol only when one of its incident edges is removed, except in
the case that this edge is the last one having that town as endpoint.
Conversely, if we are given a particular symbol {a,, a2..... a,_:} other than the
empty symbol, then we write down the numbers 1, 2, ..., n and find the first
number which does not appear in the symbol. Let this be b,. Then we connect the

54
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
towns b, and a, by a line. We now strike out the first clement of the symbol and
the number b,.
If (a2, a,, ....
is also not the empty symbol, then we find b2, the first of
the n - I remaining numbers which does not appear in the symbol, and connect the
towns b2 and a2. Then we strike out the number b2 and the element a2 in the
symbol.
In this way we eventually obtain the empty symbol. When that happens, we join
the last two towns not yet crossed out.
That the system of lines obtained by this construction actually is a net. and that
this net and no other actually gives rise to the given symbol, follows by an
induction argument. For, if a net is represented by a symbol, then the towns which
do not appear in the symbol are just the endpoints of the net. As the line b,a, is
the only line ending at b,, it must appear in the net. But we may assume that we
have proved that the symbol (a2, a,. ... ,
corresponds to just one net
connecting all the towns except b,, and that this net was obtained by the
construction, so that we also get the truth of the proposition for the symbol
(a a;, .... a. - ,}.
References
I.
ST-kUL T, G. K. C. Gcomerrie der Loge. Niirnberg. 1847.
2. KIRCHHOFF. G. R. Uber die Aufiosung der Gleichungen. auf welche man bei der
Untersuchung der linearen Vertheilung galvanischer Strome gefiihrt wird. Ann. Phys.
Chern. 72 (1847). 497-508 = Ges. Abk, 22-33. [8AJ
3. SYLVESTh-R.1. J. On differential transformation and the reversion of serieses. Proc. Roy.
Soc. London 7 (1854-5). 219-223 = Mark Papers. Vol. 2. 50-54.
4. CAYLEY, A. On the theory of the analytical forms called trees-pan II. Phil. Mag. (4)
18 (1859). 374-378 = Afath. Papers. Vol. 4. 112-115.
5. SYLVESTER. J. J. On recent discoveries in mechanical conversion of motion. Proc. Roy.
Inst. Gt. Brit. 7 1187-3-5), 179-198 =Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 7-25.
6. CAYLEY, A. On the mathematical theory of isomers. Phil. Mag. (4) 47 (1874).
444-446 = Math. Papers, Vol. 9. 202-204. [48]
7. CAYLEY, A. On the analytical forms called trees, with application to the theory of
chemical combinations. Rep. Brit. Assoc. Advance. Sci. 45 (1875), 257-305 = Mask
Papers, Vol. 9. 427-460.
8. SYLVESTER. J. J. Question 5208. Mask Quest Solut Educ Trines 27 (1877), 81.
9. CAYLFY, A. A theorem on trees. Quart. J. Pure AppL Math. 23 (1889), 376-378=
Afath. Papers. Vol. 13, 26-28.
10. BORCHARDT. C. W. Uber eine der Interpolation entsprechende Darstellung der
Eliminations-Resultante. J. Reine Angew. Mask 57 (1860), 111-121.
11. SYLVESTER. J. J. On the change of systems of independent variables. Quart. J. Pure
Appl. Math. 1 (1857). 42-56, 126-134 = Math. Papers, Vol. 2, 65-85.
12. DzIoKI K. O. Eine Formel der Substitutionsthcorie. Sitzungsber. Berliner Math. Ges. 17
(1917). 64-67.

4
Chemical Graphs
d
J. J. SYLVESTER (1814-97)
THE interchange of ideas between two different branches of science is
often highly beneficial to both of them. The aim of this chapter is to
describe how Cayley related his work on trees to the studies of chemical
composition which were being carried on at the same time-in particular,
to the investigation of pairs of compounds having the same chemical
composition, but different properties. This fusion of mathematical and
chemical ideas inspired some of the terminology which is now standard in
graph theory, including the word 'graph' itself.
Graphic formulae in chemistry
We shall begin by describing briefly some of the fundamental advances
which were made in theoretical chemistry during the nineteenth century.
By 1850 it was becoming dear that chemical compounds are formed from
constituent elements, and that these elements combine together in certain
fixed proportions. Consequently, chemical formulae, such as H2O for
water and C2H5OH for ethyl alcohol, were well established. It was thus
natural that chemists should speculate on the mechanisms underlying the
laws of chemical combination. There is a well-known account of how
inspiration came to the German chemist F.A. Kekule in 1854, on the top
of a London omnibus [1]:
During my stay in London I lived for a long time in Clapham Road, near
to the common. I often spent the evenings with my friend Hugo Muller in
Islington, at the opposite end of that vast town. There we talked about

56
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
many things but most often of our beloved chemistry. One fine summer day
I was riding once again on the last omnibus through the deserted streets of
the metropolis, at other times so crowded-'outside'. on the roof of the
omnibus, as usual. I sank into a day-dream. There before my eyes gambol-
led the atoms. I had always seen them in motion, those tiny beings, but I had
never succeeded in discerning the nature of their motion. This day I saw how
frequently two smaller atoms joined themselves together like a loving
couple; how larger ones embraced two smaller ones, how still larger ones
seized three and even four of the smaller ones, and how the whole twisted
in a whirling dance. I saw how the larger ones formed a line and dragged
along still smaller ones at the ends of the chain. I saw what our past master
Kopp, my highly respected teacher and friend, described to us in such a
delightful manner in his 'Molecularwelt', but I saw it long before him. The
cry of the conductor 'Clapham Road' roused me from my musings, but I
stayed up part of the night in order to commit to paper at least the outlines
of that vision. In this way began the structure theory.
Kekule was not the only person to think in these terms. Other claims
for priority have been made by (or for) several chemists: A. M. But-
lerov, a Russian; A. S. Couper, a Soot; and Edward FRANxt.AND, who
wrote a paper on 'the doctrine of atomicity' in 1852. It is not for us to
discuss these rival claims in detail here, but the reader interested in
knowing more about them is recommended to refer to the book by C. A.
Russell [2].
From the confused dreams and imaginings of Kekule and his contem-
poraries sprang the need to represent chemical compounds by diagrams.
In fact, diagrams had been used as early as 1789 by William Higgins [3],
who employed figures like d\S,
representing ferrous sulphate
(FeSOs), where I stands for iron, S stands for sulphur, and D and d stand
for dephlogisticated air (oxygen). But Higgins was ahead of his time, and
his work had little influence on the development of chemical theory.
However, by the middle of the nineteenth century, ideas about atoms and
the way they combine had been clarified to the point where meaningful
diagrams of chemical molecules could be drawn. The introduction of
such diagrams was closely related to the evolution of one of the most
important of these new ideas-the concept of valency, which arose from
the known facts about chemical equivalents of elements. For example, it
was known that in marsh-gas, CHs, four equivalents of hydrogen com-
bined with one equivalent of carbon; this could be explained by supposing
that each carbon atom has four 'bonds' by which it may be linked to other
atoms, whereas each hydrogen atom has just one bond. Nowadays we
express this fact by saying that carbon has valency four and hydrogen has
valency one. The use of the same terminology in graph theory is a result
of the link between chemistry and graph theory, which will become clear
in the course of this chapter.

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
57
Loschmidt
FIG. 4.1.
Kckuk
In Fig. 4.1 we illustrate three early attempts to represent molecules
diagrammatically; the substance represented is ethyl alcohol, C2HsOH.
The first diagram is due to Couper, and is typical of the notation he
introduced in 1858 [4]. (The presence of two oxygen atoms is due to his
mistaken belief that the atomic weight of oxygen was 8. rather than the
correct value,
16.)
His system had several disadvantages, the most
serious of which was the lack of provision for the use of multiple bonds.
Nevertheless, his use of dotted lines to represent bonds was a helpful
technique, and the resulting system was undoubtedly superior to the other
two, due to the Austrian chemist J. Loschmidt and to Kekuld. Los-
chmidt's system dates from 1861 [5]. He used circles of different sizes to
represent different atoms, and indicated the presence of a bond by
making the circles touch; multiple bonds were represented by means of
overlapping circles. Kekule's system was introduced in a footnote to the
first volume of his Lehrbuch der organischen Chemie [6], which also
appeared in 1861. Univalent atoms were represented by circles, while
atoms of higher valency were shown as 'sausages', with a number of
bulges corresponding to the valency.
An important advance occurred in 1864, when the Edinburgh chemist
Alexander CRUM BROWN introduced his version of the 'graphic notation'
[7]. Each atom was shown separately, represented by a letter enclosed in
a circle, and all single and multiple bonds were marked by lines joining
the circles (Fig. 4.2). Crum Brown's system is essentially the one in use
today, except that the circles are now usually omitted.
1H
4
0
O
H
b
b
Succinic acid
Pvrotartaric acid
FIG. 4.2.

58
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
At first, Crum Brown's work was available only in an Edinburgh
journal, but in 1866 his ideas became accessible to a wider readership. In
that year Frankland published an introductory text called Lecture notes for
chemical students, which did much to propagate Crum Brown's system.
The first extract [4A] in this chapter is a short section from Frankland's
book. After explaining the representation of atoms and bonds by means of
circles with lines emanating from them, he went on to describe the
graphic notation.
4A
E. FRANKLAND
GRAPHIC NOTATION
Lecture notes for chemical students. London, 1866.
This mode of notation, although far too cumbrous for general use, is invaluable
for clearly showing the arrangement of the individual atoms of a chemical
compound. It is true that it expresses nothing more than the symbolic notation of
the same compound, if the latter be written and understood as above described;
nevertheless the graphic form affords most important assistance, both in fixing
upon the mind the true meaning of symbolic formulae, and also in making
comparatively easy of comprehension the internal arrangement of the very
complex molecules frequently met with both in mineral and organic compounds.
It is also of especial value in rendering evident the causes of isomerism in organic
bodies.
Graphic notation, like the above method of symbolic notation, is founded
almost entirely upon the doctrine of atomicity, and consists in representing,
graphically, the mode in which every bond in a chemical compound is disposed of.
Inasmuch, however, as the principles involved are precisely the same as those
already described under the heads of SYMBOLIC NOTATION and ATOMIC-
ITY OF ELEMENTS, it is unnecessary here to do more than give the following
comparative examples of symbolic and graphic formulae:-
Symbolic.
Graphic.
Water
OH:.
Nitric acid
NO:Ho.
Ammonic chloride
NH.CI.
H
O
H

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
59
Sulphuric anhydride
SO..
Sulphuric acid
SO:Ho2.
Carbonic anhydride
CO2.
Potassic carbonate
Marsh-gas
COKo2.
CH..
Ammonic carbonate
COAmo..
Zincic nitrate
NO:O
Zn"
NOZO
H
0
H
It must be carefully borne in mind that these graphic formulae are intended to
represent neither the shape of the molecules, nor the relative position of the
constituent atoms. The lines connecting the different atoms of a compound, and
which might with equal propriety be drawn in any other direction, provided they
connected together the same elements, serve only to show the definite disposal of
the bonds: thus the formula for nitric acid indicates that two of the three
constituent atoms of oxygen are combined with nitrogen alone, and are conse-
quently united to that element by both their bonds, whilst the third oxygen atom
is combined both with nitrogen and hydrogen.
The lines connecting the different atoms of a compound are but crude symbols
of the bonds of union between them; and it is scarcely necessary to remark that
no such material connexions exist, the bonds which actually hold together the
atoms of a compound being in all probability, as regards their nature, much more
like those which connect the members of our solar system.
It may also be here mentioned that graphic, like symbolic formulae, are purely
statical representations of chemical compounds, they take no cognizance of the
K
o
C
o
K
O
H
H
H
H
H
N
O
C
O
N
H

60
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
amount of potential energy associated with the different elements. Thus in the
formulae for marsh-gas and carbonic anhydride. there is no indication that the
molecule of the first compound contains a vast store of force, whilst the last is
comparatively a powerless molecule.
Isomerism
Crum Brown's notation was soon accepted everywhere, after some
resistance from Kekule and others. Its acceptance was partly due to its
success in explaining one strange experimental fact-that there are pairs
of substances which have the same chemical composition, although their
physical properties are different. The graphic notation made it plain that
this is because the atoms are arranged in different ways in the different
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
O
H
Fla. 4.3.
H
H
H
substances. For example, the original paper of 1864 [7] gave the graphic
formulae (Fig. 4.3) for two substances with the composition C3H7OH.
known to Crum Brown as propylic alcohol and Friedel's alcohol.
This is an instance of what is now called isomerism, and the two
compounds are known as isomers. in many cases there are more than two
isomers with the same constitutional formula. By 1874, the phenomenon
and its explanation in terms of the graphic notation were widely known,
and Cayley wrote a paper [4B] explaining how his earlier work on trees
could usefully be applied to the subject.
4B
A. CAYLEY
ON THE MATHEMATICAL THEORY OF ISOMERS
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
O
H
Philosophical Magazine (4) 47 (1874). 444-446.
1 consider a "diagram." viz. a set of points H. 0, N, C, &c. (any number of
each). connected by links into a single assemblage under the condition that

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
61
through each H there passes not more than one link, through each 0 not more
than two links, through each N not more than three links, through each C not
more than four links. Of course through every point there passes at least one link,
or the points would not be connected into a single assemblage.
In such a diagram each point having its full number of links is saturate, or
nilvalent: in particular, each point H is saturate. A point not having its full
number of links is univalent, bivalent, or trivalent, according as it wants one, two,
or three of its full number of links. If every point is saturate the diagram is
saturate, or nilvalent; or, say, it is a "plerogram"; but if the diagram is susceptible
of n more links, then it is n-valent; viz. the valency of the diagram is the sum of
the valencies of the component points.
Since each H is connected by a single link (and therefore to a point 0, C &c.
as the case may be, but not to another point H), we may without breaking up the
diagram remove all the points H with the links belonging to them, and thus obtain
a diagram without any points H: such a diagram may be termed a "kenogram":
the valency is obviously that of the original diagram plus the number of removed
H's.
If from a kenogram, we remove every point 0, C &c. connected with the rest
of the diagram by a single link only (each with the link belonging to it), and so on
indefinitely as long as the process is practicable, we arrive at last at a diagram in
which every point 0, C, &c. is connected with the rest of the diagram by two links
at least: this may be called a "mere kenogram."
Each or any point of a mere kenogram may be made the origin of a "ramifica-
tion"; viz. we have here links branching out from the original point, and then
again from the derived points, and so on any number of times, and never again
uniting. We can thus from the mere kenogram obtain (in an infinite variety of
ways) a diagram. The diagram completely determines the mere kenogram; and
consequently two diagrams cannot be identical unless they have the same mere
kenogram. Observe that the mere kenogram may evanesce altogether; viz. this
will be the case if the diagram or kenogram is a simple ramification.
A ramification of n points C is (2 n + 2)-valent: in fact, this is so in the most
simple case it = 1; and admitting it to be true for any value of n, it is at once seen
to be true for the next succeeding value. But no kenogram of points C is so much
as (2 n + 2)-valent; for instance, 3 points C linked into a triangle, instead of being
8-valent are only 6-valent. We have therefore plerograms of n points C and
2n+2 points H. say plerograms
C"HZ"'2; and in any such plerogram the
kenogram is of necessity a ramification of it points C; viz. the different cases of
such ramifications are
1
n=2
n=3
n=4
I
I
I \/
(at
(2)
(2)
(7)
(r3)

62
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
n-5
n=6
(,I
1$)
(y)
(71
(5)
(y)
(d)
where the mathematical question of the determination of such forms belongs to
the class of questions considered in my paper "On the Theory of the Analytical
Forms called Trees" [3A]. [8]. and in some papers on Partitions in the same
Journal. (The distinction in the diagrams of asterisks and dots is to be in the first
instance disregarded; it is made in reference to what follows, the explanation as to
the allotrious points.)
The different forms of univalent diagrams C"V"'' arc obtained from the same
ramifications by adding to each of them all but one of the 2n +2 points H; that is.
by adding to each point C except one its full number of points H, and to the
excepted point one less than the full number of points H. The excepted point C
must therefore be univalent at least; viz. it cannot be a saturate point, which
presents itself for example in the diagrams n = 5(y) and it = 6(8). And in order to
count the number of distinct forms (for the diagrams C"HZ"''), we must in each
of the above ramifications consider what is the number of distinct lasses into
which the points group themselves, or. say, the number of "allotrious" points. For
instance, in the ramification it = 3 there are two classes only; viz. a point is either
terminal or medial; or. say. the number of allotrious points is =2: this is shown in
the diagrams by means of the asterisks; so that in each case the points which may
be considered allotrious are represented by asterisks, and the number of asterisks
is equal to the number of allotrious points.
Thus. number of univalent diagrams C°H'"-':
n=
it = 3,
it =4, (a)2; (P)2:
it = 5; (a);: (13)4; Iy)l;
it = 6, (a 13; (W; (y)2; (6)3;
2
together 4
together
8
together 13
where it will be observed that. n = 5(y), and it =6(S). the numbers of allotrious
points are 2 and 4 respectively: but since in each of these cases one point is
saturate. they give only the numbers I and 3 respectively. It might be mathemati-
cally possible to obtain a general solution; but there would be little use in this;
and for even the next succeeding case, No. of bivalent diagrams C"H"; the
extreme complexity of the question would, it is probable, prevent the attainment
of a general solution.

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
63
Passing to the chemical signification of the formulae, and instead of the radicals
C"N2n' considering the corresponding alcohols C"H2w'1.OH. then. n = 1. 2. 3,
4, the numbers of known alcohols are 1, 1, 2. 4. agreeing with the foregoing
theoretic number (see [91); but n = 4, the number of known alcohols is =2.
instead of the foregoing theoretic number 8. It is, of course, no objection to the
theory that the number of theoretic forms should exceed the number of known
compounds; the missing ones may be simply unknown; or they may be only
capable of existing under conceivable, but unattained, physical conditions (for
instance, of temperature); and if defect from the theoretic number of compounds
can be thus accounted for, the theory holds good without modification. But it is
also possible that the diagrams, in order that they may represent chemical
compounds, may be subject to some as yet undetermined conditions, %iL. in this
case the theory would stand good as far as it goes. but would require modification.
Despite his original opinion that 'there would be little use' in obtaining
an expression for the number of diagrams with a given carbon content,
Cayley later wrote further papers on this problem. We shall illustrate his
work by reference to the series of compounds with constitutional formula
C"H2".2. for n = 1, 2, ... ; these compounds are known as paraffins or
alkanes.
Cayley's interest was aroused by the fact that the graphic formulae for
paraffins (and some other series of compounds) are representations of
trees. This is not the case for all molecules, a famous example being the
hexagonal formula for benzene discovered by Kekule. To check the result
for the paraffins, we note that each carbon atom has four bonds and each
hydrogen one, and every bond has two ends, so that the total number of
bonds is
214.n + 1.(2n +2)} = 3n + 1.
Since there are 3 n + 2 atoms in all, and since this is one more than the
number of bonds, the graphic formula must be a tree. For a given value of
n there may be several trees corresponding to
for example, Fig.
4.4 depicts the molecules of butane and isobutane. both having the
0
9
Y
FIG. 4.4.

64
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
formula C.H,o. By ignoring the hydrogen atoms. Cayley obtained a tree
made up entirely of carbon atoms, in which the valency of each atom is
at most four. (These 'carbon-trees' are drawn with heavier lines in Fig.
4.4.) This procedure is reversible, since from any carbon-tree we may
obtain a paraffin by joining to each carbon atom enough hydrogen atoms
to ensure that its valency is four. It follows that the problem of finding the
number of different paraffins with the formula
is essentially the
same as the problem of counting unrooted trees with n vertices, where no
vertex has valency exceeding four.
In 1875, Cayley discovered a systematic method of counting these
carbon-trees. He presented his method in a lengthy paper [10] read to the
British Association, and at the same time he outlined a solution of the
general problem of counting unrooted trees. The computations involved
were laborious, and his paper contained many pages of tabulated calcula-
tions. Nevertheless, he did succeed in finding the numbers of carbon-trees
with n vertices for values up to n = 11. Subsequently he published more
papers on this problem [11], [ 12], but he was unable to obtain a neat or
compact solution. Further progress required more sophisticated techni-
ques, which we shall outline in the final section of this chapter. But first,
we shall describe how the term 'graph' came into existence.
Clifford, Sylvester, and the term 'graph'
Cayley's long paper on trees and isomerism was not the only paper of
graphical significance presented to the British Association at their meet-
ing in Bristol in 1875. In a report [13] of the transactions of the
mathematical section we read that:
Professor Clifford astonished the Section by some remarkable applications
of Grassman's "polar multiplication" defined by the law that ha is minus ab.
He applied it to the graphical representation of invariants, to the expan-
sion of unsymmetrical functions, and to the notation of matrices, illustrating
his remarks by drawings representing atoms hung together in various ways.
The astonishing gentleman was William Kingdon CLIFFORD, already (at
the age of thirty) a leading figure on the British mathematical scene. The
main subject of his talk was the study of the invariants of binary
quantics. We do not need to go into the technicalities of this subject here;
it is sufficient to say that a binary quantic is an homogeneous expression
in two variables, such as ax 3 + 3bx 2 y + 3cxy 2 + dY3, and that an invariant is
a function of the coefficients a, b, c, d which is unaltered by certain
transformations of the variables. Both Cayley and Sylvester had made
important contributions to the study of invariants, and Clifford introduced
the fashionable graphic notation into the subject.
In 1876 Svlvester crossed the Atlantic to become the first Professor of

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
65
Mathematics in the newly-founded Johns Hopkins University in Balti-
more. The years he spent in Baltimore were happy ones, and his fertile
imagination brought forth many new ideas, some good, and some not so
good. In particular, he conceived the notion that there is a relationship
between chemistry and algebra, exemplified by the use of graphic nota-
tion. He published a note on his ideas in February 1878, in the scientific
journal Nature [4C]. In this note the word 'graph' is used in our sense for
the first time; it is clearly derived from the chemical 'graphic notation'. So
the credit (or blame) for the use of this term must be ascribed to
Sylvester.
4C
J. J. SYLVESTER
CHEMISTRY AND ALGEBRA
Nature 17 (1877-8), 284.
It may not be wholly without interest to some of the readers of Nature to be
made acquainted with an analogy that has recently forcibly impressed me between
branches of human knowledge apparently so dissimilar as modern chemistry and
modern algebra.
I have found
it of great
utility in explaining to non-
mathematicians the nature of the investigations which algebraists are at present
busily at work upon to make out the so-called Grundformen or irreducible forms
appurtenant to binary quantics taken singly or in systems, and I have also found
that it may be used as an instrument of investigation in purely algebraical
inquiries. So much is this the case that I hardly ever take up Dr. Frankland's
exceedingly valuable Notes for Chemical Students, which are drawn up exclusively
on the basis of Kekule's exquisite conception of valence, without deriving sugges-
tions for new researches in the theory of algebraical forms. I will confine myself to a
statement of the grounds of the analogy, referring those who may feel an interest
in the subject and are desirous for further information about it to a memoir which
I have written upon it for the new American Journal of Pure and Applied
Mathematics, the first number of which will appear early in February.
The analogy is between atoms and binary quantics exclusively.
I compare every binary quantic with a chemical atom. The number of factors
(or rays, as they may be regarded by an obvious geometrical interpretation) in a
binary quantic is the analogue of the number of bonds, or the valence, as it is
termed, of a chemical atom.
Thus a linear form may be regarded as a monad atom, a quadratic form as a
duad, a cubic form as a triad, and so on.
An invariant of a system of binary quantics of various degrees is the analogue
of a chemical substance composed of atoms of corresponding valences.
The order of such invariant in each set of coefficients is the same as the number
of atoms of the corresponding valence in the chemical compound.
A co-variant is the analogue of an (organic or inorganic) compound radical. The

66
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
orders in the several sets of coefficients corresponding, as for invariants, to the
respective valences of the atoms, the free valence of the compound radical then
becomes identical with the degree of the co-variant in the variables.
The weight of an invariant is identical with the number of the bonds in the
chemicograph of the analogous chemical substance, and the weight of the leading
term (or basic differentiant) of a co-variant is the same as the number of bonds in
the chemicograph of the analogous compound radical. Every invariant and
covariant thus becomes expressible by a graph precisely identical with a Kekulean
diagram or chemicograph. But not every chemicograph is an algebraical one. I
show that by an application of the algebraical law of reciprocity every algebraical
graph of a given invariant will represent the constitution in terms of the roots of a
quantic of a type reciprocal to that of the given invariant of an invariant belonging
to that reciprocal type. I give a rule for the geometrical multiplication of graphs,
that is. for constructing a graph to the product of in- or co-variants whose
separate graphs are given. I have also ventured upon a hypothesis which, whilst in
nowise interfering with existing chemicographical constructions, accounts for the
seeming anomaly of the isolated existence as "monad molecules" of mercury,
zinc, and arsenic-and gives a rational explanation of the "mutual saturation of
bonds".
I have thus been led to see more clearly than ever I did before the existence of
a common ground to the new mechanism, the new chemistry, and the new
algebra. Underlying all these is the theory of pure colligation. which applies
undistinguishably to the three great theories, all initiated within the last third of a
century or thereabouts by Eisenstein, Kekule, and Peaucellier.
Sylvester's paper in the American Journal of Mathematics (which he
himself had founded) was entitled 'On an application of the new atomic
theory to the graphical representation of the invariants and covariants of
binary quantics' [141. In it, his ideas are developed at length. A few
sentences from one of the appendices are worth quoting:
Chemistry has the same quickening and suggestive influence upon the
algebraist as a visit to the Royal Academy, or the old masters may be
supposed to have on a Browning or a Tennyson. Indeed it seems to me that
an exact homology exists between painting and poetry on the one hand and
modern chemistry and modern algebra on the other. In poetry and algebra
we base the pure idea elaborated and expressed through the sehide of
language.
in painting and chemistry
the idea enveloped
in
matter.
depending in part on manual processes and the resources of art for its due
manifestation.
In spite of these enthusiastic sentiments, it is worth noting that Sylves-
ter was somewhat nervous of the reception his paper might receive. In a
letter to Simon Newcomh 115. p. 134]. he wrote:
I feel anxious as to how it will he received as it will be thought by many
strained and over-fanciful. It is more a 'reverie' than a regular mathematical
paper. I have however added some supplementary mathematical matter
which will
I hope serve to rescue the chemical portion from absolute

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
67
contempt. It may at the worst serve to suggest to chemists and Algebraists
that they may have something to learn from each other.
A debate on the merits of the 'chemico-algebraic' theory ensued in the
pages of the American Journal and several eminent chemists and
mathematicians contributed letters. One such letter was from Clifford
[16], and to this letter Sylvester added many footnotes; the two men vied
to ascribe to each other the credit for the discovery of the theory.
Unfortunately Sylvester's cherished theory was short-lived. What he
had noticed was but a superficial analogy-the use of a similar notation-
between two unrelated topics (see [32, p. 3681). Of course, the usefulness
of the graphic notation in chemistry is unchallenged to this day, and in
the theory of invariants it proved helpful for a while. Clifford himself con-
tinued to work on the subject [ 17], [18]. until his researches were cut short
by his untimely death, and various English mathematicians loyally pro-
duced several studies on 'Clifford's graphs' [ 19], [20]. But the whole
cottage industry of invariant theory was soon taken over by the powerful
methods of abstract algebra. heralded by D. Hilbert's proof [21] of the
'finite basis theorem'.
Although the chemico-algebraic theory was a flop, it was a major
stimulus for the study of graphs as objects of interest in themselves. In
this respect, a landmark in graph theory was the publication, in 1891. of
the work of the Danish mathematician. Julius PETERSEN. who had fre-
quently corresponded with Sylvester. We shall describe
Petersen's
achievements in Chapter 10.
Enumeration, from Cayley to Polya
Cayley's method for enumerating hydrocarbons, explained in his 1875
address to the British Association, was cumbersome and impractical;
perhaps this was one reason why it made little impact on the chemists of
his own country. However, a shortened account of his method was also
published in German [I I]. and drew an immediate response from H.
Schiff [22], [23], who reported on an alternative method of enumeration.
During the next thirty years, several chemists and mathematicians consi-
dered the problem, but their publications do not contain any significant
new developments in the mathematical theory; a survey of some of this
work may he found in [24].
It was not until the late 1920s that the problem was once more
subjected to searching mathematical analysis. In fact, the first work which
might have had important applications was published by J. H. Redfield in
1927 [25], but his paper was unfortunately completely overlooked for
many years, and so had no influence on the development of the subject.
However, a paper which did arouse some interest was published in 1929,

68
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
under the title 'Isomerism and Configuration' [26]. Its authors were a
chemist, A. C. Lunn, and a mathematician, J. K. Senior; they recognized
that the terminology of the mathematical theory of permutation groups is
appropriate to the problem of enumerating isomers, and in this respect,
their paper foreshadowed the fundamental work of Polya.
Before we come to Polya's work, we should mention a series of papers
by two chemists, C. M. Blair and H. R. Henze, which appeared from
1931 onwards (see, for example [24], [27]). They realized that it was too
optimistic to hope for a formula giving the numbers of isomers in a series
as a function of the carbon content, and so they concentrated instead on
setting up recursion formulae for these numbers. This straightforward
mathematical technique works quite well in many cases, and, in recent
years. its scope has been considerably extended by the use of computers.
The enumerative theory due to George Polya is a milestone. not only in
graph theory and chemical enumeration, but in mathematics as a whole.
Much of the work was developed in the period covered by this book, and
we shall reproduce one of Polya's earlier papers [4D] on the subject,
which was published in 1935.
We introduce Polya's paper by means of a simple example. Let us
suppose that each of the vertices of a square is to be coloured with one of
two colours, black and white. The total number of ways in which this can
be done is 2' = 16, but some of these colourings are indistinguishable if
we take into account the symmetry of the square. For example, the two
colourings shown in Fig. 4.5 may be transformed into one another by
giving the square a half-turn about its centre. It turns out that there are
just six non-equivalent colourings in this sense, and we have depicted
these in Fig. 4.6.
In order to deal with enumerative problems of this kind in general,
P61ya combined the classical method of generating functions with some
basic results from the theory of permutation groups. His method can be
outlined in the following way, using the notation of [4D] and referring to
the example given above. We begin with a set of 'figures', each of which
contains a number of 'objects'; in our example, a figure contains just one
object-a vertex-and it may be coloured black or white, so that the
FIG. 4.5.

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
69
FiG. 4.6.
generating function for the set of figures is simply
f(x,Y)=x+Y.
(In general, the coefficient a,1 of the term x'y' is the number of figures
containing i black vertices and j white vertices. here a ,o= ao, = 1, aa, _
an = 0). We next introduce the idea of a 'configuration', which is formed
by placing a figure at each of a given set of points; in our example, the
points are the corners of a square. Two configurations are 'equivalent' if
they are related by a symmetry of the set of points.
Our aim is to find the generating function for the set of non-equivalent
configurations. That is, we require the function
;F(x. V) = Y, A,,x'y',
where A,, denotes the number of non-equivalent configurations contain-
ing i black objects and j white ones. In order to explain the relationship
between
and f, we must consider the group of permutations acting as
symmetries of the given set of points. In our example. there are eight such
permutations, and they are, in the usual cycle form:
(l)(2)(3)14),
(1)(3)(24),
(2)(4)(13),
(13)(24).
(12)(34),
(14)(23),
(1234),
(1432).
(The numbers 1, 2, 3. 4. stand for the corners of the square in clockwise
order.) In general, the group will contain n permutations in all, and the
number of permutations with j, I -cycles. j_ 2-cycles.... , and j,, p-cycles
will be denoted by H,,,, ... ti. The cycle lndrx of the group is then defined
to be the expression
n Y H,:,:... ,, s,'' s2" ... sp
%%hcre the sum ,. o%er all possible choices of the j, for permutations in the
group. Vor example. the cycle index for the group of the square is
,1.11 + 'S S2+3s2T
We can now state Polya's famous result: the generating function
(x. y)
is obtained by substituting f(x', y') for s, in the cycle index.

70
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
In the case of the square. this gives
5;Ix, r1= {(x+y)'+2(x+y)'(x'+y=)+3(x'+y')'+2(x'+y')}
=x'+x'y+2x2 v2+xy3+y'.
from which we deduce (looking at the coefficients) that there are, for
example, two configurations with two black vertices and two white
vertices, and one configuration with three black vertices and one white
vertex Isee Fig. 4.6).
In [41)], the theory is developed for three colours instead of two, and
there is an example in which only one colour is needed.
4D
G. P6LYA
UN PROM IAIF.
(OMB1NATOIRE. GENERAL. SUR LES GROUPES DE PERM.UTA-
TIONS NT I F- ('ALCUL DU NOMBRE DES ISOMERES DES COMPOSES
ORGANIOL'ES
[A general combinatorial problem on groups of permutations and the calculation
of the number of isomers of organic compounds]
Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Seances de I'Academie des Sciences (Paris)
201 (1935). 1167-1169.
I shall state my problem in concrete language and in a slightly specialised form.
1. We are given figures m, V. 4, . .. , each different from one another.
These figures contain three sorts of objects, some red, some blue and some white.
The number of figures containing k red, I blue and m white is am,,. We put
Z a,., x`y'z^ = f(x. y. Z).
((X. Y. z)=fi- flx=, y
. z2 )=f ,
f(X A , t'', .11=f ......
2. We are given p points fixed in space and a group
of order It permuting
these points. Let H,,,, ... ,, he the number of permutations of K fixing j, points.
and effecting j: transpositions, j, cycles of order 3. j, cycles of order 4, etc. These
permutations are said to he of rope [j,. j,..... jJ naturally. 1j, +21, + ... + pi" = p.
3. By placing p figures from amongst (1), 4,`, V*_. at the p points, we obtain
a configuration (4',, 02...., 4'p); the figures may be repeated, that is to say the
same figure may appear at several points in the same configuration. Two config-
urations
and
are identical if 01=4)1. (b: =
V, .... 4),. = (V; and they are called equivalent mod X if there exists a permuta-
tion
S,
1
2...p
(1)
=
It
iz... ip
of the group N such that 4 = 4 . 4' = 4'z..... m,, = 0;,.

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
71
4. We seek the number Au,., of non-equivalent configurations mod at which
contain k red, I blue and m whir' objects. We are going to find the generating
function
Z A.,," x & v _
= .)
x. y, z 1.
. We say that the configuration A),. 4t,..... (P,,) admits the permutation 11) if
T, . (P - m,...... (1), -1),). Lct
:'1:,,,,(S, i be the numhcr of configurations
admitting S and containing k red, I blue and in white object.. If the tspe of S, is
[j' h
. j, ] it is easily seen that
(2)
'A.,",(S,)x`v'z
= f;'f°... fP:
this is just the classical method of Euler.
6. The permutations of 9C admitted by a fixed configuration C form a subgroup
IS of order g. The number of configurations different from one another, but
equivalent to C, is h/g, and each of these configurations admits a subgroup. whose
order is g. Each of these h/g configurations contains the same numbers k. 1. m of
red, blue and white objects, and each is counted in g terms of the sum
A,a,,,(SO+Aia" (S:) + ... +Au,"(Se).
Thus in this sum, the family of configurations equivalent to C (mod X) is
counted g h/g = It times, that is to say, we have
(3)
A,,,,,,(S,) +Au,.(S:)+...+A.,,
We obtain from (2) and (3),
(4)
Ax. V. Z) _
1
H,.,.
,f, l ... (,t.
the sum ranging over the types [j,. j-
jr].
7. The formula (4) has a large number of applications in the study of symmet-
ries. in particular in the calculation of the number of isomers, of which I shall
speak elsewhere. Here I restrict myself to a single example. The figures are the
radicals
n = 0 included, the objects are the atoms C (there is only one
type of object). and a is the number of isomeric alcohols C,H:".,OH (without
taking account of s(ereoisomerism). Thus we have
f(x) = 1 +x+x'+2x+4x'+8x`+ 17x"+ ... .
I take p = 6 points, vertices of a regular hexagon. and aC to be the group of
It = 12 rotations of the hexagon. The coefficient of x" in the expansion of
I +x+4x't8x'+22x'+51x`7 136x"+...
is then the number of derived isomers C.... H".," of henzene.
Polya wrote several other papers on this subject. He published an
account of the applications to isomer enumeration in Zeitscltrift fiir
Kristallographie [28]. and in 1937 a long paper of over one hundred

72
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
pages appeared in Acta Madumatica [29]. In the latter paper he discus-
sed many mathematical aspects of the theory, including its application to
the enumeration of graphs: an English translation with commentary
appears in [33).
We should not conclude this chapter without some further reference to
the work of Redfield. His 1927 paper contained many of the ideas later
rediscovered independently by P61ya. In particular, towards the end of
this paper he dealt with the problem of enumerating what he called
'symmetrical aliorelative dyadic relation-numbers of a field of n ele-
ments': in our terms, these objects are just simple graphs with n vertices.
Perhaps this language difficulty may explain why so many English-
speaking mathematicians are so much more familiar with the results of
P61ya's German paper than with those of Redfield's English one.
Although Redfield's 1927 paper was the only one published during his
lifetime, two or three later manuscripts have come to light in recent years
(see [301, [311).
References
1. KEUULE, F. A. [Antwon des lubilars August Kekule). Ber. Deut. Chem. Gcs. 2311890).
1306.
2. RussEU., C. A. The history of valency. Leicester University Press. 1971.
3. WHEELER, T. S. and PARTINGTON. J. R. The life and work of William Higgins. chemist.
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1960.
4. CourER, A. S. Sur unc nouvelle thforie chimique. PhiL Mag. (4) 16 (1858).104-116.
5. LOSCHMtDT, J. Chenusche Studien. alien, 1861.
6. KEKULE, F. A. Lehrbuch der organischen Chemie, Vol. 1. Erlangen, 1861.
7. CRui BRowN. A. On the theory of isomeric compounds. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 23
(1864).707-719.
8. CAYLEY, A. On the theory of the analytical forms called trees-part 11. PhiL Mag. (4)
18 (1859), 374-378 = Math. Papers, Vol. 4, 112-115.
9. SCHORLEMMER. C. A manual of the chemistry of the carbon compounds. London, 1874.
10. CAYLEY. A. On the analytical forms called trees, with application to the theory of
chemical combinations. Rep. Brit Assoc. Advance. Sci. 65 (1875), 257-305 = Math.
Papers, Vol. 9, 427-460.
11. CAYLEY. A. Uber die analytischen Fiiguren. welche in der Mathematik BSume genannt
werden and ihre Anwendung auf die Theorie chemischer Verbindungen. Ber. Dent
Chem. Ges. 8 (1875), 1056-1059.
12. CAYLEY, A. On the number of the univalent radicals C.H.,,.,. Phil. Mag. 151 3 118771.
34-35 = Math. Papers, Vol. 9, 544-545.
13. [Report of the British Association Meeting]. Athenaeum No. 2498 (11 Sept. 1875),
341.
14. SYLVESTER. J. J. On an application of the new atomic theory to the graphical represen-
tation of the invariants and covariants of binary quantics,-with three appendices.
Amer. J. Math. 1 (1878), 64-125 = Math Papers, Vol. 3, 148-206.
15. ARCHIBALD, R. C. Unpublished letters of James Joseph Sylvester ... Osiris 1 (1936),
85-154.
16. CLIFFORD, W. K. Extract of a letter to Mr S%hc,tcr
Amer J
Moth. I ( 1878),
126-128 = Math Papers, 255-257.
17. CuFFORD, W. K. Note on quantics of alternate numbers. used as a means for
determining the invariants and covariants of quantics in general. Proc. London Math.
Soc. 10 (1878-9), 124-129 =Math. Papers, 258-265.

CHEMICAL GRAPHS
73
18. CLIFFORD. W. K. Binary forms of alternate variables. Proc. London Math. Soc. 10
(1878-9). 214-221 = Marh. Papers 277-286.
19. SPOTnswooDE. W. On Clifford's graphs. Proc. London.kfath. Soc. 10(1878-9).2()4-214
20. KEMPE. A. B. On an applacauon of Clifford's graphs to ordinary binary quantla. Proc.
London Math. Soc. 17 (1887), 107-121.
21. HILBERT. D. Zur Theorie der algebraischen Gebilde
1.
Nachr.
K.
Ges.
Wiss.
Gortingen, (1888), 450-457 = Ges. Abh., Vol. 2. 176-183.
22. SCHIFF. H. [Correspondenzen] aus Florenz. Her. Deur. Chem. Ges. 8 (1875). 1360-
1361.
23. SCHIFF, H. Zur Statistik chemischer Verbindungen. Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges. 8 (1875),
1542-1547.
24. HENZE, H. R. and BLAIR, C. M. The number of isomeric hydrocarbons of the methane
series. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 53 (1931), 3077-3085.
25. REDFIELD, J. H. The theory of group-reduced distributions. Amer. J. Math. 49 (1927).
433-455.
26. LUNN. A. C. and SENIOR, J. K. Isomerism and configuration. J. Phys. Chem. 33 (1929).
1027-1079.
27. HENZE, H. R. and BLAIR. C. M. The number of structural isomers of the more
important types of aliphatic compounds. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 56 (1934).157.
28. POLYA. G. Algebraische Berechnung der Anzahl der Isomeren einiger organischer
Verbindungen. Z Kristal. (A) 93 (1936). 415-443.
29. POtxw, G. Kombinatori the Anahlbestimmungen fur Gruppen. Graphen and
chemische Verbindungen. Acta Math. 68 (1937), 145-254.
30. RPDFmD, J. H. Enumeration by frame group and range groups. J. Graph Theory 8
(1984), 205-223.
31. LLOYn, E. K. J. Howard Redfield 1879-1944. J. Graph Theory 8 (1984). 195-203.
32. GRACE. J. H. and YOUNG. A. The Algebra of Invariants. Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge. 1903. pp. 366-8.
33. POLYA. G. and READ, R. C. Combinatorial Enumeration of Groups. Graphs, and
Chemical Compounds. Springer-Verlag. 1987.

S
Euler's Polyhedral Formula
A.-L. CAUCHY (1789-1857)
IN our account of the work of Kirkman and Hamilton (Chapter 2) we
explained how a solid figure bounded by plane faces, called a polyhedron,
can be represented by a graph. In this chapter we shall trace the study of
polyhedra and their graphs, taking as our theme one important formula
and its generalizations. The simplest version of this formula relates the
numbers of vertices
edges (Ne), and faces (N,) of a polyhedron;
under certain quite general conditions it asserts that
For example, for the pentagonal pyramid (Fig. 5.1) the formula yields
6-10+6=2, and for the regular dodecahedron (Fig. 5.2) we have
20-30+12=2.
The history of polyhedra
Although the study of polyhedra can be traced back at least four
thousand years, to the pyramids of Ancient Egypt, we shall begin our
story some two thousand years later, in Greece. The Greeks were
especially interested in the mathematical properties of 'regular' polyhedra
(those in which all the faces are congruent regular polygons), and they
found just five of these solids; a full account of them was written by

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
75
Fia. 5.1.
Theaetetus, who died in 369 B.c. What is more, it has been argued that
the Elements of Euclid (written about 320 B.c.) were primarily intended
as an introduction to the study of these five solids. But surprisingly, there
is no evidence that the Greeks knew the simple formula relating the
numbers of vertices, edges, and faces.
There are two possible reasons for this. One possibility is that they did
discover the formula, and that it was lost in subsequent, more barbarous,
times. We know that many works of Greek scholarship did not survive; in
particular, some of the writings of Archimedes (287-212 B.c.) were
destroyed, probably in the fire of Alexandria (47 B.c). Archimedes was
one of the greatest of the Greek thinkers, and he had made an
extensive study of polyhedra. The second possibility is that the Greeks
missed the formula because their geometry was entirely concerned with
measurement-lengths, angles, areas, and volumes. The formula is not
about such metrical notions; it is, in fact, a topological result.
In comparatively recent times (around 1640 A.D.), Rend Descartes, the
founder of analytic geometry, also missed the formula. He obtained an
expression for the sum of the angles of all the faces of a polyhedron, from
FIG. 5.2.

76
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
which the required formula can be deduced. But he did not make the
deduction, presumably because he too was accustomed to thinking in
terms of measurement. We know of Descartes' work because Leibniz
made a copy of it, but this was not discovered until 1859. The text,
together with the story of its discovery, translation, and publication, may
be found in the collected works of Descartes [ 1, Vol. 10, pp. 257-277].
By the time that Descartes' work came to light, the formula he had
missed so narrowly was well known, for it had been discovered and
published by Euler. For many years Euler corresponded with a fellow
mathematician, C. Goldbach, and in 1750 he wrote him a letter [5A]
saying that he had found the formula, but had not been able to prove it.
The complete letter, written partly in German and partly in Latin, is
available in the Euler-Goldbach correspondence [2]. We have omitted
the first part (dealing with a dispute between Goldbach and a bookseller)
and the conclusion, in which Euler gave a formula for the volume of a
tetrahedron in terms of its edges.
5A
L. EULER
[Letter to Christian Goldbachl
Berlin. November 1750.
Recently it occurred to me to determine the general properties of solids
bounded by plane faces, because there is no doubt that general theorems should
be found for them, just as for plane rectilinear figures, whose properties are: (1)
that in every plane figure the number of sides is equal to the number of angles.
and (2) that the sum of all the angles is equal to twice as many right angles as
there are sides, less four. Whereas for plane figures only sides and angles need to
be considered, for the case of solids more pans must be taken into account,
namely
1. the faces, whose number = H;
II. the solid angles, whose number = S:
Ill. the joints where two faces come together side to side, which, for lack of an
accepted word I call 'edges', whose number = A ;
IV. the sides of all the faces, the number of which all added together=L;
V. the plane angles of all faces, the total number of which = P.
1. Concerning these five quantities, it is clear first that P = L since in each face
the number of angles = the number of sides.
2. Also, A always= L, or A = P. because two sides of different faces must
come together to form one edge.
3. Therefore the number of sides, or of plane angles. of all the faces enclosing
the solid is always even.

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
77
4. Either L = 3H or
L > 3H
5. Either P = 3S
or P> 3S
and P = L.
These are obvious, since no face can have less than 3 sides, and no solid angle
less than 3 plane angles. But I cannot yet give an entirely satisfactory proof of the
following propositions:
6. In every solid enclosed by plane faces the aggregate of the number of faces
and the number of solid angles exceeds by two the number of edges. or
H+S=A+2, or H+S=]L+2=:P+2.
7. It is impossible that A+6>3H or A+6>3S.
8. It is impossible that H+4>2S or S+4>2H.
9. No solid can be formed all of whose faces have 6 or more sides, nor all of
whose solid angles are joined from six or more plane angles.
10. The sum of all plane angles which occur in the solid is equal to as many
right angles as there are units in 4A - 4H.
11. The sum of all plane angles is equal to four times as many right angles as
there are solid angles, less eight. that is=4S-8 right angles.
FIG. 5.3.
For an example consider the triangular prism [see Fig. 5.3]. where:
1. the number of faces, H = 5;
2. the number of solid angles, S = 6;
3. the number of edges (ab, ac. be, ad, be. cf, de, df, ef), A = 9:
4. the number of sides and plane angles, L = P = 18. For the body is bounded
by two triangles and three quadrilaterals, so that L = P = 2.3+3.4 = 18.
Now, in agreement with Theorem 6. H + S(11) = A + 2(11). Furthermore the
sum of all plane angles (from the two triangles = 4 right angles. and from the
three quadrilaterals = 12 right angles) is = 16 right angles, = 4(A - H) = 4S - 8
right angles.
I find it surprising that these general results in solid geometry have not
previously been noticed by anyone, so far as I am aware; and furthermore, that
the important ones, Theorems 6 and 11, are so difficult that I have not yet been
able to prove them in a satisfactory way.
In 1752 Euler wrote two papers on the polyhedral formula. In the first
one [3], he verified it for several families of solids, but admitted that he
had still been unable to find a general proof. In the second one [4], he set
forth a proof by dissection; it consists of slicing out tetrahedral pieces of
the solid in such a way that the number NC - N, + Nf is unchanged, until

78
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
eventually all that remains is a single tetrahedron, for which N, - N. + Nt
= 4-6+4 = 2. It is an ingenious method-and an apt one, since it uses
no metrical concepts. However, it is not at all obvious that this slicing
procedure can always be carried out, and it may give rise to 'degenerate'
polyhedra for which the meaning of the formula is ambiguous.
One point which was overlooked by Euler, and some other early writers
on the subject of polyhedra, is the matter of convexity. A solid body S is
said to be convex if, for any two points X and Y of S, the entire line
segment XY lies in S. Although this property holds for all the polyhedra
considered by the Greeks, it is by no means universal. In 1619 the
astronomer Johannes Kepler [S] described a non-convex polyhedron
which he called the stella octangula (Fig. 5.4); for further details of this
and many other fascinating non-convex polyhedra the interested reader is
referred to the book by Wenninger [6]. We do not need to discuss
convexity in detail, but it should be remembered that this property cannot
be taken for granted in the theory of polyhedra.
An entirely different proof of Euler's formula was given by A. M.
Legendre in 1794 [7, p. 228] using metrical properties of spherical
polygons. In fact, his ideas were quite similar to those used by Descartes
many years earlier, but Legendre had the advantage of knowing what he
wanted to prove, and so he pursued the arguments to their logical
conclusion.
Planar graphs and maps
We have already referred at some length to a paper [8] written by
Poinsot in 1809, in which he discussed some diagram-tracing puzzles (see
Chapter 1). One of the major achievements of that paper was the
description of four non-convex regular polyhedra, in addition to the five
convex ones known to the Greeks; all nine polyhedra have either 4, 6, 8,
12, or 20 faces, and Poinsot asked if these were the only possibilities.
FiG. 5.4.

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
79
Fta. S.S.
Soon afterwards, a brilliant young Frenchman, Augustin-Louis CAUCHY,
proved that this is indeed so. In the course of his proof he investigated
certain new aspects of Euler's formula, one of which is particularly
interesting to us, since it involves the formulation of the result as a
theorem about graphs drawn in the plane. This idea is central in later
chapters of this book, and so we shall devote some time to it here.
In Fig. 5.5, we depict the process of projecting a cube from a point p
on to a plane n. The vertices and edges of the cube are projected into a
plane diagram of the graph associated with the cube, whereas the faces
correspond to the regions into which the plane is divided by the lines of
the diagram. The face nearest the point p is lost, and may be thought
of as corresponding to the outside region of the diagram. It is not hard to
see that, for any convex polyhedron, the point p and the plane n can be

80
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Ftc. 5.6.
chosen so that the projected diagram is a faithful representation of the
graph of the polyhedron. By this we mean that the lines representing the
edges intersect only at the points representing the vertices, so that no
extra crossings occur. In this sense, the diagram in Fig. 5.6 is not a faithful
representation of the cube graph.
We say that a graph is planar if it has a faithful representation by
means of a plane diagram. The process of projection shows that the graph
of a convex polyhedron is planar. although (as we shall see in Chapter 8)
there are many abstract graphs which are not planar.
It is also possible to think of the plane diagram of a graph as a
geographical map: the regions are the 'countries' and the lines are their
'frontiers'. Of course, the same kind of map may be drawn on other
surfaces besides the plane; for example, if we take a point inside a convex
polyhedron and project from it onto a sphere surrounding the polyhe-
dron, we obtain a 'map' on the sphere. The fact that the edges are no
longer represented by straight lines is immaterial, for it is necessary only
that the representation is faithful, and that no extra crossings occur. In
general we shall define a map to be a representation of a graph on any
surface, with the property that the lines intersect only at their assigned
end points.
With this terminology, Cauchy's formulation of Euler's result is a
theorem about planar graphs, or equivalently, about maps on the plane.
Our extract (5B] begins with a generalization of Euler's formula. Cauchy
considered the effect of allowing extra vertices and edges inside a
polyhedron so that it is, in fact, decomposed into a number P of separate
polyhedra. For this situation he stated that
N,-Ne+N1=P+1,
from which the Euler formula is obtained by putting P = 1. He continued
by discussing the effect of flattening the polyhedron so that it becomes a
plane network of polygons, and he explained how this could be regarded
as the case P = 0 of his general formula. He then gave a direct proof of
the relation
N,.-NN+N,=I

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
81
for this case. As the reader will see, his proof really does belong to graph
theory, for it uses a process of 'triangulation', rather than any metrical
ideas. So this procedure, together with the process of projection, can be
used to give a topological proof of the original polyhedral formula.
5B
A.-L. CAUCHY
RECHERCHES SUR LES POLYEDRES-PREMIER MEMOIRE
[Researches on polyhedra-first memoir]
Journal de l't~cole Polytechnique 9 (Cah. 16) (1813), 68-86.
SECOND PART
Euler was the first to determine, in the Petersburg Memoirs for 1758. the
relation which holds between the different elements forming the surface of a
polyhedron; and Legendre, in his Elements de Geometrie, has proved Euler's
theorem in a much simpler manner by considering spherical polygons. Having
been led by some research to a new proof of the theorem, I have arrived at a
more general theorem than that of Euler, which is stated as follows:
THEOREM.-If a polyhedron is decomposed into as many others as we choose, by
taking at will new vertices in the interior, and if the number of new polyhedra so
formed is denoted by P, the total number of vertices including those of the original
polyhedron by S. the total number of faces by F. and the total number of edges by A,
then
(1)
S + F = A + P + 1.
that is, the sum of the number of vertices and that of the faces exceeds by one unit
the sum of the number of edges and that of the polyhedra.
It is easy to see that Euler's theorem is a special case of the preceding theorem;
since, if we suppose that all the polyhedra reduce to a single one, then we have
P= 1,
and equation (1) becomes
(2)
S+F=A+2.
Furthermore, we may deduce from equation (1) a sccond theorem relating to
plane geometry; for, supposing that all the polyhedra are reduced to a single one.
let us destroy this last one by taking one of its faces as base and projecting onto it
all the other vertices without changing their number; then we obtain a plane
figure composed of several polygons enclosed in a given contour. Let F be the
number of these polygons, S the number of their vertices, and A that of their
sides; we shall obtain the relationship between these three numbers by putting
P = 0 in the general formula, so that we have
(3)
S+F=A+1.

82
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
From this we conclude that the sum of the number of polygons and the number of
vertices exceeds by one unit the number of straight lines which form the sides of
these polygons. This last theorem is the equivalent in plane geometry of the
general theorem in the geometry of polyhedra.
We could prove the general theorem contained in equation (1) immediately,
and deduce from it as corollaries the two other theorems. $ut in order to explain
the spirit of the proof more clearly, we shall begin by proving, in an analogous
manner, the last theorem contained in equation (3).
It is easy to apply the theorem in certain particular cases.
Let us suppose, for example, that the contour is given as the perimeter of a
triangle, that we take a point in the interior of it, and that we construct three
straight lines from this point to the three vertices, thereby forming three triangles
inside the given contour. These three triangles furnish four vertices, and the
number of straight lines forming their sides is equal to 6; now 6. increased by one.
gives the same as 4 + 3, which verifies the theorem.
Suppose, as a second case, that the contour is given as a quadrilateral, that we
take a point in its interior, and that we construct four straight lines from this point
to the four vertices, thereby forming four triangles in the given contour. These
four triangles furnish five vertices and eight sides, so
8+1=4+5,
which verifies the theorem.
Finally, suppose that the contour is given as a polygon of n sides, and that we
take a point in its interior which we join to the n vertices of the polygon by means
of straight lines. The n triangles which are formed by this means furnish a number
of vertices equal to n + 1, and a number of sides equal to 2n; then 2n increased
by one is equal to the sum of n and n + 1. which verifies the theorem.
Now let us pass to the general case, and suppose that a number F of polygons is
enclosed in a given contour. Let S be the number of vertices of these polygons
and A be the number of straight lines which form their sides. Decompose each
polygon into triangles. by joining one of its vertices to non-adjacent vertices by
diagonals. If n is the number of diagonals drawn in the different polygons, F+ n
will be the number of triangles resulting from the decomposition of the polygons,
and A+ n will be the number of sides of these triangles. The number of their
vertices will be the same as for the vertices of the polygons. that is, S. Now let us
suppose that we remove the triangles in turn, in such a way as to leave just one at
the end, beginning with those which adjoin the exterior contour and subsequently
removing only those which, as a result of previous reductions, have one or two
sides belonging to that contour. Let h' be the number of triangles which have one
side in common with the exterior contour at the time they are removed, and h"
the number of triangles which have two sides in common with that contour. The
destruction of each triangle will entail, in the first case, the loss of one side; and in
the second case, the loss of two sides and one vertex. It follows that, when all the
triangles except one have been destroyed, the number of triangles destroyed will
he
h'+ h".
the number of sides removed will be
h'+2h".
and the number of vertices removed will be
h".

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
83
The number of triangles remaining will therefore be
F+n-(h'+h")= 1,
the number of sides remaining will be
A+n-(h'+2h")=3.
and the number of vertices remaining will be
S-h"=3.
If we add the first equation to the third and subtract the second, we shall have
S+F-A= I.
or
(3)
S+F=A+1.
which was to be proved.
*
*
*
*
*
Cauchy's memoir also contained a general proof of his extension of
Euler's formula, but we turn now to other generalizations, more relevant
to graph theory.
Generalizations of Euler's formula
At about the same time as Cauchy was writing his memoir, a systematic
study of exceptions to Euler's formula was being made by the Professor
of Mathematics in Geneva, Simon-Antoine-Jean LHUIL1ER. Lhuilier found
three types of polyhedra for which the formula fails, and he developed
the generalizations needed to deal with them. He published a paper [9]
on this topic in 1811, and sent a long memoir containing his results to J.
D. Gergonne, a French mathematician who had founded his own journal;
however, the memoir was so long that Gergonne could not publish all of
it. Instead he published his own account of Lhuilier's memoir into which
he incorporated some of his own ideas. The next extract [SC] is taken
from this paper.
The first part of our extract is concerned with the application of Euler's
formula to the proof of the fact that there are only five regular convex
polyhedra. It is probable that this work was common knowledge among
mathematicians at that time, but the account is notable for three reasons.
First, it points out that the derivation makes no appeal to congruence or
other metrical notions. Secondly, the concept of duality is anticipated by
the remark that regular polyhedra occur in reciprocal pairs; and thirdly,
the regular subdivisions (tessellations) of the plane are treated as limiting
cases of regular polyhedra in which the number of faces has become
infinite.

84
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
The second part of our extract deals with exceptions to Euler's for-
mula; these exceptions lead on to important topological considerations
about surfaces, which will be discussed after the paper.
5C
S.-A.-1. LHUILIER
MEMOIRE SUR LA POLYEDROMETRIE
[Memoir on polyhedrometry]
Annales de Mathematiques 3 (1812-3), 169-189.
8. If one requires that in a polyhedron all the faces have the same number f of
sides and all the solid angles the same number s of edges, then in order to
determine A. F, and S we have the three equations:
fF=2A.
sS=2A,
S+F=A+2.
If f and s. F and S, are interchanged these equations remain the same, and we
conclude that the polyhedra of this kind are reciprocal in pairs; thus, in the two
members of a pair, the number of edges is the same, and the number of vertices of
each is equal to the number of faces of the other; this allows one to inscribe or
circumscribe one in the other.
From these equations. we obtain
2fs
F=
4s
S
4f
A2(f+s)-fs.
2(f+s)-fs'
= 2(f+s)-fs
The requirement that f, s, F, S, A be positive integers greater than 2, restricts the
solutions of the equations as follows:
f = 3,
3,
4,
3.
5, 3, 6, 4,
s = 3,
4,
3,
5.
3. 6, 3, 4,
F = 4,
8,
6. 20, 12, a, oc,
oo,
S=4,
6,
8, 12, 20, -,
A =6, 12, 12, 30. 30, oo,
x. x,
=. M.
We deduce from this not only that there are just five regular solids, but that there
can be only five kinds of polyhedra, regular or not, with all faces having the same
number of sides, and all solid angles the same number of edges.
We see also that there are just three different ways in which the sphere may be
considered as a regular polyhedron with an infinite number of infinitely small
faces; these faces may be either triangles joined six by six, or hexagons joined
three by three, or finally, squares joined four by four.

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
85
We see also that a plane can be exactly covered with polygons of the same kind,
assembled with the same number around each vertex, in just three different ways;
with triangles assembled six by six, with squares assembled four by four, and with
hexagons assembled three by three.
We see finally that the regular polyhedra occur in pairs, the tetrahedron with
itself, the hexahedron with the octahedron, the dodecahedron with the icosahe-
dron, the sphere covered by hexagons with the sphere covered by triangles, and the
sphere covered by squares with itself.
As I have already stated, in the second part of his memoir Lhuilier concerns
himself with the diverse exceptions to which Euler's theorem is subject. These
exceptions are of three kinds. I shall present them successively.
11. The first kind of exception occurs when the polyhedron has an interior
cavity; that is, if it has two separate surfaces and one of them entirely encloses the
other.
In this case, let ft s, a be the numbers of faces, vertices, and edges of the
exterior surface; and let f', s', a' be the analogous numbers for the interior
surface; from the previous results we have
f+s=a+2,
f'+s'=a'+2;
thus
(f+ f')+(s+s')=(a+a')+4;
but, denoting by F the total number of faces of the polyhedron, by S the total
number of vertices. and by A the total number of edges. we clearly have
f+ f'= F. s+s'= S. a + a'= A.
it follows that
F+S=A+4;
that is to say. in such a polyhedron, the number of faces augmented by the number
of vertices, exceeds by four units the number of edges.
In general, a solid may have n closed polyhedral surfaces exterior to one
another, and a closed polyhedral surface enclosing them all; then, with the same
notation as above, we have
F+S=A+2(n+l).
12.
The second kind of exception occurs when the polyhedron is ring-shaped:
that is if. although it has but a single surface, there is an opening passing right
through it.
Let us imagine that we cut such a ring by a plane section which, by reason of
the two faces separated by the cut, reduces it to the class of ordinary polyhedra;
then let the number of faces be denoted by F', the number of vertices by S', and
the number of edges by A'; as above, we have
F'+S'=A'+2.
Let n be the number of sides of the two faces of the cut, and let us imagine that

86
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
these two faces are welded together in order to reconstruct the original polyhe-
dron. Then denoting by S. F. A the quantities corresponding to those denoted by S'
F. A' in the cut polyhedron, we find, by reasoning similar to that given above,
that
F+S-A =F+S'-A'-2=2-2=0,
or
F+S=A:
that is, in such a polyhedron, the number of faces augmented by the number of
vertices is precisely equal to the number of edges.
In general, a polyhedron bounded by a single surface may be pierced by an
arbitrary number of distinct openings. If n denotes the number of these tunnels,
we shall have
F+S=A-2(n-1).
The reasoning 'similar to that given above', referred to in the penulti-
mate paragraph, is just the observation that F = F- 2, S = S' - v, A =
A'- P. where v denotes the number of sides of the cut faces.
Lhuilier's third exception applies to polyhedra which have indentations
in their faces, so that a face may appear like the first diagram in Fig. 5.7,
rather than the second. In modern terminology a face of the second type
is said to be simply-connected, whereas a face of the first type is not:
Lhuilier remarked that faces which are not simply-connected occur natur-
ally in certain crystals-Calcareous spar, for instance. But undoubtedly
the most important of his three exceptions is the second one, and we shall
now discuss it in some detail.
It is helpful to think of the formulae of Euler, Cauchy, and Lhuilier as
statements about maps on various surfaces. We shall suppose that the
surface is connected (that is, all in one piece, unlike Lhuilier's first
FiG. 5.7.

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
87
FIG. 5.8.
exceptions), and that every face is simply-connected (unlike his third
exceptions). Then the formulae assert that the Euler characteristic,
rl = N. - N, + N,,
depends only on the surface on which the map is drawn, and not on the
map itself. For example, the ordinary convex polyhedra of Euler corre-
spond to maps on a sphere, for which -q = 2, whereas the plane networks
of Cauchy correspond to maps on a plane disc, for which rl = 1.
The second class of exceptions considered by Lhuilier corresponds to
maps on surfaces having one additional property besides those stated
earlier: the surfaces are required to be closed, in the sense that they have
no boundary curves and are of finite extent. So surfaces such as the whole
plane, disc, or hemisphere, are not allowed. The simplest allowable
surface is the sphere, and the next simplest is the ring-shaped surface re-
ferred to in [5C] and illustrated in Fig. 5.8. It is called the torus, or anchor ring.
If we take a cube and bore a square tunnel joining two parallel faces,
and add extra edges so that all of the faces are simply-connected, then we
have an example of a polyhedron whose surface has the form of a torus
(Fig. 5.9). The reader may care to check that q = 0 for this example, in
agreement with Lhuilier's result.
In fact, infinitely many allowable surfaces may be constructed in a
similar way: take a sphere and cut out two circular pieces from its surface;
then take a cylindrical 'handle' and glue its ends to the sides of the holes
Fic. 5.9.

88
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 5.10.
in the sphere; repeat this process g times, so that a sphere with g handles
is obtained. The construction for g = 2 is shown in Fig. 5.10. The torus is
just the case g = 1 and, of course, the sphere itself is the case g = 0. Our
construction is equivalent to Lhuilier's procedure of boring g tunnels
through a spherical polyhedron, and the result-a sphere with g
handles-is usually known as a closed surface of genus g.
Nowadays we regard the last equation of [5C] as a formula for the
Euler characteristic of a closed surface of genus g; that is, we assert that
p=2-2g
for maps which can be drawn on such a surface. This formula was the
starting point for an extensive investigation (1861) by Listing, which was
to be influential in the separate development of topology as a branch of
modern mathematics. His work, which he called Der Census ri urnlicher
Complexe (The census of spatial complexes) [10]. continued the studies
begun in the Topologie. He defined certain objects, called 'complexes'
because they were built up from simpler pieces, and investigated their
topological properties, especially the question of how such properties
affect the generalizations of Euler's formula. The properties were given
names such as 'periphraxis' and 'cyclosis'. borrowed from the biological
sciences. Listing's ideas were taken up by other mathematicians, and in
particular, they were used by Poincare in his fundamental researches on
algebraic topology at the turn of the century. What Poincarb possessed,
and Listing lacked, was the mathematical apparatus needed to formulate
topological ideas within the framework of algebra. Poincare's work will
be discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Lhuilier had noticed all the peculiarities which a surface may exhibit,
with one important omission; he overlooked the possibility that a surface
can be 'one-sided'. This phenomenon of one-sidedness, exemplified by
such surfaces as the Mi bius strip and the Klein bottle, was not discovered
until around 1858, as we shall see in Chapter 7.
References
1. ADAM. C. and TANNERY. P. Oeuvres de Descartes. Cerf. Paris, 1897-1913.
2. JU$KEVIt. A. P. and Wih-rER. E. Leonhard Euler and Christian Goldbach: Briefwechsel
1729-1764. Akademie-Verlag. Berlin. 1965.

EULER'S POLYHEDRAL FORMULA
89
3. EuLER. L. Elements doctrine solidorum. Novi Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp. PetropoL 4
(1752-3. published 1758). 109-140=Opera Omnia (1), Vol 26, 72-93.
4. EuLER. L. Demonstratio nonnullarum insignium proprietatum quibus solida hedris
planis inclusa sunt praedita. Novi Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp. Petropol. 4 (1752-3, published
1758). 140-160= Opera Omnia (1). Vol. 26, 94-108.
5. KEPLER. J. Harmonices mundi, libri V. Lincii Austriac. 1619.
6. WENNINGER, M. Polyhedron models. Cambridge University Press, London, 1971.
7. LEGENDRE, A. M. Elements de geometric (1st edn.). Firmin Didot, Paris, 1794.
8. PoiNSOr, L. Sur les polygons et les polyedres. J. Ecole Polytech. 4 (Cah. 10) (1810).
16-18.
9. L'HutLwER. S. Demonstration immediate d'un theorbme fondamental d'Euler sur les
polyhedres, et exceptions dont cc theori:me est susceptible. Mim. Acad. Imp. Sci. St.
Pitersb. 4 (1811), 271-301.
10. LJSr1NG,
J.
B. Der Census riumlicher Complcxc oder Verallgemeinerung des
Euler'schen Satzcs von den Polyedern. Abh. K. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen Math. Cl. 10
(1861-2), 97-182 = Separately as book, Dieterich'sche Verlagshandlung, Gottingen,
1862.

6
The Four-Colour Problem
Early History
A. B. KEMPE (1849-1922)
THr four-colour problem, which remained unsolved for more than a
hundred years, has played a role of the utmost importance in the
development of graph theory as we know it today. The origins and early
history of the problem will be surveyed in this chapter; in particular, we
shall explain why it was thought for some time that the problem had been
solved. In Chapter 9 we shall continue the story with an account of the
progress made in the first part of the twentieth century.
The origin of the four-colour problem
The first written reference to the four-colour problem occurs in a letter,
dated 23 October 1852, sent to Sir William Rowan Hamilton by Augus-
tus DE MORGA\. Professor of Mathematics at University College. London.
In this letter, preserved in the manuscript collection of Trinity College,
Dublin, he related that he had been asked about the problem by one of
his students:
A student of mine asked me today to give him a reason for a fact which I
did not know was a fact-and do not yet. He says that if a figure be anyhow
divided and the compartments differently coloured so that figures with any

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
91
portion of common boundary line are differently coloured-four colours
may be wanted, but not more-the following is the case in which four are
A .
C JO a,Y
.TQmg
aJl
wanted. Query cannot a necessity for five or more be invented. As far as I
see at this moment if four ultimate compartments have each boundary line
in common with one of the others, three of them inclose the fourth and
prevent any fifth from connexion with it. If this be true, four colours will
colour any possible map without any necessity for colour meeting colour
except at a point.
8 y
Now it does seem that drawing three compartments with common bound-
ary ABC two and two you cannot make a fourth take boundary from all.
except by inclosing one. But it is tricky work, and I am not sure of the
convolutions-what do you say? And has it, if true, been noticed? My pupil
says he guessed it in colouring a map of England. The more I think of it, the
more evident it seems. If you retort with some very simple case which
makes me out a stupid animal. I think I must do as the Sphynx did...
The student who had questioned De Morgan was Frederick Guthrie. In
1880, when the problem had become well known, he published a note [1]
which revealed that the originator of the question was his brother, Francis
GUTHRIE:
Some thirty years ago, when I was attending Professor
De Morgan's class, my brother, Francis Guthrie. who
had recently ceased to attend them (and who is now
professor of mathematics at the South African Univer-
sity, Cape Town). showed me the fact that the greatest
necessary number of colours to be used in colouring a
map so as to avoid identity of colour in lineally contiguous districts is four. I
should not he justified. after this lapse of time, in trying to give his proof,
but the critical diagram was as in the margin.

92
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
With my brother's permission I submitted the theorem to Professor De
Morgan. who expressed himself very pleased with it; accepted it as new;
and, as I am informed by those who subsequently attended his classes, was
in the habit of acknowledging whence he had got his information.
If I remember rightly, the proof which my brother gave did not seem
altogether satisfactory to himself; but I must refer to him those interested in
the subject.
Frederick Guthrie's account of his brother's work is not quite clear, but
it is fairly certain that Francis had noticed that four colours are sometimes
necessary (as shown by the marginal diagram), and conjectured that this
number is always sufficient. Consequently, we are justified in saying that
Francis Guthrie was the first person to state the 'four-colour conjecture'.
But he published nothing on the problem, and Hamilton, to whom De
Morgan had appealed, was obviously not interested. The reply which
Hamilton sent to De Morgan on 26 October 1852 stated simply: `I am
not likely to attempt your "quaternion of colours" very soon'.
Before we continue with the story, we should dispose of a popular
myth. At one time it was often claimed that the four-colour problem had
been invented by A. F. Mobius in 1840; this claim is false, although
Mobius did discuss a problem which is superficially similar. In the next
chapter we shall describe Mi bius' problem, and explain how the confu-
sion arose.
The credit for spreading the four-colour problem belongs to Dc Mor-
gan; his curiosity had been aroused by Guthrie's question, and he
tried to interest other mathematicians in it, both verbally and in print. In
a long (unsigned) book review, published in the Athenaeum on 14 April
1860 [2]. he wrote:
When a person colours a map, say the counties in a kingdom, it is clear he
must have so many different colours that every pair of counties which have
some common boundary line-not a mere meeting of two corners-must
have different colours. Now, it must have been always known to map-
colourers that four different colours are enough. Let the counties come
cranking in, as Hotspur says ...
Although this is probably the first printed reference to the four-colour
problem, it remained unnoticed by historians of mathematics until 1976
[3]. However, it was noticed by some of De Morgan's contemporaries.
One person who read it was the American logician and philosopher, C. S.
Peirce. who stated [4, pp. 476-7] that, soon after reading the article, he
presented an attempted proof to a mathematical society at Harvard.
Furthermore, the Athenaeum article is almost certainly the 'somewhere'
later referred to by Cayley in his famous note [6A].
At a meeting of the London Mathematical Society on 13 June 1878 [5],
[6], Cayley asked whether it had been proved that four colours are
sufficient; soon afterwards, he sent a short paper [6A] on the question

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
93
to the Royal Geographical Society. In that paper he attempted to
explain in simple terms where the difficulty lies. From his account we
infer that there is no good reason to assume, at the outset, that any
finite number of colours will always be sufficient-it might be possible
to construct maps requiring an arbitrarily large number of colours.
6A
A. CAYLEY
ON THE COLOURING OF MAPS
Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society (New Series) 1 (1879). 259-261.
The theorem that four colours are sufficient for any map, is mentioned
somewhere by the late Professor De Morgan. who refers to it as a theorem known
to map-makers. To state the theorem in a precise form, let the term "area" be
understood to mean a simply or multiply connected area: and let two areas, if
they touch along a line, be said to be "attached" to each other; but if they touch
only at a point or points, let them be said to be "appointed" to each other. For
instance, if a circular area be divided by radii into sectors, then each sector is
attached to the two contiguous sectors, but it is appointed to the several other
sectors. The theorem then is, that if an area be partitioned in any manner into
areas, these can be, with four colours only, coloured in such wise that in every
case two attached areas have distinct colours; appointed areas may have the same
colour. Detached areas may in a map represent parts of the same country, but this
relation is not in anywise attended to: the colours of such detached areas will be
the same, or different, as the theorem may require.
It is easy to see that four colours are wanted; for instance, we have a circle
divided into three sectors, the whole circle forming an enclave in another area;
then we require three colours for the three sectors, and a fourth colour for the
surrounding area: if the circle were divided into four sectors, then for these two
colours would be sufficient, and taking a third colour for the surrounding area,
three colours only would be wanted; and so in general according as the number
of sectors is even or odd, three colours or four colours are wanted. And in any
tolerably simple case it can be seen that four colours are sufficient. But I have
not succeeded in obtaining a general proof: and it is worth while to explain wherein
the difficulty consists. Supposing a system of n areas coloured according to the
theorem with four colours only, if we add an (n + 1)th area, it by no means follows
that we can without altering the original colouring colour this with one of the
four colours. For instance, if the original colouring be such that the four colours
all present themselves in the exterior boundary of the n areas, and if the new
area be an area enclosing the n areas, then there is not any one of the four
colours available for the new area.
The theorem, if it is true at all, is true under more stringent conditions. For
instance, if in any case the figure includes four or more areas meeting in a point
(such as the sectors of a circle), then if (introducing a new area) we place at the
point a small circular area, cut out from and attaching itself to each of the original
sectorial areas, it must according to the theorem be possible with four colours
only to colour the new figure; and this implies that it must be possible to colour the
original figure so that only three colours (or it may be two) are used for the

94
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
sectorial areas. And in precisely the same way (the theorem is in fact really the
same) it must be possible to colour the original figure in such wise that only three
colours (or it may be two) present themselves in the exterior boundary of the
figure.
But now suppose that the theorem under these more stringent conditions is true
for n areas: say that it is possible with four colours only, to colour the n areas in
such wise that not more than three colours present themselves in the external
boundary: then it might be easy to prove that the n + I areas could be coloured
with four colours only: but this would be insufficient for the purpose of a general
proof; it would be necessary to show further that the n + I areas could be with the
four colours only coloured in accordance with the foregoing boundary condition;
for without this we cannot from the case of the n + I areas pass to the next case
of n + 2 areas. And so in general, whatever more stringent conditions we import
into the theorem as regards the n areas, it is necessary to show not only that the
n + I areas can be coloured with four colours only, but that they can be coloured
in accordance with the more stringent conditions. As already mentioned, I have
failed to obtain a proof.
The 'proof'
We come now to what is probably the most famous fallacious proof in
the whole of mathematics. The author of this 'proof' was a London
barrister, Alfred Bray KEMPE, who, having studied mathematics under
Cayley at Cambridge, had become well known for his work on linkages.
On 17 July 1879, it was announced in Nature [7] that Kempe had proved
the four-colour conjecture. His proof was contained in a paper [6B]
which, possibly at Cayley's suggestion, he submitted to the American
Journal of Mathematics; as we mentioned in Chapter 4, this journal had
recently been founded, and Sylvester was its editor-in-chief. An associate
editor W. E. Story studied the paper, made some simplifications which
were published as an addendum [8], and communicated the material to a
meeting of the Scientific Association at Johns Hopkins University on 5
November 1879 [9]. In addition to Sylvester and Story, the staff of Johns
Hopkins included C. S. Peirce. Peirce was present at the November
meeting, and at the next meeting, in December, he spoke of his own work
on the conjecture [10]. The papers of Kempe and Story were published
shortly afterwards in the second volume of the American Journal.
Although Kempe's argument contained a fallacy, which we shall pin-
point in due course, it is nevertheless worthy of careful study. One
technique in particular deserves to be mentioned, for it is used in many
later studies of the four-colour conjecture and more general colouring
problems.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
95
Suppose that we have a map in which all but one of the regions have
been coloured. We may assume that the regions surrounding the uncol-
oured region have been assigned all four available colours, since other-
wise we can immediately colour the last region with a colour not used for
the surrounding regions; so the portion of the map depicted in Fig. 6.1
might be typical. If we now consider only those regions coloured red or
green, then two possible situations can occur: either the regions A and C
are joined by a continuous chain of such regions, or there is no such
chain. In the latter case, we may interchange the colours red and green in
D
bluc)
Fic. 6.1.
those red-green regions linked to A, without affecting the colour of C
The result of this interchange is that the regions A and C are now both
coloured red, so that the uncoloured region may be coloured green,
thereby completing the colouring of the map. However, if there is a chain
of red-green regions joining A and C then the interchange achieves
nothing, since all four colours still occur on regions surrounding the
uncoloured one. At this stage we may use the fact that our map is drawn
on a plane; this means that there cannot be both a red-green chain from
A to C and a blue-yellow chain from B to D. So if the interchange
argument cannot be applied to A and C, then it can be applied to B and
D, thereby reducing the number of surrounding colours to three and
enabling the last region to be coloured.
This kind of argument is now referred to as `the method of Kempe-
chains'. It is used several times in [6B], and the mistake occurs in the
application of the method to the case when five regions surround the'
uncoloured one. The reader may care to find the error for himself;
alternatively, he may prefer to await the refutation in the final extract
[6D] of this chapter.

96
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
6B
A. B. KEMPE
ON THE GEOGRAPHICAL PROBLEM OF THE FOUR COLOURS
American Journal of lfaihernarics 2 (18791. 193-200.
If we examine any ordinary map, we shall find in general a number of lines
dividing it into districts, and a number of others denoting rivers, roads, etc. It
frequently happens that the multiplicity of the latter lines renders it extremely
difficult to distinguish the boundary lines from them. In cases where it is
important that the distinction should be clearly marked, the artifice has been
adopted by map-makers of painting the districts in different colours, so that the
boundaries are clearly defined as the places where one colour ends and another
begins; thus rendering it possible to omit the boundary lines altogether. If this
clearness of definition be the sole object in view, it is obviously unnecessary that
non-adjacent districts should be painted different colours; and further, none of
the clearness will he lost, and the boundary lines can equally well be omitted, if
districts which merely meet at one or two points be painted the same colour. (See
Fig. [6.2].)
This method of definition may of course be applied to the case of any surface
which is divided into districts. I shall, however, confine my investigations primarily
to the case of what are known as simply or singly connected surfaces, i.e. surfaces
such as a plane or sphere, which are divided into two parts by a circuit. only
referring incidentally to other cases.
If, then, we take a simply connected surface divided in any manner into
districts, and proceed to colour these districts so that no two adjacent districts
shall be of the same colour, and if we go to work at random, first colouring as
many districts as we can with one colour and then proceeding to another colour,
we shall find that we require a good many different colours; but, by the use of a
little care, the number may be reduced. Now, it has been stated somewhere by
Professor De Morgan that it has long been known to map-makers as a matter of
experience-an experience however probably confined to comparatively simple
cases-that four colours will suffice in any case. That four colours may be
necessary will be at once obvious on consideration of the case of one district
surrounded by three others, (see Fig. [6.3]), but that four colours will suffice in all
cases is a fact which is by no means obvious, and has rested hitherto, as far as I
know, on the experience I have mentioned, and on the statement of Professor De
Morgan, that the fact was no doubt tnie. Whether that statement was one merely
of belief, or whether Professor De Morgan. or any one else, ever gave a proof of
FiG. 6.2.
FIG. 6.3.
FiG. 6.4.
FIG. 6.5.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
97
it. or a way of colouring any given map.
is.
I belie%e. unknown. at
all
events, no answer has been given to the query to that effect put by Professor
Cavley to the London Mathematical Society on June 13th. 1878. and subse-
quentl y. in a short communication to the Proceedings of the Royal Geographical
Society. Vol. 1. P. 259. Professor Cayley. while indicating wherein the difficulty of
the question consisted, states that he had not then obtained a solution. Some
inkling of the nature of the difficulty of the question. unless its weak point be
discovered and attacked, may be derived from the fact that a very small alteration
in one part of a map may render it necessary to recolour it throughout. After a
somewhat arduous search. I have succeeded. suddenly. as might he expected, in
hitting upon the weak point, which proved an easy one to attack. The result is.
that the experience of the map-makers has not deceived them, the maps they had
to deal with, viz: those drawn on simply connected surfaces, can, in every case, be
painted with four colours. How this can be done I will endeavour-at the request
of the Editor-in-Chief-to explain.
Suppose that we have the surface divided into districts in any way which admits
of the districts being coloured with four colours, viz: blue. yellow, red, and green:
and suppose that the districts are so coloured. Now if we direct our attention to
those districts which are coloured red and green, we shall find that they form one
or more detached regions. i.e. regions which have no boundary in common,
though possibly they may meet at a point or points. These regions will be
surrounded by and surround other regions composed of blue and yellow districts.
the two sets of regions making up the whole surface. It will readily be seen that
we can interchange the colours of the districts in one or more of the red and green
regions without doing so in any others, and the map will still be properly
coloured. The same remarks apply to the regions composed of districts of any
other pair of colours. Now if a region composed of districts of any pair of colours.
say red and green as before, he of either of the forms shown in Figures [6.4] and
[6.5]. it will separate the surface into two parts, so that we may be quite certain
that no yellow or blue districts in one part can belong to the same yellow and blue
region as any yellow or blue district in the other part. Thus any specified blue
district, for example, in one part can, by an interchange of the colours in the
yellow and blue region to which it belongs. be converted into a yellow district,
whilst any specified yellow district in the other part remains yellow.
Now let us consider the state of things at a point where three or more
boundaries and districts meet. It will be convenient to term such a point a point of
concourse. If three districts meet at the point, they must be coloured with three
different colours. If four, they may be coloured with two or three colours only in
some cases, but on the other hand they may be coloured with four, as in Fig. [6.6].
If the districts a and c in this case belong to different red and green regions, we
can interchange the colours of the districts in one of these regions, and the result
will he that the districts a and c will be of the same colour, both red or both
green. If a and c belong to the same red and green region, that region will form a
ring as in Fig. [6.5]. and b will be in one of the parts into which it divides the
surface and d in the other, so that the yellow and blue region to which b belongs,
will be different from that to which d belongs: if therefore, we interchange the
colours in either of these regions. b and d will be of the same colour, both yellow
or both blue. Thus we can always reduce the number of colours which meet at the
point of concourse of four boundaries to three.
The same thing may be shown in the case of points of concourse where five
boundaries meet. The districts meeting at the point may happen to be coloured

98
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FiG. 6.6.
F iG. 6.7.
FiG. 6.8.
Fio. 6.9.
with only three colours, but they may happen to be coloured with four. Fig. [6.7]
shows the only form which the colouring can take in that case, one colour of
course occurring twice. If a and c belong to different yellow and red regions.
interchanging the colours in either, a and c become both yellow or both red. If a
and c belong to the same yellow and red region. see if a and d belong to different
green and red regions; if they do, interchanging the colours in either region, a and
d become both green or both red. If a and c belong to the same yellow and red
region. and a and d belong to the same green and red region, the two regions cut
off b from e, so that the blue and green region to which b belongs is different from
that to which d and e belong, and the blue and yellow region to which e belongs
is different from that to which b and c belong. Thus, interchanging the colours in
the blue and green region to which b belongs, and in the blue and yellow region
to which e belongs. b becomes green and e yellow, a, c and d remaining
unchanged. In each of the three cases the number of colours at the point of
concourse is reduced to three.
It will be unnecessary for my purpose to take the case of a larger number of
boundaries. Later on, we shall see that we can arrange the colours so that not only
will three colours only meet at any given point of concourse, however many
boundaries meet there, but also at no point of concourse in the map will four
colours appear. It is, however, at present. enough, (and I have proved no more).
that if less than six boundaries meet at a point we can always rearrange the
colours of the districts so that the number of colours at that point shall only be
three.
Before leaving this part of the investigation, I may point out that it does not
apply to the case of other surfaces. A glance at Fig. [6.8]. which represents an
anchor ring, will show that a ring-shaped district, a a, if it clasps the surface, does
not divide it into two parts, so that the foregoing proof fails. In fact, six colours
may be required to colour an anchor ring. For, if two clasping boundaries be
described so as to divide the ring into two bent cylindrical portions, and if each
portion be divided into three pans by longitudinal boundaries, a, b. c being the
three parts on one and d, e. f being those on the other, so that a abuts on d and e
at one end, and on e and f at the other; b abuts on e and f at one end, and on f
and d at the other; c abuts on f and d at one end, and on d and e at the other.
then a. h. c, d. e. f must all he of different colours.
Returning to the case of the simply connected surface, and putting aside for the
moment the question of colouring. let us consider some points as to the structure
of the map on its surface. This map can have in it island-districts having one
boundary IFig. [6.9]); and island-regions (Fig. [6.10]), composed of a number of
districts; also, peninsula-districts, having one boundary and one point of con-
course (Fig. [6.11]); and peninsula-regions (Fig. [6.12]); complex-districts, which
have islands and peninsulas in them; and simple-districts which have none, and

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
99
Flc. 6.10.
FIG. 6.11.
Fio. 6.12.
have as many boundaries as points of concourse (Fig. [6.13]). It should also be
noticed that, with the exception of those boundaries which are endless, such as
that in Figure [6.9], and those which have one point of concourse such as that in
Figure [6.11]. every boundary ends in two points of concourse; and further, that
every boundary belongs to two districts.
Now, take a piece of paper and cut it out to the same shape as any simple-
island- or peninsula-district, but rather larger. so as just to overlap the boundaries
when laid on the district. Fasten this patch as I shall term it) to the surface and
produce all the boundaries which meet the patch, (if there be any. which will
always happen except in the case of an island), to meet at a point, (a point of
concourse) within the patch. If only two boundaries meet the patch, which will
happen if the district be a peninsula, join them across the patch. no point of
concourse being necessary. The map will then have one district less, and the
numbers of boundaries will also be reduced. Fig. [6.14] shows the district before
the patch is put on, the place where it is going to be, being indicated by the dotted
line, and Fig. [6.15] shows what is seen after the patch (again denoted by the
dotted line) has been put on. and the boundaries have been produced to meet in a
point on it. This patching process can be repeated as long as there is a simple
district left to operate upon, the patches being in some cases stuck partially over
others. If we confine our operations to an island or peninsula, we shall at length
get rid of the island or peninsula, and doing this in the case of all the islands and
peninsulas, complex-districts will be reduced to simple ones, and can be got rid of
by the same process. We can thus, by continually patching, at length get rid of
every district on the surface, which will be reduced to a single district devoid of
boundaries or points of concourse. The whole map is patched out.
Now, reverse the process, and strip off the patches in the reverse order, taking
off first that which was put on last, as each patch is stripped off it discloses a new
district, and the map is developed by degrees.
Suppose that at any stage of this development, when we have stripped off a
Fic. 6.13.
FIG. 6.14.
FIG. 6.15.

100
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
number of patches, there are on the surface
D districts
B boundaries
P points of concourse,
and suppose that after the next patch is stripped off there are
D' districts
B' boundaries
P points of concourse.
If the patch has no point of concourse on it or line, i.e., if when it is stripped off an
island is disclosed,
P=P
D'=D+1
B'=B+1.
If the patch has no point of concourse but only a single line, so that when it is
stripped off a peninsula is disclosed,
P'=P+1
D'=D+1
B'=B+2.
If the patch has a point of concourse on it where a boundaries meet
r = P+o--1
D'=D+I
B'=B+Q.
In each case therefore
P+D'-B'- 1 =P+D-B- 1.
i.e.. at every stage of the development
P+D-B-I
has the same value. But at the first stage
P=0
D=1
B = 0.
Therefore we always have
P+D-B- 1 =0.
(1)
That is in every map drawn on a simply connected surface the number of points of
concourse and number of districts are together one greater than the number of
boundaries.
Let d,, d_. d,. etc.. denote the number of districts at any stage, which have one,
two, three. etc.. boundaries, so that
D = d, +dZ+d,+ ... ,

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
101
and let p,. p,, etc., denote the number of points of concourse, at the same stage of
the development, at which three, four, etc.. boundaries meet, so that
P=p,+p,+ ....
Then, since every boundary belongs to two districts.
2B = d,+2d:+3d,+ ... ,
and since every boundary ends in two points of concourse, except in the case of
continuous boundaries which have no points of concourse, of which let there be
$o, and boundaries round peninsula districts which have one point of concourse,
of which let there be 161, therefore,
2B =2$.+,S,+3p.+4p,+ ....
Thus, since (1) may be written
(6D -2B)+(6P-4B) -6 = 0,
we have
5d,+4d,, +3d,+2d,+d,-etc.=0,
the first five terms being the only positive ones. At least one, therefore, of the
quantities d,, d2, d3, d4, d5, must not vanish. i.e. every map drawn on a simply
connected surface must have a district with less than six boundaries.
It may readily be seen that this proof applies equally well to an island-region or
peninsula-region as to the whole map. The result is, that we can patch out any
simply-connected map, never putting a patch on a district with more than five
boundaries. Consequently, if we develop a map so patched out, since each patch,
when taken off, discloses a district with less than six boundaries, not more than
five boundaries meet at the point of concourse on the patch. Of course districts
which, when first disclosed, have only five boundaries may ultimately have
thousands.
Returning to the question of colour, if the map at any stage of its development,
can be coloured with four colours, we can arrange the colours so that, at the point
of concourse on the patch next to be taken off, where less than six boundaries
meet, only three colours shall appear, and, therefore, when the patch is stripped
off, only three colours surround the disclosed district, which can, therefore, be
coloured with the fourth colour, i.e. the map can be coloured at the next stage.
But, at the first stage, one colour suffices, therefore, four suffice at all stages, and
therefore, at the last. This proves the theorem and shows how the map may be
coloured.
I stated early in the article that I should show that the colours could be so
arranged that only three should appear at every point of concourse. This may
readily be shown thus: Stick a small circular patch, with a boundary drawn round
its edge, on every point of concourse, forming new districts. Colour this map.
Only three colours can surround any district. and therefore the circular patches.
Take off the patches and colour the uncovered parts the same colour as the rest of
their districts. Only three colours surrounded the patches. and therefore only
three will meet at the points of concourse they covered.
A practical way of colouring any map is this, which requires no patches.
Number the districts in succession, always numbering a district which has less than
six boundaries, not including those boundaries which have a district already
numbered on the other side of them. When the whole map is numbered.
beginning from the highest number, letter the districts in succession with four
letters, a, b, c, d, rearranging the letters whenever a district has four round it, so

102
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
that it may have only three, leaving one to letter the district with. When the whole
map is lettered, colour the districts, using different colours for districts lettered
differently.
Two special cases should be noticed.
(1). If, excluding island and peninsula districts from the computation, every
district is in contact with an even number of others along every circuit formed by
its boundaries, three colours will suffice to colour the map.
(2). If an even number of boundaries meet at every point of concourse, two
colours will suffice. This species of map is that which is made by drawing any
number of continuous lines crossing each other and themselves any number of
times.
If we lay a sheet of tracing paper over a map and mark a point on it over each
district and connect the points corresponding to districts which have a common
boundary, we have on the tracing paper a diagram of a "linkage," and we have as
the exact analogue of the question we have been considering, that of lettering the
points in the linkage with as few letters as possible, so that no two directly
connected points shall be lettered with the same letter. Following this up, we may
ask what are the linkages which can be similarly lettered with not less than n
letters?
The classification of linkages according to the value of n is one of considerable
importance. I shall not, however, enter here upon this question, as it is one which
I propose to consider as a part of an investigation upon which I am engaged as to
the general theory of linkages. It is for this reason also that I have preferred to
treat the question discussed in this paper in the manner I have done, instead of
dealing with the analogous linkage.
I will conclude with a theorem which can readily be obtained as a corollary to
the preceding results. It is one of which I long endeavoured to obtain an
independent proof, as a means of solving the four-colour problem. The polyhedra
mentioned are to he understood to be simply connected ones. The theorem is this:
-Polyhedra can be added to the faces of any polyhedron so that in the resulting
polyhedron (I) the face's are all triangles. (2) the number of edges meeting at every
angular point is a multiple of three.''
The supposed solution of the four-colour problem was greeted with
great enthusiasm. Peirce remarked upon it in a report which appeared in
the Nation on 25 December 1879 [11]. Cayley and others proposed that
Kempe should be made a Fellow of the Royal Society, on the strength of
his work on linkages. and he was duly elected. Improved versions of the
'proof'. still containing the essential flaw, were quickly published [121,
[131. We must presume that Kempe's argument was generally accepted
as correct.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
103
Kempe's improved `proof' aroused the interest of P. G. Tait, whom we
had cause to mention at the end of Chapter 2. On 15 March 1880 he read
a paper on the map-colouring problem to the Royal Society of Edinburgh
and an abstract [ 14] of this paper was published in the Proceedings of the
Society. Tait began by stating that Cayley had told him about the problem
some years previously, and that he himself had shown that, in cases where
an even number of boundary lines meet at each point, two colours will
always suffice. He then sketched some ideas which, he claimed, would
lead to alternative proofs of the four-colour conjecture. With hindsight,
we are not disposed to treat his claim too seriously.
It was the published abstract of Tait's paper which prompted Frederick
Guthrie to publish his account of the origin of the problem in the same
Proceedings [1]. Immediately following this account is the abstract of
another paper by Tait, delivered on 19 July 1880 [6C]. This second paper
amplified an idea which he had mentioned in the first one. it deserves
careful study, since it contains a mixture of a brilliant idea with a certain
amount of nonsense.
Both Cayley and Kempe, in the extracts given above, had pointed out
that it is sufficient to prove the four-colour conjecture for the case when
three boundary lines meet at each point-in other words, when each
vertex of the underlying graph has valency three. We shall use the
modern term, trivalent, to describe such a graph or map. Tait noticed that
a four-colouring of the regions of a trivalent map is equivalent to an
assignment of three colours to the edges of the map, in such a way that all
three colours appear at each vertex. The procedure which he gave in [6C]
is illustrated in Fig. 6.16. this procedure, and the resulting equivalence
with the four-colour conjecture, are essentially correct, but the other
remarks in [6C] must be viewed with scepticism.
7
1)
Fic. 6.16.

104
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
6C
P. G. TAIT
[REMARKS ON THE COLOURING OF MAPS]
Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh 10 11878-801, 729.
In a paper read to the Society on 15th March last. 1 gave a series of proofs of
the theorem that four colours suffice for a map. All of these were long, and I felt
that, while more than sufficient to prove the truth of the theorem, they gave little
insight into its real nature and bearings. A somewhat similar remark may, I think,
be made about Mr Kempe's proof.
But a remark incidentally made in the abstract of my former paper has led me
to a totally different mode of attacking the question, which puts its nature in a
clearer light. I have therefore withdrawn my former paper, as in great part
superseded by the present one.
The remark referred to is to the effect that, if an even number of points be
joined, so that three (and only three) lines meet in each, these lines may be
coloured with three colours only, so that no two conterminous lines shall have the
same colour. (When an odd number of the points forms a group. connected by one
line only with the rest, the theorem is not true.)
This follows immediately from the main theorem when it is applied to a map in
which the boundaries meet in threes (and the excepted case cannot then present
itself). For we have only to colour such a map with the colours A. B, C, D. Then if
the common boundaries of A and B, as also of C and D, be coloured a ; those of
A and C, and of B and D, 0; and those of A and D, and of B and C, y, it is clear
that the three boundaries which meet in any one point will have the three
colours a, 13. y.
The proof of the elementary theorem is given easily by induction; and then the
proof that four colours suffice for a map follows almost immediately from the
theorem, by an inversion of the demonstration just given.
We escape the excepted case by taking the points as the summits of a
polyhedron, all of which are trihedral; and when the figure is a pentagonal
dodecahedron the theorem leads to Hamilton's Icosian Game.
Tait believed that Kempe had proved the four-colour conjecture, and
so he had some excuse for thinking that his 'elementary theorem' was
true in consequence. But Kempe was wrong, and Tait's claim that a direct
proof of the elementary theorem is easily given by induction was also
wrong-indeed, the new problem is just as difficult as the original one.
The full version of Tait's second paper was eventually published in the
Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh; it contains the same
mixture of sense and nonsense, including the statement that Hamilton
took the idea for the Icosian Game from Kirkman [15]. We shall
return to these muddied waters, suitably prepared, in Chapter 10.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
105
Heawood and the five-colour theorem
Throughout the 1880s the four-colour 'theorem' was regarded as an
established fact, and its fame spread far and wide. For example, Lewis
Carroll (C. L. Dodgson) turned it into a game. in which one player drew a
map for a second player to colour [16].
There were also contributions from rather more unexpected sources. In
1886, the Headmaster of Clifton College, an English boys' school, posed
the problem as a 'challenge' to the school:
In colouring a plane map of counties, it is of course desired that no two
counties which have a common boundary should be coloured alike; and it is
found, on trial, that four colours are always sufficient, whatever the shape or
number of the counties or areas may be. Required. a good proof of this.
Why four? Would it be true if the areas are drawn so as to cover a whole
sphere?
Solutions to be sent to the Head Master on or before Dec. 1, with mottos,
and envelopes bearing the motto outside and the name inside.
No solution may exceed one page, 30 lines of MS., and one page of
diagrams.
The Headmaster's challenge was published in the Journal of Education
[17], with an editorial comment which suggested that: 'Perhaps it will
tempt some of our correspondents to send us a solution'. This hope was to
be fulfilled. The Bishop of London (Frederick Temple, later Archbishop
of Canterbury) allowed his mind to wander while attending a meeting;
oblivious to the speaker, he wrote out his own 'proof', which later
appeared in the same Journal [ 18]. In 1906 J. C. Wilson [ 19] pointed out
Temple's error.
The fallacy in Kempe's proof was first revealed in 1890. In the
introduction to his paper on the 'map-colour theorem', Percy John
HEAWOOD almost apologized for having found a mistake in Kempe's
argument. Our extract [6D] contains those parts of his paper in which
Heawood demonstrated the fallacy and showed, by a modified Kempe-
chain argument, that five colours are always sufficient for colouring a
plane map. In the same paper he investigated the colouring of maps
on other surfaces, a topic which we shall discuss at length in the next
chapter.
6D
P. J. HEAWOOD
MAP-COLOUR THEOREM
Quarterly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics 24 (1890), 332-338.
The Descriptive-Geometry Theorem that any map whatever can have its divi-
sions properly distinguished by the use of but four colours, from its generality and

106
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
intangibility, seems to have aroused a good deal of interest some few years ago
when the rigorous proof of it appeared to be difficult if not impossible, though no
case of failure could be found. The present article does not profess to give a proof
of this original Theorem; in fact its aims are so far rather destructive than
constructive, for it will be shown that there is a defect in the now apparently
recognised proof.
Of five divisions surrounding another it will be easily seen that there must be
some pair touching each other nowhere; when we reduce the map by removing
the division which the five surround, we may. instead of merely making the 5
divisions close up and touch as in Fig. [6.171). throw such a pair of them into
one with the division removed, as e.g.. 2 and 5 in Fig. [6.18]. The new map thus
formed, coloured with five colours, will show how the original map also could be
coloured with five colours; two of the five divisions being in the reduced map
portions of one division, and therefore necessarily of the same colour, so that four
colours only will appear within their boundaries, and the fifth will be available for
the division which they touch. Reduction being continued as before, this proves
that five colours are sufficient, and a similar method applied to a division touched
by four others would reduce the map on the supposition of but four colours.
However, the required problem is to show that 4 colours are sufficient for the
map's colouring to follow from a reduced map, even where a five-contact division
is the lowest. Mr. Kempe's device aims at meeting this case by showing that, if a
map can be done in 4 colours apart from such a division, and should all four occur
round it, as in Fig. [6.17], we can then so transpose the colours as to remove from
those in contact with it one colour, with which it can therefore be Coloured.
Throughout a red-blue region, for instance, that is, throughout the whole of a
continuous aggregate of red and blue divisions, the red and the blue may be
obviously transposed without any alteration in the rest of the map. Now suppose
that 2 and 5 (Fig. [6.17]) belong to different blue-yellow regions. The transposition
of blue and yellow throughout one of the two regions will remove one of these
colours from occurring round the division for which a colour is required. Simi-
larly. a colour may be removed, if 2 and 4 belong to different blue-green regions.
However. 2 and 5 may belong to the same blue-yellow, and 2 and 4 to the same
blue-green region. In this case, however. I and 4 are necessarily cut off from
belonging to the same red-green, and 3 and 5 from belonging to the same
red-yellow region. as seen in Fig. [6.19]. Therefore-Mr. Kempe says-the
transposition of colours throughout l's red-green and 3's red-yellow regions will
each remove a red, and what is required is done. If this were so, it would at once
FIG. 6.17.
Fin. 6.18.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-EARLY HISTORY
107
FIG. 6.19.
lead to a proof of the proposition in question; by showing that the colouring of a
map in 4 colours could always be made to depend on the colouring of a reduced
map in 4 colours, it would prove that 4 colours were sufficient for any map. But,
unfortunately, it is conceivable that though either transposition would remove a
red, both may not remove both reds. Fig. [6.19] is an actual exemplification of this
possibility, where either transposition prevents the other from being of any avail,
by bringing the red and the other division into the same region; so that Mr.
Kempe's proof does not hold, unless some modifications can be introduced into it
to meet this case of failure. There is another simpler proposition not yet noticed,
that a map can be coloured with but 3 colours if all its divisions are touched by an
even number of others. The proof of this is not difficult, but it appears to shed no
light on the main proposition. which, in spite of all attempts to prove it or
disprove it, seems to have been hitherto attempted with very partial success.
Heawood's discovery was reported to the London Mathematical Soci-
ety by Kempe himself [20]. He admitted his error, and conceded that he
had not been able to remedy the defect. Later, on 9 April 1891, he
discussed the question at a meeting of the Society [211.
It is perhaps natural that the refutation of an accepted proof should be
greeted with a certain lack of enthusiasm. Whatever the cause, we find no
complimentary references to Heawood in the popular journals, and no
record of honours granted to him. (Many years later he was to receive an
honorary degree and the Order of the British Empire-for his efforts
towards the restoration of Durham Castle.)
The obscurity in which Heawood's paper remained may be inferred from
the pages of L'Intermediaire des Mathematiciens, a journal founded in
1894 for the dissemination of problems and solutions. One of its first
problems, set by P. Mansion in February 1894 [22], was just a statement
of the four-colour conjecture. Almost immediately, replies were pub-
lished from H. Delannoy and A. S. Ramsey [23], stating that the problem
had been solved and giving references to the work of Kempe and Tait;
the fourth volume of Lucas' book [24], which gave an account of Kempe's

108
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
work, was also cited. There was no mention of the fact that Heawood had
refuted the purported solution. Further correspondence ensued, but it
soon became bogged down in arguments about the work of Tait (see
Chapter 10). Even in 1896, when C. de la Valle a Poussin [25] pointed out
the error in Kempe's argument, as given by Lucas, there was still no
mention of Heawood.
This point in our book marks the end of the 'Age of Innocence' for
graph theory. Until now we have been discussing articles and papers using
specific techniques which, with hindsight, we recognize as belonging to
graph theory. From now on, we shall be dealing mainly with papers which
set out to build up the theory as a mathematical discipline in its own right.
In particular, in Chapter 9 we shall discuss the theory of colouring which
was developed in the face of the challenge of the four-colour conjecture.
Relerewoes
1. GUTHRIE. FREDERICK. Note on the colouring of maps. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 10 (1880),
727-728.
2. DE MORGAN. A. Review of The philosophy of discovery, chapters historical and critical,
by W. Whewell. D.D. Athenaeum No. 1694 (1860), 501-503.
3. WnsoN. J. New light on the origin of the four-color conjecture. Hist. Math. 3 (1976),
329-330.
4. EISELE. C. The new elements of mathematics by Charles S. Peirce. Vol. 111/ 1. Mouton. Den
Haag. 1976.
5. [Report of meeting, 13 June 1878]. Proc. London Math. Soc. 9 (1877-8). 148.
6. [Report of London Mathematical Society meeting]. Nature 18 (1878), 294.
7. [Notes]. Nature 20 (1879). 275.
8. STORY. W. E. Note on the preceding paper. Amer. J. Math. 2 (1879), 201-204.
9. [Report of meeting of Scientific Association, 5 November 1879]. Johns Hopkins Univ.
Circ. 1, No. 2 (Jan. 1880), 16.
10. [Report of meeting of Scientific Association. 3 December 1879]. Johns Hopkins Univ.
Cir. 1, No. 2 (Jan. 1880), 16.
11. PEIRCE, C. S. [Untitled abstract]. Nation No. 756 (1879), 440.
12. KEMPE, A. B. [Untitled abstract]. Proc. London Math. Soc. 10 (1878-9), 229-231.
13. KEMPE. A. B. How to colour a map with four colours. Nature 21 (1879-80), 399-400.
14. TArr, P. G. On the colouring of maps. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 10 (1878-80), 501-503.
15. TArr, P. G. Note on a theorem in the geometry of position. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 29
(1880). 657-660 = Sci. Papers, Vol. 1. 408-411.
16. COLLINOWOOD, S. D. The life and letters of Lewis Carroll (Rev. C. L Dodgson). Nelson,
London. 1898.
17. [Note by the Headmaster of Clifton College]. J. Educ. 9 (1887). 11-12.
18. [Note by the Headmaster of Clifton College]. J. Educ. 11 (1889), 277.
19. WltsoN. J. C. On a supposed solution of the 'four-colour problem'. Math. Gas. 3
(1904-6). 338-340.
20. [Appendix]. Proc. London Math. Soc. 21 (1889-90). 456.
21. [Report of Meeting,9 April 1891]. Proc. London Math. Soc. 22 (1890-1). 263.
22. MANsIoN, P. Question 51. Intermed. Math. 1 (1894), 20.
23. DEi.*NNoy. H. and RAMSEY. A. S. [Reponse A question 51]. Interned. Math. 1 (1894).
192.
24. LucAs, E. Recreations mathematiques. Vol. 4. Gauthier-Villars, Paris. 1894.
25. DE LA VALUE POI:SSIN, C. [Probl2me des quatre couleurs-deuxitme reponse]. Intermed.
Math. 3 (18%). 179-180.
26. Btacs, N. L. De Morgan on map colouring and the separation axiom. Archive for
History of Exact Sciences 28 (1983). 165-170.

Colouring Maps on Surfaces
P. J. HEAWOOD (1861-1955)
IN his paper [6B] on the four-colour problem, Kempe remarked that
maps on surfaces more complicated than a sphere may require more than
four colours. Indeed, he gave an example of a map on a torus which
needs six colours. Later writers, from Heawood onwards, turned to the
general problem in the hope that more general methods might illuminate
the problem for the special case of maps on a sphere. It is true that
general techniques were developed, and that these led eventually (in
1967) to a complete solution of the problem on higher surfaces, but
surprisingly the problem of maps on spheres remained unsolved for a few
more years. In this chapter we shall survey some of the early work on the
colouring of maps on surfaces other than the sphere.
The chromatic number of a surface
In Chapter 5 we described a family of closed surfaces, the 'spheres with
handles', the simplest examples of which are the sphere itself, the torus
(Fig. 5.8), and the double-torus (Fig. 5.10); a sphere with p handles is
said to have genus p. We also remarked that it is possible to construct
other closed surfaces which have only one 'side', unlike the surfaces of
genus p which have two sides. Later in this chapter we shall give a full
explanation of the concept of one-sidedness; for the moment it is suffi-
cient to consider only two-sided surfaces, although our arguments will
often apply to both cases.

110
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
For a given map M on a closed surface S, the symbol X(M) will denote
the chromatic number of M-this is defined to be the smallest number of
colours which suffices for colouring the faces of M, subject to the usual
constraint that faces which have an edge in common shall be coloured
differently. At first sight it might seem possible that, for a given surface S,
we could construct a map M on S whose chromatic number is as large as
we please. However, it turns out that the opposite is true: there is an
upper bound for X(M) which depends only on the surface S. This fact was
first published by Heawood in 1890, in the same paper in which he
demolished Kempe's arguments. Heawood's proof is rather complicated,
and so, before embarking upon it, we shall give a more straightforward
version.
We already know one thing which is invariant for all maps on a given
surface. If N, N., and Nr denote the numbers of vertices, edges, and
faces of a map M on a surface S, then the Euler characteristic defined by
depends only on S, so that we are justified in writing q (S) for its constant
value. The first step in the colouring problem is to use this formula to
show that every map on S must have at least one face with a 'small'
number of neighbours.
There is no effective loss of generality in assuming that all our maps
have two simple properties; we may assume, first, that every edge bounds
two faces, and secondly, that the valency of each vertex is at least three.
Under these assumptions, simple counting arguments show that
3N,--2N. and
aNf=2N.,
where a is the average number of edges surrounding a face. Substituting
for Nc and N, in the definition of the Euler characteristic, we obtain the
bound
/
In order to convert this bound for a into an absolute one, depending
only on the surface S. we consider the quadratic expression
Q(t) = t2-7t+6r1(S).
From the fact that ,1(S) -- 2 for all surfaces, it follows that Q has two real
zeros. and that the larger one (/3, say) is strictly positive. Thus
/3"-70+6r1(S)=0,
and so
rl(S1`

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
111
FIG. 7.1.
Comparing this with the bound for a, we see that, provided ,l(S) -- 0 and
Nr= R, the average number of edges surrounding a face must satisfy
a<f3-1.
Let h denote the integer part of ig. There must be at least one face with
not more than the average number of edges, and so we have a face with
not more than h -1 edges. In the following discussion we emphasize the
dependence on S by writing h(S) instead of h. We have proved that every
map on S has a face with not more than h(S) -I edges, given that
,1(S) --0 and that the total number of faces exceeds h(S).
These remarks enable us to prove, by induction on the number of faces,
that
X(M -- h(S)
for all maps M on a surface S with ,l(S)<O. For, suppose first that
N, < h(S). Since we need at most Nr colours for Nr faces, it follows that
X(M) < h(S), and we may start the induction. If Nr> h(S), then the results
of the previous paragraph imply that M has a face R with not more than
h(S) - I neighbours. We construct a new map M' on S by removing an
edge e which bounds the face R (see Fig. 7.1). The map M' has Nr-1
faces, and we make the induction hypothesis that it is coloured with not
more than h(S) colours. Since there are at most h(S)-1 faces adjacent to
R in M, there is a spare colour not used on the corresponding faces of M;
so we may reinstate the edge e, assign to R the spare colour, and thereby
obtain a colouring of M with not more than h(S) colours. Thus the result
is proved.
The foregoing argument applies to any map M on a surface S with
n(S)<0; using the familiar formula for the larger root of the quadratic

112
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
equation Q(t) = 0, we obtain
X(M) -_ h (S) = [i + zs/(49 - 24r1(S))],
where [y] denotes the integer part of y. The number h(S) is often called
the Heawood number of S. So if x(S) is the minimum number of colours
which will colour any map on S, we have proved that X(S) exists and
obtained the explicit upper bound
X(S)= h(S).
The number X(S) is called the chromatic number of S.
It is important to notice what has not been proved. Our proof works
only if rl(S) _ 0; this excludes the original case when S is a sphere, and
just one other (one-sided) closed surface. In addition, it has been proved
only that h(S) colours are sufficient, not that they are necessary. We
shall return to this point after Heawood's paper.
The proof given by Heawood [7A] is similar to the one given above,
but it does not always proceed in a logical order. For instance, he
assumed (without saying so) that all maps are trivalent, derived a formula,
and then returned to proving that, in fact, maps can be modified so as to
make them trivalent.
7A
P. J. HEAWOOD
MAP-COLOUR THEOREM
Quanerly Journal of Pure and Applied Mathematics 24 (1890), 332-338.
i
K
In dealing with a map on an ordinary singly-connected surface, or, better, on a
sphere I for we need only consider complete surfaces, a plane map being equivalent to
a portion of a map on a sphere), we have the one definite fact to start with that if
there are it divisions, the average number, (A,). of contacts of a division with the
others is 6 - 12. This is easily proved by induction: if we reduce the number of
n
divisions to n - I by annihilating a division touched by, say m others, and closing
up the divisions round it in any way. we shall now have (fig. [7.2]) m - 3 new
contacts of these divisions with each other in place of their m contacts with the
division which has disappeared. Thus the sum of the numbers of contacts of all the
divisions is reduced by 6 (each line of contact belonging to two divisions, and
6(n-2)
therefore counting twice); the average with n divisions will therefore be
,
n
provided the average with n - I divisions is 6(n - 2) - 6 or 6(n - 3) ; but the law ob-
n - I
n -I

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
113
FIG. 7.2.
FiG. 7.3.
viously holds for 4 divisions Ifig. [7.3]): therefore it holds for 5 and for 6 and so
on universally. It is. indeed, the equivalent of the polyhedron formula S + F = E + 2
just in the special case where all the angles are trihedral and 3S = 2E, so that
F = 6-
1F (as in our formula A. = 6 - In ), which implies that in a map we only
recognise the meeting of three divisions at a point, as is in fact assumed in the above
proof.
If four boundaries meet in a point (fig. [7.4]), the supposition may be made that
one pair of opposite divisions, 1 and 3, touch; but this must debar the other pair,
2 and 4, from touching, and we have to consider the point as equivalent to two
meeting points of three divisions joined by an infinitesimal boundary line, as
shown in the figure. It should also be noticed that if a division touches another at
two separate places (fig. [7.5]) we must reckon two distinct contacts. With this
understanding A.= 6 -
12
` universally, at least where n is not less than 3. The
n
only exception is where a division or divisions are entirely surrounded by one
other, where we may treat the enclosed divisions as forming a separate map; or
we may observe generally that all such cases of degeneracy give a lower not a
higher number of contacts than there would otherwise be for that number of
divisions, which it will be seen does not interfere with any of the deductions
presently to be made from the formula.
For more highly connected surfaces a similar law holds and the proof is similar.
On an anchor-ring we find A = 6, generalising by induction from a special simple
case (fig. [7.6]) just as before. So generally A. = 6(1 + k), where k is a positive
n
Or
FIG. 7.4.
FiG. 7.5.

114
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Fio. 7.6.
constant depending on the connectivity of the complete surface on which the map
is drawn: degenerate cases leading as before to a lower rather than a higher
number of contacts, being indeed equivalent to a repetition of maps on simpler
surfaces.
Now the above law gives us at once a superior limit to the number of colours
required for a map. For let x be the next integer to the greatest value of A,,, and
therefore = 6 for an ordinary map; x colours will certainly be sufficient to colour
the map with. For it follows immediately, the average number of contacts being
less than 6, that there must be some divisions touched by not more than 5 others:
we can then annihilate such a division, making those round it close up in the space
which it occupied (fig. [7.2]). and obviously the original map can be done in 6
colours if the reduced map can (for whatever the colouring of the divisions
around, there would be a colour to spare for the division annihilated); and we can
proceed with our reduction till, say. 6 divisions are left, and the truth of the
proposition is evident. An inferior limit to the number of colours can also be
found. For suppose that we can construct a map of any number of divisions each
touching all the rest, it is obvious that at least that number of colours must be
necessary. Our formula A.= 6-12 shows that the number of such divisions
n
cannot be greater than 4 for an ordinary map; for it cannot be greater than such
an integer y as will not make A, < y - 1; for A, must have at least this value to
enable each of y divisions to touch y - I others; for instance, As = 3 shews that
we could not have five divisions each touching all the rest which would necessitate
A, = 4 at least. It is obvious that four divisions each touching each can he actually
realised (fig. [7.3]). and therefore four colours are necessary; but it is important to
notice that verification by reference to an actual figure must not be omitted. It is
conceivable that y divisions might each have y - I contacts, and yet owing to
double contacts they might fail each to touch all the rest; or at any rate that this
might be the case although A, = y - I. and then y colours might not be necessary
for the y divisions, as, in fact, four colours are not necessary for the four divisions
in the special case of (fig. [7.5)). For an ordinary map we have so far only proved
that four colours are necessary and that six are sufficient, but for a map described
on an anchor-ring we have seen that A = 6, so that x = 7; therefore seven

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
115
colours are always sufficient for such a map; while A = y - I when y = 7; and
therefore seven colours are presumably necessary, as there are just sufficient
contacts for seven divisions each to touch each; also (fig. [7.6]) gives the required
verification that such a case can be realised; thus for a map on such a surface
x = v = 7, and we can prove at once that seven colours are both necessary and
sufficient. Moreover, for higher kinds of surface in general. A. being = 6(1 + k),
\
n
which diminishes as n increases, we have a slight difference in the determination
of x, which need not now be greater than the greatest value of A. but only
greater than A._,. For this ensures A. < x for all values of n greater than X. which
is of course sufficient to ensure that there must be some divisions touched by
fewer than x others. (A higher average when n is lower than this can only be
accounted for by duplicate and triplicate contacts of the same divisions.) The
condition for x being now A. ., < x. and for y as before A, not < y - 1. x and y
necessarily have a common value, namely the greatest integer [which] will not make
`
A.
or
6(1+ kI<x -l,
x /
which gives x2-7x not >6k, i.e. x not >i{7., (24k+49)}. This or the next less
integer is therefore the number of colours necessary and sufficient for a surface
where k is positive or zero, and a single surface such as a sphere is the only one
where x and y are not necessarily equal and where we consequently do not get an
immediate definite solution of the problem.-apart from the verification figure.
which we have indeed only given for the case of an anchor ring, but for more
highly connected surfaces it will be observed that there are generally contacts
enough and to spare for the above number of divisions each to touch each.
Neighbouring regions
Heawood clearly stated that in order to prove X(S) = h(S) we must
construct a map on S which requires h(S) colours. Yet he did so only
when S is a torus, dismissing the general case with the claim that 'there
are generally contacts enough and to spare'. The first steps towards a
comprehensive proof of this difficult result were taken by a German
mathematician, Lothar HEFVrER. soon after the publication of Heawood's
paper. His idea was to construct maps in which each face is adjacent to
every other one, and he called such a map a system of neighbouring
regions.
In fact the problem of neighbouring regions on the plane was the
subject of a puzzle discussed by A. F. Mobius, in his lectures around the
year 1840. It was this puzzle, which we shall now describe, that led to the
mistaken belief that Mobius had invented the four-colour problem.
There was once a king said Mobius) with five sons. In his will he stated
that after his death the sons should divide the kingdom into five regions in
such a way that the boundary of each one should have a frontier line (not

116
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
just a point) in common with each of the other four. Can the terms of the
will he satisfied?
The problem asks for a system of five neighbouring regions in the
plane, and one can easily prove, using Euler's formula, that it is insoluble
(see Chapter 8). But how did this simple result come to be confused with
the four-colour problem?
In 1885 R. Baltzer published an account [1] of how the problem of five
neighbouring regions had been suggested to Mobius by his friend at the
University of Leipzig, the philologist, Professor Weiske. At the end of his
paper, he mentioned that Felix Klein had pointed out to him the
similarity between this problem and the four-colour problem. Baltzer's
paper was brought into prominence by a 'Note on the history of the
map-coloring problem' [2], written in 1897 by Isabel Maddison of Bryn
Mawr College. Writing of the four-colour conjecture, she claimed that
'Mobius discussed the question, in a slightly different form, in his lectures
in 1840', and cited Baltzer as a reference. After this, the notion that
Mobius had originated the four-colour conjecture became a part of
mathematical folk-lore, and was mentioned in such popular works as
W. W. Rouse Ball's Mathematical recreations and essays [3, p. 223] and
E. T. Bell's The development of mathematics [4, p. 606].
However, the logical connection between the map-colouring problem
and the problem of Mobius and Weiske is a one-way relationship. If five
neighbouring regions could be constructed, then five colours would be
needed for colouring the map so formed; but the fact that five such
regions cannot be found proves nothing. Also it seems certain that
Mobius himself saw no relation between his problem and the colouring of
maps. It was not until 1959 that the record was put right, in an article by
H. S. M. Coxeter [5].
We now return to the work of Heftier. He had read Baltzer's article,
and he saw that the concept of neighbouring regions is relevant to the
problem left unfinished by Heawood, since in this instance the one-way
relationship operates in the right direction. In order to colour a map of
neighbouring regions, all the faces must have different colours, and so the
chromatic number of the map is equal to the number of its faces.
Consequently. Heffter's approach involved the construction of h(S)
neighbouring regions on L surface S. from which it would follow that
X(S) = h(S).
In fact, his paper [7B] is mainly concerned with the closed two-sided
surfaces; we shall use the notation S, to denote such a surface, where p is
the genus. The Euler characteristic is given by Lhuilier's formula rl(Sp) _
2-2p, so that if we write h(p) for h(Sp), Heawood's result becomes
X(Sp)
h(p) = [i +1,/(1 + 48p)],
provided that p , 1.

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
117
Heffter employed a notable degree of dexterity in his attempts to
construct h(p) neighbouring regions on the surface SP; he not only turned
the problem upside down, but inside out as well! His first step was to fix
the number n of neighbouring regions and vary the genus p, instead of
vice versa. That is, he asked for the least number p such that n neigh-
bouring regions may be constructed on Sp. If pn denotes this least
number, then it is quite easy to apply Euler's formula to show that
P,, -_ k(n), where k(n) denotes the least integer not less than
(n-3)(n-4)
12
this proof is included in extract [7B]. Furthermore, if the equality
pn = k(n) holds for a particular value of t, then we also have the desired
equality
X(SP) = h(p),
for all values of p in the range k(n) <_ p < k(n + 1). To see this, we observe
that if pn = k(n) then there are n neighbouring regions on Sk,n,, whence
X(Sk,n,) = n. So, if p -_ k (n ), then, by Heawood's theorem.
n
X(Sk,nl) -- x(S,)
[H]
where H = + ,/(1 + 48p ). If in addition p < k (n + 1). then
p<(n-2)(n-3)
12
,
that is,
n2-5n+(6-12p)>0.
For p -_ I and it > 7 this implies that
n> +41/(l+4$p)=H-1.
In summary, we have the inequalities H - I < X(SP) _ [H], which, since
X(SP) is an integer, gives the required result,
X(SP) _ [H] = h(p).
Heffter's second inversion of the problem used the notion of 'duality'
for maps. If we are given a map M on a surface S, then we may construct
a dual map M* in the following way: place a vertex of M* inside each
face of M. and join two such vertices by an edge whenever the corre-
sponding faces of M have a common edge. (It is convenient to make the
edges of M* cross those of M, so that an explicit one-to-one correspon-
dence is set up.) An example of this construction, in which the surface S is
chosen to be the plane. is shown in Fig. 7.7. In general. the numbers of
vertices, edges, and faces of NP are given in terms of the numbers for M
by the equations
N," = N(.
NC* = Ne,
Nf = N.
Also, if M is connected, then M** (the dual of M*) is just M, so that we
have a true duality.

118
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
11
FIG. 7.7.
The idea of duality was mentioned by Kempe at the end of his 1879
paper [6B], and it had been used before that in the study of stresses in
frameworks, notably by J. C. Maxwell [6], [7], who is best known for his
work in electromagnetic theory. But the concept had originated in the
study of polyhedra, as may be seen by referring to the first paragraph of
our extract from Lhuilier's work [5C]. Indeed, the duality between the
cube and the octahedron, and between the dodecahedron and the
icosahedron, goes back to the so-called 'fifteenth book of Euclid' (see
[8]): the origin of this book is not known with any certainty, but it is much
later than Euclid. and probably dates from the sixth century A.D.
The dual of a map of neighbouring regions is called, in Heffter's
terminology, a system of neighbouring points. In such a system each
vertex (point) is joined to all the others, so that the graph formed by the
vertices and edges is a complete graph. Thus the dual form of Heffter's
problem asks for the least genus p such that the complete graph K. can
be drawn on S., and this is the form in which the problem is treated in
[7B]. However, there are occasional, rather confusing references to the
problem in the dual 'neighbouring regions' formulation.
7B
L. HEFFTER
(JBER DAS PROBLEM DER NACHBARGEBIETE
[On the problem of neighbouring regions]
Mathernatisehe Annalen 38 0891). 477-508.
We next enquire after the minimal value of the genus of a surface which does
admit n neighbouring points, and call this number N; that is to say it will be
supposed that on a surface of genus p there really exist n neigi'bouring points,
but not on one of lower genus. Then it is easy to determine a lower bound for pn.

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
119
By virtue of the n neighbouring points and their #n(n - 1) connecting lines, a
system of n points or vertices, }n(n - 1) lines or edges, and a number (F) of faces
or bounded regions are formed on the closed surface.The last are all simply-
connected; for were a multiply-connected piece to arise thereby, then we could
place on it a closed contour not contractible to a point, which would not cut up
the undivided surface. Thus the genus of the surface could be reduced by one, and
there would also be n neighbouring points on it, contrary to hypothesis. For the
number F of these simply-connected faces, we obtain the upper bound
3
this is because around each of the it points lie it - I faces, which certainly are at
least triangles, since if digons were to be found two of the it points would be
doubly joined with each other. Now we apply to the system of vertices, edges and
faces of the surface of genus p the generalized Euler polyhedral theorem, thus
obtaining
2
-2=n(n-1)-n-F,
2
2-1 n(n-1)_n-n(n-1)
p" -
2
3
(n -3)(n -4)
12
and since
(A)
in every case p must be an integer. we can write
(n-3)(n -4)+2a
12
where 2a is the smallest positive integer which makes the numerator divisible by
12. It is very easily seen that this number can only be an even one. and
furthermore, that a can only have one of the values 0. 2. 3. 5.
8.
For the lowest values of n, that is n = 3, 4, the inequality sign in the formula
(A) can be omitted. Further, we shall show in the sequel that. at least for the
values up to it = 12 inclusive, and so for all practical values of it. our problem will
indeed be solved exhaustively by the equation
(B)
pw = (n -3)(n -4)+2a
12
For the following values of p. namely p = p,., p + 1. p + 2, ... , p,,., - 1, where it
is such a value for which equation (B) is valid, the converse question of the
maximum number it, of neighbouring elements on a surface of genus p will then
be answered by the equation
(C)
7 +I
rt,=2
/ +4 p- a,,
where a,, denotes the smallest positive integer which makes the radicand into a
square. (In this form, with the addition of the sign <, the result appears in
Heawood [7A]. if there the value K, of which Heawood only says it is 'a positive

120
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
constant depending on the connectivity of the complete surface', be put equal to
2p - 2.) Hence if a,< 6, then the value of p employed would be such that the
corresponding number of neighbouring regions it, did not already occur on a
surface of smaller genus. If a, a6, namely = 61, +a ,, where a',<6, then the same
number of neighbouring regions already occurs on a surface of genus p - S.
Before we begin the promised proof, the following remarks necessary for
understanding it must be stated.
9.
The numbers a have a simple significance with reference to the nature of
the network on the surface. If there are it points on any surface of genus p. and
the resulting faces are all simply-connected, then the relation
(n-3)(n-4)+2a
p
12
n(n- 1)-a
certainly always holds, whence the number of faces is
3
. Thus in the
whole network there are now exactly n(n - 1) polygonal vertices or angles. so a is
the number of polygonal vertices which remain if three vertices are removed from
each face. Hence if equation (B) holds, the faces corresponding to the four
possible values of a (0. 2. 3. 5) form respectively:
1) triangles;
or
or
or
2) triangles and 2 quadrangles
or triangles and I pentagon;
3) triangles and 3 quadrangles
or triangles, I quadrangle. I pentagon
or triangles and 1 hexagon;
4) triangles and 5 quadrangles
or...
or finally: triangle- and 1 octagon.
Of particular interest is the case where a = 0, that is, supposing that equation (B)
n(n-1)
holds, when the whole surface is divided into
3
triangles, of which every
n - I meet in a vertex; or, in the dual interpretation, in it (n
of which
every three form a polyhedral vertex. We shall call these cases regular. They arise
if a = 0, so that it has one of the four forms:
n=12n,
n=12a+3,
n=12K+4,
n=12u+7,
because the genus p of the surface, of which such regular division is possible,
satisfies the necessary condition
1+48p=A'

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
121
A' - 1
or
P
48
where
A' = I mod. 48.
Put K = 0; then from the third line one has n = 4, and consequently p = 0 (such
a regular case is for example the surface of the tetrahedron). Indeed, all regular
cases are formed by the generalizations of the tetrahedron to surfaces of higher
genus in the sense of analysis situs, and of course in one or other of their two dual
conceptions; just as we consider the tetrahedron (for which the dual manifesta-
tions coincide) as a system of four faces each of which borders the three others, or
as a network of four points, each of which is connected to the three others on the
surface.
§3
Arithmetical
form
of
the
investigation.-Proof
of
the
equation
(B)
for n = 4, 5.....12.
10.
The difficulties inherent in the attempt to prove equation (B) have their
origin in the purely arithmetical nature of the problem. Indeed a purely arithmeti-
cal form can be given to it. One considers n (n - 1)-gons (dually, it simply-
connected faces as the carriers of it points, from each of which it - 1 lines go
across the boundary), labels them by writing thereon the numbers 1, 2..... it.
and then labels each of the sides of the Polygon K by one of the numbers 1 , 2, ... ,
K - 1, K + 1..... n, in order to indicate to which other polygon the polygon K is
to be joined along this edge. Then, if one fastens them together in the manner
indicated, a closed surface is always obtained which is divided into it regions; but
124)+2a". If this number is
the genus of it will in general exceed
3)(n
achieved, then the total number of vertices is n(n - 1) -a
3
The arrangement of A polygons, 1, 2.... , A for example, meeting at one vertex
(or
k points 1, 2..... A being vertices of one polygon). is thence expressed
arithmetically by the sequence of them in a clockwise order around the vertex. If.
for instance, the order is the natural one 1, 2, ... , A, then among the it - 1
numbers which label the sides of I are: 2, A (following in that order); and in
polygon 2 we have: 3. 1: for 3: 4. 2; and so on. We shall say that these A number
pairs form a cycle of A elements or pairs. In particular, therefore, a trivalent vertex
(or triangle) gives a three element cycle
(IK),
(KI),
(Ii):
and then it follows that among the boundary segments of the polygon i, and in
clockwise succession, are K, I; in K are 1, i : and in 1 are i, K.
So our problem is now this (where the numbers in each line are to be
considered as closed into a cycle):
(D)
(1) the numbers 2, 3, .... n (which represent the sides of polygon 1),
(2) the numbers 1, 3, ... , it (which represent the sides of polygon 2).
(n) the numbers 1, 2, ... , n - I (which represent the sides of polygon n),

122
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
n(n - 1)-a
are to be arranged so that the number of cycles arising is exactly
3
For
the sake of brevity we shall denote such an array by (D).
11.
For each of the numbers n = 4, 5, 6, ... , 11, 12, the following tables give
an arrangement (D) by which the validity of statement (B), and simultaneously (C),
is proved. Above each table is placed the value of n and of p,,, a,,, and
n(n-1)-a
F=
3
. In the tables the number pairs which belong to cycles of more
than three elements are marked by a curve placed under them, while under each
table we give the number of triangles, and those cycles which have more than
three elements.
n=4. p4=0, a,=0, F=4.
n=5, ps=1, as=5, F=5.
Regular (tetrahedron).
1) 3 2 4 5
1)234
2)435 1
2)314
3)5412
3)41 2
4) 1523
4)213
5)2134
4 triangles.
5 quadrangles: [1342], [1435],
[1254], [15231, [3245].
In the table for n = 5 a curve should strictly be placed under every pair, and they
are all omitted for that reason; the arrangement is illustrated in Fig. [7.8]. The
closed surface of genus one is obtained by joining together the lines AB and DC,
BC and AD. The result is a 'pentahedron', for which, just as for the tetrahedron,
the two dual manifestations coincide. The five vertices of the pentahedron are
neighbouring points. (Thus we have another surface, regularly divided into five
quadrangles, and with genus greater than zero, which is not contained in the four
series of regular cases cited above. One can easily convince oneself that, in our
problem where the least genus is always sought, other regular divisions cannot
arise. Letting that restriction fall, the tetrahedron and pentahedron are just the
first cases in an infinite series of regular surfaces, to which I hope to return when
the opportunity arises. These are surfaces of genus (n
1)((n
4) (n = 4, 5, 8,
9-- 4K, 4K + 1....), which are divided into n neighbouring (n -1)-gons so that
A
B
D
C
FIG. 7.8.

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
123
just n vertices arise, which are simultaneously neighbouring points. Compare the
previous figure and the following Figure [7.9], also the figures of W. Dyck [9].)
n=6, p6=1, as=3, F=9.
n=7,p,=1. a7=0,F=14.
Regular.
1) 3564
1) 2 4 3 7 5 6
2)465.1 5
2) 3 5 4 1 6 7
3)5146
3) 4 6 5 2 7
1
4)625_,3 1
4) 5 7 6 3 1
2
5) 1 3642
5) 6 1 7 4 2 3
6) 2453
6) 7 2
1 5 3 4
8 triangles and the hexagon
7)
1 3 2 6 4 5
[123456].
14 triangles.
B
1)
FIG. 7.9.
Fig. [7.9] illustrates the arrangement for n = 7 on a surface of genus 1. The
continuous lines divide the surface into seven neighbouring hexagons; the dotted
lines join the middle points of these with one another. The closed surface results
by joining to one another the lines AB and ED. BC and FE, CD and AF.
1) 2345678
2) 3 1 85476
314 1 2 6 7 5 8
4)21 3 8 6 5 7
5)61_s8374
6) 2_I 5 4 8 7 3
7) 8 X4536
8) 2
1 7 6 4 3 5
16 triangles and the two quadrangles [ 1425], [1627].
s
s
t
s

124
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Heffter's tables for n = 5. 6, and 7 have the property that all rows may
be obtained from the first row by cyclic permutations. In the remainder of
his paper, after presenting tables for n = 9, 10, 11, and 12, he went on to
show that such a cyclic arrangement is possible only when n = 5, 6, or n
is of the form 12K + 7. He then gave an explicit construction for this case,
under the additional restrictions that 4K + 3 is a prime number (= q, say)
and the order of 2 in the multiplicative group of residues modulo q is
either q - I or 12(q - 1). These conditions define a sequence which begins
n = 19. 31. 55. 67. 139. 175, 199.... , but even today we do not know
whether or not the sequence continues indefinitely. A leading twentieth-
century mathematician. Emil Artin, has made a deep conjecture in
number theory, whose truth would imply that Heffter's sequence is
infinite; unfortunately Artin's conjecture has been proved only by assum-
ing the truth of an even more enigmatic conjecture-the 'generalized
Riemann hypothesis' [10]. So Heftier never knew if he had proved
X(SP) = h(p) for infinitely many values of p. In fact, the question is now an
academic one, for it has been shown (in a similar, but independent, way)
that X(SP) = h(p) for all p -- 1 [ 11]. Although Heawood and Heftier each
lived to a ripe old age-Heawood died in 1955 at the age of 93, and
Heifer in 1962 at 99-neither of them lived to see the complete solution
of the problem in 1967.
One-sided surfaces
A good account of the strange properties of one-sided surfaces may be
found in a little hook by Frechet and Fan [12]. We shall give a brief,
self-contained outline, referring the reader to that book for more details.
Let us begin with an illustration: an insect crawling on the inside
surface of a sphere is trapped, for it cannot find any route which will bring
it onto the outside surface. The inside and outside surfaces are quite
distinct. and so we say that the sphere is a two-sided surface. This property
of two-sidedness is shared by the torus (S1) and all the closed surfaces
(SP) constructed in Chapter 5 by attaching handles to a sphere. However,
in the second half of the nineteenth century, mathematicians realised that
two-sidedness is not an inherent property of all surfaces. An example of a
surface having only one side was discovered, in about 1858, by Listing
[ 131 and Mobius [ 14] independently (see also [ 15], [16])-. this surface is
now known as the Mobius strip.
The construction of a Mobius strip is quite simple. We take a rectangu-
lar strip ABCD. give it a half-twist, and join the ends AD, BC so that A
coincides with C and B with D (Fig. 7.10). If our wandering insect starts
at a point 0 on the 'equator' and crawls once around the strip, it will find
itself back at the same point 0, but on the 'other side' of the surface.
There is, in fact, only one side!

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
B
c
FIG. 7.10.
125
It is natural to ask if one-sidedness can occur in a closed surface-the
Mobius strip is not closed, for it has a boundary curve. Such surfaces do
exist, but in order to construct them we must renounce the limitations of
three-dimensional space. This is no hindrance to the mathematician, for
whom spaces of many dimensions are a commonplace, but it does mean
that the visualization of these surfaces is rather complicated.
First, let us consider the boundary curve of a Mobius strip. It is formed
from the two edges AB, CD of a rectangle by joining A to C and B to D,
and so. topologically, it is just a circle; certainly, the circle is twisted and
looped, but nevertheless it is still a circle. We now imagine that the
boundary circle of a Mobius strip is untwisted and unlooped, so that it
becomes a flat circle lying in a plane. Although this is mathematically
possible, it cannot be done in ordinary three-dimensional space without
causing the strip to intersect itself. An attempt to picture the result of
flattening the boundary circle in this way is shown in Fig. 7.11; a Mobius
strip in this form is called a cross-cap. In order to construct a closed
one-sided surface, we take a sphere, cut out a piece with a circular
boundary, and attach a cross-cap in its place. Clearly, we could be more
general: if q circular holes are made and q cross-caps attached thereto,
then we still get a closed one-sided surface. So we have an infinite family
Y. , T:?, ... of surfaces which are both closed and one-sided. Indeed, it
FIG. 7.11.

126
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
may be shown that any surface which has these two properties is topologi-
cally equivalent to one of the surfaces 1q [12]. Just as for the two-sided
surfaces, the Euler characteristic
Ti(M)=N,.-NN+N1
is the same for all maps M on Gq, and its constant value turns out to be
,q (Y.,) = 2-q.
The colouring of maps on one-sided surfaces was investigated by
Heinrich TIErzE at the beginning of this century, using Heffter's formula-
tion of the problem in terms of neighbouring regions. He showed [7C]
that the Mi bius strip admits six neighbouring regions and deduced that its
chromatic number is six. For the closed surface E, he found X(11) = 6, but
the chromatic number of 12 eluded him. The latter surface, which Tietze
called the 'closed two-fold one-sided surface', is now usually known as
the Klein bottle-it is a somewhat inefficient bottle, since it has no inside,
but the reason for its name may be apparent from the sketch in Fig. 7.12.
Tietze also applied the arguments of Heawood to obtain an upper
bound for X(Y.,, ). His result may be derived by substituting 1q for S and
2 - q for q(S) in the general formula given earlier in this chapter. We find,
for q , 2,
X(1q)=h(y-q)=[i+,,/(1+24q)].
A translation of part of Tietze's paper follows. About half of the
original consisted of footnotes dealing with historical matters (mentioned
elsewhere in this book) and terminology; we have suppressed most of the
footnotes in the translation.
Fit. 7.12.

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
127
7C
H. TIETZE
EINIGE BEMERKUNGEN USER DAS PROBLEM DES KARTENFARBENS AUF
EINSEITIGEN FLACHEN
[Some remarks on the problem of map-colouring on one-sided surfaces]
Jahresberichr der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 19 (1910), 155-159.
That five neighbouring regions (spatia confinia) can be constructed on a Mobius
strip (14. p. 482], that is five regions each of which touches the others along at
least one edge, was reported by L. Heffter in his work 'Uber das Problem der
Nachbargebiete' [7B]. As will be shown here, it is possible for six, but no more,
neighbouring regions to be marked on a Mobius strip.
A'
I
6
B
B'
3
I
1
1
2
4
A
1.
If the edge AB of the rectangle in the figure were to be brought into
coincidence with the edge A'B' (and, therefore, A with A', B with B') then the
arrangement of regions illustrated would furnish an example of six neighbouring
regions on the resulting Mobius strip, provided that we coalesce into one region
on the strip regions labelled with the same numbers (e.g. 5) but separated in the
figure. So at least six neighbouring regions can be constructed on any one-sided
surface, since on any one-sided surface there are areas which represent a Mobius
strip.
2.
The simple adaptation of an argument employed by Heawood [7A] for
two-sided surfaces to the case of one-sided surfaces now shows that not more than
six neighbouring regions can exist on the Mobius strip. Henceforth let N be the
value of the Euler characteristic ao - a, - a2. attached to a given surface
where
ao, a,, a2 denote the number of vertices, edges, faces of such a division. For an
arbitrary map drawn on 3 (that is, for an arbitrary division of
into bounded
regions which need not necessarily be faces), we obtain the equation
(1)
a - k+N,=a-k+f+
(N,-1)=N,
where e, k, f are the number of vertices, edges and components of this division
and N, is the value of N pertaining to the ith component. Moreover, denoting by
k,, the number of edge-ends which are incident with the hth vertex, then by virtue
of
=
2k
ti-,

128
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
we obtain from (1) the relation
ti_.
(2)
(N,-1) - E (k,,-3).
I
1,_1
Since for all components, whether two- or one-sided, we have N,!51, and
assuming throughout the following investigation that all k,, >_ 3, it follows that
(3)
At= jX6(1
where A, is the average number of.edges which are contained in a face. For the
simplest type of closed one-sided surface, as represented for example by the
projective plane, N = 1, so that At <6. Consequently, for each division of such a
surface, at least one region is contiguous with at most 5 other regions. Thus it
follows by a simple induction proof (see [7A]) that, for every map on the surface,
6 colours certainly suffice to give each of the regions one of the colours, in such a
way that no two regions which are adjacent to one another along one or more edges
exhibit the same colour.
In general, the smallest number c of colours which suffice to colour each map
on a surface in the specified manner, is never smaller than the largest possible
number v of neighbouring regions on the surface. Thus, for every one-sided
surface which can be regarded as a portion of the closed one-sided surface under
consideration, and also for this surface itself, the equation:
c=v=6
follows.
Thus, in particular, for all maps on the projective plane or the Mobius strip, the
regions can be distinguished by 6 colours, and so not more than 6 neighbouring
regions may be drawn.
3.
For the closed 2-fold one-sided surface, N = 0 and At
6, implying that
c:-57. whilst on the other hand, just as for every one-sided surface, v6.
Whether there is a map on this surface whose colouring actually requires 7
colours, and in particular whether it has 7 neighbouring regions, remains unde-
cided. In any case, 7 such neighbouring regions, in as much as they fill up the
whole closed surface, must be the totality of faces; this follows from (2) (under the
permissible assumption k,, ? 3) since k ? 7.6
Z , or by considerations analogous to
those employed by Heffter [7B].
If q > 2. then for a closed q-fold one-sided surface we have N <0. So from (3),
as Heawood has shown for c. and hence also for v,
,J7-x(49-24N))=47+,/(1+24q)1
V'5 C!S
2
2
where Ft x i denotes the largest integer I x.
4.
For several years I have given a lecture [17] concerning the facts mentioned
in Sections 1 and 2. and on those occasions I have also exhibited the 6 regions on
the Mobius strip using a model made of coloured materials. In the meantime. I
have noticed that the presence of 6 neighbouring regions on the one-fold
one-sided surface is already contained implicitly in the first of the examples of
one-sided surfaces given by Mobius [14]. It is a polyhedral surface ([18] p. 39 and
figure) which in a concrete realization can be obtained in the following manner.

COLOURING MAPS ON SURFACES
129
Let A, B, C. D, E be the points with rectangular coordinates (0, 0, 0), (1, 0, 0).
(0, 1.0). 6, J. i). (0, 0. 1). and let F be any point which does not lie in a plane with
any of the 5 triangles (d) (see below). The said polyhedron consists of the 10
triangles:
(d) ABC, BCD. CDE. DEA, EAB
(d') FAC FBD,
F'CE,
FDA,
FEB.
It is a closed one-fold one-sided surface of the same type as the projective
plane. Each of the 6 vertices is connected with every other by an edge
passing through the surface. By transition to the reciprocal (dual) figure of the
surface [7B], we obtain 6 regions, of which each one borders every other along
one edge of the region; that is, 6 neighbouring regions.
It is worth emphasizing that Tietze was unable to obtain the chromatic
number of the Klein bottle, <<. As he pointed out, the existence of six
neighbouring regions on a Mobius strip, and hence on any one-sided
closed surface, means that X(-2) = 6; the general 'Heawood bound' gives
X(12)-_ 7.
In the 1930s these questions were taken up by several American
mathematicians, as part of a resurgence of interest in colouring problems.
In 1934 Philip FRANKLIN [19] proved that x(2)6, a rather surprising
result, since it means that the Heawood bound is not attained in this case.
However, I. N. Kagno [20] then showed that if q = 3, 4, and 6, then
X(2q) = h(` q 1. We now know the complete solution of the map colouring
problem for one-sided surfaces [21 ], and it turns out that the Klein bottle
is truly anomalous. It is the only closed surface S for which X(S) is not
equal to h(S).
References
1. BALTZER, R. Eine Erinnerung an Mobius and semen Freund Weiske. Ber. K. Sdchs.
Ges. Wiss. Leipzig .Math.-Phys. Cl. 37 (1885), 1-6.
2. MADDISON. 1. Note on the history of the map-coloring problem. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
3 (1896-7), 257.
3. ROUSE BALL. W. W. Mathematical recreations and essays (11th edn.). Macmillan.
London, 1939.
4. BELL. E. T. The development of mathematics (2nd edn.). McGraw-Hill. New York.
1945.
5. COXETER. H. S. M. The four-color map problem. Math. Teacher 52 (1959). 283-289.
6. MAXWELL. J. C. On reciprocal figures and diagrams of forces. Phil. Mag. (4) 27 (18641.
250-261 = Sci. Papers. Vol. 1, 514-525.
7 MAXWELL. J. C. On reciprocal figures. frames and diagrams of forces. Trans. Roy. Soc.
Edinb. 26 11869-72). 1-40 = Sci. Papers. Vol. 2. 161-207.
8. HEATH, T. L. The thirteen books of Euclid's elements, Vol. 3. Dover, New York, 1956.
9. DYCK. W. Gruppentheoretische Studien. Math. Ann. 20 (1882). 1-44.
10. HOOLEY. C. On Artin's conjecture. J. Reine Angew. Math. 225 (1967), 209-220.
11. RINGEL, G. and You"Gs. J. W. T. Solution of the Heawood map-coloring problem.
Proc. Nat. Acad. Ski. U.S.A. 60 (1968), 438-445.

130
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
12. FRECHET, M. and FAN, K. Initiation to combinatorial topology. Prindle, Weber and
Schmidt, Boston, 1967.
13. LISTING,
J. B. Der Census raumlicher Complexe oder Verallgemeinerung des
Euler'schen Satzes von den Polyedern. Abh. K. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen Math. CL 10
(1861-2), 97-182 = Separately as book, Dieterich'sche Verlagshandlung, G8ttingen,
1862.
14. Modus, A. F. Uber die Bestimmung des Inhaltes eines Polyeders. Ber. K. Sachs. Ges.
Wiss. Leipzig Math.-Phys. Cl. 17 (1865), 31-68 = Werke, Vol. 2, 473-512.
15. STACKEL, P. Die Entdeckung der einseitigen Flachen. Math. Ann. 52 (1899), 598-600.
16. MOBIUS, A. F. Zur Theorie der Polyeder and der Elementarverwandtschaft (Mit-
theilungen aus Mbbius' Nachlass, ed. C. Reinhardt). Werke, Vol. 2, 515-559.
17. [Meeting of the Mathematical Society of Vienna, 10 February 1905]. Jahresber. Deut.
Math.-Ver. 14 (1905), 202.
18. KLEIN, F. Elementar-Mathematik vom hoheren Standpunkte aus, Vol. 2. Teubner,
Leipzig, 1911. English edn.: Elementary mathematics from an advanced standpoint,
geometry. Dover, New York, 1939.
19. FRANKLIN, P. A six color problem. J. Math. Phys. 13 (1934), 363-369.
20. KAGNO, I. N. A note on the Heawood color formula. J. Math. Phys. 14 (1935),
228-231.
21. RINGEL, G. Farbungsprobleme auf Flachen and Graphen. DeutscherVerlag der Wiss.,
Berlin, 1959.

8
Ideas from Algebra and Topology
G. R. KIRCHHOFF (1824-87)
THE branches of mathematics are not isolated from one another, but are
interlinked in many ways; for instance, in Chapters 1 and 2 we described
how the origins of graph theory are related to those of topology. One of
the aims of this chapter is to show how the growth of topology, in the
years from 1860 to 1930, led to a second infusion of topological ideas
into the study of graphs.
Another important factor in the development of both topology and
graph theory was the use of techniques from modern algebra. The first
such example of the use of algebraic methods was due to a physicist,
rather than to a mathematician, and we shall begin by explaining the
relevant background, which is concerned with the structure of the set of
circuits in a graph.
The algebra of circuits
In 1845 a young student of physics, Gustav Robert KIRCHHOFF,
formulated two rules which govern the flow of electricity in a network of
wires [1]; these rules are now known as Kirchhoff's laws. From our point
of view, such a network may be thought of as a graph, with certain physical
characteristics which need not concern us here. One of Kirchhoff's laws
deals with the current flow around a circuit, and it leads to a set of linear
equations, one for each circuit in the graph. These equations are not all

132
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
independent, and so there arises the question of how many of them are
necessary in order to obtain the complete set. It was this question which
Kirchhoff asked and answered in 1847 [8A].
a
h
Fic. 8.1.
Let us consider the graph-theoretical implications of this problem, by
means of a simple example. The graph shown in Fig. 8.1 contains three
circuits, which we may denote by their sets of edges: C, = abe, C2 = cde,
and C3 = abcd. It is clear that the circuit C3 is, in some sense, the `sum' of
C, and C2. To make this precise, we shall say that the sum of two circuits
consists of all those edges which belong to one, but not to both, of them;
this can be extended in an obvious way to the sum of any finite number of
circuits. A set of circuits is said to be independent if no one of them can
be expressed as a sum of others, so that in our example, the sets {C1, C2}
and {C1, C3} are independent, whereas the set {C1, C2, C3} is not. A
maximal set of independent circuits is called a fundamental set.
Our problem is to find the number of circuits in a fundamental set, and
to describe a method for constructing such a set; if a fundamental set is
given, then every other circuit can be written as a sum of members of this
set. The problem treated by Kirchhoff is essentially the same-the linear
equation corresponding to a sum of circuits is just the sum of the
equations corresponding to the individual circuits, and consequently the
equations corresponding to an independent set of circuits are independ-
ent.
In his 1847 paper [8A], Kirchhoff explained how a fundamental set of
circuits may be constructed (Section 1), and proved that, for any con-
nected graph with m vertices and n edges, a fundamental set always
contains n - m + 1 circuits (Section 5). We have omitted those parts of his
paper in which he dealt with the technicalities of determining the currents
in the wires of the network, but the statement of the result of this
calculation has been retained.

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
133
8A
G. R. KIRCHHOFF
UBER DIE AUSFLOSUNG DER GLEICHUNGEN. AUF WELCHE MAN
BEI DER UNTFRSUCHUNG DER LINEAREN VERTHEILUNG
GALVANISCHER STROME GEFUHRT WIRD
[On the solution of the equations obtained from the investigation of the linear
distribution of galvanic currents]
Annalen der Physik and Chemie 72 (1847). 497-508.
If we are given a system of n wires, 1, 2 ... n, which are joined to one another
in an arbitrary way, and if the system has an arbitrary electromotive force in series
with each of the wires, then the number of equations necessary for determining
the strengths of the currents I1, Iz... I,,, flowing through the wires, is obtained by
applying the following two theorems [1]:
1. If the wires k1, kz.... form a closed figure, and if wk denotes the resistance
of the wire k, and Ek denotes the electromotive force in series with it, taken to be
positive in the same direction as Ik, then in the case when Ik,, Ik ... are all
considered as positive in the same direction:
wk, Ik, + Wk, Ik, + ... = Ek, + Ek, + ... .
11. If the wires A1, k,,,... meet together in one point, and if Ik IA,,... are all
taken to be positive towards this point, then:
I,,,+I,,+...=0.
Assuming that the given system of wires does not decompose into quite separate
parts, 1 shall now prove that the solutions of the equations. which are obtained for
I1. 12, ... , I by using these theorems, can be stated in general as follows:
Let m be the number of available crossing-points. i.e. the points where two or
more wires meet, and let µ = n - m + 1. Then the common denominator of all the
currents I is the sum of those combinations of µ elements wk, . wk, .... wk,
chosen from w,. w:, ... w,,. which have the property that. after the removal of the
wires k1, k2,.. k,., no closed figure remains. The numerator of I is the sum of
those combinations of µ - i elements,
wk, . wk, .... w,ti_,, chosen from w1,
wz ... w,,, which have the property that, after the removal of k1. kz, . . . k,._,. one
closed figure remains, and contains A. Each combination is multiplied by the sum
of the electromotive forces occurring in the relevant closed figure. The electromo-
tive forces are taken to be positive in the direction in which I is taken to be
positive.
For the sake of simplicity. I shall divide my proof of this theorem into separate
sections.
1.
Let µ be the least number of wires that must be removed from an arbitrary
system so that all the closed figures are destroyed: then µ is also the number of
independent equations which can be obtained by using Theorem 1.
For, one can find µ equations which are independent of one another, and from
which every equation obtained from Theorem I may be derived, as follows:
Let 1 , 2 ... µ - l . µ be µ wires whose removal leaves no closed figure, and
such that the removal of any µ -1 of these wires leaves one closed figure. Let us

134
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
apply Theorem I to the closed figures which remain if
2,3,....p.
1,
3.....µ
1,2,3,....µ-1
respectively, are removed.
None of the µ equations formed in this way can be a consequence of the others,
since each one contains an unknown which does not appear in any others; only
the first contains I,, the second 12, and so on. But from these equations, every
other equation which can be obtained from Theorem I can be derived; for an
equation derived from a closed figure made up from several other closed figures,
must itself be obtainable from the equations for these other figures (by addition
and subtraction); and, as we wish to show, every closed figure can be made up
from those µ figures. The collection of closed figures of the given system, which
we shall denote by S, can be divided into those containing the wire µ, and those
contained in the system S' obtained from S by removing the wire µ. We suppose
that all of the figures of the second type can be made up from the first µ -1 of
those µ figures, and so we see that every figure of the system S may be made up
from all µ of them. For, an arbitrary figure containing the wire IL is made up from
a particular one containing µ, and others to which µ does not belong. But the
assumption made about the system S' may be reduced to a similar assumption
with regard to S", where S" is the system which arises from S by removing both µ
and µ - 1; namely to the assumption that all closed figures occuring in S" can be
made up from the first It - 2 of those µ. By continuing in this way, we eventually
arrive at the system
S('-1); since this contains only one closed figure, the
correctness of the assumption we must make for this system in order to see the
truth of our assertion, is itself clear.
5.
In order to prove our theorem, as we stated it, we must still show that
µ = n - m + 1. This statement holds only if the given system of wires does not
decompose into quite separate parts, whereas our discussion so far did not require
such a hypothesis.
As we have seen, µ is the number of independent equations which can be
obtained from Theorem I; therefore the number of independent equations
obtained from Theorem II must be n - µ. But it will now be shown that, under
our hypothesis, this number is m -1, whence it follows that µ = n - m + 1. One
cannot obtain more than m - 1 independent equations from Theorem II; if we
apply that theorem to all m of the crossing-points, then each current I appears
twice in the resulting equations, once with the coefficient +1, the other time with
the coefficient -1; the sum of all these equations thus gives the identity 0 = 0. But
the equations obtained by applying that theorem to m -1 arbitrary crossing-
points are independent of one another, since they have the property that if we
choose any number of them, at least one of the unknowns appears only once.
Let us call the crossing-points 1, 2, .. in, and let us call (K, A) a wire joining the 2
points K and A. Then if, in the equations corresponding to the points K1, K2 .. K,,,
one of those points (Ki, say) is joined to another point A (other than K2 .. Kr), the

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
135
unknown
will occur only once. But if the wires joining the points K1, K2.. Kv
to one another do not form a self-closed system, then one of the points Ki, K2 .. K
must also be joined to a point A, as well as being joined to others of the same set.
Kirchhoff's laws soon found their rightful place among the basic facts of
elementary physics. But the mathematical techniques underlying his gen-
eral method of solution were of less immediate practical value, and their
importance was not recognized until mathematicians began to employ
algebraic methods in topology.
The two classic works of Listing, the Topologie and the Census, heralded
the investigation and application of topological ideas in several branches
of mathematics, a process which developed sporadically throughout the
second half of the nineteenth century. Then, in the years 1895-1904, a
series of papers by Henri Poincare laid the foundations of the subject now
known as `algebraic topology'.
Among other things, Poincare developed [2] a method for constructing
geometrical objects, which he called `complexes' (following Listing), from
basic building blocks, called `cells'. In order to describe how the cells fit
together, he adapted Kirchhoff's technique, replacing the system of linear
equations by a matrix. The simplest kinds of cells are the 0-cells (vertices)
and the 1-cells (edges); a complex constructed from such cells is a graph,
and the matrix which Poincare used to describe how the cells are fitted
together in this case is no1v called the `incidence matrix' of the graph. All
of this will be clarified presently.
Poincare's theory was an instant success. One of the first books to
include an account of it was the third volume of the famous Encyklopadie
der Mathematischen Wissenschaften, a monumental work which was in-
tended to survey all the mathematical knowledge available at the time. Its
twenty-three volumes, published from 1898 to 1935, contained articles by
eminent scholars on all branches of mathematics. The article on topology
(Analysis Situs) was written in 1907 by M. Dehn and P. Heegaard [3] and
is of historical importance in graph theory, since it began with a section
on graphs (called Liniensysteme). This was the first comprehensive ac-
count of the subject, and it contained an extensive set of references, not
all of them accurate.
At about this time topological ideas began to spread in the United
States of America, mainly through the influence of George David Bia-
KHOFF and Oswald VEBLEN. (In addition to their general interest in
topology, both men were intrigued by the four-colour conjecture, and in
the next chapter we shall give an account of their work on that notorious
problem.) In 1916, Veblen gave a series of American Mathematical

136
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
---------------
FIG. 8.2.
Society Colloquium lectures on Analysis Situs, and these were later
published as a book. Like the authors of the Encyklopddie article, Veblen
chose to introduce the general theory by means of a chapter on graphs.
In the extract [8B] which we give here, Veblen showed clearly how the
ideas of Kirchhoff had been formalized by Poincare. One central concept
is the number of circuits in a fundamental set. This number had already
appeared in various guises-as the 'cyclomatic number' in Listing's Cen-
sus, and the 'degree of continuity' (less one) in Jordan's work on trees
[3B]. In the algebraic treatment it turns out to be the dimension of the
kernel of the incidence matrix, and so it is related to the rank of this
matrix.
Veblen also discussed Kirchhoff's method for constructing a fundamen-
tal set of circuits, in a form which clarified its relationship with the
problem of finding a special kind of tree in a graph (Sections 26 and 27 of
[SB]). He showed that every connected graph contains a tree which
includes every vertex of the graph; in modern terminology, this is called a
spanning tree. For example, a spanning tree in the graph depicted in Fig.
8.2 is indicated by the unbroken edges. From each spanning tree in a
graph it is possible to construct a fundamental set of circuits, in the
manner explained by Veblen at the end of our extract.
8B
O. VEBLEN
LINEAR GRAPHS
Analysis Sirus. (American
Mathematical Society Colloquium Lectures 1916). New
York. 1922.
Symbols for Sets of Cells
14. Let us denote the 0-cells of a one-dimensional complex C, by a,". a:°....
a,,," and the 1-cells by a,'. a,'..... a.,'.

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
137
Any set of 0-cells of C, may be denoted by a symbol (x,, x2..... x.,) in which
x, = 1 if a° is in the set and x = 0 if a.° is not in the set. Thus. for example, the
pair of points a,°. a,° in Fig. [8.3] is denoted by (1, 0, 0, 1). The total number of
symbols (x,, x2, ... , x,) is 2°. Hence the total number of sets of 0-cells, barring
the null-set, is 2'-- 1. The symbol for a null-set. (0. 0, .... 0) will be referred to as
zero and denoted by 0.
The marks 0 and I which appear in the symbols just defined may profitably be
regarded as residues, modulo 2, i.e., as symbols which may be combined algebrai-
cally according to the rules
0+0=1+1=0,
0+1=1+0=1.
0x0=0x1=1x0=0,
1x1=1.
Under this convention the sum (mod. 2) of two symbols, or of the two sets of
points which correspond to the symbols (x,, x2, ... ,
X and (y,, y2, ... ,
y,) = Y , may be defined as (x,+ y,,
V , , . . . . ,
y,) = X+ Y. Geometrically,
X + Y is the set of all points which are in X or in Y but not in both.
For example, if X = (1.0.0, 1) and Y = (0. 1, 0, 1). X + Y = (1, 1, 0, 0); i.e., X
represents a,° and a,°. Y represents a2° and a,°, and X+ Y represents a,° and
a2 . Since a,° appears in both X and Y, it is suppressed in forming the sum,
modulo 2.
This type of addition has the obvious property that if two sets contain each an
even number of 0-cells, the sum (mod. 2) contains an even number of 0-cells.
15. Any set. S. of 1-cells in C, may be denoted by a symbol (x,, .x;, .... x,,.) in which
x, = 1 if a,' is in the set and x, = 0 if a,' is not in the set. The 1-cells in the set may
be thought of as labelled with l's and those not in the set as labelled with 0's. The
symbol is also regarded as representing the one-dimensional complex composed
of the 1-cells of S and the 0-cells which bound them. Thus, for example, in fig.
[8.3] the boundaries of two of the faces are (1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0) and (1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1).
The sum (mod. 2) of two symbols (x,. x2, ... , x.,) is defined in the same way as
for the case of symbols representing 0-cells. Correspondingly if C; and C; are
one-dimensional complexes which have a certain number (which may be zero) of
1-cells in common and have no other common points except the ends of these
1-cells, the sum
C;+Ci (mod. 2)
is defined as the one-dimensional complex obtained by suppressing all 1-cells

138
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
common to Ci and Ci and retaining all 1-cells which appear only in Cl' or in Cl.
For example, in Fig. [8.3], the sum of the two curves represented by (1, 0, 1, 0, 1, 0)
and (1, 1, 0, 0, 0, 1) is (0, 1, 1, 0, 1, 1) which represents the curve composed of
a2', a3', a51, a6' and their ends.
The Matrices Ho and H1
16. ..... Any one-dimensional complex falls into R° sub-complexes each of
which is connected. Let us denote these sub-complexes by C11, C12, ... , C1R0, and
let the notation be assigned in such a way that aj° (i = 1, 2, ... , ml) are the 0-cells
of Cl', a° (i = m1 + 1, ... , m2) those of Cl', and so on.
With this choice of notation, the sets of vertices of
C,', C12,. . .
,
C1RO
respectively, are represented by the symbols (xi, x2, ... , x,O) which constitute the
rows of the following matrix.
MI
m2-m1
ao-mRO-1
II1
1
1
0
0
...
0
...
0
0 ...
011
0
0
...
0
1
1
...
1
...
0
0
...
0
H° =
110
0
...
0
0
0
...
0
...
1
1
...
111
For, most purposes it is sufficient to limit attention to connected complexes. In
such cases Ro = 1, and H° consists of one row all of whose elements are 1.
17. By the definition ..... a 0-cell is incident with a 1-cell if it is one of the ends
of the 1-cell, and under the same conditions the 1-cell is incident with the 0-cell.
The incidence relations between the 0-cells and the 1-cells may be represented in
a table or matrix of ao rows and a1 columns as follows: The 0-cells of C, having
been denoted by a°, (i =1, 2, ... , ao) and the 1-cells by a11, (j = 1, 2, ... , a1), let
the element of the ith row and the jth column of the matrix be 1 if a;° is incident
with all and let it be 0 if a;° is not incident with a11.
For example, the table for the linear graph of Fig. [8.3] formed by the vertices
and edges of a tetrahedron is as follows:
I
all
a21
ail
a41
a51
a61
a,°
1
0
0
0
1
1
a2
0
1
0
1
0
1
a3°
0
0
1
1
1
0
a4°
1
1
1
0
0
0
In the case of the complex used ..... to define a simple closed curve the
incidence matrix is
We shall denote the element of the ith row and jth column of the matrix of
incidence relations between the 0-cells and 1-cells by ?)if' and the matrix itself by
I"t=illl = Hl.

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
139
The ith row of H, is the symbol for the set of all 1-cells incident with a,° and the
jth column is the symbol for the set of two 0-cells incident with a,'.
The condition which we have imposed on the graph, that both ends of every
1-cell shall be among the ao 0-cells, implies that every column of the matrix
contains exactly two l's. Conversely, any matrix whose elements are 0's and l's
and which is such that each column contains exactly two l's can be regarded as
the incidence matrix of a linear graph. For to obtain such a graph it is only
necessary to take ao points in a 3-space, denote them arbitrarily by a,°, a2°.... ,
ate,°, and join the pairs which correspond to l's in the same column successively
by arcs not meeting the arcs previously constructed.
20. Denoting the connected sub-com?lexes of C, by C,'. C,'. . . . , C,"° as in § 16
let the notation be so assigned that a...... a,' are the 1-cells in Cl', a,,,,-,', ... .
the 1-cells in C,2; and so on. The matrix H, then must take the form
1
0
0
0:
0I 11
. 0 10.
00...111J
where all the non-zero elements are to be found in the matrices 1. If. Ill. etc., and
I is the matrix of C,'. 11 of C,2, etc. This is evident because no element of one of
the complexes C,' is incident with any element of an% of the others.
There are two non-zero elements in each column of H,. Hence if we add the
rows corresponding to any of the blocks I. II. etc. the sum is zero (mod. 2) in
every column. Hence the rows of H, are connected by R° linear relations.
Any linear combination (mod. 2) of the rows of H, corresponds to adding a
certain number of them together. If this gave zeros in all the columns it would
mean that there were two or no l's in each column of the matrix formed by the
given rows. and this would mean that any 1-cell incident with one of the 0-cells
corresponding to these rows would also be incident with another such 0-cell.
These 0-cells and the I -cells incident with them would therefore form a sub-complex
of C, which was not connected with any of the remaining 0-cells and I -cells of C1.
Hence it would consist of one or more of the complexes C,' (i = 1. 2..... R,,) and
the linear relations with which we started would be dependent on the R° relations
already found. Hence there are exactly R linearly independent linear relations
among the rows of H,. so that if p, is the rank of H,,
p, = a - Ro.
One-dimensional Ciircuils
22. A connected linear graph each vertex of which is an end of two and only two
I-cells is called a one-dimensional circuit or a I -circuit...... Any closed curve is
decomposed by any finite set of points on it into a 1-circuit. Conversely, it is easy
to see that the set of all points on a I-circuit is a simple closed curve. It is obvious.
further, that any linear graph such that each vertex is an end of two and only two
I-cells is either a I-circuit or a set of I-circuits no two of which have a point in
common.

140
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Consider a linear graph C, such that each vertex is an end of an even number
of edges. Let us denote by 2n, the number of edges incident with each vertex a,°.
The edges incident with each vertex a,° may be grouped arbitrarily in n, pairs no
two of which have an edge in common: let these pairs of edges be called the pairs
associated with the vertex u;'. Let C,' be a graph coincident with C, in such a way
that (1) there is one and only one point of C,' on each point of C, which is not a
vertex and (2) there are t, vertices of C,' on each vertex a;' of C, each of these
vertices of C,' being incident only with the two edges of C,' which coincide with a
pair associated with a,°.
The linear graph C,' has just two edges incident with each of its vertices and
therefore consists of a number of 1-circuits. Each of these 1-circuits is coincident
with a 1-circuit of C:. and no two of the 1-circuits of C, thus determined have a
I -ccl1 in common. Hence C, consists of a number of 1-circuits which have only a
finite number of 0-cells in common.
It is obvious that a linear graph composed of a number of closed curves having
only a finite number of points in common has an even number of 1-cells incident
with each vertex. Hence a necessary and sufficient condition that C, consist of a
number of 1-circuits having only 0-cells in common is that each 0-cell of C, be
incident with an even number of I-cells. A set of 1-circuits having only 0-cells in
common will be referred to briefly as a set of 1-circuits.
24. Let us now inquire under what circumstances a symbol (x,. X2, ... , xe,) for a
one-dimensional complex contained in C, will represent a 1-circuit or a system of
1-circuits.
Consider the sum
'X,rn,X t...+Tlw,'x.,
where the coefficients ,t,;' are the elements of the ith row of H,. Each term Tb,'x,
of this sum is 0 if u,' is not in the set of 1-cells represented by (x,, x2,. .., Xe,)
because in this case x, = 0: it is also zero if a,' is not incident with a° because
0 in this case. The term 1),, X, = I if a,' is incident with a,' and in the set
represented by (x,, x:.... ,
because in this case ,f,,' = I and x, = 1. Hence
there are as many non-zero terms in the sum as there are I-cells represented by
(x,. x:......r,, which are incident with a,°. Hence by §22 the required condition
is that the number of non-zero terms in the sum must be even. In other words if
the x's and
are reduced modulo 2 as explained in §14 we must have
(i= 1.2,....ao)
if and onh if 1.%:. x,..... x,.,) represents a 1-circuit or set of 1-circuits. The matrix
of this let of equations for congruences. mod. 21 is H,.
2-;. If the rank of the matrix H, of the equations tH,) be p, the theory of linear
homogeneous equations (congrucnces. mod. 2) tells us that there is a set of a, - p,
linearly independent solutions of tH,) upon which all other solutions are linearly
dependent. This means geometrically that there exists a set of a, -P, 1-circuits or
cvstems of I -circuits from which all others can he obtained by repeated applications
of the operation of adding o nod. 2) described in §14. We shall call this a complete
Net of I -circuits or systems of I -circuits.
Sincc p = o..
R., i s 21h. the number of solutions of (H,) in a complete set is
R,,

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
141
where µ is the cyclomatic number ..... For the sake of uniformity with a
notation used later on we shall also denote µ by R, - 1. Thus we have
Trees
26. A connected linear graph which contains no 1-circuits is called a tree. As a
corollary of the last section it follows that a linear graph is a set of Ro trees if and
only if p. =0.
Any connected linear graph C, can be reduced to a tree by removing µ
properly chosen 1-cells. For let ap' (p = i,. i:, .... i,,,) be a set of 1-cells whose
boundaries form a complete set of 0-circuits ($ 20). The remaining I-cells of C,
are ,u in number and will be denoted by ap' (p = j,, j:.... , j.). If these ,u
I -cells
arc removed from C, the linear graph T, which remains is connected because
every bounding 0-circuit of C, is linearly expressible in terms of the boundaries of
the 1-cells a,' (p = i,, 12, .... i,,,) of T, and hence any two 0-cells of C, are joined
by a curve composed of 1-cells of Ti. But since the cyclomatic number of C, is
µ = a, - ao+ 1, the removal of µ 1-cells reduces it to 0 and hence reduces C, to a
tree. In like manner. if C, is a linear graph for which Ro> 1. it can be reduced to
Ro trees by removing µ = a, - a + R properly chosen 1-cells.
27. There is at least one l-circuit of C, which contains the 1-cell a,', for
otherwise C, would be separated into two complexes by removing this
I-cell.
Call such a 1-circuit C,'. In the complex obtained by removing a,,' from C, there
is. for the same reason, a 1-circuit C,' which contains
and so on. Thus there is
a set of 1-circuits C,'. C,', ... , C," such that C,p (p = 1, 2.... , µ) contains a,,'.
These I-circuits are linearly independent because C,`
' contains a 1-cell, a,',
which does not appear in any of the circuits Cl'. C," -'
... C,' and therefore
cannot be linearly dependent on them. Hence C,', C,2...., C," constitute a
complete set of 1-circuits. This sharpens the theorem of $ 25 a little in that it
establishes that there is a complete set of solutions of (H,) each of which
represents a single 1-circuit.
Planar graphs
Although our next extract is also concerned with a topological problem,
the treatment therein is not based on algebraic methods, but belongs
rather to the realm of 'analytic' topology. This subject flourished in the
first decades of this century, one of its highlights being the proof of what
is now known as the Jordan curve theorem. This theorem states that a
plane curve which is closed and does not intersect itself divides the plane
into two connected sets, a bounded 'inside' and an unbounded 'outside'.
Jordan was the first to recognize that such an intuitively obvious result
required proof, but his own attempt was inadequate, and the first correct
proof was gisen by Veblen in 1905 [4]. From our point of view, the
interest lies in the application of this kind of result to planar graphs.
We recall from Chapter 5 that a graph is planar if its vertices and
edges can be represented by points and lines in the plane. in such a way
that the lines do not cross. Like several other aspects of graph theory, the

142
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
study of planarity originated from puzzles. One such puzzle is the problem
of Mobius which we discussed in the previous chapter, and which we shall
reconsider here in a dual form.
Let us suppose that the capital cities of the five neighbouring regions
arc to be joined in pairs by roads, in such a way that no bridges or
crossroads are necessary. The five cities and ten roads may then be
regarded as the vertices and edges of the complete graph K. and the
problem requires us to draw this graph in the plane without crossings. A
few experiments with pencil and paper will convince the reader that the
problem is insoluble, and that K, is consequently not planar. We shall
give a proof of this result shortly.
Another puzzle involving planarity appeared in 1913 in one of the
articles written by H. E. Dudeney for the Strand Magazine [5]. Dudeney
presented the problem, under the title 'Water, gas, and electricity', in the
following way.
There are some half-dozen puzzles, as old as the hills, that are perpetually
cropping up. and there is hardly a month in the year that does not bring
inquiries as to their solution. Occasionally one of these, that one had
hoped was an extinct volcano, bursts into eruption in a surprising manner.
For some quite unknown reason I have lately received an extraordinary
number of letters (four of them from the United States) respecting the
ancient puzzle that I have called "Water, Gas and Electricity." It is much
older than electric lighting. or even gas, but the new dress brings it up to
date. The puzzle is to lay on water, gas, and electricity, from W. G. and E,
to each of the three houses, A. B. and C, without any pipe crossing another.
Take your pencil and draw lines showing how this should be done. You will
soon find yourself landed in difculties... .
Although Dudeney spoke of the puzzle as an ancient one, we have
been unable to find any earlier printed references to it. Sam Loyd Jnr.
claimed [6] that his father 'brought out' the puzzle in 1900, but he did not
sa% who had invented it.
Graph theorists now hale a special name for the kind of graph
encountered in this puzzle. The complete bipartite graph K.., has two sets
of vertices, one with s members and the other with t members; each

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
K,.
K__
FiG. 8.4.
143
K.,
vertex in the first set is joined to each vertex in the second set, so that
there are st edges in all. For example, the graphs K,.2, K2.2, and K2.3 are
depicted in Fig. 8.4, with circles and squares indicating the two sets of
vertices; these graphs are immediately seen to be planar, since the plane
drawings of them have no crossings. But the graph K3.3, which is the
subject of the water, gas, and electricity puzzle, is non-planar, as we shall
now prove.
The proofs for both KS and K3.3 use Euler's formula. (For reference,
diagrams of these graphs, with some unavoidable crossings, are given in
Fig. 8.5.) Let us first consider Ks. In any faithful planar representation of
it there would have to be Nr regions, where Nr satisfies Euler's formula
N - N,,+ N, = 2. In this case N.. =5 and N.= 10, so Nr =7. Now each
region must be bounded by at least three edges (since there are no loops
or multiple edges), and each edge belongs to the boundary of just two
regions. Consequently, for seven regions we need at least 1(7x3) edges;
since this number exceeds 10, KS cannot be planar. A similar argument
applies to K3.3; here N. = 6 and NN = 9, so that N, = 5. But each circuit in
K3.3 has at least four edges, and so the boundary of each region must
contain at least four edges. Thus we need at least
(5 x 4) edges al-
together, and since this number exceeds 9, K3,3 is not planar.
The reader may be wondering why so much discussion has been
devoted to these two particular examples of non-planar graphs. The
reason is that in 1930 the Polish mathematician Kazimierz KURATOWSKI
published a remarkable theorem, in the form of a converse to the simple
FiG. 8.5.

144
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
results just described. He proved that if a graph is non-planar, then it
must contain either K5 or K3,3; in other words, these two graphs are
essentially the only obstacles to planarity. According to Kuratowski
himself [7, p. 44], when he began to think about the problem of
non-planar graphs he expected that K5 would be the only obstacle.
Clearly, he was not familiar with the water, gas, and electricity puzzle!
In our statement of Kuratowski's theorem, we did not explain just what
is meant by the word `contain'. To do so, we use the idea of subdividing
an edge of a graph-that is, replacing an edge joining the vertices v and w
by a chain of edges, from v to v1, v1 to V2 ,---, v._1 to v,, and yr to w,
where each of the new vertices v, has valency two. If G is a given graph
and H is a graph derived from it by subdividing some of the edges, then H
is said to be a subdivision of G. Any two subdivisions of G are equivalent
from a topological point of view, and they are said to be homeomorphic
to each other, and to G. The precise statement of Kuratowski's theorem
says that every non-planar graph has a subgraph homeornorphic to either
K5 or K3,3. Typical subdivisions of the basic graphs are depicted in Fig.
8.6.
The next extract [8C] comes from the paper in which Kuratowski
proved his theorem, and it contains the essential part of the proof. The
original (in French) was written from the standpoint of analytic topology,
and so it is necessary to begin by explaining several points concerning
terminology and notation. Kuratowski dealt with a structure rather more
general than a graph, called a continu Poanien; we lose nothing by
translating this phrase by the word `graph', provided that we remember
that it signifies a topological realization of a graph as a system of points
and lines. The term gauche is accurately translated as 'non-planar'.
The first few sections of the paper were devoted to the proof of some
intuitively obvious results whose significance is topological, rather than
graph-theoretical. We ask the reader to take for granted the meaning of
such terms as `inside', `outside', and `boundary'; if these words are given
their usual interpretation, then the paper becomes more easily intelligible,
without losing the essence of the argument.
Fio. 8.6.

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
145
Type 1
FIO. 8.7.
Typc 2
The notation used in [8C] needs a little explanation. A path joining two
points a and b, without its end points, is denoted by ab; when it lies in a
specified set S, it is denoted by (ab)s. A circuit in S, through a and b,
gives rise to two paths joining a and b; they are distinguished by giving
the circuit an orientation, and writing them as (ab)s and (ba)s to conform
with the orientation. The symbol X is used to denote a set X together
with its boundary points.
After setting up the necessary topological machinery, Kuratowski went
on to state his main theorem:
Theorem A. If A is a connected non-planar graph which has only a finite
number of circuits, then A contains a subgraph homeomorphic to the graph
of type I or the graph of type 2. [Fig. 8.7.1
The graph of type 1 is K,.;, and the graph of type 2 is Ks. In order to
simplify the proof of Theorem A, Kuratowski defined two vertices x and
y of a graph C to be conjugate if there is a planar representation of C in
which x and y can be joined by a line which does not meet the rest of C.
He then considered the graph M formed from the non-planar graph A by
removing an edge joining two vertices, a and b. He showed that if (i)
there is no circuit in M through a and h. or (ii) a and b are conjugate
Type 5
FIG. 8.8.

146
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
relative to M, then the hypothesis that A is non-planar
is
con-
tradicted. So the critical case is when M does not have these two
properties.
Kuratowski remarked that it is sufficient to show that, in this case, M
must contain a subgraph Q of one of the three types depicted in Fig. 8.8.
For if M contains Q, then A = M U ab contains Q U ab: if 0 is of type 3
then Q U ab is of type 1; if 0 is of type 4 then Q U ab is of type 2; and if
Q is of type 5 then Q U ab (less the path joining b to the vertex of valency
4) is of type 1 again. Thus the proof of Theorem A is reduced to the
proof of what Kuratowski called Theorem B.
8C
K. KURATOWSKI
SUR LE PROBLEME DES COURBES GAUCHES EN TOPOLOGIE
[On the topological problem of non-planar curves]
Fundamenta Mathematicae 15 (1930), 271-283.
w
s
s
»
s
Theorem B. Given a planar representation of a graph M containing only a finite
number of circuits and such that 1: M contains two non-conjugate vertices a and b,
2: a and b lie on a circuit in M,-then M contains a graph homeomorphic to one of
type 3, 4 or 5.
5. Proof of theorem B.
Among the circuits contained in M and containing a and b, there is one circuit
K with the property that there exists no other circuit K' whose inside is contained
in V. the inside of K.
For, otherwise, there would be an infinity of circuits in M.
K being so defined, if cd is a path lying in V fl M and having its extremities on
K. then one of them belongs to (ab),. and the other to (ba)N (these symbols
denoting the paths in K).
Let W be outside K.
I shall prove that, among the components of m n w. there is one component S
such that:
1:
S contains two vertices p and q such that p E (ab)x and q E (ba),;,
2:
S n K contains two points s and t which cannot be joined by any path
stcV - M.
To begin, I shall prove the existence of a component S satisfying condition I
and the following:
3: there is no component R of V - M such that
S - Sc R.
Let us suppose. in order to obtain a contradiction, that there is no component S
satisfying conditions
I and 3. Let G be the union of all the S such that
S n (ab),, #0# S n (ba),;. The family of all these S is infinite...... and conse-
quently. there exists a finite sequence R,.... , R. of components of V - M such
that, for each S. the set S- S is contained in one of the sets R,. Let G, = the union
of all the S such that 9 - S c R,. and, in general, let G, = the union of the S such

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
147
that 9-S-9 and S is not in any G, with j< i. Thus G = G, + ...+G..
G, - G,,= R and the G, are disjoint...... It follows that M is homeomorphic to a
graph M, = G; U M - G,, where G' c R,.
Now the same proposition can also be applied to the graph M,. In fact, the set
Gz, since it is open in M, is open in M,. since Gz C W and G* c V. On the other
hand, R2, being a component of V - M. is a component of V - M,, since the
inclusion G; c R, implies Rz n M = Rz n M,.
Thus we may substitute M, for M. Rz for R, and G: for G into the preceding
proposition. Continuing in the same way we arrive at the conclusion that M is
homeomorphic to a'graph M' = G* U M- G where G* c V.
Since M' n w = M n W - G. we conclude from the definition of G that M' n W
contains no connected set (and, more particularly, no component) S' such that
S' n (ab),, # 0 o s, n (ba)K. But then ..... the points a and b may be joined by a
path ab disjoint from M', contrary to the hypothesis that these two points are
non-conjugate relative to M.
The existence of a component S which satisfies conditions 1 and 3 is thereby
established.
This component also satisfies condition 2. This is evident in the case where the
set S - S reduces to two points. So let us suppose that
S - S contains three or
more points, of which two, x and y. belong to (ab)x and, furthermore, suppose
that S satisfies condition 3 but not 2...... The existence of a path xy c V n M
follows. Now the ends of this path are situated on (;b),,, leading to a contradiction
of the property of K established at the start of the proof.
Thus it is established that S satisfies 2.
Condition 2 implies ..... the existence of a path cd c V n M such that c E (st)K
and d E (ts)x. Furthermore, according to the property of K just mentioned, we
may assume that c r= (ab)K and d E (ba)K.
We shall now pick out from K U S U cd a graph which is of type 3, 4, or 5. We
shall have 4 cases to distinguish:
1) sE(ab)x and tE(ba)x.
In this case, the graph K U (st)s U cd is of type 3.
Thus it is permissible to assume in the following cases that there exists no pair
s, I which satisfies conditions 2 and 1) at the same time.
2) s=a, tE(ba)K.
Let T be a "T-shaped" graph (triod) taken from S and having the vertices p, s,
t for its ends. The graph K - (ac)x U T U cd is of type 3.
3) s = a, t = b. Thus p = c and q = d (because otherwise we are in case 1) or 2)).
If there exists in S an "X-shaped" graph having for its ends the points a, b, c, d,
then the graph K U X U cd is of type 4. If this is not so. let T be the triod defined
as above. Let v be its "centre". In S - T there is a path D which joins d to T; this
path leads either to av, or to by. Evidently we may assume that the the former is
the case; the graph K - (cb)x - (da )K U T U D U cd is of type 3.
4) The only case which remains to be considered is: s, tE (ba)K and p = c.
In this case, the graph K U T U cd is of type 5.
Theorem B and, consequently, theorem A are thereby proved.
Kuratowski announced his results to the Polish Mathematical Society in
Warsaw on 21 June 1929. A few months later, before his paper had

148
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
appeared in print, the following abstract was published in the Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society [8].
Irreducible non-planar graphs. One of the results of this paper is a simple
necessary and sufficient condition that an arbitrary linear graph be ihapp-
able on a plane. (Received February 10, 1930.)
In fact, the authors of this paper, Orrin FRINK and P. A. Smith, had
independently arrived at the same result as Kuratowski. Their paper was
intended for publication in the Transactions of the American Mathemati-
cal Society, but, as Frink informed us in a letter written in 1974:
`Unfortunately Kuratowski's proof came out in Fundamenta just at that
time, and equally unfortunate was the fact that our proof was similar to
Kuratowski's. Hence our paper was simply rejected by the Transactions.'
Such are the pitfalls of original research. However, Frink and Smith
could at least console themselves with the thought that the credit had
gone to the first person to announce the result. History has not been so
kind to Kirkman and his work on 'Hamiltonian' circuits.
Planarity and Whitney duality
The notion that planar graphs could be characterized by a property
which is combinatorial, rather than topological, had been suggested long
before Kuratowski obtained his theorem. In 1916 Denes Konig [9]
declared that progress on the four-colour conjecture might depend upon
such a characterization. Indeed, although the famous conjecture played
no part in Kuratowski's discovery, it was indirectly responsible for a
similar result shortly afterwards. This result was due to a young Ameri-
can, Hassler WHITNEY, who had become interested in the four-colour
problem in the late 1920s, while studying physics in Germany. In the
years from 1930 to 1935 he wrote about a dozen papers on various
aspects of graph theory. Some of these were concerned with a combina-
torial characterization of planarity, and we shall give an account of them
here; others, more directly relevant to colouring problems, will be sur-
veyed in the next chapter.
Whitney's approach to planarity was based on the notion of duality. In
Chapter 7 we explained how a map M on a surface gives rise to a dual
map M* on the same surface, by means of a simple geometrical construc-
tion. In the special case of a map formed by a graph G drawn in the
plane, the vertices and edges of the dual map form another planar graph
G*, which we shall call the geometric dual of G. It must be stressed that
the idea of duality is now being applied to graphs on a particular surface
(the plane), rather than to maps. An example is illustrated in Fig. 8.9,
where the edges of G are denoted by continuous lines and those of G* by
broken lines. There is a one-to-one correspondence between the edges of

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
149
Fic. 8.9.
G and the edges of G*. which we emphasize in the illustration by
ensuring that corresponding edges cross one another. If G is connected,
then G** = G; but this is not so when G has more than one component.
as shown by the example in Fig. 8.10.
The geometric duality between G and G* leads to some combinatorial
relationships between them, when they are considered as abstract graphs.
Whitney studied these relationships and used them to formulate an
abstract notion of duality; if G and G* are geometric duals, then they are
duals in Whitney's sense also. Furthermore, it turns out that this abstract
notion is precisely equivalent to the geometric one in the planar case: a
graph is planar if and only if it has a Whitney dual. This result, which first
appeared in 1931 [10], is Whitney's combinatorial characterization of
planarity.
In 1932 a full account of Whitney's work on planarity was published.
and our next extract [8D] is taken from this paper. The first part of the
paper dealt with the process of separating a graph into what Whitney
called its 'components'. Unfortunately. he used this term in a non-
standard way. We say that a graph is non-separable if it is connected and
cannot he disconnected by removing a single vertex (a cut vertex). In
Whitney's sense. a 'component' is a maximal non-separable part of a
graph. Nowadays we call this a block. For example, the graph on the left
DD DD
Fic. 8.10.

11;0
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 8.11.
of Fig. 8.11 has five such 'components' (blocks). as shown in the diagram
on the right. A graph with more than one block is said to be separable.
Whitney used the term 'connected piece' to denote a component in the
usual sense of the word; the graph on the left of Fig. 8.11 has just two
'connected pieces'.
The theorems about separability in graphs are of a routine kind, and in
our extract [8D] we have omitted a lengthy discussion of them. Those
that are needed for the proof of the main result are stated here for
reference, with Whitney's numbering and terminology.
THEOREM 6. Let G be a connected graph containing no 1-circuit [loop]. A
necessary and sufficient condition that the vertex a be a cut vertex of G is
that there exist two vertices b, c in G, each distinct from a. such that every
chain from b to c passes through a.
THEOREM 8. A non-separable graph G containing at least two arcs [edges]
contains no 1-circuit and is of nullity >0. Each vertex is on at least two arcs.
THEOREM 9. Let G be a graph of nullity I containing no isolated vertices,
such that the removal of any arc reduces the nullity to 0. Then G is a
circuit.
THEOREM 18. If G is a non-separable graph of nullity N> 1, we can
remove an arc or suspended chain [subdivided edge] from G. leaving a
non-separable graph G' of nullity N- 1.
A result concerning the relationship between separability and duality is
also required:
THEOREM 25. Let G and G' be dual graphs. and let H,..... H,,, be the
components of G. Let H;..... H;., be the corresponding subgraphs of G'.
Then H;..... H;,, are the components of G'. and H' is a dual of H,,.
i=1.-...m.
In particular,
THEOREM 26. A dual of a non-separable graph is non-separable.

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
151
8D
H. WHITNEY
NON-SEPARABLE AND PLANAR GRAPHS
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 34 (1932). 339-362.
2. Rank and nullity. Given a graph G which contains V vertices. E arcs, and P
connected pieces, we define its rank R. and its nullity (or cyclomatic number or
first Betti number) N. by the equations
R=V-P,
N=E-R=E-V+P.
(These are just the rank and nullity of the matrix H, of Poincare. See Veblen's
Colloquium Lectures. Analysis Sites [8B].)
If G contains the single arc ab, it is of rank 1. nullity 0, while if it contains the
single arc aa, it is of rank 0, nullity 1.
The first two theorems follow immediately from the definitions of rank and
nullity:
THEOREM 1. If isolated vertices be added to or subtracted from a graph, the rank
and nullity remain unchanged.
THEOREM 2. Let the graph G' be formed from the graph G by adding the arc ab.
Then
(1) if a and b are in the same connected piece in G. then
R'= R. N'=N+1;
(2) if a and b are in different connected pieces in G. then
R'=R +1.N'=N.
THEOREM 3. In any graph G,
R y0. N?0.
For let G, be the graph containing the vertices of G but no arcs. Then if R, and
N, arc its rank and nullity.
R,=N,=0.
We build up G from G, by adding the arcs one at a time. The theorem now
follows from Theorem 2.
8. Duala. Given a graph G. if H, is a subgraph of G. and H: is that subgraph of G
containing those arcs not in H,. we say H, is the complement of H, in G.
Throughout this section, R, R', r. r', etc., will stand for the ranks of G. G'. H,
H'. etc.. respectively, with similar definitions for V. E. P. N.

152
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Definition. Suppose there is a (1. 1) correspondence between the arcs of the
graphs G and G'. such that if H is any subgraph of G and H' is the complement
of the corresponding subgraph of G', then
r'=R'-n.
We say then that G' is a dual of G.
(While this definition agrees with the ordinary one for graphs lying on a plane
or sphere, a graph on a surface of higher connectivity, such as the torts, has in
general no dual. See Theorems 29 and 30.)
Thus if the nullity of H is n, then H' (including all the vertices of G') is in n
more connected pieces than G'.
THEOREM 20. Let G' be a dual of G. Then
R'= N.
N'= R.
For let H be that subgraph of G consisting of G itself. Then
n = N.
If H' is the complement of the corresponding subgraph of G', H' contains no arcs,
and is the null graph. Thus
r'=0.
But as G' is a dual of G,
r'=R'-n.
These equations give
R'=N.
The other equation follows when we note that E' = E.
THEOREM 21. If G' is a dual of G. then G is a dual of G'.
Let H' be any subgraph of G', and let H be the complement of the correspond-
ing subgraph of G. Then, as G' is a dual of G,
By Theorem 20,
r'=R'-n.
R'= N.
We note also,
These equations give
e+e'=E.
re- n = e-(R'-r')=e-N+(e'-n')
=E-N-n'=R- n'.
Thus G is a dual of G'.
Whenever we have shown that one graph is a dual of another graph, we may
now call the graphs "dual graphs".

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
153
9. Planar graphs.
Up till now, we have been considering abstract graphs alone.
However. the definition of a planar graph is topological in character. This section
may be considered as an application of the theory of abstract graphs to the theory
of topological graphs.
Defaitions. A topological graph is called planar if it can be mapped in a (1, 1)
continuous manner on a sphere (or a plane). For the present, we shall say that an
abstract graph is planar if the corresponding topological graph is planar. Having
proved Theorem 29. we shall he justified in using the following purely combina-
torial definition: A graph is planar if it has a dual.
We shall henceforth talk about "graphs" simply, the terms applying equally
well to either abstract or topological graphs.
Lr stMA. if a graph can be mapped on a sphere. it can be mapped on a plane, and
conversely.
Suppose we have a graph mapped on a sphere. We let the sphere lie on the
plane. and rotate it so that the new north pole is not a point of the graph. By
stereographic projection from this pole, the graph is mapped on the plane. The
inverse of this projection maps any graph on the plane onto the sphere.
By the regions of a graph lying on a sphere or in a plane is meant the regions
into which the sphere or plane is thereby divided. A given region of the graph is
characterized by those arcs of the graph which form its boundary. If the graph is
in a plane. the outside region is the unbounded region.
LEMMA. A planar graph may be mapped on a plane so that any desired region is
the outside region.
We map the graph on a sphere, and rotate it so that the north pole lies inside
the given region. By stereographic projection, the graph is mapped onto the plane
so that the given region is the outside region.
We return now to the work in hand.
THEOREM 27. If the components of a graph G are planar. G is planar.
Suppose the graphs G, and G2 are planar. and G' is formed by letting the
vertices a, and a_ of G, and G: coalesce. We shall show that G' is planar. Map
G, on a sphere. and map G: on a plane so that one of the regions adjacent to the
vertex a., is the outside region. Shrink the portion of the plane containing G, so it
will fit into one of the regions of G, adjacent to a,. Drawing a, and a2 together,
we have mapped G' on the sphere. (Here and in a few other places we are using
point-set theorems which. however, are geometrically evident.) The theorem
follows as a repeated application of this process.
THEOREM 28. Let 0 and G' he dual graphs. and let a(ab), a'(a'b') be two
corresponding arcs. Form G, from G by dropping out the arc a(ab). and form G,'
from G' by dropping out the arc a'(a'b'), and letting the vertices a' and b' coalesce
if they are not already the same vertex. Then G, and G,' are duals, preserving the
correspondence between their arcs.
Let H, be any subgraph of G, and let H,' be the complement of the
corresponding subgraph of 01'.
Case 1. Suppose the vertices a' and b' were distinct in G'. Let H be the
subgraph of G identical with H,. Then
n = n,.

154
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Let H' be the complement in G' of the subgraph corresponding to H. Then
r'= R'-n.
Now H' is the subgraph in Gcorresponding to H,' in G1', except that H' contains
the arc a'(a'b'), which is not in H,'. Thus it we drop out a'(a'b') from H' and let
a' and b' coalesce, we form H,'. In this operation, the number of connected pieces
is unchanged, while the number of vertices is decreased by 1. Hence
r,'=r'- 1.
As a special case of this equation, if H' contains all the arcs of G', we find
R,'= R'- 1.
These equations give
r,'= R,'- n, .
Thus G,' is a dual of G,.
Cage 2. Suppose a' and b' are the same vertex in G'. In this case, defining H
and H' as before, we form H,' from H' by dropping out the arc a'(a'a'). This
leaves the number of vertices and the number of connected pieces unchanged.
Thus two of the equations in Case I are replaced by the equations
r,' =r,,
R,'= R,.
The other equations are as before, so we find again that G,' is a dual of G,. T
theorem is now proved.
THEOREM 29. A necessary and sufficient condition that a graph be planar is that
it have a dual.
We shall prove first the necessity of the condition. Given any planar graph G,
we map it onto the surface of a sphere. If the nullity of G is N. it divides the
sphere into N + 1 regions. For let us construct G arc by arc. Each time we add an
arc joining two separate pieces, the nullity and the number of regions remain the
same. Each time we add an arc joining two vertices in the same connected pieces,
the nullity and the number of regions are each increased by 1. To begin with, the
nullity was 0 and the number of regions was 1. Therefore, at the end, the number
of regions is N + 1.
We construct G' as follows: In each region of the graph G we place a point. a
vertex of G'. Therefore G' contains V = N+ I vertices. Crossing each arc of G
we place an arc, joining the vertices of G' lying in the two regions the arc of G
separates (which may in particular be the same region, in which case this arc of G'
is a 1-circuit). The arcs of G and G' are now in (1. 1) correspondence.
G' is the dual of G in the ordinary sense of the word. We must show it is the
dual as we have defined the term.
Let us build up G arc by arc, removing the corresponding arc of G' each time
we add an arc to G. To begin with. G contains no arcs and G' contains all its arcs,
and at the end of the process, G contains all its arcs and G' contains no arcs. We
shall show
(1) each time the nullity of G is increased by I upon adding an arc, the number
of connected pieces in G' is reduced by 1 in removing the corresponding arc, and
(2) each time the nullity of G remains the same, the number of connected
pieces in G' remains the same.
To prove (1) we note that the nullity of G is increased by I only when the arc
we add joins two vertices in the same connected piece. Let ab be such an arc. As

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
155
a and b were already connected by a chain, this chain together with ab forms a
circuit P. Let a'b' be the arc of G' corresponding to ab. Before we removed it, a'
and b' were connected. Removing it, however, disconnects them. For suppose
there were still a chain C joining them. As a' and b' are on opposite sides of the
circuit P. C must cross P, by the Jordan Theorem, that is. an arc of C' must cross
an arc of P. But we removed this arc of C when we put in the arc of P it crosses.
(1) is now proved.
The total increase in the nullity of G during the process is of course just N.
Therefore the increase in the number of connected pieces in G' must be at least
N. But G' was originally in at least one connected piece, and is at the end of the
process in V = N + 1 connected pieces. Thus the increase in the number of
connected pieces in G' is just N (hence, in particular, G' is itself connected) and
therefore this number increases only when the nullity of G increases, which
proves (2).
Let now H be any subgraph of G. let H' be the complement of the correspond-
ing subgraph of G', and let H' include all the vertices of G'. We build up H arc by
arc, at the same time removing the corresponding arcs of G'. Thus when H is
formed. H' is also formed. By (1) and (2), the increase in the number of
connected pieces in forming H' from G' equals the nullity of H, that is,
p'-P'=n.
But
r'=V'-p'.
R'=V'-P',
as G' and H' contain the same vertices. Therefore
r'= R'- n,
that is, G' is a dual of G.
To prove the sufficiency of the condition, we must show that if a graph has a
dual, it is planar. It is enough to show this for non-separable graphs. For if the
separable graph G has a dual, its components have duals, by Theorem 25. hence
its components are planar, and hence G is planar, by Theorem 27. This part of
the theorem is therefore a consequence of the following theorem:
THEOREM 30. Let the non-separable graph G have a dual G'. Then we can map
G and G' together on the surface of a sphere so that
(1) corresponding arcs in G and G' cross each other, and no other pair of arcs
cross each other, and
(2) inside each region of one graph there is just one vertex of the other graph.
The theorem is obviously true if G contains a single arc. (The dual of an arc ab
is an arc a'a', and the dual of an arc as is an arc a'b'.) We shall assume it to be
true if G contains fewer than E arcs, and shall prove it for any graph G
containing E arcs. By Theorem 8, each vertex of G is on at least two arcs.
Case 1. G contains a vertex b on but two arcs, ab and be. As G is non-
separable, there is a circuit containing these arcs. Thus dropping out one of them
will not alter the rank, while dropping out both reduces the rank by 1. As G' is a
dual of G. the arcs corresponding to these two arcs are each of nullity 0, while the
two arcs taken together of nullity 1. They are thus of the form a'(a'b'), P'(a'b').
the first corresponding to ab, and the second, to be.
Form G, from G by dropping out the arc be and letting the vertices b and c
coalesce, and form G' from G' by dropping out the arc jg'(a'b'). By Theorem 28,
G, and G,' are duals, preserving the correspondence between the arcs. (Obvi-
ously G, is non-separable.) As these graphs contain fewer than E arcs, we can, by

156
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
hypothesis, map them together on a sphere so that (1) and (2) hold; in particular,
a'(a'b') crosses ac. Mark a point on the arc ac of G, lying between the vertex c
and the point where the arc a'(a'b') of G' crosses it. Let this be the vertex b,
dividing the arc ac into the two arcs ab and bc. Dr N the arc 19'(a'b') crossing the
arc he. We have now reconstructed G and G', and hey are mapped on a sphere
so that (1) and (2) hold.
Case 2. Each vertex of G is on at least three a c s. As then G contains no
suspended chain, and G is not a circuit and therefore is of nullity N> 1, we can,
by Theorem 18, drop out an arc ab so that the resulting graph G, is non-
separable. G' is non-separable, by Theorem 26, and hence the arc a'b' cone-
sponding to ab in G is not a 1-circuit. Drop it out and let the vertices a', b'
coalesce into the vertex a,', forming the graph G,'. By Theorem 28, G, and G,'
are duals, and thus G,' also is non-separable.
Consider the arcs of G' on a'. If we drop them out, the resulting graph G" has a
rank one less than that of G'. For if its rank were still less, G' would be in at least
three connected pieces, one of them being the vertex a'. Let c and d be vertices
in two other connected pieces of G". They are joined by no chain in G", and
hence every chain joining them in G' must pass through a', which contradicts
Theorem 6. If we put back any arc, the rank is brought back to its original value,
as a' is then joined to the rest of the graph. Hence. G' being a dual of G, the arcs
of G corresponding to these arcs are together of nullity 1, while dropping out one
of them reduces the nullity to 0. Therefore, by Theorem 9, these arcs form a
circuit P. One of these arcs is the arc ab. The remaining arcs form a chain C.
Similarly, the arcs of G corresponding to the arcs of G' on b' form a circuit Q,
and this circuit minus the arc ab forms a chain D. C and D have the vertices a
and b as end vertices. Also, the arcs of G, corresponding to the arcs of G, on a,
form a circuit R. These arcs of G, are the arcs of G' on either a' or b'. except for
the arc a'b' we dropped out. Thus the arcs of G, forming the circuit R are the
arcs of the chains C and D.
As G, and G1' contain fewer than E arcs, we can map them together on a
sphere so that properties (1) and (2) hold. a,' lies on one side of the circuit R,
which we call the inside. Each arc of R is crossed by an arc on a,'. and thus there
are no other arcs of G,' crossing R. There is no part of G,' lying inside R other
than a,', for it could have only this vertex in common with the rest of G,', and G,'
would be separable. Also, there is no pan of G, lying inside R, for any arc would
have to be crossed by an arc of G,', and any vertex would have to be joined to the
rest of G, by an arc, as G, is non-separable.
Let us now replace a,' by the two vertices a' and b'. and let those arcs abutting
on a,' that were formerly on a' be now on a', and those formerly on b', now on
b'. As the first set of arcs all cross the chain C. and the second set all cross the
chain D. we can do this in such a way that no two of the arcs cross each other. We
may now join a and b by the arc ab, crossing none of these arcs. This divides the
inside of R into two pans, in one of which a' lies, and in the other of which b'
lies. We may therefore join a' and b' by the arc a'b', crossing the arc ab. G and
G' are now reconstructed, and are mapped on the sphere as required. This
completes the proof of the theorem, and therefore of Theorem 29.
The paper concluded with a statement of Kuratowski's theorem and a
proof that neither Ks nor K3.3 has a dual in Whitney's sense. From this it

IDEAS FROM ALGEBRA AND TOPOLOGY
157
follows that Kuratowski's characterization can be used to give an alterna-
tive proof of the fact that a graph which has a Whitney dual must be
planar. In a later paper [11], published in 1933, Whitney succeeded in
reversing the argument. He proved that a graph which does not contain
either Ks or K3.3 must have a Whitney dual, and thereby obtained a new,
less topological, proof of Kuratowski's theorem.
The linking thread of this chapter has been Kirchhoff's idea of a
fundamental set of circuits, conceived by him for a very practical pur-
pose. Listing invented the name 'cyclomatic number' and Poincare and
Veblen gave it algebraic form as the nullity of a matrix. Then Whitney
used the complementary concepts of rank and nullity as the foundation
for his definition of duality. In 1935, he carried the process a step further,
motivated by the analogy between the structure of the edge-set of a graph
and the structure of a vector space. This analogy is exemplified in the
following table:
subsets of edge-set -> subsets of vector space
circuit
--> minimal dependent set
spanning tree
---' basis
rank
--' dimension of linear span.
In a paper 'On the abstract properties of linear dependence' [ 12],
Whitney axiomatized the properties of a rank function. The resulting
structure, called a matroid, is a generalization of both graphs and vector
spaces. It has proved useful in several branches of mathematics.
References
1. KIRCHNoFF. G. R. Uber den Durchgang eines electrischen Stromes dutch eine Ebene
unbesondere durch eine Kreisformige. Ann. Phys. Chem. 64 (1845). 497-514 = Ges.
Abh., 1-17.
2. POINCARE, H. Second complement a ['Analysis Situs. Proc. London Math. Soc. 32
(1900). 277-308 = Oeuvres, Vol. 6, 338-372.
3. DEHN, M. and HEECAARD, P. Analysis situs. Encyklopadie der mathematischen Wis-
senschaften IIIAB3 (1907), 153-220.
4. VEBLEN, O. Theory of plane curves in non-metrical analysis situs. Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 6 (1905). 83-98.
5. DuDexEY, H. E. Perplexities. Strand Magazine 46 I1uly 1913). 110. and (August
1913). 221.
6. Lovn. S.. JNR. Sam Loyd and his puzzles. Barse. New York. 1928.
7. KURAT(iwsi i,
K.
Colloquio
Internazionale
sulle Teorie Combinatorie. Accademia
Nazionale dci Lincei, Rome. 1976.
8. MazIGE7t, K. Uber plattbare Dreiergraphen and Potenzen nichtplattbarer Graphen.
Anz. Akad. Wiss. Wien 67 (1930). 85-86 = Ergebnisse eines Math. Kolloquiums, Vol. 2,
1930, 30-31.
9. KBNIC D. Uber Graphen and ihre Anwcndung auf Determinantentheorie and Mengcn-
lehre. Math. Ann. 77 (1916), 453-465. [ 10D]
10. WHITNEY. H. Non-separable and planar graphs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 17 (1931).
125-127.
11. WHITNEY. H. Planar graphs. Fund Math. 21 (1933). 73-84.
12. WHITNEY, H. On the abstract properties of linear dependence. Amer. J. Math. 57
(1935), 509-533.
13. KENNEDY. J. W. and QUISTAS. L. V. The theorem on planar graphs. Historia Math.
12 (1985). 356-368.

9
The Four-Colour Problem-to 1936
G. D. BIRKHOFF (1884-1944)
IN THIS chapter we shall resume our account of the continuing search
for a solution of the four-colour problem. The story is set mainly in the
United States of America, where several leading mathematicians took an
interest in the problem, and made important (though not decisive) con-
tributions. A recurring theme is the idea of formulating the problem in
new ways, so that it might become more amenable to powerful techniques
from other branches of mathematics.
The first attempts to refor
a the problem
The first alternative form of the four-colour conjecture was Tait's
`theorem' on colouring the edges of a trivalent planar map. We described
this formulation in Chapter 6, and its implications will be fully discussed
in the following chapter, since it is a special case of the general problem
treated therein.
In 1898 another formulation was published by Heawood, who at that
time had probably the clearest insight into the intricacies of the question.
His paper `On the four-colour map problem' [1] began with the observa-
tion that if the number of edges bounding each region of a trivalent map
is divisible by three, then the regions may be coloured with four colours.
He went on to generalize this result in the following way. Suppose that we
can assign to each vertex of a trivalent map one of the numbers + 1, -1,
in such a way that the sum of the numbers bordering each region is
divisible by three: then the map is four-colourable. Conversely, if the map

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
159
Fia. 9.1.
is four-colourable, then the numbers may be assigned in the prescribed
manner. (The special case when the number + 1 is assigned to each vertex
corresponds to the situation mentioned above, that is, when the number
of edges bounding each region is divisible by three.)
The proof of the equivalence is very simple. A four-colouring of the
regions of a trivalent map is equivalent to a three-colouring of its edges. as
explained by Tait; if the edge colours are called a, A, and y, then we
assign + 1 to a vertex where the clockwise order of the colours is any,
and -1 to a vertex where the clockwise order is ays. Fig. 9.1 shows the
assignment corresponding to the colouring of the map given in Fig. 6.16.
In general, it turns out that the sum of the numbers on the boundary of
each region is always divisible by three, and that the whole procedure is
reversible.
It
follows
that
if the
vertices of a trivalent map are
labelled
v1, v2..... v,,, then we have a system of congruences of the form
x,+x,+...+xk=0 (mod 3),
where there is exactly one congruence for each region of the map. Each
unknown is + 1 or - 1, and x, occurs in the congruence corresponding to
a region R if and only if v, is on the boundary of R. Furthermore, every
unknown appears in exactly three of the congruences, since there are
three regions at each vertex. The truth of the four-colour conjecture is
equivalent to the assertion that, for every trivalent planar map, the
corresponding system of congruences has a solution.
Heawood devoted a great deal of time and energy to the investigation
of such systems of congruences. He published papers on the subject in
1898 (1]. 1932 [2], 1936 [3], and even later; the last in the series
appeared in 1950. when he was nearly 90. These papers are fairly
technical and not particularly easy to read, but the approach is patently
no more and no less successful than any other yet discovered.
Although mathematicians are now inclined to view with scepticism any
purported proof of the four-colour conjecture, it seems that around the

160
GRAPH THEOR' 173,6-19?n
turn of the century the conjecture was still commonly regarded as a
topological curiosity, and many people thought that some bright young
man would construct a proof with a single stroke of genius. Indeed, the
story is told [4, pp. 92-93] of how Hermann Minkowski decided. in the
middle of one of his lectures. that he was to be the bright young man. He
set out to prove the conjecture there and then. but failed to do so in the
time allocated for the lecture, and the next lecture, and the next ...
.
Eventually, he had to admit defeat.
The next significant developments were a symptom of the emerging
mathematical might of the United States of America. We have already
remarked on the part played in the early history of the problem by the
mathematicians of Johns Hopkins University (Peirce, Story, and Sylves-
ter), and the continuing American interest is evident from an address
Peirce [5] gave on the subject to the National Academy of Sciences in
November 1899. Another mathematician who worked on the problem
around that time was Paul Wernicke, a graduate of Gottingen who
became professor of mathematics at the University of Kentucky. He read
a paper 'On the solution of the map-color problem' to the American
Mathematical Society at their Summer meeting in Toronto. in 1897, but
the published abstract [6] does not indicate clearly what he said. In 1904
Wernicke published a second paper [7]. which foreshadowed the study of the
'reducibility' of maps, a subject we shall discuss in the following section.
It was not until about 1912 that American mathematicians became
seriously involved in the four-colour problem. and the credit for this
involvement is due primarily to Veblen. His general interest in topology,
and his knowledge of the new algebraic methods developed by Poincare,
led naturally to an attack on the four-colour conjecture. In his paper [9A]
on the problem, which was read to the American Mathematical Society
on 27 April 1912, he employed ideas from finite geometry and incidence
matrices over a finite field. At the end of the paper he explained how his
formulation may be regarded as a generalization of the system of
Heawood congruences.
9A
O. VEBLEN
AN APPLICATION OF MODULAR EQUATIONS IN ANALYSIS SITUS
Annals of Mathematics (2) 14 11912-3). 86-94.
1. By a map we mean a set of a: simply connected regions (countries) covering
the surface of a sphere and bounded by a, simple arcs (edges) joining ao distinct
points (vertices). No two regions have a point in common, no two arcs intersect.

THE FOUR-C'OLOI'R PROBI FM-TO 1436
161
For all known maps it is possible to assign to each region one of four colors in
such a way that any two regions having an edge in common are differently
colored. Whether or not this is true for all maps is still unknown in spite of the
investigations of a considerable number of mathematicians. It is therefore perhaps
not without interest to show how the problem can be stated in terms of linear
equations in a finite field.
These equations turn out to be of service in describing the elementary proper-
ties of the map. In particular they supply us with an easy proof of Euler's formula.
We shall first outline the discussion of these equations as they arise in the field of
integers reduced modulo two and then show how they connect with the four-color
problem when the field is extended to include certain Galois imaginaries.
2. A map can be fully described by means of two matrices. To do this, the vertices
are numbered in an arbitrary way from I to an. the edges from I to a,, and the
countries from I to a:. In the first matrix the rows correspond to the vertices and
the columns to the edges. A "1" appears as the element of the ith row and jth
column if the ith vertex is on the jth edge; and a "0" appears as the element of
the ith row and jth column if the ith vertex is not on the jth edge. We shall
denote this matrix by A ; it has a rows and a, columns. In the second matrix the
rows correspond to the edges and the columns to the countries. The element of
the ith row and jth column is I if the ith edge is on the jth region and "0" if not.
We shall call this matrix B; it has a, rows and a2 columns.
For the map obtained by projecting an inscribed tetrahedron from one of its
interior points to the surface of a sphere the matrices A and B are respectively
(cf. Fig. [9.2]):
(1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
A
(I
1
0
1
1
0
B=
(1
l
1
11
1
0
0
1 0 1
I
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
(I
VI
FIG.92.
3. With these matrices may be associated four sets of linear homogeneous
equations. In each case the variables and coefficients are regarded as integers

162
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
reduced modulo two. In other words, let us add according to the rules 1 + 1= 0,
1+0= 1, 0+1 = 1, 0+0=0; and multiply according to the rules 1 x 1=1, 1 x 0 =
0, 0 x 1=1, 0 x 0 = 0. All the formal laws of elementary algebra are satisfied by
this field.
In the first set the equations correspond to the rows of the matrix A. There is
one variable for each edge of the map and one equation,
(1)
xa+xb+X,+ =0
for each vertex, the variables in the equation representing the edges which meet
at the corresponding vertex. A solution of this system of equations represents a
way of labelling the edges of the map with 0's and 1's so that there shall be an
even number of 1's on the edges at each vertex. The edges labelled with 1's in this
manner form a number of closed circuits no two of which have an edge in common.
For let us start with an arbitrary edge labelled 1 and describe a path among the
edges labelled 1. Whenever there is an edge by which this path approaches a
vertex, since the number of 1-edges at this vertex is even, there is a 1-edge by
which the path can go away. Hence the path may be continued till it intersects
itself. A portion of the path then forms a closed circuit. If this be removed there
are still an even number of 1-edges at each vertex. Another circuit may be
removed and so on till all the 1-edges are accounted for.
If (xt, x2,
, xa.) and (xi', x2',
, xa') are solutions of the equations (1) it is
clear that (xl+x1', x2+X2',
.
, xal+xaZ) is also a solution. The boundary of each
of the a2 countries of the map is represented by a solution in which each edge of
the boundary is marked with a 1 and each other edge with a 0. One such solution
is supplied by each column of the matrix B. We shall call these the fundamental
solutions. The solution representing any circuit whatever may be expressed
linearly in terms of these a2 fundamental solutions. In fact, the circuit divides the
surface of the sphere into two parts, and the solution representing the circuit is
expressible as the sum of the solutions corresponding to the countries in one of
these parts.
The sum of the a2 fundamental solutions is (0, 0,
, 0) because each edge
appears on the boundary of two and only two countries. These solutions cannot
be subject to any other linear homogeneous relation because the coefficients of
such a relation could be only 0 or 1, and hence the relation would merely state
that the sum of a certain subset of solutions would be (0, 0,
, 0). This is
impossible because any subset of the a2 countries has at least one country with an
edge not on any other country of the subset. Hence the number of linearly
independent solutions of the equations (1) is a2-1, and the total number of
solutions is
2'2-1.
4. A second set of equations is determined by the columns of the first matrix.
In these equations the variables correspond to the vertices of the map and there is
one equation
(2)
va + vb = 0
for each edge, Va and Vb being the vertices at the ends of the edge. The only
possible solutions are such that all the variables are equal. For if va is given, Vb
must be equal to va; if v, is connected with vb by an edge, v, is also equal to va,
and so on. Since there is a path along the edges joining any vertex to any other it
follows by this argument that all the variables are equal to va. Hence the only
solutions of the equations are (0, 0,
, 0) and (1, 1,
, 1). There are ao

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
163
variables. Hence the number of the a, equations which are linearly independent
must be
1. Hence the rank of the matrix A is
a moment to the first set of equations. Here there were ao
equations among at variables and there were a2- l solutions. The rank of the
matrix A has just been seen to be ao -I so that the number of linearly
independent equations is an- 1. Hence
or
a,-(ao-1)=a2-1,
at,-at +a,=2,
which is the well-known Euler's formula.
6. The third set of equations may be read from the rows of the matrix B. The
variables correspond to the countries and for each edge there is an equation of the
form
(3)
ya+ya=0,
where ya and yn correspond to the countries meeting in the edge in question.
These equations are entirely analogous to the equations (2). In fact if a point (the
capital of the country .....) be introduced in each region and the points in
abutting regions be joined by non intersecting arcs, there is obtained a map (of a:
points, at edges and ao regions) dual to the first map and interchanging the roles
of the matrices A and B. The only solutions of the equations (3) are, by precisely
the argument used for the equations (2), 10. 0.
, 0) and (1, 1.
- , 1). Hence
the rank of B is a2 - 1.
7. The fourth set of equations correspond to the columns of the matrix B. The
variables correspond to the edges of the map and for each country there is an
equation of the form
(4)
ea+es+... =0,
where ea, e,,,
-
- are the edges of the region. Just as in the case of the equations
(I). a solution represents a system of circuits among the regions of the map. A
circuit is a set of distinct countries r,, r2,
, r and distinct edges e,. e2.
. e
such that r, and r: meet along e,, r., and r, meet along e:,
- , r and r, meet
along e,,. A circuit is simple if no subset of its edges and regions form a circuit. To
distinguish a simple circuit composed of edges and regions from an ordinary
circuit which is composed of edges and vertices we may call the former a cycle.
The set of all edges and regions meeting at a vertex form a cycle which we shall
call fundamental. The solutions which correspond to fundamental cycles are given
by the rows of matrix A of which
1 are linearly independent. Since the rank
of B is a-- - I and the number of variables in the equations (4) is a,, the number
of linearly independent solutions is a, - a: + 1, which by Euler's formula is a - 1.
Hence the an fundamental cycles furnish a set of solutions of (4) in terms of which
all the solutions are expressible; and these fundamental solutions satisfy one
linear homogeneous relation.
8. Turning to the four color problem. let us suppose the field GF(2), consisting
of 0 and I combined modulo two, to be extended by the Galois imaginaries
satisfying the relations i' + i + I = 0. The extended field GF(22) has four elements,
0, 1. i, i + l which we may use to denote the four colors. Two elements a, S of
this field are equal if and only if a + j9 = 0. Hence a solution of the four color
problem consists in finding a set of values (y,, y:,
, y..) which satisfies none of
the equations (3) corresponding to the rows of the matrix B.

164
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
9. The set of values (y,. y,.
.
. y;,,) may be regarded as a point in a finite
projective space of a, - I dimensions [8] provided we exclude the set (0. 0, 0.
0) and regard (ky,. ky,.
ky...) as the same as (y,. y2.
. y...). Each of the
equations 01 then represents an la., - 2)-space. If the variables y, range only over
the GF(2) there will be 2 - l points in the (a2 - I) space. If the variables range
over the GF122) there will be (4°=- 10 such points. The first space is included in
the second and the points of the second space not included in the first may be
regarded as imaginary with respect to the first space.
In general. there can be no real point which satisfies none of the equations (3)
for such a point would represent a coloring of the map by two colors, which is
impossible whenever an odd number of regions meet at any vertex. Hence, in
general, every, real point lies on at least one of the (a.,-2)-spaces.
An imaginary point can be written in the form (y, + iy,', y2 + iy,'.
, ye:+ iya; )
where ( v,. y,.
v...) and (y,'. y2'.
. y",') are real. Hence every imaginary
point is on a real line. No imaginary point can be on two real lines because two
such lines if they intersect at all have a real point in common. But if (y, +iv,'.
Y: +iy.',
.
. , y,,,+iy",') satisfies one of the equations (3), so must (y,, y2,
, y,.;)
and t.y,', y,'.
, ya,'). and conversely. Hence a solution of the four color problem
is given by each real line which does riot lie on any of the (a2-2) spaces which are
represented by equations (3).
10. If a point of the real (a,- 1)-space does not satisfy any of the equations (3)
corresponding to the edges in a cycle (cf. §7) the countries in the cycle must be
assigned alternately the values 0 and 1. This is impossible in a cycle containing an
odd number of regions. Hence every real point (y,, y2, .
. ya,) lies in at least one
(a, - 2 1- space corresponding to an edge of each odd cycle in the ntap.
If the equations corresponding to the edges in a cycle be added, each variable
enters twice in the sum. Hence the sum vanishes. In other words, the equations
corresponding to the edges in the cycle satisfy a linear relation. If any subset of
these equations be added it is clear from the definition of a cycle that there is at
least one variable which enters only once in the sum, and hence the sum does not
vanish. Hence the equations corresponding to the edges in a cycle satisfy only one
linear relation. A set of t (a2 - 2)-spaces in an (a2 - I)-space would in general
meet in an (a, - n - 1)-space. But the (a2 - 2) spaces corresponding to the edges
in a cycle satisfy one linear relation and therefore meet in an (a2 - n)-space. Let
us denote by Sa, .., the (a, - n)-space thus determined by a cycle C. of n regions.
Any point of Sa,
must satisfy all the equations corresponding to edges of C..
Hence. if n is odd, a line joining any point of S;;_.,, to any point whatever must lie
in at least one of the (a, - 2)-spaces corresponding to the edges in C,,. Therefore a
line which furnishes a solution of the four color problem cannot pass through any
point of the S,,
corresponding to any odd chain G. In order that it be possible
to color the map it is necessary that there be at least one point (y',. v2,
, y.,)
not on any S " for which n is odd.
This condition is also sufficient. For suppose we have a point (y,. y2.
, y",)
not on any S,. " corresponding to an odd value of n. The countries are accord-
ingly all labelled 0 or 1. and every cycle consisting entirely of 0's or entirely of l's
contains an even number of countries. The map breaks up into a finite number of
connected portions. each of which is entirely composed of 0-countries and entirely
bounded by I -countries or entirely composed of I-countries and entirely bounded
by 0-countries. Consider all the 0-countries of a given connected set. They can be
reached from an arbitrary 0-country, r,. by paths which do not pass through
vertices and go only through 0-countries. The paths from r, to any other country

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1036
10
r2 of this set cross always an odd or always an even number of edges. for if not, on
cancelling the common edges of two paths from r, to r2 there would remain at
least one odd cycle of 0-countries. Let us color white the country r, and all
countries of the set connected with it which are reached by crossing an even
number of edges and let us color black all countries of the set which are reached
by crossing an odd number of edges. No two white countries are adjacent nor are
any two black countries. Treat all the connected sets of 0-countries in this fashion.
Treat all the connected sets of 1-countries similarly with the colors red and
yellow. The result is a solution of the four color problem. Hence the existence of a
point (y,. Y2-
, ),o,) not on any Sc,
for which n is odd implies a solution of the
four color problem.
The four color problem has now been reduced to the following form. In a finite
projective space of (a2- 1) dimensions with three points on a line there are a
certain number of spaces S' 1,_ of dimensionality a2 - n, one for each odd cycle
C.. They all have one point in common (36). The map can be colored in four colors
if and only if there exists a point not on any of these Sa,._,,'s. There are as many
distinct ways of coloring the map (aside from permutations of the colors) as there are
real lines in the (a: - I)-space which do not meet any Sc..
t n. odd).
1 f . Another set of equations associated with the map problem arises as follows.
It v, and v, are two variables which appear in the same one of the equations (3).
i.e., which correspond to adjacent regions. let us denote y, + y, by a new variable
x&. There will be one x,, for each of the equations (3). i.e.. for each edge of the
map. The condition that none of the equations (3) be satisfied now takes the form
(5)
x.40
The set of all x's corresponding to the edges meeting at a vertex of the map is a
sum of pairs of y's in which each y appears twice. Hence if the x's meeting at a
vertex be x,,, xr, x.,
, they must satisfy the equation.
(6)
..=0.
These equations are evidently the same as (1). D. In other words, it is necessary in
order to solve the problem to find a solution of the equations (1) in which none 4 the
variables vanishes.
This is also sufficient. For any equation of the form (6) in which x,,, xb.
are
the edges which appear in a cycle is linearly dependent on the equations (1). (It is
in fact the sum of the equations (1) corresponding to vertices in one of the two
parts into which the surface of the sphere is divided by the cycle.) Hence a
solution of the equations (I) is such that the sum of the marks on the edges of any
cycle is zero. Suppose this solution labels all the edges of the map with marks
different from 0. If now the mark 0 be assigned to an arbitrary region and the
other regions be marked according to the rule that the sum of the marks of two
adjacent countries shall be equal to the mark of the edge separating them, a
unique mark is assigned to each country: otherwise the edges of some cycle would
have a sum different from zero. Since the marks of no two adjacent countries are
alike, this determines a coloring in four colors.
12. It is well known that the four color problem may be reduced to the
problem of coloring a map in which three edges meet at each vertex. In this case
the equations (1) discussed in § I I have only three [terms] each..... .
From the equations (1) in this form can be derived the set of equations modulo
three discovered by Heawood [I]. In an
solution of (1) the three values of the

166
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
variables xa, xb, x, corresponding to the edges which meet at any vertex must be 1,
i and i2 in some order, for this is the only way of satisfying
xa+xb+& =0
by values different from zero. An arbitrary sense on the sphere having been
chosen as positive, the three marks on the edges at any vertex follow one another
in the positive sense either in the cyclic order 1, i, i2 or the cyclic order 1, i2, i. In
the first case each mark is obtained from its predecessor by multiplying by i, in the
second case by multiplying by i2. Thus by properly distributing the marks i, and i2
at the vertices the marks of all edges are determined as soon as the mark on one
edge is given. For if the mark a on an edge, e, is given and f3 is the mark at one of
its vertices, v, then the mark on the edge following e in the positive cyclic order at
v is af3 and the mark on the other edge is af32. In order that this process assign a
unique mark to each edge, the product of the i's and i2is multiplied in while
describing any closed circuit must be unity.
It is necessary and, in view of the simple connectivity of the sphere, sufficient
that this condition be satisfied for the boundary of each country in the map. In
view of the identity,
i3 = 1,
this means that the sum of the exponents of the i's at the vertices of any country
must be divisible by three. Hence if z1, z2,
, zk are the exponents at the
vertices of any country they must satisfy the relation,
z1+z2+ +zk =0
(mod. 3).
The a2 countries give rise to a2 equations of this form among ao variables
representing the vertices of the map. These are Heawood's equations. The matrix
of the coefficients of the equations is the matrix analogous to A and B represent-
ing the incidence relations of the vertices and countries of the map.
To solve the four color problem it is necessary and sufficient to find a solution
of these equations in which none of the variables vanish. The variables may be
interpreted as coordinates of points in a finite projective space of ao-dimensions
in which there are four points on every line.
About this time (1912), one of Veblen's colleagues at Princeton Uni-
versity was G. D. Birkhofl. He became interested in the four-colour
problem, and wrote two papers on it during his stay in Princeton. The
papers of Veblen and Birkhoff became the major stimuli for the steady
stream of American work on graphs and maps from 1912 onwards.
The volume of the Annals of Mathematics which contained Veblen's
paper on the four-colour problem also contained the first paper by
Birkhoff on the same problem. In this paper he initiated a new, quantita-
tive approach to the problem. For a given positive integer A and a given
map M, he introduced the symbol P(A) to denote the number of ways of
colouring the regions of M when A colours are available, subject to the
usual restriction that adjacent regions have different colours. For exam-
ple, if M is the map shown in Fig. 9.3, then we can colour region 0 with

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
167
FiG. 9.3.
any one of the A colours, region R with any of the remaining A - I
colours, and regions S and T with any of the other A - 2 colours;
consequently, for this map
P(A)= A(A - 1)(A - 2)` = A- 5A'+8A' -4A.
Birkhoff noticed that the function P is always a polynomial in A, and he
derived a general formula for the coefficients of this polynomial. In our
extract [9B] we have omitted his complicated determinantal proof of the
formula for the coefficients, since a simpler method due to Whitney will
be given later in this chapter.
9B
G. D. BIRKHOFF
A DETERMINANT FORMULA FOR THE NUMBER
OF WAYS OF COLORING A MAP
Annals of Mathematics (2) 14 (1912-3), 42-46.
Suppose that a finite set of two-dimensional regions making up a simply or
multiply connected closed surface are given, so that these form a map M. Each of
these regions may be taken to be limited by closed curves, formed by a finite
number of continuous boundary lines which the region has in common with other
regions. The ends of these lines, at which three or more regions meet, are called
vertices of the map. A coloring of the map consists in attributing to each region a
color different from that of any region having in common with it a boundary line,
but not necessarily different from that of a region meeting it at a vertex.
The following fact will first be proved: The number of ways of coloring the given
map M in A colors (A = 1.
2..
- ) is given by a polynomial Of A) of degree n. where
n is the number of regions of the map M. In fact let nt,(i = 1, 2..
, n) he the
number of ways of coloring the map by using exactly
i colors when mere
permutations of the colors are disregarded. With this definition it is clear that
m, - A
represents the number of ways of coloring the given map in exactly i of the A
colors counting two colorings as distinct when they are obtained by a permutation
one from the other; for, of the i colors used. the first may be chosen in A ways, the
second in A - I ways, and so on. If A is less than i the above term reduces to zero.

168
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
But the total number of ways of coloring the given map in k colors is the sum of
the number of ways of coloring it with 1, 2,
, n of these colors, since no more
than n colors can be used. Accordingly the total number of ways is represented by
P(A)=m1A+m2A(A-1)+ +mnA(A-1)
. (A-n+1)
for all values of A. It is clear that in general m1= 0 inasmuch as for n > 1 no map
can be colored in a single color, and that m =1 since there is only one way of
coloring M in n colors if permutation of the colors be disregarded.
In order to proceed to the effective determination of P(A) we consider the total
number µ - 1 of ways of forming from the map M") = M submaps M(2),
,
M"' of n -1 regions, M<k+l> ..
M(`) of n - 2 regions, and so on to M11) of one
region, by successive coalescence of regions adjacent along a boundary line. Such
a coalescence may be indicated by the removal of all the common boundary lines
of the two regions which coalesce. The maps M(2), .
, M(k) are obtained by one
such step, the maps M(k+l),... , M (l) by two such steps, and so on.
At this point we introduce the symbol (i, k) to denote the number of ways of
breaking down the map M in n regions to a submap of i regions by k simple or
multiple coalescences, i.e., by picking out maps M, M(',),
, M(°`k), each but the
first being a submap of the preceding one, and the last one having i regions. It is
apparent that we have (i, k) = 0 for k > n - i, and that (1, n - i) represents the
number of ways of making n - i successive simple coalescences. By definition we
take (n, 0) =1 and (i, 0) = 0 for i < n.
is
The final formula for the number of ways of coloring the given map in k colors
n
n-1
P(A)= E A` Z (-1)k(i, k).
1=1
k=0
The term in An, corresponding to the identical substitution, has the proper
coefficient unity according to our previous convention by which the symbol (n, 0)
has the value 1.
As a first example of the formula we take the very simple case of a map of three
regions which are adjacent each to each. We will have
(2, 1) = 3,
(1,1) =1,
(1, 2) = 3,
and
P(A) _ (3, 0)A3-(2, 1)A2+[-(1, 1)+(1, 2)]A = A(A -1)(A -2).
The validity of this formula may be verified at once by noticing that we can color
any one of these three regions in A colors, a second region in the A - 1 remaining
colors, and the third region in the A - 2 colors left after the first two regions are
colored.
As a second example we take the case of a map in five regions formed by a ring
of three regions bounding an interior and exterior region. In this case the symbols
(i, k) which enter have the values
(4, 1) = 9,
(3, 1) = 22,
(3, 2) = 51;
(2, 1) =14,
(2, 2) = 125,
(2, 3) = 150;
(1, 1) =1,
(1, 2) =45,
(1,3)=176,
(1,4)=150

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
169
so that
P(A) = A5 - 9A4+29A3 -39 k2 + 18A =A (A -1) (A -2) (A
-3)2.
In this case also the validity of the formula may be at once verified, for the three
regions of the ring must be in three distinct colors, while the interior and exterior
regions may be in any fourth color different from these three colors.
Even in this second case the value of the symbols (i, k) is not immediately
obtained; and if we have a somewhat more complicated map, for example the
map formed by twelve five-sided regions on the sphere, a considerable computa-
tion would be necessary to determine P(A) directly from the formula, or from the
map itself.
Birkhoff was intrigued by the four-colour problem, and in later years
he regretted that he had wasted so much time on it. But he also declared
that every great mathematician had at some time attacked the problem,
and had, for a while, believed himself successful. From his son, Garrett,
we learn that he would ask his wife to prepare suitably complicated maps
for him to colour: Mrs. Birkhoff's opinion of this task has not been
recorded.
Reducibility
Birkhoff's second paper on map colouring was published in 1913,
entitled `The reducibility of maps' [9]. In this paper he reviewed several
ideas due to earlier writers, and welded them into a systematic method of
investigation. The line of enquiry which he suggested was eventually
to lead to the solution of the problem, in 1976.
If there are plane maps which need five colours, then there must be
among them a map with the smallest number of regions; such a map is
said to be irreducible. The basic idea is to obtain more and more
restrictive conditions which an irreducible map must satisfy, in the hope
that eventually we shall have enough conditions either to construct the
map explicitly, or, alternatively, to prove that it cannot exist. Birkhoff
began by showing that an irreducible map must be trivalent, and went on
to prove that it cannot contain any regions bounded by less than five
edges. Suppose, for example, that the map contained a triangle (Fig. 9.4).
The removal of the edge ab gives a map with fewer regions which can
therefore be coloured with four colours; only three colours (say A, B, C)
are used in the vicinity of the vertex c, and so ab can be reinstated and
the fourth colour D assigned to the triangular region. In the same way we
can rule out a region with four edges, using the method of Kempe-chains
as explained in Chapter 6. Further results of this kind were obtained in
Wernicke's 1904 paper, which showed that an irreducible map must
contain either two adjacent pentagons, or a pentagon adjacent to a
hexagon [7].

170
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
C
F,c. 9.4.
Birkhoff applied Kempe-chain techniques to obtain results concerning
'rings' of regions. If R is a ring of regions with the maps M, and M2 in its
interior and exterior (Fig. 9.5). then a colouring of the maps M, U R and
M2 U R can be combined to give a colouring of the whole map M provided
that these colourings agree on R. By taking M to be an irreducible map,
and using a Kempe-chain argument to match a four-colouring of M, U R
and a four-colouring of M2 U R. Birkhoff proved that an irreducible map
can contain no ring of four regions. and no ring of five regions (unless M,
is a single pentagon). He also found several other forbidden configura-
tions.
In 1922 Philip Franklin. who had worked with Veblen on analysis
situs. made a significant application of the concept of reducibility, in a
paper [9C] which showed that the four-colour conjecture is true for all
Fic. 9.5.
PW2

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
171
maps with at most twenty-five regions. His paper illustrates very clearly
the types of argument used in proving results about reducibility, and so
we have reproduced it in full.
9C
P. FRANKLIN
THE FOUR COLOR PROBLEM
American Journal of Mathematics 44 (1922), 225-236.
1. By, a map we shall understand a subdivision of an inversion plane or sphere
by means of a finite number of circular arcs into a finite number of regions, which
completely cover it. There is no loss of generality in this restriction, as a "map"
on any surface of genus zero, with a finite number of regions bounded by simple
curves, may be deformed into a map of the type just described. A side is a line
'along which two distinct regions touch each other; a vertex is a point which
belongs to three or more regions. The problem of coloring a map with a given
number of colors (denoted in what follows by A, B, C, etc.) is the association of a
color with each region in such a way that any two regions with a side in common
are given different colors. Two regions with only a vertex (or a finite number of
vertices) in common may of course have the same color.
Whether every map can be colored with four colors is an outstanding question,
for while no map has ever been exhibited which could not be colored with four
colors, no rigorous demonstration of the possibility for the general case has ever
been given. It is known that four colors are necessary to color some maps and that
five colors are sufficient to color all maps. If any maps which can not be colored in
four colors exist, there must be one such map of a minimum number of regions.
We will call such a map an irreducible map. It is known that an irreducible map
has the following properties [9]:
1. Each vertex belongs to three and only three regions.
2. No group of less than five regions forms a multiply-connected portion of the
map. (Consequently there are no two-, three- or four-sided regions and no
multiply-connected regions.)
3. No group of five regions forms a multiply-connected portion of the map
unless the group consists of the five regions surrounding a pentagon.
4. No edge is surrounded by four pentagons.
5. No region is completely surrounded by pentagons.
6. No even-sided region is completely surrounded by hexagons. Each of these
statements amounts to saying that a certain configuration is not possible in an
irreducible map. Such a configuration will be called a reducible configuration.
In this paper we shall derive a few additional reducible configurations, by
means of which it can be shown that the number of regions in an irreducible map
is greater than 25. An example is also given of a map of 42 regions which,
although colorable in four colors, satisfies all the conditions which have been
derived for an irreducible map. It may be taken as showing the extreme lack of
generality of the results thus far obtained for this problem.
2. It is interesting to find out some of the properties of a map not containing
any region of less than five sides, as this is a property of an irreducible map. Since

172
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
our map is drawn on a sphere. the Euler formula (applied to a manifold of genus
zero) gives:
(1)
a4,-a,+a:=2.
where a,,, a,. a: are the number of vertices, sides and regions respectively. Also
since only three regions touch any one vertex, we have:
) 2)
2 a, =Sao =
vA,.,
where A, means the number of regions of v sides in the map: the last two
expressions are each equal to the first since they represent twice the number of
sides in the map, counted first with reference to vertices, then with reference to
regions. From (Ii and (2) we obtain:
(3)
a,=3(a:-2).
ao=2(a:-2).
From (2). (3) and the fact that a: _
A., we see that
(4)
6( A.-2)A,..
This may be written:
(5)
A.=12+6)A,
and since the second term on the right is positive, A. must be at least 12. and we
have the well-known theorem:
Event' Wrap containing no triangles or quadrilaterals and having three regions
abutting on each vertex contains at least twelve pentagons [6B].
We shall also prove that such a map must contain either:
A pentagon adjacent to two other pentagons.
A pentagon adjacent to a pentagon and to a hexagon, or
A pentagon adjacent to two hexagons.
That every such map contains either two adjacent pentagons or a pentagon
adjacent to a hexagon was proved by P. Wernicke [7].)
For, consider a map with none of these combinations of regions and let us count
the number of vertices in the map which belong to a hexagon or a pentagon. We
find that the number of vertices contributed by hexagons nowhere in contact with
pentagons will be greater than twice the number of such hexagons since each
hexagon has -:ix vertices and no vertex belongs to more than three hexagons:
pentagons isolated from hexagons or other pentagons will give five vertices each.
two pentagons adjacent to each other but to no other pentagons or hexagons give
eight vertices together, and hence average four each. while a pentagon adjacent to
a hexagon gives over four vertices, since of its five vertices we need only deduct
two thirds to account for the two where the hexagon joins it. Thus if none of the
three conditions enumerated above existed, the number of vertices would be at
least 4.A, + 2A,,. That is we would have to have:
(6)
a?3A.+2As.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
But from 1 S i and the obvious inequality:
(I1)
(12_)
0-V 17-r 1A,
A.412sA,
A,+12s2A,+A,.
Y A.
14 :s 2 A, + A,,.
aU+28s4A,+2A,,.
173
which contradicts (61 and thus proves the theorem.
The above theorem is not restricted to irreducible maps. but it follows from it
that if the configurations there shown to be present were reducible there could not
be any irreducible maps and the four-color problem would be solved. While it
does not appear to be possible to prove this, there are a number of more
complicated configurations which are reducible.
3. To obtain these configurations, and prove their reducibility, we shall need
the notion of chains. originated by Kempe. and employed by Birkhoff. If a map is
colored, or partially colored, a group of regions colored in two colors (say A and
B). forming a connected region. and such that each region adjacent to a region of
the group is either colored in one of the remaining two colors (C or D) or not yet
colored, is said to form a chain (an AB chain). Evidently we may obtain a second
coloration or partial coloration of the map by interchanging the two colors on a
single chain, and unless the map contains only one chain in this pair of colors, the
new coloration will differ from the old by more than a mere permutation of the
colors of the whole map.
Furthermore since two chains with no color in common, as an AB chain and a
CD chain, can not "cross" each other, if we have a closed circuit consisting of an
AB chain, or an AB chain and an uncolored region in the case of a partially
colored map. it follows that the C and D regions on one side of the closed circuit
can not belong to the same CD chain as those on the opposite side of the circuit.
Thus in Fig. [9.61, if
I is an uncolored region. and 2 and 4 are joined by an AB
chain. 3 must belong to a CD chain distinct from the one containing 6 and 7.
Consequently we may interchange the colors in the CD chain containing 3
without affecting 6 and 7. Since, in most of the applications of this process, we
shall only be concerned with the arrangement of the colors about the uncolored
region, and the rest of them are unchanged by this operation, we shall briefly refer
to this operation as "changing 3 to a D." The value of these operations will be
seen in the proofs which follow.
4. We shall now prove that
A side of a hexagon surrounded by this hexagon and three pentagons is a

174
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 9.6.
reducible configuration. For, if it were present in an irreducible map, and we
erased the dotted lines as in Fig. [9.7], we would obtain a new map which would
contain fewer regions than an irreducible map and hence be colorable. From the
way we selected the lines which were erased, regions 1 and 4 would have the same
color (say A) while regions 5 and 7 would have a different common color (say B).
Of the five essentially distinct coloration, the three cases shown in a, b and c
C
w
4
'
4
(b)
(c)
(I)
Flc. 9.7.

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
175
permit of immediate coloration, as indicated. In the case shown in d, if 5 is joined
to 7 by a BD chain, A may be changed to a C reducing the problem to case a,
while if 5 is joined to 3 by a BD chain. 4 may be changed to a C. and the map
colored as shown in e. If neither of these chains exist. 5 may be changed to a D.
and the map colored as shown in f. Finally in the case given in g, either a BD
chain joins 7 with 5. and we reduce to c by changing 6 to A. or a BD chain joins
7 with 3, and we color as in it after interchanging A and C in the AC chain
including I and 2. or 7 may be changed to a D and we color as in i.
If 5 and 7 had a side in common in our original map. we could not erase the
dotted lines, and still leave a map; but in this case we would have three regions
forming a multiply-connected piece. If 1 and 4 had a side in common, we would
have a group of five regions forming a multiply-connected region of the map, and
not all adjacent to the same pentagon. Hence both these cases are excluded by the
properties of irreducible maps given in the first section.
If a pentagon is in contact with three pentagons, a hexagon. and a fifth region of
any number of sides, either the hexagon is adjacent to this fifth region, in which
case the three adjacent pentagons, with the initial pentagon. completely surround
an edge, or the hexagon is adjacent to two pentagons, and we have a side of the
hexagon completely surrounded by this hexagon and three pentagons. In either
case, it is reducible and we have the result:
A pentagon in contact with three pentagons and a hexagon is a reducible
configuration.
Also if a pentagon is in contact with two pentagons and three hexagons, if the
two pentagons are not adjacent. they are separated by a hexagon. which with the
three pentagons forms a reducible configuration. If the two pentagons are
adjacent, we proceed as follows: We erase the boundaries which are dotted (Fig.
[9.8(a)]) and color the resulting map. If all the regions 1, 2. 3, 4 are not colored in
one color, there are two of them, say I and 2. which are separated by a single
region and in different colors, say B and C respectively. We then color 5 with C.
and 6, 7, 8. 9 in turn, which is possible since taking them in this order we shall
never come to a region surrounded by more than three different colors. On the
other hand, if all the regions 1. 2. 3, 4 are colored in the same color, say B, either
there is no BC chain joining all these regions. in which case we can change some
of these regions to C and reduce our problem to the case just discussed, or the
AD chain containing the region 10 is separated from the other regions marked A
and can be changed to a D. The map is then colored as shown in Fig. [9.8(b)].
This proves the theorem:
A pentagon surrounded by two pentagons and three hexagons is a reducible
configuration.
L_I
_-t
rte'
,1
A_
i l)
Fic. 9.8.

176
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
In this proof we have omitted any reference to the case where the dotted lines
can not be erased without giving rise to a region which meets itself along one
edge. We shall also do this in future cases where, as in this case, it may be
excluded by the considerations used for this purpose in the proof of our first
theorem.
By a method quite similar to the above, we could easily show that any
odd-sided region. completely surrounded by one or more pairs of pentagons, the
two of each pair being adjacent, and a number (necessarily odd) of hexagons, is a
reducible configuration.
To lead up to a slightly more general theorem, we repeat Birkhoff's proof of the
reducibility of an even-sided region surrounded by hexagons, for definiteness
stating the proof for a hexagon so surrounded. We erase the dotted lines of Fig.
[9.9(a)] and obtain the coloration shown. If all the regions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 6 are not
colored in one color, there are two of them, say 1 and 2, which are separated by a
single region and in different colors, say B and C We then color 7 with C, and
color 8, 9, 10, 11. 12 in turn, which is possible since we shall find each adjacent to
regions of three different colors at most, and thus have a fourth with which to
color each. If 1, 2, 3. 4. 5, 6 are all in the same color, our map is colored as in Fig.
[9.91h1].
Our generalization is to the case where two adjacent hexagons are replaced by
pentagons. and the above method is directly applicable, provided we imagine one
of the regions marked A as shrunk to a point. This shows that:
An even-sided region completely surrounded by hexagons and pairs of pentagons,
the two of each pair being adjacent, is a reducible configuration.
If a hexagon is surrounded by two hexagons and four pentagons. either the
pentagons are grouped so as to come under the theorem just proved, or one of
the edges of the hexagon is in contact with three pentagons which we proved
above was a reducible configuration. Thus:
A hexagon surrounded by four pentagons pnd two hexagons is a reducible
configuration.
A region of an even number of sides (2n) surrounded by 2n-2 pentagons and
two other regions, which are adjacent, is reducible.
To fix the ideas, we state the proof for an octagon. We erase the dotted lines
(Fig. [9.10]1 and color the resulting map. If 4 is a C, we color 15. 14, 13. 12, 11,
10 in turn which will be possible since each will only be adjacent to regions in at
A
A
'-{
10 )--
Rt
D9 } -
DI 1
A }--<
A }--( A
8 \r--(
12
R6
-
D7 r
2
A
\
(a)
A
(h)
FIO. 9.9.
/_R

THE FOUR-COLOUR PRQBLEM-TO 193h
1A
I
CI0,
177
13 r--Y
II
YA
i
4
-1
A
FIG. 9.11.
most three different colors when we come to it. If 4 is a B or D. we color 10 D or
B respectively, and color 1 I C. If 6 is a C. we color 15, 14. 13, 12 in turn, as
before; while if it is B or D we color 12 D or B respectively and 13 C. We then
color 14 and 15 D. C; B. D. or B. C: according as 8 is B. C or D.
A region of an odd number of sides (2n - 1) surrounded by 21t - 2 pentagons and
one other region is reducible.
We give the proof for a heptagon. After erasing the dotted lines (Fig. [9.111) we
color the new map. as indicated. Reasoning exactly as for the preceding theorem,
we show that if 5 is a C the map is colorable, while if it is not C we color 11 and
12, giving 12 the color C. Then we color 13 and 14 D. C. B. D. or B. C;
according as 7 is B. C or D.
It follows from our last two theorems that:
An n-gon in contact with n - I pentagons is reducible.
5. We will now deduce certain inequalities which must be satisfied by the
numbers A. if the map is an irreducible one. We have shown that such a map
must not contain:
(a) An n-gon in contact with n - I pentagons.
(b) A pentagon in contact with three pentagons and one hexagon,
(c) A pentagon in contact with two pentagons and three hexagons.
(d) A hexagon in contact with four pentagons and two hexagons,
in addition to the six configurations given in the first section. and have also shown
that the equation (see (5u:
(13)
A5= 12+) (v-6)A..
7
applies to such a map.
From (a) we know that every region of our map is in contact with at least two
regions of more than five sides. Hence the number of sides (a side being counted
with each of the two regions it separates) of regions with more than five sides
must be at least equal to twice the total number of regions. That is:
(14)
E -,A.>2
A...
To obtain a second inequality from the remaining conditions, we write:
A s = the number of pentagons in contact with no region of more than six sides,
A 15 = the number of pentagons in contact with only one such region.

171;
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
A'"s = the number of pentagons in contact with two or more such regions.
A6 = the number of hexagons in contact with no such regions, and
A.'= the number of hexagons in contact with at least one such region.
From (a) it follows that each region As. A6 (we thus abbreviate regions of the
type counted in As, A6) as well as those of more than six sides is in contact with
at least two regions of more than five sides. Also from (a), (b) and (c) it follows
that each pentagon As is in contact with at least four hexagons, and from (a) and
(b) that each pentagon As' is in contact with at least two hexagons in addition to
the one region of more than six sides; and therefore to at least three regions of
more than five sides. Finally from (a) and (d) we see that each hexagon A6 is in
contact with at least three other hexagons. Thus we have:
(15)
E PA. -2:4As+3As+2A2+3A6+2A6+2 Y A,..
7
But from the definitions of the regions As, etc.:
(16)
PA.?A'.+2Ai+A6.
7
If we add corresponding members of (15) and (16), recollecting that As =
A03 +A,+A25 and A6=Ah+A6, we obtain the result:
(17)
vA,.+
,A.?4As+3A6+2E A-
7
7
which may be written:
(18)
2Z PA.->4As-3A6+2ZA..
7
7
For a map which contains no regions of more than seven sides, we may obtain a
somewhat stronger inequality, by using:
(19)
4A6+5A7?4A°s+3A's+2A,
(20)
5A7?
A.+2A25,
which are analogous to (15) and (16); except that by considering only sides of
pentagons in contact with regions of more than five sides we are enabled to use
(a) in deriving the left members. They give:
(21)
4A6+ 10A7?4Ac,
which is only applicable to maps composed entirely of pentagons. hexagons. and
heptagons.
By using (13) we may reduce (14) and (18) to the respective forms:
(22)
(23)
(10-v)A.-24.
2(11-v)A.z48-3A6.
These two inequalities show that the map we are considering must have at least
25 regions, and if it have only 25, they must be 17 pentagons, 3 hexagons, and 5

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
179
heptagons. For if the map contained two hexagons (22) would give:
(24)
1
7
which requires at least six regions of more than six sides, and hence by (13) at
least 18 pentagons. This would make 26 regions. If the map contained less than
two hexagons, the same equation would show that there were more than 27
regions in the map, by a similar argument. Also our map can not have less than
five regions of more than six sides, since if the map contained four heptagons, (23)
would give:
(25)
3A6> 16,
and the six hexagons required by (25) together with the 16 pentagons required by
(13) would make 26 regions. Furthermore each heptagon less than four will
increase the right member of (25) by eight, and hence require at least two
additional hexagons in place of the heptagon and pentagon removed. Replacing
any of the heptagons by octagons or regions of more than eight sides will
strengthen our inequalities, as well as necessitating more pentagons to satisfy (13).
But the map of 17 pentagons, three hexagons, and five heptagons is not
irreducible, since it does not satisfy (21). Consequently every irreducible map
must contain more than 25 regions and this gives the theorem:
Every map containing 25 or fewer regions can be colored in four colors.
6. The question naturally arises whether 25 is the greatest number for which
we can prove such a theorem as the above on the basis of the reductions already
described. While an exact answer to this question is lacking, it is evident that the
smallest number of regions in a map not containing any of these known reducible
configurations is not considerably above 25, as we can construct a map with a
small number of regions not containing any of them. Thus in Fig. [9.12] we
exhibit a map of 42 regions which satisfies all the properties of irreducible maps
given by previous writers as well as those derived in this paper. The map may be
formed by constructing 'a hexagon on each of the 30 edges of a regular
FIG. 9.12.

180
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
dodecahedron, in such a way as to leave twelve pentagonal faces, and may be
colored by first coloring the pentagons as they would be colored for the
dodecahedron.
Franklin's paper was the first in a long line of applications of the
concept of reducibility. In 1925 a Belgian mathematician, Alfred Errera,
proved that an irreducible map must contain at least thirteen pentagons
(101. This was followed by a paper [I I] by C. N. Reynolds, who showed
that the number 25 in Franklin's theorem could be increased to 27.
It was not until 1976 that the four-colour problem was finally solved. In
that year K. Appel and W. Haken used a computer to construct a set of
1936 reducible configurations. They then showed that every trivalent map
must necessarily contain at least one of these configurations. This com-
pleted the proof of the four-colour conjecture.
Birkhoff, Whitney, and chromatic polynomials
In the late 1920s, Birkhoff returned to the four-colour conjecture, and,
at about the same time, Whitney began to work on a thesis on colouring
problems, under Birkhoff's direction. These two events led to some
significant developments in the theory of graphs.
Birkhoff took up once again a quantitative approach to the four-colour
conjecture, and published a paper [ 12] in which he proved that, for a map
with n . 3 regions
P(A)= A(A - 1)(A -2)(A -3)"-3,
where A is any positive integer, except 4. Of course, if the result were
true for A = 4 also, then the truth of the four-colour conjecture would
follow.
Whitney began his researches by extending the quantitative approach
so that it could be applied to graphs rather than maps. A colouring of a
graph is an assignment of colours to its vertices, in such a way that
vertices which are joined by an edge have different colours; so a colouring
of the regions of a map corresponds to a colouring of the dual graph. The
general problem of colouring graphs had been mentioned by Kempe at
the end of his 1879 page- [6B], but little work had been done on this
problem prior to 1930. Whitney used the notation M(A) to denote the
number of ways of colouring a given graph when A colours are available;
as in the case of a map, the function M is a polynomial function of A, and
it is now known as the chromatic polynomial of the graph.
The first result obtained by Whitney was an expression for the coeffi-
cients of the chromatic polynomial similar to the one found by Birkhoff in
1912. Whitney used a general principle, or 'logical expansion', which is

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
181
sometimes called the 'principle of inclusion and exclusion'; this method
has a long history which can be traced back to de Moivre in the early
eighteenth century. In a paper [9D] published in 1932, Whitney ex-
plained how the principle may be verified, and gave several applications of
it in various branches of mathematics. We have reproduced only one such
application-his derivation of the formula for the coefficients of the
chromatic polynomial.
9D
H. WHITNEY
A LOGICAL EXPANSION IN MATHEMATICS
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 38 (1932). 572-579.
1. Introduction. Suppose we have a finite set of objects, (for instance, books on
a table), each of which either has or has not a certain given property A (say of
being red). Let it, or n(1). be the total number of objects, n(A) the number with
the property A. and n(A) the number without the property A (with the property
not-A or A). Then obviously
(1)
n(A)=n-n(A).
Similarly. if n(A B) denote the number with both properties A and B, and
n(A B) the number with neither property, that is, with both properties not-A and
not-B. then
(2)
ri(AB)=n-n(A)-n(B)+n(AB),
which is easily seen to be true.
The extension of these formulas to the general case where any number of
properties are considered is quite simple, and is well known to logicians. It should
be better known to mathematicians also, we give in this paper several applications
which show its usefulness......
2. The Logical Expansion. We prove now the general formula
n(A,.A.
Amt=n-[n(A,)*n(A.) + +n(A-)]
(3)
+[n(A,A.)+n(A,A,)+ +n(A,,.,A-)]
-[n(A,A:A,)+...1+...+(- 1)
'n(AtA.... A.).
which gives the number of objects without certain properties in terms of the
numbers of objects with various of these properties. The formula is exactly what
we should get if we multiplied out the expression in brackets in n[(1 -A,) x
(I - A.)
. (1 - A-)] by ordinary algebra and applied the general formulas
n(F+G1=n(F)+n(G), n(-F)=-n(F).
We assume the formula holds if there are two properties involved. and shall

182
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
prove it for the case that three properties are involved. The proof obviously holds
if the numbers two and three are replaced by i and i + 1, and hence the formula is
true in general, by mathematical induction.
Consider the objects counted in n(A,A:), that is, those with neither of the
properties A, and A:. We wish to know how many of these have the properly A,.
Applying (1) to this set, we have
n(A,A:A3) = n(A,A2) - n(A,A2A3).
We know, by hypothesis. that
n(A,A2) = n -[n(A,)+n(A2)]+n(A,A2).
To find n1A,A:A:) we need merely consider those objects with the property A3,
and apply the expansion to this set. Thus
n(A,A:A,)= n(A,)-[n(A,A,)+n(A:A3)]+n(A,A,A,).
Hence
(4)
n(A,A_A,)=n-[n(A,)+n(A2)+n(A,)]
+[n(A,A2)+n(A,A3)+n(A:A3)]-n(A,A2A,),
as required.
s
s
h. On the Number of Ways of Coloring a Graph. Consider any set of objects a,
b. c.
. f and any set of pairs of these objects, as ab. bd -
- , cf. We call the
whole collection a graph, containing the vertices a, b, c.
, f, and the arcs ab,
bd.
. cf. It can be visualized simply by letting the vertices be points in space,
and letting each arc be a curve joining the two vertices involved.
Suppose we have a fixed number A of colors at our disposal. Any way of
assigning one of these colors to each vertex of the graph in such a way that any
two vertices which are joined by an arc are of different colors, will be called an
admissible coloring of the graph. We wish to find the number M(A) of admissible
colorings, using A or fewer colors.
As a special case of this general problem we have the four-color map problem:
To know if we can assign to each region of a map on a sphere one of four colors
in such a way that no two regions with a common boundary are of the same color,
that is, to see if M(4)>0. Our graph (which is just the dual graph of the map) is
constructed by placing a vertex in each region of the map, and joining two vertices
by an arc if the corresponding regions have a common boundary. We shall deduce
a formula for the number M(A) of ways of coloring a graph due to Birkhoff [9B].
If there are V vertices in the graph G. then there are A v possible colorings.
formed by giving each vertex in succession any one of the A colors. Let R be this
set of colorings. Let Aab denote those colorings with the property that a and b are
of the same color. etc. Then the set of admissible colorings is
A.bAba ... A,.
and the number of colorings is. if there are E arcs in the graph.
M(A) = n(A,bAb, ... Air)
I 1 1)
= n -[n(Aab)+n(Ab,,)+- - -+ n(At)]
+[n(AabAbd)+ "]-.. .
+(-1)En(AAbeA.,).

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
183
With each property A.6 is associated an arc ab of G. In the logical expansion,
there is a term corresponding to every possible combination of the properties A,;
with this combination we associate the corresponding arcs, forming a subgraph H
of G. In particular, the first term corresponds to the subgraph containing no arcs,
and the last term corresponds to the whole of G. We let H contain all the vertices
of G.
Let us evaluate a typical term, such as n(A,,A.d
A;,).This is the number of
ways of coloring G in A or fewer colors in such a way that a and b are of the
same color, a and d are of the same color,
, c and e are of the same color. In
the corresponding subgraph H, any two vertices that are joined by an arc must be
of the same color, and thus all the vertices in a single connected piece in H are of
the same color. If there arc p connected pieces in H. the value of this term is
therefore Al. If there are s arcs in H, the sign of the term is (- U. Thus
(-I)'n(A bA." ... A-)=(- 1)'A°.
If there are (p, s) (this is Birkhoff's symbol) subgraphs of s arcs in p connected
pieces. the corresponding terms contribute to M(A) an amount (- 1)'(p, s)A°.
Therefore, summing over all values of p and s, we find the polynomial in A:
(12)
M(A) _
(-1)'(p, s)A°.
v.
Consider a subgraph H of G of s arcs, in p connected pieces. Let us define its
rank i and its nullity j by the equations i = V - p, j = s - i = s - V + p. Then
9= V - i, s = i + j, and putting (p. s) =
= m,,, (thus, in,, is the number of
ubgraphs of G of rank i, nullity j), we have
(13)
M A
7. The in, in Terms of the Broken Circuits of G. We shall find in this section an
interpretation of the coefficients of M(A) directly in terms of properties of the
graph. Consider for instance the graph G containing the vertices a, b. c, d and the
arcs ab, ac, bc, bd, cd, the arcs being given in this definite order. Make a list of the
circuits in G. naming the arcs of a circuit in the order in which they occur above.
Here, the circuits are ab, ac, bc. and bc. bd, cd, and ab, ac, bd. cd. From each
circuit we now form the corresponding broken circuit by dropping out the last arc
of the circuit. The broken circuits here are ab. ac. and bc, bd. and ab, ac, bd. Then
the number (- 1)'m, is the number of subgraphs of G of i arcs which do not contain
all the arcs of any broken circuit.
To show this, we arrange the broken circuits of G in a definite order, where we
put a broken circuit P, before a broken circuit P, if. in naming the arcs of G one
by one in the given order, all the arcs of P are named before all those of P, are
named, otherwise, the ordering is immaterial. Suppose there are o broken
circuits, P,, P2,
, P.. We now divide the subgraphs of G into a+ I sets (some
of which may be empty), putting in the first set, S,, all those subgraphs containing
all the arcs of P,; in the second, S2, all those not containing P,, but containing P ;
in the third, S,, all those containing neither P, nor P2, but containing P,;
in
the last set. S,.,, all those containing none of these broken circuits.

I54
GRAPH THEORY 1716-1936
Consider now all the terms in )11) corresponding to the first set of subgraphs.
Suppose a, is the arc we dropped out of a circuit to form the first broken circuit
P. To each suhgraph in S, not containing at corresponds a subgraph in S,
containing a, and conversely, as a, is not in P1. The subgraphs of S,. and hence
the corresponding terms of (1 1), arc thus paired off. But the two terms of each
pair cancel. For let H and H' he the two corresponding subgraphs. If H is in p
connected pieces, so is H', as the arc a, joins two vertices already connected by
the broken circuit P,. The terms each contribute A' therefore; but they are of
opposite sign. as H' contains one more arc than H.
Consider now the terms corresponding to S: Iif there are any such). If a2 is the
arc dropped out in forming P:. a: is in neither P, nor P:. on account of the way
we hale ordered the broken circuits. Thus to each suhgraph in S. not containing
a: corresponds a suhgraph in S, containing a.. and conversely. The corresponding
terms of 111) are thus paired off. and they cancel, exactly as before.
Continuing, we cancel all terms in S1. S4,
. S.,. We are left only with terms in
S,,.,. that is. those corresponding to subgraphs not containing all the arcs of any
broken circuit, and none of these have been canceled.
Consider any such term containing i arcs. The corresponding suhgraph H
contains no circuit, as it contains no broken circuit. If we build up H arc by are,
each arc we add joins two vertices formerly not connected therefore, and the
number of connected pieces is decreased by one each time. Thus the number of
connected pieces in H is V- i. and the corresponding term contributes (-
to All A ). If there are
1, such subgraphs, they together contribute an amount
) - 1 ) ' I , A '
' . Hence. summing over i. we have P A)
I )'1,A `
Comparing
with113). we see that 1, = (-
as required.
1:x ss,r'i rs. Iet G contain the vertices a, b, c. and the arcs ab, uc. he. There is
one broken circuit: cab. ac. There is one subgraph of no arcs, and mo = I. There
are three subgraphs of a single arc. and - in, = 3. There are three subgraphs of
two arcs; but one of them contains the broken circuit, so nt: = 2. The subgraph of
three arcs contains the broken circuit. Hence, as V = 3,
AfiA)=A'-3A7+2A=A(A-I)(A-2).
This is easily verified. For we can color a in A ways; there are A - I colors left for
h; there are now k - 2_ colors left for c.
Let G be the graph named at the beginning of this section. If a subgraph
contains the last broken circuit, it contains the first also, so we can forget the last.
We find
.%1(A) = A' - 5A' +SA' -dA = A)A - I)(A - 2_)',
which again is easily verified.
Parts of Whitney's thesis on 'The coloring of graphs' were published as
a paper [ 13]. also in 1932. In this paper he continued his study of
chromatic polynomials, showing that the numbers mi; (in the notation of
[9D]) may be obtained by considering only the non-separable subgraphs,
instead of the much larger set of all subgraphs.
Although much of Whitney's other work on graphs (some of which we

THE FOUR-COLOUR PROBLEM-TO 1936
185
reviewed in the previous chapter) was indirectly influenced by the four-
colour problem, there is one particular direct result of his interest in that
problem which deserves special mention. He proved [14] that if we have a
trivalent plane map with no loops which cannot be disconnected by the
removal of three disjoint edges, then its dual graph must be Hamiltonian.
So, in the dual form of the four-colour conjecture-the assertion that
every planar graph may be coloured with four colours-it is sufficient to
consider only Hamiltonian planar graphs. This is undoubtedly a deep
result, as anyone who tries to understand Whitney's paper will agree, and
its implications have yet to be exploited fully.
To end this chapter. we return to the work of Birkhoff. In 1934 he
published another paper [15] on map-colouring, and, in the first para-
graph of his introduction, he outlined the philosophy behind the quantita-
tive approach to the four-colour conjecture:
In the past, systematic attack upon simple unsolved mathematical problems
has invariably led to the discovery of new results of importance as well as to
a deeper understanding of the nature of these problems, if not to their
actual solution. Perhaps the simplest of all unsolved mathematical problems
is that concerned with the validity of the so-called "four-color theorem".
The present paper is devoted to the study of the polynomials P(A)
expressing the number of ways in which a map M. of n regions covering the
sphere can be colored in A (or fewer) colors; in terms of these polynomials
the conjecture of the four-color theorem is that 4 is not a root of any
equation P JA) = 0.
In the rest of his paper Birkhoff discussed the problem of locating the
roots of the equation P(A) = 0. He hoped that the theory of chromatic
polynomials might be developed to the point where powerful methods of
analytic function theory-could be applied.
Of the two methods introduced by Birkhoff, the method of reducibility
eventually yielded more positive results than the method of chromatic
polynomials. But although the four-colour problem has now been solved,
there are still many intriguing questions on graph colourings which
remain unanswered.
References
1. HEAWOOD. P. J. On the four-colour map theorem. Quart. J. Pure. Appl. Math. 29
(1898),270-285.
2. HEAWOOD. P. J. On extended congruences connected with the four-colour map
theorem. Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 33 (1932). 253-286.
3. HEAWOOD, P. J. Failures in congruences connected with the four-colour map theorem.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 40 (1936). 189-202.
4. REID, C. Hilbert. Allen and Unwin. London and Springer, Berlin, 1970.
5. [Report of meeting of Scientific Session. 15 November 1899]. Rep. Nat. Acad. Sci.
(1899). 12-13.
6. [Report of the Fourth Summer meeting of the Society). Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 4
(1897-8). S.

186
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
7. WERNICKE, P. Uber den kartographischen Vierfarbensatz. Math. Ann. 58 (1904),
413-426.
8. VEBLEN, O. and BUSSEY, W. H. Finite projective geometries. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 7
(1906), 241-259.
9. BIRKHOFF, G. D. The reducibility of maps. Amer. J. Math. 35 (1913), 115-128 = Math.
Papers, Vol. 3, 6-19.
10. ERRERA, A. Une contribution an probleme des quatre couleurs. Bull. Soc. Math. France
53 (1925), 42-55.
11. REYNOLDS, C. N. On the problem of coloring maps in four colors, I. Ann. of Math. (2)
28 (1926-7), 1-15.
12. BIRKHOFF, G. D. On the number of ways of colouring a map. Proc. Edinb. Math. Soc. (2) 2
(1930), 83-91 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 20-28.
13. WHITNEY, H. The coloring of graphs. Ann. of Math. (2) 33 (1932), 688-718.
14. WHITNEY, H. A theorem on graphs. Ann. of Math. (2) 32 (1931), 378-390.
15. BIRKHOFF, G. D. On the polynomial expressions for the number of ways of coloring a
map. Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa (2) 3 (1934), 85-104 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 29-47.

10
The Factorization of Graphs
J. P. C. PETERSEN (1839-1910)
IN this, the final chapter of our book, we discuss the problem of 'factoriz-
ing' graphs. A special case is Tait's form of the four-colour problem, and
we shall begin by describing the tangled web of conjecture and confusion
which surrounds his work. The rest of the chapter is devoted to some
important contributions to the general theory, due to Julius Petersen and
Denes Konig. It was Konig who wrote the first full-length book on graph
theory, which was published in 1936 (1].
Regular graphs and their factors
The graphs considered in this chapter are regular, that is, every vertex
has the same valency. In fact, we shall use the word `degree', rather than
4valency', since this usage is traditional in studies of factorization.
The basic problem is concerned with splitting a regular graph into other
regular graphs which have the same set of vertices. For example, the
complete graph Ks may be split into two pentagons, as in Fig. 10.1. To be
precise, we say that the regular graph G has an r-factor H if H is a regular
graph with degree r, whose vertex-set is the same as that of G and whose
edge-set is a subset of that of G. In Fig. 10.1, we depict two 2-factors of K5.
It is clear that a 1-factor of G consists of a set of disjoint edges,
incident with each vertex of G. It follows that a simple graph which has a
1-factor must have an even number of vertices, and, in particular, that Ks
has no 1-factor. The extreme case of factorization occurs when a regular
graph of degree k is decomposed into k disjoint 1-factors; in this case we
may assign k different colours to its edges in such a way that two edges

188
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 10.1.
have the same colour if and only if they belong to the same 1-factor. The
result is a colouring of the edges in which each colour occurs just once in
the set of edges meeting at any given vertex. This is called an edge-k-
colouring of the graph.
The first reference to questions of this kind occurred in 1880, in two
papers [6C], [2] by Tait on map-colouring. In the second of these papers
Tait remarked that he had previously given
... a theorem which may be stated as follows:-
If 2n points be joined by 3n lines, so that three lines, and three only, meet at
each point, these lines can be divided (usually in many different ways) into
three groups of n each, such that one of each group ends at each of the points.
The difficulty of obtaining a simple proof of this theorem originates in the
fact that it is not true without limitation.
The use of the word `theorem', to describe a result which is `not true
without limitation', is likely to lead to misunderstanding. It did. In its
unqualified form, Tait's `theorem' states that a trivalent graph may be
split into three disjoint 1-factors, or equivalently, that it has an edge-3-
colouring. Tait himself noticed that the statement is false for trivalent
graphs which have a cut vertex, and gave as an example the trivalent
graph in Fig. 10.2, which has no edge-3-colouring. But he went on to
state his `theorem' in a form which he believed to be `universally true':
The edges of a polyhedron, which has trihedral summits only, can be divided
into three groups, one from each group ending in each summit.
In this statement there are two implicit conditions, as a consequence of
FIG. 10.2.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
189
the fact that the result is now asserted only for the graphs of polyhedra.
In fact, a graph may be associated with a convex polyhedron if and only if
it is both planar and 3-connected (that is, at least three vertices must be
removed in order to disconnect it). This important result was proved by
E. Steinitz in 1922 [3], but its usefulness was not fully appreciated until
quite recently.
Tait's paper [2] continued with an account of various methods which he
thought would lead to a proof of the restricted 'theorem'. We now realize
that the assertion should be regarded as a conjecture, and that it is, in
fact, equivalent to the four-colour conjecture: so his remarks should not
be taken too seriously.
Tait returned to this topic in an address to the Edinburgh Mathematical
Society on 9 November 1883 [4]. He asserted that the statement of his
'theorem' holds, provided that the points lie in a plane and the lines do
not cross, and that the figure cannot be disconnected by removing
one line. In other words, he recognized that some conditions were
necessary, and believed that the result could then be proved. This attitude
is understandable (although unjustified), since the result would then
follow from Kempe's 'proof' of the four-colour conjecture, which was
generally accepted at that time.
In another part of his address, Tait drew attention to a related
question. He conjectured that every trivalent polyhedron has a Hamilton-
ian circuit; and he pointed out that if this were true, then the existence
of an edge-3-colouring would follow-since the edges of the Hamiltonian
circuit may be coloured a,
13, alternately, and the remaining edges
coloured y. He had raised this question in 1880, and had consulted
Kirkman on the subject. Kirkman posed the problem (in verse) in the
Educational Times in 1881, and published a rambling and inconclusive
reply [5] to his own query, in which he said that the conjecture 'mocks
alike at doubt and proof'. (It was around this time that the two men
convinced themselves that Kirkman had been responsible for the idea
which led to the Icosian Game.)
In 1946 W. T. Tutte [6] found a trivalent 3-connected planar graph
which does not have a Hamiltonian circuit, and thus disproved Tait's
conjecture. So Tait was doubly unfortunate: his 'theorem' turned out to
be a conjecture, and another conjecture turned out to be false.
The first general discussion of the problem of factorizing graphs was
due to Julius Petersen, and appeared in 1891. His interest stemmed from
a problem in the theory of invariants. and he set out to apply the
graphical notation of Clifford and Sylvester to a question which had
arisen in a paper by Hilbert (see [221). Petersen's paper is a landmark in
graph theory, and the extract [10A] which we give here is only a partial
indication of its importance, as we shall explain later.

190
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Two preliminary remarks are necessary. The first is that Petersen
always thought of graphs as figures formed by points and lines in a plane,
and so extraneous crossings are required in some diagrams. The second
remark is that he used the word 'graph' as an English word in a German
context, and had it printed in italics throughout. This explains the strange
syntax of the original German title.
10A
J. PETERSEN
DIE THEORIE DER REGULAREN GRAPHS
[The theory of regular graphs]
Acta Mathematica 15 (1891), 193-220.
1. In his proof of the finiteness of the system of invariants associated with a
binary form, Hilben [7] employs a theorem of Gordan concerning a certain class
of Diophantine equations. It is a consequence of this theorem that, for a given n,
one can construct a finite number of products of the type
(x,-x:)°(x,-x,)°(x:-x,)`...(x.,_,-x,)',
so that all other products of the same type can be built up by multiplying them
together. The products are to have the property that the exponents are positive
integers (zero included), and that the degree in x,. X2- ... , x,. is constant for each
product. The products so constructed are called ground-factors; they correspond
to basic solutions of Diophantine equations. For example. if n = 3. then one must
have a =13 = y and the only ground-factor is (x, - x2)(x2 - x3)(x3 - x, ). For HiI-
bert's proof the finiteness of the number of ground-factors is sufficient; for further
investigations the actual determination of the expressions is important; this
determination is the aim of the following discussion. It makes a remarkable
difference whether the degree in each letter (which is equal to the degree of the
corresponding invariant) is even or odd. In the first case, which must necessarily
occur if the forms have odd order. it turns out that all ground-factors are of the
first or second degree (in each letter); in the second case, which is far more
complicated, there can be found a ground-factor for which this is not true, for
every degree and sufficiently large n. The simplest example has degree three and
n = 10, and is due to Sylvester, who has undertaken an attack on the question of
ground-factors at the same time as myself, and with whom I have often corre-
sponded. Although we have adopted different ways of answering the question. I
am nevertheless grateful for his encouragement, without which I would perhaps
have been daunted by the great difficulties inherent in each step.
2. One can give the problem a geometrical form by representing x,, x2..... X.
as arbitrary vertices in the plane and indicating each factor x - xp by means of an
edge joining x and xp. A product thus g.ves rise to a figure made up of n vertices
joined in such a way that each vertex is incident with the same number of edges.
The same two vertices may be joined by several edges. For example, consider

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
191
Fic. 10.3.
Figure [10.3] which represents the product
(x, - x:)`(x, - x4)2(x, - x3)(x: - x4)(x, -x.)(xi - x.).
English authors have given the name graph to such a diagram; I shall retain this
name, and say that a graph is regular when each vertex is incident with the same
number of edges. Irregular graphs would arise from the consideration of semi-
invariants. but they will not be considered here.
By the order of a graph I mean the number of its vertices (the order of the
binary form) and by its degree the number of edges incident with each vertex (the
degree of the corresponding invariant).
I shall denote by Go, or simply Ga. a
graph of order n and degree a. Such a graph can be decomposed into factors
when other graphs of the same order but lesser degree can be found, such that
superimposing them results in the given graph. A graph which cannot be split in
this way is said to he primitive. Our problem is the determination of all primitive
graphs.
Taking the vertices to he a. b. c, .... and denoting the edges by ab, ac, be.....
and the graph by (ab)° (be)d.... then in this expression each letter occurs equally
often, taking account of the exponents.
We shall usually assume that the graph is not made up of graphs of smaller
order, that is, that it is not the union of pieces which have no edges connecting
them.
Graphs of even degree
3. A graph of the second degree consists of closed polygons; if all of them have an
even number of edges. then the graph can be decomposed into two factors of the first
degree; in all other cases the graph is primitive.
Precisely: we may set out from an arbitrary vertex a and follow an edge ab;
there are two edges incident with b; we can continue thence from b to c (let us
say); we proceed in this way traversing no edge more than once; so we must
eventually return to a, when we have completed a closed polygon; if there are any
more edges in the graph, we deal with them in the same way; we stop when all the
edges of the graph have been assigned to closed polygons. The two-gons (double
edges) can be included in this set.
If from the stated procedure we obtain only one polygon, having an even
number of edges. then the graph can he split into two factors of the fist
degree, since the first, third, fifth.... edges constitute a graph of the first degree
and the same holds for the remaining edges. When the graph has p polygons, each
of which has an even number of edges, then, by taking half the edges of each
polygon in the stated manner and using different combinations, the graph may be
decomposed in Z°-' different ways. If not all the polygons have an even number
of edges. then one can easily see that the graph is primitive.
4. Let us assume that a graph of given degree a + S can be decomposed in two
different ways, into two graphs of degrees a and S. We can suppose that the edges

192
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
of the first graph are blue and the edges of the second redt, so that a blue edges
and 13 red edges are incident with each vertex. The second decomposition can be
obtained from the first by switching certain edges between the two factors, that is,
by making certain blue edges red and certain red edges blue. If these two systems
of edges are represented by symbols [(ab)'(bc)" ... ], then each letter occurs
equally often, since the number of switches involving any letter cannot vary.
Supposing, for example, that ab is one of the blue edges switched, then one of the
red edges at b, say bc, must be switched, and one of the blue edges at c, say cd,
and so on, until one returns to a on a red edge. The edges which are switched
must therefore comprise one or more closed polygons, in which the edges are
alternately red and blue, and which consequently all have an even number of
edges. The second decomposition will be obtained when the colours of the edges
of these polygons are all reversed. (Fig. [10.4] and [10.5].)
Such a polygon will be called an alternating-polygon, while an alternating-line
or alternating-path will denote an open polygonal line whose sides are alternately
red and blue.
Thus we have the following result:
When an arbitrary graph can be decomposed in several ways into two factors (one
blue, one red), then each decomposition can be obtained from any other by switching
the colours on the edges of certain alternating-polygons.
Similarly, it is quite clear that:
When an arbitrary graph is decomposed into two factors in such a way that an
alternating-polygon can be found, then one can obtain a new decomposition by
switching the colours on all edges of this alternating-polygon.
5. Any graph of even degree can be drawn in one continuous stroke, assuming that
it is not made up of unconnected pieces.
In order to demonstrate this theorem, we start from any given vertex a and
proceed continuously along the edges iil an arbitrary way, except that we are not
allowed to traverse any edge more than once. Each time we pass through a vertex,
we traverse two of the edges incident with that vertex, while an even number
(zero included) of such edges remain to be traversed. When we can proceed no
further we must be at a, having used all the edges leading therefrom. We have
thus completed a single closed stroke. If all the vertices occurring have been
visited as often as possible, then we have traversed the entire graph, for otherwise
we have a part of the graph not connected to the rest.
When the route visits a vertex b, but not as often as possible, we break the
route at b, and set out in a different way from b, until again the enlarged route is
halted at b, all the edges at b having been traversed; in this way we can extend the
route until all the edges of the graph are included.
Fic. 10.4.
FiG. 10.5.
t For typographical reasons we shall use continuous lines and dashed lines respectively to
represent the blue and red edges.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
193
F i c. 10.6.
In the case when the graph is composed of several unconnected pieces, we
require as many strokes as there are pieces. If that is not the case, then draw one
closed polygon whose edges correspond to the route and which represents the
original figure. When the degree is 2a. each letter will appear a times as a vertex
of the polygon. We shall call this polygon the unravelled graph.
For example, we can consider Fig. [10.6]; we construct the route
ab,be,ec.ca,ab,bd,da;
breaking it open at d, we insert the route
dc, ce. ed,
and we can now draw the unravelled graph (Fig. [ 10.7]). Moreover, one easily
sees that the proof of the theorem holds for non-regular graphs, provided that an
even number of edges are incident with each vertex. So the theorem holds in
particular for any algebraic curve which is not composed of separate pieces. given
a suitable convention for infinite branches.
6. Any graph of the fourth degree can be split into two factors of the second
degree.
Lest the graph IFig. [10.6]1 be unravelled in the manner explained above, so that
we obtain a polygon (Fig. [ 10.7]) in which each letter appears twice at a vertex, and
which has an even number of edges. Colour the edges of this polygon alternately
blue and red, so that a letter labels the intersection of one blue and one red, and
each letter occurs twice at the end of a blue edge. Carrying over the colouring of
/.1
FiG. 10.7.

194
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 10.8.
the edges to the graph, it must follow that each vertex is incident with two red
edges and two blue edges (Fig. [10.8]). The graph is thus decomposed into two
factors of the second degree.
In the same way, any graph G2. can be split into two factors G., provided that
the number of edges is even, that is to say, when a and n are not both odd. In that
case. the stated decomposition is impossible, for there is no graph of odd order
and odd degree. (It is to be taken for granted that the graph is not made up of
separate pieces.)
7. Given any graph G2. whose degree is even, we can derive a new graph G.
by deleting two non-intersecting edges ab and cd and substituting two new edges
ac and bd. or ad and bc. If there are several edges ab then we remove only one of
them. It is of no significance if one of the replacement edges is already in the
graph: it then becomes one of higher multiplicity. I shall call these two paired
graphs.
When one of two paired graphs can be decomposed into factors of the second
degree. then the other can also be so decomposed.
In order to prove this theorem, suppose that G2. is decomposed into factors of
the second degree. If ab and cd are in the same factor of degree two, then a new
graph of degree two is obtained from it by means of the above construction, while
the other factors (which may also contain edges ab and cd) remain unaltered. G;.
is thus decomposed into factors of the second degree. If, on the other hand, ab
and cd are in two different factors, then we can take the union of the two factors,
which is a graph of the fourth degree. Now, when we carry out the above
construction to get G., the fourth degree factor becomes another factor of
degree four, while all factors of the second degree remain unaltered. However, as
described above, we can decompose any graph of degree four into two second
degree factors. Thus G. is likewise, in this case, decomposed into factors of the
second degree.
8. Any graph may be transformed into any other one of the same order and degree
by repeated application of the process described in 7.
Suppose we wish to transform a given graph into another which contains the
second degree factor ah he cd de of... ka. Suppose further that the edges ab be
cd. but not de. occur in the given graph. The edges emanating from d and e
cannot all meet at a single vertex; we can therefore find two edges dg and eh. such
that g and It are different vertices. We then put de and gh in place of dg and eh.
and so introduce de; if there are several edges cd. then it is immaterial if g
coincides with c; on the other hand, if cd is simple. we cannot allow g to coincide
with c without removing cd. an edge already required. Since the remaining edges
emanating from d and e cannot meet in a single vertex, it is however always
possible to choose for g a vertex other than c. Thus, we see that it is always

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
195
possible to insert a new required edge without removing one of those already
introduced; we can continue in this way until we have the given second degree
factor in the resulting graph. We now remove this factor and obtain a graph,
which again can be altered in such a way as to introduce an arbitrary given factor of
the second degree. Hence, proceeding in this way, we eventually obtain a graph
consisting of arbitrarily chosen factors of the second degree. Any other graph of
the same order and degree can likewise be transformed into this, and thence into
the original graph.
9. Every graph of even degree can be decomposed into factors of the second
degree.
In fact, we have seen in S that we can construct a sequence of graphs, beginning
with one arbitrarily given and ending with one decomposed into factors of the
second degree, and such that each two in succession are paired. It follows from
the theorem proved in 7 that all graphs in the entire sequence may be decom-
posed into factors of the second degree.
We have thus attained the first object of our investigations, since we have
shown that, when all graphs of the first degree and all primitive graphs of the
second degree are given, then all others of even degree can be constructed by
superimposition (multiplication). It follows from this that the basic solutions of
the Diophantine equations, by means of which the exponents (multiplicities of the
edges) are determined, can only be the numbers 0, 1 and 2 in the case under
consideration.
We describe the primitive graphs for the first values of n. For n = 2 we have a
single edge. for n = 3, as in 1, a triangle; for n = 4. two single edges, representing
(x, - x,,)(x, - x,) and the two products obtained from this by interchanging sym-
bols. The graphs of odd degree give rise to no new primitive graphs for n < 10, as
will be explained later. For n = 5 there are two kinds of primitive graph, one a
pentagon and the other composed of a triangle and a two-gon. For n = 6, the
graph consisting of two triangles is primitive, while the other graphs of the second
degree may be decomposed; and so on.
As Petersen remarked at the beginning of his paper, the theory of
factorization is more difficult for graphs of odd degree than for graphs of
even degree. In the part of his paper not included in our extract, he
inaugurated the study of graphs of odd degree by proving an important
result about trivalent graphs. This result is justifiably famous in its own
right, and is related to the four-colour problem, so we shall devote our
next section to it.
Petersen's theorem on trivalent graphs
A trivalent graph may have only two kinds of non-trivial factor: a
2-factor or a 1-factor. If a 2-factor exists then its complement is a
1-factor, and conversely. If. in addition, there is a 2-factor which itself
splits into two 1-factors (that is, if the 2-factor consists entirely of even
circuits), then the graph is the union of three disjoint 1-factors. On the

196
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1Q36
FIG. 10.9.
left of Fig. 10.9, we depict a graph as the union of a 2-factor and a
1-factor; in this case the 2-factor cannot be further decomposed. But the
diagram on the right shows the same graph as the union of three
1-factors.
Petersen's famous result, proved in his 1891 paper, is that a regular
graph of the third degree always possesses a 1-factor, provided that one
simple condition is satisfied. The condition is that the graph should have
not more than two leaves, where a leaf is a part of the graph which can be
disconnected from the rest by removing a single edge. In particular, if the
graph arises from a polyhedron, then at least three edges must be
removed to disconnect it, so that there are no leaves and Petersen's
theorem applies. Petersen's original proof was quite complicated, and we
have omitted it in favour of a simpler version [10C] which will be
presented at the end of this section.
In 1898 Petersen made another contribution to the theory of trivalent
graphs. This came about as a result of a lengthy controversy in the pages
of L' fntermediaire des Mathematiciens; as we mentioned at the end of
Chapter 6, this debate had begun with some confusion about the status of
the four-colour conjecture, and when the subject of Tait's 'theorem' was
introduced, it became almost farcical. Petersen [lOB] entered the fray
better armed than most, since he had a theorem which had actually been
proved.
He began by giving an example (which, in his 1891 paper, he had
Fta. 10.10.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
1'7
attributed to Sylvester) of a trivalent graph with no 1-factor (Fig. 10.11).
He then stated his major theorem, and noted that Tait's 'theorem' is
apparently stronger. However, he went on to exhibit a graph to which the
latter result does not apply-in other words, he constructed a trivalent
graph, with no leaves, which cannot be split into three disjoint 1-factors.
This example has become very well known, and is now called the
F. kaaee prnpr (Fig. 10.15), although it had appeared earlier in a paper
of Kempe [21). It has remarkable symmetry properties, which are mani-
fest in the alternative drawings given in Fig. 10.10.
10B
J. PETERSEN
(SCAR LE THEOREME DE TAIT)
[On the theorem of Tait]
L'Intermediaire des
5 (1898). 225-227.
I have developed the theory of regular graphs in a previous memoir [10A). By
the term regular graph I mean a figure consisting of n vertices (n being called the
order of the graph) joined by edges in such a manner that d edges are incident
with each vertex (d being the degree of the graph). Graphs are closely related to
the invariants of binary forms; to each invariant corresponds a graph, and
conversely. The order and the degree of the graph are just the order and the
degree of the corresponding invariant.
A graph is decomposable when it can be formed by superimposing other
graphs of the same order but smaller degree.
There is a very remarkable difference between graphs of even degree and those
of odd degree. The former may always be decomposed into graphs of degrees one
and two; on the other hand, when the degree is odd it is always possible to find
indecomposable graphs. for any such degree. The graph in fig. [ 10.11 ] is the
simplest example (except, of course, for degree one).
Defining a leaf to be part of a graph which can be separated from the rest by
removing just one edge. I have proved the following theorem:
An indecomposable graph of the third degree must have at least three leaves.
Thus, a graph of the third degree which has no leaves can he decomposed,
Fu,. 10.11.

198
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
FIG. 10.12.
F10. 10.13.
FIG. 10.14.
either into three graphs of the first degree, or into one of degree one and one of
degree two.
In my terminology. Tait's theorem can be stated as follows:
A graph of the third degree which has no leaves can be decomposed into three
graphs of the first degree.
This is, as will be clear, stronger than my theorem and it seems to me
impossible that it can be true without the adjunction of extra conditions. What is
more. as I shall show, I have succeeded in constructing a graph to which Tait's
theorem does not apply.
Let us suppose that a graph of the third degree may be decomposed into three
others; then one can colour the edges in such a way that each vertex is incident
with a blue edge, a red edge and a black edge. (Those points where the edges
meet, but which are not vertices, do not enter into this discussion.)
Let us suppress the blue edges; then the resulting graph has degree two and
consists of closed polygons. Thus any closed curve (or infinite straight line) must
meet it in an even number of points. So, if such a curve cuts x blue edges, y red
edges and -- black edges. the numbers x + y, x + z. y + z must all be even. If the
number of edges cut is five, then the three numbers can only he 3. 1. 1.
Consider a polygon with five sides, from the vertices of which emanate five
edges (fig. [ 10.12]); there are two possibilities, according as the three blue edges
emanate from three consecutive vertices (fig. [10.13]) or from two consecutive
vertices and an opposite one (fig. [10.14)).
In the first case a colouring is possible, while in the second case it is easy to see
that it is not possible.
We can now easily construct a graph whose decomposition in the manner of
Tait's theorem is impossible. Take (fig. [10.15]) a polygon of five sides whose
Fu.. 10.15.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
149
vertices are, in order, a, b. c, d. e. and another whose vertices are assigned the
same letters but in the order a. d. b. e. c. Join aa. bb. cc, dd. ce and the graph is
constricted, because three consecutive letters in one polygon cannot be consecu-
tive in the other.
Petersen's remarks drew a reply from E. Goursat [8]. who pointed out
that, although Petersen had shown that the most general form of Tait's
theorem is false, he had not disproved it in the case of polyhedra. (In fact,
Petersen's graph is not the graph of a polyhedron. since it is non-planar.)
At about the same time, C. de Polignac [9] noted the interesting fact that
Petersen's graph is non-Hamiltonian.
In 1899 Petersen published another note [10] on trivalent graphs. He
accepted Goursat's comment, and went on to make some observations on
the relationship between the four-colour problem and the factorization
of trivalent planar graphs. At the end of his article he made a surprising
statement:
As I have said, I am not certain of anything. but if I had to wager. I would
hold that the theorem of four colours is not correct.
So far we have given no proof of Petersen's main theorem on the
existence of a 1-factor in a trivalent graph. The importance of this
theorem was recognized by the American school of topologists, and
simplified proofs were published by two.members of that school-H. R.
Brahana in
1917 [ 1 1 ], and Orrin Frink in 1926 [10C]. Unlike
its
predecessors, Frink's proof involves no counting arguments, but it con-
tains a slight flaw; the published proof of his Theorem I is incomplete. but
the necessary repairs are quite straightforward. and may be found in
Ki nig's book [1, pp. 187-1921. We have included Frink's paper here,
since it provides the most direct proof of Petersen's theorem.
10C
0. FRINK
A PROOF OF PEIERSE%*S THEOREM
Annals of Mathematics (2) 27 (1925-6), 491-493.
By a regular linear graph of the third degree we mean a network of lines
I-cells) and points 10-cells or vertices) such that there are exactly three 1-cells
meeting at every vertex. The number of vertices is called the order of the graph.
A regular graph is said to he primitive if it cannot be obtained by superposing two
regular graphs of the same order but of lower degree. Sylvestcr gave an example

2101
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1416
of a primitive graph of the third degree. but it contained three leaves. Petersen's
theorem states that every primitive third degree graph has three or more leaves.
By a leaf we mean a portion of the graph which is connected to the rest of the
graph only by a single 1-cell, and no proper part of which has this property.
Petersen's proof has been simplified by Brahana [I I ] and Errera [ 12]. The
present proof is intended to be still simpler and to involve simpler notions. The
method used is to consider first graphs without leaves and show that these are
factorable (that is, not primitive). The proof is by induction, no shrinking or
counting processes being used. A connected regular graph of the third degree
without leaves will he called a simple graph. It is easy to see that a connected
third degree graph is simple when and only when every 1-cell is on a closed
circuit.
THEoRF4t 1. Given a simple graph of order greater than two we can always
obtain from it a simple graph of lower order by removing any 1-cell and properly
joining the four incident 1-cells in pairs.
Thus in fig. [ 10.16] delete x and join I to 3 and 2 to 4 obtaining fig. [ 10.17]. The
result will be a simple graph unless the part of the graph containing 1-3 is
connected to that containing 2-4 by a single I-cell or not at all. If this is the case
there must be in the original graph a path from I to 3 and a path from 2 to 4. For
example. if there were no path from 1 to 3 then either I or 3 would he the stem of
a leaf, or an "isthmus". Thus I say that if we delete x and join 1 to 4 instead and
2 to 3 we obtain a simple graph. To prove this it is sufficient to show that all the
closed circuits that were disturbed by the deletion, that is, those through the
I-cells 1. 2, 3 and 4 have been replaced by new ones. The circuits through I and 3
have been lengthened. the 1-cell x having been replaced by the path we proved to
exist from 2 to 4. The same is true of the circuits through 2 and 4. As for
circuits through I and 2, if the first deletion disconnected the graph these must
also contain 3 and 4 and hence have not been disturbed. If the first deletion
resulted in an isthmus however, a circuit through I and 2 need not contain 3 and
4 if it contains the isthmus. In this case there are two new circuits, joining 1-3 and
2-4 to the isthmus, one of which will do the work of the original circuit through I
and 2. The same argument applies in the case of circuits through 3 and 4. The
circuits through 1 and 4 and through 2 and 3 have not been disturbed.
It is unfortunate that such a trivial and obvious theorem should require such a
long proof. It is to be noted that the argument holds even if a pair of the I-cells 1.
Y
\/
I
t
2
4
F1c..
10 Ih
Fu,. 10.17.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
201
2, 3 and 4 are identical or incident at another vertex. If a third degree graph is
not primitive, it is said to be factorable, and the first and second degree graphs
into which it can be decomposed are called its factors. If the 1-cells of the first
degree factor are colored red and those of the second degree factor blue, there
will be two blue lines and one red line at every vertex. The graph is then said to
be colored. If there exists in a colored graph a closed path consisting of an even
number of 1-cells colored alternately red and blue we can interchange colors
along this path and obtain a new coloration and hence a new factorization of the
graph.
THEOREM II. Every 1-cell of a colored simple graph is on a closed red-blue path
and hence can have its color changed.
Suppose the theorem were false, then there would exist a colored simple graph
of lowest order containing a blue 1-cell, say x, not on any closed red-blue path.
Take a blue 1-cell adjacent to x, say y, and delete the red 1-cell incident with its
other end joining loose ends according to Theorem I to obtain a simple graph of
lower order. In the new graph, which is also colored, there must exist a closed
red-blue path through x. But this same path must exist in the original graph,
because it is not disturbed by restoring the deleted 1-cell. It is possible that a
closed red-blue path containing y might be disturbed by this restoration, but x and
y, being adjacent blue 1-cells, cannot be on the same red-blue path. Thus we
obtain a contradiction. For a graph of order two Theorem I need not apply, but
the conclusion is then obvious.
THEOREM III. Every simple graph is colorable.
If the theorem were false there would exist a non-colorable simple graph of
lowest order. Lower its order according to T4ieorem I and color it. Three cases
arise. Case I. If both new 1-cells are colored blue, restore the deleted 1-cell
colored red. Case II. If one is colored blue and the other red, restore the deleted
1-cell colored blue. In either case we have a coloration of the original graph
contrary to assumption. Case III. If both new 1-cells are colored red, change the
color of one of them according to Theorem II. If this changes the color of the
other also we have Case I, if not, Case II. For a graph of order two the theorem is
obvious. This proves the theorem.
THEOREM IV (Petersen's Theorem). A regular graph of the third degree with
fewer than three leaves is colorable.
We have shown that a simple graph is colorable. A graph with one leaf is
impossible. To color one with two leaves, join the leaves by a new 1-cell. The
resulting graph is simple and may be colored. If the new 1-cell is colored red,
delete it. If it is colored blue, change its color according to Theorem II and then
delete it. This restores the original graph, which is now colored.
An alternative view: correspondences
Suppose that we are given a positive integer k and two sets X and Y. A
relationship between the members of X and the members of Y, with the
property that each x in X is related to exactly k members of Y, and each

202
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
y in Y is related to exactly k members of X, is called a (k, k)-
correspondence between X and Y. When k = I we have the familiar case
of a one-to-one correspondence.
Any (k, k)-correspondence may be represented by a graph in the
following way. The vertices of the graph represent the members of X and
Y, and two vertices are joined by an edge whenever they are related by
the correspondence. For example,
Fig.
10.18 represents a
(2, 2)-
correspondence.
A graph representing a (k, k)-correspondence has two special proper-
ties. First of all, it is a regular graph of degree k; and secondly, the fact
that every edge has one end in X and one end in Y means that the graph
is bipartite. The bipartite property can also be expressed by saying that
two colours suffice for colouring the vertices of the graph-blue for the
vertices of X. and red for the vertices of Y, for example. An equivalent
property is that the graph has no circuits of odd length, since the vertices
on any circuit must be coloured alternately blue and red, and so the
circuit must contain an even number of vertices and an even number of
edges.
If there is a (k, k)-correspondence between two finite sets X and Y,
then we can deduce that X and Y have the same number of elements; we
just count the edges of the representative graph in the following way.
Since every edge meets just one vertex in X and every vertex is at the end
of k edges. the total number of edges is kIXI. The same argument applied
to Y shows that the number of edges is kI YI, so that kIX) = kI YI, and
hence IXI =I Yl. Consequently, the existence of a (k, k)-correspondence
between X and Y implies that there is also a one-to-one correspondence
between them. A question which arises naturally is: can we choose the
one-to-one correspondence in such a way that, if x and y are related by
it, then they are related in the original (k, k)-correspondence?
In terms of the representative graph, the question asks whether one can
find a subset of the edges with the property that every vertex meets just
one of them. For example. the graph in Fig. 10.18 has such a set of edges.
Fu.. 10.18.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
203
namely, xty2, x2y4, x3yt, x43. So, in the terminology of graph theory, the
question becomes: does every bipartite regular graph have a 1-factor?
It was this question which, around the year 1910, inspired the Hun-
garian mathematician Denes Konig to become interested in the theory of
graphs. Later [ 13, p.126], he attributed the idea of the graphical
representation of correspondences to his father; and indeed, in a paper
[14] published in 1906, the elder Konig had used a technique which can
clearly be expressed in terms of paths in the representative graph.
On 7 April 1914, Denes Konig addressed a Congress on Mathematical
Philosophy in Paris. He stated (without proof) that every bipartite regular
graph has a 1-factor, and deduced as a simple corollary that such a graph
may be decomposed into k disjoint 1-factors. The text of his address was
not published until 1923 [15]. and in the intervening years he had
published a proof in both Hungarian [16] and German [10D].
10D
D. KONIG
USER GRAPHEN UND IHRE ANWENDUNG AUF DETERMINANTENTHEORIE
UND MENGENLEHRE
[On graphs and their applications in determinant theory and set theory]
Mathematische Annalen 77 (1916), 453-465.
The following article deals with problems from. analysis sites, the theory of
determinants, and set theory. The central notion, by means of which these
problems are related to one another, is that of a graph. The method of graphs
displays, by virtue of its highly geometrical interpretation (which is. indeed,
leading to the solution of many recently-discovered questions), the equivalence of
apparently remote researches.
§ 1. Graphs
Let a finite number of points be given: then one can choose certain pairs of the
points so that one or more (but finitely many) edges join them. A figure
constructed in this way we shall generally call a graph. A graph is said to be
connected when one can travel along its edges from any of its points to any other.
If the graph is not connected, then it splits in a unique way into connected pieces.
From this trivial assertion there arise certain (algebraic) applications of graphs.
When the same number of edges leave each point, then the graph is said to be
regular, and this constant number we shall designate as the degree of the graph.
The so-called bipartite graphs are of considerable importance; a graph will be so
designated when every circuit which can be formed from its edges contains an
even number of edges (for example, the graph of the cube).
A graph is bipartite if and only if its points can be divided into two sets so that only
points in different sets are joined directly (by means of an edge).
Proof: If the partition into two such sets is possible, then the points belonging
to any circuit must alternate between one set and the other. the circuit must

20W
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1436
therefore contain an even number of edges. And conversely. if one arranges the
points of any path alternately in one set or the other, then this can only lead to a
contradiction when one follows a closed path containing an odd number of points.
("ibis result holds also for disconnected graphs. except that then the partition of
points into two sets is not unique).
In this way the "disconnected" and "bipartite" graphs can be defined in a
mutually reciprocal way, for one may characterize disconnected graphs by means
of the fact that their points can be separated into two sets in such a way that only
points in the same set can be joined directly to one another.
A collection Gk of edges of a graph G is said to be a factor of the UP degree
when each point of G is incident with k edges of G. A factor of the kth degree is
itself a regular graph of the kth degree, its points coinciding with those of the
original graph. In particular. a set of edges constitutes a factor of the first degree
when each point of G is the endpoint of just one of these edges. If G is regular of
the Pith degree, then those edges which are not contained in a factor of the kth
degree form a factor of the (n - k)th degree G.
. In this case one writes, fol-
lowing Petersen.
Similarly. one can define a decomposition of a regular graph into more than than
two factors. The sum of the degrees of the factors is equal to the degree of the
given graph. In what follows we shall be dealing especially with the decomposition
of a regular graph into factors of the first degree.
Every graph of the second degree is made up of simple (non-self-intersecting)
circuits. It follows that one can find a factor of the first degree if and only if all the
circuits have an even number of edges [IOA]. We shall prove the following
generalization of this statement:
A) Every bipartite regular graph possesses a factor of the first degree.
This theorem is a direct consequence of the following (which is, however,
only superficially more general):
B) Every bipartite regular graph of the kth degree splits into k factors of the first
degree.
This theorem will, in turn, arise as a consequence of the following:
C) Supposing that each point of a bipartite graph is incident with at most k
edges, then one can assign one of k labels to each edge of the graph in such a way
that two edges incident with the same point must have different labels.
Theorem B) is in fact a direct consequence of this, since, in the case of a regular
graph of the kth degree. the edges having a given label comprise a factor of the
first degree.
For the proof of Theorem C) we shall employ the method of induction, which,
although it is inapplicable to Theorem B). leads directly to the objective in
Theorem C. If the number of edges is
k, then the theorem is clearly true. We
suppose then that it is correct when this number is < N, and prove the result for a
graph G with N edges.
If we delete any edge. e say. from G. there results a (similarly bipartite) graph
G'. to whose edges we can assign k labels in the manner prescribed in Theorem
C). We think of these labels as on the edges of G. Suppose that the deleted edge e
joins the points A and B: then, first, it is possible that every one of the labels at A
(that is. on an edge incident with A.) also occurs at B. In this case one can assign a
label to the edge e, and our goal is attained. We can thus restrict ourselves to the

THE FA<'TORIZATION OF GRAPHS
205
second case: a label, say "I". which is missing at B lone such must exist, since at
most k - I edges are incident with B. and also with A) occurs at A. In the same
way, let
be a label not occurring at A. and let AA, be the edge with label
"I". It may happen that there is an edge A,A_ with label "2", and possibly an
edge A:A, with label"l". an edge A,A, with label "2". and so on. We continue
this "alternating" path AA t A2 A, ... for as long as possible. Depending only on
the choice of the labels "I" and "2", it is uniquely determined. No point can
occur twice in this path. for if A, were the first such point, which had already been
passed through once, then three edges with labels "I" and "2" would occur at A,.
Also, one cannot return to A, since "2" certainly does not occur there and "I"
has already been used ton the edge AA,). Finally, one cannot reach B on this
path. since this could only happen by an edge labelled "2" ("1" does not occur at
B.) and then we should have a path from A to B containing an even number of
edges; with the restitution of the deleted edge e. this path gives a circuit with an
odd number of edges-in contradiction to our hypothesis.
AA,A.... A, is thus a double-point-free open path. not containing the point
B. whose edges carry alternately the labels "I" and "2". Interchange the labels
"I" and "2" on the edges of this path without altering the labels on the remaining
edges. The distribution of labels resulting from this interchange is sufficient for
our purpose. One sees this immediately for the first point A. with which no edge
labelled "2" was incident originally, for the internal points A. and indeed for the
endpoint A,, with which no two edges labelled "1" or "2" are incident since
otherwise our path would not end at A,. We have now arranged that the label "1"
no longer occurs at A, and so it can be assigned to the deleted edge e.
Consequently Theorem C) is proved, and thence also Theorem A) and B).
Before we pass on to the applications of the foregoing to determinant theory
and set theory, we remark that our Theorem B is related to a well-known
problem of analysis sinus: the problem of map-colouring. The hitherto unproved
four-colour theorem asserts the following: it is possible to assign one of four
colours to the countries of a plane map in such a way that two countries with a
common boundary have different colours. One can easily see that it is sufficient to
consider the case when the boundaries in the map form a regular graph of the
third degree. and that then the four-colour theorem is equivalent to Tait's
theorem, which states that such a graph splits into three factors of the first degree.
Of course, it is not required for this purpose that every graph of the third degree
splits into three factors, for a graph may only be regarded as the system of
boundaries of a plane map when the following conditions are satisfied: 1) it may be
drawn on a plane for sphere) in such a way that no new crossing points arise, and
2) each one of its edges belongs to some simple circuit. Without these two
restrictions, Tait's theorem (which Tait formulated [4] without conditions and
claimed to be self-evident) is certainly false, as we can show by means of two
examples [10B]. However, if the graph is a bipartite graph then the theorem is
true without the two restrictions, according to Theorem B). Indeed, this is well
known in the four colour problem. for in this case-as Kempe [613] has shown-not
just four, but even three, colours suffice. In order to make progress in the general
case, and indeed by simpler means, we shall require the characterization of graphs
satisfying condition It by intrinsic (combinatorial) properties. To that end, the
Euler polyhedral theorem plays an important role [17].

206
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Konig wrote several other papers on the subject of correspondences. In
one of them, published in 1926 [18], he and Stephan Valk6 extended the
results of [10D] to the case of infinite graphs.
There are two other noteworthy theorems which should be mentioned
here. Although Konig's theorem is apparently unrelated to them, it is in
fact a consequence of either one.
The first theorem is a result of K. Menger, first published in 1927 in a
paper [ 19] dealing with a problem in analytic topology. When expres-
sed in the terminology of graph theory, it concerns the relationship
between the number of disjoint paths joining two given vertices v and w,
and the number of vertices which must be removed in order to ensure
that v and w lie in different components of the remaining graph.
The second theorem is due to the group-theorist Philip Hall, and was
published in 1935 [20]; it is often expressed informally in the following
way. Suppose we have a set X of boys and a set Y of girls, and that we
know which boys are acquainted with which girls; that is, we are given a
correspondence between X and Y, although it does not necessarily have
the regular properties of a (k, k)-correspondence. In this situation, an
important question is: can we find a subset of girls such that each boy can
marry a girl with whom he is acquainted? In other words, we seek a
subset Y, of Y such that each x in X can be assigned a unique y in Y,, x
and y being related in the given correspondence. Hall's necessary and
sufficient condition is simple to state: we can find a suitable subset of the
girls if and only if, for each subset S of the boys, there are at least ISI girls
acquainted with a boy in S. where ISI denotes the number of boys in S.
Somewhat surprisingly, Menger's theorem and Hall's theorem are
equivalent; furthermore, it can be shown that Konig's theorem may be
deduced from either one of them.
The year 1936 marked the two-hundredth anniversary of Euler's article
on the problem of the Konigsberg bridges, and so it was a fitting
coincidence that the first book on graph theory should be published in
that year. The publication of this book, written by Denes Konig and
entitled Theorie der endlichen and unendlichen Graphen, signified that,
after two hundred years, graph theory had at last become a branch of
mathematics in its own right.
References
1. KoNIG, D. Theorie der endlichen and unendlichen Graphen. Akademische Verlags-
gescllschaft. Leipzig. 1936. Reprinted: Chelsea. New York, 1950. English translation
with commentary by W. T. Tutte. BirkhSuser. Basel. 1990.
2. TAn. P. G. Note on a theorem in the geometry of position. Trans. Roy. Soc Edinb. 29
(1880). 657-660 = Sci. Papers, Vol. 1. 408-411.
3. STF.INITz. E. Polyeder and Raumenteilungen. Encykfopddie der Mathentatischen Wts-
censchafren 111AB12 (1922). 1-139.

THE FACTORIZATION OF GRAPHS
207
4. TAIT, P. G. Listing's Topologie. Phil. 11 fag (5) 17 (1884), 3(1-36 = Sei. Papers. Vol. 2,
85-98.
5. KIRKMA.. T. P. Ouestion 6610. solution by the proposer. Math. Quest. Solut. Educ.
Tithes 35 (1881). 112-116.
6.
W. T. On Hamiltonian circuits. J. London Math. Soc. 21 (1946). 98-101.
7. Hit.BE.RT, D. Uber die Endlichkeit des Invariantensvstems fiir biniire Grundformen.
Math.
33 (1889). 223-226 = Ges. Abh.. Vol. 2. 162-164.
8. GOURSAT. E. [Sur Ie theorcme de Tait]. Interned. Math. 5 (1898). 251.
9. DE PoLIGNAC. C. Sur le theoreme de Tait. Bull. Soc..Math. France 27 (1899). 142-145.
10. PETERSEN. J. [Reponse A question 360J. Intennid. Math. 6 (1899). 36-38.
11. BRAHANA. H. R. A proof of Petersen's theorem. Ann. of Math. 12) 19 (1917-8). 59-63.
12. ERRERA, A. Une demonstration du theoreme de Petersen. Mathesis 36(1922). 56-61.
13. KONIG. D. Sur les correspondances multivoques des ensembles. Fund. Math. 8 (1926).
114-134.
14. Kumc,. J. Sur la theorie des ensembles. Conipt. Rend. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 143 (1906).
I10-112.
15. Kosu;, D. Sur un prohkmc de la thcoric generale des ensembles ct Ia theorie des
graphes. Rev. Mitaphys. Morale 30 (1923), 443-449.
16. Ko,i ,. D. Grifok cs alkalmaz:isuk a determininsok es halmazok elmeleteben. Mat.
Terntisrettud. Ertedtfi 34 119161, 104-119.
IT Ko'.u.. D Vonalrendszerck ketoldalu fcluleteken. Mat. Tergi.%zci ld
Fresirr Z9
(l9ll). 112-117.
18. KoNic. D. and VAI KO. S. Uber mehrdeutigc Abhildungcn von Mcngcn.NPath. Ann. 95
(1926). 135-138.
19. MENGER, K. Zur allgemcinen Kurventheorie. Fund. Math. 10 (1927). 96-115.
20. HALL. P. On representatives of subsets. J. London Math. Soc. 10 (1935), 26-31).
21. KEMPE, A. B. A memoir on the theory of mathematical form. PhiL Trans. Roy. Soc.
London 177 (1886). 1-70.
22. SABIDUSSI, G. Correspondence between Sylvester, Petersen. Hilbert and Klein on
invariants and the factorisation of graphs 1889-1891. Discrete Math. 100 (1992).
99-155.


W. R. Hamilton i 1 So r, .6c 1
P. (.
`1;i11 11811 - I Q() 1)
M -E.-C. Jordan (1838-1922)
0. Veblen (1880-1960)

PLATE 2
W. K. Clifford (1845-79)
F. Guthrie (1831-99)
K. Kuratowski (1896-1980)
H. Whitney (1907-89)

APPENDIX 1
Graph Theory since 1936
IN THIS appendix, we shall describe briefly some of the progress made in graph
theory since 1936. Our aim is not to give a complete survey of all the noteworthy
results which have appeared since that date, but rather to take a few specific areas
discussed earlier in this book, and outline the subsequent development of the
subject in these areas. The reader who wishes to learn more about recent work in
graph theory should consult the specialist monographs listed at the end of this
appendix.
Paths and circuits
In Chapters I and 2. we saw how Euler and Hierholzer obtained a necessary
and sufficient condition for a connected graph to have an Eulerian path, but we
remarked that the corresponding problem for a Hamiltonian circuit was unsolved.
Since 1936 some progress has been made on the latter problem, in that various
sufficient conditions for a graph to be Hamiltonian have been found. G. A. Dirac
[1] proved in 1952 that if G is a simple graph with n(>3) vertices, and if the
valency of each vertex is at least in, then G is Hamiltonian. Similarly, O. Ore [2]
proved in 1960 that if G is a simple graph with n(33) vertices, and if the sum of
the valencies of each pair of non-adjacent vertices is at least n, then G is
Hamiltonian. These results were later generalized by L. Posa [3] and V. Chvatal
[4].
Enumeration and chemistry
In Chapters 3 and 4, we described the contributions of Cayley. Redfield. and
Pblya, and concluded with a brief mention of P61ya's fundamental paper, pub-
lished in 1937. Polya's theorem has been generalized by N. G. de Bruijn [5], and
it has been applied to the enumeration of many kinds of graphs. For example, R.
W. Robinson has enumerated graphs which have an Eulerian path [6], and
trivalent graphs. However, little progress has been made in problems relating to
the enumeration of k -colourable graphs. or graphs with a Hamiltonian circuit. For
a survey of results on enumeration. the reader is referred to [M].
The use of graph theory in chemistry has grown enormously during recent
years. Quite apart from its applications to enumerative chemical problems such as
those mentioned in Chapter 4, graph theory has been employed in problems
relating to chemical nomenclature and documentation, bonding theory, and the
analysis of chemical systems. The interested reader is referred to [7] for further
details.
Maps on surfaces
In Chapter 5, we introduced the study of maps drawn in the plane and on more
complicated surfaces. This led, in Chapter 7. to a discussion of the chromatic
number of an orientable surface of genus g, and we presented Heawood's
conjecture, that this number is equal to [! +# j(I +48g)], for all g _- 1. The truth of
Heawood's conjecture for all values of g was not finally established until 1967;

210
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
several mathematicians contributed to the proof, but most of the credit goes to G.
Ringel and J. W. T. Youngs. The proof is fairly complicated, involving the
consideration of twelve separate cases, corresponding to the residue classes
modulo 12. Full details may be found in Ringel's book [I].
The four-colour problem
In Chapters 6 and 9, we outlined the history of the four-colour problem from
De Morgan's letter of 1852 until the mid-1930s. In particular, we saw how the
study of reducibility enabled Franklin to prove the four-colour conjecture for all
maps with at most 25 countries, and we mentioned that this number was increased
to 27 by Reynolds. More recently, it was increased still further to 35 by C. E.
Winn [8], to 39 by O. Ore and J. Stemple in 1968, and to 95 by J. Mayer (in work
as yet unpublished).
But the big breakthrough occurred in 1976 with the announcement by K.
Appel and W. Haken [9] that a set of 1936 reducible configurations had been
found, with the property that every trivalent map must necessarily contain at least
one of them. The discovery of these configurations finally established the truth of
the four-colour conjecture.
Some years earlier, a different approach to the problem had been suggested by
H. Hadwiger [10], who conjectured that every k-colourable graph can be con-
tracted to K,k. (A contraction of a graph is a sequence of operations, each of which
consists of deleting an edge and identifying its incident vertices.) Hadwiger's
conjecture is known to be true for k = 2, 3, 4; its truth for k = 5 can be deduced
from the 'four-colour theorem', but very little is known about its truth for k , 6.
There have been some interesting developments in the theory of chromatic
polynomials. After Birkhoff's death, his colleague D. C. Lewis wrote a long paper
[11] which contained all Birkhoff's work on the subject. In recent years, W. T.
Tutte has obtained some intriguing results on the zeros of chromatic polynomials
of planar graphs. He has proved [12] that such polynomials tend to have a real
zero close to 1+T, where T is the `golden ratio'
In addition, there have been two important results on colouring, although they
are only indirectly related to the four-colour problem. The first of these is due to
R. L. Brooks [13], who proved that if G is a connected simple graph which is
neither a complete graph nor a circuit graph with an odd number of vertices, then the
vertices of G can be coloured with only p colours, where p is the maximum valency
of the graph. A similar result, concerning the colouring of the edges, is due to V.
G. Vizing [14], who proved that if G is a simple graph with maximum valency p,
then the edges of G can always be coloured with p + 1 colours, in such a way that
any two edges with a vertex in common are assigned different colours.
Planarity
In Chapter 8, we saw how Whitney defined the dual of a graph in terms of the
concepts of rank and nullity, and that he proved that a graph is planar if and only
if it has a dual. An alternative characterization of planar graphs was given by S.
MacLane [15]: a non-separable graph is planar if and only if it has a set of circuits
with the property that each edge of the graph lies in exactly two of the circuits.
We also mentioned the concept of a `matroid'. The study of matroids has
become an important branch of combinatorial theory, and it has led to the
simplification of several topics in graph theory. In 1959 W. T. Tutte [16] proved
an important result giving a necessary and sufficient condition (similar to that in
Kuratowski's theorem) for a matroid to be one which arises from a graph.

APPENDIX I
GRAPH THEORY SINCE 1936
211
Kuratowski's theorem has been extended to both orientable and non-orientable
surfaces: for any surface there is a finite collection of 'forbidden subgraphs' corre-
sponding to KS and K;, for the plane or sphere. Further details are given in [17]
and in N. Robertson and P. D. Seymour [18].
Factorization
In Chapter 10. we defined the notion of an r-factor in a graph. In 1947 W. T.
Tutte [191 obtained a necessary and sufficient condition for a graph G to have a
1-factor, namely that
co(S)-_ S.
for every subset S of the vertex-set of G: here, ISO is the number of vertices in S.
and c (S) denotes the number of those components of the graph resulting from the
deletion of the vertices in S. which have an odd number of vertices. Tutte also
obtained a similar condition for the existence of an r-factor [201.
References
Paper referred to above.
1. DIRAU. G. A. Some theorems on abstract graphs. Proc. London Math. Soc. (3) 2 (1952).
69-81.
2. ORE, O. Note on Hamiltonian circuits. Amer. Math. Monthly 67 (1960). 55.
3. POSH, L. A theorem concerning Hamilton lines. Magyar Tud. Akad. Mat. Kutat6. Int.
K1t_l. 7 (1962). 225--,26.
4. CHV4?AI. V. On Hamilton's ideals. J. Combinatorial Theory (B) 12 (1972). 163-168.
5. of BRUim. N. G. Generalization of Pblya's fundamental theorem in enumerative
combinatorial analysis. lndugationes Math. 21 (1959). 59-69.
6. RoBINSON, R. W. Enumeration of Euler graphs. In: Proof techniques in graph theory.
Academic Press, New York. 1969. pp. 147-153.
7. ROUVRAY, D. H. and BALABAN. A. T. Chemical applications of graph theory. Appli-
cations of Graph Theory (ed. Wilson R. J. and Beineke. L. W.). Academic Press.
London, 1979.
8. WiNN, C. E. On the minimum number of polygons in an irreducible map. Amer. J.
Math. 62 11940). 4(16-316.
9. APPEL, K. and HAKEN. W. Every planar map is four colorable. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc.
$2 11976). 711-712.
10. HADWIGER. H. Ober vine Klassifikation der Streckenkomplexe. Vierreljschr. Natur-
forsch. Ges. ZUsich 88 (1943),133-142.
11. BIRKHOFF. G. D. and LEwis, D. C. Chromatic polynomials. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
60 (1946). 355-451.
12. Tt:rrE. W. T. On chromatic polynomials and the golden ratio. J. Combinatorial Theory
9 (19701, 289-296.
13. BROOKS. R. L. On colouring the nodes of a network. Proc. Cambridge Phil. Soc. 37
11941). 194-197.
14. VIzIU. V. G. The chromatic class of a multigraph. Cybernetics I No. 3 (1965). 32-41.
15. MACLAST., S. A structural characterization of planar combinatorial graphs. Duke Math.
J. 3 (19371, 460-472.
16. TLT IE. W. T. Matroids and graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 90 (1959), 527-552.
17. GLOVER. H. H.. HUNEKE. J. P. and WANG. C. S. 103 graphs that arc irreducible for
the projective plane. J. Combinatorial Theory (B) 27 (1979). 332-370.
18. ROBERTSON. N. and SEYMOUR, P. D. Generalizing Kuratowski's theorem. Congr.
Numer. 45 (1984). 129-138.
19. TI.-rm.. W. T. The factorization of linear graphs. J. London Math. Soc. 22 (1947).
107-111.
20. TL-rtE, W. T. The factors of graphs. Canad J. Math. 4 (1952).314-328.

212
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Books references A-D are general books on graph theory, references E-T are more special-
ized, and reference u is a personal account by a distinguished contributor to the subject.
A.
BERGE. C. Graphs, 2nd edn. North-Holland Mathematical Library, Elsevier,1985.
a.
CHARTRAND. G. and LESNIAK, L Graphs and digraphs, 3rd edn. Chapman-Hall.
London, 1996.
C.
HARARY, F. Graph theory. Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass. 1969.
D.
WILSON. R. J. Introduction to graph theory. 4th edn. Addison Wesley Longman,
Harlow. Essex, 1996.
E.
APreL. K. and HAKEN. W. Every planar map is four colorable. American Math. Soc..
1989.
F.
BEINEKE, L W. and WILSON, R. J. Selected topics in graph theory (1), 2, 3. Academic
Press. London, 1978, 1983.1987.
G.
BEINEKE, L. W. and WttsoN. R. J. Graph connections: relationships between graph
theory and other areas of mathematics. Oxford University Press, 1997.
H.
BIGGS. N. L. Algebraic graph theory. 2nd edn. Cambridge Math. Library, Cambridge
University Press. 1993.
1.
CHARTRAND. G. and OEL ERMANN. O. Applied and algorithmic graph theory. McGraw-
Hill. 1993.
i.
FLEISCHNER, H. Eulerian graphs and related topics, 2 vols. Annals of Discrete Mathe-
matics 45.50. North-Holland. 1990.1991.
K.
GRAHAM. R. L.. GROTSCHEL, M. and LovAsz, L. Handbook of combinatorics.
Elsevier. 1995.
L.
GROSS. J. L and TUCKER, T. W. Topological graph theory. Wiky-Interscience. 1987.
M. HARARY. F. and PALMER. E. M. Graphical enumeration. Academic Press. New York,
1973.
N.
JENSEN, T. R. and ToFT. B. Graph coloring problems. Wiley-Intcrscience, 1995.
o.
Lov Asz, L. and PLt'MMER. M. D. Matching theory. Annals of Discrete Mathematics 29,
North-Holland, 1986.
P.
OxLEY, J. G. Matrond theory. Oxford University Press. 1992.
O.
READ. R. C. and WILSON, R. J. An atlas of graphs. Oxford University Press. 1998.
R.
RINGEL, G. Map color theorem. Springer-Verlag. Berlin. 1974.
s.
SAA'rY, T. L. and KAINEN. P. C. The four-color problem. McGraw Hill. New York. 1977.
T.
WHnE. A. T. Graphs, groups and surfaces. North-Holland. Amsterdam. 1984.
11.
Ttrrr. W. T. Graph theory as I have known it, Oxford University Press. 1998.

APPENDIX 2
Biographical Notes
Tins appendix contains short biographies of all the authors of our main extracts.
together with those of a few other people. The material has been collected from
many sources including the following:
Bet_t.. E. T. Men of mathematics. Gollancz. London, 1937.
BOAsi-. F. Modern English biography. 6 vols. Netherton and Worth. Truro.
1892-1921.
MACFARL.ANE. A. Lectures on ten British mathematicians of the nineteenth century.
Mathematical Monographs, No. 17. Wiley, New York, 1916.
MAY. K. 0. Bibliography and research manual of the history of mathematics.
University of Toronto Press. 1973.
PcxioENtx,nt:, J.
C.
Biographisch-Literarisches Handworterbuch der exakten
Naturwissenschaften. Vols 1-7h. 1863-.
Dictionary of American biography. 20 vols. 1928-36, and supplementary vols.
Dictionary of national biography. 63 viols, 1885-1900. and supplementary vols.
Dictionary of scientific biography, 16 vols. 1970-80.
Dictionary of South African biography. 2 vols. 1968-72.
Isis cumulative bibliography. 2 vols. 1971.
Meyers Lexikon, (7th edn.1. 12 vols. 1924-30.
Neue deutsche Biographie, 1952-.
Various editions of: Who was who, Who was who in America, American men and
women of science. Encyclopaedia Britannica and Larousse.
The biographies are arranged alphabetically and are preceded by a chronological
list.
Fuler. L.
1707-1783
Petersen. J. P. C.
1839-1910
Vandermonde. A.-T.
1735-1796
Hierholzer. C. F. B.
1840-1871
Lhuilicr. S.-A.-J.
1750-1840
Tarry. G.
1843-1913
Poinsot. L.
1777-1859
Clifford. W. K.
1845-1879
Cauchy. A.-L.
1789-1857
Kempe. A. B.
1849-1922
Hamilton. W. R.
1805-1865
Heawood. P. J.
1861-1955
Kirkman. T. P.
1806-1895
Heffter. L. W. J.
1862-1962
Dc Morgan. A.
1806-1871
Veblen. 0.
1880-196(1
Listing. J. B.
1808-1882
Tietze, H. F. F.
1880-1964
Svivester. J. J.
1814-1897
Sirkhoff. G. D.
1884-1944
Cavlcy. A.
1821-1895
Konig, D.
1884-1944
Kirchhoff. G. R.
1824-1887
P61ya. G.
1887-1985
Frankland. F.
1825-1899
Kuratowski. K.
1896-1980
Tait. P. G.
1831-1901
Priifer. E. P. H.
1896-1934
Guthrie. F.
1831-1899
Franklin, P.
1898-1965
Jordan. M.-E.-C.
1838-1922
Frink, 0.
1901-1988
Crum Brown. A.
1838-1922
Whitney. H.
1907-1989

214
GRAPH THEORY 17?6-19?6
BIRKHOFF. George David
b 21 March 1884
Overisel, Mich.
d 12 November 1944
Cambridge, Mass.
After studying at the University of Chicago and at Harvard, Birkhoff held
appointments at the University of Wisconsin and at Princeton before returning to
Harvard in 1912 where he spent the rest of his career. He was generally regarded
as the leading American mathematician of his time, and his interests included
differential equations, difference equations, and dynamical systems; the contribu-
tion which he made to graph theory was a rather minor interest.
CAUCHY, Augustin-Louis
b 21 August 1789
Paris
d 22 May 1857
Sceaux
After training as a civil engineer Cauchy went, in 1810, to Cherbourg, where he
worked on the design of the fortifications and harbour. His mathematical career
began around this time, and one of his first papers was the memoir on polyhedra
[5B].
Cauchy rapidly became the leading mathematician in France. His original work
on groups of substitutions (permutations) and complex functions made him
famous throughout the mathematical world, and he has more concepts and
theorems named after him than any other mathematician. The influence of his
lectures and books led to the introduction of proper standards of definition and
proof in mathematical analysis.
CAYI.EY. Arthur
b 16 August 1821
Richmond, Surrey
d 26 January 1895
Cambridge. England
After graduating from Cambridge in 1840 Cayley held a fellowship at Trinity
College for a few years. He then entered the legal profession, and was called to
the bar in 1849. By 1863, in spite of his legal duties, he had written nearly three
hundred mathematical papers, and in that year he was appointed to the new
Sadlerian chair of pure mathematics at Cambridge, a post which he held until his
death.
In all, Cayley wrote nearly a thousand papers (he used to write out his
discoveries and send them to be published without delay), but only one full-length
book, a treatise on elliptic functions.
In 1881-2 Cayley lectured at Johns Hopkins University at the invitation of his
close friend Sylvester, whom he had first encountered during his period as a
lawyer.
CLIFFORD, William Kingdon
b 4 May 1845
Exeter
d 3 March 1879
Madeira
Educated at King's College. London. and Trinity College, Cambridge. Clifford
graduated in 1867. In 1870 he took part in an eclipse expedition to Italy and was
shipwrecked in Sicily. In the following year he was appointed professor of applied
mathematics and mechanics at University College, London. Clifford suffered a
physical collapse in 1876 and the remainder of his life consisted of long visits to
the Mediterranean area to recuperate. He left England in 1878 never to return.
Clifford's contemporaries believed that his early death deprived the world of
one of the best mathematicians of his time.

APPENDIX 2 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
215
CRUM BROWN, Alexander
b 26 March 1838
Edinburgh
d 28 October 1922
Edinburgh
Crum Brown graduated at Edinburgh University in 1858. received his M.D. in
1861 and a D.Sc. from London in the following year. After spending several
months in Germany. he returned to Edinburgh as a lecturer in chemistry in 1863.
He was promoted to professor in 1869, and retired in 1908. Crum Brown was a
colleague and brother-in-law of Tait.
DE MORGAN, Augustus
b 27 June 1806
Madura, India
d 18 March 1871
London
De Morgan studied at Trinity College. Cambridge, and graduated in 1827. He
was known as an eccentric and renowned for his strongly held beliefs. In 1828 he
was appointed professor of mathematics at what is now University College.
London. but resigned on a matter of principle in 1831. He was reappointed in
1836. but resigned again in 1866.
The most important researches of Dc Morgan were in the field of logic, but he
also took an interest in the history of mathematics and formed a large collection
of arithmetical books. He wrote many articles for the Penny cyclopaedia (1833-43)
and contributed regularly to several periodicals. He was also a strong advocate of
decimal currency.
One of De Morgan's best-known books, the Budget of paradoxes, was edited by
his widow and published posthumously in 1872.
EULr_R. Leonhard
b 15 April 1707
Basel
d 18 September 1783
St. Petersburg
Euler's father was a Calvinist pastor who wished his son to follow a career in
the church, so Leonhard entered the University of Basel to study theology and
Hebrew. Eventually his father was persuaded that Leonhard was destined to
become a mathematician, and his theological training was abandoned.
In 1727 Euler was called to the Academy at St. Petersburg officially as an
associate of the medical section. but in effect he soon became a member of the
mathematical section. Six years later he succeeded Daniel Bernoulli as the leading
mathematician in the Academy.
In 1740 Euler moved to the Berlin Academy, but his years spent there were not
entirely happy and he was glad to be able to return to St. Petersburg in 1766.
Several of the mathematicians mentioned in our book were prolific authors, but
Euler surpassed them all. He lost the sight of one eye during his first period in
Russia. and became totally blind soon after returning there, but this seems to have
increased his output. He performed extensive calculations in his head and dictated
the results to amanuenses, including his son Johann Albrecht.
Euler died suddenly in his seventy-seventh year; he had remained active to the
end and was still performing calculations on the day of his death.
FRANKLANr), Edward
b 18 January 1825
Catterall, Lancs.
d
9 August 1899
Golaa, Norway
Frankland was apprenticed to a Lancashire druggist who taught him little, and
then he secured employment at the Museum of Economic Geology in London. He
subsequently held various appointments both in Britain and in continental Europe
before returning to London in 1863. His duties included making the official

216
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
monthly analyses of the water supplies of London, and he served on the second
Royal Commission on River Pollution. He was knighted in 1897.
FRANKLIN, Philip
b 5 October 1898 New York City
d 27 January 1965 Boston, Mass.
After receiving his Ph.D. from Princeton in 1921, Franklin was an instructor in
mathematics at Princeton and Harvard before moving to the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in 1924. He became a full professor there in 1937. Besides
his work on map colouring, he published books on calculus, differential equations,
complex variable, and Fourier methods.
FRINK, Orrin
b 31 May 1901
Brooklyn, New York
After receiving his Ph.D. from Columbia University, Frink spent the academic
year 1925-6 as an instructor at Princeton University where he attended a seminar
conducted by Veblen. He was given the assignment of applying Veblen's methods
to the four-colour problem, and in particular to simplifying Brahana's proof of
Petersen's theorem. In the event, Frink realised that a much simpler proof was
possible, and the outcome was his paper [10C].
In 1928 Frink moved to Pennsylvania State University where he remained until
his retirement. He has published papers on a variety of topics including lattice
theory and topology.
GUTHRIE, Francis
b
1831
London
d 19 October 1899 Cape Town
After obtaining a B.A. degree from University College, London, Guthrie went
on to obtain a law degree and to practice as a barrister. In 1861 he was appointed
professor of mathematics in the newly established Graaff-Reinet College, Cape
Colony, and moved to Cape Town in 1875; he obtained a chair in mathematics at
the South African College in the following year.
Guthrie's contribution to graph theory was, in some respects, minimal; he
conjectured one result (the four-colour problem), but made no direct contribution
to the theory.
Guthrie published a few mathematical papers, but he was also interested in
botany. In particular he is remembered for his work on the genus Erica, in which
he is commemorated by Erica Guthriei.
HAMILTON, William Rowan
b midnight 3-4 August 1805
Dublin
d
2 September 1865
Dunsink
Hamilton was a child prodigy, and by the age of 14 had mastered several
languages, modern, classical, and oriental. He also showed great ability in
mathematics, and in 1822 noticed an important error in Laplace;s Mecanique
celeste. As a result of this he came to the attention of the Astronomer Royal of
Ireland. Hamilton entered Trinity College, Dublin, at the. age of 18, and was an
outstanding student in both classics and science. Before he had taken his degree
he was appointed Astronomer Royal of Ireland and took up his duties in 1827.
He remained at Dunsink Observatory until his death.
Hamilton was not a success as a practical astronomer, but his theoretical work
in geometrical optics, dynamics, and algebra was brilliant. He had an obsession
for his work on quaternions, and although this particular topic proved less useful

APPENDIX 2
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
217
than he hoped, his discovery of non-commutative systems has revolutionized
algebra.
The later career of Hamilton was marred by his addiction to alcohol, and he
died from an acute attack of gout.
HEAWOOD. Percy John
b
8 September 1861
Newport. Salop
d 24 January 1955
Durham
Hcawood studied at Oxford and remained there until 1887 when he was
appointed a lecturer at the Durham Colleges. later to become Durham University.
He remained in Durham for the rest of his long life.
He has earned a place in history on two counts. The first of these was his work
on map-colouring which began with his paper [6D/7A] and extended over a period
of nearly sixty years. The other was his work as secretary of the Durham Castle
restoration fund. In 1928 the castle's foundations were found to be insecure, and
long after others had given up hope of ever raising sufficient funds to prevent it
from sliding down the hill on which it stands. Heawood persevered. His successful
efforts were rewarded by honours from both his University and his Country.
HEFFTF.R. Lothar Wilhelm Julius
b 11 June 1862
Kdslin
d
1 January 1962
Freiburg im
Breisgau
After studying mathematics and physics at Heidelberg and Berlin. Heffter held
various appointments at Giessen, Bonn, Aachen, and Kiel. He eventually settled
down at Freiburg in 1911. where he was to remain for over half a century until his
death. Although he became an emeritus professor in 1931, he continued lecturing
regularly until 1936 and began lecturing again during the Second World War
because of the shortage of teachers. His teaching duties finally came to an end
with the devastation of Freiburg by bombing in 1944.
Heffier wrote a short autobiography when he was 75 (Mein Lebensweg and meine
Mathematische Arbeit, Leipzig, 1937) and at the age of 90 a much longer one
IBegliickte Riickschau auf 9 Jahrzehnte. Freihurg, 1952).
HIERHOLZER. Carl Fridolin Bernhard
b
2 October 1840
Freihurg im
Breisgau
d 13 September 1871 Karlsruhe
The short life of Hierholzer included studies in Karlsruhe, Berlin, and Heidel-
berg. where he was awarded his doctorate in 1865. In 1870 he became assistant to
Liiroth. an algebraic geometer, in Karlsruhe. He has three papers in the early
volumes of Mathematische Annalen, the last one being his posthumous paper on
Eulerian paths [I B].
JORDAN. Marie-Ennemond-Camille
b
5 January 1838
Lyons
d 20 January 1922
Paris
Camille Jordan followed the usual career of French mathematicians of the
nineteenth century. He trained as an engineer at the Ecole Polytechnique and did
mathematics in his spare time. Subsequently (1873-1912) he taught at both the
Ecole Polytechnique and the College de France.
He published papers in many areas of mathematics and is especially remem-
bered for his Cours d'analyse de I'Ecole Polytechnique which reached a third

218
GRAPH THEORY 1716-1916
edition and had a great influence on the development of analysis. Equally
important was his work in algebra. and his Traite des substitutions et des equations
algebriques was the standard work in group theory for some thirty years. His one
contribution to graph theory [3B] was concerned with the symmetry groups of
graphs and trees.
KEMPE, Alfred Bray
b
6 July 1849
London
d 21 April 1922
London
Kempc was a barrister by profession and became a leading authority on
Ecclesiastical Law. But he had studied mathematics at Cambridge, and through-
out his life he continued to devote some of his time and energy to it. His first
researches were in kinematics, in particular the construction of linkages for
drawing various curves. The result was a minor classic entitled How to draw a
straight line. Another of Kempe's works was A memoir on the theory of mathemat-
ical form, published in 1886. Although his ideas on this subject have been
superseded by later work on mathematical logic, his use of a graphical notation in
this context is worthy of note. Strangely, the one work which assures Kempe a
permanent place in the history of mathematics was his paper [6B] containing a
fallacious 'proof'!
For many years Kempe held the post of treasurer of the Royal Society. He was
knighted in 1912.
KIRCHHOFF, Gustav Robert
b 12 March 1824
Konigsberg
d 17 October 1887
Berlin
At the age of 21. whilst studying at the University of Konigsberg, Kirchhoff
formulated his famous laws on the flow of electric currents. He then spent three
years as a Privatdozent at the University of Berlin before accepting the post of
professor of physics at Breslau, to which he moved in 1850. Four years later he
moved to Heidelberg where, as a result of work done there, he propounded a
fundamental law of electromagnetic radiation.
For a number of years Kirchhoff suffered from a disability which forced him to
use crutches or a wheelchair. Eventually his failing health hindered his experi-
mental work, and, in 1875. he was appointed professor of theoretical physics at
Berlin.
KIRKMAI. Thomas Penyngton
b 31 March 1806
Bolton
d
3 February 1895
Croft, Lancashire
After studying at Dublin University, Kirkman entered the Church of England.
After two brief curacies he became rector of the parish of Croft with Southworth
in Lancashire. where he was to remain for fifty-two years.
Besides some theological pamphlets. Kirkman published a remarkable number
of mathematical papers. His early work was on combinatorial puzzles, and his
name is associated with the famous problem of the fifteen schoolgirls. In 1853 he
began to publish papers on what he always called 'polyedra', and he retained his
interest in that topic for the rest of his life. His discovery of 'Hamiltonian' circuits
[2B] is just one of the many significant ideas for which he has not received due
credit.

APPENDIX 2 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
219
KONIG, DEnes
b 21 September 1884
Budapest
d 19 October 1944
Budapest
Dens Konig was the son of the mathematician Julius Konig, whose posthu-
mously published book Neue Grundlagen der Logik. Arithmetik and Mengenlehre
was edited by Denes and published in 1914.
Konig studied at Budapest and Gottingen, receiving his doctorate from Buda-
pest in 1907. The whole of his career was also spent at Budapest, initially as an
assistant and finally as a professor. His life came to a tragic end in 1944 when he
committed suicide.
Most of Konig's work was in the field of combinatorics and he wrote the first
comprehensive treatise on graph theory. Theorie der endlichen and unendlichen
Graphen, published in 1936.
KURATOWSKI, Kazimierz
b 2 February 1896
Warsaw
d 18 June 1980
Warsaw
Kuratowski studied in Glasgow. where he read engineering, and in Warsaw.
From 1921 to 1934 he worked in Lvov, and then returned to Warsaw. His main
interest was analytic topology, and the paper [8C] which earned him a permanent
place in graph theory was written from the standpoint of that subject.
LHUILIER, Simon-Antoine-Jean
b 24 April 1750 Geneva
d 28 March 1840 Geneva
Lhuilier began his studies of mathematics and physics at Calvin Academy. In 1775
he entered a competition which was being held by the commission in charge of
for use in Polish schools. His proposal for a mathematics text
won the competition, and as a result Lhuilier was asked to become a tutor in the
household of a Polish royal family. Despite the social obligations of this post. he
wrote the proposed text and several memoirs.
After leaving Poland in 1789. Lhuilier spent most of the next few years in
Ti bingen and then held the chair of mathematics at the Geneva Academy from
1795 until his retirement in 1823.
LISTING, Johann Benedict
b 25 July 1808
Frankfurt am Main
d 24 December 1882
Gottingen
There seem to be few accounts of the life of Listing, but what little there is
suggests that he was an original thinker who deserves to be much better known.
He was of Czech descent, began his studies in mathematics at Gottingen in 1829,
and graduated in 1834. He spent most of the next three years in Italy and Sicily.
where he helped a colleague perform scientific experiments. After two years in
Hannover, Listing returned to Gottingen in 1839 as professor of mathematical
physics and optics.
In addition to the two mathematical classics, the Topologie [ 1C] and the Census,
Listing wrote pioneering work on physiological optics and was awarded an
honorary doctorate of medicine by the University of Tiibingen in 1877.
PETERSEN. lulius Peter Christian
b 16 June 1839
Soro
d
5 August 1910 Copenhagen
Petersen was an important figure in Danish mathematics. He obtained his Ph.D.
in 1871. and taught in a polytechnic and a military academy. later becoming a

220
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
professor at the University of Copenhagen. He was a member of the board of
inspectors of senior schools (1887-1900) and was nationally known as the author
of a series of school and undergraduate textbooks, one of which, Methods and
theories for the solution of problems of geometrical constructions, achieved interna-
tional recognition, being translated into five languages. He was, however, in-
terested only in able students and his books for elementary schools proved to be
too advanced.
Petersen's research interests were wide and he wrote on algebra, number
theory, analysis, mechanics, and geometry. His most important work was in
geometry, and his paper on regular graphs [ 10A] was perhaps the most important
of all.
POINSOT, Louis
b 3 January 1777
Paris
d 5 December 1859
Paris
The Ecole Polytechnique was established in 1794, and Poinsot was a member of
its first graduation class. in 1797. He qualified as a civil engineer and was
soon appointed professor at the Lycee Bonaparte. From 1816 to 1825 he was the
first professor of analysis and mechanics at the Eeole Polytechnique, and he later
became entrance examiner. His subsequent appointments seem to have been in
administration rather than in teaching.
One of his earliest works was Elements statique (1803) and, in addition to his
work on geometry (1809) mentioned in Chapter 1, his researches included the
history of numbers.
P6LYA, George
b 13 December 1887
Budapest
d 7 September 1985
Stanford, California
The son of a statistician, P61ya studied at Budapest, Gottingen, Vienna, and
Paris. receiving his Ph.D. from Budapest in 1912. From 1914 to 1940 he taught in
Zurich, initially as Privatdozent and later as professor.
In 1940 P61ya emigrated to the United States where he was visiting professor at
Brown University until 1942. Then, after a brief period at Smith College,
Massachusetts, he moved to Stanford where he remained, becoming emeritus
professor in 1953.
P61ya has worked in several areas of mathematics and, in addition, has
established a fine reputation in mathematical education.
PRUFER, Ernst Paul Heinz
b 10 November 1896
Wilhelmshaven
d
7 April 1934
Munster
After receiving his doctorate from Berlin in 1921, Priifer was a Privatdozent at
Jena and then at Munster. He became a professor at Munster in 1930 and died
four years later.
Besides his paper [3D] on permutations, Prefer published work on Abelian
groups, algebraic numbers, Sturm-Liouville theory, and knot theory. From his
papers a book on projective geometry was compiled by G. Fleddermann and G.
Kothe, and published privately.
SYLVESTER, James Joseph
b
3 September 1814
London
d 15 March 1897
London
Sylvester studied at St. John's College, Cambridge. He held a brief appointment
at the University of Virginia in 1841. and after returning to England was called to

APPENDIX 2 BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES
221
the bar. During this period of his life he became friendly with Cayley. and they
began their famous work on the algebraic theory of invariants.
In 1855 he became professor of mathematics at the Royal Military Academy.
Woolwich. but War Office regulations retired him on half pay when he was 55. In
1876 Sylvester returned to the United States to become professor at Johns Hopkins
University. There he founded the American Journal of Marhentarics. the first
volume of which contained his thoughts on the relationship between chemistry
and algebra.
At the age of 68. Sylvester returned to his native land to become Savilian
professor of geometry at Oxford.
TAIT. Peter Guthrie
b 28 April 1831
Dalkeith
d
4 July 1901
Edinburgh
After attending Edinburgh Academy. Tait spent one session at Edinburgh
before moving to Peterhouse. Cambridge. where he graduated in 1852. He
remained at Peterhouse as a fellow until 1854, when he was appointed professor
of mathematics at Queen's College. Belfast. But Tait's interests were inclined more
towards the real world than to pure mathematics, and in 1860 he became
professor of natural philosophy at Edinburgh: he was to remain there until his
retirement in 1901. shortly before his death.
Tait was an accomplished teacher and prolific author whose writings included a
substantial number of articles for the Encyclopaedia Britannica and Chambers'
encyclopaedia.
TARRY. Gaston
b 27 September 1843
Villefranche. Aveyron
d 21 June 1913
Le Havre
Tarry studied at the Ecole Polytechnique in 1857, and later became a finance
inspector. Much of his life was spent in Algeria. His best-known papers are on the
maze problem [I D], and on Euler's problem of the thirty-six officers: in modern
terminology, the latter paper proved the non-existence of a pair of orthogonal
6 x 6 Latin squares.
TIErr_E. Heinrich Franz Friedrich
b 31 August 1880
Schleinz
d 17 February 1964
Munich
Tietze studied at Vienna, Munich. and Gottingen, and received his doctorate
from Vienna in 1904. He became a Privatdozent in Vienna in 1908. and was later
appointed professor at Brunn (1910-9). Erlangen (1919-25) and then Munich. He
became emeritus professor in 1950, and continued to live in Munich.
Besides his paper [7C] on map colourings, his works include a well-known book
called Famous problems of mathematics. which contains some fine colour plates
illustrating map colourings on certain surfaces.
V %?t)ERMO5 DE. Alexandre-Theophile
b 28 February 1735 Paris
d
I January 1796
Paris
Music was Vandermonde's first lose. and he turned to mathematics relatively
late in life. He entered the Academic des Sciences. Paris. in 177 I. and his entire
contribution to mathenuttic% consists of four memoirs published in the Hisroires of
the Academy in the years 1771-2. The most important of these four is a treatment
of the symmetric functions of roots of equations. The others are concerned with

222
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
factorials, determinants, and the knight's tour [2A]. (It is worth remarking that the
paper on determinants makes no mention of the so-called Vandermonde deter-
minant.)
VEBLEN, Oswald
b 24 June 1880
Decorah, Iowa
d 10 August 1960
Brooklin, Maine
Veblen's distinguished career began with studies in Iowa, Harvard and the
University of Chicago. After teaching for two years in Chicago, he moved to
Princeton University (1905-32), and later to the Institute of Advanced Study,
Princeton, where he played an important role in organizing the school of
mathematics.
His early work on the foundations of geometry led him to write two volumes
entitled Projective geometry (Vol. 1 with J. W. Young). His Analysis situs (see [8B])
was his most important book and the standard work on topology for many years.
Another important book, which he wrote with his student, Henry Whitehead, was
Foundations of differential geometry.
Veblen's interest in geometry led him to try to construct a theory to unify
gravitation and electromagnetism. An offshoot of this work was a new treatment
of spinors included in his book Projektive Relativitdtstheorie.
WHITNEY, Hassler
b 23 March 1907 New York City
After receiving the degrees of Ph.B. and Mus.B from Yale, Whitney moved to
Harvard where he received his Ph.D. in 1932. Apart from a year at Princeton, he
remained at Harvard until 1952, becoming full professor in 1946. He then moved
to the Institute of Advanced Study, Princeton, where he has remained ever since.
Whitney was a grandson of Simon Newcomb, a contemporary of Sylvester at
Johns Hopkins University. He produced more than a dozen papers on graph
theory, a subject in which he became interested during a visit to Germany, and
has also worked on manifolds, integration theory, and analytic varieties.

APPENDIX 3
Bibliography: 1736-1936
THIS appendix contains a chronological list of papers on graph theory covering
the years 1736-1936. Journals relating to the activities of learned societies and
published in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries often bear two dates: one
relating to the year in which the meetings were held and the other a publisher's
date. As these dates differ by up to as much as five years it has been difficult to
decide precisely where to place some papers in the list, but we have generally
preferred the earlier dates.
We have had to be selective at times. For example, there seemed little sense in
including every reference to the Konigsberg bridge problem, or to the knight's
tour problem, merely because such problems can be given graph-theoretical form.
Where the original article was untitled, we have supplied a title but inserted it
in square brackets; in a few cases we have amplified a title and the addition is also
bracketed.
There seems to be no standard list of journal abbreviations which covers all the
titles in our bibliography. Where possible we have followed the list appearing in
the Isis cumulative bibliography, Vol. 1, Mansell (in conjunction with the History
of Science Society), London, 1971.
Appropriate references are included to the following collected works:
BIRKHOFF, G. D. Collected mathematical papers, 3 vols. American Mathematical Society,
New York, 1950.
CAUCHY, A.-L. Oeuvres completes d'Augustin Cauchy, 27 vols. Gauthier-Villars, Paris,
1882-1970.
CAYLEY, A. Mathematical papers, 13 vols and index vol. Cambridge University Press,
1889-97.
CLIFFORD, W. K. Mathematical papers. Macmillan, London, 1882.
EULER, L. Opera omnia, series prima, opera mathematica, 29 vols. Sub auspiciis societatis
scientiarum naturalium Helveticae, 1911-56.
HAMILTON, W. R. Mathematical papers of Sir William Rowan Hamilton, Vol. 3. Cambridge
University Press, 1967.
JORDAN, C. Oeuvres de Camille Jordan, 4 vols. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1961-4.
KIRCHHOFF, G. R. Gesammelte Abhandlungen von G. Kirchhoff. Barth, Leipzig, 1882.
MAXWELL, J. C. Scientific papers of James Clerk Maxwell, 2 vols. Cambridge University
Press, 1890.
Modus, A. F. August Ferdinand Mobius Gesammelte Werke, 4 vols. Hirzel, Stuttgart,
1885-7.
POINCARE, H. Oeuvres de Henri Poincare, 11 vols. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1916-56.
SYLVESTER, J. J. Collected mathematical papers of James Joseph Sylvester, 4 vols. Cambridge
University Press, 1904-12.
TAIT, P. G. Scientific papers, 2 vols. Cambridge University Press, 1898-1900.

224
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
1736
EULER, L. Solutio problematis ad geometriam situs pertinentis. Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp.
Petropol. 8 (1736). 128- 140 = Opera Omnia (1), Vol. 7. 1-10. For translations. see [1A)
(English). Coupy 1851 (French), and Speiser 1925 (German).
1752
EULER. L. Elementa doctrine solidorum. Novi Comm. Acad. Sci. Imp. PetropoL 4 (1752-3).
109-140 = Opera Omnia (1). Vol. 26, 72-93.
EULER, L. Demonstratio nonnullarum insignium proprietatum quibus solida hedris planis
inclusa suns praedita. Novi Comm. Acad. Sci Imp. Petropol. 4 (1752-3). 140-160 = Opera
Omnia (1), Vol. 26. 94-108.
1759
EULER. L. Solution d'une question curie use qui ne paroit soumise a aucune analyse. Mim.
Acad. Sci. Berlin 15 (1759). 310-337 = Opera Omnia (1). Vol. 7. 26-56.
1771
VANDERMONDF. A.-T. Remarques sur les probltmes de situation. Mini. Acad. Sri. (Paris)
11771), 566-574. [2A]
1810
POINSOT, L. Sur les polygons et les polytdres. J. Ecole Polytech. 4 (Cah. 10) (1810). 16-48.
1811
L'HUILIER, S. Demonstration immediate d'un thEoreme fondamental d'Eulcr sur les
polyhtdres, et exceptions dont cc theorime est susceptible. Mim. Acad.
Imp. Sci. St.
Pitersb. 4 (1811). 271-301.
1812
LHUILIER. S. (abridged by J. D. Gergonne). Memoirc sur la polyedrometrie; contenant une
demonstration directe du Theoreme d'Euler sur Ies polyedres, et un examen des diverse-.,
exceptions auxquelles ce theortme est assujetti. Ann. de Math. 3 (1812-3). 169-189. [5C]
1813
CAUCHY. A.-L. Recherches sur les polytdres-premier memoire. J. Ecole Polytech. 9 (Cah.
16) (1813). 68-86 = Oeuvres (2). Vol. 1. 7-25. [5B]
1827
GRUNFRT. J. A. Einfacher Beweis der von Cauchy and Euler gefundenen Siitze von
Figurennetzen and Polyedern. J. Reine Angew. Math. 2 (1827), 367.
1844
CLAUSt:N. T. [Second postscript to:] De linearum tertii ordinis proprietatibus. Asrron. Nachr.
21 (18441, col. 209-216.
1847
KIRCHHOFF. G. R. Ober die Auflosung der Gleichungen, auf welche man bci der Unter-
suchung der linearen Vertheilung galvanischer Strome gefiihrt wird. Ann. Phys. Chem. 72
118471. 497-508 = Ges. Abh.. 22-33. [8A]
LISTING, J. B. Vorstudien zur Topologic. Goninger Studien (Abu 1) Math. Naturwiss. Abh. 1
11847). 811-875 = Separately as book. G6ttingen. 1848. [1C]
1849
TFROUTAI. O. Sur Ies polygones et les polyedres etoilcs. polygones funiculaires. `ouv.
Ann. Math. 8 (18491. 68-74.
TFROUFM. O.
Polyedres
reguliers
ordinaires
et
polytdres
reguliers
etoilcs.
Nouv.
Ann. Math. 8 1 1 8391. 132-1 39

APPENDIX 3 BIBLIOGRAPHY: 1736-1936
225
1851
Cot-PY. E. Solution dun prohleme appartenant a la geometric de situation, par Euler. Nouc.
Ann. Math. 10 t 18511. 106-111),
1855
KIRKSIA\. T. P. On the representation and enumeration of polyedra. Mem. Liz. Phil. Soc.
Manchester (2) 12 (1855). 47-70.
1856
HAMILTON. W. R. Memorandum respecting a new system of roots of unity. Phil. Mag. (4) 12
((8561. 446 =Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 610.
KIRKMAN, T. P. On the enumeration of x-edra having triedral summits. and an Ix - I)-gonal
base. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London 146 (1856). 399-411.
KIRKMAN. T. P. On the representation of polycdra. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London 146
(1856). 413-418. [2B]
1857
CAYLEY, A. On the theory of the analytical forms called trees. Phil. Mag. (4) 13 (1857).
172-176= Marh. Papers, Vol. 3. 242-246. [3A]
KIRKMAN, T. P. On autopolar polyedra.
Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London 147 (1857),
183-215.
1858
HAMILTON. W. R. [Account of the icosian calculus]. Proc. Roy. Irish. Acad. 6 11858).
415-416 = Math. Papers. Vol. 3. 609.
Poi-.so-i. L. Note sur la theorie des polycdres. Comp:. Rend. Acad. Sci. Paris 46 (1858).
65-79.
1859
CASI.r_Y. A. On the theory of the analytical forms called trees-pan 11. Phil. Mag.
(4) 18 (18591. 374-378 =Math. Papers. Vol. 4. 112-115.
1860
DE MORGAN, A. Review of The philosophy of discovery. chapters historical and critical, by
W. Whewell, D.D. Athenaeum No. 1694 (1860). 501-5)13.
1861
CAYLEY. A. On the partitions of a close. Phil. :Nfag. (4) 21 (1861). 424-428 = Math. Papers,
Vol. 5. 62-65.
LISITNG. J. B. Der Census raumlicher Complexe. Abh. K. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen Math. 0. 10
(1861-2). 97-182 = Separately as book, Dieterich'sche Verlagshandlung. Gottingen.
1862.
LISrING, J. B. [Der Census raumlicher Complexe]. Nacho K. Ges. Wiss. Gottingen (1861).
352-358.
1862
CAYLEY. A. On the D faced polyacrons. in reference to the problem of the enumeration of
polyhedra. Merit. Lit. Phil. Soc. ,Manchester 1 (1862), 248-256 = Math. Papers. Vol. 5.
38-43.
HERSCtHEL.. A. S. Sir Wm. Hamilton's icosian game. Quart. J. Pure Appl. Math. 5 11862),
305
1864
MAXWELL. J. C. On reciprocal figures and diagrams of forces. Phil. Mug. (4) 27 (18641,
250-261 = Sei. Papers. Vol. 1. 514-525.

226
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
1867
Byrawu, If. B. Teopesta Sit:repa o stuororpaattu iaxb. Csoflcrsa It.iocKoft reoMer-
ceru. Mat. Sb. 2 (1867). 87-92.
LISTING, J. B. Uber einige Anwendungen des Census-Theorems. Nachr. K. Ges. Wiss.
Giittingen (1867). 430-447 = Arch. Math. Phys. 48 (1868). 186-198.
1869
JORDAN, C. Sur Ies assemblages de lignes. J. Reine Angew. Math. 70 (1869). 185-190 =
Oeuvres. Vol. 4. 303-308. [3B]
1870
MAZWFti. J. C. On reciprocal figures, frames, and diagrams of forces. Trans. Roy. Soc.
Edinb. 26 (1869-72). 1-40 = Sc.. Papers, Vol. 2, 161-207.
1873
CAYLEY, A. On Listing's theorem. Mess. Math. (New Ser.) 2 (1873), 81-89= Math.
Papers, Vol. 8, 540-547.
HIERHOIZER, C. Uber die M6glichkeit, einen Linienzug ohne Wiederholung and ohne
Unterbrechnung zu umfahren. Math. Ann. 6 (1873). 30-32. [1B]
WIENER, C. Uber cine Aufgabe aus der Geometria situs. Math. Ann. 6 (1873), 29-30.
1874
CAYLEY. A. On the mathematical theory of isomers. Phil. Mag. (4) 47 (1874), 444-446=
Math. Papers, Vol. 9. 202-204. [4B]
S. VFSTER, J. J. On recent discoveries in mechanical conversion of motion. Proc. Roy. Inst.
Gt. Brit. 7 (1873-5). 179-198 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3. 7-25.
1875
CAYLEY, A. Clber die analytischen Figuren. welche in der Mathematik Biiume genannt
werden and ihre Anwendung auf die Theorie chemischer Verbindungen. Ber. Deut.
Chem. Ges. 8 (1875), 1056-1059.
CAYLEY. A. On the analytical forms called trees, with application to the theory of chemical
combinations. Rep. Brit Assoc. Advance. Sci. 45 (1875), 257-305 = Math. Papers, Vol. 9.
427-460.
ScHWF. H. Zur Statistik chemischer Verbindungen. Ber. Deut. Chem. Ges. 8 (1875),
1542-1547.
1876
SAALSCHUT7_. L. [Untitled]. Schr. Phys.-Okon. Ges. Kdnigsberg Pnassia 16 (1876), 23-
24.
1877
CAYLEY, A. [Solution to question 5208]. Math. Quest. Solut. Educ. Times 27 (1877).
81-83 = Mash. Papers, Vol. 10. 598-600.
CAYLEY. A. On the number of the univalent radicals C.H2,,.1. PhiL Mag. (5) 3 (1877).
34-35 = Mask Papers. Vol. 9, 544-545.
SYLVE.STER. J. J. Question 5208. ,llath. Quest. Solut. Educ. Times 27 (1877), 81.
1878
CAYLEY. A. The theory of groups: graphical representation. Amer. J. Math. 1 (1878),
174-176 = Mark Papers. Vol. 10, 403-405.

APPENDIX 3 BIBLIOGRAPHY: 1736-1936
227
CAYLEY, A. On the theory of groups. Proc. London Math. Soc. 9 (1877-8), 126-133 =
Math. Papers, Vol. 10, 324-330.
CLIFFORD, W. K. Extract of a letter to Mr. Sylvester.... Amer. J. Math. 1 (1878),
126-128 = Math. Papers, 255-257.
LISTING, J. B. [Der sogenannte Census-Satz]. Amtl. Ber. Versamm. Deut. Natur. Arzte
(1878), 224-227.
SYLVESTER, J. J. On an application of the new atomic theory to the graphical representation
of the invariants and covariants of binary quantics,-with three appendices. Amer. J.
Math. 1 (1878), 64-125 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 148-206.
SYLVESTER, J. J. Chemistry and algebra. Nature 17 (1877-8), 284 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3,
103-104. [4C]
1879
CAYLEY, A. On the colouring of maps. Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. (New Set.) 1 (1879), 259-
261 = Math. Papers, Vol. 11, 7-8. [6A]
CLIFFORD, W. K. Binary forms of alternate variables. Proc. London Math. Soc. 10 (1878-9),
214-221 = Math. Papers, 277-286.
KEMPE, A. B. On the geographical problem of the four colours. Amer. J. Math. 2 (1879),
193-200. [6B]
KEMPE, A. B. [Untitled abstract]. Proc. London Math. Soc. 10 (1878-9), 229-23 1.
SPOTTISWOODE, W. On Clifford's graphs. Proc. London Math. Soc. 10 (1878-9), 204-214.
STORY, W. E. Note on the preceding paper [by Kempe]. Amer. J. Math. 2 (1879), 201-204.
SYLVESTER, J. J. On the mathematical question, what is a tree? Math. Quest. Solut. Educ.
Times 30 (1879), 52.
SYLVESTER, J. J. Question 573[8]. Math. Quest. Solut. Educ. Times 30 (1879), 81. [Incor-
rectly numbered 573; 5738 in Educ. Times itself].
TEBAY, S. [Solution to question 5738]. Math. Quest. Solut. Educ. Times 30 (1879), 81-85.
1880
DE POLIGNAC, C. Formules et considerations diverses se rapportant a la theorie des
ramifications. Bull. Soc. Math. France 8 (1879-80), 120-124.
DE POLIGNAC, C. Formules et considerations diverses se rapportant a la theorie des
ramifications. Bull. Soc. Math. France 9 (1880-81), 30-42.
GUTHRIE, F. Note on the colouring of maps. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 10 (1880), 727-
728.
KEMPE, A. B. How to colour a map with four colours. Nature 21 (1879-80), 399-400.
TAIT, P. G. On the colouring of maps. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 10 (1878-80), 501-503.
TAIT, P. G. Remarks on the previous communication [by Guthrie]. Proc. Roy. Soc. Edinb.
10 (1878-80), 729. [6C]
TAIT, P. G. Note on a theorem in the geometry of position. Trans. Roy. Soc. Edinb. 29
(1880), 657-660 = Sci. Papers, Vol. 1, 408-411.
1881
CAYLEY, A. On the analytical forms called trees. Amer. J. Math. 4 (1881), 266-268 = Math.
Papers, Vol. 11, 365-367. [3C]
CLIFFORD, W. K. Mathematical fragments being facsimiles of his unfinished papers relating to
the theory of graphs. Macmillan, London, 1881.
KIRKMAN, T. P. Question 6610, solution by the proposer. Math. Quest. Solut. Educ. Times
35 (1881), 112-116.
LEMOINE, E. Quelques questions de geometrie de position sur les figures qui peuvent se
tracer d'un seul trait. Compt. Rend. Ass. Franc. Avance. Sci. 10 (1881), 175-180.
1882
CAYLEY, A. On the geometrical forms called trees. Johns Hopkins Univ. Circ. 1 (1879-82),
202.
LUCAS, E. Recreations mathematiques, 4 vols. Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1882-94.

228
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Svt.s ESTER. J. J. [On the geometrical forms called trees]. Johns Hopkins Univ. Circ. I (1879-82).
202-203 = Math. Paper. Vol. 3. 640-64 1.
1883
KIRKMAN. T. P. On the enumeration and construction of polyedra whose summits are all
triedral. and which have neither triangle not quadrilateral. Proc. Lit. Phil. Soc. Liverpool
37 11882-3). 49-66.
LUCAS. E. Le probleme giographique des quatre eoukurs. Rev. Sci. (3) 6 (1883). 12-17.
1884
TAIT. P.G. Listing's Topolog.e. Phil. Mag. 15) 17 (1884). 30-46 = Sci. Papers. Vol. 2.
85-98.
1885
BAtTZER, R. Eine Erinnerung an Mi bius and semen Freund Weiske. Ber. K. Sdchs. Ges.
Wiss. Leipag .Math.-Phvs. Cl. 37 (1885). 1-6.
1886
KEStee, A. B. A memoir on the theory of mathematical form. Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London
177 118961. 1-70.
TARR1. G. Nombrc de manicres distinctes de parcourir en une scule course toutes les allies
d'un labyrinthe rentrant, cn nc passant qu'une seule foil par chacunc des allies. Comps.
Rend. Ass. Franc. Avance. Sci. 15 Pt. 2 (1886). 49-53.
1889
CAYLEY. A. On the theory of groups. Amer. J. Math. 11 (1889). 139-157 = Math. Papers.
Vol. 12. 639-656.
CAYLE'. A. A theorem on trees. Quart. J. Pure Appl. Math. 23 11889). 376-378 = Math.
Papers, Vol. 13, 26-28.
1890
BRCNE1, G. [Coloration dune carte giographique]. Mint Soc. Sc:. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (3)
5 (1890), Extr. Proc.-Verb. lxxxix.
HEAWOOU, P. J. Map-colour theorem. Quart. J. Pure. Appl. Math. 24 (1890), 332-338.
[6D/7A]
1891
BRUNEL, G. Sur les configurations riguheres trades cur une surface quelconque. Mint Soc.
Sci. Phys Nat. Bordeaux (4) 2 (1891). Exrr. Proc.-Verb. xxii-xxiv.
BRUNEI. G. Sur Is relation qui existe entre le probleme de la determination de la distribution
electrique dans un systeme de conducteurs liniaires cc la question du saut du cavalier cur
I'ichiquier. Mint Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (4) 2 (1891). Extr. Proc.-Verb. xxxiv-
xxxvi.
HeaTr R, L. Uber das Problem der Nachbargebietc. Math. Ann. 38 (1891). 477-508. [7B]
MACMAHON, P. A. Yoke-chains and multipartite compositions in connexion with the
analytical forms called 'trees'. Prnc. London Math. Soc. 22 11890-11. 330-346 = Collected
papers. Vol. 1.600-6 16.
PETERSEN. J. Die Theorie der regularen Graphs. Acia Math. 15 (1891). 193-220. [10A]
1892
MAcMAtioN. P. A. The combinations of resistances. Electrician 28 (1892). 601-602 =
Collected papers. Vol. 1. 617-619.
ROUSE BALL, W. W. Mathematical recreations and problems of past and present times. (Later
entitled Mathematical recreations and essays.) Macmillan, London, 1892.

APPENDIX 3 BIBLIOGRAPHY: 1736-1936
229
1894
BRUNEL, G. Reseaux reguliers. Proc.-Verb. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (1894-5), 3-7.
BRUNEL. G. Polymerisation du carbone. Pr".- Verb. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (1894-51,
8-10.
DELANNOY, H. A. Sur les arbres geometriques et leur emploi dans la theorie des com-
binaisons chimiques. Comps. Rend. Ass. Franc. Acance. Sci. 23 Pt. 2 (1894). 102-116.
DELANNOY. H. A. [Reponse a question 20]. Intermed. Math. 1 (1894). 72-74.
FRIEDEL, C. Question 20. Intermed. Math. 1 (1894). 6.
MANSION. P. Question 51. Intemted. Math. 1 11894). 20.
1895
BROCARD, H. [Reponse a question 360]. buernu'd. Math. 2 11895), 232-235.
BRUNEL, G. Recherches sur les reseaux.:Hem. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (4) 5 (1895),
165-215.
BRUNEL, G. (Remarques sur un probleme de combinaisons). Mcm. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat.
Bordeaux (4) 5 (1895), Extr. Proc.-Verb. xiv-xv.
TARRY. G. Le probleme dcs labyrinthes..Nour. Ann. Math. (3) 14 (1895), 187-190. [ID]
1896
BRUNEL, G. Construction d'un reseau donne a I'aide d'un nombre determine de traits.
Proc.-Verb. Soc. Sci. Phys. Nat. Bordeaux (1895-6), 62-65.
DE LA VALLEE PoussIN, C. [Probli me des quatre couleurs-deuxie me reponse]. Intemted.
Math. 3 (1896). 179-180.
HEFFTER. L. Uber Nachbarconfigurationen, Tripelsysteme and metacyklische Gruppen.
Jahresber. Deut. Math.-Ver. 5 (1896), 67-68.
MASCHKE, H. The representation of finite groups, especially of the rotation groups of the
regular bodies of three- and four-dimensional space, by Cayley's color diagrams. Amer. J.
Math. 18 (1896), 156-194.
WHITE, H. S. Numerically regular reticulations upon surfaces of deficiency higher than 1.
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 3 (1896-7). 116-121.
1897
AHRENS, W. Uber das Gleichungssystem einer Kirchhoff'schcn galvanischen Stromver-
zweigung. Math. Ann. 49 (1897). 311-324.
HERRMANN. F. Uber das Problem, die Anzahl der isomeren Paraffine von der tot mel C H_,, ,:
zu bestimmen. 8er. Deist. Chem. Ges. 3011897). 2423-2426.
LOSANITSCH. S. M. Die Isomeric-Arten be) den Homologen der Paraffin-Reihe. Ber. Deist.
Chem. Ges. 30 (1897). 1917-1926.
LoSANITSCH. S. M. Bemerkungen zu der Hermannschen Mittheilung: Die Anzahl der
isomeren Paraffine. 8er. Deut. Chem. Ges. 30 (1897). 3059-3060.
WERNICKF. P. [On the solution of the map-color problem].
Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 4
(1897-8), 5.
1898
DAVIS. E. W. Note on special regular reticulations. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 4 (1897-8).
529-530.
FITTING, F. Question 1228. Intermed. Math. 5 (1898). 29-30.
GouRSAT. E. [Sur le theoreme do Tait]. Intermid. Math- 5 (1898). 251.
HEAw001), P. J. On the four-colour map theorem. Quart. J. Pure Appl. Math. 29 11898).
270-285.
HEFFTER, L. Uber metacyklische Gruppen and Nachharconfigurationen. Math. Ann. 50
(1898), 261-268.
LEMOINE. E [Sur Ic theoreme do Tait]. Intermed. Math. 5 (18981, 251.
PETERSEN. J. [Sur le theoreme de Tait]. Intermed..Math. 5 (1898). 225-227. [10B)
WHITE. H. S. The construction of special regular reticulations on a closed surface. Bull.
Amer. Math. Soc. 4 (1897-8). 376-382.

230
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
1899
BRt".LL, G. Sur la representation graphiquc des isomcres.
&x. Sci. Phys. Nat.
Bordeaux 0998-9). 108-110.
i. G. [Reponsc a question 1467. lntermid. Math. 6 )18991, 209-210.
DE Pot IGNA(. . C. Sur Ie theoremc dc Tait. BuIL Soc. Math. France 21 0899). 142-145.
LEMOINE. E. Question 1467 [Prohlemc des communication,]. Interned. .%lath. 6 (1899).
51-52.
PETERSEN. J. [Reponse a question 360]. lntermid. Math. 6 (1899). 36-38.
1900
POINCARE. H. Second complement a ('Analysis Situs. Proc. London Math. Soc. 32 (1900).
277-308 = Oeurres, Vol. 6, 338-372.
1901
AHRENS, W. Ma:nematische Unterhaltungen and Spie.e. Tcubncr. Leipzig. 1901.
1902
DIxos. A. C. On map colouring. Mess. Math. (New Scr.1 32 (1902-3), 81-83.
FEUSSNER, W. Uber Stromverzweigung in netzformigen Leitern. An,. Phys. 9 (1902). 1304-
1329.
ROBERTS. S. Networks. Proc. London Math. Soc. 34 (1901-2). 259-274.
1904
FEUSSNER. W. Zur Berechnung der Stromstirke in netzformigen Leitern. Ann. Phys.
15 (1904). 385-394.
KONIG. D. Matematikai mulats4gok, Vol. 2. Magyar Konvvtir No. 418. Budapest, 1904.
WERNICKE. P. Uber den kartographischen Vierfarbensatz. Math. Ann. 58 (1904). 413-426.
1905
Kostc,. D. A terkeps. zinezesrol. Mat. Fiz. Lapok 14 (1905). 193-200.
WILSON. J. C. On the traversing of geometrical figures. Clarendon Press, Oxford. 1905.
1906
Wnso%. J. C. On a supposed solution of the 'four-colour problem'. Math. Gaz. 3 (1904-6).
338-340.
1907
DEHN. M. and HEEGAARD, P. Anaiysis situs. Encvklopodie der marhemattschen Wis-
senschaften IIIAB3 (1907), 153-220.
HILTON. H. An application of Cayley's colour-groups. Quart J. Pure Appl. Math. 38 (1907),
382-384.
MANTEL, W. [Problem 281. Wisk. Opg. Wisk. Genoot. (New Ser.l 10 11906-10). 60.
WYTHOFF. W. A. [Solution to problem 28]. Wisk. Opg. Wisk. Genoot. (New Ser.) 10
(1906-10). 60-61.
1910
TiErzt. H. Einige Bemerkungcn ubcr das Problem des Kartenfiirbens auf einseitigta
Flachen. Jahresber. Deut. Math.- Ver. 19 (1910). 155-159. [7C]
1911
Ktsio. D. Vonalrendszerek ketoldalu felideteken. Mat. Termeszettud. Eriesuo 29 (1911),
112-117.

APPENDIX 3 BIBLIOGRAPHY: 1736-1936
231
1912
BIRKHOFF. G. D. A determinant formula for the number of ways of coloring a map. Ann. of
Math. (2) 14 (1912-3). 42-46 - Math. Papers. Vol. 3. 1-5. [9B]
VEBLEN, O. An application of modular equations in analysis situs. Ann. of Math. 12) 14
(1912-3). 86-94. [9A]
1913
BIRKHOFF, G. D. The reducibility of maps. Amer. J. Math. 35 119131. 115-128 = Math.
Papers. Vol. 3. 6-19.
1916
KosiG, D. Grifok es alkalmazasuk a determmansok es halmazok elmelcteben. Mat.
Termiszertud. Ertesito 34 (1916), 104-119 = Uber Graphen and ihre Anwendung auf
Determinantentheorie and Mengenlehre. Math. Ann. 77 (1916). 453-465. [IOD]
1917
BRAHANA. H. R. A proof of Petersen's theorem. Ann. of Math. 12) 19 (1917-8). 59-63.
KowAt.F.wsKI, A. W.R.Hamilton's Dodckaederaufgabc als Buntordnungsproblem. Sit-
zungsber. Akad. Wiss. Wien (Aht.Ila) 126 (1917). 67-90.
KOWALEWSKI, A. Topologische Deutung son Buntordnungsproblemcn. Suzungsber. Akad.
Wiss. Wien (Abt.lla) 126 (1917), 963-1007.
SKOLEM, T. Untersuchungen uber einige Klassen kombinatorischer Prohleme. Videns-
kapsselskapets Skrifter (1. Mat.-Natur. KI.) No. 6 (1917). 1-99.
1918
PR(FER, H. Neuer Beweis eines Satzcs fiber Permutationen. Arch. Math. Phys. (3) 27 (1918).
142-144. [3D]
1921
ERRERA. A. Du colonage des canes et de quelques questions d'analysis sites. Falk fils.
Brussels, and Gauthier-ViIlars, Paris. 1921.
1922
CHUARD. J. Questions d'analysis situs. Rendic. Circ. Mat. Palermo 46 (1922). 185-224.
ERRERA. A. Une demonstration du theoreme de Petersen. Mathesis 36 (1922). 56-61.
FRANKLIN. P. The four color problem. Amer. J. Math. 44 11922). 225-236. [9C]
STEiNrtz, E. Polyeder and Raumenteilungen. Encyklopddie der Mathematischen Wis-
senschaften IIIABI2 (1922), 1-139.
VEBLEN. O. Analysis situs. (Amer. Math. Soc. Colloq. Lect. 1916), New York, 1922. [8B]
1923
BRAHANA. H. R. The four-color problem. Amer. Math. Monthly 30 (1923). 234-243.
CHUARD. J. Quelques proprietes des reseaux cubiques traces sur une sphere. Comps. Rend.
Acad. Sci. (Paris) 176 (1923), 73-75.
CHUARD. J. Sur un theoreme relatif a certains reseaux cubiques traces sur une sphere.
Enseign. Math. 23 (1923). 209.
CHUARD. J. Le probleme des quatre couleurs. Enseign. Math. 22 (1923). 373-374.
ERRERA. A. Un theoreme sur Ics liaisons. Comps. Rend. Acad. Sci. (Pans) 177 (1923).
489-491.
ERRERA. A. Le probleme des quatre coulcurs. Enseign. Math. 23 (19231. 95-96.
KONG, D. Sur un probkme de Ia theorie generale des ensembles et la theorie des graphes.
Rec. Mitaphys. Morale 30 (1923). 443-449.
LEvI, F. Streckenkomplexe auf Flachen. Math. Z 16 (1923). 148-158.
SAMNTE-LAGUE. A. Les reseaux. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sci. (Pans) 176 (1923). 1202-1205.
WEYL, H. Repartici6n de corriente en una red conductora (lntroduccibn al an3lisis com-
binatorio). Rev. Mat. Hispano-Amer. 5 (1923), 153-164 = Ges. Abh., Vol. 2. 378-389.

232
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
1924
ERRERA. A. Sur le probltme des quatre couleurs. Comps Rend. Ass. Franc. Avance. Sci.
Liege (1924). 96-99.
ERRERA. A. Ouelques remarques sur Ie probltme des quatre eouleurs. Proc. Int. Congr.
Math. Toronto. Vol. 1. 1924, 693-694.
REYNOLDS. C. N. Note on the map coloring problem. Bu1L Amer. Math. Soc. 30 (1924). 220.
1925
ERRERA. A. Une contribution au probltme des quatre couleurs. Bult. Soc. Math. France 53
(1925). 42-55.
FRANKLIN. P. The electric currents in a network. J. Math. Phys. 4 (1925). 97-102.
LEVI, F. Streckenkomplexe auf Flachen (Zweite Mitteilung). Math. Z 22 (1925), 45-61.
REYNOLDS. C. On the map-coloring problem. with particular reference to connected sets of
pentagons. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 31 (1925). 297-298.
SPEISER. A. [Translation of Euler's 1736 paper). Klassische Stucke der Mathematik. Orell
Fiissli. Zurich and Leipzig. 1925. 127-138.
1926
BORUVKA. O. 0 jistem problEmu minirrullnim. Prdce Mor. Pfirodovid. SpoL v Brni (Acta
Societ. Scient. Natur. Moravicae) 3 (1926). 37-58.
FRtsK. O. A proof of Petersen's theorem. Ana of Math. (2) 27 (1925-6). 491-493. [10C)
KoNIG. D. and VAI.K6, S. Halmazok tobbertelmil lekepzeserol. Mat. Termeszetrud_ Ertesi'tti
42 (1926). 173-176 = Uber mehrdeutige Abbildungen von Mengen. Math. Ann. 9S
(1926), 135-138.
RE', sot i c. C. N. On the problem of coloring maps in four colors. 1. Ann. of Math. (2) 28
(1926-7).1-15.
REYNOLDS. C. N On the problem of coloring maps in four colors. Compt_ Rend. Ass. Franc.
Atwnce. Sct. Lyon (1926). 814-91.
S a..1F-LA(,t E. A. Les rrxaua unicursaux et bicursaux. Compt. Rend. Acad. Sri. IPans) 182
119261. 747-700.
SAtv~rt -LAGUE, A. Les riseaux (ou graphes). Memorial des Sciences Math., fast.
18.
Gauthier-Villars. Paris. 1926.
1927
ERRERA. A. Expose historique du probltme des quatre couleurs. Period. Mat. (4) 7 (1927),
2(x-41
Komu. D. Uber cine Schlussweise aus dem Endlichen ins Unendliche. Acta. Litn. Sci.
Szeged 311927). 121-130.
MENGER. K. Zur allgemeinen Kurventheorie. Fund. Math. 10 11927). 96-115.
REDFIEI.D. J. H. The theory of group-reduced distributions. Amer. J. Math. 49 (1927).
433-455.
REYUot is. C. N. On the problem of coloring maps in four colors. 11. Ann. of Math. (2) 28
(1926-7).477-492.
SKOI EM. T. Chap. 15. 292-308 of: Netto. E. Lehrbuch der Combinatorik 2nd ed., Teubner.
Stuttgart. 1927. Reprinted: Chelsea, New York. 1958.
1928
GoNSEnt. F. and JUVET. G. Sur Ie probleme des quatre couleurs. Ath. Congr. Du. Math.
Bologna, Vol. 4. 1928. 363-365.
1929
LUNN, A. C. and SENIOR, J. K. Isomerism and configuration. J. Phys. Chem. 33 (1929).
1027-1079.
A. Gcomitrte de situation et jeux. Memorial des Sciences Math.. fasc. 41.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1929.

APPENDIX 3 BIBLIOGRAPHY: 1736-1936
233
1930
BIRKHOFF. G. D. On the number of ways of colouring a map. Proc. Edmb. Math. Soc. (2) 2
(1930), 83-91 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 20-28.
JARrIIK. V. 0 jistErn problkmu minimglnfm. Prdce Mor. PHrodovid. Spot v Brni (Acta Societ.
Scient Natur. Moravicae) 6 (1930). 57-63.
KCRAroWSKI. K. Sur Ie prohli me des courbcs gauches en topologic. Fund. Math_ 15 (19301,
271-283.[8C]
MENGER, K. Uber platthare Dreiergraphen and Potenzen nichtplattharer Graphen. An:.
Akad. Wiss. Wien 67 (1930), 85-86 = Ergebnuse ernes .)lath. kolloqutams, Vol. 2. 1930.
30-31.
RASUFY. F. P. On a problem of formal logic. Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 30 119301,
264-286.
1931
RaKI R. R. P CayIc% diagrams on the anchor ring. Amer. J. Math. 53 (1931). 645-669.
KosuG. D. Graphok es matrixok. Mat. Fc. Lapok 38 (1931), 11t,-119.
WHtrsrY. H. A theorem on graphs. Ann. of Math. (2) 32 (1931), 378-390.
WHIrNEY. H. The coloring of graphs. Proc.
'at. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 17 (19311. 122-125.
WHITNEY. H. Non-separable and planar graphs. Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 17 1193 1),
125-127.
1932
CHUARD. J. Les reseaux cubiques et le prohkme des quatre couleurs. Mint. Soc. Vaudoise
Sci. Nat. 4 (19321. 41-101.
CHUARD. J. Une solution du probleme des quatre couleurs. Verhandl. Int. Math. Kongr.
Zurich. Vol. 2. 1932. 199-200.
FOSTER. R. M. Geometrical circuits of electrical networks. Trans. Amer. Inst. Elec. Eng. 51
(1932). 309-317.
HEAWOOD. P. J. On extended congruences connected with the four-colour map theorem.
Proc. London Math. Soc. (2) 33 (1932). 253-286.
KRAHN. E. Die Wahrschcinlichkeit der Richtigkeit des Vierfarbcnsatzes. Acta Comment.
Unir. Tanu (A) 22, No. 2 (1932). 1-7.
PANNwrrz. E. [Review of Chuard's paper]. Jahrb. Fonschr. Math. 58 (1932). 1204.
REYNOLDS, C. N. Circuits upon polyhedra. Anti of Math_ 12) 33 11932 ), 367-372.
STUCKE, E. Ein mathematisch-asthetisches Problem. Z. fiir Math.
bliss. Unterrich 63
(19321. 110-112.
WHITNEY. H. Congruent graphs and the connectivity of graphs. Amer. J. Math. 54 (1932),
150-168.
WHITNEY. H. The coloring of graphs. Ann. of Math. (2) 33 (1932). 688-718.
WHITVFY, H. [Conditions that a graph base a dual]. Bull. Amer..Math. Soc. 3811932). 37.
WHITNEY, H. A logical expansion in mathematics. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 38 (1932).
572-579. [9D]
WHITNEY, H. Non-separable and planar graphs. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 34 (1932).
339-362. [8D]
1933
DIXON. A. C. The specification of a map. J. London Math. Soc. 8 (1933). 133-136.
Kosu,. D. later trenncnde Knotenpunktc in Graphen )nebst Anwcndungen aul Deter-
minantcn and Matrizen). Acta Litt. Sci. Szeged 6 11933). 155-179.
WHITNEY. H. A set of topological invariants for graphs. Amer. J. Math. 55 (19331. 231-235.
WHITNEY. H. On the classification of graphs. Amer. J. Math. 55 (19331. 236-244.
WHITNEY, H. 2-isomorphic graphs. Amer. J. Math. 55 (1933). 245-254.
WHITNEY. H. Planar graphs. Fund. %lath. 21 (1933). 73-84.
WHITNEY. H. A characterization of the closed 2-cell. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 35 (1933).
261-273.
ZYLINSKI, E. Dcux remarques Sur les reseaux. Bull. Int. Acad. Pol. Sc,. (A) No. 9 (1933),
295-297.

234
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
1934
BIRKHOEF, G. D. On the polynomial expressions for the number of ways of coloring a map.
Ann. Scuola Norm. Sup. Pisa (21 3 (1934). 85-104 = Math. Papers, Vol. 3, 29-47.
FRANKLIN, P. A six color problem. J. Math. Phys. 13 (1934), 363-369.
HMOs. G Zum Mengerschen Graphcnsatz. Acta Litt. Sci. Szeged 7 (1934). 44-47.
REDEI. L. Ein kombinatorischer Satz.. Acta Lin. Sci. Szeged 7 (1934), 39-13.
SCHONBERGER. T. Ein Beweis des Pctcrsenschen Graphensatzes. Acta L.itt. Sci. Szeged 7
0934), 51-57.
1935
ERRERA. A. Un probleme de topologic. Comps. Rend. Prem. Congr. Int. Recreation
Mathintanque. I.ibrarie du "Sphinx". Bruxelles 119351. 69-70.
HALL, P. On representatives of subsets. J. London Mash. Soc. 10 (1935), 26-30.
K.AGNO, 1. N. A note on the Hcawood color formula. J. Math. Phys. 14 (1935). 228-231.
Kn rEL L. 1. A group of operations on a partially colored map. Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. 41
(1935). 407-413.
MACLANE. S. Some unique separation theorems for graphs. Amer. J. Math. 57 (1935).
805-820.
Pot YA. G. Un probleme combinatoire general sur les groupes de permutations et Ie calcul du
nombre des isomeres des composes organiques. Comps. Rend. Acad. Sct. (Pans) 201
(1935). 1167-1169 = Collected Papers. Vol. 4. 253-256.
WHITNEY, H. On the abstract properties of linear dependence. Amer. J. Math. 57 (1935),
509-533.
1936
ERDOs. P.. GRUNWALD, T.. and WEISZFELD, E. Vegielen grafok Euler-vonalair6l. Mat. Fez.
Lapok 43 (1936). 129-141.
HARMEGNIES, R. Sur quelqucs proprietes des reseaux. Comps. Rend. Acad. Sci. (Paris) 202
(1936).1142-1144.
HFAWOOD. P. J. Failures in congruences connected with the four-colour map theorem. Proc.
London Math. Soc. (2) 40 (1936), 189-202.
HEEGAARD, P. Bemcrkungen zum Vierfarbenproblem. Mat. Sb. (New Ser.) 1 (1936),
685-693.
KAGNO, 1. N. The triangulation of surfaces and the Heawood color formula. J. Math. Phys.
15 (1936). 179-186.
Korac. D.
Theone der endltchen and unendlichen Graphen. Akademische Verlags-
gesellschaft, Leipzig, 1936. Reprinted: Chelsea, New York. 1950.
MorzxlN. T. Contributions a la theorie des graphes. CompL Rend. Congr. Int. Math. Oslo,
Vol. 2. 1936. 133-134.
POL'A, G. Kombinatorischc Anzahlbestimmungen fiir Permutationsgruppen and chemische
Verhindungen. Comps. Rend. Congr. Int. Math. Oslo. Vol. 2. 1936. 19.
POLYA, G. Sur le nombre des isomtres de pertains composes chimiques. Comps. Rend
Acad. Sci. (Paris) 202 (1936), 1554-1556 = Collected papers, Vol. 4. 289-291.
POI.YA. G. Algebraischc Bcrechnung der Anzahl der Isomeren ciniger organischer Verbin-
dungen. Z. Kristal. (A) 93 (1936). 415-443 = Collected papers. Vol. 4. 260-288.
RArut, 1. and Wi'. C. E. Generalisation d'une reduction d'Errera daps le probkme des
quatre eouleurs. Comps. Rend. Congr. Int. Math. Oslo, Vol. 2, 1936, 131-133.
WANNER. K. Bemerkungcn zum Vierfarbenproblem. Jahresber. Dew. Math.- Verein. 46 Pt. 1
(1936). 26-32.
WAGNER, K. Ein Satz ober Komplexe. Jahresber. Deut. Math.- Verein. 46 Pt. 2 (1936),
21-22.
WAGNER, K. Zwei Bemerkungen fiber Komplexe. Math. Ann. 112 11936). 316-321.

Index of Names
Capital letters are used for those whose biographies are given in Appendix
a number with
an asterisk refers to a portrait of the person concerned.
Adam. C.
88
Ahrens. W.
L7,20.22,119-10
Appel.K.
180,210-11
Archibald, R. C.
722
Archimedes
75
Artin. E.
124 129
Baker. R. P.
' 133
Balaban, A.T.
211
Baltzer, R.
116 129 228
Beineke. L. W. 211-2
Bell. E. T.
116 129. 211
Berge, C.
211
Bernoulli. D.
215
Betti, E.
151
Biggs. N. L.
36, 118.. 212
Birkhofl, G.
169
BIRKHoJF, G. D.
135, 158'. 166-7. 169-
70 17.1.
L7_6
184. 181
81
210-1,
213-4. 223, 2.3]. 713-4 [9B]
Blair. C. M.
68. 73
Boase, F.
213
Borchardt, C. W.
51, 54
Bordvka, O.
232
Brahana, H. R.
199-200.
07 216, 23.1
Brocard. H.
229
Brooks. R. L.
210-1
Brunel, G.
228-10
Byraea, If. B. 2Z6
Bussey. W. H.
186
Butlerov. A. M.
56
Carroll. L.-see Dodgson, C. L.
CAUCHY. A.-L.
74'
79-81. 81 86-7.
213-4. 223-4 [5B]
CAYLEY, A.
37'-40. 44 48-9. 51-2. S4-
55.60.63-4.6_7 72 92-4.97 102-3-209.
213-4. 224. 223. 225-30 23.3 (3A, 3C.
4B. 6A]
Chartrand, G.
211_-2
Chuard, J.
23 , 233
Chvetal. V.
209 211
Clausen. T.
20. 224
CLIFFORD. W. K.
Pl. 2'. 64. 67 72-3. 11
213-4. 223. 227
Collingwood, S. D.
L08
Couper. A. S.
56-7 72
Coupy. E-
12. 20. 214-5
Coxeter, H. S. M.
LUL 12.9
Comm BRowN. A.
57-8. 660 22 213, 215
Davis. E. W. 229
de Bruijn, N. G.
2-09, 211
Dehn, M.
135, 137 230
Delannoy, H.
107-8.2-1-9
de Ia Vallee Poussin. C.
L(L& 2.29
de Moivre. A.
1.82
DE MoR<,.AN. A. 90-3. 96 108 210, 213
J
2255
de-Pohgnac, C.
199. 217. 227,
Descartes. R.
75-6. 7x 88
Dirac. G. A.
209 211
Dixon, A. C.
230 233
Dodgson, C. L. (L. Carroll).
105. 108
Dudeney, H. E.
142
15'7
Dyck. W.
123. 129
Dziobek. O.
52. 54
Eisele, C. 108
Eisenstein, F. G.
66
ErdSs. P.
234
Errera. A.
1811.. 186, 241). 207 231-2. 234
Euclid 75 I18 129
EuLER. L.
v'. 2.3 8-10 14.4
16. 20-2.
27 31, 3-6 L9 71 76-8.80-1.83-9 110.
116-7. 119 126-7. 130. 143 161, 163
172
205-6. 2129 21 L 213. 215, 217
221.. 223-6. 232. 234 [IA. 5A]
Fan, K.
124 130
Feussner. W.
2,I1
Fitting. F.
229
Fleddermann, G.
220
Fleischner. H.
212
Foster. R. M.
233
FRANKLAND, E.
56. 58, 65, 213. 215 [4A]
FRANKLIN, P.
129-30. 170-1. 180
210,
213 216. 231-2. 234 [9C]
Frechet. M.
124. 130
Friedel, C. 60 229
FRINK, 0.
148, 199, 213 216, 2-32 [1 OC]
Gauss, C. F.
21 36
Gergonne. J. D. 81 22A
Glover. H. H.
211
Goldbach, C.
76.88
Gonseth. F.
232
Gordan, P. A.
190
Goursat, E. J. B.
199 207
Grace. J. H.
73
Graham, R. L.
212
Grassman, H. G. 64
Graves, R. P.
36
Gross, J. L.
212
GrOtschel, M.
212
2.29

236
GRAPH THEORY 1736-1936
Grunert. J. A.
22_4
Grunwald, T.
234
GUTHRIE, Francis
PI. 2, 91-2 21:1 216
Guthrie, Frederick
91-2. 101 10& 227
Hadwiger. H.
210-I
Hajbs. G.
2 1t
Haken. W.
180,210-1 1
Hall. P.
206-7. 2 44
HAMUTON. W. R.
PI. 1', 31-2. 34-6, 74,
2
1114, 148, L
189. 199 209
9L, 9
211, 213.., 216-8. 223. 22_.5
1,11 [2C]
Harary, F.
212
Harmegnies. R.
234
Hawkins, T.
36
Headmaster. Clifton College
105. 1011
Heath. T. L.
129
HEAWOOD. P. J.
1215.,
1I1=R. 109'-I10,
LL_) 1!5=7. LL. 124- 126-L8W,
165
LS-S_ 209 211217, 22.8=9 233-4
[6D. 7A]
Heegaard. P.
135. 157 !
234
HEFT-ER. L. W. J.
115-8. 124
126-9-
21-1 211, 2211-9 [7B]
Henze. H. R.
68. 23
Herrmann. F.
22_9
Herschel. A. S.
22-5
HIERHOLZER. C. F. B.
111=:. I3.
2.129. 213. 217. 226 [IB]
Higgins, W. 56 L
Hilbert, D. 67 73 L$5,
819-90.
Hilton. H.
230
Hooky. C.
1=9
Huneke. J. P.
211
Huygens, C.
21
. 2 35
Jacques, J.
3.
Jarnik, V.
Z33
Jensen, T. R.
212
16.18
241
JORDAN. M.-E.-C.
PI. L' 44-5. 47-8. 50,
136 L4.L 155. 213. 217. 223. 226 [3B]
Juukevic, A. P. 8
Juvet. G.
2
Kagno. 1. N.
129-30 23_4
Kainen. P. C.
212
Kekuli. F. A.
55-7. 60 61 65_6" 22
KEMPE. A. B.
7190,92, Q4-6 102-110.
118.. 169-70. 123, 190 IRE 197 205
207.. 213 211 227-8 16B)
Kennedy. J. W.
132
Kepler, J.
78 114
KIRc lHOFF, G. R
3$., 55
131'-3. 135-6.
157, 213. 218, 223-4, 229 [8A]
KIRKMAN, T.
P.
211 28-31. 35-6. 74.
104 148. 189 207 213, 221,8 225 227-8
[2B]
Kittell, 1.
234
Klein, F.
88. 116, 126, 129-30. 202
KONIG, D. v, Al
20 148. 177, 181 199,
203, 206-7. 213, 21% 230-4 [10D]
Konig. J.
203. 207 214
Kopp, H. F. M. 36
Kothe. G.
220
Kowalewski, A.
231
Krahn. E.
213
KURATOWSKI, K.
Pl. 2', 143-8. 1.11 210,
213. 219. 233 [8C]
Laplace. P.-S.
216
Legendre, A.-M.
78. 81. 89
Lcihni,. G. W.
3. '-1. 36. 16
Lemoine, E.
227. 229-30
Levi, F.
231_-2
Lewis. D. C.
210-1
Lesniak. L.
211
LHUII.IE.R. S.-A.-J.
U. 20. 83-9. 116. LL8
2L. 214. 244 [SC]
LISTING, J. B.
1'. 12, La. 16. 21. 36, 88-9.
124, 130. 135-6. 157 2117. 21; 219
214-8 [IC]
Lloyd. E. K.
23
Losanitsch. S. M.
229
Loschmidt. J.
57. ?2
Lovisz, L.
212
Loyd. S.
L57
Loyd. S. Jnr.
L;=, L57
Lucas. E.
16. 1-8 211 22 108 227-8
Lunn. A. C. 68 2.3.
32
Luroth. J.
11. 217
Macfarlane, A. 2l
Macl ane. S.
210-1, 234
MacMahon, P. A.
22,8
Maddison, 1.
116.. 1.29
Mansion, P.
107-8. 229
Mantel. W.
'2331-
Maschke. H.
299
Maxwell. J. C.
LLx 129 223. 225-6
May. K. O. 21?
Mayer. J.
210
MenQer. K.
148. 137 206-7. 232-4
Meyer. J.
21 3
Minkowski. H.
16.4)
Mobius. A. F.
88. 92. 115-6. 124-30. 142
223, 22$
Motzkin. T.
234
Muller, H.
55
Netto. E.
232
Newcomb. S.
66.222
Oellermann, O.
212
Oxley, J. G.
212
Palmer. E. M. 212
Pannwitz. E.
233

INDEX OF NAMES
237
Partington. J. R.
71
Peaucellier, C.-N.
ft6
Peirce. C. S.
92 94 102 108 L64
PETERSEN, J. P. C.
67. 187. 189-90 L9-S-
197,199-201.204.207.213.')16.219-20,
228-32. 234 [10A. 10B]
Plummer. M. D.
212
Poggendorf. J. C.
213
Poincark, H. 88 135-6, LlL 157. 160
223, 2351
POINSOT. L.
1;.-4
16 20. 78 89. 213
220. 224-5
POLY A, G.
37, 67-73. 209. 211, 213. 22-0
223, 23'_4 (4D]
Pontryagin. L S.
148
P6sa, L.
209, 211
PRUFER, E. P. H.
52. 213. 220. 231
Quintas. L V.
152
Ramsey. A. S.
Ramsey. F. P.
Ratib. 1.
;14
107-
23-1
Read, R. C.
73, 212
Ridei, L.
234
Redfield. J. H. 67 72-3. 209 232
Reid. C.
1145
Reinhardt. C.
130
Reiss, M. 20
Reynolds, C. N.
180, 186. 210, 232-3
Ringel, G.
129-30 210. 212
Roberts, S.
2312
Robertson, N.
210
Robinson. R. W.
209. 211
Rouse Ball. W. W.
16. 20 22, 116. 1.29.
228
Rouvray, D. H.
211
Russell, C. A. 56 22
Saalschutz. L.
U. 20. 226.
Saaty, T. L.
212
Sabidussi, G.
201
Sachs, H.
251
Sainte-Lague. A.
2.3.1_-2
Schiff, H.
67. 73 226
Schonberger, T.
234
Schorlemmer. C.
22
Schur. L 52
Senior, J. K.
73 232
Seymour. P. D.
210
Skolem. T. A.
231_-2
Smith. P. A.
148
Speiser, A.
224. 232
Spottiswoode, W. 73 227
Stickel, P.
130
Steinitz, E.
189 200
231
Stemple, J.
210-1
Stiebitz, M. 20
Story, W. E.
94. 108 160, 227
Stucke, E.
233
SYLVESTER, J. J. 39 44 47-8.51 54--
55* 64-7, 72.9
160, 189-90, L 199
2 77 213-_ 221-3- 226.8 14C]
TAIT. P. G.
PI. 1L 36 102-4. 1 >07-8. L5&-
15_9
187-9.
196-9. 205-7. 213. 215,
221,223,227-3O[6C]
Tannery. P. hh
TARRY, G.
L. 18. 10 213 211. 229-9
[1D]
Tebay. S.
227
Temple, F.
195
Terquem, 0.
2(L 22_4
Theaetetus
25
TIETz1. H. F. F.
126-7. 129. 213, 221.
2311 [7C]
Toft. B.
212
Trdmaus
113.20
Tucker, T. W. 212
Tuttc. W. T.
189. 206-7 210-2
Valko. S.
206-7. 232
VANDERMONDE.
A.-T.
21-2.
35
21-1
2z 1-2. 224 [2A]
VEBI FN, 0.
PI. L 135-6, 14 1, 151. L.
161 166. 186. 213 216, 222. 231 [8B,
9A]
Vizing. V. G.
210-1
on Staudt. G. K. C.
36 5;
Wagner. K. Z4
Wang, C. S.
211
Wetske, B.
136. 12y. 228
Weiszfeld. E.
234
Wenninger, M. 78 89
Wernicke. P.
160 169. 12.
186. 229-30
Weyl, H.
231
Wheeler, T. S.
Z'
Whewell. W.
10$. 22S
White, A. T.
21.'
White, H. S.
224
Whitehead. J. H. C.
222
WHITNEY, H.
PI. 2'. 148-51, 157
167.
180-1. 184-6. 210, 213 222. 231-4 [813.
9D]
Wiener, C. 10 18 20, 226
Wilson. J.
LOS
Wilson. J.C.
16 20 10- 108 2351
Wilson, R. J.
20. 211-2
Winn, C. E.
210-1, 234
Winter. E. x8
Wythoff, W. A.
Young, A.
23
2.0
Young, J. W.
222
Youngs. J. W. T.
129. 210
Zeiller, M. 21
Zylinski. E.
21-1

General Index
This index gives the main reference for each of the terms included; when a given term
features in an important way in more than one section of the book, a reference is given for
each occurrence.
algebra of circuits
131
algorithm
18
alkanes
63
automorphism
45
bicentre 42
bicentroid
31
binary quantic
64
bipartite graph
311
block
149
branch of tree
carbon-tree
centre
42
3_R
64
centroid
47
chemico-algebraic theory
65
chemistry
55 209
chromatic number of map
L1.Q
chromatic number of surface
L12
chromatic polynomial
167 180 210
circuit
22
colouring of graph IN
complete bipartite graph
complete graph
1-1
component
10
conjugate vertices
L45
connected graph
10
convex body
78
correspondence
201
132
counting trees
39. 47. 62
cross-cap
125
cut-vertex
149
cycle index
69
degree
10.181
diagram-tracing puzzles
12
disconnected graph
112
domino problem
16
dual graph
148
dual map
L11
edge
9
edge-colouring
188, 210
electrical network
131
enumeration
39. 47. 67, 209
Euler characteristic
81
Eulerian path 9
Euler's polyhedral formula
24
factor
IA; 210
four-colour problem 90 158 210
fundamental set of circuits
L32
generating function
19
genus
88
geometric dual
148
graph
9
graphic formula
55
Hamiltonian circuit
35 209
Hamiltonian graph 35 2114
handle
82
Heawood congruences
159
Heawood number
112. 292
homeomorphic graphs 144
Icosian calculus
31
Icosian game
31
inclusion-exclusion principle
18i
independent set of circuits
132
irreducible map
169
isomer 60
isomerism
611
isomorphic graphs 44
isomorphism
45
join
9
Kempe-chain argument
95
(k. k )-correspondence
22112
Klein bottle
126
knight's tour problem
22
knot of tree
3$
Ki nigsberg bridges problem
1
labelled tree
51
labyrinth
16
leaf
126
loop
9
map 80
maps on surfaces WE 2119
marriage theorem
206
matroid
157. 210
maze
16
method of Kempe-chains 95
Mobius' problem
92, LL
Mobius strip
124
multiple edges
27
neighbouring points
118
neighbouring regions
115
non-separable graph
149
nullity
151

GENERAL INDEX
one-sided surfaces
124
order of symmetry 45
origin of term 'graph'
65
paraffin
61
path
9
Petersen graph
L22
planar graph
84. 141 210
Pblya's theorem
62. 242
polyhedral formula
24
polyhedron 28.24
principle of inclusion and exclusion
181
ramification
48
rank
151
reducibility
169
regular graph
182
r-factor
187. 210
root
38
rooted tree
38
separable graph
15Q
simple graph
21
simply-connected face
86
spanning tree
136
stella octangula
28
subdivision of graph
144
sum of circuits
L3_?.
3-connected
1X9
topology
21
traveller's dodecahedron
35
tree
32
trivalent graph
103
unrooted tree
IN
utilities problem
142
valency
10
vertex
9
voyage round the world
35
water, gas and electricity problem
Whitney dual
149
239
142

This book has been widely acclaimed both for its significant contribution to
the history of mathematics and for the dynamic and accessible way in which
the material is presented. Building on a set of original writings from some of
the founders of graph theory, the book traces the historical development of the
subject through a linking commentary. The relevant underlying mathematics
is also explained, providing an original introduction for students. Appendices
give a brief account of developments since 1936, biographical information, and
a comprehensive bibliography.
FROM REVIEWS
'be book ... serves as an excellent example-in fact, as a model-of a new
approach to one aspect of mathematics, when mathematics is considered as a
living, vital and developing tradition'.
Isis
`Biggs, Uoyd and Wilson's unusual and remarkable book traces the evolution
and development of graph theory... Conceived in a very original manner and
obviously written with devotion and a very great amount of painstaking his-
torical research. it contains an exceptionally fine collection of source material,
and to a graph theorist it is a treasure chest of fascinating historical informs-
non and curiosities with rich food for thought'.
Centaurus
`The lucidity, grace and wit of the writing makes this book a pleasure to read
and reread'.
Bu/erm of the Insunim of Mathemaucs and its Applicanons
The cover shows a seventeenth-century map of Konigsberg. Many people attempted to
devise a route round the cirv which would cross each of the seven bridges just once.
The proof that this is impossible was the bast result in graph theory.
ALSO PUBLISHED BY OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
Discrete mathematics Revised edition
N. L Biggs
Graph theory as I have known it
W. T. Tutte
Atlas of graphs
R. C. Read and R. J. Wilson
Graph connections
L W. Beineke and R. J. Wilson

