
Graphene Oxide

Graphene Oxide
Fundamentals and Applications
Edited by
Ayrat M. Dimiev
Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Nanostructures, Kazan Federal 
University, Kazan, Russian Federation
Siegfried Eigler
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 
Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden 

This edition first published 2017
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd
Registered Office
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse 
the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or 
by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs 
and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in 
electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand names and product 
names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The 
publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts in preparing this book, 
they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and 
specifically disclaim any implied warranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. It is sold on the understanding 
that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services and neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable for 
damages arising herefrom. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional 
should be sought.
The advice and strategies contained herein may not be suitable for every situation. In view of ongoing research, equipment 
modifications, changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of experimental 
reagents, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided in the package insert or 
instructions for each chemical, piece of equipment, reagent, or device for, among other things, any changes in the instructions or 
indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. The fact that an organization or Website is referred to in this work 
as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the 
information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that 
Internet Websites listed in this work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. 
No warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the publisher nor the author shall 
be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging‐in‐Publication Data
Names: Dimiev, Ayrat M., 1965– | Eigler, Siegfried, 1978–
Title: Graphene oxide : fundamentals and applications / Ayrat M. Dimiev, Siegfried Eigler.
Description: Chichester, West Sussex : John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2017. | 
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016018225| ISBN 9781119069409 (cloth) | ISBN 9781119069430 (epub)
Subjects: LCSH: Graphene. | Graphene–Oxidation. | Graphene–Industrial applications.
Classification: LCC TA455.G65 D56 2017 | DDC 662/.9–dc23 LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016018225
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12pt Times by SPi Global, Pondicherry, India
10  9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1

Contents
About the Editors	
xi
List of Contributors
xiii
Foreword
xv
Preface
xvi
Part I  Fundamentals
1
1	 Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
3
Anton Lerf
1.1	 Introduction
3
1.2	 Preparation of Graphite Oxide
5
1.2.1	 Trials for Improving and Simplifying GO Preparation
5
1.2.2	 Over‐Oxidation of Graphite
8
1.2.3	 Formation Mechanism – First Approximation
9
1.3	 Discovery of Essential Functional O‐Containing Groups and its Relation 
to the Development of Structural Models
10
1.3.1	 Analytical Composition of Graphite Oxide
10
1.3.2	 Creation of the Structural Model from 1930 till 2006
11
1.3.3	 Considerations for the Formation Mechanism – Second  
Approximation
16
1.4	 Properties of Graphite Oxide
18
1.4.1	 Thermal Degradation and its Products
18
1.4.2	 Chemical Reduction Reactions
19
1.4.3	 Reactions with Acids and Bases
21
1.4.4	 “Osmotic Swelling”: Hydration Behavior and Colloid Formation
22
1.4.5	 GO Acidity
23
1.4.6	 Intercalation and Functionalization Reactions
26
1.4.7	 Functional Groups, their Reactions and their Relation to GO  
Formation and Destruction
28
1.5	 Epilogue
29
References
30
2	 Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
36
Ayrat M. Dimiev
2.1	 Introduction
36
2.2	 Basic Concepts of Structure
37
2.3	 Preparation Methods
39

2.4	 Mechanism of Formation
41
2.4.1	 Theoretical Studies and System Complexity
41
2.4.2	 Step 1: Formation of Stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC Graphite  
Intercalation Compound
42
2.4.3	 Step 2: Transformation of Stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC  
to Pristine Graphite Oxide
43
2.4.4	 Pristine Graphite Oxide Structure
45
2.4.5	 Step 3: Delamination of Pristine Graphite Oxide
47
2.5	 Transformation of Pristine Graphite Oxide Chemical  
Structure Upon Exposure to Water
47
2.6	 Chemical Structure and Origin of Acidity
51
2.6.1	 Structural Models and the Actual Structure
51
2.6.2	 Origin of Acidity and the Dynamic Structural Model
57
2.7	 Density of Defects and Introduction of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
64
2.7.1	 Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene by Charpy–Hummers Approach
65
2.7.2	 Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene from Graphite Sulfate
69
2.8	 Addressing the Challenges of the Two‐Component  
Structural Model
72
2.9	 Structure of Bulk Graphite Oxide
76
2.10	 Concluding Remarks
80
References
81
3	 Characterization Techniques
85
Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat M. Dimiev
3.1	 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Graphene Oxide
85
3.1.1	 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in Solids
85
3.1.2	 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Graphene Oxide
87
3.1.3	 Discussion
92
3.2	 Infrared Spectroscopy
93
3.3	 X‐ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
97
3.4	 Raman Spectroscopy
100
3.4.1	 Introduction
101
3.4.2	 Raman Spectroscopy on Molecules
101
3.4.3	 Raman Spectroscopy on Graphene, GO and RGO
101
3.4.4	 Defects in Graphene
103
3.4.5	 Raman Spectra of GO and RGO
104
3.4.6	 Statistical Raman Microscopy (SRM)
109
3.4.7	 Outlook
110
3.5	 Microscopy Methods
111
3.5.1	 Scanning Electron Microscopy
113
3.5.2	 Atomic Force Microscopy
114
3.5.3	 Transmission Electron Microscopy
115
3.5.4	 High‐Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy
115
References
118
vi
Contents

Contents
vii
4	 Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
121
Cristina Vallés
4.1	 Liquid Crystalline Behaviour of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
121
4.1.1	 Liquid Crystals and Onsager’s Theory
121
4.1.2	 Nematic Phases in Carbon Nanomaterials
122
4.2	 Rheological behaviour of aqueous dispersions of LC‐GO
124
4.2.1	 Dynamic Shear Properties
125
4.2.2	 Steady Shear Properties
128
4.2.3	 Recovery of the Structure
133
4.2.4	 Tuning the Rheology of GO Dispersions to Enable  
Fabrication
133
4.2.5	 Electro‐Optical Switching of LC‐GO with an Extremely  
Large Kerr Coefficient
136
4.3	 Comparison with Other Systems
138
4.3.1	 Comparison of Aqueous and Polymer Matrix Systems
138
4.3.2	 Comparison Between Aqueous Dispersions of GO and Oxidized  
Carbon Nanotubes: Role of Dimensionality
141
4.4	 Summary and Perspectives
142
References
143
5	 Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
147
Anton V. Naumov
5.1	 Introduction
147
5.2	 Absorption
148
5.3	 Raman Scattering
153
5.4	 Photoluminescence
155
5.5	 Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots
168
5.6	 Applications
169
References
170
6	 Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
175
Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat M. Dimiev
6.1	 Introduction
175
6.2	 Diverse Structure of Graphene Oxide
176
6.3	 Stability of Graphene Oxide
178
6.3.1	 Thermal Stability of Graphene Oxide
178
6.3.2	 Stability and Chemistry of Graphene Oxide in Aqueous Solution
179
6.3.3	 Stability of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
182
6.4	 Non‐Covalent Chemistry
184
6.5	 Covalent Chemistry
186
6.5.1	 Reactions Mainly at the Basal Plane
187
6.5.2	 Consideration About C–C Bond Formation on the Basal Planes
192
6.5.3	 Reactions at edges
192

6.6	 Reduction and Disproportionation of Graphene Oxide
200
6.6.1	 Reduction
200
6.6.2	 Disproportionation
203
6.6.3	 Reduction Strategies
207
6.6.4	 Reduction of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
209
6.7	 Reactions with Reduced form of Graphene Oxide
212
6.8	 Controlled Chemistry with Graphene Oxide
215
6.8.1	 Nomenclature of Polydisperse and Functionalized Graphene
215
6.8.2	 Organosulfate in Graphene Oxide – Thermogravimetric  
Analysis
216
6.8.3	 Synthetic Modifications of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
218
6.9	 Discussion
223
References
224
Part II  Applications
231
7	 Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
233
Samuele Porro and Ignazio Roppolo
7.1	 Field‐Effect Transistors
233
7.2	 Sensors
237
7.2.1	 Gas Sensors
238
7.2.2	 Humidity Sensors
240
7.2.3	 Biological Sensors
240
7.3	 RGO Transparent Conductive Films
243
7.4	 Memristors Based on Graphene Oxide
245
7.4.1	 Fabrication of Devices
246
7.4.2	 Switching Mechanisms
248
References
250
8	 Energy Harvesting and Storage
257
Cary Michael Hayner
8.1	 Solar Cells
257
8.2	 Lithium‐Ion Batteries
258
8.2.1	 Introduction
258
8.2.2	 Electrochemistry Fundamentals
258
8.2.3	 Anode Applications
261
8.2.4	 Cathode Applications
270
8.2.5	 Emerging Applications
275
8.3	 Supercapacitors
278
8.3.1	 Introduction
278
8.3.2	 Electrochemistry Fundamentals
279
8.3.3	 Carbon‐only Electrodes
280
8.3.4	 Pseudo‐Capacitive GO–Composite Electrodes
287
8.4	 Outlook and Future Development Opportunities
291
References
292
viii
Contents

9	 Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
296
Ho Bum Park, Hee Wook Yoon and Young Hoon Cho
9.1	
Rise of Graphene‐Based Membranes: Two Approaches
296
9.2	
GO Membrane: Structural Point of View
298
9.3	
GO Membrane for Gas Separation
299
9.4	
GO Membrane for Water Purification and Desalination
305
9.5	
Other Membrane Applications
309
9.5.1	
Fuel Cell Membrane
309
9.5.2	
Ion‐Selective Membrane for Next‐Generation  
Batteries
310
9.5.3	
Dehydration
311
9.6	
Conclusions and Future Prospects
311
References
312
10	 Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
314
Mohsen Moazzami Gudarzi, Seyed Hamed Aboutalebi and  
Farhad Sharif
10.1	 Introduction
314
10.1.1	 How Graphite Met Polymers?
316
10.1.2	 Graphite Oxide‐Based Composites
318
10.1.3	 CNTs Versus Graphene (Oxide)
319
10.2  Why Mix Graphene Oxide and Polymers?
323
10.2.1	 Making Stronger Polymers: Mechanical Properties
325
10.2.2	 Electrical Properties
333
10.2.3	 Thermal Conductivity
339
10.2.4	 Barrier Properties
341
10.3.  Graphene Oxide or Graphene Oxides?
344
10.3.1	 Size Effect
344
10.3.2	 Effect of Medium on GO Structure
347
10.3.3	 The Purification Process
347
10.3.4	 Thermal Instability
349
10.3.5	 Health Issues
349
10.3.6	 Environmental Impact
351
10.4	 Conclusion
351
References
352
11	 Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
364
Larisa Kovbasyuk and Andriy Mokhir
11.1	 Introduction
364
11.2	 Toxicity of Graphene Oxide
365
11.3	 On the Toxicity Mechanism
366
11.3.1	 Membrane as a Target
366
11.3.2	 Oxidative Stress
368
11.3.3	 Other Factors
369
Contents
ix

x
Contents
11.4	 Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
370
11.4.1	 Graphene Oxide in Treatment of Cancer and Bacterial  
Infections
370
11.4.2	 Photothermal Therapy
370
11.4.3	 Graphene Oxide as a Drug Carrier
371
11.5	 Bioanalytical Applications
376
Acknowledgments
378
References
378
12	 Catalysis
382
Ioannis V. Pavlidis
12.1	 Introduction
382
12.2	 Graphene Oxide Properties
383
12.3	 Oxidative Activity
384
12.3.1	 Oxidation Reactions of GO
384
12.3.2	 Oxidation of Sulfur Compounds
391
12.3.3	 Functionalized Materials
393
12.4	 Polymerization
394
12.5	 Oxygen Reduction Reaction
396
12.6	 Friedel–Crafts and Michael Additions
399
12.7	 Photocatalysis
400
12.8	 Catalytic Activity of Other Layered Carbon‐Based Materials 
and Hybrid Materials of GO
400
12.8.1	 Non‐Functionalized Carbon‐Based Nanomaterials
400
12.8.2	 Hybrid Catalysts and Alternative Applications
401
12.9	 Outlook
404
References
405
13	 Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
410
Sean E. Lowe and Yu Lin Zhong
13.1	 Introduction
410
13.2	 Scope and Scale of the Graphene Market
411
13.3	 Overview of Graphene Oxide Synthesis
414
13.4	 Challenges of Graphene Oxide Production
416
13.4.1	 Graphite Sources
416
13.4.2	 Reaction Conditions
418
13.4.3	 Work‐up and Purification
422
13.4.4	 Storage, Handling and Quality Control
425
13.5	 Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
427
References
428
Vocabulary	
432
Index	
435

About the Editors
Dr. Ayrat M. Dimiev
Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Nanostructures, Kazan 
Federal University, Kazan, Russian Federation
Ayrat M. Dimiev received his PhD degree in physical chem-
istry from Kazan University, Kazan, Russian Federation. 
After three years of holding an assistant professorship at Kazan 
Agricultural University, he emigrated to the USA to teach the 
International Baccalaureate chemistry course. In 2008 he joined 
the group of Professor James M. Tour at Rice University, 
where he started his studies in the field of carbon. His 
research spreads over the areas of unzipping carbon nano-
tubes, carbon‐based dielectric composite materials, graphite 
intercalation compounds, and graphene oxide chemistry. His 
most important contributions to the field were revealing the mechanism of the stage tran-
sitions in graphite intercalation compounds, and developing the dynamic structural 
model of graphene oxide. In 2013, Dr. Dimiev accepted a personal invitation from AZ 
Electronic Materials (presently EMD Performance Materials Corp., USA, a business of 
Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) to help in developing their newly started carbon pro-
gram. During his time at EMD Performance Materials Corp, he employed his expertise in 
the field to develop and commercialize new products comprising graphene oxide and 
other carbon nanostructures. In May 2016, Dr Dimiev returned to his alma mater in 
Kazan as a head of the Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Nanostructures, Kazan Federal 
University. Dr. Dimiev is the author of 18 recent publications in the carbon field, with 
an overall total number of citations exceeding 2000; he also has five recent patent 
applications.
Dr. Siegfried Eigler
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers 
University of Technology, Sweden
Siegfried Eigler received his PhD in organic chemistry from 
the Friedrich‐Alexander‐Universität Erlangen‐Nürnberg in 
2006 under the guidance of apl. Prof. Dr.  Norbert Jux. 
Subsequently he conducted industrial research at DIC‐Berlin 
GmbH, part of DIC Corporation, Japan. The research concen-
trated on electrically conductive polymers and the development 
of novel semiconducting monomers. In 2009 he started work-
ing on the synthesis and application of ­graphene oxide. Two 
years later he became a lecturer and research ­associate at the 
Friedrich‐Alexander‐Universität Erlangen‐Nürnberg. There, he 

xii
About the Editors
conducted deep research on the synthesis of graphene oxide and he realized that defects in 
the carbon lattice could be avoided by controlling the synthesis. With this discovery he 
could investigate the controlled chemistry of graphene oxide and synthesized several new 
graphene derivatives and composites. Currently, his research focuses on advancing the con-
trolled chemistry of graphene. Dr. Eigler has authored 27 papers in the field of carbon 
research and applied for one patent related to the wet‐chemical synthesis of graphene that 
allows the control of the defect density. He accepted an offer from Chalmers University of 
Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, as Associate Professor which started in 2016.

List of Contributors
Seyed Hamed Aboutalebi Condensed Matter National Laboratory, Institute for Research 
in Fundamental Sciences (IPM), Tehran, Iran
Young Hoon Cho Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea
Ayrat M. Dimiev Laboratory of Advanced Carbon Nanostructures, Kazan Federal 
University, Kazan, Russian Federation
Siegfried Eigler Department of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Chalmers 
University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden
Mohsen Moazzami Gudarzi Department of Inorganic and Analytical Chemistry, 
University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Cary Michael Hayner Chief Technology Officer, SiNode Systems Inc., Chicago, IL, 
USA
Larisa Kovbasyuk Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Inorganic Chemistry II, 
Friedrich‐Alexander‐Universität, Erlangen‐Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany
Anton Lerf  Emeritus Walther‐Meissner‐Institut der Bayerischen Akademie der 
Wissenschaften, Garching, Germany
Sean E. Lowe Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, 
Clayton, Australia
Andriy Mokhir Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy, Inorganic Chemistry II, 
Friedrich‐Alexander‐Universität, Erlangen‐Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany
Anton V. Naumov Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas Christian University, 
Fort Worth, USA
Ho Bum Park Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea
Ioannis V. Pavlidis Department of Biochemistry, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany

xiv
List of Contributors
Samuele Porro Department of Applied Science and Technology, Politecnico di Torino, 
Torino, Italy
Ignazio Roppolo Center for Space Human Robotics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, 
Torino, Italy
Farhad Sharif Department of Polymer Engineering and Color Technology, Amirkabir 
University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
Cristina Vallés School of Materials, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK
Hee Wook Yoon Department of Energy Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul, 
Republic of Korea
Yu Lin Zhong Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Monash University, 
Clayton, Australia

Foreword
This book presents a timely review of research on graphene oxide, which is a term 
representing the individual layers obtained by exfoliation of graphite oxide.
Although graphite oxide was first synthesized in the 1850s, it is a material that has 
attracted renewed and intense interest only in the past decade because it affords a product 
material, by relatively straightforward exfoliation in water, of individual layers of function-
alized graphene. The functionalization of the graphene consists of hydroxyl and epoxide 
groups, among others, and the individual layers, for which the term “graphene oxide” has 
been used, are thus hydrophilic, such that they form stable dispersions in solvents like 
water. This has allowed stable dispersions of chemically modified graphene (of a particular 
type) to be readily prepared and then used in interesting ways.
It was fortunately possible that we could help with “early contributions” in this past 
decade, including use of graphene oxide or its modifications to make (i) electrically 
conducting polymer composites, (ii) thin “paper‐like” material composed of stacked and 
overlapped platelets, and (iii) electrodes for supercapacitors. It has been gratifying to see 
the growth of a now relatively large body of literature about both fundamental aspects of 
the chemistry and properties of graphene oxide and its derivatives, and of applications or 
potential applications. Graphene oxide and its related product or derivative materials have 
been shown to be highly versatile and have been applied in a wide range of studies.
Fundamental aspects as well as applications are well covered herein, and the book should 
be useful for learning about graphene oxide and related materials, and thus for providing a 
basis for thinking about new possibilities as well.
It is perhaps of interest to speculate about the future, and I do so here only briefly. For 
graphene oxide, and in general chemically modified graphenes, there are many exciting 
possibilities. Fine control of the chemical functionalization, including with oxygen‐containing 
groups, remains an important challenge. As greater control of the specific location and 
distribution of functional groups is achieved, and, when desired, of the deliberate removal of 
carbon atoms from the “graphene lattice”, a wider range of applications, including for better 
sensors and in materials such as composites and filters, will emerge. There is also the fasci-
nating possibility of control of folding or “crumpling” through thermodynamics and clever 
design of where functional groups are “placed” and how they interact: intra‐sheet to “fix” 
certain morphologies, or perhaps inter‐sheet and also with their surrounding environment. 
(This could be a type of origami but is not limited to specific types of folding.)
Rodney S. Ruoff
IBS Center for Multidimensional Carbon Materials
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology
March 2016

Preface
Graphene oxide (GO) has become one of the most extensively studied materials of the 
last decade. It has facilitated massive interdisciplinary research in the fields of chemistry, 
physics and materials science. Due to its unique properties, GO has been successfully 
tested for numerous applications. This fruitful research has resulted in an enormous 
number of publications. Several review articles have summarized the most recent advances. 
However, up to the present day, very little has been done to systematize all the published 
research, and to assist a non‐expert audience interested in the field. This book is designed 
to fulfill this task. The content of each chapter and the book in general develops from basic 
to more complex. The material is presented in the categories typical for the classical fields 
of science. This makes this book unique and different from the other literature.
Today, keeping track of all the recent publications in the field is difficult even for experts. 
For non‐experts, it is practically impossible to navigate this ocean of publications. This task 
is further complicated by confusion that is widespread in the modern GO field. This confu-
sion is caused by the misuse of the main fundamental concepts, and by oversimplification 
and misinterpretation of GO chemistry. It is very difficult to identify trustable high‐quality 
publications that correctly employ fundamental chemical terms, and correctly interpret 
experimental data. In this book, we intend to demonstrate the actual GO chemistry based 
on trustable publications, with correct usage of the main fundamental concepts, as they 
have been identified up to now.
Since the beginning of the graphene era in 2004, GO has been closely associated with 
graphene. At that time, GO was considered mainly as a precursor for graphene. The term 
“chemically converted graphene” (CCG) was introduced for reduced graphene oxide 
(RGO) to highlight the graphene‐like nature of RGO. The misuse of the term “graphene” 
instead of RGO in the literature creates significant confusion among a non‐expert reader-
ship. We aim to help readers to differentiate between the two by drawing a clear borderline 
between graphene and RGO, and by showing where they are similar, and where they are 
different. Additional confusion arises from the misuse of the term RGO for material 
obtained by annealing of GO. We highlight that those two are very different materials, and 
we introduce the term “thermally processed graphene oxide” (tpGO) for the latter.
Since the electrical properties of RGO are inferior of those of real graphene, GO is often 
considered as graphene’s “younger brother”, or as a low‐grade graphene. This point of view 
was dominant up until about 2011. Later, it was demonstrated that GO is a unique and valuable 
material in itself, both from fundamental science perspectives and for practical applications. 
The main advantage of GO over the graphene counterpart is its solubility and processability 
in water and in several organic solvents. Another benefit of GO is due to its versatility of 
chemical modification to alter its properties. The ability for mass production on the scale of 
tonnes makes GO especially attractive for applications compared to its graphene counterpart. 
We intend to demonstrate all the advantages and uniqueness of GO in this book.

Preface
xvii
The book is divided into two parts. Part I focuses on the fundamentals of GO, and Part II 
on the applications of GO.
Part I starts with research on GO, which has a very long history. It did not start in 2006 
with the work on GO reduction, as one might think by looking at the citation indexes of 
some publications from that period. Very serious and in‐depth studies on GO chemistry 
were conducted throughout the entire twentieth century. Most of these studies, performed 
in the best old‐school traditions, were in many ways advantageous when compared to some 
modern publications. The fundamentality of scientific thinking, the methodology of the 
research, and, importantly, the trustworthiness of reported data were on a level that is rather 
rare in the modern GO field. One could easily avoid misinterpretations of experimental 
results by studying those early works before even designing one’s own experiments. 
Because of the high importance of that early research, and in an attempt to make the 
connection between the two eras, we begin the book with a historical retrospective of GO 
research done in the twentieth century (Chapter 1). This is written by the long‐term 
expert in the field, one of the developers of the famous Lerf–Klinowski structural model, 
Anton Lerf.
In the modern literature, the structure of GO is greatly oversimplified. This leads to 
misinterpretation of the chemical reactions involving GO. Chapter 2, written by Ayrat 
Dimiev, aims to clarify some aspects of GO structure. In the form typical for textbooks, the 
mechanism of GO formation, its transformation during aqueous work‐up, and the fine 
chemical structure of GO are methodologically described. The structure of GO is discussed 
with respect to its intrinsic chemical properties, such as the acidity of aqueous solutions.
The methods used for GO characterization are reviewed in Chapter 3 in a tutorial 
manner. This chapter will be of particular importance for researchers entering the field. The 
advantages and disadvantages of different methods are highlighted. Several examples 
where different methods have helped to understand the structure of GO are discussed. This 
chapter is written jointly by the editors, Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat Dimiev.
In aqueous solutions, GO delaminates to single‐layer sheets and forms colloidal solutions. 
From aqueous solutions, GO flakes can be transferred into the phase of low‐molecular‐weight 
alcohols; the alcoholic solutions are as stable against precipitation as aqueous ones. 
At certain concentrations, GO solutions form liquid crystals. The rheology of GO solutions 
is reviewed in Chapter 4 by Cristina Vallés. Colloid chemistry, surface science, rheology 
and liquid chemistry of GO are discussed in this chapter.
Due to its electronic configuration, GO possesses a number of remarkable optical 
properties. As opposed to pristine graphene, GO exhibits photoluminescence in the ultra-
violet, visible and near‐infrared regions, depending on its structure. The origins of this 
emission and other related questions are discussed in Chapter 5 by Anton Naumov.
The chemical properties of GO is the largest, most difficult and most controversial 
topic. In Chapter 6, written by Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat Dimiev, the following topics 
are discussed. The thermal and chemical stability of GO is reviewed first, followed by 
introducing wet‐chemical non‐covalent functionalization protocols. The covalent function-
alization of GO, which is discussed next, is a very controversial topic. When well‐known 
organic chemistry principles are applied to GO, it remains challenging to prove the successful 
accomplishment of reactions by analyzing the as‐modified GO product. We provide an 
alternative interpretation for experimental results of some selected examples to demonstrate 
this challenge. The chemical reduction methods are summarized next, and special emphasis 

xviii
Preface
is given to differentiating true chemical reduction from so‐called “thermal reduction”. 
While discussing GO chemical properties, in parallel with typical GO, we discuss these 
properties for the oxo‐functionalized graphene (oxo‐G1), a type of GO with very low density 
of structural defects. This sheds additional light on the role of defects in GO chemistry. 
Finally, additional properties of oxo‐G1 are introduced. Oxo‐G1 can act as a compound 
that enables the controlled chemistry for the design and synthesis of functional materials 
and devices.
In Part II, applications that use the reduced and non‐reduced forms of GO are reviewed 
separately. A reduced form of GO is required where electrical conductivity is of importance. 
These applications exploit the graphene‐like properties of RGO and tpGO.
Due to its two‐dimensional character, real graphene is not available in bulk quantities 
by definition. It is obtained only as a substrate‐supported material either by microme-
chanical cleavage of graphite, or by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth on the 
surface of a catalytically active metal. The electrical conductivities of RGO and tpGO 
are three or four orders of magnitude lower than that of real graphene due to the 
numerous defects or scattering centers in the former. Nevertheless, in applications 
where bulk forms of graphene are needed, GO derivatives are the only choice. 
Currently, about 90% of the studies performed with RGO and tpGO use the term “gra-
phene” both in the title and in the abstract. We highlight that GO derivatives, and not 
real graphene, are used for the applications reviewed in Chapters 7 and 8.
Field‐effect transistors and sensors are the two most promising applications that 
exploit the unique electronic properties of GO. RGO is also considered as one of the best 
candidates for fabricating transparent conductive films for many applications, due to its 
electrical and mechanical properties, reasonable carrier mobility, and optical transparency 
in the visible range. Chapter 7, written by Samuele Porro and Ignazio Roppolo summarizes 
the enormous potential for applications of GO in the above‐mentioned fields.
The electrical conductivity and high surface area of tpGO have driven substantial efforts 
for its integration into advanced energy systems. In Chapter 8, the integration of GO 
into two major energy storage systems – lithium‐ion batteries and supercapacitors – is 
discussed. Particular attention is given to understanding the important physicochemical 
properties that can be emphasized in order to achieve the greatest performance, as well as 
the synthetic processes used to derive these unique benefits. This chapter is written by Cary 
Hayner, CTO of SiNode Systems, a start‐up company that develops a new generation of 
lithium‐ion batteries based on the novel electrode material comprising GO.
Due to the two‐dimensional character of GO flakes, and their solubility in water, GO can 
be cast into thin films by simple drop casting or filtration. The as‐formed GO membranes 
exhibit unimpeded permeability to water molecules, being absolutely impermeable to other 
molecules and atoms. Applications of GO and RGO for selective membranes are reviewed 
in Chapter 9 by Ho Bum Park, Hee Wook Yoon and Young Hoon Cho.
Due to the processability of GO in water and organic solvents, GO has been tested as a 
component in numerous composite materials. The incorporation of GO into polymers 
modifies electrical and thermal conductivity, lowers permeability and improves mechanical 
properties. This topic is covered in Chapter  10 by Mohsen Moazzami Gudarzi, Seyed 
Hamed Aboutalebi and Farhad Sharif.
Biomedical applications and toxicity studies of GO are of utmost importance for using 
GO in real applications. Other materials, such as carbon nanotubes, are suspected to be 

Preface
xix
toxic or carcinogenic. Therefore, the current advances in analyzing the medical properties 
and biomedical applications of GO are covered by Larisa Kovbasyuk and Andriy Mokhir 
in Chapter 11.
GO and its derivatives possess unique properties that grant them interest as catalysts 
in oxidative reactions, Friedel–Crafts and Michael additions, polymerization reactions, 
oxygen reduction reactions and photocatalysis. This property is reviewed in Chapter 12 by 
Ioannis Pavlidis.
The scalable production of GO still holds the key to its commercialization. The most 
crucial factor for GO to be commercially viable is its cost‐effectiveness. This is not a 
simple task to ascertain, since GO production involves lengthy purification procedures 
that produce significant quantities of acidic waste. The challenges facing commercial 
GO production are discussed in Chapter 13 by Sean Lowe and Yu Lin Zhong.
This book is written and edited by professionals in their respective fields, and it is 
intended to be helpful for a very broad community, including experts broadening their field 
of research.
Ayrat M. Dimiev
Russian Federation
and 
Siegfried Eigler
Sweden

Part I
Fundamentals

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
1
Graphite Oxide Story – From 
the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
Anton Lerf
1.1  Introduction
The formation of graphite oxide (GO) was described for the first time by Brodie in a short 
note that appeared in 1855 in Annales de Chimie in French [1]. Another preparation 
method – the reaction of graphite with potassium chlorate in fuming nitric acid, now known 
as the “Brodie method” – and a detailed description of the composition and the chemical 
properties of the new compound were published in 1859 in the Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society of London [2]. One year later this paper was published in both French 
and German translations [3, 4]. The titles of all these papers [1–4] do not give any hint of a 
new carbon compound. The title of the English version is as follows: “On the atomic weight 
of graphite”. The new compound was called “oxyde de graphite” in the first publication, 
and “graphitic acid” in the later papers. It is also worth mentioning that Brodie himself did 
not cite his first work on the new compound.
The actual aim of Brodie’s scientific work presented in his publications was to differenti-
ate by means of chemical methods various forms of carbon with dissimilar properties but 
all called graphite. Among the reactions described in the second paper, there was also the 
treatment of graphite with a mixture of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids, leading to 
the  graphite sulfate intercalation compound. The graphite intercalation compound was 
described for the first time by Schafhäutl [5] (pp. 155–157) in 1840, but it was hidden in 
two other publications devoted almost exclusively to iron–carbon steels. This might be 
the reason why Brodie was not aware of this data, and did not cite it. On the other hand, the 

4
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
content of the first paper had been presented before in the London and Edinburgh 
Philosophical Magazine. In the paper of 1859, Schafhäutl [6] (pp. 300–301) complained 
that nobody took notice of his result.
The circumstances of the beginning of the GO story have been outlined in extenso 
because of their curiousness. In 1865 Gottschalk [7] reproduced and confirmed the results 
of Brodie. In his publication the term “graphitic acid” appeared for the first time in the title: 
“Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Graphitsäure” (“Contributions to the knowledge of graphitic 
acid”). GO received greater attention only due to the publication of Berthelot [8] in 1870 in 
which he proclaimed Brodie’s procedure for the preparation of GO as a method to distin-
guish different forms of graphitic carbon, although Brodie had already described the differ-
ent behavior of various graphite forms toward oxidation reactions earlier.
In 1898 Staudenmaier [9] discussed in detail the problems and disadvantages of the vari-
ous preparation methods existing up to the end of the nineteenth century. He also described 
his trials to find more convenient and less dangerous preparation methods, and presented 
the new preparation method which is named after him to the present day.
Of utmost importance is the publication of Kohlschütter and Haenni in 1919 [10]. It 
marks the end of the classical research on GO, which was based on classical chemical 
analysis and a careful description of the reaction behavior. On the one hand, it carefully 
reviews and evaluates all the previous publications on the topic. Based on crystallographic 
considerations, reproducing the results of Brodie [2] and Weinschenk [11], the authors 
consider the close structural correlation between graphite and GO as evidence for a “topo-
tactic” relation. This paper presents new data for the formation of GO, its thermal decom-
position and chemical reduction, and the products of chemical reduction. Also, in this 
publication, the authors discarded their own previous pessimistic view that GO could be 
nothing other than an adsorption of CO and CO2 at graphite surfaces.
A new period of GO research was opened by Hofmann in 1928 [12] and by Hofmann 
and Frenzel in 1930 [13] by applying for the first time powder X‐ray diffraction (XRD) to 
GO. Based on these investigations and chemical considerations, Hofmann and his school 
of researchers gave the first structural model of GO to find general acceptance. This period 
of research started in 1928, continued through 1930 and 1934 with the first structural mod-
els by Thiele [14] and Hofmann et al. [15], and ended in 1969 with a new structural model 
proposed by Scholz and Boehm [16]. During this period, GO structural models were modi-
fied several times, mainly due to the debate between Hofmann and Thiele, and due to the 
application of new spectroscopy methods allowing the proof of assumptions about the 
functional groups playing a role in the chemistry of GO.
The third period of activity on GO was initiated by the first application of magic angle 
spinning nuclear magnetic resonance (MAS NMR) on 13C by Mermoux et al. in 1989–1991 
[17, 18]. In the extended publication [18], the authors questioned the structural model of 
Scholz and Boehm [16] and credited the model of Ruess [19] as the one that best fitted their 
data. However, later this interpretation was questioned again [20]. The interpretation of the 
60 ppm signal as originating from epoxide functions revitalized the first model of Hofmann 
et al. [15], with some modifications [20]. This model has been confirmed in various studies 
[21], but is now again questioned by a two‐component model [22].
Graphite oxide was a laboratory curiosity [23] till the discovery of graphene by Geim 
and Novoselov [24]. Soon after this discovery, the easy reduction of graphite oxide was 
considered as a cheap method to obtain graphene layers. This idea started a hype of research 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
5
on GO, which has lasted up to now. Looking at many modern publications from a historical 
perspective, one cannot avoid the impression that many groups have fallen into traps, which 
previous generations of scientists have learned to circumvent. And, vice versa, reading the 
previous publications from the actual point of view, one discovers a lot of interesting 
aspects that have been described with scrutiny, later considered as unimportant, still later 
forgotten completely, but can now be re‐evaluated on the basis of recent research.
The aim of this chapter is to sketch the storylines of various aspects of GO‐related stud-
ies, which were important for understanding the peculiarities of GO. These topics include 
GO preparation and purification, the development of structural models, the problem of 
stability and decomposition, the swelling to a colloid, the acidity of GO, and the ability to 
intercalate very different chemical species. Some of these aspects have been on the agenda 
since the discovery of GO, and others came to attention triggered by progress in neighbor-
ing fields of research. This chapter is restricted mostly to the historical retrospective of GO 
studies. My own thoughts and conclusions from the historical material, colored by my own 
experience in the field, are written in italic.
1.2  Preparation of Graphite Oxide
1.2.1  Trials for Improving and Simplifying GO Preparation
In his paper of 1855 Brodie achieved the oxidation of graphite by adding concentrated sul-
furic acid to a mixture of graphite and KClO3 [1]. The subsequent treatment with water led 
to disintegration of the solid and a strong extension of the volume. Calcination of the dry 
product resulted in graphite, which was contaminated with sulfates and chlorates. At the end 
of the short paper, Brodie mentioned as alternative oxidants nitric acid and bichromate.
In his publication of 1859 Brodie described first the treatment of graphite with a mixture 
of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids [2]. The product obtained can be assigned in mod-
ern terms as the graphite intercalation compound of sulfuric acid, as one can conclude from 
the described properties of the sample, especially the exfoliation phenomena (observed 
earlier by Schafhäutl [5, 6]). Then Brodie stresses that replacing nitric acid by potassium 
chlorate or potassium bichromate leads to a different product that is bright yellow or brown 
and decomposes easily to a graphite‐like material.
The procedure given in this paper for the new compound has been used to the present 
day and is called “Brodie’s method” [2]:
The details of this process are as follows:– A portion of graphite is intimately mixed with three 
times its weight of chlorate of potash, and the mixture placed in a retort. A sufficient quantity 
of the strongest fumic nitric acid is added, to render the whole fluid. The retort is placed in a 
water‐bath, and kept for three or four days at a temperature of 60 °C until yellow vapours cease 
to be evolved. The substance is then thrown into a large quantity of water, and washed by 
decantation nearly free from acid and salts. It is dried in a water‐bath, and the oxidizing 
operation repeated with the same proportion of nitric acid and of chlorate until no further 
change is observed: this is usually after the fourth time of oxidation. The substance is ulti-
mately dried, first in vacuo, and then at 100 °C. A modification of the process which may be 
advantageously adopted, consist in placing the substance with the oxidizing mixture in flasks 
exposed to sunlight. Under these circumstances the change takes place more rapidly, and 
without the application of heat.

6
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The note at the end of this paragraph, that sunlight can favor the formation of GO, sounds 
very interesting, but seems to have been overlooked up to now.
From that time there were many trials to replace the used reagents (fuming nitric acid, 
concentrated sulfuric acid and potassium chlorate) by less dangerous and more convenient 
oxidizing reagents. Staudenmaier [9] and Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] mention explicitly 
the dangerous reaction of chlorate with concentrated sulfuric acid leading to ClO2, which 
decomposes at temperature above 45 °C in explosions. Is that fact the reason why Brodie 
did not mention this procedure in his second paper?
Luzi [25] and later Charpy [26] applied KMnO4 and HCrO4 (“acide chromique”) in sul-
furic acid, both mentioning the tendency to decompose graphite (see section  1.1.2). 
Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] mentioned unsuccessful trials of oxidation with persulfuric 
acid, Caro’s acid and ozone. Boehm et  al. [27] studied Ce(iv) nitrate, Co(iii) sulfate, 
NaOCl, (NH4)2S2O8 and OsO4. Hofmann and Frenzel [13] and later Boehm et al. [27] 
obtained GO by the reaction of graphite suspended in a mixture of concentrated nitric and 
sulfuric acids with gaseous ClO2. Boehm et al. [27] also obtained GO by oxidation of 
graphite suspended in concentrated sulfuric acid with Mn2O7 and by reaction of a suspen-
sion of graphite in fuming nitric acid with an O2/O3 mixture for 10 days.
Despite these efforts, at the present day only two further methods are of importance, 
the procedures described by Staudenmaier [9] and Hummers and Offeman [28], 
respectively.
Staudenmaier [9] used (as Luzi [25] did) exfoliated (“aufgeblähten”) graphite, adding it 
to the mixture of concentrated nitric and sulfuric acids when the mixture was cooled to 
room temperature after mixing. He mentioned explicitly that the oxidation is faster the 
faster the KClO3 has been added, but more KClO3 is then necessary because of the tem-
perature increase leading to stronger decomposition of the chlorate. Whereas he used up to 
25 g of graphite for one procedure, he never observed an explosion. The green product 
obtained after washing and drying can then be transferred to the yellow product by a reac-
tion with a solution of potassium permanganate in diluted sulfuric acid. Interestingly, 
Staudenmaier commented on the procedure used by Luzi, but did not mention Luzi’s trials 
with permanganate.
Kohlschütter and Haenni [10], Hofmann and Frenzel [13] and Hamdi [29] used the 
“Staudenmaier method”, but with some modifications, as follows. Instead of exfoliated 
graphite, they used powdered graphite; hence, the reaction afforded longer reaction times. 
At least three oxidation cycles were necessary to get a reasonable degree of oxidation. The 
oxidation with permanganate solution was dropped without giving an explicit reason. 
Hofmann and Frenzel [13] and Hamdi [29] also found the process hazardous.
Hummers and Offeman [28] for the first time successfully applied permanganate as an 
oxidant for the formation of GO: powdered graphite flakes and solid sodium nitrate were 
suspended in concentrated sulfuric acid and then the permanganate added in portions, so 
that the temperature can be kept below 20 °C. Then the temperature of the suspension was 
brought to 35 °C, and kept at that temperature for 30 minutes. The now pasty suspension 
was then diluted by adding water, causing a temperature increase up to 98 °C. After 15 
minutes the mixture was diluted with more water and the residual permanganate reduced 
with hydrogen peroxide.
Boehm and Scholz [30] discussed for the first time the drawbacks and advantages of 
the three preparation methods for GO. (Almost no attention has been paid (only 11 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
7
citations in 50 years) to this important paper.) The following most important conclusions 
should be mentioned:
The GO samples obtained via “Brodie’s method” are the purest and the most stable ones (see 
section 1.4.1).
The purification of GO samples prepared according to the “Staudenmaier method” and the 
“Hummers–Offeman method” is much more tedious; especially, the Hummers–Offeman sam-
ples are contaminated with a considerable amount of sulfur, probably bound to carbon as sul-
fonic acid or as esters of sulfuric acid.
Replacing KClO3 by NaClO3 prevents the formation of insoluble KClO4, which is hard to 
remove by washing with water.
Warning is mentioned to allow temperature increase during pouring the sample into water 
at the end of the oxidation reaction because of decomposition.
The chemical composition of the various samples shows a great variation, but there is a 
trend in the degree of oxidations: the C/O ratio decreases in the order Brodie > Staudenmaier > 
Hummers–Offeman.
The principal routes of work‐up have been established since the early days of GO 
research. It is a tedious process, which can lead to changes in samples exposed to light or 
to water for too long. The work‐up always starts with a strong dilution of the acids. In the 
first step, it is recommended to pour the reaction mixture into a huge amount of excess 
water to keep the temperature as low as possible. Since the particles of GO are very 
small, the sedimentation takes some time. During the washing process, the sediment 
volume increases strongly and the time for sedimentation becomes longer. In order to 
shorten the process, the GO is precipitated after some dilution/sedimentation cycles by 
adding dilute HCl. The obtained precipitate can be separated from the solvent by filtra-
tion or centrifugation. For the cleaning steps, dialysis or electrodialysis [29] has also 
been applied.
A very strange purification was recommended by Thiele [14]: he removed the oxidation 
mixture (KClO3/H2SO4/HNO3) by repeated boiling with concentrated nitric acid; the nitric 
acid is then removed by washing with acetic acid/acetic acid anhydride, and at the end with 
alcohol or ether.
Obtaining dry GO is also a tricky business. It is almost impossible to remove the solvent 
water completely. The minimum water content (5–10%) can be achieved without decom-
position at room temperature in vacuum and in the presence of P2O5. An alternative method 
is freeze‐drying [30].
Apart from these chemical preparation methods, it is possible to obtain graphite oxide 
also by electrochemical oxidation. This was shown for the first time by Thiele [31] in 1934. 
He applied a very high current density and obtained in concentrated sulfuric acid first the 
blue phase, which is the sulfuric acid intercalation compound, and then a so‐called primary 
oxide, graphite oxide and perhaps humic acid. Later Boehm et al. [27] and Besenhard and 
Fritz [32] obtained GO under controlled conditions in 70% perchloric acid. However, the 
degree of oxidation is considerably lower than for GO samples prepared via chemical oxi-
dation. In the case of the concentrated sulfuric acid, beyond the first‐stage phase C24(HSO4)
(H2SO4)2, there is a two‐phase region in which there is a superposition of GO formation and 
O2 evolution. The processes in this range depend strongly on the current density, indicating 
that the processes involved are much slower than the formation of the graphite sulfate inter-
calation [33].

8
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
1.2.2  Over‐Oxidation of Graphite
Whereas graphite treated with boiling sulfuric acid loses only a small quantity of carbon as 
CO2 [7, 34], most of it is lost when oxidizing agents such as nitric acid or K2Cr2O7 are 
added to the boiling mixture [7]. Even Schafhäutl observed that repeated treatment of a 
piece of graphite with boiling sulfuric acid and the addition of nitric acid leads to a continu-
ous loss of the material and finally to a complete disappearance [6].
Gottschalk [7] showed that the graphite‐like carbon obtained by thermal decomposition 
of GO (prepared via the “Brodie method”) reacted faster during the Brodie reaction the 
more oxidation/decomposition cycles had been carried out: after the third oxidation, only 
traces of GO were found. In every oxidation cycle the quantity of graphite is reduced, and 
after the fourth oxidation step the graphite is gone completely.
Charpy [26] showed later that pristine graphite can be transferred to GO by bichromate or 
permanganate in sulfuric acid, but these reactions lead easily to over‐oxidation: at room tem-
perature one can get GO with nearly no loss of graphite. By oxidation with permanganate at 
45 °C, a small part of the graphite is lost, whereas at 100 °C already 50% is oxidized to CO2. 
In the case of chromate, 50% is lost at 45 °C and all graphite is transferred to CO2 at 100 °C.
In their GO preparation experiments in which they used a modified “Staudenmaier 
method”, Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] described that the amount of GO obtained decreases 
with every step of oxidation (the yield of GO being 95% after the first oxidation and only 54% 
after the fifth repetition of oxidation) till nothing is left. The amount of GO obtained decreases 
also with the time that graphite or graphite oxide is in contact with the oxidizing medium.
Hofmann and Frenzel [13] found that the C/O ratio of the obtained GO decreases (thus the 
oxygen content increases) with decreasing size of the graphite crystallites. Very interesting are 
the results of Luzi [25]. He demonstrated that, besides the insoluble GO, some soluble by‐
products, especially mellitic acid, are formed, even in chlorate/nitric acid mixtures. The quan-
tity of this by‐product increases with subsequent oxidation steps. According to Thiele [14], up 
to 50% of mellitic acid is formed when GO is prepared via the procedure of Staudenmaier. To 
avoid it, the portions of chlorate should be small, the time intervals of additions longer, and 
the reaction temperature should be kept below 20 °C. Thiele [14] stated also that GO can be 
transformed to humic acid. In a later paper Thiele [35] mentioned that under special circum-
stances (not formulated) humic acids can be obtained as an intermediate state of the total 
oxidation of graphite to CO2 by application of alkaline oxidation agents. In the same paper 
[35] he stated that humic acid is formed when an aqueous suspension of GO is left in air.
Ruess [19] remarked upon an increasing tendency to form mellitic acid or to destroy the 
graphite structure with decreasing particle size of the starting graphite. This tendency is 
confirmed by my own experience. We have obtained mostly mellitic acid with the Hummers–
Offeman method, when we applied the optimal reaction conditions for getting GO from 
crystalline graphite (particle size 500 µm) to a graphite powder with particle diameters 
of <100 µm (unpublished results). And even Hummers and Offeman [28] recommended in 
their work‐up process to filter the suspension while it is still warm to avoid precipitation of 
mellitic acid. In their GO preparation Hummers and Offeman used powdered graphite 
flakes with particle size 325 mesh (44 µm).
On the basis of these very early results in GO research, I have the feeling that Rourke 
et al. [22] do not really present a new structural model, but investigate intermediate states 
between the formation of GO and mellitic acid.

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
9
1.2.3  Formation Mechanism – First Approximation
Already in 1919 Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] (p. 125) had recognized the essential role of 
nitric acid to open the graphite interior for the access of oxidants without acting as an oxi-
dant for the formation of GO.
In 1930 Hofmann and Frenzel [13] showed for the first time by the application of XRD 
that the layer distance increases from 3.4 Å to 8 Å when graphite reacts with a mixture of 
sulfuric acid and nitric acid. Thus, they confirmed the suggestion of Kohlschütter and 
Haenni [10] that nitric acid supports the opening of the interlayer space in graphite. 
The product obtained is the “blue phase” described first by Schafhäutl [5, 6] and Brodie 
[2–4] and has been identified as a graphite sulfate [36]. Since this compound is highly 
sensitive to water, the pure first‐stage compound (intercalation in every interlayer space) 
C24
+(HSO4)−(H2SO4)2 with the maximum content of sulfuric acid can be obtained by chemi-
cal or electrochemical oxidation of graphite in concentrated sulfuric acid [36, 37]. In a 
chemical oxidation with nitric acid in sulfuric acid (water content of 20%), the redox 
potential of the nitric acid allows only the preparation of a second‐stage intercalation com-
pound [37]. Although nitric acid is a strong oxidant, it is hard to get a pure first‐stage nitric 
acid intercalation compound. In concentrated nitric acid (66 wt.%), only a mixture of 
higher stages can be obtained, and even in fuming nitric acid only a second‐stage phase 
[36]. Only the addition of a small amount of permanganate allows the formation of the 
first‐stage compound [38].
Thiele [39] as well as Rüdorff and Hofmann [36] mention that other oxidants such as 
KClO3 or KMnO4 or CrO3 could take over the role of nitrate in the formation of graphite 
salts. However, they do not give experimental details. In 1992 Avdeev et al. [40] gave a 
physicochemical basis for the rational choice of oxidants allowing the formation of graph-
ite sulfate salts. A detailed study of the system KMnO4/H2SO4/C was presented only in 
2005 by Sorokina et al. [41]. They showed that the graphite sulfate salt is only formed 
when the MnO4
− : C molar ratio is ≤ 1 : 1 [41]. The formation of a CrO3/H2SO4 graphite salt 
is even more complex [42].
Thus, the unfortunate experiences of Brodie [1–4], Gottschalk [7], Charpy [26], Luzi 
[25] and Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] are not surprising (see section 1.2.1). From these 
experiences one can conclude that it seems to be unfortunate when the oxidant for the for-
mation of GO has to act also as the oxidant for the formation of the graphite salt. In that 
case the opening of the interlayer galleries and the oxidation to GO start simultaneously 
and can, thus, lead to over‐oxidation. The original formulation of Kohlschütter and Haenni 
[10] (p. 126) sounds, therefore, very modern:

10
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
(English translation: “Only when the oxidation starts simultaneously in the total mass from the 
interior does the formation of graphitic acid occur. If the oxidizing agent attacks [the graphite] 
from outside, the oxidation continues to the simplest products, since the time of action for the 
small amount of graphite is too long, when the reaction can proceed only layer by layer …”)
To get optimal access of the oxidant to the interlayer space and to get GO monolayers in 
the colloidal state, it must be guaranteed that a pure first‐stage intercalation compound has 
been obtained. This corresponds quite well with the statement of Boehm et al. [27] that the 
water content in sulfuric acid should not exceed 15% for the preparation of GO of high 
quality. However, it is hard to recognize the ideal endpoint of the intercalation reaction 
because of inter‐stratification phenomena. Looking at the modern preparation methods of 
GO, I get the feeling that the importance of the intercalation process for optimal GO for-
mation is mostly overlooked and the time before the addition of the oxidants is too short for 
optimal intercalation.
If the interlayer space is free for the access of the oxidizing agent, two questions arise: 
What are the oxidizing species? And how do they enter into the interlayer space? It is gener-
ally assumed that ClO2 and Mn2O7 formed in concentrated sulfuric/nitric acid mixtures from 
KClO3 and KMnO4 are the active species. In the case of KMnO4 in concentrated sulfuric 
acid, the reactive species could also be the MnO3
+ cation [43]. However, it is hard to imagine 
that this cation enters the interlayer space constrained by two positively charged carbon 
layers. To enter into the interlayer space, ClO2 and Mn2O7 have to replace the sulfuric acid 
molecules that form together with the HSO4
− ions a densely packed arrangement in the inter-
layer space in the precursor intercalation compound. This exchange process has to occur 
against a huge excess of sulfuric acid in the surroundings of the graphite salt. Therefore, it 
seems to me more probable that the ion exchange of the monovalent chlorate and the per-
manganate ion against the HSO4
− ion is the essential next step in the GO formation. (The 
possibility of ion exchange in the graphite salts was mentioned by Boehm et al. [27] and 
demonstrated by Rüdorff and Hofmann [36].) Both ions could be present to some extent 
since the pKa values of sulfuric acid, chloric acid and permanganate acid are almost of the 
same order of magnitude (H2SO4/HSO4
−, −3; HMnO4/MnO4
−, −2.25; HClO3/ClO3, −2.7; 
provided these values have any meaning under conditions in which the pH scale is not really 
valid). However, one essential problem is left: permanganate and chlorate act differently on 
organic compounds; but in the case of GO formation both must act very similarly.
1.3  Discovery of Essential Functional O‐Containing Groups and its 
Relation to the Development of Structural Models
1.3.1  Analytical Composition of Graphite Oxide
Throughout the history of GO research, the composition of GO was determined by com-
bustion analysis to determine the C and H contents. The oxygen content corresponds to the 
difference from 100%. Only Thiele [14] carried out reduction reactions of GO to determine 
the amount of reducing agent necessary for full reduction, to get the C/O ratio. However, 
there was general agreement at that time that the reduction is never complete even under 
strong conditions (e.g. up to 800 °C). To get the correct C/O ratio one has to make a correc-
tion for the ash left after burning. A serious problem for the determination of the correct 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
11
C/O ratio is the amount of hydration water left in the sample after careful drying without 
the risk of deterioration. Boehm and Scholz [30] recommend using samples for analysis 
with 10–17% residual water because this corresponds to the water content of GO in the 
normal water vapor pressure in the laboratory atmosphere; thus, the samples do not change 
the weight so much during weighing.
For samples prepared via “Brodie’s method”, the carbon and hydrogen contents are 
fairly constant over the time of GO research. Brodie reported a carbon content of 60–61% 
and a hydrogen content of 1.75–1.91%; Gottschalk [7] reported similar values, but ques-
tioned whether these values mark an endpoint of drying. However, Boehm and Scholz [30] 
confirmed, despite some scatter, the values of Brodie [2].
For their GO prepared via the modified “Staudenmaier method”, Kohlschütter and 
Haenni [10] found after the first oxidation a carbon content of 59% and a hydrogen content 
of 1.91%. The carbon content decreases with the number of oxidation/purification cycles 
to 55%. Such strong alterations have not been reported since. Boehm and Scholz [30] 
reported values between 56% and 58% with an average of 57%.
Hummers and Offeman [28] reported a carbon content of 47% for their product and a 
carbon content of 52% for the sample prepared according to the “Staudenmaier method”. 
These values are the lowest to be found in publications. Boehm and Scholz [30] found the 
carbon content in the range from 56% to 63.7% for the Hummers–Offeman GO product.
Boehm and Scholz [30] stated that there is always a large scatter in the analytical results 
of various samples, but they are convinced that there is a trend in the degree of oxidation: 
the value of the C/O ratio is highest for the Brodie samples (C/O = 3.5), slightly lower for 
the Hummers–Offeman samples (3.3) and lowest for the Staudenmaier materials (2.9). In 
contrast, Thiele [14] stated (without giving experimental proof) that the number of oxida-
tion cycles and the method of preparation have no serious influence on the analytical 
results. On the other hand, he gave the ratio of C : O : H of 2 : 1 : 1 for his own samples 
prepared via the “Staudenmaier method”. This would correspond to the full oxidation of all 
aromatic double bonds.
Summing up all the analytical data in the Boehm and Scholz publication [30] and the 
analytical work done by all scientists working on GO since Brodie, I conclude that carbon 
contents lower than 55% (corresponding to a C/O ratio below 2.5) indicate over‐oxidation 
of GO, and that carbon contents higher than 63% (C/O ratio above 3.3) are caused by 
incipient decomposition due to drying the samples at about 100 °C.
1.3.2  Creation of the Structural Model from 1930 till 2006
Based on his analytical result and especially on the unusually high hydrogen content, in 
1930 Thiele proposed that oxygen is attached to the carbon grid in the form of OH groups 
[14]. Since the carbon atoms form a honeycomb arrangement, he gave a sum formula 
C6O3H3. To be in agreement with this sum formula, Thiele had to assume that the OH func-
tions are covalently bound to every second C atom on both sites of a carbon bilayer, which 
are interconnected by covalent C–C bonds. A sketch of this structural model is shown in 
Figure 1.1. Thiele considered the possibility to transform GO into humic acid as an addi-
tional hint for the presence of OH groups in GO.
Almost 60 years after Thiele, Nakajima et al. [44, 45] presented a very similar structural 
model of GO (see Figure 1.1, right), without giving any reference to Thiele’s paper. Nakajima 

12
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
et al. proposed a slightly different sum formula (C8(OH)4) instead of C6(OH)3) and based 
their model on the similarity of XRD data to those of a carbon fluoride compound with the 
same composition. Neither of these models found attention in the community.
An alternative model for the structure of GO was presented by Hofmann et al. [15] in 
1934. The starting point of the model construction was based on the following considera-
tions. As a maximum, all three double bonds per carbon hexagon could be replaced by 
three oxygen atoms bridging two neighboring carbon atoms (forming epoxide units). Since 
the most frequently found C/O ratio is 3, some double bonds have to be left unoxidized. In 
the oxygen removal from some ethylene oxide compounds under re‐formation of a double 
bond via HI treatment, Hofmann et al. [15] saw an analogy to the ease of oxygen removal 
in GO. This analogy was considered as a hint for the presence of epoxide functions in GO. 
From the fact that the heat of combustion of GO is quite similar to that of graphite, Hofmann 
et al. concluded that the oxygen is only weakly bound to the carbon layers in GO [15]. An 
additional proof is presented by the authors via the first single‐crystal XRD analysis of GO.
For the calculation of the intensities of the reflections, four different arrangements of 
oxygen atoms has been considered (Figure 1.2, top, a–d). The observed intensities agree 
best with the calculated intensities for model a) under the additional assumptions that every 
third C layer is at the same position, and that the oxygen atoms are statistically distributed 
between the possible sites. This arrangement is only possible if the carbon grid remains flat 
OH
OH
OH
: A—A′
: B—B′
8.22 Å
C8(OH)4
1.40 Å
1.43
0.51
1.54
A′
A
B′
B
Figure 1.1  The structural models of Thiele [14] (left) and Nakajima et al. [44, 45] (right). (left) 
Reproduced from [14] with permission of Wiley‐VCH. (right) Reproduced from [44] with 
permission of Elsevier

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
13
as in graphite. The authors did not see any evidence for the presence of OH groups cova-
lently attached to the carbon grid. They ascribe the hydrogen exclusively to residual 
“bound” water, without specifying the nature of this bonding state [15]. The unusually high 
hydrogen content in Thiele’s samples can be explained by the retention of the organic sol-
vents (acetic acid, acetic anhydride, ether) used by Thiele in his work‐up process (described 
in section 1.2.1). In a subsequent paper, Hofmann and König [46] devoted a small section 
to sum the formula of Thiele, which they discarded again. This conclusion has been con-
firmed also by a very thorough study of Thiele’s purification method carried out by Ruess 
[47]. In his experiments Ruess observed some evidence for a covalent attachment of the 
acetyl groups from the acetic acid anhydride to the OH groups (see section 1.4.6).
In the 1937 paper of Hofmann and König [46] there is an interesting turn. They confirm 
the cation exchange capacity in slightly basic medium determined by Thiele [35] and con-
clude that the amount of carboxyl groups in GO will not be enough to explain the acidity 
of GO. Thus, OH groups like those in humic acid may fill the gap. In addition, they suggest 
that the OH groups may be formed by hydrolysis of the epoxide groups.
In 1947 Ruess pointed out in his paper [19] that GO is not as reactive as organic epoxides 
and does not show the typical ring opening reactions with ammonia, HBr or HCl forming 
vicinal hydroxyamines or halogenohydroxides. He questioned also the idea that hydroxyl 
groups can be formed by hydrolysis of the epoxide functions. Based on these chemical 
arguments, the covalent bonding of OH to the carbon grid and a re‐evaluation of Hofmann 
et al.’s [15] and his own XRD data, Ruess [19] presented a new structural model. He 
claimed the best fit between the observed and calculated structure factors he had obtained, 
shown in Figure 1.3.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1.4 Å
2.48Å
b-axis
O atoms
C atoms
Figure 1.2  The structural model of Hofmann et al. [15]. Reproduced from [15] with permission 
of Wiley‐VCH

14
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The carbon grid is now corrugated in a form typical for an arrangement of cycloalkanes 
with sp3‐hybridized carbon atoms. This structure no longer allows epoxide functions, and 
is therefore replaced by 1,3‐ether functions. According to Ruess’s determination of non‐
removable hydrogen atoms, there is about one OH group per six carbon atoms in the struc-
ture. The remaining oxygen atoms form the ether bridges. Their number and the number of 
double bonds vary with the degree of oxidation.
However, a single type of OH groups – particularly tertiary OH functions – is hardly 
compatible with the variety of reactions of the GO hydroxyl functions (see section 1.4.5) 
[16, 46, 48, 49]. Therefore, Clauss et al. [48] suggested that an OH function in the neigh-
borhood of a C–C double bond (enols) could be much more acidic. However, in that case 
C–C bonds must have been broken, and the arrangements shown in Figure 1.4 (left) could 
be present in GO.
The transition from an enol to a keto function could explain the transition from the bright 
to the dark state of GO. However, this tautomerism could not be clearly established by the 
authors in an infrared (IR) spectrum. IR spectra by Clauss et al. [48] and earlier by Hadži 
and Novak [50] clearly confirmed the presence of carboxyl and hydroxyl groups but gave 
no indications for the 1,3‐ether functions. Trials to split these ethers were unsuccessful also 
[16, 48]. Hadži and Novak assigned a weak feature at a wavenumber of 980 cm−1 as a hint 
for the presence of epoxide functions. In a later paper Scholz and Boehm [16] assigned the 
signal at 1720 cm−1 to a carbonyl function, which in alkaline solution undergoes a keto–
enol tautomerism or forms a geminal diol. Another vibration mode at 1620 cm−1 was inter-
preted as originating from a carbonyl function of an extended quinonoid system. This 
assignment was the basis of the new structural model of Scholz and Boehm [16] shown in 
Figure 1.4 (right). Note that this assignment was later shown to be incorrect [51]. I think 
that the model published by Szabó et al. [51] combines structural elements of both Scholz 
and Boehm [16] (broken C–C bonds, quinone groups) and Ruess [19] (1,3‐ethers).
In 1962 Aragon de la Cruz and Cowley [52] found the intensity distribution of the spots 
in their electron diffraction pattern to be compatible with epoxide functions over C–C dou-
ble bonds and OH groups on top of carbon atoms in a random distribution, in agreement 
with a modified Hofmann model. However, the authors conceded that this interpretation 
C atoms
O atoms
Figure 1.3  The structural GO model according to Ruess [19]. However, this figure is taken 
from Ref. [48] because it shows clearly the double bonds left unoxidized. Reproduced from 
[48] with permission of Wiley‐VCH

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
15
suffers from some uncertainty. And, indeed, Scholz and Boehm [16] stated that a similar 
electron density distribution would be found for carbonyl functions in neighboring carbon 
layers lying on top of each other. The electron density distribution could also originate 
when the layers were built up from small areas oriented in all three a‐directions [16].
Summing up the results of this era of investigation, it is disappointing that the applica-
tion of the most modern methods at that time did not allow the structure of GO to be unam-
biguously clarified. With respect to the XRD, this is mainly due to the fact that, for GO, one 
can observe only two 00 l reflections and a few hk0 reflections, but no hkl reflections.
A new era in GO studies started with the possibilities offered by MAS NMR. NMR 
monitors mainly the electronic structure of the first coordination sphere and is, therefore, 
less sensitive to the long‐range order in a crystal. Thus, it is the ideal method for investigat-
ing almost amorphous materials. The first NMR experiments on GO were published by 
Mermoux et al. in 1989 and 1991 [17, 18]. The 13C NMR spectrum shows just three domi-
nant signals, as shown later in Figure 1.6(a), with chemical shifts of 60, 70 and ~130 ppm. 
The three signals of an as‐prepared GO have been assigned to ether functions, to alcohol 
functions and to aromatic or conjugated double bonds, respectively. Therefore, Mermoux 
et al. [18] ruled out the structural models of Thiele [14], Nakajima et al. [44, 45] and Scholz 
and Boehm [16]. Whereas in their first paper [17] Mermoux and Chabre assigned the 
60 ppm signal to epoxide functions, in the following paper [18] they did not differentiate 
between epoxide (1,2‐ether) and 1,3‐ether functions and considered their spectra as confir-
mation of Hofmann et al.’s [15] and Ruess’s models [19]. At the end the authors preferred 
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
H
HO
C
8
8
8
8
8
4
4
4
6
3
3
1
1
4
5
5
7
7
6
6
8
8
8
2
2
6
C
C
C
OH
HO
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
O
O
C
C
C
C
H
C
C
C
OH
O
O
H
O
O
C
C
O
HO
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
H
O
O
HO
Figure 1.4  Possible keto–enol tautomerism in graphite oxide (left) according to Clauss et al. 
[48], and the new structural model (right) of Scholz and Boehm [16]. (left) Reproduced from 
[48] with permission of Wiley‐VCH. (right) Reproduced from [16] with permission of Wiley‐VCH

16
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
a Ruess‐type model, but name the 1,3‐ethers as epoxides as well. In subsequent papers 
[53, 54] the position of the authors is not clear. On the one hand they assign the 60 ppm 
peak to epoxides, but on the other hand they argue only based on the model of Ruess, 
despite Ruess [19] clearly stating that epoxides are not compatible with corrugated layers 
of sp3 carbons.
The assignment of the 60 ppm signal to epoxide groups in our studies signifies the return 
to the structural model of Hofmann with some modifications [20, 55]. Part of the epoxide 
groups must be replaced by tertiary OH groups; and the two functional groups are more or 
less randomly distributed over both sites of the carbon grid. Since the signal at 130 ppm can 
be ascribed to aromatic carbon atoms, patches of aromatic rings of varying size are distrib-
uted between the oxygen‐carrying areas. These aromatic areas and the epoxide groups keep 
the carbon grid almost flat; some deviations may result from the sp3‐hybridized carbon 
atoms carrying the OH groups. A sketch of the resulting structure is shown in Figure 1.5.
To be honest, one should be aware that the interpretation of the NMR spectra might not 
be the end of the story. We cannot differentiate if isolated or conjugated double bonds con-
tribute to the signal at 130 ppm. In addition, NMR is a local probe and, thus, we do not 
know whether this signal is caused by isolated aromatic rings or by polycyclic arrange-
ments as we have shown it in the sketch of our model. Thus, the NMR data could also be 
compatible with a distribution of aromatic rings following Clar’s concept of aromaticity 
(as shown in figure 1 of Ref. [56]). The signals at 60 and 70 ppm overlap partially. A decon-
volution analysis showed that perhaps four signals are hidden in the experimental peak. 
Going through NMR data collections (e.g. Ref. [57]), one can find structural features that 
could be compatible with the structural models discussed with almost similar chemical 
shifts, i.e. allylic alcohol. However, it is clear that in pristine GO there is little evidence for 
the presence of enol or phenol functions.
1.3.3  Considerations for the Formation Mechanism – Second Approximation
As discussed in section 1.2.3, the intercalation of sulfuric acid and/or nitric acid into graph-
ite is the first step of GO formation [10, 13, 16]. Recently, Dimiev and Tour [58] confirmed 
elegantly by means of modern scientific methods (XRD, Raman spectroscopy) all the 
observations on GO formation described from the early days of GO research by Brodie [2], 
Gottschalk [7], Staudenmaier [9], Luzi [25], Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] and Hofmann 
and Frenzel [13], just to mention the most important workers.
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH OH
OH OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
OH
OH
Figure 1.5  Lerf–Klinowski model of the as‐prepared GO structure [55]. Reproduced from [55] 
with permission of Elsevier

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
17
Since it is hard to guarantee a pure first‐stage phase throughout the intercalated graphite 
particles, it cannot be ruled out that there are multi‐layer assemblies of a second‐stage 
phase. In that case the oxidation could occur only in any second interlayer gallery, resulting 
in an assembly according to Thiele’s model [14]. The real arrangement must not follow the 
ideal and very regular arrangement in Thiele’s model, but there could be some covalent 
linkages of C atoms (carrying OH groups) between the neighboring C layers. Besides the 
OH groups, there could also be epoxides or other functional groups.
Hofmann et al. [15], Boehm et al. [16, 48] as well as Dimiev and Tour [58] refrain from 
discussing the molecular mechanism of graphite oxidation. This is understandable because 
there are no low‐molecular‐weight model systems with large polycyclic aromatic hydro-
carbons (PAHs) where the reaction behavior of hydrogen‐free carbon atoms has been 
investigated. Therefore, considerations on the mechanism of GO formation must start from 
knowledge of the reaction behavior of low‐molecular‐weight PAHs.
Assuming epoxides as an important structural element in GO, one is faced with the fact 
that neither ClO3
− nor MnO4
− are known to oxidize PAHs to epoxides [59]. MnO4
− reacts 
with isolated double bonds to form cis‐diols [59, 60]. This sort of reaction could happen only 
at the peripheral carbon atoms of the graphite layers, and the subsequent reaction from diols 
to ketones could occur with breaking of C–C bonds. Whether isolated double bonds can 
undergo the same reactions is not clear. The proposed mechanism of diol formation has been 
proved experimentally only for permanganate oxidation in neutral or basic solutions [60]. 
However, it cannot be ruled out completely that this diol–ketone reaction can happen also in 
concentrated sulfuric acid, as has been discussed for the unzipping of carbon nanotubes [61].
In the destructive oxidation of PAHs, the permanganate ion is bound via an oxide ion to 
the carbon under abstraction of a proton, the formation of a carbonium ion and the reduction 
of manganese to the Mn(v) state [62]. At the end of the reaction, the manganese is liberated 
and a quinone is formed. This process could work again only for peripheral carbon atoms or 
at defect sites in the graphite layers. Such defect sites could be the nuclei for the subsequent 
oxidation of the whole layers. The product of this reaction would be compatible with the 
structural model of Scholz and Boehm [16] and Szabó et al. [51]. However, according to the 
NMR spectra, quinones are at best minority species in pristine GO (I guess less than 10%).
If one assumes that cis‐diols are formed, then there is no mechanism explaining their 
transformation to 1,3‐ethers postulated by Ruess [19]; the water abstraction to epoxide 
groups by concentrated sulfuric acid can also be questioned. Whether these reactions can 
occur in the interlayer space of GO is also unclear. Even less clear is how these functional 
groups could be formed with the other important oxidant ClO2 (or ClO3
−, HClO3?). Their 
oxidation power is so high that low‐molecular‐weight compounds are completely destroyed. 
In addition, when oxidants diffuse from outside into the interior of graphite salt crystals, 
one would expect that oxidation occurs at the site of entry. The removal of the reaction 
by‐products and the different chemical nature of the carbon surfaces could obstruct the 
progress of oxidation toward the center of the crystals.
Therefore, it seems necessary to think about a common mechanism for both oxidants. If 
in the case of the chlorate and permanganate ions the ion exchange process were faster 
than the oxygen liberation, the process of oxidation could start in the interior of the graph-
ite salt crystals. If this liberated oxygen is in the 1O2 state and cyclohexadiene units exist 
due to the disturbances in the graphite π‐electron system (positive electron holes or the 
carbocations), it could be attached to the graphite sheets as peroxide functions, which can 

18
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
thermally rearrange to diepoxides in analogy to reactions discussed in Ref. [63]. Starting 
from these oxidized nuclei, new sites would be created to continue the reaction. The epox-
ides could be hydrolyzed to hydroxyl groups. It should be recalled that Boehm postulated 
that some residual water in the concentrated acids is necessary for GO formation [27].
However, one should keep in mind that these considerations are deduced from the solu-
tion chemistry of PAHs, and it is not clear whether these reactions can occur in the same 
way in the constrained space of the interlayer galleries and in an electrostatic field created 
by the interaction of the intercalated anions with the positively charged graphite planes. In 
addition, there is a highly protic solvent in the surrounding of the crystals which is also 
present as a solvent in the interlayer space.
1.4  Properties of Graphite Oxide
1.4.1  Thermal Degradation and its Products
In the 1850s Brodie [2] described the vigorous decomposition of GO during heating. To 
control the process better, he carried out the decomposition reactions in purified naphtha. 
In the temperature range of 100–200 °C considerable amounts of water and CO2 are liber-
ated. The black residue obtained after heating GO in this fluid for a few hours at 240 °C still 
contains some oxygen, and Brodie determined its composition as C22H2O4. By heating this 
sample in a stream of nitrogen, more CO2 and CO were liberated, but even after heating the 
sample to red heat some oxygen and hydrogen was left in the sample.
Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] as well as other workers before (e.g. Gottschalk [7], 
Berthelot [8] and Staudenmaier [9]) confirmed the observations of Brodie and stated that 
the form of the black decomposition products is in close correlation with the form of the 
graphitic acid and the starting graphite materials. The decomposition residues become 
more voluminous the more often the oxidation and cleaning cycle is repeated [10]. 
Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] found also that the temperature of deflagration is the lower 
the slower the materials are heated up. Decomposition under pressure resulted in a more 
graphite‐like residual compound with higher density. When the samples are heated in con-
centrated sulfuric acid, the samples decompose again to graphite‐like material, but do not 
deflagrate. Hofmann found by XRD investigation (this is the first application of XRD in the 
GO research carried out in 1928) that the decomposition products obtained under pressure 
or in sulfuric acid are more crystalline than the soot‐like decomposition products obtained 
in decomposition products at normal pressure [12].
Hofmann et al. [15] stressed later that no oxygen can be detected in the gaseous decompo-
sition products and concluded that the liberated oxygen had reacted with carbon at the crystal 
edges, forming CO2 and CO. Later De Boer et al. [64] reported that they discovered a con-
siderable amount of oxygen due to the decomposition of the proposed peroxides present in 
GO. This conflicting result was not confirmed by Boehm and coworkers [16, 65]. Boehm 
and Scholz [66] showed in addition that the deflagration point of GO decreases in the order 
GOBrodie > GOStaudenmaier > GOHummers–Offeman. The low decomposition temperature of the Hummers 
and Offeman samples could be caused by catalysis from residual manganese ions. This con-
clusion is based on the observation that a GO sample soaked in an aqueous FeCl3 solution 
explodes under fire. In general, any impurity leads to lowering of the deflagration point [66].

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
19
Hofmann et al. [15] found that the interlayer distance decreases almost continuously dur-
ing decomposition. At a temperature slightly above the temperature of deflagration (320 °C), 
the layer distance amounts to 4.05 Å, and after heating up to 850 °C, it is 3.38 Å, almost iden-
tical to the layer distance of graphite. This can be explained only when the gaseous decom-
position products leave the interlayer spaces almost randomly and when there is an almost 
random interstratification of completely empty and partially oxygen‐loaded interlayer spaces.
Decomposition of GO can occur at 70 °C [66]. Very slow decomposition of GO with the 
liberation of CO2 and CO can be observed already at 50 °C [67]. Hofmann and Holst [49] 
showed that the ion exchange capacity decreases irreversibly when the samples have been 
dried at 130 °C.
To the best of my knowledge, Matuyama carried out the first thermogravimetric and dif-
ferential thermal analysis (TG‐DTA) measurement in 1954 [68]. He chose a heating rate of 
42 °C h−1 to avoid deflagration. The weight loss starts slightly below 50 °C and reaches a 
plateau at ~100 °C. This weight loss is mainly caused by dehydration. The greatest weight 
loss occurs in the range 150–200 °C and amounts to about 40%. Up to 300 °C the weight 
loss continues smoothly. Martín‐Rodríguez and Valerga‐Jiménez [69] extended the TG‐
DTA analysis up to 800 °C and determined the evolved gases by gas chromatography. They 
confirmed the results of the previous works. In a most recent TG‐DTA study of the thermal 
decomposition of GO coupled with a mass spectroscopic analysis of the evolved gases, 
new (up to now unknown) gaseous species with molar masses of 43, 46, 59 and 60 have 
been detected [70]. Hofmann et al. had already mentioned the liberation of “carbon like 
oxygen containing compounds” beside CO2 and CO as decomposition products [15].
1.4.2  Chemical Reduction Reactions
Again, Brodie [2] was the first to describe that the treatment of GO with reducing agents 
such as potassium or ammonium sulfide, Cu(i) chloride or Sn(ii) chloride leads to a black 
residue with the appearance of graphite. However, he could not purify the obtained solids 
and, thus, a further study was given up. Gottschalk [7], Staudenmaier [9] and Kohlschütter 
and Haenni [10] using Cu(i) chloride and Fe(ii) sulfate confirmed the graphite‐like appear-
ance of the reduction products. These authors stated also that the reduction product can be 
transferred again to GO.
Thiele’s conclusion [14] that GO can be quantitatively reduced to graphite was not con-
firmed by Hofmann et al. [15]. They found that the amount of oxygen that can be removed 
depends on the reducing agent used: with Fe(ii) chloride, ~68% oxygen can be removed; 
with hydrazine hydrate in aqueous medium, 82%; and with H2S in water, 91%. In the latter 
case Hofmann and Frenzel assumed that sulfur replaces oxygen by forming the sulfur 
analog of the epoxides, which decompose already at room temperature [71]. Lerf et al. 
treated GO with thiourea, an agent sensitive to epoxides; however, they could not get an 
NMR spectrum because the sample exploded in the rotator after starting the measurement 
[20]. Only more recently, in 2003, have Bourlinos et al. [72] introduced new reducing 
agents: NaBH4 and hydroquinone. Especially the latter is of interest because the graphite 
obtained shows a higher crystallinity.
When GO is reduced with hydrazine, first mentioned by Thiele [73], the residual solid 
retains a lot of water (>30%) although the layer distance of 3.5 Å is only slightly larger 
than that of the graphite [46]. Most of the water can be removed by application of 

20
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
mechanical pressure on the sample. More water can be removed then by heating the sam-
ple to 110 °C, and it requires temperatures up to 350 °C to remove all the water. Hofmann 
and König [46] explained this surprising fact in the following way: since an aqueous solu-
tion of hydrazine is alkaline, GO disperses to piles with a few GO monolayers and these 
piles are further propped apart by the reduction processes; after reduction the lamellae are 
deposited randomly to a dense felt where the water is occluded in hollow spaces. The loss 
of water during heating is again a continuous process and is accompanied by a decrease of 
the linewidth of the 00 l Bragg peaks indicating an increased ordering of the graphite layers 
in the direction of the crystallographic c‐axis. Thiele reported that the specific conductivity 
is in the order of that of graphite [35].
Whereas Hofmann et al. [15] considered the deoxygenation of molecular epoxides with 
hydrogen iodide under the formation of double bonds as a model case for the deoxygena-
tion of GO, Ruess [19] and later Scholz and Boehm [16] mentioned that hydrogen iodide 
does not react with the epoxide or the 1,3‐ethers in GO. However, De Boer and van Doorn 
[74] observed a reduction of GO with sodium iodide and ascribed the amount of liberated 
iodine to the reduction of a hydroperoxide function and to a ketone function which is 
involved in a keto–enol equilibrium.
By means of 13C NMR spectroscopy it has been shown that iodide treatment affects GO 
considerably (see Figure 1.6). Following the suggestion of Hofmann et al. [15], Lerf et al. [20] 
assumed that iodide could lead to a selective abstraction of the epoxide oxygen. However, 
the intensity of the peak assigned to epoxide groups (60 ppm) decreased simultaneously 
with the intensity of the 70 ppm signal (Figure 1.6a). Simultaneously, new features appear 
(a)
(b)
(c)
GO treated
100 °C
vacuum
GO treated
with KJ
GO
as-prepared
200
150
100
ppm/TMS
O
O
OH
OH
O
+6I·/6H·
–3I2/3H2O
50
0
OHOH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
Figure 1.6  (a) 13C MAS NMR spectra of GO modified by thermal treatment and reduction 
with KI [20, 55]. (b) Proposed reorganization of the double bond system after liberation of 
oxygen [20, 55]. (c) Modified structure of GO containing only phenols and double bonds after 
complete removal of epoxide groups [55]. Reproduced from [55] with permission of Elsevier

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
21
in the NMR spectrum: a peak at ~110 ppm and another at ~160 ppm. The simultaneous 
appearance of these signals has been interpreted as the formation of phenols in GO.
A complete disappearance of the epoxide and OH functions and a still higher portion of 
signals typical of phenols were observed when GO was treated at 100 °C in vacuum. The 
transformation of OH functions can only occur when the electron system has been reorgan-
ized completely after removal of oxygen and breaking of some C–C single bonds 
(Figure 1.6c). In an extreme case, only phenol groups and the rearranged π electron system 
could be left (Figure 1.6c).
These results demonstrate a relation between the structural models of Hofmann et al. 
[15] and Lerf and Klinowski [20, 55] and the slightly modified model of Scholz and Boehm 
[16] and Szabó et al. [51] due to the proposed chemical transformations. The Scholz–
Boehm model can now be considered as a verification of Thiele’s suggestion that oxygen 
could enter the carbon grid as a first step of GO transformation to humic acid [14, 35]. 
Pallmann [75] and Hamdi [29] compared the colloidal dispersion, the ion exchange capac-
ity and the acidity of GO, humic acid and different forms of lignin (see section 1.4.5) and 
found that lignin takes an intermediate state between humic acid and GO.
1.4.3  Reactions with Acids and Bases
GO was shown to be very stable against acids, at least against oxidizing acids. In his clean-
ing process Thiele treated GO with boiling concentrated nitric acid without evidence for 
destruction [14]. Several authors added ClO2 or nitric acid to aqueous suspensions of GO 
to keep the samples bright‐colored [7, 9, 30, 48].
Aqueous alkali/alkaline earth–alkali hydroxide solutions can interact with GO in differ-
ent ways:
●
●Dilute NaOH solutions are essential for the redispersion of acid‐precipitated GO or to 
cause osmotic swelling of GO (see section. 1.4.4).
●
●Alkali and alkaline earth acetate solutions deprotonate GO, leading to GO–alkali salts 
(see section 1.4.5) and these neutralization reactions seem to be reversible.
●
●OH− ions can initiate more or less reversible alterations of GO.
Only the latter phenomenon will be discussed here. GO suspensions in dilute alkaline 
solutions (<0.1 M) turn black within minutes, but NMR spectra do not show significant 
changes even when the samples are exposed to the solution for a day at room temperature 
(unpublished results). In contrast, Dimiev et al. [76] found a significant decrease of the 
peak intensity of the alcohol and epoxide peaks, but no other significant changes in the 
spectrum. When a GO–ethylate sample is treated with a 1 M NaOH solution at 70 °C for 
3 h, the NMR spectrum looks similar to the NMR spectrum of the thermally treated 
­sample shown in Figure 1.6(a) [20]. The only difference is that the sharp signals are 
superimposed on a very broad background with a maximum at about 130 ppm, perhaps 
indicating that the changes of the samples are more serious than in the case of the ther-
mally treated sample. Fan et al. [77] observed, by treating GO with 18 M NaOH solution 
at 80 °C, a spectrum similar to ours, which we have obtained for a sample treated at 
100 °C in vacuum.
Therefore, I think that Fan et al. observed a “base‐assisted thermal decomposition”. 
Recently, Dimiev et  al. [76] proposed chemical rearrangements in the GO structure, 

22
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
triggered by the nucleophilic attack of OH− ions. The proposed mechanism explains for the 
first time the liberation of CO2 during the slow decomposition of GO in basic solutions. It 
is also a model process to explain the lack of oxygen liberation during thermal deflagration 
of GO [15, 65] as well as the evolution of CO2 in the thermal decomposition of GO at 50 °C 
[66], if one assumes that the strongly bound water can act as a nucleophile, perhaps after 
deprotonation. In that case it could be that the changes of GO caused by soaking GO in 
water [35] or by exposure to sunlight [67] follow the same mechanism. The presence of Ba 
salts, which can act as a trap of the liberated CO2 due to the formation of insoluble BaCO3, 
may enhance the rate of decomposition [35, 49].
The iodide reaction [20] leads to very similar products as the thermal decomposition, 
but it acts as a reducing agent. Therefore, the question arises how it can be combined with 
the reaction scheme of Dimiev et al. [76].
1.4.4  “Osmotic Swelling”: Hydration Behavior and Colloid Formation
The hygroscopic properties of GO have been described already by Brodie [2]. Gottschalk 
[7] mentioned the presence of “Hydratwasser” casually. Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] 
mentioned the weight gain of dried GO exposed to air and that the water taken up can be 
removed easily during mild heating. They mentioned also that the water is liberated in 
vacuum or by keeping the samples over concentrated sulfuric acid, but that it is hard to get 
constancy in weight even for long time runs.
Hofmann and Frenzel [13] found by means of powder XRD that the water taken up in 
GO props open the graphite oxide sheets. A sample containing about 95% water showed a 
layer distance of 11.3 Å; an air‐dried sample with ~15% water, a distance of 7.84 Å; and a 
thoroughly dried sample with 7–8% water, a distance of 6.4 Å. The uptake and the release 
of water is a reversible process. From the layer expansion of ~6 Å the authors assumed that 
two layers of water are inserted between the GO monolayers when GO is soaked in water. 
Since the hk0 reflections are not changed by the water uptake, the authors call the phenom-
enon a “one‐dimensional swelling”.
Hofmann et al. [15] demonstrated for the first time the correlation between the water 
vapor pressure in the air with the percentage of water taken up and with the layer distances 
of the hydrated product. This correlation was later confirmed by Derksen and Katz [78] and 
Ruess [19]. Derksen and Katz [78] as well as Hofmann et al. [15] found that the isotherm 
of water adsorption shows a sigmoidal curve as for other known water adsorption pro-
cesses. The maximum layer distance in fully hydrated GO decreases with temperature from 
11.3 Å to 9.95 Å at 80 °C [78]. They found also, like Hofmann et al., that the layer distance 
increases almost linearly with the amount of water taken up during hydration. This effect 
has been confirmed later several times [79, 80]. It can be explained only in terms of random 
interstratification [15, 81, 82]. Hofmann et al. [15] mentioned that partially decomposed 
GO samples with C/O ratios up to 5 do not lose their swelling behavior in water.
According to the latter authors [15], shaking the fully hydrated GO in alkaline and ammo-
nia solutions leads to a complete delamination of GO. Derksen and Katz [78] gave the layer 
distance of GO as a function of the pH. They showed the increase of the layer distance from 
10.7 Å to 11.4 Å with decreasing proton concentration and a layer distance of 12.5 Å at 
pH 13. In the range 6 < pH < 13 no layer distances are given because of the colloidal 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
23
dispersion of GO. Clauss et al. [48] showed that the layer distance in 0.05 M and 0.03 M 
NaOH solution increases from 11.3 Å to 12.5 Å. In 0.02 M NaOH solutions the colloidal 
dispersion of the GO occurs discontinuously. The authors mentioned also that disintegration 
occurs at the same layer charge density (1–2 sodium ions per 100 Å2) as for montmorillon-
ites [48, 83].
Whereas the swelling behavior during the work‐up of GO has been well known since the 
discovery of GO by Brodie, Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] described this process as col-
loidal dispersion (“Kolloidisierung”) of GO for the first time and mentioned the precipita-
tion with strong acids. Thiele was then the first who described the fundamental colloidal 
properties of GO [84], e.g. the movement of the colloidal particles towards the anode in an 
electrophoresis experiment, and the increase of the flocculation tendency according to the 
Hardy–Schulze rule in the series of flocculants H < K < Ca < Al < Ce.
Hofmann et al. used colloidal dispersions of GO to prepare membranes and measured 
their properties [85, 86]. These membranes were permeable for water and cations but not 
for oxygen and nitrogen. An application is difficult because of their instability due to the 
strong swelling. The fractal dimension of such “membranes” (single‐ or multi‐layer aggre-
gates) determined by light scattering has been determined to be 2.5. This has been inter-
preted by crumpling of the GO layers [87, 88]. Other workers disproved this finding and 
corrected the value of the fractal dimension to 2.15, indicating flat GO monolayers [89].
Boehm et al. [90, 91] succeeded in preparing extremely thin graphite lamellae by reduc-
ing dispersed GO via reduction with hydrazine or by thermal treatment (Thiele mentioned 
this possibility [84]). They found monolayers and aggregates up to four layers. Reduced 
samples in suspension have a specific surface area of ~800 m2 g−1 determined by means of 
the methylene blue method, and only ~100 m2 g−1 when measured with the Brunauer–
Emmett–Teller (BET) method. Thus, Boehm et al. were the first to prepare graphene lay-
ers. In the new era, Stankovich et al. [92] simply used this method in the context of graphene 
formation. They showed also that hydrazine attacks the epoxide functions and transfers 
them to the nitrogen analog (aziridine), which then splits off the nitrogen.
Colloidal dispersions of GO have been used by Matsuo et al. to prepare GO–polyethyl-
ene oxide nanocomposites by flocculation of GO with the polymer [93, 94]. Later, synthe-
sis of other nanocomposites, e.g. poly(vinyl acetate), polyacrylamide, poly(vinyl alcohol) 
[95–97] (and references therein) were reported. Almost at the same time Kotov et al. [98] 
described highly organized GO–polymer nanocomposites by means of layer‐by‐layer dep-
osition using GO colloidal dispersions. Only a few research groups have used this elegant 
method [99–101].
1.4.5  GO Acidity
Again, Brodie [2] in 1859 as well as Gottschalk [7] in 1865 described the acidic properties 
of GO by the reaction with litmus. Thiele was the first to start a thorough investigation of 
the acidic properties of GO in 1937 [35]. He found that an aqueous NaCl solution becomes 
strongly acidic when GO is soaked in it. Thiele explained this observation by a release of 
protons from GO and a simultaneous uptake of sodium ions with the formation of a gra-
phitic acid sodium salt. In sodium hydroxide solutions, Thiele determined a reversible 
uptake of sodium up to 800 mval/100 g of GO (mval is the same as mmol).

24
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Almost simultaneously Hofmann and König [46] found that the cation exchange capacity 
from sodium acetate solutions of increasing concentrations approaches a limit of 
~150 mval/100 g GO. The most obvious explanation for the acidity would be that there are 
COOH groups at the external edges of the GO particles. A rough estimate of the possible 
number of such acidic groups would result in an uptake of sodium in the order of 1 mval/100 g 
GO [46]. The assumption of a partial destruction of the graphite layers during exhaustive 
oxidation could lead to a strong increase in the number of COOH groups when the edges of 
the interior holes are also fully covered with them, as shown in Figure 1.7. Even in such a case, 
the high cation exchange capacity cannot be explained. Therefore, Hofmann and König con-
cluded that, apart from the carboxylic groups, some acidic OH groups must be present in GO.
Hofmann and Holst [49] observed later that the cation exchange capacity determined 
with sodium and calcium acetate varies strongly in the range of 27–184 mval/100 g GO 
depending on the degree of oxidation. GOs with higher C/O ratios show lower values of the 
exchange capacity, but there is no systematic correlation. The exchange capacity of GO is 
much higher when the experiments are carried out with sodium hydroxide. The limiting 
value is scattered in the range 500–600 mval/100 g GO depending on the nature of the GO 
samples used, in fair agreement with the data of Thiele [35].
To get more insight into the acidic properties of GO, Hofmann and Holst [49] carried out 
methylation reactions. The methylation with methanol and HCl is known to be sensitive for 
carboxyl groups, whereas diazomethane reacts with different OH groups including car-
boxyl OH and phenolic OH groups. Only ~30 mval of CH3O/100 g GO have been obtained 
for the first reaction independent of the pretreatment of GO (wet, dried at 100, 130 or 
180 °C). Thus, only the carboxyl groups at the edges have been methylated with this 
method. The methylation of GO dried at 100 °C with diazomethane in ether leads to 
~500 mval CH3O/100 g GO, in fair agreement with the values of the sodium ion exchange 
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
Extended defects
in a graphite layer
due to missing C atoms
COOH
HOOC
HOOC
Figure 1.7  Defective graphite layer [46]. Reproduced from [46] with permission of Wiley‐VCH

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
25
capacity. This value is strongly reduced for a GO dried at 180 °C. Ruess [19] carried out 
acetylation reactions to transfer carboxyl and acidic OH groups into acetic esters by treat-
ing GO with acetic acid anhydride and a trace of sulfuric acid in closed ampoules at 70 °C. 
The amount of acetic acid bound to OH groups in GO is again in the range 500–
600 mval/100 g GO. When he carried out the acetylation reaction in a dioxane solution, the 
amount of inserted acetate was in the order of 800 mval/100 g GO, the highest values of the 
cation exchange capacity (CEC) found by Thiele [35]. Ruess explained the difference 
between the two methods by the enhanced diffusion of the reactant to the acidic sites, 
because dioxane is co‐intercalated and props up the interlayer expansion to 9–10 Å. He 
suggests that the acetylation reaction without an additional solvent and the methylation 
reaction with diazomethane in ether were not finished because of retarded diffusion in the 
constrained interlayer space; in these cases the layer expansion amounts only 3–4 Å.
Pallmann [75] and Hamdi [29] confirmed the values of the exchange capacity deter-
mined by Hofmann and Holst [49]. Pallmann as well as Hamdi compared the cation 
exchange capacity of GO with those of humic acid, lignin and oxidized lignin, and they 
found a correlation between the C/O ratio and the cation exchange capacity: it decreases 
the higher the carbon content. The partially destroyed samples of Hofmann and Holst [49] 
fit quite well into this correlation.
Hamdi [29] carried out also the first titration experiments monitoring the pH change in 
the supernatant solution versus the applied quantity of mval NaOH/g of GO (Figure 1.8, 
left). The titration curve shows two well‐pronounced inflection points. If they are not just 
experimental artifacts, the one at a pH of 10.5 corresponds to the number of OH groups that 
can be deprotonated with NaOH solutions, with methylation or esterification. The pH of 
the other inflection point is in the order of the pKa values of phenols. The maximum depro-
tonation that can be achieved with acetate solutions (~100 mval/100 g GO) leaves no trace 
in the pH curve. Of the recently published titration experiments [76, 102, 103], one [103] 
seems to be compatible with the previous data of Hamdi [29], whereas the other two show 
a continuous featureless increase of pH with increasing amounts of NaOH. All four titra-
tion curves start at a pH of ~ 4.
12
10
8
6
pH
4
2
1
11
10
9
8
7
pH
6
5
4
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Volume of titrant (mL)
0.8
1
0.005 M NaCl
0.05 M NaCl
0.5 M NaCl
1.2
2
3
4
5
6
7
mval NaOH/1g GO
Figure 1.8  Titration curves of Hamdi [29] (left) and Szabó et al. [102] (right). (left) Reproduced 
from [29] with permission of Springer (right). Reproduced from [102] with permission of 
Elsevier

26
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The amount of exchangeable protons is roughly half of the expected value when one 
assumes that all hydrogen determined by chemical analysis (including the hydrogen of not 
extractable water, which amounts to 7–8%) is bound as OH to the carbon grid. When the care-
fully dried GO samples are treated with sodium ethylate, it is possible to deprotonate also 
those OH groups which cannot be exchanged by highly concentrated NaOH solutions [16, 48].
Scholz and Boehm [16] collected all information available about deprotonation (titra-
tion) experiments for the three different types of GOs (Brodie, Staudenmaier and Hummers–
Offeman), showing no clear distinction between them. The scatter of available data could 
be due to the properties of the GOs (particle size, degree of oxidation and degree of decom-
position), the equilibration time, the deprotonation methods applied and the skill of the 
workers. The results of the exchange experiments of Thiele, Hofmann and Boehm indicate 
that there are four different types of OH groups with differing acidities:
•
• OH deprotonated with Na ethylate
    pKa values 14–17
tertiary alcohols (sp3 C)
•
• OH deprotonated with NaOH
    pKa values 10–12
enols, vicinal diols
    pKa values 7–9
phenols
•
• OH deprotonated with Na acetate
    pKa values < 8
carboxyl groups, phenols, water (?)
For pH < 12, this division seems to be in fair agreement with the inflection points of the 
titration experiments of Hamdi and the most recent ones of Konkena and Vasudevan [103]. 
The titration curves found by Szabó et al. [102] were greatly affected by the solution condi-
tions: increasing the pH and the ionic strength promotes the dissociation of acidic surface 
sites as weaker functional groups progressively participate in the ion exchange process, 
and the electrolyte provides an effective shielding for the surface charge. The acidity and 
surface charge characteristics were also found to depend on the degree of oxidation. Thus, 
their study points out that additives such as acids, bases and salts affect the surface charge 
behavior, which, in turn, may reflect the colloidal stability of their aqueous dispersions.
In addition, the question arises whether it is really possible to define discrete pKa values 
for OH groups in the constrained space of the interlayer galleries in which an increasing 
electric field is created by the deprotonation of the OH groups and the concomitant charg-
ing of the GO layers partially shielded by the uptake of cations. In addition, the NMR 
experiments (dipolar dephasing, short contact time measurements) of Mermoux et al. [18] 
and He et al. [104] show that the protons of the OH groups and of the bound water ­molecules 
are in strong van der Waals interactions to the neighboring O atoms and to the carbons on 
which the atoms are attached. This may enhance their acidity so that they take part also in 
the deprotonation reactions.
1.4.6  Intercalation and Functionalization Reactions
In 1962, Slabaugh and Seiler intercalated ammonia into GO for the first time [105]. They 
carried out the reaction at temperatures between −25 and −45 °C and they found an excep-
tionally high ammonia uptake of ~170 mg/g GO, which corresponds to the total amount of 
OH groups determined by Clauss et al. [48]. Later Seredych and Bandosz found an ammo-
nia uptake of ~18 mg/g GO prepared by the “Brodie method”. These authors explained the 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
27
uptake by the neutralization of the carboxylic groups and the deprotonation of interlamellar 
weakly acidic OH groups [106]. The GOHummers–Offeman takes up even more NH3 (~60 mg/g 
GO) because it forms (NH4)2SO4 with the sulfate groups covalently bound to GO (first 
proposed by Boehm and Scholz [30] and later by Titelman et al. [107]) and detached from 
the GO by the action of the superoxide radical anion present in GO [108].
Whereas Kohlschütter and Haenni [10] and earlier authors discussed the solubility and 
insolubility of GO, Hofmann et al. [15] described for the first time reactions of solvents 
with GO in terms of swelling. Kohlschütter and Haenni mentioned the insolubility of GO 
in alcohols, ether, benzene, toluene, xylol, acetone, carbon disulfide and chloroform. 
Hofmann et al. [15] stated that GO swells in many polar liquids, e.g. ethanol, acetic acid, 
acetone and red fuming nitric acid, but they do not give layer distances. Derksen and Katz 
[78] gave for the first time the layer distance of GO swollen in ethanol, which is 9.3 Å. 
These authors show also that the admixture of ethanol or tannin to water reduces the layer 
distance with respect to the fully hydrated GO.
Ruess [19] discovered that dioxane is the only swelling agent that leads to some ordering 
in the GO compound, as indicated by the appearance of up to six 00 l reflections (normally 
only one or two 00 l reflections are observed). Therefore, he used this intercalation com-
pound to improve his structural analysis.
“Interlamellar sorption complexes” of a great number of organic compounds were stud-
ied for the first time by Cano‐Ruiz and MacEwan [109, 110] following the research pro-
gram of MacEwan first applied to montmorillonite and halloysite [111]. They showed that 
non‐polar molecules like alkanes, PAHs, CS2 or long‐chain alcohols are not taken up in the 
interlayer space. For various other molecules, the insertion into the interlayer galleries can 
be questioned. If the so calculated expansions are ≤3 Å, an uptake of organic molecules in 
the interlayer space is highly improbable because it affords an expansion of at least 3.5 Å, 
the smallest possible dimension for an organic molecule. Layer expansions of 4–5 Å have 
been found for various aliphatic alcohols, glycol, glycerol, other diols, phenol, aliphatic 
and aromatic amines, and aliphatic and aromatic nitro‐compounds. Significantly higher 
layer expansions have been described for aniline or pyridine and long‐chain aliphatic alco-
hols and amines. Intercalation of amines is preferred with respect to the uptake of other 
molecules because they undergo acid–base reactions like ammonia with particular OH 
groups in the interlayer space forming ammonium cations. This effect leads to a higher 
uptake of amines over that of the alcohols. Recently, Bourlinos et al. have shown that 
amines are intercalated easily in GO, but not ammonium ions [72]. They show also that 
tertiary amines are hardly inserted in GO [72].
Subsequent papers were exclusively devoted to the uptake of long‐chain alkyl alco-
hols and amines (up to 16 C atoms) [112, 113] (and references therein). These com-
pounds found increased attention after their discovery by MacEwan [111] and Jordan 
[114, 115] in 1948–1959, because of the membrane‐like arrangements of the alkyl com-
pounds in the interlayer space. Krüger‐Grasser continued this work, but used a sodium‐
loaded GO for her studies; thus she transferred GO to a montmorillonite‐like system 
[116]. Correspondingly, she found much higher layer distances (up to 50 Å) and could 
also insert long‐chain alkyl alcohols. In addition, mixtures of alcohols and amines have 
been intercalated. These systems allow the selective adsorption of hydrophobic sol-
vents from their mixtures [117]. Matsuo et al. [118] used the sodium salt of GO to 
insert quaternary ammonium surfactants [R3NCnH2n+1]+ (R = CH3, C2H5; n = 12, 14, 16) 

28
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
and [C16H33NC5H5]+. In subsequent papers they used them for selective adsorption of 
PAHs (e.g. [119, 120]).
Due to the reactive oxygen atoms in the interlayer space of GO, the uptake of organic 
molecules (intercalation) can be accompanied by the reaction of some of the reactive spe-
cies taken up. The first examples of this functionalization were realized with two very 
reactive organic species – diazomethane and acetic acid anhydride – both reacting with the 
OH groups with the formation of a methyl ether and an acetic acid ester, respectively [19, 
47, 49]. Both reactions have been used to determine acidic sites on GO (see section 1.4.5). 
Aragón de la Cruz and MacEwan [113] and later Krüger‐Grasser [116] intercalated long‐
chain alkyl compounds into these functionalized GO. However, the functionalization leads 
to a reduced uptake of these compounds.
Later the functionalization was used to identify the functional groups on GO by specific 
reactions [20, 55, 104, 121]. While in the cases of acetylation, ethylation and the reaction 
with an isocyanate, the specific functionalization could be confirmed by NMR, most of the 
other reagents studied did not lead to detectable changes in the NMR spectrum. In all the 
studies a new peak at about 110 ppm has been assigned to the formation of phenols. 
Protonation/deprotonation reactions and additions of water or OH groups like those pro-
posed by Dimiev et al. [76] could also induce phenol formation near defect sites apart from 
epoxide ring opening reactions.
Bourlinos et al. [72] suggested that nucleophilic attack on epoxides and covalent bond-
ing is the main mechanism for the uptake of primary aliphatic amines by GO. This conclu-
sion has been drawn mainly from the observation that the treatment of amine–GO complexes 
with hot ethanol or aqueous NaOH solution does not reduce the layer distance 
significantly.
Bourlinos et al. [72] and Matsuo et al. [121] were able to silylate the hydroxyl groups of 
GO, forming C–O–Si bonds. The product is stable up to 300 °C. Since that time the func-
tionalization of GO has become a new field of research.
1.4.7  Functional Groups, their Reactions and their Relation  
to GO Formation and Destruction
The thermal decomposition behavior of GO is indicative of a reactive oxygen function. The 
1,3‐ethers of Ruess are not as reactive as the 1,2‐ethers. Peroxide groups would be even 
more reactive, but the evidence for peroxides in GO is weak. The H2S, the thiourea and 
probably the iodide reactions seem to be indicative for epoxide functions.
The argument of Ruess that typical nucleophilic addition reactions do not occur in GO 
is not a convincing argument against epoxides. Nucleophilic ring opening reactions on 
epoxides start with the addition of the nucleophile from the opposite site of the epoxide 
oxygen. But both sites of the carbon grid are covered with a more or less densely packed 
oxygen layer, which is negatively polarized. So the access of the nucleophiles to the carbon 
atoms is restricted to defects in the oxygen coverage. This may retard the reaction consider-
ably. And indeed steric hindrance by bulky substituents on the opposite site of the epoxide 
oxygen prevents any nucleophilic reaction [122].
Hydronium ions in the interlayer space could induce ring opening of epoxides via a 
proton transfer to the epoxide oxygen followed by the covalent bonding of a hydroxyl group 
to the carbocation [59, 60, 123]. Electrophilic reactions induced by protons can also induce 

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
29
the transformation of epoxides to phenols, at least for low‐molecular‐weight PAHs. The 
transformation to phenols in GO would afford C–C bond breaking, which seems improba-
ble, but it could happen at defects in the carbon grid. Protons could also induce an oxygen 
walk on the carbon surface, another interesting aspect for GO chemistry [59]. Perhaps 
electrophilic reactions could be of much more importance in GO than nucleophilic 
reactions.
1.5  Epilogue
Going through the publications of 150 years or so, it is interesting to see how the mode of 
scientific work and the style of writing publications have changed, what has been cited in 
later generations, what has been omitted consciously or subconsciously, and what has been 
neglected because it could not be understood in later times. These topics would be an inter-
esting case for a study in the sociology of science. I would like to give just a few comments 
for such a study.
Knowledge of the chemical properties of GO was highly developed by 1919, and it was 
excellently reviewed by Kohlschütter and Haenni [10]. This remarkable paper and all the 
previous publications had practically no figures. The experimental conditions were not 
described separately. The manipulations done were integrated in the very precise and 
detailed description of the observations made. The experiments were focused on the reac-
tion behavior with respect to other chemical substances, temperature or in vacuum. 
The observations were mostly qualitative in nature. Analytical results were restricted to 
the determination of the C/H contents via combustion analysis, as in organic chemistry. 
The procedure applied was a standard method and not further described.
Worth noting is the debate between Thiele [14, 31, 35, 39] and Hofmann [12, 13, 15, 46, 
49]. Thiele was the first to make a statement concerning the functional groups in GO and 
presented the first structural model. He carried out for the first time the ion exchange reac-
tions, the electrochemical intercalation of sulfuric acid and the electrochemical preparation 
of GO, and discussed the relation to humic acids. Hofmann in 1934 presented an alternative 
structural model and criticized Thiele’s model with a few pejorative remarks. In 1937, 
shortly after the paper by Thiele, he presented a confirmation of Thiele’s data concerning 
the ion exchange and admitted the existence of OH groups in GO besides the epoxide func-
tions. He never corrected his structural model; modifications of it were given by his young 
coworkers, first Ruess [19] and later Boehm [16, 27, 30, 48], maybe because his scientific 
interests shifted towards clay minerals. It is interesting to look at the style of the publica-
tions. Thiele published in the style of previous workers; his publications are narrative and 
many important experimental details are not reported; exceptions from this attitude were 
the description of his reduction and his ion exchange experiments. Hofmann was more 
modern; although he was also narrative in large parts of his publications, he gave the exper-
imental details in a separate part of the publications; one can also recognize in his arguing 
the influence of physical chemistry.
The research on GO received some stimuli from other fields of research: the invention of 
XRD, colloid chemistry, ion exchange processes and soil science (i.e. the relation between 
GO and humic acids). An important aspect was the phenomenon of swelling. In the 1920s 
macromolecular chemistry was established and it was found that especially biological 

30
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
macromolecules show a remarkable swelling behavior, which was investigated with XRD 
[78]. This triggered the corresponding work of Hofmann and his coworkers. In at least one 
of his publications he called the isolated graphite oxide layers “macromolecules”. Because 
these macromolecules were layered materials, the swelling could occur in just one dimen-
sion. This one‐dimensional swelling was also discovered by Hofmann almost simultane-
ously for the low‐charged clay minerals.
The research on GO was for a long time a specialty of solid‐state chemists. The most 
important work was done by researchers in France and Germany. Therefore, many impor-
tant publications on GO were written in German. This is a problem for estimating the value 
of previous work in the field today.
In 2015 one can say the following about GO from the point of view of scientific 
activities over the 150 years from 1855 to 2005: GO is a metastable non‐stoichiometric 
solid carbon compound whose structure has not been fully established. It is a tricky 
intermediate state between over‐oxidation and self‐destruction. While all the informa-
tion was available, nobody had drawn this conclusion in 1970. Only under careful 
adjustment of the preparation conditions, starting with the choice of the graphite (crys-
talline, powders, particle size), the control of the water content of the acids applied, the 
temperature and time regime, exclusion of sunlight during work‐up, and the drying con-
ditions, can one obtain GO with reproducible properties. A useful guide for the choice 
of the reaction conditions is the almost neglected publication of Boehm and Scholz [30]. 
The sample with a residual water content of about ~8% should have a C/O ratio of 
3 ± 0.3 and in the NMR spectrum there should be only three peaks at ~60 ppm, ~70 ppm 
and ~130 ppm.
Comparing recent work on GO and the historical material, a statement of an older col-
league of mine came to my mind: “You can redo the same thing in 25 years, and almost 
nobody will recognize it.” I also feel I should mention a statement by the English mathema-
tician and philosopher, A.N. Whitehead, who wrote in a footnote of his most famous book 
Process and Reality: “All philosophical concepts are just footnotes to Plato.” So, in a 
­manner of speaking, most workers active in the field of GO research since 2005 are just 
preparing footnotes to the seminal works of Kohlschütter, Hofmann and Boehm, and I must 
confess that my own work is also nothing else. I realized that I have overlooked also many 
interesting aspects in the previous works when we wrote our own papers. I fear this is quite 
normal, because you can recognize and understand the importance of details in publica-
tions only when you have your own experimental experience in a new field into which you 
have jumped.
References
[1]	 Brodie, M.B.C., Note sur un nouveau procédé pour la purification et la désagrégation du graph-
ite. Ann. Chim. Phys. 1855, 45, 351–352.
[2]	 Brodie, B.C., On the atomic weight of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 1859, 149, 249–259.
[3]	 Brodie, B.C., Sur le poids atomique du graphite. Ann. Chim. Phys. 1860, 59, 466–472.
[4]	 Brodie, B.C., Über das Atomgewicht des Graphits. Ann. Chem. Pharm. 1860, 114, 6–24.
[5]	 Schafhäutl, C., Über die Verbindungen des Kohlenstoffs mit Silizium, Eisen und anderen 
­Metallen, welche die verschiedenen Gattungen von Roheisen, Stahl und Schmiedeeisen bilden. 
J. Prakt. Chem. 1840, 21 (1), 129–157.

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
31
[6]	 Schafhäutl, C., Über weißes und graues Roheisen, Graphitbildung u.s.w. J. Prakt. Chem. 1859, 
76 (1), 257–310.
[7]	 Gottschalk, F., Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Graphitsäure. J. Prakt. Chem. 1865, 95 (1), 321–350.
[8]	 Berthelot, M., Recherches sur les états du carbone. Ann. Chim. Phys. 1870, 19, 392–417.
[9]	 Staudenmaier, L., Verfahren zur Darstellung von Graphitsäure. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1898, 31 
(2), 1481–1487.
[10]	 Kohlschütter, V.; Haenni, P., Zur Kenntnis des graphitischen Kohlenstoffs und der Graphitsäure. 
Z. Anorg. Chem. 1919, 105 (1), 121–144.
[11]	 Weinschenk, E., Über den Graphitkohlenstoff und die gegenseitigen Beziehungen zwischen 
Graphit, Graphitit und Graphitoxid. Z. Kristallogr. 1897, 28 (3), 291–304.
[12]	 Hofmann, U., Über Graphitsäure und die bei ihrer Zersetzung entstehenden Kohlenstoffarten. 
Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1928, 61 (2), 435–441.
[13]	 Hofmann, U.; Frenzel, A., Quellung von Graphit und die Bildung von Graphitsäure. Ber. Dtsch. 
Chem. Ges. 1930, 63 (5), 1248–1262.
[14]	 Thiele, H., Graphit und Graphitsäure. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1930, 190 (1), 145–160.
[15]	 Hofmann, U.; Frenzel, A.; Csalán, E., Die Konstitution der Graphitsäure und ihre Reaktionen. 
Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1934, 510 (1), 1–41.
[16]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Betrachtungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1969, 369 (3–6), 327–340.
[17]	 Mermoux, M.; Chabre, Y., Formation of graphite oxide. Synth. Met. 1989, 34, 157–162.
[18]	 Mermoux, M.; Chabre, Y.; Rousseau, A., FTIR and 13C NMR study of graphite oxide. Carbon 
1991, 29 (3), 469–474.
[19]	 Ruess, G., Über das Graphitoxyhydroxyd (Graphitoxyd). Monatsh. Chem. 1947, 76 (3), 381–417.
[20]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[21]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[22]	 Rourke, J.P.; Pandey, P.A.; Moore, J.J.; et al., The real graphene oxide revealed: stripping the 
oxidative debris from graphene‐like sheets. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (14), 3173–3177.
[23]	 Boehm, H.P., Graphene – how a laboratory curiosity suddenly became extremely interesting. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (49), 9332–9335.
[24]	 Geim, A.K.; Novoselov, K.S., The rise of graphene. Nature Mater. 2007, 6 (3), 183–191.
[25]	 Luzi, W., Beiträge zur Kenntnis des Graphitkohlenstoffs. Z. Naturwiss. 1891, 64, 224–269.
[26]	 Charpy, G., Sur la formation de l’oxyde graphitique et la définition du graphite. C. R. Hebd. 
Séances Acad. Sci. 1909, 148, 920–923.
[27]	 Boehm, H.P.; Eckel, M.; Scholz, W., Über den Bildungsmechanismus des Graphitoxids. 
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1967, 353 (5–6), 236–242.
[28]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R.E., Preparation of graphite oxide. J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80 
(6), 1339–1339.
[29]	 Hamdi, H., Zur Kenntnis der kolloidchemischen Eigenschaften des Humus. Dispersoidchemische 
Beobachtungen an Graphitoxid. Kolloid Beihefte 1942, 54, 554–643.
[30]	 Boehm, H.P.; Scholz, W., Vergleich der Darstellungsverfahren für Graphitoxyd. Liebigs Ann. 
Chem. 1966, 691 (1), 1–8.
[31]	 Thiele, H., Die Quellung des Graphit an der Anode und die mechanische Zerstörung von 
Kohleanoden. Z. Elektrochem. 1934, 40 (1), 26–33.
[32]	 Besenhard, J.O.; Fritz, H.P., Uber die Reversibilität der elektrochemischen Graphitoxydation 
in Säuren. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1975, 416 (2), 106–116.
[33]	 Besenhard, J.O.; Wudy, E.; Möhwald, H.; et al., Anodic oxidation of graphite in H2SO4: dilatometry–
in‐situ X‐ray diffraction–impedance spectroscopy. Synth. Met. 1983, 7 (3–4), 185–192.
[34]	 Marchand, R.F., Über die Einwirkung der Schwefelsäure auf die Holzkohle. J. Prakt. Chem. 
1845, 35 (1), 228–231.
[35]	 Thiele, H., Über Salzbildung und Basenaustausch der Graphitsäure. Kolloid‐Z. 1937, 80 (1), 
1–20.
[36]	 Rüdorff, W.; Hofmann, U., Über Graphitsalze. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1938, 238 (1), 1–50.

32
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[37]	 Inagaki, M.; Iwashita, N.; Kouno, E., Potential change with intercalation of sulfuric acid into 
graphite by chemical oxidation. Carbon 1990, 28 (1), 49–55.
[38]	 Sorokina, N.E.; Shornikova, O.N.; Avdeev, V.V., Stability limits of graphite intercalation 
­compounds in the systems graphite–HNO3(H2SO4)–H2O–KMnO4. Inorg. Mater. 2007, 43 (8), 
822–826.
[39]	 Thiele, H., Über die Quellung von Graphit. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1932, 206 (4), 407–415.
[40]	 Avdeev, V.V.; Monyakina, L.A.; Nikol’skaya, I.V.; et al., The choice of oxidizers for graphite 
hydrogensulfate chemical synthesis. Carbon 1992, 30 (6), 819–823.
[41]	 Sorokina, N.E.; Khahkov, M.A.; Avdeev, V.V.; Nikol’skaya, I.V., Reaction of graphite with 
­sulfuric acid in the presence of KMnO4. Russ. J. Gen. Chem. 2005, 75 (2), 162–168.
[42]	 Skorwroński, J.M., Distribution of intercalates in CrO3–H2SO4–graphite and CrO3–HClO4–
graphite bi-intercalation compounds. Synth. Met. 1998, 95 (2), 135–142.
[43]	 Royer, D.J., Evidence for the existence of the permanganyl ion in sulfuric acid solutions of 
potassium permanganate. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1961, 17 (1–2), 159–167.
[44]	 Nakajima, T.; Mabuchi, A.; Hagiwara, R., A new structural model of graphite oxide. Carbon 
1988, 26 (3), 357–361.
[45]	 Nakajima, T.; Matsuo, Y., Formation process and structure of graphite oxide. Carbon 1994, 32 
(3), 469–475.
[46]	 Hofmann, U.; König, E., Untersuchungen über Graphitoxyd. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1937, 234 
(4), 311–336.
[47]	 Ruess, G., Zur Formel des Graphitoxyds. Kolloid‐Z. 1945, 110 (1), 17–26.
[48]	 Clauss, A.; Plass, R.; Boehm, H.P.; Hofmann, U:, Untersuchungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxyds. 
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1957, 291 (5–6), 205–220.
[49]	 Hofmann, U.; Holst, R., Über die Säurenatur und die Methylierung von Graphitoxid. Ber. 
Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1939, 72 (4), 754‐771.
[50]	 Hadži, D.; Novak, A., Infrared spectra of graphitic oxide. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1955, 51, 
1614–1620.
[51]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi,O.; Forgó, P.; et al., Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of 
progressively oxidized graphite oxides. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18 (11), 2740–2749.
[52]	 Aragón de la Cruz, F.; Cowley, J.M., Structure of graphitic oxide. Nature 1962, 196 (4853), 
468–469.
[53]	 Blumenfeld, A.L.; Muradyan, V.E.; Shumilova, B.; et al., Investigation of graphite oxide by 
means of 13C NMR and 1H spin lattice relaxation. Mater. Sci. Forum 1992, 91–93, 613–617.
[54]	 Hontoria‐Lucas, C.; Lopez‐Peinado, A.J.; Lopez‐Gonzalez, J.deD.; et al., Study of oxygen con-
taining groups in a series of graphite oxides: physical and chemical characterization. Carbon 
1995, 33 (11), 1585–1592.
[55]	 He, H.; Klinowski, J.; Forster, M.; Lerf, A., A new structural model for graphite oxide. Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 1998, 287 (1–2), 53–56.
[56]	 Fujii, S.; Enoki, T., Clar’s aromatic sextet and π‐electron distribution in nanographene. Angew. 
Chem. 2012, 124 (29), 7348–7353.
[57]	 Kalinowski, H.O.; Berger, S.; Braun, S., 13C NMR‐Spektroskopie, Georg Thieme, Stuttgart, 1983.
[58]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Tour, J.M., Mechanism of graphene oxide formation. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (3), 
3060–3068.
[59]	 Boyd, D.R.; Jerina, D.M., Arene oxides‐oxepins. In The Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds, 
ed. A. Hassner, vol. 42, pp. 197–282. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1985.
[60]	 Fatiadi, A.J., The classical permanganate ion: still a novel oxidant in organic chemistry. 
Synthesis 1987, 1987 (2), 85–127.
[61]	 Kosynkin, D.V.; Higginbotham, A.L.; Sinitskii, A.; et al., Longitudinal unzipping of carbon 
nanotubes to form graphene nanoribbons. Nature 2009, 458 (7240), 872–877.
[62]	 Forsey, S.P.; Thomson, N.R.; Barker, J.M., Oxidation kinetics of polycyclic aromatic hydrocar-
bons by permanganate. Chemosphere 2010, 79 (6), 628–636.
[63]	 Foster, C.H.; Berchtold, G.A., Addition of singlet oxygen to arene oxides. J. Org. Chem. 1975, 
40 (25), 3743–3746.

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
33
[64]	 De Boer, J.H.; van Doorn, A.B.C., Graphitic oxide III. The thermal decomposition of graphitic 
oxide. Proc. K. Ned. Akad. Wetensch. B 1958, 61, 17–21.
[65]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Die thermische Zersetzung von Graphitoxyd. Naturwissenschaften 
1964, 51 (7), 160.
[66]	 Boehm, H.P.; Scholz, W., Der “Verpuffungspunkt” des Graphitoxyds. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1965, 335 (1–2), 74–79.
[67]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Die Ursache der Dunkelfärbung des hellen Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. 
Allg. Chem. 1964, 331 (3–4), 129–132.
[68]	 Matuyama, E., Pyrolysis of graphitic acid. J. Phys. Chem. 1954, 58 (3), 215–219.
[69]	 Martín‐Rodríguez, A.; Valerga‐Jiménez, P., Thermal decomposition of the graphite oxidation 
products. Thermochim. Acta 1984, 78 (1–3), 113–122.
[70]	 Barroso‐Bujans, F.; Alegría, A.; Colmenero, J., Kinetic study of the graphite oxide reduction: 
combined structural and gravimetric experiments under isothermal and nonisothermal condi-
tions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114 (49), 21645–21651.
[71]	 Hofmann, U.; Frenzel, A., Die Reduktion von Graphitoxyd mit Schwefelwasserstoff. Kolloid‐Z. 
1934, 68 (2), 149–151.
[72]	 Bourlinos, A.B.; Gournis, D.; Petridis, D.; et al., Graphite oxide: chemical reduction to graphite 
and surface modification with primary aliphatic amines and amino acids. Langmuir 2003, 19 
(15), 6050–6055.
[73]	 Thiele, H., Über die Quellung von Graphit. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1932, 206 (4), 407–415.
[74]	 De Boer, J.H.; van Doorn, A.B.C., Graphitic oxide IV. Some chemical properties. Proc. K. Ned. 
Akad. Wetensch. B 1958, 61 (3), 160–169.
[75]	 Pallmann, H., Dispersoidchemische Probleme in der Humusforschung. Kolloid‐Z. 1942, 101 
(1), 72–81.
[76]	 Dimiev, A.M; Alemany, L.B.; Tour, J.M., Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity, its instability in 
water, and a new dynamic structural model. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 576–588.
[77]	 Fan, X.; Peng, W.; Li, Y.; et al., Deoxygenation of exfoliated graphite oxide under alkaline 
conditions: a green route to graphene preparation. Adv. Mater. 2008, 20 (23), 4490–4493.
[78]	 Derksen, J.C.; Katz, J.R., Untersuchung über die intramicellare Quellung der Graphitsäure. 
Rec. Trav. Chim. 1934, 53 (7), 652–669.
[79]	 Lerf, A.; Buchsteiner, A.; Pieper, J.; et al., Hydration behavior and dynamics of water molecules 
in graphite oxide. J. Phys. Chem. Solids 2006, 67 (5–6), 1106–1110.
[80]	 Barroso‐Bujans, F.; Cerveny, S.; Alegría, A.; Colmenero, J., Sorption and desorption behavior 
of water and organic solvents from graphite oxide. Carbon 2010, 48 (11), 3277–3286.
[81]	 Hendricks, S.B.; Jefferson M.E., Structures of kaolin and talc‐pyrophylite hydrates and their 
bearing on water sorption of the clays. Amer. Miner. 1938, 23 (12), 863–875.
[82]	 Hofmann, U.; Hausdorf, A., Kristallstruktur und innerkristalline Quellung von Montmorillonit. 
Z. Kristallogr. Mineral. Petrogr. A 1942, 104 (1–6), 265–293.
[83]	 Weiss, A., Die innerkristalline Quellung als allgemeines Modell für Quellungsvorgänge. 
Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1958, 91 (3), 487–502.
[84]	 Thiele, H., Die Mizellarstruktur der Graphitsäure. Kolloid‐Z. 1931, 56 (2), 129–138.
[85]	 Clauss, A.; Hofmann, U.; Weiss, A., Membranpoteniale an Graphitoxydfolien. Z. Elektrochem. 
1957, 61 (10), 1284–1290.
[86]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Hofmann, U., Graphite oxide and its membrane properties. J. Chim. 
Phys. 1961, 58 (12) 141–147.
[87]	 Hwa, T.; Kokufuta, E; Tanaka, T., Conformation of graphite oxide membranes in solution. Phys. 
Rev. A 1991, 44 (4), R2235–R2238.
[88]	 Wen, X.; Garland, C.; Hwa, T.; et al., Crumpled and collapsed conformations in graphite oxide 
membranes. Nature 1992, 355 (6359), 426–428.
[89]	 Spector, M.S.; Naranjo, E.; Chirovolu, S.; Zasadzinski, J.A., Conformation of tethered mem-
brane: crumpling in graphite oxide? Phys. Rev. Lett. 1994, 73 (21), 2867–2870.
[90]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Fischer, G.O.; Hofmann, U., Dünnste Kohlenstoff‐Folien. 
Z. Naturforsch. B 1962, 17 (b), 150–153.

34
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[91]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Fischer, G.O.; Hofmann, U., Surface properties of extremely thin 
graphite lamellae. In Carbon: Proceedings of the Fifth Conference, vol. 1, pp. 73–80. Pergamon 
Press, Oxford, 1962.
[92]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R.D.; et al., Synthesis of graphene‐based nanosheets via 
chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 2007, 45 (7), 1558–1565.
[93]	 Matsuo, Y.; Tahara, K.; Sugie, Y., Synthesis of poly(ethylene oxide)‐intercalated graphite 
oxide. Carbon 1996, 34 (5), 672–674.
[94]	 Matsuo, Y.; Tahara, K.; Sugie, Y., Structure and thermal properties of poly(ethylene oxide)‐
intercalated graphite oxide. Carbon 1997, 35 (1), 113–120.
[95]	 Liu, P.; Gong, K.; Xiao, P.; Xiao, M., Preparation and characterization of poly(vinyl acetate)‐
intercalated graphite oxide nanocomposite. J. Mater. Chem. 2000, 10 (4), 933–935.
[96]	 Xu, J.; Hu, Y.; Song, L.; et al., Preparation and characterization of polyacrylamide intercalated 
graphite oxide. Mater. Res. Bull. 2001, 36 (10), 1833–1836.
[97]	 Xu, J.; Hu, Y.; Song, L.; et al., Preparation and characterization of poly(vinyl alcohol)/graphite 
oxide nanocomposite. Carbon 2002, 40 (3), 445–467.
[98]	 Kotov, N.A.; Dékány, I.; Fendler, J.H., Ultrathin graphite oxide–polyelectrolyte composites 
prepared by self‐assembly: transitions between conductive and non‐conductive states. Adv. 
Mater. 1996, 8 (8), 637–641.
[99]	 Cassagneau, T.; Fendler, J.H., High density rechargeable lithium‐ion batteries self‐assembled 
from graphite oxide nanoplatelets and polyelectrolytes. Adv. Mater. 1998, 10 (11), 877–881.
[100]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin 
composite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 
11 (3), 771–778.
[101]	 Cassagneau, T.; Fendler, J.H., Preparation and layer‐by‐layer self‐assembly of silver nanopar-
ticles capped by graphite oxide nanosheets. J. Phys. Chem. B 1999, 103 (11), 1789–1793.
[102]	 Szabó, T.; Tombácz, E.; Illés, E; Dékány, I., Enhanced acidity and pH‐dependent surface charge 
characterization of successively oxidized graphite oxides. Carbon 2006, 44 (3), 537–545.
[103]	 Konkena, B.; Vasudevan, S., Understanding aqueous dispersibilty of graphene oxide and 
reduced graphene oxide through pKa measurements. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2012, 3 (7), 867–872.
[104]	 He, H.; Riedl, T.; Lerf, A.; Klinowski, J., Solid‐state NMR studies of the structure of graphite 
oxide. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100 (51), 19954–19958.
[105]	 Slabaugh, W.H.; Seiler, B.C., Interactions of ammonia with graphite oxide. J. Phys. Chem. 
1962, 66 (3), 396–401.
[106]	 Seredych, M.; Bandosz, T.J., Removal of ammonia by graphite oxide via its intercalation and 
reactive adsorption. Carbon 2007, 45 (10), 2130–2132.
[107]	 Titelman, G.I.; Gelman, V.; Bron, S; et al., Characteristics and microstructure of aqueous 
­colloidal dispersions of graphite oxide. Carbon 2005, 43 (3), 641–649.
[108]	 Petit, C.; Seredych, M.; Bandosz, T.J., Revisiting the chemistry of graphite oxides and its 
effect on ammonia adsorption. J. Mater. Chem. 2009, 19 (48), 9176–9185.
[109]	 Cano‐Ruiz, J.; MacEwan, D.M.C., Interlamellar sorption complexes of graphitic acid with 
organic substances. Nature 1955, 176 (4495), 1222–1223.
[110]	 Cano‐Ruiz, J.; MacEwan, D.M.C., Interlamellar organic complexes of graphitic acid. A pre-
liminary study. In Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on the Reactivity of 
Solids, Madrid, 1956, pp. 227–242.
[111]	 MacEwan, D.M.C., Complexes of clays with organic compounds. I. Complex formation 
between montmorillonite and halloysite and certain organic liquids. Trans. Faraday Soc. 1948, 
44, 349–367.
[112]	 Aragón, F.; Cano‐Ruiz, J.; MacEwan, D.M.C., β‐type interlamellar sorption complexes. 
Nature 1959, 183 (4663), 740–741.
[113]	 Aragón, F.; MacEwan, D.M.C., Sorption of organic molecules by graphitic acid and methyl-
ated graphitic acid: a preliminary study. Kolloid‐Z. 1965, 203 (1), 36–42.
[114]	 Jordan, J.W., Organophilic bentonites. I. Swelling in organic liquids. J. Phys. Chem. 1949, 53 
(2), 294–306.
[115]	 Jordan, J.W.; Hook, B.J.; Finlayson, C.M., Organophilic bentonites. II. Organic liquid gels. 
J. Phys. Chem. 1950, 54 (8), 1196–1208.

Graphite Oxide Story – From the Beginning Till the Graphene Hype
35
[116]	 Krüger‐Grasser, R., Interkalatkomplexe von Graphitoxiden. Ph.D. thesis, Munich, 1980.
[117]	 Dékány, I.; Krüger‐Grasser, R.; Weiss, A., Selective liquid sorption properties of hydrophobi-
zed graphite oxide nanostructures. Colloid Polym. Sci. 1998, 276 (7), 570–576.
[118]	 Matsuo, Y.; Niwa, T.; Sugie, Y., Preparation and characterization of cationic surfactant‐intercalated 
graphite oxide. Carbon 1999, 37 (6), 897–901.
[119]	 Matsuo, Y.; Hatase, K.; Sugie, Y., Selective intercalation or aromatic molecules into alkyltri-
methylammonium ion‐intercalated graphite oxide. Chem. Lett. 1999, 28 (10), 1109–1110.
[120]	 Matsuo, Y.; Watanabe, K.; Fukutsua, T.; Sugie, Y., Characterization of n‐hexadecylalkylamine‐
intercalated graphite oxides as sorbents. Carbon 2003, 41 (8), 1545–1550.
[121]	 Matsuo, Y.; Fukunaga, T.; Fukutsua, T.; Sugie, Y., Silylation of graphite oxide. Carbon 2004, 
42 (10), 2117–2119.
[122]	 Thiergardt, R.; Rihst, G.; Hugt, P.; Peter, H.H., Cladospirone bisepoxide: definite structure 
assignment including absolute configuration and selective chemical transformation. Tetrahedron 
1995, 51 (3), 733–742.
[123]	 Bruice, T.C.; Bruice, P.Y., Solution chemistry of arene oxides. Acc. Chem. Res. 1976, 9, 378–384.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
2
Mechanism of Formation and Chemical 
Structure of Graphene Oxide
Ayrat M. Dimiev
2.1  Introduction
Graphene oxide (GO) has been attracting the recurring interest of the chemical community 
since it was first synthesized almost 160 years ago. The fine chemical structure of this won-
der material remains ambiguous up to the present day despite the efforts of generations of 
chemists to propose a suitable structural model. The mechanism of GO formation is even 
less studied and understood. As the reader might have learned from the previous chapter, 
very serious studies on GO chemistry have been conducted throughout the entire twentieth 
century. Unfortunately, today a large part of those early studies has been forgotten, because 
they were written in German and French. In the author’s opinion, those early studies, per-
formed in the best old‐school traditions, were in many ways advantageous when compared 
to some modern publications. The fundamentality of scientific thinking, the methodology of 
the research and, importantly, the trustworthiness of the reported data were on a level that is 
rather rare in the modern GO field. The lack of advanced instrumentation was the main factor 
that prevented the old‐time researchers from arriving at the conclusions we can make today. 
Another factor is that experimental data in the field has been accumulating gradually through-
out the years. Today, one can build a theory on the structure of GO simply by reading and 
re‐evaluating previously published research, in the way Anton Lerf did in Chapter 1. At the 
same time we should admit that for several reasons the early researchers were wrong in their 
views on GO chemistry. Even the most recent and broadly accepted model from Lerf himself 
contains some drawbacks, and cannot account for all the experimental observations.

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
37
The “graphene era”, started in 2004 by works of Novoselov and Geim, sparked renewed 
interest in GO, first as a potential graphene precursor, and later as a unique and interesting 
material in itself. However, in contrast to the twentieth century, the major part of modern 
GO‐related studies is applied research: GO has been tested for numerous potential applica-
tions. The fundamental aspects of this material have gained significantly less attention. In 
modern application‐driven research, fundamental science is considered a luxury, and is the 
realm of a few enthusiasts who can afford such a luxury. As a result, today one can observe 
a substantial decrease in the quality of GO‐related publications caused by underestimating 
the importance of the fundamentals. One should never forget that fundamentals are para-
mount for successful applications. Understanding the mechanism of GO formation is criti-
cal for developing cost‐effective production methods for products with target properties, 
while understanding the actual chemical structure is critical for developing meaningful 
functionalization protocols.
In this chapter, the most recent view on GO formation and its chemical structure will be 
described. However, this chapter is not a review article; we do not pursue the goal of refer-
encing all the related publications. For those interested in a broader coverage of the pub-
lished literature, we recommend the excellent review articles by Loh et al. [1], Chua and 
Pumera [2], Dreyer et al. [3], and Eigler and Hirsch [4]. In this chapter, we discuss only 
selected publications that directly contribute to the topic. In the form typical of textbooks, 
we methodologically describe the mechanism of GO formation, its transformation during 
aqueous work‐up, and finally arrive at the fine chemical structure of GO. In large part, this 
chapter is based on the author’s personal experimental studies, and reflects the author’s 
personal views on the topic. Open questions are clearly indicated. The important thoughts 
and conclusions are underlined.
2.2  Basic Concepts of Structure
Graphene oxide (GO) is a two‐dimensional (2D) material that is derived from the parent 
graphene backbone by introducing several oxygen functionalities. The oxygen atoms are 
covalently bonded to carbon atoms, converting them from the sp2‐hybridized state in the 
parent graphene into the sp3‐hybridized state. In a typical GO, the number of carbon atoms 
bonded to oxygen exceeds the number of intact sp2‐hybridized carbon atoms. This makes 
GO very different from the parent graphene. On the one hand, these oxygen functionalities 
can be considered as defects introduced into the otherwise ideal graphene plane. These 
defects convert electrically conductive graphene into an insulator. On the other hand, the 
oxygen functionalities provide GO with many unique properties that the parent graphene 
does not possess. One of these properties is hydrophilicity, i.e. the ability to be dissolved 
and to form stable colloid solutions in water and in some low‐molecular‐weight alcohols. 
Another advantage is opening a tunable bandgap that is responsible for unique optical and 
electronic properties.
The oxygen functionalities decorate the carbon grid from both sides. From this per-
spective, every single GO layer can be considered as a triatomic‐layer 2D material where 
the carbon layer is sandwiched between two layers of oxygen atoms. This simplified 
model is not exactly correct, because oxygen atoms do not fully cover the carbon grid. The 
C/O atomic ratio varies to some extent, and for sufficiently oxidized GO samples it is 

38
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
approximately 2 : 1. In the oxygen‐free areas, called graphitic or graphenic domains, the 
GO flakes are only one atomic layer thick. Thus, it will be more correct to state that every 
GO layer is one atomic layer thick with oxygen functionalities extending out of the plane 
in certain locations. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is not able to resolve oxidized 
domains from graphitic domains and provides only the average thickness for a GO flake. 
The reported flake thicknesses vary from 0.8 Å through 1.2 Å. For comparison, the meas-
ured thickness of a single‐layer intact graphene on a substrate is 0.5–0.6 Å.
While GO is only one carbon layer thick, the lateral size of the flakes can vary from 
hundreds of nanometers through the tens and even hundreds of micrometers. In this truly 
2D form, GO can exist only in solution (Figure 2.1a), where it is completely exfoliated to 
single‐layer sheets, or being placed on a substrate surface (Figure 2.1b). In these two cases, 
GO flakes are in totally different environments. In solutions, GO flakes are fully sur-
rounded by solvent molecules (water or alcohols). When on a substrate, GO flakes are in 
contact with a substrate surface on one side and with air on the other side. Most likely, the 
water molecules are still strongly physisorbed onto the GO surface on both sides, even 
when it is on a substrate surface. Note that, in aqueous solutions, GO flakes are negatively 
charged with the formation of an electrical double layer at the GO/water interface.
In the bulk form, the 2D character of GO is not really pronounced. The bulk form of GO 
is a lamellar paper‐like solid material that was historically referred to as “graphite oxide”. 
Solid graphite oxide is the product formed by restacking of the previously exfoliated 
­single‐layer GO sheets. Graphite oxide can also be obtained after oxidation of graphite 
(a)
(b)
10 μm
Figure 2.1  Graphene oxide in its true 2D single‐layer form. (a) Photograph of GO aqueous 
solution; the solution color may vary from yellow to brown. (b) Scanning electron microscope 
image of GO flakes on a Si/SiO2 wafer. The number of layers can be distinguished by their 
opacity. All the flakes on this image are single‐layered. The image is darker where the flakes are 
folded or overlapped, making double‐layered structures

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
39
without applying a delamination step. This substance has a loosely ordered structure in the 
c‐axis direction with a repeat distance of 6–9 Å between the constituent GO layers, depend-
ing on the amount of absorbed water. Despite a weak interaction between the flakes, upon 
dissolution in water, the GO flakes easily separate from each other to form a colloid solu-
tion of single‐layer GO sheets (Figure 2.1a). From these perspectives, solid graphite oxide 
can be considered simply as an accumulation of single GO sheets. From another point of 
view, we have to stress that the fine chemical structure of GO depends on the form of the 
material and on its environment. To some extent, the nature of the functional groups of a 
GO flake suspended in an aqueous solution (Figure 2.1a) is different from that of the same 
flake placed on a solid substrate (Figure 2.1b), or that sandwiched between neighbors in the 
form of bulk graphite oxide. This is one of the reasons why the fine chemical structure of 
GO is still not fully understood.
2.3  Preparation Methods
GO is produced from graphite by oxidation with strong oxidants in concentrated acid media. 
Depending on the choice of the oxidant and the acidic medium, today one can differentiate 
three major methods of GO preparation: Brodie’s method [5], Staudenmaier’s method [6] 
and the Hummers method [7]. Brodie’s method uses potassium chlorate (KClO3) as an oxi-
dant in fuming nitric acid medium. This method is not effective, since it is not complete in 
one step and in one vessel. The partially oxidized product from the first reaction needs to be 
isolated, purified and subjected to a new oxidation cycle several times until sufficiently 
oxidized product is obtained. Staudenmaier’s method uses KClO3 in a mixture of concen-
trated nitric and sulfuric acids. It is similar to Brodie’s method in the sense that it requires 
multiple portions of KClO3 to be added to the reaction mixture during the course of oxida-
tion. This is needed because it is difficult to maintain a high concentration of the oxidizing 
agent in an acidic medium for a long time. The added KClO3 portion quickly decomposes 
in a reaction, which is parallel to the target reaction, i.e. oxidizing graphite. The Hummers 
method uses potassium permanganate (KMnO4) as on oxidant in concentrated sulfuric acid 
medium. Hummers and Offeman claimed that their reaction completes in two hours, and 
thus it is more effective compared to Brodie’s and Staudenmaier’s methods. Indeed, this 
method is more effective compared to the two predecessors; however, it is that fast only 
with the small‐particle‐size powdered graphite source that was used by Hummers and 
Offeman. When large‐particle‐size graphite is subjected to oxidation by exactly the same 
Hummers method, an incompletely oxidized graphite–GO hybrid is obtained.
As one might have learned from the previous chapter, credit for the so‐called Hummers 
method should in fact be given to Charpy [8], who had successfully used the combination 
of potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid fifty years before Hummers and Offeman 
published their report. In this chapter, we will use the term “Charpy–Hummers approach” 
whenever the combination of potassium permanganate and sulfuric acid is involved. We 
will use the term “Hummers method” strictly for the procedure described by Hummers and 
Offeman [7].
The GOs prepared by the three methods vary slightly in chemical composition [9–11]. 
The samples prepared by the Charpy–Hummers approach are normally more oxidized, 
while the samples prepared by Brodie’s method are less oxidized. This is often attributed 

40
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
to the fact that potassium permanganate, used in the Hummers method, is a stronger oxidizing 
agent than potassium chlorate. However, the actual situation is not as simple. The oxidation 
level of GO depends not only on the nature of the oxidants, but most importantly on the 
amount of the oxidant (graphite to oxidant ratio) used for oxidation. GOs with different 
oxidation levels can be prepared by all three methods by varying the amount of oxidant 
used, and the time allowed for reaction. Here, we must differentiate between an oxidant, 
i.e. the chemical compound used for reaction, and an oxidizing agent, i.e. the actual species 
that interacts with graphene to convert it to GO. The nature of the actual oxidizing agents 
is still unknown for all three oxidation protocols, mainly due to the lack of research targeting 
this topic. Today, one can speak only about effectiveness of the compounds, or combina-
tions of compounds, used for oxidation.
Of the three methods, the Charpy–Hummers approach is the one most widely used today 
because of the shorter reaction time and the relative ease of GO preparation. Also, this 
method avoids having to deal with the toxic fumes of nitric acid and chlorine that are 
formed in large quantities with the Brodie and Staudenmaier methods. The Charpy–
Hummers approach has two major modifications [12, 13] that are used almost as often as 
the original Hummers method [7]. The Kovtyukhova modification [12] includes a so‐called 
pre‐oxidation step where graphite is exposed to a mixture of potassium persulfate, diphos-
phorus pentaoxide (phosphorus(v) oxide) and sulfuric acid. While this step is called “pre‐
oxidation”, its actual role is the intercalation‐assisted expansion of graphite. This expansion 
affords better access of the oxidizing agent into the graphite galleries during the following 
oxidation step with potassium permanganate. As a consequence, higher oxidation rates are 
afforded. The modification proposed by Marcano et al. [13] includes the use of more oxi-
dant (twice as much as in the original Hummers method), and the addition of phosphoric 
acid to the sulfuric acid medium. The use of more oxidant affords higher oxidation levels 
of GO product, while the addition of phosphoric acid, as was claimed by the authors, 
affords less structurally damaged GO product.
An absolutely new preparation method for GO was proposed very recently by Peng et al. 
[14]. This method uses potassium ferrate as an oxidant and concentrated perchloric acid as 
an acidic medium. After decades of dealing with the same oxidants and the same acids, this 
new combination of reactants is very refreshing, and the entire preparation method is very 
elegant. The authors claim significantly higher reaction rates compared to all the previ-
ously known methods, and an eco‐friendly technology, since no manganese is present in 
the acidic waste. In addition to the fact that this method might be very attractive for indus-
trial‐scale GO production, this finding also provides additional experimental data for 
understanding the mechanism of GO formation in general. In the very near future one can 
expect feedback on the method’s effectiveness from a broader community.
Regarding the production cost, the oxidation process itself is not the most critical step 
in GO production. The bottleneck is the purification steps that follow the oxidation. 
Purification of as‐prepared GO is performed by lengthy washing procedures in water. After 
each washing cycle, the GO product and washing waters are separated by centrifugation. 
Upon washing and removing acids, GO product exfoliates to single‐layer sheets, and forms 
a very stable and voluminous colloid solution, or a gel at higher concentrations. This intro-
duces additional difficulties into purification protocols. Alternatively, dialysis can be used 
for purification. However, this method takes even longer than multiple washing–separation 
cycles, and it is usable for small portions of GO only.

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
41
2.4  Mechanism of Formation
2.4.1  Theoretical Studies and System Complexity
Despite recent progress in understanding GO chemistry and structure, the mechanism of its 
formation has received significantly less attention. Until recently, most reported studies in 
this field were theoretical [15–18] and focused on the act of introducing oxygen atoms into 
the graphene lattice with the formation of C–O covalent bonds. Back in 2006, by utilizing 
a density functional theory, Li et al. [15] proposed a mechanism to explain the observed 
fault lines and cracks on GO. The authors showed that strain, generated by cooperative 
alignment of epoxy groups on opposite sites of the hexagon ring, can initiate the formation 
of cracks on GO. Sun et al. [16] arrived at similar conclusions, suggesting that oxidation of 
graphene is accompanied by cutting of graphene sheets. This process is limited by oxygen 
diffusion and driven by the local strain induced by the oxygen functional groups. The 
authors show that as‐formed epoxy groups and their diffusion play the central role in the 
nucleation and growth of extended linear defects and in the subsequent cutting of graphene. 
Shao et al. [17] suggested that oxidation begins from the existing defects on the graphene 
plane or from the flake edges. The authors suggested that oxidation of graphene begins 
with the formation of phenolic groups. The phenolic groups form first on the edges and 
defects, and then propagate to the basal planes. In the next step, phenolic groups transform 
to either epoxides or ketones. Importantly, Shao et al. further suggested the rupture of the 
C–C bonds, or even the loss of carbon atoms with the formation of point defects. Note that 
the mechanism suggested by Shao et al., involving primary formation of phenols, is very 
different from the mechanisms proposed by Li et al. and Sun et al., where epoxy groups are 
the primary functionalities.
Theoretical studies, published to the present day, consider both graphene and an oxidiz-
ing agent as freestanding species with no interaction with their surroundings. However, in 
fact, GO is produced from bulk graphite, where individual graphene layers are closely 
aligned and stacked. In order to attack graphene layers, the oxidizing agent needs to first 
penetrate between those layers. As will be shown below, at the time when the oxidizing 
agent attacks graphene, the latter is in intimate contact with sulfuric acid. These factors 
have not been yet taken into account in the theoretical studies. This is true even for the 
most recent studies, such as the one by Boukhalov [18]. As an advantage over the earlier 
theoretical works, Boukhalov demonstrated a significant difference in the oxidation 
mechanisms between single‐layer graphene and graphite. This is a significant step forward 
that makes the studied system closer to reality, compared to previous publications. 
Unfortunately, the chosen standing points in this work were very different from the actual 
experimental conditions. Thus the study was based on the assumption that, in Brodie’s 
method, water molecules penetrate graphite galleries first, and assist in the oxidation that 
occurs next. This conclusion is in fact misleading. In reality, in all the known methods, 
graphite is first oxidized in water‐free conditions, and as the next step the oxidized graphite 
is exposed to water.
While theoretical studies proved to be beneficial in understanding the structure of GO 
and its thermal decomposition, concerning the mechanism of GO formation, they are still 
far away from the real system. Due to the complexity of the real system, there is a long road 
ahead for theoretical studies, before the actual complex reaction conditions can be modeled 

42
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
in a reliable way. At the present day, mostly experimental work has contributed to the 
understanding of this complex phenomenon. Little by little experimental data are accumu-
lated and the whole picture of GO formation is shaping up.
2.4.2  Step 1: Formation of Stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC Graphite  
Intercalation Compound
Work on the reaction mechanism should ultimately reveal the full content of the black box 
shown in Figure 2.2.
Since the Charpy–Hummers approach and its modifications are the most widely used 
methods for GO production today, we will first focus our discussion on this method, and 
then we will generalize our discussion on other preparation protocols. In our recent experi-
mental study, we tried to reflect the complexity of the actual reaction conditions between 
graphite and the oxidizing medium [19]. In the course of conversion of bulk graphite to 
GO, we single out three distinct independent steps. The reaction can be stopped at any step, 
and the corresponding intermediate products can be isolated, characterized and stored 
under appropriate conditions. The first step is the conversion of graphite to the sulfuric 
acid–graphite intercalation compound (H2SO4‐GIC), which can be considered as the first 
intermediate. The second step is conversion of the GIC to the oxidized form of graphite that 
was defined as “pristine graphite oxide” (PGO), constituting the second intermediate. The 
third step is conversion of PGO to GO by the reaction of PGO with water.
The first step, the formation of H2SO4‐GIC, begins immediately upon exposing graphite 
to the acidic oxidizing medium, and it comes to completion within a few minutes. The GIC 
formation is manifested by the characteristic deep‐blue color acquired by graphite flakes. 
The nature of the intercalation compound formed is the stage‐1 GIC, where every graphene 
layer alternates with a layer of intercalant. The characteristics of the GIC intermediate 
formed in the course of GO production are identical to those of H2SO4‐GICs produced by 
different methods electrochemically or chemically [20–24]. The stoichiometry of the 
stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC can be represented by the formula C(21–28)
+ · HSO4
− · 2.5H2SO4 [20, 23]. 
The interlayer galleries in the stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC are closely packed with H2SO4 molecules 
Figure 2.2  The conversion of bulk graphite to GO is a black box. Researchers studying the 
mechanism of this conversion must reveal and fully describe all the steps and underlying 
mechanisms that lead to this transformation

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
43
and HSO4
− ions, which do not form any orderly structure [20, 23]. The second step, conver-
sion of the GIC into PGO, is significantly slower; it takes several hours or even days 
depending on the graphite source. Thus, the stage‐1 GIC can be considered as a real inter-
mediate that can be isolated and characterized. The ability of acidic oxidizing media to 
intercalate graphite with the formation of stage‐1 GIC is the first necessary condition for 
successful oxidation of graphite. This occurs with all the known GO preparation methods. 
All the used combinations of reactants, i.e. KClO3/HNO3, KClO3/H2SO4, KMnO4/H2SO4 
and the new K2FeO4/HClO4, afford the formation of respective stage‐1 GICs. Intercalation 
increases the distance between the graphene layers in graphite, making the interlayer gal-
leries accessible for the oxidizing agent. While the intercalation phenomenon was well 
known to scientists in the past, in the new graphene era, the significance of this step in the 
course of GO formation is often neglected and many researchers do not even take this sig-
nificant step into consideration, while discussing the reaction conditions.
2.4.3  Step 2: Transformation of Stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC  
to Pristine Graphite Oxide
The second step, the conversion of the stage‐1 GIC to PGO, is the most intriguing step. It 
involves the insertion of the oxidizing agent into the pre‐occupied graphite galleries. 
Careful study of this conversion by Raman microscopy has lifted the veil on this transfor-
mation. Figure 2.3(a) shows a partially oxidized graphite flake in the course of its transfor-
mation from stage‐1 GIC to PGO.
It is apparent that the transformation of stage‐1 GIC to PGO has clear edge‐to‐center 
propagation. The spectra taken from the blue‐colored areas in the middle of the flake 
(Figure 2.3b) show the presence of the stage‐1 GIC only. The Raman spectrum from the 
light‐yellow‐pearl‐colored area along the flake perimeter (Figure 2.3c) confirms the pres-
ence of GO phase only. The spectrum acquired from the dark‐looking bordering area 
between the blue and yellow areas (Figure 2.3d) is simply the sum of the two spectra dis-
cussed above. Thus, on the border, there is a mixture of the two phases: stage‐1 GIC and 
GO. No traces of stage‐2 GIC, higher stages or pure graphite were ever detected. These 
observations suggest that PGO is formed directly from the stage‐1 GIC without any additional 
rearrangements in the graphite structure.
The actual nature of the oxidizing agent in the Hummers method is as elusive as in the 
methods that use KClO3. Not only is the identity of the specific oxidizing agent species that 
attacks the graphene layers unknown, but also even the nature of the KMnO4/H2SO4 solu-
tion itself has not been systematically studied. Some researchers suggest that the oxidizing 
agent is manganese heptaoxide (Mn2O7) [25]. Indeed, the green‐colored Mn2O7 can be 
isolated from the KMnO4/H2SO4 solution of similar color [26]. However, it was also shown 
that, in concentrated sulfuric acid medium, Mn(vii) exists in the form of the planar perman-
ganyl (MnO3
+) cation, which might be closely associated with hydrogen sulfate (HSO4
−) in 
the form of MnO3HSO4 [27, 28]. In the author’s opinion, it is more likely that the MnO3
+ 
cation and not the Mn2O7 molecule is the real oxidizing agent.
In order to diffuse between the graphene layers, the oxidizing agent needs to either 
replace existing intercalant molecules or insert between them. The clear edge‐to‐center 
front‐like propagation of the reaction (Figure 2.3a) is an indication that the rate of diffusion 
of the oxidizing agent into the graphite interlayer galleries must be lower than the rate of 

(a)
100 μm
c
d
e
b
d
c
1200
0
20
40
60
80
(b)
(d)
(c)
(e)
1800
2400
Raman shift (cm–1)
3000
1200
4
8
12
16
20
1800
2400
Raman shift (cm–1)
3000
1200
1800
D
G
2D
2D
D+G
D+G
G
D
G
D
G
2400
Raman shift (cm–1)
3000
1200
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
1800
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
2400
Raman shift (cm–1)
3000
1560 1600 1640 1680
1600
1550 1600 1650
1640 1680
1620 1640 1660
Figure 2.3  A graphite flake in the course of its transition from stage‐1 GIC to PGO. (a) Map of the flake showing spots of 
acquisition; the circles labeled “b”, “c”, “d” and “e” indicate the four typical areas on the flake surface where the spectra 
were acquired. (b)–(e) Typical Raman spectra acquired from the corresponding spots labeled in (a). The insets represent 
the x‐axis expansion in the G‐band area. The spectra taken from the blue‐colored areas in the middle of the flake (b and e) 
show the presence of the stage‐1 GIC only. The spectra taken from the light‐yellow‐colored areas (c) on the flake’s edge 
represent GO. The spectrum acquired from the dark‐looking bordering area between the blue and yellow areas (d) shows 
the presence of two phases: stage‐1 GIC and PGO. A 514 nm laser was used for excitation. Reproduced from [19] with 
permission of ACS

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
45
the chemical reaction itself. As soon as the oxidizing agent diffuses between the graphene 
layers, it must quickly react with nearby carbon atoms. Otherwise, the GO phase would 
gradually form over the entire flake body. Thus, the second step of PGO formation is 
­diffusion‐controlled, where the oxidizing agent replaces the acid intercalant. This is the 
rate‐determining step of the entire GO formation process. This conclusion explains why 
small‐particle‐size graphite reacts faster than large‐particle‐size graphite: the diffusion 
pathway is much shorter for the smaller graphite flakes and particles. It also explains why 
only partially oxidized GO product (GO shell and graphite core) is obtained when a large‐
particle‐size graphite is subjected to oxidation according to the exact Hummers protocol 
with the two hour reaction time limit: there is simply not enough time for an oxidizing 
agent to penetrate between the graphene layers.
Note that this interpretation of the GO formation reaction is not consistent with the exist-
ence of two different types of domains in GO (see section 2.6). If the process is indeed 
limited by diffusion, it is unclear how the graphitic domains survive during the slow con-
tinuous front‐like diffusion of the oxidizing agent into the stage‐1 GIC galleries. It is pos-
sible, therefore, that there are additional still unknown factors controlling this process.
2.4.4  Pristine Graphite Oxide Structure
The Raman data, presented and discussed above, are limited by the laser spot size and the 
probing skin depth. Unlike Raman microscopy, X‐ray diffraction (XRD) provides informa-
tion about the bulk quantities, and reveals all the phases present in the specimen. In this 
experiment, 4 wt equiv (weight equivalents) of KMnO4 were added sequentially to the 
graphite/H2SO4 slurry, and the corresponding samples were subjected to XRD analysis 
after complete consumption of each weight equivalent of KMnO4. The four samples were 
referred to as “transition forms” 1 to 4 (TF‐1, ‐2, ‐3 and ‐4), respectively. The samples were 
protected from moisture to prevent decomposition of their unique structure.
The graphite sample taken from the reaction mixture 20 min after addition of the first 
weight equivalent of KMnO4 exhibits a diffraction pattern typical for the stage‐1 H2SO4‐
GIC (Figure 2.4). The 002 diffraction line at 22.3° 2θ angle along with the 003 and 004 
signals at 33.7° and 45.2° can be unambiguously assigned to the stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC with 
interlayer distance (di) of 7.98 Å. The stage‐1 GIC is the only phase present in the sample. 
After the first added KMnO4 portion is consumed (TF‐1), the stage‐1 GIC signals are still 
observable, though they are less intense. The broad curve in the 15° to 28° 2θ region is 
indicative of the formation of an amorphous phase. New weak signals appear at 21.6°, 
11.4° and 11.7° 2θ diffraction angles (Figure 2.4a,b).
After addition and consumption of the second weight equivalent of KMnO4 (TF‐2), the 
signals associated with the stage‐1 GIC are no longer present. This is consistent with the 
fact that the uniformly blue‐colored areas like on Figure 2.3(a) were no longer observable 
in graphite flakes with optical microscopy. The new strong signal at 9.7° 2θ (9.12 Å) is 
observed in the sample taken after the addition and consumption of the third weight equiva-
lent of KMnO4 (TF‐3). This signal becomes even stronger in TF‐4 (Figure 2.4c). This sig-
nal is associated with the formation of PGO.
The as‐prepared PGO is highly ordered along the c‐axis, with a repeat distance of 9.12 Å, 
corresponding to the 9.7° 2θ. The 1.14 Å increase in spacing compared to the stage‐1 GIC 
(di = 7.98 Å) is likely due to insertion of oxygen atoms within the oxidized domains in 

46
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
addition to the existing sulfuric acid molecules. This structure is relatively stable and can 
exist for several months with no visible change if not exposed to large amounts of water. 
Thus, PGO can be considered as the second intermediate in the course of GO production.
Interestingly, the step of PGO formation and the unique PGO structure is not something 
specific to only the Charpy–Hummers method. Back in 1989, a green‐colored intermediate 
with a structure very similar to that of PGO was reported by Mermoux and Chabre [29] in 
the course of graphite oxidation by Brodie’s method. A repeat distance of about 8 Å was 
reported for that product. Unfortunately, Mermoux and Chabre missed the first intermedi-
ate, the stage‐1 HNO3‐GIC. They simply did not perform the XRD study of the graphite 
sample immediately after introducing KClO3 into the graphite–HNO3 mixture. However, 
there are numerous studies showing that the stage‐1 HNO3‐GIC with a repeat distance of 
7.84 Å is formed when graphite is exposed to a mixture of concentrated HNO3 with strong 
oxidants such as KMnO4 and KClO3 [30]. Interestingly, there was only 0.16 Å increase 
in the repeat distance of Mermoux and Chabre’s PGO compared to the 7.84 Å for the 
­corresponding stage‐1 HNO3‐GIC. It is unclear how to account for such an insignificant 
increase in the repeat distance with oxidation. This might be related to (i) lower oxidation 
0
10
Stage-1 GIC
TF-1
TF-2
TF-3
TF-4
CGO
PGO
20
–1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
–1
8
9
10
11
12
13
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
21
22
23
24
20
30
Two theta (deg)
Two theta (deg)
Two theta (deg)
40
50
1
2
3
4
5
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
6
7
8
PGO
(a)
(b)
(c)
Stage-1
002
Stage-1
003
Stage-1
004
Figure 2.4  X‐ray diffraction data. (a) X‐ray diffraction patterns for stage‐1 GIC (black), CGO 
(brown line) and four transition forms (red, blue, pink and dark cyan lines). The labels “TF‐1” 
to “TF‐4” represent the four consecutive transition forms obtained by consumption of 1, 2, 3 
and 4 wt equiv of KMnO4, respectively. (b,c) The x‐axis expansions of (a) in the 20° to 24° and 
8° to 13° 2θ diffraction angle regions. Reproduced from [19] with permission of ACS

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
47
level of Brodie’s GO, and (ii) planar geometry of HNO3 molecules, allowing better 
accommodation of the oxygen functional groups, and thus denser packing of the interlayer 
galleries in Mermoux and Chabre’s PGO compared to our PGO.
There are no publications reporting the formation of PGO during the oxidation of graph-
ite with the Staudenmaier method. This method is similar to the Charpy–Hummers method 
in that the reaction occurs in sulfuric acid medium. This is why with a high degree of con-
fidence we can assume that the reaction proceeds through the same three steps as in the 
case of the other two methods. Thus, the above‐described mechanism of GO formation, 
involving the two intermediate structures, stage‐1 GIC and PGO, is a general pathway for 
all three major methods of GO production in acidic media.
2.4.5  Step 3: Delamination of Pristine Graphite Oxide
The third step of GO formation, i.e. the conversion of PGO to GO, is afforded by the expo-
sure of PGO to water during quenching and washing procedures. This involves the loss of 
the c‐axis interlayer registry and exfoliation of PGO into single‐atomic‐layer sheets. Many 
synthetic protocols specify that sonication is needed to disperse as‐prepared PGO in aque-
ous solutions. In fact, sonication is only needed for not completely oxidized GO samples 
prepared from large‐particle‐size graphite under the original Brodie and Hummers proto-
cols. Many researchers simply do not provide sufficient time for the oxidizing agent to 
diffuse between the graphene layers of stage‐1 GIC, and subsequently obtain only partially 
oxidized GO. When as‐prepared GO is sufficiently oxidized, it spontaneously delaminates 
into single‐layer sheets with simple stirring in water.
Figure 2.5 summarizes and schematically represents the three steps constituting the pro-
cess of conversion of bulk graphite into GO.
2.5  Transformation of Pristine Graphite Oxide Chemical  
Structure Upon Exposure to Water
The loss of the c‐axis interlayer registry and exfoliation into single‐atomic‐layer sheets is 
not the only process that occurs upon exposure of PGO to water. The chemical composition 
of PGO also undergoes very serious transformation. As‐prepared PGO has bright‐yellow 
color, even when the reaction is already quenched with water and PGO flakes are partially 
exfoliated. Upon prolonged exposure to water during washing procedures, while the solu-
tion becomes more and more neutral, the bright yellow color gradually darkens and trans-
forms to brown. It was straightforward for us to suggest that chemical reactions between 
PGO and water must be behind the visual observations [31]. To investigate the chemical 
structure of as‐prepared PGO, one needs to free it from sulfuric acid, but also to avoid 
exposing the material to water. For this purpose we conducted a series of experiments [31], 
where as‐prepared PGO was quenched and washed by non‐aqueous organic solvents capa-
ble of dissolving H2SO4, but not possessing nucleophilic character to prevent chemical 
transformation of PGO to GO. The as‐purified organic‐solvent‐washed GO samples (OS‐
GO) were compared with those obtained by washing with 33% HCl, and the one washed 
with water (conventional GO). Quenching and washing with the organic solvents yields 
products with very light colors that vary from light yellow through bright yellow. The 

48
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
HCl‐washed GO was light brown. This preservation of the original light color for OS‐GO 
versus color darkening for conventional GO confirms that, during the water‐based purifica-
tion, a chemical reaction occurs between PGO and water.
In contrast to water, all the tested OS‐GO samples contained 1.2–6.0 at.% sulfur accord-
ing to X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data. The presence of sulfur from 0.5% to 
2% even in water‐washed GO samples had been reported by several researchers earlier. 
Sulfur is very difficult to remove even with extensive water washings, suggesting that the 
sulfur‐containing impurities are covalently bound to or strongly physisorbed onto GO. To 
account for this observation, Petit et al. suggested that sulfur is covalently bonded to ­carbon 
atoms by C–S bonds, and exists in the form of sulfones [32]. This suggestion was in line 
with the ideas expressed earlier by Boehm and Scholz suggesting the presence of either 
sulfones or sulfates [9].
The Fourier‐transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of all the light‐colored OS‐GO samples 
(Figure 2.6) contain the two enhanced bands at 1417 and 1221 cm−1, which are barely 
1
2
3
4
4
5
GO
PGO
Stage-1 GIC
Graphite
Oxidizing agent
KMnO4/H2SO4
H2SO4/HSO4
–
H2O
KMnO4/H2SO4
H2O
Figure  2.5  Schematics of conversion of bulk graphite into GO with corresponding 
micrographic images of sample appearances at each phase. The three steps signify formation 
of the two intermediate products (stage‐1 GIC and PGO) and the final GO product. The solid 
black lines represent graphene layers; dotted black lines represent single layers of GO; wide 
blue lines represent H2SO4/HSO4
− intercalant; wide purple lines represent a layer of the mixture 
of H2SO4/HSO4
− intercalant with reduced form of oxidizing agent. Reproduced from [19] with 
permission of ACS

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
49
present, if at all, in the spectrum of the water‐washed GO sample. The intensities of the 
two bands increase with the sulfur content in GO samples. This trend is opposite to the 
nucleophilic character of the solvents used for GO purification. From all the possible sul-
fur‐containing compounds, only disubstituted organic sulfates exhibit absorption at both 
1417 and 1221 cm−1 [33, 34]. Sulfones, sulfuric acid and inorganic sulfates do not absorb at 
1417 cm−1. Thus, sulfones were excluded, and the two bands at 1417 and 1221 cm−1 were 
assigned to the symmetric and asymmetric stretching of the S = O bond in disubstituted 
cyclic organic sulfates.
Most likely, the organic sulfates are formed during the second step of GO formation, i.e. 
when stage‐1 GIC is converted to PGO. If one assumes that epoxides are indeed the first 
functional groups formed during the oxidation, then the reaction mechanism in Schemes 2.1 
and 2.2 can be envisioned. Sulfuric acid or hydrogen sulfate present in the interlayer gal-
leries of PGO attack newly formed epoxides (1) according to Scheme 2.1. The reaction 
mechanism is typical of epoxide ring opening. The intermediate product is monosulfate 
(2). The monosulfate can attack the adjacent epoxide and convert to the cyclic sulfate (3).
During the third step of GO production (exposing PGO to water), the reverse reactions 
occur: cyclic sulfates hydrolyze with the formation of tertiary alcohols (Scheme 2.2). The 
first step of cyclic sulfate hydrolysis occurs with C–O bond cleavage and results in the 
formation of the monosulfate (4) [35]. The second step (hydrolysis of the monosulfate) 
occurs mainly with S–O bond cleavage and results in the formation of a 1,2‐diol (5).
The low rate of sulfate hydrolysis under acidic conditions explains why it is difficult to 
remove sulfur‐containing by‐products from a GO sample even when washing with water. 
0.0
3600
3000
2400
Wavenumbers (cm–1)
1800
1200
600
cGO
HCI-GO
M-GO
AA-GO
1221 cm–1
1417cm–1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Absorbance (a.u.)
1.0
1.2
Figure  2.6  FTIR spectra of the four different GO samples. The samples are obtained by 
purification of as‐synthesized PGO samples with acetic acid (AA‐GO), methanol (M‐GO), 
33% hydrochloric acid (HCl‐GO) and water (cGO). The two absorption bands at 1417 and 
1221 cm−1 are assigned to the symmetric and asymmetric stretching of the S ═ O bonds in 
covalent sulfates. The intensity of these two bands increases with the sulfur content in GO, and 
decreases with increasing aqueous/nucleophilic character of the solvent used for purification. 
Reproduced from [31] with permission of ACS

50
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Sulfuric acid itself is easily washed away with a few washings, but the organic sulfates are 
removed only via hydrolysis, the rate of which is slow under acidic conditions, so that 
longer reaction times are needed to remove more of those moieties.
Shortly after our work, Eigler et al. demonstrated that even in the water‐washed GO 
samples covalent sulfates might be present in quantities up to 5%, i.e. one sulfate group per 
every 20 carbon atoms [36]. However, to the present day, this is the only work claiming 
such a high content of sulfur in water‐washed GO samples. In our personal experience, the 
sulfur content in moderately washed GO samples was between 1.5 and 2.5 at.%. In thor-
oughly water‐washed samples, the sulfur content is normally less than 1 at.%. Thus it is 
reasonable to state that the content of covalent sulfates is largely dependent on the purification 
procedures.
Concerning the chemical composition of PGO, it was shown to be notably different 
from the composition of typical water‐washed GO [31]. The major functional groups in 
the PGO structure are epoxides. Their content substantially exceeds the content of the 
tertiary alcohols. The content of tertiary alcohols, in turn, only insignificantly exceeds the 
content of organic sulfates. This observation suggests that the first functional group 
formed on graphene during the oxidation of graphite is indeed epoxide, which is con-
verted to organic sulfate by reacting with sulfuric acid, and to tertiary alcohol by reacting 
with water.
O
O
O
OH
HO
OH
O
SO2
O
2
3
OSO3H
H2SO4
H2SO4
1
Scheme 2.1  The sulfate ester (2) formed in the first step is the intermediate product. The 
sulfate ester can attack the neighboring epoxide group, resulting in a 1,2‐cyclic sulfate (3). 
1,3‐Cyclic sulfates (not shown) can also be formed by the reaction. Note that one hydroxyl 
group is formed for every sulfate ester, and two hydroxyl groups form for every cyclic sulfate
O
HO
OH
3
4
5
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
O
SO2
H2O
O
H2O
+ H2SO4
SO3H
Scheme 2.2  The hydrolysis of cyclic sulfate (3) occurs in two steps. The first step occurs with 
the C–O bond cleavage and results in the formation of the monosulfate (4). The second step 
(hydrolysis of the monosulfate) results in the formation of a 1,2‐diol (5)

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
51
Unlike the first two steps of GO formation described in section 2.4, the third step does 
not have clear indicators to signal when this step is actually complete. The color of the GO 
dispersion changes gradually; the same is true of the pH of the washing waters. After some 
time of exposing PGO to water, this process can be considered not only as a step of GO 
formation (exfoliation and purification), but also as a chemical reaction of as‐prepared 
GO with water. There is no clear borderline between the two processes: the washing–­
exfoliation on the one hand and the chemical modification of the functional groups on the 
other. The chemical reactions of GO with water will be reviewed in more detail in ­section 2.6 
and in Chapter 6, describing the chemical properties of GO.
2.6  Chemical Structure and Origin of Acidity
2.6.1  Structural Models and the Actual Structure
Now let us discuss the fine chemical structure of a single‐layer GO regardless of the organic 
sulfates. In Chapter 1, Anton Lerf discussed all the structural models that were historically 
proposed throughout the decades from 1939 through 2006. For our further discussion, two 
models will be of particular importance: the now‐famous Lerf–Klinowski (LK) model [37] 
proposed in 1998, and the Szabó–Dékány (SD) model [38], proposed in 2006. While Lerf 
has reviewed the earlier models in detail, he was modestly laconic about his own develop-
ment. Regarding the SD model, in Chapter 1 Lerf wrote one single sentence:
I think that the model published by Szabó et al. combines structural elements of both Scholz 
and Boehm (broken C–C bonds, quinone groups) and Ruess (1,3‐ethers).
This is not sufficient to understand the essence of this model. Both the LK and SD models 
are significantly more advanced compared to their predecessors, and more accurately 
reflect the actual GO structure. Because of the importance of these two models in under-
standing GO structure, we begin our discussion by reviewing the LK and SD models. 
Indeed, the SD model is the further development of the model proposed earlier by Clauss 
[39], and further modified by Scholz and Boehm [40]. As such, it inherits and further devel-
ops the studies of generations of chemists, who attempted to propose a stoichiometric and 
orderly arranged GO structure. In contrast to the SD model, the LK model rejects any 
orderly structure, and proposes an irregular chaotic arrangement of the functional groups. 
From these perspectives, the LK model was a revolutionary breakthrough in GO studies; 
amazingly, it was very close to reality.
The LK model (Figure 2.7) concludes that GO planes consist of two different types of 
randomly distributed domains: (i) areas of pure graphene with sp2‐hybridized carbon 
atoms, which have survived the oxidation, and (ii) areas of oxidized and thus sp3‐­
hybridized carbon atoms. The oxidized GO domains contain epoxy and hydroxyl (tertiary 
alcohol) functional groups. The edges of the flakes are terminated by carboxyl and 
hydroxyl groups.
The SD model (Figure 2.8) represents GO as a periodic ribbon‐like structure of aromatic 
and non‐aromatic (cyclohexane) stripes. The oxygen functionalities that are thought to be 
present on basal planes (cyclohexane stripes) are hydroxyls and four‐membered‐ring 1,3‐
ethers. The SD model suggests that ketones and quinones are formed where C–C bonds 

52
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
have been cleaved. This idea of C–C bond cleavage was first proposed by Clauss [39] and 
was later supported by Scholz and Boehm [40].
One can see that the LK and SD models are substantially different. This fact demon-
strates that, at the time the SD model was proposed (2006), the situation with understand-
ing GO structure was far from coming to mutual agreement. For some reason, the SD 
model did not receive as much attention as the LK model. As will be shown below, the 
ideas proposed in the SD model and in its earlier predecessors deserve more attention.
The major breakthrough in understanding the real GO structure came in 2010 with the 
two studies reporting high‐resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images 
O
O
OH
OH
O
OH
OH
O
OH
HO
Figure 2.7  Simplified version of the Lerf–Klinowski GO structural model. GO flakes contain 
epoxides and tertiary alcohols on basal planes; carboxyl and hydroxyl groups terminate flake 
edges
HO
O
O
O
OH
OH
HO
HO
O
Figure 2.8  Simplified version of the Szabó–Dékány GO structural model. GO flakes contain 
tertiary alcohols and 1,3‐ethers on basal planes. Ketones are formed where C–C bonds are 
cleaved

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
53
of GO and RGO with atomic‐level resolution [41, 42]. While the work by Gomez‐Navarro 
et al. [41] demonstrated the images of RGO only, the work by Erickson et al. [42] demon-
strated the structure of both RGO and GO. The images confirmed the structure of GO with 
two different types of domains, as Lerf et al. had hypothesized. Two different types of 
domains were clearly observable on the HRTEM images of GO (Figure 2.9), with the only 
(A)
(B)
(C)
Figure 2.9  Aberration‐corrected transmission electron microscope images of (A) graphene, 
(B) GO and (C) RGO. The scale bar, denoting 2 nm, is valid for all images. On the right are the 
same images as on the left, where different areas are color‐coded: graphitic domains in yellow‐
green, holes in blue and oxidized domains in red‐purple. Reproduced from [42] with permission 
of John Wiley & Sons

54
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
difference being that the size of the domains was larger than predicted by Lerf et al. As is 
evident from the HRTEM images (Figure 2.9B), oxidized domains form a continuous net-
work, while graphitic domains form isolated islands. In addition to intact graphene domains 
and oxidized domains, as predicted by the LK model, nanometer‐sized holes were observed 
in GO flakes, which was a new finding. However, it is not very clear if these holes pre‐
existed on the GO planes, or were generated by the electron beam.
Unfortunately, one cannot claim that the two published HRTEM studies have completely 
resolved the mystery of GO structure. Despite the fact that the GO lattice was observed at 
the atomic level, a more precise chemical structure has not arisen. The chemical identity of 
the oxygen functional groups cannot be determined from the provided HRTEM images. 
Keeping in mind the confirmed existence of the two types of domains, today, the term 
“chemical structure of GO” signifies the fine chemical structure of oxidized domains that 
constitute more than two‐thirds of the entire GO flake body. Even more important for 
understanding GO chemistry is the chemical structure of interfaces between the two types 
of domains, and the structure of the edges of the numerous holes.
Another question is whether the presented HRTEM images represent the true oxida-
tion level and the structure of GO in general. One can easily see that RGO presented by 
Erickson et al. [42] (Figure 2.9) is significantly more disordered compared to that pre-
sented by Gomez‐Navarro et al. [41]. In the latter, about 60% of the carbon plane is 
intact graphene, and another 20% is slightly disordered graphene (see Figure  3.25), 
while in the former the graphenic areas constitute less than 50%. Apparently, the two 
studies were dealing with two very different GO samples. The presented HRTEM images 
are simply screenshots of a few particular locations of a particular GO flake(s). These 
images are not statistically sufficient to claim a similar structure even for the entire 
batch of a given GO product. They are definitely not sufficient to claim the structure of 
GO as a substance in general. Today, we know that there is significant flake‐to‐flake 
variation in oxidation levels even within the same batch of prepared GO samples [19, 
43]. Thus the observed structures cannot be extended with confidence for GO in general. 
Additional HRTEM studies of different GO samples are highly desired to better under-
stand the GO structure.
Confirmation of the existence of the two types of domains raised the popularity of the 
LK model even further. The correctness of the two‐type‐domain structure was automati-
cally extended to the entire model, including the chemical identity of the functional groups. 
Simultaneously, the importance of other models was downgraded. As often happens in 
­science, focusing on one single point of view and ignoring alternatives might play a 
­negative role in scientific development. This is exactly what happens in GO‐related studies 
today. One should remember that the publication of Lerf et al. [37] was one out of many 
studies in the chain of works on the structure of GO started in 1939. As Lerf himself 
­modestly noted in the previous chapter:
So … most workers active in the field of GO research since 2005 are just preparing footnotes 
to the seminal works of Kohlschütter, Hofmann and Boehm, and I must confess that my own 
work is also nothing else.
However, in the modern GO‐related literature, the LK model is considered almost as an 
axiom. At the same time, several valuable ideas proposed in the earlier models remain 
largely forgotten.

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
55
Misinterpretation of GO structure leads to confusion in understanding the nature of reac-
tions involving GO. This confusion, unfortunately, has only increased in recent years. 
Despite the existence of the high‐quality early publications (see Chapter 1), and several 
serious studies on GO structure published in the past few years, they have been appreciated 
only by a small circle of experts. The LK model, in turn, has been largely oversimplified 
and misinterpreted. The statement that “epoxides and hydroxyls exist on basal planes, and 
carboxyls decorate flake edges” is a typical cliché in almost every GO‐related paper today. 
Many researchers refer to the LK model without even having read the actual paper, but trust 
generalized expressions. Being focused on the final applications of GO, such as devices, 
films, hydrogels, etc., the authors do not provide a proper description of the precursor 
material they work with. Newer publications refer to previously misinterpreted chemical 
structures, and this is growing as a chain reaction. As a consequence, the current literature 
on GO is already dominated by oversimplified misleading interpretations. Those publica-
tions create a parallel reality that greatly confuses a non‐expert audience regarding actual 
GO structure.
In this chapter, we will highlight several experimental facts about GO chemistry that do 
not fit into the broadly accepted simplified views on GO structure.
Let us start our discussion of GO structure by reviewing a 13C solid‐state nuclear mag-
netic resonance (SSNMR) spectrum of GO that provides the most reliable data on existing 
functional groups (Figure  2.10). With 100% confidence, one can assign the signal at 
134 ppm as originating from carbon atoms of graphitic domains. Concerning the oxidized 
domains, at the present day, there is no solid indisputable evidence for the existence of any 
Epoxides
Tertiary
alcohols
Graphitic
domains
Carboxylic
groups?
Ketones?
240
200
160
120
80
40
ppm
0
Lactols?
Figure 2.10  Typical direct‐pulse 13C SSNMR spectrum for GO. The spectrum is taken from 
the author’s personal research files. The signals at 60, 70 and 134 ppm are assigned to epoxides, 
tertiary alcohols and aromatic carbons of graphitic domains, respectively. The signals at 101, 
167 and 193 ppm might be assigned, respectively, to lactols/gem‐diols, carboxylic groups and 
ketones

56
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
functional groups that can be accepted with 100% confidence. With high certainty, one can 
accept the existence of the major functional groups situated on the basal planes: tertiary 
alcohols and epoxides. The signals at 60 ppm and 70 ppm most likely originate from the 
epoxides and tertiary alcohols, respectively. However, the 60 ppm signal might originate 
from 1,3‐ethers as well, as Szabó et al. [38] suggested. While the actual species corre-
sponding to the 60 ppm signal are indeed most likely epoxides, there is no solid experimen-
tal evidence ruling out the 1,3‐ethers. Reactions specific to epoxides (ring opening) have 
never been unambiguously demonstrated for GO.
The assignment of the weak signals of the NMR spectrum, however, is even less straight-
forward. The 101 ppm peak could originate from the sp3‐hybridized carbon atoms con-
nected to two oxygen atoms by single bonds. Gao et al. assigned this peak to the C atoms 
in the five‐ and six‐membered rings of lactols [44]. Alternatively, Dimiev et al. assigned 
this peak to the carbon atoms of gem‐diols [31]. Neither assignment has been confirmed 
chemically or by the use of additional characterization methods. While Gao et al. place 
lactols on the flake’s edges, Dimiev et  al. place gem‐diols at the points of C–C bond 
cleavage.
The minor peaks at 167 and 192 ppm, attributed to carbonyl‐containing groups, originate 
from a relatively small number of carbon atoms. At the same time the role of these func-
tional groups is extremely important for understanding GO chemistry and structure. Let us 
take a closer look at these minor oxygen functionalities. We will begin with one of the most 
controversial functionalities: carboxyl groups that according to the LK model are situated 
on the edges of GO flakes.
Note that Lerf et al. in their famous work [37] did not provide any experimental evidence 
for the presence of carboxyl groups; the conclusion was made based on the previously 
published infrared (IR) data. It was only speculation about a functional group that might 
possibly terminate the flake edges. For some reason, this suggestion by Lerf et al. was later 
interpreted as an important integral part of the LK model. Today, despite the lack of solid 
experimental evidence, the presence of carboxyl groups in GO is one of the common 
beliefs, and often experimental data are interpreted from the perspective of a chemical 
reaction involving carboxyl groups. This is especially true for the reactions of GO with 
amines. What is often interpreted as the formation of amide bonds most likely is an elec-
trostatic interaction between negatively charged GO and positively charged ammonium. 
This type of reaction is discussed in Chapter 6.
Here we provide some arguments showing the lack of solid evidence for the existence of 
significant quantities of carboxyl groups in the GO structure. To begin with, the spectro-
scopic data either are inconclusive or suggest against carboxyls. The absorbance band at 
~1730 cm−1 in the GO FTIR spectra that was interpreted by Lerf et al. as the C = O bond 
stretch of carboxyls can be assigned to any carbonyl group, including ketones and lactones. 
Most importantly, the 13C SSNMR spectra of GO do not contain the signal at ~180 ppm, 
where the typical carboxyl carbon should appear. The two signals at 167 and 193 ppm are 
both 13 ppm from the theoretical 180 ppm value. The 193 ppm signal is most likely origi-
nated by ketones: alpha‐ and beta‐unsaturated ketones are predicted to give a signal at 
190 ppm. Subsequently, carboxyls might be associated with the 167 ppm signal. However, 
what causes the 13 ppm shift? Up to the present day these questions remain open. The 
only spectroscopic method suggesting carboxyls is X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) 

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
57
(see section 3.1). The shoulder at ~289 eV in the C 1 s XPS spectrum (see Figures 3.11 and 
3.12) is most likely to have originated from carboxyl groups. The remaining question is 
what is the actual content and the location of carboxyls on the GO platform?
2.6.2  Origin of Acidity and the Dynamic Structural Model
To answer questions related to GO structure, one needs not only to interpret the spectros-
copy data (these data can be interpreted in different ways) but also to explain the GO 
chemical properties from a structural perspective. One of the most important and unique 
properties of GO is the acidity of its aqueous solutions. Understanding the origin of GO 
acidity can greatly help in understanding its chemical structure. This was the approach we 
took in our studies and reported in two consecutive publications [31, 45]. Depending on the 
concentration, the pH of GO solutions varies from 2.0 through 4.0. The formal pKa values 
calculated from this pH are in the range of 3.93–3.96, suggesting that GO is a stronger acid 
than commonly known carboxylic acids with one functional group in a molecule [45]. 
When GO flakes are separated from water in which they were dispersed, the water does not 
possess any acidic character. This signifies that hydronium cations are tightly associated 
with GO flakes, and do not exit the boundaries of the diffusion layer of counter‐ions at the 
GO/water interface. There are no negatively charged ions in the bulk of solution to equili-
brate the positive charge of hydronium cations; they can be associated only with negatively 
charged GO planes.
GO demonstrates extremely high cation exchange capacity (CEC), a property that has 
been known for decades. Based on the early studies, 100 g of GO contains 500–800 mmol 
of active acidic sites that can take part in cation exchange reactions with bases [45, 46]. 
This translates into approximately one acidic site for every six to eight carbon atoms. Both 
the LK and SD models fail to account for such a high acidity of GO; the two structural 
models do not suggest any functional groups that can account for such a high CEC. The 
demonstrated GO acidity and Lerf’s suggestion regarding the presence of carboxyl groups 
on the flakes’ edges have led many modern researchers to link the two statements, and to 
conclude that carboxyl groups are the entities responsible for GO’s CEC. Indeed, the clas-
sical representation for the cation exchange reaction involves conversion of carboxyls to 
carboxylates. However, it is unlikely that the small number of carboxylic acid moieties 
situated on the edges of GO flakes, as proposed by the LK model, can account for such a 
high CEC. Even the edges of the holes cannot host so many carboxyls. Despite the fact that 
this was first noted back in 1909 by Hofmann and König [47], it is largely ignored in the 
modern literature. Carboxylic acids are still considered as the main moieties responsible 
for the acidic properties.
Simple geometrical considerations suggest that more or less stable two‐dimensional 
structures containing one carboxyl group per six carbon atoms can hardly be envisioned. 
Thus, the number of carboxyl groups on the GO platform (if any) should be very small, and 
ordinary carboxyls cannot be the groups accountable for GO’s acidic properties. In our 
study from 2012, we singled out two sources of GO acidity [45]. The low pKa values and 
roughly one‐third of the CEC were attributed to organic sulfates, and the other two‐thirds 
of the CEC was attributed to oxygen‐containing groups, or more exactly to reactions 
involving oxygen‐containing groups running in basic conditions. Note that organic sulfates 

58
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
are present only in GO prepared in sulfuric acid medium. At the same time, acidity is a 
property specific to all GO samples, regardless of the preparation method. Thus, the main 
contribution to acidic properties is made by oxygen functionalities. Considering the mag-
nitude of the CEC, these are the major functionalities, i.e. the groups located on the basal 
planes. The only structural model that attempted to account for GO acidity was the one 
proposed by Clauss back in 1957 [39]. Clauss suggested the presence of acidic enolic 
groups at the points of the C‐C bond cleavage. Note, Clauss derived enolic groups from 
ketones according to the keto–enol tautomerism; however, no evidence was ever provided 
in support of this statement. Interestingly, in the modern era, no attempts have been made 
to explain the acidity from the structural perspective. A few acidity‐related studies and 
some structure‐related studies have been carried out separately. We were probably the first 
since Clauss to try to combine the two aspects together [31, 45].
It was discovered that in aqueous solutions, especially in moderately basic conditions, 
GO constantly generates hydrogen cations [45]. This was registered as gradual acidifica-
tion of aqueous solutions. Thus, during the manually performed titration, after the addition 
of every new NaOH portion, and reaching the corresponding higher value, the pH of the 
solution starts drifting downward, and this drift continues if another portion of NaOH is not 
added. This acidification of GO solutions initiated by the addition of NaOH is the reason 
why the reverse titration curves (Figure 2.11) begin at lower pH values compared to the 
points where the direct titration curves end. The kinetics of the acidification reaction 
(Figure 2.11d) is typical of an ordinary chemical reaction. The process is intense in the first 
60 minutes. The pH almost stabilizes in a few hours; however, acidification slowly contin-
ues during several days. This observation suggests that hydronium cations are generated in 
the course of the ordinary chemical reaction.
The direct titration curves are featureless (see also Figure 1.8). This observation contra-
dicts the standing points of Boehm’s titration protocol [48] (see section 1.4.5 for details). 
The protocol is based on the assumption that functional groups with different pKa values 
should be neutralized sequentially with bases of different strength; this should inevitably 
lead to the existence of inflection points on titration curves. There were attempts to explain 
the lack of inflection points by overlapping of pKa values of “numerous different acidic 
groups” [32, 49]. This is where the acidity‐related studies come into conflict with existing 
structural models. According to the LK model, the only functional groups in GO having 
acidic character are carboxyls; and, as shown above, their content in GO is very low. The 
only other functional groups having some acidic character are phenols. Other types of 
functional groups possessing acidic character simply do not exist. If one assumes that both 
carboxyls and phenols indeed exist, then direct titration curves should contain two clear 
inflection points. To resolve this apparent contradiction between experimental facts and 
existing structural models, we suggested that acidic groups do not pre‐exist in GO, but are 
generated by interaction with bases.
It was proposed that, in aqueous solutions, especially in basic conditions, vicinal diols 
undergo a chain of irreversible transformations that generate hydrogen cations. The pro-
posed reaction mechanism is represented in Scheme 2.3.
The reaction between water and GO starts with the nucleophilic attack of a water mole-
cule on tertiary alcohols, and ends up with C–C bond cleavage and the formation of ketones 
and enols on the newly formed edges. The proposed reaction mechanism is based on the 

3
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
I
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
3
0
1
2
3
4
5
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
3
0
0
8.2
8.0
7.8
7.6
7.4
7.2
7.0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1
2
Volume (mL)
IV
II
II
I
III
Volume (mL)
Volume (mL)
Time (min)
3
4
5
4
5
6
7
pH
pH
pH
pH
8
9
10
11
Figure 2.11  Acidic properties of GO solutions. (a–c) Forward (black squares) and reverse 
(red circles) titration curves. In the forward titration, the GO solution (1.0 mg ml−1) was titrated 
with 0.100 M NaOH; and in the reverse titration, the conjugate base of GO was titrated with 
0.100 M HCl. (a) The reverse titration was performed immediately after the forward titration. 
The reverse titration curve begins at almost the same pH. (b) Reverse titration was performed 
6 h after the forward titration. The reverse titration curve begins at lower pH values due to the 
acidification during the 6 h time period. (c) The solution was heated at 60 °C for 15 h after the 
forward titration (III), and before performing the reverse titration (IV). The reverse titration 
begins at significantly lower pH values. (d) The change in pH of the GO solution with time after 
the addition of the 0.100 M NaOH solution. Zero time corresponds to the addition of NaOH. 
The increase in pH during the first 3 min 47 s after NaOH addition is not shown on the graph. 
All experiments are performed under nitrogen. Reproduced from [45] with permission of ACS
HO
– H3O
+
–
6
7
OH
OH
H2O
O
Scheme 2.3  Origin of GO acidity. The structure (6) is a GO fragment containing a vicinal 
diol. The C–C bond to be cleaved is shown in red. Nucleophilic attack of a water molecule on 
the hydrogen atom of the hydroxyl group results in C–C bond cleavage and in the formation of 
a ketone and an enol at newly formed edges (7). The reaction generates a hydronium cation; 
this explains the acidification of GO aqueous solutions. The hydrogen atom of the as‐formed 
enol is highly acidic; this enol can further ionize, making the GO solution even more acidic

60
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
pseudo‐acidity of tertiary alcohols that makes them prone to nucleophilic attack by water 
molecules. The acidity of the alcohol groups, in turn, is afforded by the stability of the 
conjugate base due to delocalization of a negative charge over the large area of a graphitic 
domain. The ability of GO to delocalize and accumulate negative charge is the necessary 
condition and the driving force for this reaction.
Another necessary condition is the aqueous solution. GO flakes can exist in the nega-
tively charged state only when this charge is neutralized by the positive charge of coun-
ter‐ions, building up an electrical double layer at the GO/water interface. This is possible 
only in aqueous solution. When GO reacts with bases, the attacking species, i.e. a hydrox-
ide anion, is a stronger nucleophile compared to a water molecule. This makes a larger 
number of tertiary alcohols prone to nucleophilic attack. The metal cations do not form 
direct bonds with carboxylic groups; as discussed above, GO cannot contain so many 
carboxyl groups. Instead, metal cations are electrostatically attracted to the negatively 
charged GO planes. They partially or fully replace hydronium ions in the electrical double 
layer at the GO/water interface. This is the explanation for the high CEC values, when GO 
reacts with bases.
The formation of ketones and enols requires rupture of only one of the three C–C bonds 
of carbon atoms with neighbors; this makes a virtual enol‐containing structure stronger, 
and thus more realistic compared to a carboxyl‐containing structure. Enolic groups by 
themselves are not strongly acidic. However, on a GO platform, the acidity of enolic groups 
is increased by conjugation with two different entities. (i) In conjugation with ketones, 
enols form so‐called vinylogous acids that have the same acidity as regular carboxylic 
acids. (ii) The conjugation of enols can extend to the entire graphitic domain, as shown for 
structure (7) in Scheme 2.3. This provides extremely high stability to enolate anions, thus 
rendering GO solutions highly acidic.
Based on the acidity‐related studies, we proposed a new structural model of GO, which 
was referred to as the “dynamic structural model” (DSM) [45]. This model suggests that 
in aqueous solutions GO constantly interacts with water. Upon this reaction, tertiary 
alcohols slowly transform into enols and ketones by generating hydronium ions. While 
the essence of this model is represented by Scheme 2.3, the respective GO structure is 
shown in Figure 2.12. The DSM is sufficiently different from both the LK and SD mod-
els. While it accepts tertiary alcohols and epoxides as the main functional groups on the 
basal planes, it rejects carboxyls as more or less abundant species. Also, the DSM sug-
gests the presence of enols and ketones on numerous points of the C–C bond cleavage. 
From this perspective, this model employs ideas proposed by Clauss, and incorporated 
more recently into the SD model. However, our explanation for enol formation is differ-
ent from the keto–enol tautomerism proposed by Clauss. Our model derives enols directly 
from tertiary alcohols.
Figure 2.12 represents the simplified version of the DSM; it reflects only the structure of 
the basal planes. Note that the numerous points of C–C bond cleavage are not considered 
by the DSM as edges; they are structural features of the basal planes. Indirect confirmation 
of our model has been provided by HRTEM images. The image in Figure 2.13 clearly 
shows numerous points where the C–C bonds are broken. Also, one carbon atom seems to 
be missing.

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
61
Now, let us focus on the chemical structure of the edges of numerous holes in GO planes. 
Figure 2.14 represents the complete version of the Dimiev–Tour (DT) structural model, 
featuring all the functionalities proposed by the model. The GO fragment contains a hole 
situated on the border between the graphitic domain (lower right corner) and the oxidized 
domain (upper left corner). The main functional groups on the basal planes are epoxides 
and tertiary alcohols, in accordance with the LK model. However, the basal planes also 
contain numerous points of C–C bond cleavage as at 1 and 2 with ketones and enols at the 
newly formed edges.
In aqueous solutions, ketones undergo further transformation. One of the possible trans-
formations is hydration and conversion into gem‐diols (hydrates) such as 2 and 3 [31]. The 
gem‐diols are stable in aqueous solutions, especially when carbonyls or double bonds are 
present in ɑ‐position to the gem‐diol carbon atom, and the strain favors sp3 hybridization 
[50, 51], as shown for the gem‐diol 3. There is another possible transformation, in that a 
gem‐diol can be further converted to a hemiacetal such as 2. Both gem‐diols and hemiac-
etals contain an sp3 carbon atom bonded to two oxygen atoms, which might be responsible 
for the 101 ppm signal in the 13C SSNMR spectrum of GO. The DT structural model 
accounts for GO acidity. The enols formed at the point of C–C bond cleavage such as 1 are 
strongly acidic due to the conjugation over the large graphitic domain, and/or due to forma-
tion of a vinylogous acid in combination with ketones. The same is true for numerous 
vinylogous acids such as 4, 5 and 6 situated on the edge of the hole. Thus the dynamic 
O
O
O
OH
HO
HO3SO
O
OH
HO
Figure 2.12  The simplified version of the GO dynamic structural model by Dimiev et al. The 
carbon framework is shown in black. Neutral oxygen functionalities are shown in blue. 
Functionalities with acidic properties are shown in red and purple. The enolic group shown in 
red is acidic due to conjugation with the graphitic domain. The enolic group shown in purple 
is acidic due to the formation of a vinylogous acid in conjugation with ketone. Organic sulfates 
are always adjacent to at least one tertiary alcohol. The density of organic sulfates depends on 
the washing procedures; for thoroughly washed GO samples, there is about one organic 
sulfate per 90 carbon atoms

62
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
structural model logically and in the least controversial way explains many of the known 
GO properties, including the most important one: the acidity of aqueous solutions. This 
model describes the GO structure in aqueous solutions. We suggest that the fine chemical 
structure of GO in aqueous solutions is different from that in the dry solid state. Note that 
the presence of enols is not confirmed by 13C SSNMR spectroscopy in solid graphite oxide 
samples. It is possible that enols exist only in aqueous solutions, and transform into other 
groups, such as ketones, when GO solutions are dried out, and graphite oxide is obtained 
in the bulk solid form.
(A)
(B)
Figure 2.13  HRTEM images of GO. (A) Magnification of the oxidized domain area: left is the 
actual structure, right is the simulated model. (B) Magnification of the intact graphitic domain. 
The oxidized domain contains multiple points of C–C bond cleavage. Reproduced from [42] 
with permission of John Wiley & Sons

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
63
Additional support for the dynamic structural model, with emphasis on the first word, 
came in a recent report by Kumar et al. [52]. It was demonstrated that, when a GO solu-
tion is processed hydrothermally at elevated temperatures, the as‐synthesized metastable 
GO transforms into a different, relatively more stable state (Figure  2.15). This new 
quasi‐stable state has very different spatial distribution of oxygen functional groups, 
and, as a consequence, exhibits different optical and electrical properties. With respect to 
our topic, this work demonstrates the mobility of oxygen functional groups on GO 
planes, and their ability to transform into each other when GO is in aqueous solutions. 
This process is intensified at higher temperatures, which help to overcome the activation 
energy barrier.
OH
OH
OH
3
O
2
HO
HO
5
O
6
OH
O
6
1
O OH
O
OH
O
OH
HO
O
HO
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
O
O
HO
HO
OH
O
COOH
4
OH
OSO3H
Figure  2.14  The complete version of the Dimiev–Tour GO structural model (DT model), 
featuring all the proposed functionalities. A GO fragment contains a hole situated on the 
border between a graphenic domain (lower right corner) and an oxidized domain (upper left 
corner). Different structural features are represented by different numbers and colors. 1 Ketone 
and enol groups are formed at the point of C–C bond cleavage. 2 By hydration, ketones can 
turn into gem‐diols, and further into hemiacetals. 3 Here a gem‐diol is in ɑ‐position to a ketone; 
this favors the stability of gem‐diols in aqueous solutions. 4–6 These are the vinylogous 
carboxylic acids. Conjugation in the carboxylic acid 4 is limited by two oxygen atoms. 
Conjugation of the vinylogous acids 5 and 6 extends to the entire graphitic domain; acids 5 
and 6 are stronger acids than acid 4. Organic sulfates are present in GO samples prepared in 
sulfuric acid medium

64
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
2.7  Density of Defects and Introduction of Oxo‐Functionalized  
Graphene
Let us finally discuss the origin and the density of the holes and the points of C–C bond 
cleavage on GO planes. The formation of such a defects is based on the divalent nature of 
oxygen. No permanent defects are introduced when graphene is functionalized with 
GO as-synthesized
GO annealed at 80 °C for five days
Anneal
Graphene basal plane
Oxygen
Figure  2.15  Transformation of as‐synthesized metastable GO into a different form upon 
hydrothermal treatment (“annealing” in the authors’ terminology) in aqueous solution. The top 
two images are the Auger electron spectroscopy (AES) oxygen mapping of as‐synthesized (left) 
and hydrothermally treated (right) GO films. The white spots indicate oxygen‐rich regions, and 
the black spots indicate oxygen‐deficient regions. The scale bar is 2 µm. On the bottom is the 
schematic depicting the proposed phase separation process. The as‐prepared GO exhibits a 
uniform distribution of oxygen functionalities. This metastable GO has the potential to separate 
into two distinct oxidized and non‐oxidized domains through diffusion of oxygen atoms on the 
graphene basal plane under the influence of an external stimulus, i.e. high temperature. 
Reproduced from [52] with permission of Nature Publishing Group

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
65
monovalent elements such as fluorine that can form single C–F bonds only. After hydrazine 
reduction of the fluorinated graphene, the original graphene plane can be almost fully 
restored [53]. Unlike fluorine, divalent oxygen tends to form double bonds with carbon 
atoms. After the epoxides and alcohols with the formal oxidation state of carbon +1 have 
been formed, oxygen tends to push the reaction even further to form ketones with formal 
oxidation state +2, and carboxyls with the formal oxidation state +3. As the extreme case, 
carbon dioxide with the oxidation state of carbon +4 is formed. In order to form C = O 
bonds, the C–C bonds need to be broken; this is the origin of the defects in GO.
It was reported that carbon dioxide is formed already in the course of GO production [8, 
31]. The formation of CO2, i.e. the removal of carbon, indicates the formation of holes. 
Defects are introduced in the various steps of GO production. Thus, significant evolution 
of CO2 gas was detected during the second step of GO production, i.e. conversion of stage‐1 
GIC into PGO [31]. Additional defects are introduced during the third step of GO forma-
tion, i.e. washing of as‐prepared PGO with water [45] according to the mechanism pre-
sented in Scheme 2.3. This is why, if one aims to obtain non‐defective GO, one needs to 
conduct the oxidation reaction in such a way that allows the formation of monovalent 
functionalities, but avoids the formation of divalent carbonyls.
2.7.1  Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene by Charpy–Hummers Approach
It was demonstrated back in 1909 by Charpy [8] that when graphite oxidation is conducted 
at elevated temperatures the loss of carbon increases: at room temperature almost no loss 
of carbon was registered, at 45 °C a small part of the graphite is lost, and at 100 °C already 
50% of graphite is oxidized to CO2. This observation has a simple explanation in terms of 
general chemistry: at higher temperatures, the activation energy barriers for many reactions 
are met, and oxygen realizes its full potential. At lower temperatures, oxidation is restricted 
to the formation of epoxides and alcohols, and the carbon grid is preserved. By keeping the 
reaction temperature below 10 °C, Eigler et al. [43] obtained minimally damaged GO, with 
an almost intact σ framework of C atoms. To stress the integrity of the honeycomb lattice, 
this GO can be termed “oxo‐functionalized graphene” (oxo‐G1). The developed reaction 
sequence to oxo‐G1 is illustrated in Figure 2.16. It is critical that the temperature must be 
kept below 10 °C to avoid over‐oxidation, especially during aqueous work‐up.
The delamination of graphite oxide to oxo‐G1 proceeds in water for shaken, stirred or 
sonicated dispersions. The carbon lattice remains almost intact and Raman spectroscopy 
indicates a density of defects that is as low as 0.01% for the selected best quality of chemi-
cally reduced flakes (Figure 2.16A). It can be estimated that every second carbon atom of 
oxo‐G1 is sp3‐hybridized and functional groups are located on both sides of the basal plane. 
It is possible to conclude from analyses that functionalization at the edges of oxo‐G1 plays 
a minor role and oxo‐G1 is therefore a suitable precursor for wet‐chemically synthesized 
graphene. In addition, the controlled chemistry of GO can be elaborated.
Flakes of oxo‐G1, dispersed in water, were deposited on Si/SiO2 wafers by the Langmuir–
Blodgett technique and subsequently chemically reduced by the vapor of hydriodic acid 
and trifluoroacetic acid. The graphene‐like nature of the wet‐chemically prepared graphene 
was determined by measuring magnetoresistance and Hall effect in magnetic fields up to 
14 T, at a temperature of 1.6 K. Hole‐like charge carriers with a charge carrier density 
n = 1.6 × 1012 cm−2 were found, a typical value for exfoliated graphene. The charge carriers 

66
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
responsible are attributed to the process of wet‐chemical synthesis with measured mobility 
values exceeding 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1. Furthermore, Shubnikov–de Haas (SdH) oscillations 
were observed for the first time in chemically synthesized graphene (Figure 2.16B). The 
analysis of Landau‐level indices confirmed the presence of SdH oscillations, and they 
depend linearly on the inverse magnetic field as expected for SdH oscillations. The fre-
quency of the oscillations plotted versus the charge carrier density revealed a linear depend-
ence due to the linear density of states. This observation is only expected for 2D graphene 
(Figure 2.16C).
However, statistical Raman spectroscopy revealed heterogeneous properties of as‐pre-
pared oxo‐G1: different flakes exhibit different degrees of oxidation (Figure 2.17). The 
electronic transport properties of the flakes with an ID/IG ratio of 4 were also investigated 
(Figure 2.17D–F). A charge carrier density of 2.16 × 1012 cm−2 and a mobility of 270 cm2 V−1 
s−1 were determined from the magneto‐transport measurements. The sheet resistance Rxx is 
Graphene
Graphene oxide
Reduction
10μm
Graphite
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
(E)
(F)
(G)
Graphite
600 μm
Graphite
1500
Graphite oxide
oxo-G1
Ox
Graphene
2250
3000
1500
2250
3000
1500
2250
3000
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
Deposition
oxo-G1
oxo-G1 on surface
Delamination
1. KMnO4
2. H2O
3. H2O2
H2SO4
< 10 °C
< 10 °C
< 10 °C
2. Processing
3. Reduction
Figure 2.16  (A) Synthesis of GO with an almost intact carbon framework (oxo‐functionalized 
graphene, oxo‐G1) starting from graphite in sulfuric acid with potassium permanganate as 
the oxidant. (B) Reflected light microscope image of natural graphite (flake size 600 µm).  
(C) Aqueous dispersion of oxo‐G1 at 0.1 mg ml−1. (D) Scanning electron microscope image of 
graphene on SiO2/Si. Raman spectra of (E) graphite, (F) oxo‐G1 and (G) a flake of graphene 
obtained from oxo‐G1 by chemical reduction. Reproduced from [43] with permission of Wiley‐
VCH Verlag GmbH & Co

2.5
1.5
0.5
–20
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Rxx/kΩ
3.0
3.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
B–1/T–1
0.20
–20
4
8
BF/T
12
0
20
Vg/V
Vg/V
0.25
1.5
2.0
2.5
Landau-indizes m
3.0
5V
–5V
B/T
–20V
3.5
4.0
0 V
20 V
–20 V
Raman shift/cm–1
1500
2000
2500
3000
2600
(A)
(B)
(C)
2700
2800
Graphene
from GO
(washed)
FWHM=35cm–1
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
0
20
n (1012cm–2)
Figure 2.17  Electrical properties of the wet‐chemically prepared graphene derived from oxo‐
G1. (A) Raman spectrum of a graphene flake (Γ2D = 35 cm−1) used for the measurements shown 
in (B) and (C). (B) Four‐point resistance Rxx at different gate voltages with visible Shubnikov–de 
Haas oscillations (maxima and minima indicated by arrows). The frequency of the oscillations 
varies with the charge carrier density. Inset: Linear dependence of the charge carrier density 
on the gate voltage VG. The red line represents the fit n ∝ αVG with α = −3 × 1010 cm−2. (C) 
Analysis of the Landau‐level indices for the Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations for exemplary gate 
voltages. The Landau‐level indices for a single gate voltage depend linearly on the inverse 
magnetic field. Inset: Dependence of the oscillation frequency BF shows a linear dependence 
on the external electric field also. This is an important indication of a pure 2D material

68
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Figure  2.17  (Continued) (D) Raman spectrum of graphene (ID/IG = 4.0). (E) Magneto‐
transport measurement of the sample characterized in (D). (F) Statistical Raman analysis of 
individual spectra of a film of flakes of graphene. Reproduced from [43] with permission of 
Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH & Co
Rxx/kΩ
Rxy/kΩ
Rxx (kΩ)
Rxy (kΩ)
Raman shift/cm–1
1.0
0.5
0.0
30
40
165 spectra
1191 spectra
1034 spectra
50 cm–1
40cm–1
50
60
Г2D
70
80
1.5
ID/IG
2.5
2.0
3.0
3.5
4.0
–15
7.0
7.5
8.0
8.5
9.0
9.5
10.0
10.5
11.0
–10
–5
0
B/T
20
6
8
10
50
Is-d (μA)
Vg/V
80
5
Reduced GO-n
Reduced GO-n
(selected
single layers)
10
15
–4
–2
0
2
4
1500
2000
2600
2700
2800
(D)
(E)
(F)
Graphene
from GO
(intermediate
quality)
FWHM=48.8 cm–1
2500
3000

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
69
dominated by a localization peak, and the field‐effect measurement confirms the mobility 
of 250 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes and 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons. An ambipolar field effect is 
observed, as expected for graphene samples (Figure 2.17E).
Oxo‐G1 is a suitable basis for the development of further functionalization reactions 
proceeding on the basal plane of graphene, while functional groups at the edges of the 
flakes (several micrometers) and defects play a minor role. Moreover, the performance 
limits observed for typical RGO are no longer limitations for graphene derived from oxo‐
G1, as, for example, demonstrated by the charge carrier mobility values, which can exceed 
1000 cm2 V−1 s−1.
2.7.2  Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene from Graphite Sulfate
As discussed in section 2.4, the stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC, or graphite sulfate, is the first interme-
diate product in the course of GO production. Eigler et al. have demonstrated recently [54] 
that, upon quenching with water, graphite sulfate can be converted into oxo‐functionalized 
material, as depicted in Figure 2.18A. The single‐layer character and the oxidized nature of 
the as‐obtained oxo‐functionalized graphene was confirmed by atomic force microscopy 
and Raman spectroscopy (Figure 2.18B). A high degree of functionalization is evident 
from the presented Raman spectra: broad D, G and 2D peaks similar to the spectra of 
typical GO.
This type of oxo‐G1 exhibits a degree of functionalization of about 4%, and can be indi-
cated as G1‐(OH)4%. Individual flakes of G1‐(OH)4% with a diameter of several micrometers 
are identified by atomic force microscopy (Figure 2.18B). Flakes of graphene on a Si/SiO2 
substrate are obtained after reduction with the vapor of hydriodic acid and trifluoroacetic 
acid, a method that quantitatively removes oxo‐functional groups from the carbon lattice 
(see section 1.6.4). The Raman analysis reveals that graphene with a residual density of 
defects of approximately 0.04% is obtained (Figure 2.18D). Therefore, the defect density 
was assumed to be only 0.04% in oxo‐G1 (0.04%G1‐(OH)4%). Such a low average density of 
defects was not reported for the wet‐chemically prepared graphene from oxo‐G1 prepared 
by the Charpy–Hummers approach (section 2.7.1).
The formation of oxo‐G1 by this approach is in sharp contrast with our earlier studies 
[23]: we did not observe sufficient oxidation of graphite upon intercalation–deintercalation 
cycle with the use of the same system; the oxidation degree of graphite was very low. The 
reason for this discrepancy is not yet completely clear. The possible explanation is that only 
one or a few outer graphene layers of the stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC flake are being oxidized upon 
quenching it with water. The inner graphene layers most likely remain non‐oxidized. Upon 
quenching, the graphite sulfate quickly deintercalates [24], graphite galleries close, and 
water does not have access to the inner graphene layers. Unlike the inner layers, the outer 
graphene layers are exposed to water while still in the charged (intercalated) state; this 
leads to the formation of covalent C–O bonds.
Such an oxidation sheds additional light on the mechanism of GO formation. Apparently, 
with this approach, the mechanism of oxo‐G1 formation is different from that discussed in 
section  2.4. Here, the second step, i.e. the formation of PGO, is completely missing, 
because no oxidation occurs in the concentrated persulfate–sulfuric acid system, used to 
prepare stage‐1 H2SO4‐GIC. There is no edge‐to‐center propagation of the oxidation simi-
lar to that for the KMnO4–H2SO4 system. Oxidation occurs only upon quenching. Thus, 

Figure 2.18  Oxo‐functionalized graphene from graphite sulfate. (A) Synthesis of graphene 
and few‐layer graphene from graphite sulfate, followed by the reaction with water to yield 
oxo‐functionalized graphene and graphene after reduction. (B) Atomic force microscope 
image, ultraviolet–visible spectrum and Raman spectrum of oxo‐functionalized graphene. (C) 
Thermogravimetric analysis of oxo‐functionalized graphene coupled with mass spectrometry. 
(D) Statistical Raman analysis of a film of flakes of graphene. Inset: Histogram of Γ2D. (E) 
Atomic force microscope image of graphene derived from G1‐(OH)4%. (F) Raman spectrum of 
graphene obtained from G1‐(OH)4% after reduction, with ΓD, ΓG and Γ2D given in italic numbers. 
Reproduced from [54] with permission from RSC
OXO-G1/OXO-Gfew-layer
Gfew-layer
G2
G1
Graphite sulfate
1. H2O
Graphite
rt
(A)
2. Sonication
Reduction
K2S2O8
H2SO4/
–H2SO4
or
300 400 500 600
365
Absorbance/a.u.
Intensity/a.u.
318
253
Wave/length/nm
2D
1500 2000
Raman shift/cm–1
1.6 μm
(B)
2500 3000
D + D′
D
G
700 800
GO

13%
40
0
100
200
300
1500
2000
D
1.6 μm
2D
G
Intensity/a.u.
17
14
27
Raman shift/cm–1
2500
3000
G1
Temperature/°C
400
500
600
700
0
10
20
H2O
SO2
CO2
30
40
50
60
50
60
70
80
90
100
TG/%
(C)
(E)
(F)
Counts/a.u.
TG
m/z 18
m/z 44
m/z 64
0
30
50
100
Г2D/cm–1
Г2D/cm–1
Г2D = 37.7 ± 11.6 cm–1
Г2D = 33cm–1
ID/IG = 2.2 ± 0.6
20
0
100
200
300
400
Counts
40
60
80
200
250
1.0
2.0
3.0
ID/IG
4.0
(D)
Figure 2.18  (Continued)

72
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
there is the possibility that C–O bonds form directly by contact of charged graphene with 
water molecules. However, it is more likely that the oxidizing agent here is some species 
formed by dilution of the persulfate–sulfuric acid mixture by water. The electrochemical 
potential of the persulfate–sulfuric acid system is lower than that for the permanganate–
sulfuric acid system. Thus, with the former, oxygen cannot realize its full potential, C ─ O 
bonds are not formed, and oxidation stops on the step of C–O bond formation.
With the synthesis of oxo‐functionalized derivatives of graphene and the minimization 
of defects within the carbon framework, the first step toward a controlled chemistry of 
oxo‐G1 is achieved. However, it is necessary to reliably characterize the carbon lattice of 
oxo‐G1 because of its heterogeneity. The chemistry of oxo‐G1 will be reviewed in more 
detail in Chapter 6.
Concluding this section, we need to stress that the minimally damaged oxo‐functional-
ized graphene is a new material introduced recently by Siegfried Eigler. Typical GO is very 
different due to the higher density of defects. As was shown above, and will be additionally 
demonstrated in Chapter 6, these defects are responsible for the unique and rich chemistry 
of GO.
2.8  Addressing the Challenges of the Two‐Component  
Structural Model
While discussing GO structure, one cannot avoid discussing the so‐called two‐component 
GO structural model, due to its strong impact on the scientific community. According to 
this model, proposed in 2011 by Rourke et al. [55], GO consists of two parts: (i) slightly 
oxidized, structurally intact, graphene‐like sheets, and (ii) small polycyclic organic mole-
cules, bearing most of the oxygen functional groups. The small molecules are adsorbed on 
the surface of graphene‐like sheets. When an as‐prepared GO (aGO) dispersion is heated 
with a strong base, such as NaOH, the small molecules can be separated from aGO, leaving 
behind clean “base‐washed GO” (bwGO). In this section, the original terminology sug-
gested by Rourke et al. [55] is preserved. Subsequently, these small molecules were named 
“oxidation debris” (OD) by analogy with earlier carbon‐nanotube‐related studies [56–58]. 
Being rich in oxygen groups, the OD is responsible for most of the cumulative ultraviolet–
visible (UV‐vis) absorption, IR absorption and photoluminescence of the integral aGO. 
The bwGO, in turn, contains fewer oxygen groups, and contributes significantly less to the 
integral properties mentioned above. Figure 2.19 represents this concept as seen by the 
model developers.
In the years following the original report, Rourke’s group further developed this model, 
confirming and detailing the earlier‐proposed concept [59, 60]. Up to the present day, the 
original report of the two‐component model has amassed 150 citations, and several 
research groups have invoked this model to explain their findings [61–65]. The model was 
employed to describe such GO properties as surface adsorptive behavior [60, 61], fluores-
cence [59, 63, 65] and electrochemistry [64]. In the most recent GO‐related review article, 
the model was discussed as being a matter of fact [3]. Thus, this model has evolved from 
a hypothesis proposed by one group into a theory that makes a notable impact on the entire 
GO field. The number of actual supporters of this model is probably even higher than the 

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
73
number of published studies. In the author’s informal correspondence with researchers 
working in the field, some of them admitted that they cannot fully rule it out. The attrac-
tiveness of this model lies in its apparent simplicity. This additionally illustrates that the 
modern research society likes simple solutions. The impact of the two‐component model 
is so strong that some researchers, in the rush to fit their experimental observations into the 
model’s framework, readily sacrifice not only fundamental principles of science, but 
sometimes even common sense. Thus, Guo et al. [65] suggested that intrinsically black 
bwGO appears bright yellow because OD is “strongly physisorbed” on its surface. When 
OD desorbs, the real black color of bwGO is revealed. Moreover, Rodriguez‐Pastor et al. 
[66] concluded that the oxidation of graphite is carried out in such a way that some gra-
phene layers remain almost intact (bwGO), while others are completely destroyed into 
small OD‐like fragments.
In essence, the two‐component model revises all the views on GO structure that were 
developed by generations of chemists. At closer look, the two‐component model contains 
insurmountable contradictions that were discussed in our recent publication on this topic 
[67]. As an additional example, the two‐component model fails to account for GO 
Figure  2.19  Schematic representation of the two‐component GO structural model, as 
presented by the model developers. OD, which allegedly pre‐exists in aGO samples, is an 
oxygen‐rich complex polycyclic molecule strongly physisorbed on the surface of slightly 
oxidized bwGO. OD detaches from bwGO upon treatment in hot basic solutions. Reproduced 
from [59] with permission of ACS

74
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
decomposition during annealing. How might OD, allegedly physisorbed on the surface of 
slightly oxidized graphene, possibly cause the formation of vacancy defects on the latter? 
To overcome the apparent contradictions of the two‐component model, we proposed an 
alternative explanation to the experimental observations that served as the model’s founda-
tion [67]. It was demonstrated that all the evidence used to justify the two‐component 
model is perfectly consistent with the traditional single‐component GO models. We offered 
an explanation that the so‐called oxidative debris, rather than pre‐existing on as‐synthe-
sized GO flakes, is in fact generated by the decomposition of the single‐component GO 
under basic conditions. As an argument, we demonstrated the jagged edges and highly 
defective nature of base‐treated GO flakes which confirm the disintegration of GO flakes 
on smaller pieces in basic conditions (see Figure 3.22). The flake size reduction upon base 
treatment was also observed by Taniguchi et al. [68].
The spectroscopic data that were presented in support of the two‐component model were 
also re‐examined [67]. FTIR and XPS spectra suggest the formation of carboxylate groups 
after subjecting GO to base treatment. Carboxylate ion groups can exist only on newly 
formed edges, thus proving the highly defective nature of base‐treated GO.
To reveal the chemistry behind the experimental observations, we employed the same 
ideas that were earlier placed in the foundation of our dynamic structural model. The reac-
tion between strong base and GO starts with nucleophilic attack of hydroxide anions on 
tertiary alcohols on a GO platform, and ends up with C–C bond cleavage and the formation 
of ketones and enols on the newly formed edges (Scheme 2.4). Ketones further transform 
into carboxylates. The proposed reaction mechanism is based on the relative acidity of 
1
2
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
–
–
–
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
–
–
–
Scheme 2.4  Disintegration of GO in basic conditions via C–C bond cleavage. The structure 
(1) is a GO fragment containing three vicinal diols. The C–C bonds to be cleaved are shown in 
red. The structure (2) shows the same GO fragment after the three C–C bonds have been 
cleaved. The three different transformations initiated by the attack of hydroxide ions on tertiary 
alcohols are represented by three separate sets of curly arrows shown in different colors

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
75
NaOH
NaOH
1
2
3
“OD”
“OD”
“OD”
Figure 2.20  Schematics representing the gradual disintegration of GO in basic conditions. 
Structure 1 is a fragment of a regular as‐prepared GO. The blue‐colored areas represent intact 
graphitic domains. The continuous yellow‐colored network represents oxidized domains. 
White islands represent holes. Structures  2 and 3 represent progressive stages of GO 
disintegration. The gradual color change from yellow in 1 to orange in 3 represents the change 
in chemical structure of the oxidized domains. Dotted lines represent invisible cuts formed on 
GO as a result of the C–C bond cleavage caused by reaction. The small orange‐colored shapes 
in dashed red ovals represent carbon fragments removed from the respective GO platform 
during base treatment. The size of the removed carbon fragments varies from subnanometer 
through several nanometers. Reproduced from [67] with permission of Elsevier
tertiary alcohols, which makes them prone to nucleophilic attack by hydroxide anions. The 
acidity of alcohol groups, in turn, is afforded by the stability of the conjugate base due to 
delocalization of negative charge over a large area of graphitic domains. Thus, the GO 
chemistry in basic conditions fits well into the earlier proposed dynamic structural model. 
The interaction between GO and strong bases can be considered as a deeper propagation of 
reactions running even in neutral aqueous reactions.
Figure 2.20 schematically represents the disintegration of GO flakes, and the formation 
of OD during base treatment. The GO fragment (1) represents a typical GO flake, drawn in 
accordance with the actual GO structure as recorded by HRTEM [42]. The oxidized areas 
of GO (shown in yellow) form a continuous network, while the intact graphitic domains 
(shown in blue) form isolated islands. In addition, GO contains structural defects, i.e. holes, 
shown in white. During the base treatment, numerous additional defects form on the GO 

76
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
platform (2). Some of these defects are simply points of C–C bond cleavage, where the 
carbon atoms remain on the GO platform. Other defects are tiny holes formed by the 
removal of small carbon fragments. These small defects are not detectable by scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM), while the flake 
stays in one piece, as shown in the GO fragment (2). However, these defects serve as hid-
den pathways for future disintegration. They become pronounced during sonication and/or 
prolonged base treatment, leading to disintegration of the flakes into smaller pieces (3). 
The chemical structure of the oxidized domains changes during the base treatment; this is 
represented by the gradual color change from yellow to orange.
The entire confusion with the two‐component model is probably rooted in some 
experimental mistakes made by Rourke’s group during the work‐up procedures, and in 
determining the yield of OD (see Ref. [67] for details). The high yields (25–41%) 
reported by Rourke’s group have not been reproduced by other groups [65, 67]. To tell 
the truth, one cannot rule out completely that some small amount of OD is indeed formed 
during the oxidation of graphite. Furthermore, this OD might even be physisorbed on 
GO flakes, and might further desorb from GO during the base treatment. However, the 
amount of this OD is too small (probably <1%, if at all) to be considered as a component 
of GO. Thus, there is no strong evidence for the existence of OD. To summarize this sec-
tion, all the observations placed in the foundation of the two‐component structural model 
can be explained in a less controversial way in terms of the one‐component dynamic 
structural model.
2.9  Structure of Bulk Graphite Oxide
Solid graphite oxide is the product formed by restacking of the previously exfoliated sin-
gle‐layer GO sheets. Due to the 2D nature of single GO sheets, their bulk accumulation, i.e. 
graphite oxide, has a lamellar paper‐like structure. This substance has a loosely ordered 
structure in the c‐axis direction, with a repeat distance of 6–9 Å between the constituent 
GO layers.
Due to its 2D nature, GO can acquire many different bulk forms. If simply dried from the 
gel or from aqueous paste, it forms dark‐brown shapeless material that is difficult to cut and 
grind due to its lamellar structure. However, by an intelligent design, one can shape it into 
different forms, each of which has numerous potential applications. If extruded from solu-
tion, it can be spun into fiber (Figure 2.21a). The SEM images of the fiber cross‐section 
(Figure 2.21b,c) demonstrate the ordered layered structure. The self‐deposition of GO from 
solutions by drop‐casting or by filtration leads to formation of very uniform paper‐like 
materials (Figure 2.21d). The densely packed layered structure of these films is apparent 
from the SEM images of the film edges (Figure 2.21e,f). Clauss and Hofmann demon-
strated back in 1956 that as‐prepared GO films, when of a certain thickness, demonstrate 
permeability for water molecules, while they remain absolutely impermeable for other 
molecules and even atoms [69]. The same study with GO membranes reproduced in the 
modern graphene era [70] deserved publication in the journal Science. After annealing, the 
GO membranes become permeable for several species. They demonstrate selectivity 
toward different gases, and thus have great potential for separation of gases. This very 
important application of GO is reviewed in more detail in Chapter 9 by Ho Bum Park and 

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
77
colleagues. When GO solutions are dried by freeze‐drying, highly voluminous, sponge‐like 
materials can be obtained (Figure 2.21 g). These materials, also referred to as aerogels or 
hydrogels, may find applications everywhere where high surface area is desired: superca-
pacitors, sorption materials and many more.
(a)
(d)
(g)
(b)
(e)
(h)
(c)
(f)
(i)
Figure 2.21  Various macro‐forms of GO. (a) A wet‐spun 14 m long continuous fiber with 
diameter 10 µm and (b,c) SEM images of the cross‐section of the fiber. (d) A paper‐like film 
made by the filtration method and (e,f) SEM images of the paper edges. (g) Ultra‐light‐weight 
GO aerogel with a density of 2 mg cm−3 and (h,i) SEM images of the aerogel showing the 
voluminous morphology. Scale bars: 3 cm (a), 1 µm (b), 500 nm (c), 1 cm (d), 3 µm (e), 400 nm 
(f), 2 cm (g), 30 µm (h) and 2 µm (i). Reproduced from [14] with permission of Nature 
Publishing Group

78
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
All the above‐mentioned bulk forms of GO possess unique physical properties that 
we are simply unable to review within this chapter. Some properties of different graph-
ite oxide forms are reviewed in the following chapters, in both Parts I and II. In this 
section we will only briefly touch on the ability of paper‐like solid graphite oxide 
(Figure 2.21d) to be intercalated by several species, since this is interesting from the 
structural perspectives.
All solid graphite oxide samples contain intercalated water. The amount of water depends 
on the relative humidity and varies from 6–8% for carefully dried samples through 20–25% 
for samples in high‐moisture atmospheric conditions. It is an open question whether water 
can be considered as an intercalant. The interlayer distance in bulk graphite oxide is not a 
fixed value, but depends on the amount of intercalated water, i.e. is dependent on humidity. 
Dry graphite oxide samples have an interlayer distance of about 5.3 Å, which gradually 
increases with water adsorption up to 9 Å. This suggests that water does not form an orderly 
structure between the GO layers, but simply fills numerous voids; the structure constantly 
changes when more water molecules are accommodated in the structure. Interestingly, the 
situation is different for intercalants other than water, where more or less discrete interlayer 
distances have been reported.
Several intercalated compounds of graphite oxide with intercalants other than water have 
been reported up to the present day. The reported intercalants include carbon dioxide [71], 
alcohols [72] and organic amines [73, 74]. We will now discuss some of these.
Talyzin et al. [72] demonstrated that primary alcohols could be intercalated into solid 
graphite oxide by immersion of a dry solid GO sample into liquid alcohols. The reported 
interlayer distance in the intercalated graphite oxide was: 8.85 Å in methanol, 9.23 Å in 
ethanol, and 9.50 Å in propanol. It increases by about 2.2–2.6 Å compared to the dry graph-
ite oxide; this corresponds to insertion of one monolayer of alcohol molecules. High‐pres-
sure compression of the intercalated samples results in an additional structural change 
(Figure  2.22). For the GO–methanol sample, a sharp phase transformation starts at 
0.37 GPa. A new phase with an interlayer distance of ~11.4 Å appears in addition to the 
previous phase. The patterns recorded at 0.37 and 0.43 GPa showed the coexistence of 
high‐ and low‐pressure phases, while from 0.68 GPa and above the low‐pressure phase has 
disappeared. This anomaly is explained by the insertion of additional methanol between 
the graphite oxide layers. A very similar phase transformation was also observed for the 
GO–ethanol system above 0.59 GPa. However, the high‐pressure phase of GO–ethanol 
could not be obtained in the pure state. Decompression results in a reverse step‐like trans-
formation back to the low‐pressure phase for the GO–methanol system, but in the case of 
GO–ethanol the high‐pressure phase was observed to be unchanged even after full release 
of the pressure. At ambient pressure, the interlayer spacing of the high‐pressure GO–etha-
nol phase reached a value of 13.4 Å, which is about 1 Å higher than its value at the pressure 
where this phase appeared during compression.
Intercalation of graphite oxide by four different aliphatic alkylamines (CnH2nNH2 where 
n = 2, 4, 8, 12) in water–ethanol solution was reported by Bourlinos et al. [73]. In all four 
cases, there was a systematic increment of the d001 value, as compared to the parent GO, 
indicating insertion of the alkylamines into the interlayer galleries of graphite oxide. Unlike 
alcohols, organic amines can chemically interact with GO. Bourlinos et al. suggested a 
nucleophilic substitution reaction of amines on epoxy groups of GO to account for the 
experimental observations. However, considering the aqueous medium, and in light of new 

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
79
findings [75], this phenomenon can also be explained by electrostatic interaction between 
the negatively charged GO layers and positively charged amino groups.
Matsuo et al. [74] performed intercalation of the four different n‐alkylamines (CnH2nNH2; 
abbreviated as Cn, n = 4, 8, 12, 16) simply by grinding the mixture of GO and Cn in a pestle 
(001)
(002)
(003)
1.22 Gpa
(010)
0.68 Gpa
0.43 Gpa
0.37 Gpa
0.31 Gpa
0.12 Gpa
0.04 Gpa
4
6
8
10
Diffraction angle, 2Θ
12
14
16
18
20
4
6
8
10
Diffraction angle, 2Θ
12
14
16
18
20
2.59 Gpa
2.1 Gpa
(100)
(001)H
Intensity, arb. units
(001)A
(002)H
(002)A (003)H
(010)
(–110)
(–102) (200) (002) (–202)(–112)
(012)
(–120)
(–121)
0.85 Gpa
0.59 Gpa
0.02 Gpa
Intensity, arb. units
Figure 2.22  XRD patterns (λ = 0.7092 Å) recorded upon compression from a GO–methanol 
sample (top) and a GO–ethanol sample (bottom). Indexing for the GO–ethanol phases is 
given on the 0.85 GPa pattern: A, ambient‐pressure phase; H, high‐pressure phase. A solid 
ethanol phase is indexed on the 2.59 GPa pattern by a P21/c structure with a = 7.543 Å, 
b = 4.738 Å, c = 7.1904 Å and β = 114.48°, in agreement with literature data. Reproduced from 
[72] with permission of ACS

80
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
in the presence of a small amount of hexane. Based on elemental analysis of as‐prepared 
intercalation compounds, Matsuo et al. claimed that water was removed from GO, and 
some amount of hexane co‐intercalated GO along with alkylamines. With C16, the C16/GO 
ratio in the as‐obtained intercalated product was 0.93–1.66. Within this ratio, only one 
phase, i.e. intercalation compound, was registered. Outside this region, the second phase, 
unreacted GO or C16, was registered. Note that the varying intercalant content is specific for 
intercalation compounds of GO, but no for GICs. The C16/GO samples possessed two dif-
ferent interlayer spacings (Ic) of 2.73–3.03 nm and 4.80–5.08 nm in which alkylamine mol-
ecules acquire interdigitated monolayer and bilayer orientations, respectively (Figure 2.23). 
Interestingly, for the shorter‐chain alkylamines, the Cn/GO ratios decreased with decreas-
ing chain length. The interlayer spacing of the samples with shorter alkyl chain lengths 
were very small, 2.48 nm and 0.90 nm for (C8)1.55GO and (C4)0.43GO, respectively. These Ic 
values were similar to those reported by Bourlinos et al. [73]; however, for the longer‐chain 
alkylamines C12/GO and C16/GO the Ic values were larger than that reported by Bourlinos 
et al. This was explained by the competition between alkylamines and ethanol to interca-
late GO and thus lower the intercalation degree in the work by Bourlinos et al. This obser-
vation demonstrates that intercalation into GO is accompanied and/or caused by chemical 
interaction of intercalant with GO, but not simply by charging graphene layers as in the 
case of GICs.
2.10  Concluding Remarks
Fundamental questions related to the mechanism of GO formation and the fine chemical 
structure of GO are still open. Concerning the mechanism of formation, the main avenues 
of future research should be revealing the nature of the actual oxidizing agents. The actual 
oxidizing agent might be the same for all the known preparation methods. When the actual 
15
(I):C16
Ic= 5.02 nm
Ic= 5.02 nm
Ic= 5.08 nm
Ic= 5.02 nm (2.76 nm)
Ic= 4.80 nm (3.00 nm)
Ic= 3.03 nm
Ic= 2.78 nm
Ic= 2.73 nm
Intensity, a.u.
(H):x = 1.96
(G):x = 1.90
(F):x = 1.66
(E):x = 1.46
(D):x = 1.14
(C):x =0.93
(B):x = 0.78
(A):x = 0.67
13
11
9
2 θ/deg. CuK
7
5
3
1
Figure 2.23  X‐ray diffraction patterns of the hexadecylamine–GO intercalation compound 
(C16/GO) with various C16 contents, together with that of C16. The values in parentheses are the 
interlayer spacing of a minor phase. The diffraction peaks at 2θ = 1.98°, 2.24°, 4.40°, 6.62°, 
8.80°, 10.96° and 13.2° are due to the unreacted C16 phase. Reproduced from [74] with 
permission of Elsevier

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
81
oxidizing agent is identified, theoretical studies might help to describe the act of oxidation 
resulting in the formation of the C–O bond. However, real experimental conditions, i.e. 
positively charged state of graphene layers caused by sulfuric acid intercalant, should be 
taken into account. Concerning the fine chemical structure of the as‐prepared GO, under-
standing the conditions for the transformation of the functional groups into each other 
should be developed. Despite the different preparation methods and levels of oxidation of 
as‐produced GO, there is the same set of major functional groups for all the GO samples, 
with only little variation. This is confirmed by the very similar 13C SSNMR, FTIR and XPS 
spectra acquired from different GO samples. It seems very likely that universal reaction 
mechanisms exist that account for the formation of the major functional groups and their 
transformation into each other. These mechanisms should be revealed and fully understood 
in the near future to pave the way to controlled GO production and functionalization.
References
  [1]	 Loh, K.P.; Bao, Q.; Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Graphene oxide as a chemically tunable platform 
for optical applications. Nature Chem. 2010, 2 (12), 1015–1024.
  [2]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Chemical reduction of graphene oxide: a synthetic chemistry view-
point. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (1), 291–312.
  [3]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Todd, A.D.; Bielawski, C.W., Harnessing the chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (15), 5288–5301.
  [4]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
  [5]	 Brodie, B., Note sur un nouveau procédé pour la purification et la désagrégation du graphite. 
Ann. Chim. Phys. 1855, 45, 351–353.
  [6]	 Staudenmaier, L., Verfahren zur Darstellung der Graphitsäure. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1898, 31 
(2), 1481–1487.
  [7]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R.E., Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80 (6), 
1339.
  [8]	 Charpy, G., Sur la formation de l’oxyde graphitique et la définition du graphite. C. R. Hebd. 
Séances Acad. Sci. 1909, 148 (5), 920–923.
  [9]	 Boehm, H.‐P.; Scholz, W., Vergleich der Darstellungsverfahren für Graphitoxyd. Liebigs Ann. 
Chem. 1966, 691 (1), 1–8.
[10]	 Poh, H.L.; Sanek, F.; Ambrosi, A.; et al., Graphenes prepared by Staudenmaier, Hofmann and 
Hummers methods with consequent thermal exfoliation exhibit very different electrochemical 
properties. Nanoscale 2012, 4 (11), 3515–3522.
[11]	 You, S.; Luzan, S.M.; Szabó, T.; Talyzin, A.V., Effect of synthesis method on solvation and 
exfoliation of graphite oxide. Carbon 2013, 52, 171–180.
[12]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin com-
posite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 11 
(3), 771–778.
[13]	 Marcano, D.C.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Berlin, J.M.; et al., Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. ACS 
Nano 2010, 4 (8), 4806–4814.
[14]	 Peng, L.; Xu, Z.; Liu, Z.; et al., An iron‐based green approach to 1‐h production of single‐layer 
graphene oxide. Nature Commun. 2015, 6, 5716–5724.
[15]	 Li, J.‐L.; Kudin, K.N.; McAllister, M.J.; et al., Oxygen‐driven unzipping of graphitic materials. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96 (17), 176101–176104.
[16]	 Sun, T.; Fabris, S., Mechanisms for oxidative unzipping and cutting of graphene. Nano Lett. 
2012, 12 (1), 17–21.
[17]	 Shao, G.; Lu, Y.; Wu, F.; et al., Graphene oxide: the mechanism of oxidation and exfoliation.  
J. Mater. Sci. 2012, 47 (10), 4400–4409.

82
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[18]	 Boukhalov, D.W., Oxidation of graphite surface: the role of water. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 
(47), 27594–27598.
[19]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Tour, J.M., Mechanism of graphene oxide formation. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (3), 
3060–3068.
[20]	 Eklund, P.C.; Olk, C.H.; Holler, F.G.; et al., Raman scattering study of the staging kinetics in 
the c‐face skin of pyrolytic graphite‐H2SO4. J. Mater. Res. 1986, 1 (2), 361–367.
[21]	 Yosida, Y.; Tanuma, S., In situ observation of X‐ray diffraction in a synthesis of H2SO4‐GICS. 
Synth. Met. 1989, 34 (1–3), 341–346.
[22]	 Inagaki, M.; Iwashita, N.; Kouno, E., Potential change with intercalation of sulfuric acid into 
graphite by chemical oxidation. Carbon 1990, 28, 49–55.
[23]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Bachilo, S.M.; Saito, R.; Tour, J.M., Reversible formation of ammonium persul-
fate/sulfuric acid graphite intercalation compounds and their peculiar Raman spectra. ACS 
Nano 2012, 6 (9), 7842–7849.
[24]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Cierotti. G.; Behabtu, N.; et al., Direct, real time monitoring of stage transitions 
in graphite intercalation compounds. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (3), 2773–2780.
[25]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[26]	 Glemser, O.; Schröder, H., Über Manganoxyde. II. Zur Kenntnis des Mangan(VII)‐oxyds.  
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1953, 271 (5–6), 293–304.
[27]	 Royer, D.J., Evidence for the existence of the permanganyl ion in sulfuric acid solutions of 
potassium permanganate. J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1961, 17 (1–2), 159–167.
[28]	 Dzhabiev, T.S.; Denisov, N.N.; Moiseev, D.N.; Shilov, A.E., Formation of ozone during the 
reduction of potassium permanganate in sulfuric acid solutions. Russ. J. Phys. Chem. 2005, 79, 
1755–1760.
[29]	 Mermoux, M.; Chabre, Y., Formation of graphite oxide. Synth. Met. 1989, 34 (1–3), 157–162.
[30]	 Sorokina, N.E.; Shornikova, O.N.; Avdeev, V.V., Stability limits of graphite intercalation com-
pounds in the systems graphite–HNO3(H2SO4)–H2O–KMnO4. Inorg. Mater. 2007, 43 (8),  
822–826.
[31]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[32]	 Petit, C.; Seredych, M.; Bandosz, T.J., Revisiting the chemistry of graphite oxides and its effect 
on ammonia adsorption. J. Mater. Chem. 2009, 19 (48), 9176–9185.
[33]	 Grasselli, J.G., Atlas of Spectral Data and Physical Constants for Organic Compounds. CRC 
Press, Cleveland, OH, 1973.
[34]	 Kharasch, N. Organic Sulfur Compounds. Pergamon Press, New York, 1961.
[35]	 Brimacombe, J.S., Foster, A.B., Hancock, E.B., et al., Acidic and basic hydrolysis of some diol 
cyclic sulphates and related compounds. J. Chem. Soc. 1960, 201–211.
[36]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hof, F.; et al., Sulfur species in graphene oxide. Chem.: Eur. J. 2013, 19 
(29), 9490–9496.
[37]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[38]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi, O.; Forgó, P.; et al., Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of 
progressively oxidized graphite oxides. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18 (11), 2740–2749.
[39]	 Clauss, A.; Plass, R.; Boehm, H.P.; Hofmann, U., Untersuchungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxyds. 
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1957, 291 (5–6), 205–220.
[40]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Betrachtungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1969, 369 (3–6), 327–340.
[41]	 Gomez‐Navarro, C.; Meyer, J.C.; Sundaram, R.S.; et al., Atomic structure of reduced graphene 
oxide. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (4), 1144–1148.
[42]	 Erickson, K.; Erni, R.; Lee, Z.; et al., Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene 
oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (40), 4467–4472.
[43]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[44]	 Gao, W.; Alemany, L.B.; Ci, L.; Ajayan, P., New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nature Chem. 2009, 1 (5), 403–408.

Mechanism of Formation and Chemical Structure of Graphene Oxide
83
[45]	 Dimiev, A.; Alemany, L.; Tour, J.M., Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity and dynamic structural 
model. ACS Nano 2012, 7 (1), 576–588.
[46]	 Hofmann, U.; Holst, R., Über die Säurenatur und die Methylierung von Graphitoxyd. Ber. 
Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1939, 72 (4), 754–771.
[47]	 Hofmann, V.U.; König, E., Untersuchungen über Graphitoxyd. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1937, 234 
(4), 311–336.
[48]	 Boehm, H.P.; Heck, W.; Sappok, R.; Diehl, E., Surface oxides of carbon. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
1964, 3 (10), 669–677.
[49]	 Szabó, T.; Tombacz, E.; Illes, E.; Dékány, I., Enhanced acidity and pH‐dependent surface charge 
characterization of successfully oxidized graphite oxides. Carbon 2006, 44, 537–545.
[50]	 Shapiro, Y.M., Gem‐polyols – a unique class of compound. Russ. Chem. Rev. 1991, 60 (9), 
1035–1049.
[51]	 Krois, D.; Langer, E.; Lehner, H., Selective conformational changes of cyclic systems – XII. 
Enhanced reactivity of ten membered ring ketones due to transannular steric compression: 
hydrates and hemiketals from oxo‐[2,2]metacyclophanes. Tetrahedron 1980, 36 (10),  
1345–1351.
[52]	 Kumar, P.V.; Bardhan, N.M.; Tongay, S.; et al., Scalable enhancement of graphene oxide prop-
erties by thermally driven phase transformation. Nature Chem. 2013, 6 (2), 151–158.
[53]	 Robinson, J.T.; Burgess, J.S.; Junkermeier, C.E.; et al., Properties of fluorinated graphene films. 
Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (8), 3001–3005.
[54]	 Eigler, S., Graphite sulphate  –  a precursor to graphene. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51 (15), 
 3162–3165.
[55]	 Rourke, J.P.; Pandey, P.A.; Moore, J.J.; et al., The real graphene oxide revealed: stripping the 
oxidative debris from graphene‐like sheets. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (14), 3173–3177.
[56]	 Salzmann, C.G.; Llewellyn, S.A.; Tobias, G.; et al., The role of carboxylated carbonaceous 
fragments in the functionalization and spectroscopy of a single‐walled carbon‐nanotube mate-
rial. Adv. Mater. 2007, 19 (6), 883–887.
[57]	 Verdejo, R.; Lamoniere, S.; Cottam, B.; et al., Removal of oxidation debris from multi‐walled 
carbon nanotubes. Chem. Commun. 2007, 2007 (5), 513–515.
[58]	 Fogden, S.; Verdejo, R.; Cottam, B.; Shaffer, M., Purification of single walled carbon nano-
tubes: the problem with oxidation debris. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2008, 460 (1–3), 162–167.
[59]	 Thomas, H.R.; Vallés, C.; Young, R.J.; et al., Identifying the fluorescence of graphene oxide.  
J. Mater. Chem. C 2013, 1 (2), 338–342.
[60]	 Thomas, H.R.; Day, S.P.; Woodruff, W.E.; et al., Deoxygenation of graphene oxide: reduction 
or cleaning? Chem. Mater. 2013, 25, 3580–3588.
[61]	 Faria, A.F.; Martinez, D.S.T.; Moraes, A.C.M.; et al., Unveiling the role of oxidation debris on 
the surface chemistry of graphene through the anchoring of Ag nanoparticles. Chem. Mater. 
2012, 24 (21), 4080–4087.
[62]	 Coluci, V.R.; Martinez, D.S.T.; Honorio, J.G.; et al., Noncovalent interaction with graphene 
oxide: the crucial role of oxidative debris. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 (4), 2187–2193.
[63]	 Hu, C.; Liu, Y.; Yang, Y.; et al., One‐step preparation of nitrogen‐doped graphene quantum dots 
from oxidized debris of graphene oxide. J. Mater. Chem. B 2013, 1 (1), 39–42.
[64]	 Bonnani, A.; Ambrosi, A.; Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Oxidation debris in graphene oxide is 
responsible for its inherent electroactivity. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (5), 4197–4204.
[65]	 Guo, Z.; Wang, S.; Wang, G.; et al., Effect of oxidation debris on spectroscopic and macro-
scopic properties of graphene oxide. Carbon 2014, 76, 203–211.
[66]	 Rodriguez‐Pastor, I.; Ramos‐Fernandez, C.; Varela‐Rizo, H.; et al., Towards the understanding 
of the graphene oxide structure: how to control the formation of humic‐ and fulvic‐like oxidized 
debries. Carbon 2015, 84, 299–309.
[67]	 Dimiev A.M.; Polson, T.A., Contesting the two‐component structural model of graphene oxide 
and reexaminig the chemistry of graphene oxide in basic media. Carbon 2015, 93, 445–455.
[68]	 Taniguchi, T.; Kurihara, S.; Tateishi, H.; et al., pH‐driven, reversible epoxy ring opening/­closing 
in graphene oxide. Carbon 2015, 84, 560–566.
[69]	 Clauss, A.; Hofmann, U., Graphitoxyd‐Membranen zur Messung des Wasserdampf‐
Partialdruckes. Angew. Chem. 1956, 68 (16), 522.

84
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[70]	 Nair, R.R.; Wu, H.A.; Jayram, P.N.; et al., Unimpeded permeation of water through helium‐
leak‐tight graphene‐based membranes. Science 2012, 335 (6067), 442–444.
[71]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hirsch, A.; et  al., Formation and decomposition of CO2‐intercalated 
graphite oxide. Chem. Mater. 2012, 24 (7), 1276–1282.
[72]	 Talyzin, A.V.; Sundqvist, B.; Szabó, T.; et al., Pressure‐induced insertion of liquid alcohols into 
graphite oxide structure. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (51), 18445–18449.
[73]	 Bourlinos, B.; Gournis, D.; Petridis, D.; et al., Graphite oxide:  chemical reduction to graphite 
and surface modification with primary aliphatic amines and amino acids. Langmuir 2003, 19 
(15), 6050–6055.
[74]	 Matsuo, Y.; Miyabe, T.; Fukutsuka, T.; Sugie, Y., Preparation and characterization of alkylamine‐
intercalated graphite oxides. Carbon 2007, 45, 1005–1012.
[75]	 Feicht, P.; Kunz, D.A.; Lerf, A.; Breu, J., Facile and scalable one‐step production of organically 
modified graphene oxide by a two‐phase extraction. Carbon 2014, 80, 229–234.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
3
Characterization Techniques
Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat M. Dimiev
3.1  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Graphene Oxide
3.1.1  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy in Solids
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) revolutionized the structure determina‑
tion of organic compounds and is now, next to X‐ray crystal structure analysis and mass 
spectrometry, the method of choice to characterize biomolecules and organic compounds 
in general. With molecules of high molecular weight, the signal‐to‐noise ratio as well as the 
solubility of compounds may decrease. The molecular weight of a flake of graphite with a 
typical diameter of 5 µm is on the order of 1010 g mol−1. Therefore, such molecules are more 
likely a material, rather than a molecule. However, NMR spectroscopy can also be con‑
ducted in solids, and solid‐state nuclear magnetic resonance (SSNMR) spectroscopy has 
been developed and enhanced to a reliable method in recent years. Line shapes recorded by 
SSNMR are generally broader compared to NMR spectroscopy conducted on organic mol‑
ecules; therefore, coupling constants cannot be determined. Nevertheless, a lot of informa‑
tion about the type of functional groups can be gained using SSNMR. A general overview 
about SSNMR as well as additional basic information is given by Kolodziejski and 
Klinowski [1].
In graphene oxide (GO), the carbon atoms dominate the structure, and therefore SSNMR 
spectroscopy has concentrated mostly on the analysis of the 13C atoms of GO. Unfortunately, 
the 12C nucleus has no spin and is therefore NMR‐silent, but the spin of 13C is ½, as it is for 
1H, and is therefore suitable for NMR spectroscopy. Other problems of 13C NMR arise, 
because only part of the 1.1% 13C is available in natural carbon and the magnetic moment 
is only about a quarter that of 1H. Due to these facts, recording the 13C NMR spectra of 

86
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
organic compounds requires much longer measurement times compared to 1H spectra. 
Therefore, recording 13C NMR spectra of materials in the solid state, such as GO, is time‐
consuming. Moreover, the anisotropy of the materials and the heterogeneous structure 
cause additional line broadening when recording 13C directly. Moreover, 13C is coupled to 
the 1H nucleus, which would result in even broader lines. However, special techniques have 
been developed to realize short measurement times and sharp signals.
13C spectra are normally combined with decoupling the 1H nucleus, which is possible by 
a second pulse exciting the 1H nucleus. Another technique that is combined is magic angle 
spinning (MAS). Line broadening is generally observed due to dipole and quadrupole 
interactions and the anisotropy of nuclei, because the matter in solids does not move as it 
does in the case of molecules in solution, where the anisotropy is reduced due to Brownian 
motion. The dipolar interaction and anisotropy of the chemical shift can be essentially 
reduced by rotating the probe at up to 70 kHz at the magic angle of 54.74° in relation to the 
external magnetic field. This MAS technique essentially reduces line broadening and 
makes the reliable recording of SSNMR spectra possible. Additional spinning sidebands 
are normally observed, but they can be identified by varying the spinning frequency, and no 
spinning sidebands are observed if spectra are recorded at very high spinning frequencies. 
However, direct excitation and recording of 13C spectra is called a Bloch decay (BD) exper‑
iment and requires long measurement times. Moreover, for 13C SSNMR spectroscopy, the 
spin–lattice relaxation is on the order of tens of seconds and thousands of scans are needed 
to reduce the signal‐to‐noise ratio.
Cross‐polarization (CP) was developed as a method that enables fast measurement of 13C 
SSNMR spectra (Figure 3.1) and the method is based on heteronuclear dipolar interactions. 
Another benefit of CP is due to its sensitivity to internuclear distances and the mobility of 
molecules or functional groups involved. Therefore CP is a method that gives additional 
information about dynamics and connectivity for structure determination. Although CP is 
a powerful technique, the optimization of the parameters is necessary and the contact time 
13C
1H
+x
+y
+y
+x
+y
t
CP
Decouple
π/2
CP
FID
Figure 3.1  Example of a basic cross‐polarization (CP) pulse sequence between 1H nuclei and 
13C nuclei. First, a pulse is applied to polarize the sample in the magnetic field. Next, 1H is 
excited by a pulse (π/2) along the x′‐axis of the rotating frame. Then, the 1H spin is locked by 
another pulse along the y′‐axis accompanied by another pulse to 13C nuclei along the y′‐axis. 
The CP occurs during that time, and the time is called the contact time. Next, the radio 
frequency applied to the 13C nuclei is switched off to record the free induction decay (FID) of 
the 13C nuclei. Reproduced from [1] with permission of ACS

Characterization Techniques
87
must be optimized. Moreover, dipolar dephasing is used as an additional technique to sim‑
plify NMR spectra. Signals originating from 13C directly bound to 1H can be identified and 
removed from the spectra, giving additional information. The technique can also be applied 
to, for example, 15N.
SSNMR spectroscopy developed and became a useful method suitable as a chemical 
characterization technique for materials science. However, this technique is not yet used as 
a general characterization technique. The reason for that is due to the large amounts of 
substance needed for analysis, and this was true years ago. However, nowadays 10–20 mg 
may be enough, with measurement times of several hours only. But specialists are gener‑
ally needed for that technique because pulse sequences need to be optimized to get reliable 
results and measurements still need much longer than for organic dissolved molecules, 
which can be characterized by routine measurements within minutes.
3.1.2  Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy of Graphene Oxide
The oxidation product of graphite is graphite oxide, as outlined in Chapter 2. Delamination 
of graphite oxide leads to single layers of GO. Restacking of GO leads then to randomly 
stacked graphite oxide. The two materials, graphite oxide and restacked GO, are chemi‑
cally identical and therefore structure analysis by SSNMR can be conducted on both 
materials, graphite oxide or restacked GO. Thus, GO is used in this section as an abbrevia‑
tion without distinguishing between GO and graphite oxide. In the following the SSNMR 
characterization and knowledge gained from SSNMR spectroscopy are summarized. The 
information gained from SSNMR led to the structure models of GO. The GO analyzed by 
SSNMR is generally oxidized by KMnO4 in sulfuric acid. Therefore, the chemical struc‑
ture of GO prepared by other techniques may differ. However, it was mentioned by 
Mermoux et al. [2] that the SSNMR spectra are the same for GO prepared by either the 
Staudenmaier or Hummers–Offeman protocols. Mermoux et al. published in 1991 a thor‑
ough 13C SSNMR study [2]. Their main results are summarized here.
As depicted in Figure 3.2(A) three peaks are observed in the 13C SSNMR spectrum using 
CP MAS conditions. In the original publication, these peaks were labeled as α resonating 
at 60.2 ppm, β at 71.2 ppm and γ at 132 ppm. The α and β peaks have dipolar dephasing 
characteristic times shorter than that of the γ peak (Figure  3.2B). This observation is 
expected for aliphatic carbon. Moreover, the spinning sidebands of the γ peak are typical 
for aromatic carbon. These observations allow the assignment of the peaks to ether 
(60.2 ppm), hydroxyl (71.2 ppm) and sp2 carbon (132 ppm). The lower 13C SSNMR spec‑
trum of Figure 3.2(A) is 1H‐decoupled and allows the quantification of the relative amount 
of functional groups. The results were also correlated to chemical analysis, and a formula 
of C8(O)1.7(OH)1.7 was determined. It is interesting to see that the ratio of the ether and 
hydroxyl groups is one. This ratio is also maintained for less oxidized samples. Moreover, 
no carboxylic groups could be detected, and it was concluded that the amount is below the 
detection limit. From dephasing experiments it was concluded that H atoms are too far 
away from sp2 carbon to show a significant effect on the intensity of the sp2 peak at 132 ppm 
and therefore enol groups and keto–enol tautomerism were excluded. In addition, the 
dephasing experiments show that the α and β peaks have similar dipolar relaxation times, 
which allows the conclusion that the H atoms are at an equal distance from the ether oxy‑
gen and hydroxyl groups. Thus, at short range, a certain order of the functional groups was 

88
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
suggested and an increased acidity of the tertiary alcohols was proposed. Regarding the 
structure, the authors [2] write:
In this structure, the location of the two kinds of C–O bonds, with hydrogen bonding between 
the hydrogen of the hydroxyl groups and the oxygen of the epoxy groups, can explain the 
acidic properties of GO.
However, the model depicted in the paper shows 1,3‐ethers, and 1,3‐ethers have become a 
matter of debate in the years since.
Some years later, the structure of GO was revisited by Anton Lerf, Jacek Klinowski and 
coworkers Heyong He and Michael Forster [3]. Their investigations on the structure of 
graphite oxide were thoroughly studied in earlier publications [4–6]. The results and inter‑
pretation of the SSNMR data are summarized here. Their graphite oxide was synthesized 
by the protocol introduced by Hummers and Offeman, and the as‐prepared graphite oxide 
was further washed with dilute HCl and subsequently purified by dialysis.
In the above‐mentioned investigations, the 13C NMR spectra of as‐prepared GO consist‑
ently show three peaks, located at 60, 70 and 130 ppm (Figure 3.3). The peaks were assigned 
to 1,2‐ethers (epoxide groups), tertiary alcohol groups and sp2 carbon. The epoxy group 
assignment was further supported by analyzing the reaction products. Especially, the reac‑
tion of potassium iodide (KI) with GO was analyzed. It was well known that iodine is 
produced from HI and GO. However, KI reacts much slower and a reduced intensity of the 
peaks at 60 and 70 ppm was observed. In addition, a peak at 110 ppm was produced. The 
results suggest that GO was deoxygenated, forming another type of hydroxyl group that 
has similar chemical shifts as phenol and/or aromatic diols.
The observed deoxygenation reaction suggests that epoxy groups are the majority struc‑
tural motifs, because 1,3‐ethers should be stable upon treatment with iodide. In addition, 
no signals were detected at roughly 90 ppm and thus, C–OOH groups were excluded as 
Integrated intensity (a.u.)
50
200
(A)
(B)
150
100
50
s
a
s
s
s
b
ppm/TMS
0
tDD (μs)
100
α+ β
β
γ
γ
α
Figure 3.2  (A) CP MAS 13C SSNMR spectrum of graphite oxide (top); proton‐decoupled 13C 
SSNMR spectrum measured under MAS conditions (bottom). (B) Development of the 
integrated intensity of the α, β and γ lines under a variable dipolar dephasing time ranging from 
a few microseconds to 100 µs. Reproduced from [2] with permission of Elsevier

Characterization Techniques
89
major species. Also thermally decomposed GO was analyzed and the peak at 110 ppm was 
assigned to phenolic sp2 carbon (Figure  3.3). Moreover, GO was treated with several 
chemicals. Here, only the reaction with ethoxide will be mentioned. The reaction product 
contains ethyl groups that cannot be removed by washing procedures, suggesting that 
ethoxide was chemically bound by the reaction with epoxy groups.
Next, the role of water was further investigated. Dipolar dephasing CP spectra prove that 
all carbons are quaternary carbons. Short‐contact‐time CP spectra reveal that the protons 
are very close to the carbon atoms of epoxy groups and hydroxyl groups. However, dipolar 
dephasing experiments with delay times longer than 100 µs demonstrate that the protons 
are closer to the carbon of hydroxyl groups than to the carbon of epoxy groups.
In 1H MAS NMR spectra (Figure 3.4), two peaks are found at 6.6 and 5.4 ppm. The water 
content is much too high to see tertiary alcohols. Therefore, two types of water can be dis‑
tinguished. While the peak at 6.6 ppm decreases gradually between 20 and 140 °C, the peak 
at 5.4 ppm remains stable. Thus, the two types of water are assigned to mobile water and 
strongly adsorbed water.
The structure of GO was also studied in 2009 and the 13C SSNMR spectrum is depicted 
in Figure 3.5 [7]. Well‐resolved 13C SSNMR spectra were obtained showing peaks not only 
O
GO treated with KI
O
O
OH
6 HI
–3 I2/3 H2O
OH
As-prepared GO
250
200
150
100
ppm from TMS
50
0
–50
(B)
(A)
(C)
Figure 3.3  (A) Suggested chemical scheme for the deoxygenation of GO with HI, producing 
iodine and water, and forming phenol‐like sp2 carbon atoms. 1H‐decoupled 13C MAS SSNMR 
spectra of (B) graphite oxide treated with KI and (C) as‐prepared GO. Reproduced from [3] 
with permission from ACS

90
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
160 °C
100 °C
20°C
190°C
120°C
60°C
220 °C
140 °C
80 °C
15
10
5
0
–5 15
10
5
ppm from TMS
1H MAS NMR
0
–5 15
10
5
0
–5
Figure  3.4  Different thermally treated 1H MAS NMR spectra of graphite oxide in the 
temperature range between 20 and 220 °C to reduce the water content. Reproduced from [3] 
with permission from ACS
260
Direct 13C pulse
Graphitic
sp2
133
C – OH
70
Lactol
O – C – O
101
Ketone
C  O
191
O  C–O
167
C – O – C
61
240
220
200
180
160
140
13C chemical shift
120
100
80
60
40
20
ppm
Figure 3.5  Direct 13C pulsed MAS SSNMR spectrum of GO with chemical shifts of signals at 
61, 70, 101, 133, 167 and 191 ppm. The minor groups have been assigned to ketones, carboxyl 
groups and lactols. The signal at 101 ppm may also be assigned to geminal diols (hydrates) or 
phenol‐like moieties. However, ketones and carboxyl groups may not be directly bound to sp2 
carbon, suggesting that they are not part of the main structure [8]. Reproduced from [7] with 
permission of Nature Publishing Group

Characterization Techniques
91
at 61 ppm (epoxy), 70 ppm (hydroxyl) and 133 ppm (sp2) but also at 101, 167 and 191 ppm. 
The latter three signals were assigned in that study to lactol groups, carboxyl groups and 
ketones. Another explanation of the 101 ppm signal could be due to hydrates of ketone 
groups (geminal diols) [7].
As outlined in the introduction to this section, the percentage of 13C carbon in naturally 
occurring carbon is 1.1%, and the measurements needed to get a low signal‐to‐noise ratio 
are time‐consuming. Therefore, 13C‐labeled graphite was grown on Ni from 13C‐labeled 
methane [9]. The labeling of carbon atoms allows correlation spectra (13C–13C) to be 
recorded with measurement times that are about 160 000 times faster compared to conven‑
tional samples. The major peaks found are at about 60, 70 and 129 ppm and the assign‑
ments of the earlier publications were confirmed. Moreover, cross‐peaks were found that 
confirm the connectivity between sp2 C and 13C–OH, as well as between sp2 C and the 13C 
of epoxides. Thus sp2 carbon is close to sp3 carbon. Moreover, also a cross‐peak of the 
signal at 101 ppm to 60–70 ppm is found, but no cross‐peaks are observed for the minor 
signals at 169 and 191 ppm. This observation suggests that these carbons are laterally sepa‑
rated from the majority of sp2 carbons. It is speculative, but these signals may be related to 
oxidative debris, which would however need further investigations.
In another study on 13C‐labeled graphite oxide, the regiochemistry of functional groups 
is investigated further using two‐dimensional (2D) correlation 13C SSNMR spectroscopy 
[8]. The results of correlation spectroscopy were also simulated by ab initio methods, and 
two different types of arrangements of the functional groups were modeled. As shown in 
Figure 3.6, a structure with epoxy groups and hydroxyl groups conjugated to C–C double 
bonds is compared to a structure with 1,3‐ethers and hydroxyl groups beneath aromatic 
units. The results of the modeling and the comparison with the experimental results strongly 
support the first model.
The 13C labeling provides further benefits for solving the regiochemistry of the func‑
tional groups in GO. Special 13C 2D correlation techniques allow the identification of 
­networks of functional groups, such as the network of sp2–sp2–sp2 motifs. As depicted in 
Figure 3.7 also other structural motifs are visible and sp2 regions are terminated by epoxy 
or hydroxyl groups. Another epoxy or hydroxyl group is close to the epoxy group and 
hydroxyl group, respectively. In addition, structural motifs of hydroxyl–epoxy–epoxy and 
hydroxyl–hydroxyl–epoxy are found. Those results are modeled in Figure 3.6 and suggest 
that conjugated C–C double bonds are in close proximity to functional groups.
Unfortunately, the synthesis of 13C‐labeled graphite oxide is still a curiosity and not a 
method that is easily accomplished. Thus, the studies presented here are the only available 
ones. Note that generalization of the results of these experiments on all the GO samples 
needs to be done cautiously. The graphite used for oxidation in these studies was specifi‑
cally grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) on a Ni substrate in the laboratory of the 
researchers. During the entire oxidation procedure, the graphite was still attached to the Ni 
substrate; the substrate was finally dissolved in diluted acid during the washing procedures. 
This can make the as‐obtained GO substantially different from typical GO, due to the inter‑
action with Ni salts. The role of defects could not be determined, and the size of aromatic 
units is not determined. Moreover, the stability of the functional groups and the change of 
the chemical structure with time were not revealed. Different degrees of oxidation and 
over‐oxidation could give further insights into the diversity of the chemical structure of 
GO. It would also be helpful to analyze derivatives of GO by 13C SSNMR spectroscopy. 
One benefit is the ability to gain information about the regiochemistry of those derivatives, 

92
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
allowing for the development of a more controlled chemistry. Although it was suggested 
that edges are terminated by phenol‐like functional groups, carboxylic acids or ketones, 
there is still no definitive proof.
3.1.3  Discussion
The experimental data accumulated through the years proves that SSNMR spectroscopy is 
a reliable tool to determine the structure of GO and potentially GO derivatives. Since the 
structure of GO depends on the preparation conditions, more SSNMR investigations would 
be highly appreciated in the future. It can be expected that systematic investigations will 
give insights into the results of reaction protocols applied to GO. Therefore it will become 
possible to elaborate reaction conditions to functionalize the carbon framework of gra‑
phene and GO, respectively. Especially, SSNMR spectroscopy has the potential to become 
(D)
(E)
150
100
ωCOH
+ ωCOC
ωsp2+ ωCOC
ωsp2+ ωCOH
ωsp2+ ωsp2
COH
COH
COH
COC
1,2 COC
1,3 COC
sp2
sp2
sp2
(A)
(B)
(C)
200
300
DQ frequency (ppm)
100
200
300
DQ frequency (ppm)
SQ frequency (ppm)
100
50
150
SQ frequency (ppm)
100
50
150
SQ frequency (ppm)
100
50
Figure 3.6  (A) The 2D 13C double quantum/single quantum correlation SSNMR spectrum of 
13C‐labeled GO, with (B) and (C) predicted correlation spectra assuming the chemical 
structures shown in (D) and (E), respectively. The results suggest epoxy groups and hydroxyl 
groups are adjacent to double bonds. Reproduced from [8] with permission of ACS

Characterization Techniques
93
a standard characterization tool for proving the success of chemical transformations in 
the future, as it is already for the characterization of organic molecular compounds. The 
elaboration of structure and function relationships will become possible, especially by 
combining with other analytical techniques. Thus, the development of applications with 
precision, related to the chemical structure, will become possible.
3.2  Infrared Spectroscopy
As reviewed in section 3.1, 13C SSNMR was the primary method that for the first time 
allowed researchers to determine the chemical identity of GO functional groups. The 
presence of epoxides and tertiary alcohols on the GO platform was confirmed with high 
certainty based on 13C SSNMR data.
While 13C SSNMR is no doubt the most advanced and the most informative method for 
GO characterization, it also has some limitations. The most important disadvantage is a 
very long signal accumulation time. It takes several hours, possibly days, to collect a suf‑
ficiently strong signal even with advanced instrumentation. Another limitation is that 13C 
SSNMR detects only carbon atoms, and thus it misses everything that is not directly bonded 
to the carbon grid. As the next downfall, the NMR spectra cannot be collected if ferromag‑
netic and/or paramagnetic elements such as Fe and Mn are present in the sample even in 
small quantities. Thus this method is not suitable for characterizing many composite 
­materials of GO.
For these reasons, simple, quick and robust methods are very important for routine 
analysis of GO and especially GO‐based composite materials. In the next two sec‑
tions we will review two additional spectroscopic methods broadly used for GO 
100
200
300
400
150
100
SQ frequency (ppm)
SQ frequency (ppm)
50
COH-COC-COC
COH-COH-COC
sp2-COC-COC
sp2-COH-COH
sp2-sp2-COC
sp2
COH COC
sp2-sp2-COH
sp2-sp2-sp2
Figure 3.7  Special correlation spectra of 13C signals of GO allow the identification of motifs 
of functional groups and the determination of their regiochemistry. Thus, the major motifs are 
hydroxyl–epoxy–epoxy and hydroxyl–hydroxyl–epoxy, next to sp2–epoxy–epoxy and sp2–
hydroxyl–hydroxyl. Consequently sp2–sp2–epoxy, sp2–sp2–hydroxyl and sp2–sp2–sp2 motifs are 
found. Reproduced from [8] with permission of ACS

94
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
characterization: Fourier‐transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and X‐ray photo‑
electron spectroscopy (XPS). Against expectations, we do not review FTIR in the 
same section with Raman spectroscopy. The single chemical bond vibrations in GO 
are not Raman‐active. The Raman spectroscopy in GO is sensitive to vibrations 
caused by the graphene lattice in‐plane phonons rather than to the vibrations of single 
bonds, and it is reviewed in section 3.4.
FTIR is probably the most available and the fastest method suitable for GO characteriza‑
tion. The main disadvantage of FTIR spectroscopy is that it does not allow unambiguous 
assignment of absorption bands in the fingerprint region; only a few absorption bands can 
be assigned with a high level of confidence. Another disadvantage of FTIR is that it is 
almost purely qualitative. While some comparison of different samples against each other 
is possible, no solid quantitative data can be obtained from infrared (IR) spectra. At the 
same time, in some ways, FTIR is advantageous even over 13C SSNMR. As will be shown 
below, in the authors’ personal experience, FTIR has been able to provide very valuable 
information where 13C SSNMR has been silent.
The principles of IR spectroscopy are well known, and thus they do not require a long 
introduction. IR spectroscopy is based on the fundamental properties of atoms joined by 
chemical bonds to absorb electromagnetic radiation in the 4000–400 cm−1 frequency region. 
As a platform bearing numerous functional groups, GO exhibits very rich and complex IR 
spectra. Theoretically, all the known FTIR sampling techniques can be used for GO analy‑
sis. However, two sampling techniques are used most commonly: transmission mode with 
a KBr pellet, and attenuated total reflection (ATR). In the traditional transmission mode, 
solid GO is pressed into a KBr pellet, and the radiation that passes through the pellet is 
measured. Indeed, several publications, including very recent ones, indicate that the trans‑
mission configuration was used to acquire the spectra. Note that grinding lamellar GO into 
a fine powder, in order to blend it with KBr, is difficult. Considering the uniform, lamellar, 
paper‐like morphology of GO samples, the ATR sampling technique is probably the most 
convenient way to acquire FTIR spectra from GO samples. In this case, one needs only to 
firmly press soft GO paper against the crystal surface. The penetration depth, which is 
about 2 µm, provides sufficient information for the entire sample. With the ATR configura‑
tion, the entire analytical procedure, including sample preparation, takes only a few min‑
utes. Most importantly, the sampling technique does not affect the GO spectra.
We begin the discussion here by warning the reader that at the present day the FTIR 
spectra of GO are commonly misinterpreted. Despite the existence of several high‐quality 
studies, demonstrating the correct and well‐argued interpretation, they are appreciated only 
by a small circle of experts, but remain largely ignored by the broader community. Most of 
the modern publications refer to works where the data had been previously misinterpreted; 
thus, misinterpretations are reproduced. Ironically, today, one can rarely find GO‐related 
publications where the FTIR spectrum is correctly interpreted. Below, we show correctly 
interpreted spectra and highlight the most typical misinterpretations.
A typical FTIR spectrum of GO (Figure 3.8) can be arbitrarily divided into three charac‑
teristic regions: (i) an intense and very broad absorption band in the 3600–2400 cm−1 
region, (ii) the two most recognizable absorption bands at 1723 and 1619 cm−1 in the mid‑
dle of the spectrum, and (iii) a bunch of overlapping signals in the fingerprint region. The 
3600–2400 cm−1 absorption band originates from the stretching modes of O–H bonds. 
Theoretically, this absorption can originated from two different species: tertiary alcohols 

Characterization Techniques
95
that are an integral part of the GO platform, and water molecules incorporated into the GO 
structure. In fact, this absorption band originates mostly from water molecules. The 
hydroxyl groups of alcohols contribute significantly less. This has been demonstrated by 
experiments with deuterated water (Figure  3.9) [10–12]. In these experiments, normal 
air‑dry GO was first dried under high vacuum over P2O5 to remove physisorbed H2O 
3600
3200
2800
2400
Wavenumber (cm–1)
2000
H-O
Stretch
H2O
Fingerprint
region
1600
1200
800
C  O
Figure 3.8  A typical FTIR spectrum for a GO sample can be arbitrarily divided into three 
characteristic regions: (i) an intense and very broad absorption band in the 3600–2400 cm−1 
region, (ii) the two most recognizable absorption bands at 1723 and 1619 cm−1 in the middle 
of the spectrum, and (iii) a bunch of overlapping signals in the fingerprint region
1.373
1.373
H2O-GO
3500
3000
2500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
2000
1500
1000
D2O-GO
Figure 3.9  FTIR spectra for H2O‐GO and D2O‐GO. The absorption bands associated with 
water molecules downshift upon replacing H2O molecules by D2O molecules. The shift 
corresponds to the factor 1.373 derived from the difference in masses of the H and D isotopes. 
Reproduced from [12] with permission of ACS

96
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
molecules. The as‐prepared anhydrous GO was then equilibrated in D2O vapor. This proce‑
dure affords rapid reinsertion of D2O molecules into anhydrous GO, and results in the 
formation of D2O‐GO. Note that this procedure can only replace removable H2O molecules 
by D2O molecules, but not H in hydroxyl groups. After deuteration, the 3600–2400 cm−1 
absorption band is shifted to the 2700–1900 cm−1 frequency region. This is in complete 
agreement with the frequency shift factor 1.373 that originates from the mass difference 
between the H and D isotopes. However, the 3600–2400 cm−1 absorption band is not elimi‑
nated completely. The remaining absorption in this region might originate from the hydroxyl 
groups of tertiary alcohols, and/or from remaining H2O molecules that are strongly phys‑
isorbed with GO, and are not removable with the used drying procedures. The question 
about the origin of the remaining absorption in the 3600–2400 cm−1 region for D2O‐GO 
remains open up to the present day.
The pair of absorption bands in the middle of the spectrum at 1723 cm−1 and at 1619 cm−1 
are the signature of GO FTIR spectra. These two bands are present in all the reported GO 
samples, and are easily recognizable due to the absence of other bands in the close vicinity. 
The exact positions of these bands vary slightly from work to work. The position of the first 
peak has been reported to be from 1719 cm−1 through 1734 cm−1. The position of the second 
peak varies from 1615 cm−1 through 1626 cm−1. The difference is most likely related to the 
instrumentation used rather than to the nature of the GO samples. The 1723 cm−1 band has 
been unambiguously assigned to the stretching mode of carbonyls. Often, it is attributed to 
carboxylic groups, in accordance with the Lerf–Klinowski GO structural model. However, 
it can originate from any carbonyl groups, including ketones and aldehydes. In any sce‑
nario, there is common agreement that this band originates from the stretching modes of 
C = O bonds. There is less agreement on assigning the 1619 cm−1 band. This is the most 
commonly misinterpreted absorption band in the modern literature. In the recent GO‐
related literature, it has been assigned to a variety of different species, with the most com‑
mon assignment being to the stretching modes of C = C bonds. In fact, this absorption band 
originates from the bending modes of water molecules integrated into the GO structure. 
This has been unambiguously demonstrated in the deuterated water experiments, described 
above. In the FTIR spectrum of D2O‐GO, the 1619 cm−1 band is no longer present, and a 
new band centered at 1200 cm−1 appears in accordance with the frequency shift factor 1.373 
based on the H/D mass ratio.
Assigning the bands from the fingerprint region is difficult due to overlapping of multi‑
ple bands from different functional groups. In contrast to the two bands discussed above, 
the reported positions and intensities of the bands in the fingerprint region vary from work 
to work. Thus, in our studies [12, 13] the most intense band in the fingerprint region was 
reported at 1039 cm−1. Very similar spectra were reported elsewhere [14, 15]. In other 
works [10, 16–18] the most intense band in the fingerprint region was reported at 1051–
1060 cm−1. It is difficult to attribute such a large difference to instrumentation; it is possible 
that this difference is related to the difference in GO structure. Interestingly, this difference 
is irrelevant to the method used for GO preparation. This band is often assigned to epoxy 
rings. However, epoxy rings should absorb at ~1250 cm−1, not at 1040–1060 cm−1. Thus, the 
assignment of this band remains open. Other strong absorption bands reported in the fin‑
gerprint region are at 1368 and 1420 cm−1. These bands have been assigned to the bending 
modes of tertiary C–OH groups [10, 11], and to the deformation modes of O–H in hydro‑
gen bonds to heteroatoms of hydroxyl, epoxide or sulfate groups, respectively [15]. 

Characterization Techniques
97
However, all these assignments are speculative, since they have never been confirmed in a 
way similar to the one with deuterated water experiments.
The only solid assignment of the adsorption bands in the fingerprint region was dem‑
onstrated in our experiments [13] with “pristine graphite oxide” samples. We found that 
graphite oxide samples purified by organic solvents (in contrast to commonly used 
water) exhibit two strong adsorption bands at 1221 and 1420 cm−1 (see Figure 2.6). These 
two bands were significantly weaker in the HCl‐washed samples, and barely detectable 
in the water‐washed GO samples. The signal intensity was in the opposite proportion to 
the nucleophilicity of the solvent used for GO purification, and in direct proportion to the 
amount of sulfur present in the GO samples. The two bands were assigned to the sym‑
metric and asymmetric stretch of S = O bonds in organic sulfates, i.e. sulfuric acid esters 
of tertiary alcohols. This assignment allowed us to rule out the presence of sulfones, 
which were previously suggested to be present on the GO platform [15]. Thus, FTIR was 
the tool employed to propose the new functional group on the GO platform. This became 
possible due to the high sensitivity of IR spectroscopy to the S = O stretch vibrations. 
Even with a relatively low content of covalent sulfates in GO, the corresponding signal 
intensity was high. It is worth noting here that other analytical methods, including 13C 
SSNMR, were not able to distinguish covalent sulfates from other functional groups. 
Thus, this was an example when FTIR spectroscopy was advantageous over NMR 
spectroscopy.
3.3  X‐ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy
XPS is a unique and powerful method, and in general it is more advantageous compared to 
FTIR, and may even be so compared to NMR. The two main advantages are that it provides 
the elemental content of the sample and it is quantitative. Moreover, XPS not only reveals 
GO composition with respect to its constituent elements, but also provides the percentage 
of the different oxygen functional groups on the GO platform. The main drawback of XPS 
is the instrument cost: being expansive, it is not always available. Another drawback of 
XPS is that it is limited to surface analysis. However, for GO with its lamellar structure, 
XPS provides fairly reliable data for the entire sample. Considering that in many applica‑
tions GO needs to be sampled as a film on a substrate surface, the latter obstacle can be 
considered not as a drawback, but as an advantage.
XPS is a surface chemical analysis technique. XPS spectra are obtained by irradiating a 
material with a beam of X‐rays, and measuring the number and kinetic energy of the elec‑
trons that are released by the sample upon irradiation. The working principle of the method 
is based on the law of conservation of energy written as
	
E
E
E
ph
kin
bind
=
+
+
ϕ
	
(3.1)
Here Eph is the energy of the incident photons of X‐ray radiation, Ekin is the kinetic energy 
of released electrons, φ is the work function and Ebind is the binding energy (ionization 
energy) measured in electronvolts (eV). From here, the binding energy, determined by the 
method, is represented by
	
E
E
E
bind
ph
kin
=
−
−ϕ	
(3.2)

98
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Depending on the tested material, the electrons are collected from the top 3–7 nm of the 
specimen. XPS is a very sensitive tool to determine the entity and quantity of the elements 
present in the sample. The detection limits for most of the elements on modern instru‑
ments are in the range of parts per thousand. The ability to detect heteroatoms makes XPS 
a very powerful tool in the characterization of functionalized GO samples and composites 
of GO with different materials. The elemental content is determined by running a survey 
spectrum that reveals all the elements present in the sample. XPS is also known as electron 
spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA), to emphasize that the method also provides 
the chemical or electronic state of each element. With respect to GO, XPS provides not 
only the elemental content, but also the nature and the relative content of the functional 
groups. This information is obtained by running so‐called elemental spectra for particular 
elements with lower incident radiation intensity that allows better resolution of the signals 
corresponding to different components. For GO, the most valuable information can 
be obtained from the C 1s spectrum, which reveals different states of carbon atoms in a 
sample.
Let us begin by reviewing the C 1s XPS spectrum for the graphite precursor, and then 
compare it with the spectrum for GO. The C 1s spectrum for graphite (Figure 3.10) is 
­composed of one single component centered around 284.8 eV. The peak is not symmetrical. 
This asymmetry is due to the presence of the minor component situated at 285.6 eV that 
originates from imperfections, i.e. damage to the perfect sp2 structure on the graphite sur‑
face [18, 19]. The low‐intensity peak at 291.4 eV is due to the π → π* shake‐up interactions. 
This minor peak is the signature of any high‐quality undisturbed sp2 graphitic material. 
294
292
290
288
286
284
Binding energy (eV)
282
280
Figure 3.10  The C 1s XPS spectrum for graphite. The spectrum consists of one non‐symmetric 
peak centered at 284.8 eV and a low‐intensity peak at 291.4 eV generated by the π → π* shake‐
up interactions

Characterization Techniques
99
It  is present in the spectra of high‐quality graphite and high‐quality carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs). Generally, it is not present in the spectra of significantly damaged materials such 
as ­turbostratic graphite, functionalized graphene, functionalized CNTs, graphene nanorib‑
bons and GO.
The C 1s spectrum for GO samples (Figure 3.11) normally consists of three apparent 
components. The peak at 284.5 eV is attributed to the carbon atoms of graphitic 
domains. Even if the carbon atom is not perfectly graphitic, it will generate a signal in 
this area as long as it is not chemically bound to oxygen atoms. The spectrum is domi‑
nated by the component centered at 286.5 eV. This peak is normally attributed to the 
carbon atoms of epoxides and tertiary alcohols; this is perfectly in line with informa‑
tion from databases for model small‐molecule compounds. The integral spectrum con‑
tains a shoulder at 289.2 eV that is normally attributed to carboxylic acid groups. The 
still open question is where the signal from ketone groups should appear. Some 
researchers place the signal from ketones into the 286.5–287.5 eV interval together 
with epoxides and alcohols. Others place it into the 288.5–289.2 eV interval together 
with carboxyl groups. The actual position of the ketone carbon atoms is probably 
somewhere between. Most of the references in the XPS databases for known com‑
pounds report the ketone carbon signal between 287.7 and 288.1 eV (see e.g. http://
www.lasurface.com/database/liaisonxps.php) [20, 21]. The databases for the known 
carboxyl and ester group carbon O–C = O provide values from 288.6 eV through 
289.2 eV. Thus ketones bridge alcohols and epoxides on the right side of the spectrum 
with carboxyls on the left. Note that the component indicated by the pink line on 
Figure 3.11 is centered at 288.2 eV; this cannot be attributed either to ketones or to 
carboxyls, if based on the data for known compounds. Most likely, this component is 
the sum of the overlapping of the two peaks for carboxyls and ketones. Since the 
292
290
288
286
284
Binding energy (eV)
282
280
Figure 3.11  The C 1 s spectrum for GO. The black line is the actual experimental spectrum. 
The integral spectrum can be deconvoluted into three major components: at 284.8 eV (blue 
line), at 286.5 eV (red line) and a shoulder at 289.2 eV (pink line)

100
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
question about the presence and content of ketones and carboxyls in GO remains open 
in principle, there is almost no way to unambiguously resolve the content of them both 
by XPS.
In the literature, one can find many different ways of deconvoluting the integral C 1s 
spectra. Some of these deconvolutions try to disentangle the emission of the C–OH carbons 
from the emission of the C–O–C atoms, and the emission of the C = O groups from that of 
the O–C = O groups [22, 23]. While these deconvolutions might indeed be correct, they are 
highly speculative (Figure 3.12). The number of possible ways to deconvolute the integral 
spectra is virtually unlimited. The question is how much one can trust these data. One thing 
can be stated with confidence: the C 1s XPS spectrum demonstrates well the overall oxida‑
tion level of GO and RGO. For this purpose, XPS is probably the most effective and the 
most precise method among all the spectroscopic methods. With its ability to quantitatively 
detect heteroatoms, this method is a very powerful tool in characterization of GO and its 
composites.
3.4  Raman Spectroscopy
Raman spectroscopy is a well‐established characterization tool to probe the quality of gra‑
phene. A monochromatic laser excites a sample and the emitted light is detected. Among 
the excitation wavelength (Rayleigh scattering), other frequencies can also be detected. 
The interaction of matter and light results in a shift relative to the excitation wavelength 
that is specific for a material. Raman spectroscopy is based on the interaction of light with 
the polarizable electron density of molecules or materials [24]. Thus, polar solvents or 
polar impurities, such as water, do not essentially disturb the Raman process. Consequently, 
Raman spectroscopy is a characterization method suitable to probe GO (containing reason‑
able amounts of water), RGO and graphene, respectively.
60000
(a)
(b)
35000
30000
25000
20000
15000
10000
5000
0
50000
40000
CPS
CPS
30000
20000
10000
0
292
290
288
286
Binding energy (eV)
284
282
280
292
290
288
286
Binding energy (eV)
284
282
280
Experimental data
Envelope
Graphitic carbon
Alkylinic carbon
C-OC, C-OH
CO-C=O
O-C(=O)-O
C-OC=O
C=O, O-C-O
Experimental data
Envelope
Graphitic carbon
Alkylinic carbon
C-OC, C-OH
CO-C=O
O-C(=O)-O
C-OC=O
C=O, O-C-O
Figure 3.12  Deconvolution of the integral C 1s XPS spectra of two carbon‐based materials 
that includes all the theoretical components. (a) The content of oxygen‐free carbon is 79%. 
(b) The content of oxygen‐free carbon is 49%. The authors disentangle the C–O–C and C–OH 
components, as well as graphitic carbon and alkylinic carbon. Reproduced from [22] with 
permission of ACS

Characterization Techniques
101
3.4.1  Introduction
The Raman spectrum of graphene is well understood and readily used to characterize the 
quality of graphene in production processes as well as in research, because Raman spec‑
troscopy is non‐destructive [25]. Scanning Raman microscopy (SRM) can be performed 
with a high local resolution close to the diffraction limit [26]. In reality a resolution of 
about 250–300 nm can be reached using blue and green lasers, respectively. Tip‐enhanced 
Raman spectroscopy (TERS) is also possible to further increase the resolution [27]. 
However, the tip of an atomic force microscope (AFM), operated in contact mode, must be 
coupled to a Raman spectrometer to get access to resolution on the nanometer scale. Even 
if TERS becomes more and more attractive, it is not yet a routine method.
In this section, Raman spectroscopy will be described in general and in particular for 
graphene. Then the Raman spectroscopy of different types of GO and RGO is described and 
discussed. While the Raman spectra of GO and RGO prepared by standard methods almost 
do not change, due to the manifold defects within the carbon lattice, various different Raman 
spectra are obtained for RGO if lattice defects can be avoided by the synthesis protocol. 
Raman spectroscopy can be used for the characterization of the carbon framework of RGO 
and it is possible to quantify the density of defects within the carbon framework of RGO, 
especially in the range between roughly 0.01% and 3%. It is even possible to make conclu‑
sions about the density of defects within the carbon framework of GO itself. Also the term 
“defect” in graphene and GO is discussed and open questions are described.
3.4.2  Raman Spectroscopy on Molecules
Raman spectroscopy is a widely used technique to characterize molecules [24]. The 
method is complementary to infrared spectroscopy. The crucial difference is due to the 
selection rules and the excitation process. Without going into the details, Raman‐active 
vibrations are possible in non‐polar and easily polarizable bonds. Infrared‐active modes 
are active for polar bonds, such as carbonyl C = O bonds or O–H bonds. Thus, polar water 
shows strong infrared bands, but is Raman‐silent. Raman‐active bonds are, for example, 
C = C bonds and aromatic subunits. The Raman process excites the molecule and this exci‑
tation can be either resonant or non‐resonant (Figure 3.13). A resonant excitation requires 
the proper excitation wavelength to reach a real excited state. If the excitation is not reso‑
nant, a virtual energy state is reached. If the same frequency as the excitation frequency is 
emitted, the Rayleigh line is observed. However, the interaction of light and molecular 
vibrations or phonons results in a shift relative to the excitation. The emitted energy can 
be of either lower energy (Stokes scattering) or higher energy (anti‐Stokes scattering). In 
most cases the matter is in the ground state and excitation into a virtual state occurs. The 
interaction of light and molecular vibrations leads to Stokes scattering, which is normally 
interpreted. On the contrary, anti‐Stokes shifts are mostly of lower intensity and are often 
less studied.
3.4.3  Raman Spectroscopy on Graphene, GO and RGO
In 2006 the Raman spectra of graphene were measured [28]. Moreover, as well as gra‑
phene, also a few layers of graphene, RGO and graphite can be measured, and distinct 
differences in the spectra are observed [29]. Raman spectroscopy is applied to all types of 

102
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
carbon allotropes, such as graphite, fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, graphite, diamond or 
amorphous carbon, as well as polyconjugated molecules [30]. For graphene the Raman 
excitation process is always resonant. Graphene is a zero‐bandgap semiconductor. 
Although, graphene bears no bandgap, there are energy states for a resonant excitation 
process using commonly available lasers for excitation, such as 532, 514, 473, 453 or 
405 nm, as well as ultraviolet (UV) lasers [31]. Unwanted or unexpected reaction products, 
such as conjugated molecules, can be detected, as well as structural defects or functional 
groups, which makes Raman spectroscopy a powerful tool [32]. Currently, and in the past 
few years, knowledge about the Raman process as well as its interpretation have changed a 
lot. Thus, it is possible to determine stress and strain, or doping, the nature of edges and 
many more things. However, here we concentrate on the main features that are related to 
research on GO. We focus on the interpretation of spectra that relate to single layers. For 
the interpretation of spectra of a few layers, we refer to the literature [33–36].
The electronic structure is the basis for interpreting the Raman spectrum of graphene, 
as depicted in Figure 3.14(A) [37]. The electronic Brillouin zones of graphene are shown 
in Figure 3.14(C) and the first‐phonon Brillouin zone is marked as the red rhombus. The 
Dirac cones illustrate the electronic dispersion. Phonon wavevectors connect electronic 
states in different valleys and are labelled in red. The Raman spectrum displays two major 
peaks at a Raman shift of about 1580 cm−1 (G peak) and 2700 cm−1 (2D peak). The G peak 
at about 1580 cm−1 is an allowed Γ‐point phonon emission and corresponds to a high‐
frequency­ E2g phonon at the Γ‐point. The optical in‐plane phonon dispersions of graphene 
in the energy and frequency range relevant for Raman scattering are depicted in 
Figure 3.14(D) (black). As illustrated in Figure 3.14(B) there is more than one option for 
Real
states
Virtual
states
Vibrational
energy
states
Infrared
absorption
Rayleigh
scattering
Stokes
Raman
scattering
Anti-stokes
Raman
scattering
Resonant Raman
scattering (stokes)
Figure 3.13  Illustration of the Raman process in comparison to infrared excitation. In addition 
to Rayleigh scattering, Stokes shifts are observed in Raman spectroscopy, as well as anti‐Stoke 
shifts. The excitation of molecules can occur into either virtual states or excited states, which is 
called resonant Raman spectroscopy

Characterization Techniques
103
excitation that leads to the G peak. However, doping can eliminate one option 
(Figure 3.14B). The D peak at about 1340 cm−1 is a defect‐activated peak and the 2D peak 
at about 2700 cm−1 is the overtone that is Raman‐active without activation by a defect. For 
the latter, no defect is required because of momentum conservation due to two phonons 
with opposite wavevectors. A possible process is illustrated in Figure 3.14(B). The defect‐
activated D peak at about 1340 cm−1 is due to the breathing mode of a six‐membered ring 
and it originates from TO phonons (Figure 3.14D) at the Brillouin zone corner K. The D 
peak is dispersive due to the interaction of phonons and electrons, and in practice the peak 
position varies with excitation wavelength between roughly 1310 cm−1 (red laser excita‑
tion) and 1400 cm−1 (ultraviolet laser excitation). More details about the origin of the 
peaks observed in the Raman spectra of graphene, G2 or graphite are given in the special‑
ized literature [33–37].
3.4.4  Defects in Graphene
The major peaks in graphene are the D, G and 2D peaks. As illustrated in Figure 3.16(A), 
the Raman spectra of graphene change their shape with the introduction of defects. The 
intensity of the D peak evolves on introducing defects [38]. These defects can be of 
G
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
D + D″
D + D″
2D
G
K
K
E
1,700
211
198
186
174
161
149
136
124
112
Frequency (cm–1)
Energy (meV)
1,600
1,500
1,400
1,300
TA
LA
TO
LO
1,200
1,100
1,000
900
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6
Phonon wave vector (2π/a0)
0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4
EF
Γ
Γ
Γ
M
K
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
Γ
K
K
K′
K′
K′
K
D
2D
2D′
2D′
2D
G
D
Intensity (a.u.)
D′
1500
2000
Raman shift (cm–1)
2500
3000
D + D′
π
π
Figure 3.14  (A) Raman spectra of graphene (top) and graphene with defects (bottom) with 
the main peaks labelled as D, G and 2D. (B) Illustrations of the excitation and emission in the 
Raman process responsible for the G, D and 2D peaks. (C) Electronic Brillouin zones of 
graphene and the first‐phonon Brillouin zone marked in red. Electronic dispersion is visualized 
by Dirac cones. Phonon wavevectors that connect electronic states of different valleys are 
shown in red. (D) The black curves represent the dispersion of in‐plane phonon modes of 
graphene in the frequency range (900–1700 cm−1) relevant for Raman scattering and the 
interpretation of the Raman spectra of graphene. Reproduced from [37] with permission of ACS

104
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
structural nature, such as disorder within the carbon framework, e.g. misarranged carbon 
lattice atoms (other than six‐membered rings), or missing atoms or even substituted atoms. 
Another possible evolution of the D peak is due to chemical functionalization of sp2 carbon 
atoms of the lattice. With the introduction of addends, sp3 carbon is formed and the Raman 
spectra evolve similarly to the depiction in Figure 3.16(A). Therefore, one cannot easily 
discriminate between these types of defects [26, 32, 39].
Nevertheless, even if the type of defect cannot be determined by Raman spectroscopy, 
one can estimate the origin of the D peak depending on the starting material. The example 
of Ar+ ion bombardment on graphene that originally bears no defects will lead to a rear‑
ranged carbon lattice [38]. A D peak that evolves upon chemical reaction will be due to 
addends, and over‐oxidation of the carbon lattice will lead to vacancies [26, 39, 40]. It is 
important to keep in mind that a D peak with, for example, the same intensity as the G peak 
does not necessarily mean that a high degree of functionalization was achieved or a high 
amount of defects was introduced [31, 38]. As depicted in Figure 3.15(A) the intensity ratio 
of the D peak and the G peak (ID/IG) follows a relation. A ratio ID/IG = 2 can therefore be 
related either to a high degree of defects with a distance between defects LD = 2 nm or to a 
lower degree of defects with LD = 6 nm. However, it is easy to discriminate between these 
two values by taking the full width at half‐maximum (FWHM) Γ of the peaks into account. 
Generally speaking, sharp peaks relate to a lower degree of defects and broad peaks to a 
higher degree of defects.
Examples of Raman spectra that show the important peaks, D, G and 2D, are shown in 
Figure 3.16(A) [31]. The LD values that relate to these spectra are between 24 and 2 nm. At 
LD = 24 nm, the ID/IG ratio is 0.2, which increases to 2.9 for LD = 5 nm. For LD = 5 nm, one can 
expect that there are about 800 C atoms within the area between defects. As derived from 
the graphene lattice, one carbon atom fills an area of 0.026195 nm2 and so the area between 
defects can be calculated from (LD)2 × (3)1/2/2 [26].
The illustration of the graphene structure in Figure 3.16(B) shows three red circles that 
mark the positions of possible defects [41]. For LD = 10 nm, the density of defects can be 
related to 0.03% and there are 3300 C atoms within this area. The Raman spectrum in 
Figure 3.16(C) (right) shows the corresponding ID/IG ratio of 1. The D peak is well resolved, 
but is much more narrow compared to the spectrum on the left of Figure 3.16(C). Such 
broad peaks relate to a density of defects of about 3% and thus there is almost no intact 
honeycomb lattice left. One could calculate that there are about 33 C atoms in place; how‑
ever, the lattice might be highly distorted due to the large amount of defects.
3.4.5  Raman Spectra of GO and RGO
For interpreting the Raman spectra of RGO (and graphene), analysis of the exact FWHM 
Γ of the D, G and 2D peaks is necessary [39]. However, it should be clearly stated that the 
RGO mentioned here is not a typical RGO, as normally obtained by conventional prepara‑
tion methods. RGO normally bears too many defects, so that Raman spectroscopy is not 
sensitive. Typical Raman spectra of GO and RGO are depicted in Figure 3.18 and described 
there. However, with RGO with less than roughly 1% of defects, it is possible to character‑
ize this RGO by Raman spectroscopy. The interpretation is in line with the spectra obtained 
from graphene treated with ions, as outlined in section 3.4.4.

Characterization Techniques
105
This analysis of typical Raman D, G and 2D peaks is the basis for characterizing RGO 
and the determination of the density of defects. A set of Raman spectra of RGO is depicted 
in Figure 3.17. The FWHM Γ values of the D, G and 2D peaks are printed in italic num‑
bers. Values of ΓD between 21 and 57 cm−1 are found in the ID/IG ratio range that goes from 
1 up to about 4 and down to about 2 again. The ΓG values are between 12 and 51 cm−1 and 
4
(A)
(B)
(C)
3
2
1
0
1
rs
ra
2
1
1 nm
50 nm
1 nm
5 nm
5 nm
5 nm
2
3
4
3
4
5
10
0
15
LD (nm)
ID/IG
20
25
Figure  3.15  (A) The ID/IG data points of different graphene samples as a function of the 
average distance LD between defects. Defects generated by Ar+ ion bombardment. The ID/IG 
ratio is shown as a function of LD. (B) Activated regions (green) with radius ra and structurally 
disordered regions (red) with radius rs. The density of defects increases from panels 1 to 4 (as 
described in (C)). (C) STM images of the surface of a bulk highly oriented pyrolytic graphite 
(HOPG) sample subjected to 90 eV Ar+ ion bombardment. The ion doses were varied between 
1011 (1), 1012 (2), 1013 (3) and 1014 (4) Ar+ ions per cm2 and are the basis for the images shown 
in (B). The defective structure is depicted in the insets in panels 1 and 3. Reproduced from [38] 
with permission of Elsevier

106
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the Γ2D values are between 31 and 107 cm−1. The density of defects estimated by the relation 
described above is between 0.03% and 1%.
For a high density of defects, the Γ value of the peaks broadens; however, it is difficult 
to make a reliable correlation. Hypothetically, RGO with a density of defects of about 5% 
would have the same spectral properties compared to RGO with a density of defects of 
10%, or even 40%. As described above, chemical functionalization can also be a defect and 
thus a D peak is visible. On increasing the degree of functionalization to >3%, very broad 
D, G and 2D peaks are expected. In Figure 3.18(A) the Raman spectra of two different 
strongly oxidized layers of graphene are displayed. The characteristic peaks are all quite 
1500
2000
2500
3000
D
D
1200
(A)
(C)
(B)
1600
2000
2400
2800
3200
0.77%
D
LD= 2 nm
ID/ IG= 2.2
ID/ IG= 2.9
ID/ IG= 1.6
ID/ IG= 0.6
ID/ IG= 0.2
LD= 5 nm
LD= 7 nm
LD= 14 nm
LD= 24 nm
G
2D(G′)
D′
0.12%
0.062%
0.016%
0.005%
Intensity (a. u.)
G
10 nm
1nm
(about 0.03%)
10 nm (about 0.03%)
(about 3%)
G
2D
1500
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
2000
2500
3000
Figure  3.16  (A) Raman spectra of graphene with a variable amount of defects between 
0.005% and 0.77% based on the relation described and illustrated in Figure 3.15. The ID/IG ratio 
increases with increasing density of defects, and at about 0.3% the ID/IG ratio decreases again. 
In contrast, the ΓD, ΓG and Γ2D peaks increase with increasing density of defects. (B) Illustration 
of the carbon framework of graphene with symbolized defects marked as red circles. Here 
LD = 10 nm and the expected ID/IG ratio would be 1. (C) Examples of Raman spectra of RGO with 
a density of defects of about 3% (left) and 0.03% (right). (A) Reprinted from Ref. [31] with 
permission from American Chemical Society. Copyright 2011. (B, C) Reproduced from [41] 
with permission of Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH & Co

Characterization Techniques
107
broad with ΓD = 81 cm−1, ΓG = 61 cm−1 and Γ2D = 209 cm−1 for a GO with a degree of oxida‑
tion roughly estimated to be 4% only (black line).
This type of oxo‐functionalized graphene (GO) stems from water‐quenched graphite 
sulfate, an intercalation compound of graphite, which can be delaminated to single layers 
[42]. Also shown in Figure 3.18(A) (green) is a spectrum of GO with about 40% of C atoms 
1500
35
38
intensity (a. u.)
65
0.5%
ID/IG=3.4
ID/IG= 3
ID/IG= 2
0.7%
1%
0.03%
ID/IG=1
ID/IG= 2
ID/IG= 3
0.06%
0.1%
45
43
70
57
51
107
21
D
G
2D
12
D′
D+D′ 2D′
31
22
16
35
30
31
46
2000
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
Raman shift (cm–1)
2500 3000
1500 2000 2500 3000
1500 2000 2500 3000
Figure 3.17  Raman spectra of specially prepared RGO with a variable amount of defects. For 
the D, G and 2D peaks, the Γ values are given in italic numbers. For the displayed spectra, a 
density of defects between 1% and 0.03% can be estimated. Reproduced from [39] with 
permission of ACS
1500
Intensity (a. u.)
Intensity (a. u.)
2000
209
61
81
D
(A)
(B)
G
273
78
120
2D
Raman shift (cm–1)
2500
3000
1500
2000
Raman shift (cm–1)
2500
3000
GO (4% of functionalization)
GO (40% of functionalization)
GO; ID/IG= 1.1
RGO; ID/IG= 1.3
Figure 3.18  (A) Raman spectra of GO with degree of functionalization of about 4% and 
about 40%, respectively (Γ values are given in italic numbers). A significant difference between 
the spectra and the relation to the degree of functionalization are not yet reliably established. 
(B) Spectra of typical GO and RGO prepared according to standard methods [43], outlined in 
Chapter 2. Spectral features almost do not change, because, although oxygen functional groups 
are removed, more than 3% permanent structural defects remain that also cause line 
broadening and a D peak. Only the ID/IG ratio increases slightly, which is related to a minimal 
increase of quality, as shown in Figure 3.15(A) for graphene with a density of defects of 0.77% 
and 0.12%, respectively. (B) Reproduced from [43] with permission of Elsevier

108
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
being sp3 carbon, thus functionalized by oxygen groups, conventional GO [43]. The values 
of ΓD = 120 cm−1, ΓG = 78 cm−1 and Γ2D = 273 cm−1 are about 30–40% broader compared to 
GO with a degree of functionalization of 4%. However, up to now, there is no reliable cor‑
relation between the degree of functionalization of GO with a degree of functionalization 
of more than 3%. In short, Raman spectroscopy on GO that is generally an oxo‐­functionalized 
derivative of graphene (degree of functionalization of about 40–50%) with a reasonable 
amount of additional structural defects can only be verified as GO and discriminated from 
unoxidized graphite. However, the degree of functionalization cannot be determined by 
Raman spectroscopy.
Another issue in Raman spectroscopy of GO and RGO is the change of spectra during 
chemical reduction. While the D peak in GO is mainly due to chemical functionalization 
and extended amounts of sp3 C atoms, the D peak in RGO deviates from structural defects 
within the carbon framework. Functional groups have been removed by reduction from the 
π surface and structural defects, such as vacancies or rearranged structures of the carbon 
framework (five‐membered or seven‐membered rings), dominate [40]. However, as 
depicted in Figure 3.18(B) the Raman spectra of GO and RGO look very similar. In this 
example the ID/IG ratio slightly increases; however, the RGO structure is still far away from 
Reduction
Graphene with defects
Graphene without defects
Figure 3.19  Illustration of the chemical structure of GO. (left) GO with structural defects, 
such as vacancies, on the >3% scale. After chemical reduction, defects can be probed by 
Raman spectroscopy. Functional groups at defect sites are omitted for clarity. (right) GO 
with an intact carbon framework is shown, which can be chemically reduced to intact 
graphene (RGO without defects). Reproduced from [41] with permission of Wiley‐VCH 
Verlag GmbH & Co

Characterization Techniques
109
being similar to graphene, and structural defects dominate the chemical structure and a 
density of defects of about 3% can be estimated.
Recent investigations revealed that chemical reduction of GO to RGO can result in 
RGO of different quality. Even graphene can be yielded that meets the same quality and 
shows the same Raman spectra as graphene prepared by other methods [44]. As described 
above, the D peak in graphene can be due to structural defects or functional addends as in 
GO. Thus, by removal of the addend, it should be possible to study the integrity of the 
carbon framework. This process is illustrated in Figure 3.19. For conventional GO that 
bears defects, the reduction removes functional groups, but with a density of structural 
defects of more than 3% the Raman spectra barely change, because Raman spectroscopy 
is very sensitive to scattering. Thus, the Raman spectra of RGO only change if the density 
of defects already present in GO is below at least about 1–3%, which can be seen as an 
experimentally determined upper limit for a suitable quantification of the density of 
­structural defects [39, 44].
3.4.6  Statistical Raman Microscopy (SRM)
GO is a processable derivative of graphene; however, the quality of GO with respect to 
structural defects is difficult to determine, because conventionally prepared GO bears 
defects of more than 3% and Raman spectroscopy is not sensitive to variation of the density 
of defects on that scale. However, GO that bears less structural defects can be synthesized 
and oxo‐functional addends are chemically bound on the surface of graphene. After chemi‑
cal reduction and thus removal of functional groups, the quality of RGO can be probed. The 
D, G and 2D peaks can be fitted by Lorentz functions and parameters, such as the intensity 
of the peaks as well as the Γ values, can be determined [39].
Modern scanning Raman spectrometers are equipped with a microscope and a motorized 
x–y table. The table can be moved on the micrometer scale and even below. Raman spectra 
and the x–y coordinates can be recorded and large areas of a film of RGO can be scanned 
by this method. With such a dataset, the quality of RGO can be analyzed statistically. 
A histogram of IG is shown in Figure 3.20(A). It is found that IG is mainly dependent on the 
carbon atoms probed by the focused laser beam and thus it is possible to discriminate 
between substrate, edges of flakes, RGO and a few layers of RGO. A plot of IG versus ΓG 
allows determination of the IG value that relates to single layers of RGO: ΓG values below 
about 30 cm−1 are only obtained for single layers of RGO with a density of defects less than 
about 0.3% (Figure 3.20B). Moreover, the Γ2D value is sensitive to the quality of the RGO 
and values below 30 cm−1 relate to single layers; and for a density of defects less than 0.3%, 
Γ2D values are below 50 cm−1 (Figure 3.20C). A plot of the ID/IG ratio or AD/AG versus Γ2D 
can visualize the quality of RGO (Figure 3.20D). The comparison of ID/IG ratio and AD/AG 
ratio reveals that qualitatively the same results are obtained. Because intensities are easier 
to determine, the ID/IG ratio is more often used.
It is also possible to further relate SRM results to other microscopic techniques, such as 
atomic force microscopy [39]. Probing the same position by other techniques allows proof 
of, for example, the assignment of spectral features made by SRM. Since the quality of 
graphene and RGO, respectively, is generally heterogeneous within a given sample, it is not 
sufficient to measure only one single‐spot spectrum. Therefore, SRM was introduced, 
which allows for the determination of the quality within a complete sample using statistical 

110
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
methods. As outlined above, the x–y position and the corresponding Raman spectrum can 
be recorded. Furthermore, the spectral features can be extracted from the Raman spectra. 
With these data it is possible to build maps of films of RGO and it is possible to display 
spectral features. In Figure 3.21(A), the results obtained from a scanned film of flakes of 
RGO are shown. The single layers of RGO are color‐coded in green and flakes of RGO 
with a value Γ2D < 45 cm−1 are in orange. These flakes are RGO flakes that relate to LD > 3 nm 
and they bear a density of defects less than about 0.3%.
3.4.7  Outlook
Raman spectroscopy is the most important technique to characterize graphene, as well as 
few‐layer graphene. The borders between RGO and graphene start to vanish. However, 
Raman spectroscopy is only one tool for the characterization of GO. Although the integrity 
of the honeycomb lattice of GO can be quantitatively determined, there are several possible 
(B)
Edges
1 layer
Few layers
10
20
30
40
ΓG (cm–1)
50
60
IG (a. u.)
4
(A)
3
23%
Edges
1 layer
Few layers
66%
11%
Number of spectra × 1000
2
1
0
0
200
400
600
IG (a.u.)
800
1000
(C)
Γ2D (cm–1)
I2D (a. u.)
25
50
75
100
125
150
(D)
4
3
2
1
Γ2D (cm–1)
Ratio
25
50
75
100
125
150
AD/AG
ID/IG
Figure 3.20  (A) Histogram of IG and discrimination of RGO and few layers of RGO as well as 
edges of flakes of RGO. (B) Plot of IG versus ΓG extracted from a dataset of about 6 × 104 Raman 
spectra from RGO. The highest quality of RGO spectra is indicated by small ΓG values. (C) Plot 
of I2D versus Γ2D; edges (red), monolayer graphene (green) and few‐layer graphene (blue). (D) 
Plot of the ID/IG ratio and AD/AG versus Γ2D that allows the quality of RGO to be illustrated. 
Reproduced from [39] with permission of ACS

Characterization Techniques
111
origins for spectral features such as the D peak. Thus, other analytical techniques must be 
developed to thoroughly analyze GO. One recent development is statistical analysis of the 
quality of films of RGO. The quality can be visualized and quantified by SRM, a tool that 
gives information about the whole sample. In GO itself, up to now, it has been impossible 
to determine the density of structural defects beneath a high degree of functionalization of 
the carbon lattice by oxo‐functional groups. Currently, mainly the D, G and 2D peaks of 
RGO are used to characterize samples. However, other peaks, such as D′, or a combination 
of peaks and especially their position may imply more information that needs to be revealed 
in future studies. A promising recent study on the relation of the size of defects and Raman 
spectra is only one example that may be used in the near future [45]. An open question 
about the reliability of the Γ value of single layers of GO with variable densities of defects 
is another field of research that must be conducted. It can be assumed that Raman spectros‑
copy of GO, RGO and graphene will remain an exciting topic in the future.
3.5  Microscopy Methods
Every GO flake is a two‐dimensional nanoparticle. As such, a GO flake can be analyzed 
and characterized by microscopy techniques. Unlike spectroscopy methods that analyze 
bulk samples, microscopy methods provide full data about a single flake’s morphology. 
250
(A)
(B)
200
150
100
50
0
50
100
x (μm)
10 μm
y (μm)
150
200
250
Substrate
SiO2
Edges 1 layer Few layer Flakes
Γ2D<45cm–1
Figure 3.21  (A) SRM image of a film of 250 × 250 µm2 of RGO. The IG values are color‐coded 
according to IG and single layers of RGO are shown in green. (B) Magnification of the gray 
marked area of (A). Raman information about the thickness of the flakes is illustrated as an 
overlay of the corresponding AFM image. Reproduced from [39] with permission of ACS

112
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Most of the GO flakes are too small to be well resolved in an optical microscope. 
However, electron microscopy techniques generate images that reveal all the structural 
features of GO flakes. Thus, microscopy methods are a very important part of GO 
characterization.
In this section we will briefly review the four main methods most often used for 
GO‐related studies: scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM) and high‐resolution transmission 
electron microscopy (HRTEM). While SEM can be broadly used for everyday routine 
analysis, the remaining three, especially HRTEM, are mostly used for specific research 
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 3.22  SEM images of different GO samples on Si/SiO2 wafers. Images are acquired 
at different magnifications. (a) The image demonstrates that SEM allows simultaneous 
imaging of hundreds of flakes on the screen with a size 200 µm by 200 µm. (b) Typical 
monolayer GO flakes. The flake’s size, edge roughness and other morphological features are 
easily visible. In the light‐gray areas the flakes are of a single carbon layer. The double‐ and 
triple‐layer areas, where flakes are folded or overlapped, are easily identifiable by flakes’ 
opacity. (c) The image demonstrates GO flakes with different morphology; multi‐layered 
flakes appear as black, non‐transparent bodies. (d) A GO flake with smooth straight edges; 
the edges intersect at 120°

Characterization Techniques
113
purposes. This is related to two factors: cost/availability, and the time needed to acquire 
the respective images.
3.5.1  Scanning Electron Microscopy
SEM images are generated by detecting and collecting the secondary electrons emitted 
by specimen atoms excited by the incident electron beam. SEM is probably the most 
robust microscopy method to analyze GO samples. It allows fast scanning of large 
surface areas of a specimen that includes tens and even hundreds of different GO flakes 
on the same image. High‐quality GO images can be obtained with magnifications vary‑
ing from 500 through 100 000. When GO flakes are deposited on a substrate (usually 
SiO2‐coated Si wafers), SEM provides complete information about the flake size dis‑
tribution, number of carbon layers, flake morphology, etc. (Figure 3.22). For its sim‑
plicity and robustness, in principle, SEM can even be used as a routine quality control 
method when GO production comes to industrial scale. SEM was used as the main 
instrumental method in the study contesting the two‐component structural model of 
GO (Figure 3.23) [46].
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
5μm
5μm
1 μm
1 μm
Figure 3.23  SEM images of GO flakes demonstrating the impact of base treatment on flakes’ 
morphology. (a,b) Typical GO flakes retain their integrity and have smooth edges. (c,d) GO 
flakes damaged by base treatment and consecutive sonication for 20 s. These flakes exhibit 
smaller size and jagged edges. Reproduced from [46] with permission of Elsevier

114
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
3.5.2  Atomic Force Microscopy
AFM is based on continuous scanning of the specimen surface by the probing tip attached 
to the cantilever, while the cantilever is moving across the surface in the x and y directions. 
When the tip is brought into the proximity of a sample surface, forces between the tip and 
the sample lead to a deflection of the cantilever. Typically, the deflection is measured using 
a laser spot reflected from the top surface of the cantilever onto a photodiode. The AFM 
image is formed as a color‐mapped signal obtained from the tip/cantilever as a function of 
the tip’s x–y position. The lateral resolution of the AFM is related to the tip curvature diam‑
eter, which is currently on the order of 10 nm. In the z direction, the resolution is in the 
fractions of nanometers.
With respect to graphene and GO‐related studies, AFM is normally employed to obtain 
the thickness of the flakes. When on a substrate surface, the thicknesses of monolayer GO 
flakes are normally within the 0.8–1.2 nm interval. These values are slightly higher than the 
0.6–0.9 nm repeat distance obtained from the X‐ray diffraction method. Unlike SEM, 
(A)
10 μm
10 nm
2.24 nm
1
2
3
4
5
6
2.29 nm
0.82 nm
0.91 nm
0.81 nm
0.08 nm
10 nm
5 nm
5 nm
10 nm
5 μm
10 μm
10 μm
10 μm
1
2
3
4
5
6
10 μm
10 μm
(B)
(D)
(E)
(G)
(H)
(F)
(I)
(C)
Figure 3.24  (A, D, G) SEM images and (B, E, H) corresponding AFM images of a GO flake. 
(C, F, I) Height profiles corresponding to the respective images (B, E, H). The image demonstrates 
removal of a single GO layer from an original bilayer flake. Reproduced from [47] with 
permission of AAA

Characterization Techniques
115
acquisition of AFM images takes from several minutes through several tens of minutes. 
Also, most of the current atomic force microscopes require lengthy and complex alignment 
procedures. AFM also does not allow one to quickly move along the substrate to spot 
desired objects, as one can do with SEM. Nevertheless, AFM is the only method to obtain 
the exact flake thickness. Thus, AFM was used in combination with SEM to confirm the 
removal of a single layer of GO from multi‐layered GO samples (Figure  3.24) [46]. 
Figure 3.24 demonstrates that, when GO is less than three layers, the number of layers can 
be obtained from the SEM images by the flake’s opacity. In addition to the traditional 
height (used to obtain flake thickness) and phase modes, modern AFM instruments allow 
additional functional modes such as adhesion, surface potential, electrical conductivity, 
etc. The size of the oxidized and graphenic domains on GO is on the order of 2–4 nm. This 
is smaller than the tip diameter. This is why, unfortunately, AFM cannot resolve two types 
of domain on the GO platform.
3.5.3  Transmission Electron Microscopy
TEM is based on detecting the electrons transmitted through a thin specimen. It is a very 
convenient method for 2D materials such as graphene and GO, because the specimens can 
be easily prepared by suspending flakes on a TEM grid.
However, the use of TEM for GO‐related studies is relatively limited. This is because of 
the relatively small viewing area in TEM, allowing one to view one single flake at a time. 
This is a disadvantage when compared to SEM, which allows one to image numerous 
flakes simultaneously, which is advantageous for comparison purposes and for statistical 
analysis. TEM might be beneficial for studying nanocomposite materials such as GO 
impregnated with nanoparticles. Since single‐layer GO is completely transparent in the 
electron beam, good contrast between the GO background and nanoparticles can be 
obtained. See Figure 3.25 as an example.
3.5.4  High‐Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy
Due to the significantly higher magnification allowed by high‐resolution transmission elec‑
tron microscopy (HRTEM), this method affords numerous possibilities as compared to 
regular TEM. The level of resolution, allowing single atoms or groups of atoms to be seen, 
provides numerous details that are valuable for understanding GO structure. The first aber‑
ration‐corrected HRTEM images for RGO (reduced under hydrogen plasma) were reported 
by Gómez‐Navarro et al. [49] in 2010 (Figures 3.26 and 3.27). The reported images help to 
understand the actual chemical structure of GO. Below, we briefly discuss the reported 
images in relation to the fine chemical structure of GO discussed in Chapter 2.
It is apparent that the largest portion of the carbon layer comprises clean crystalline 
graphenic areas where the hexagonal lattice is clearly observed (light gray color in 
Figure 3.26). The average size of the visible well‐crystallized areas is from 3 to 6 nm, 
and statistics reveal that they cover ~60% of the RGO plane. In part there are point 
defects visible within those areas of graphenic regions. In addition to graphenic areas, 
a significant amount of topologically defective areas that appear as quasi‐amorphous 
single‐layer carbon structures (marked in blue in Figure 3.26b) can also be observed. 
These extended defects incorporate a large number of carbon pentagons, heptagons 
and rotated hexagons in a limited nanometer‐sized area. Nevertheless, all the carbon 

116
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
atoms in these areas are bonded to three neighbors in a planar sp2 configuration. The 
extended topological defects cover ~5% of the surface and exhibit typical sizes of 
1–2 nm in diameter.
Surprisingly, despite the presence of such a significant amount of topological defects, 
the long‐range orientation of the graphene plane is maintained. This long‐range order is 
partially preserved even within the areas color‐coded as topological defects.
The defective areas are bordered by black curved lines. These are most likely the points 
of C–C bond cleavage (Figure 3.27d). The edges of the black lines have a higher density of 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
1nm
d111=0.225nm
20nm
10 nm
100nm
50 nm
(f)
0
1
2
3
4
Diameter (nm)
5
STD = 0.51 nm
Dmean= 1.76 nm
6% Pd-GE after reaction
6
7
8
Figure 3.25  TEM images of GO–Pd nanoparticle (NP) composite. The tiny dark spots on 
panels (a)–(d) are Pd NPs. (e) The HRTEM image reveals the crystalline structure of a Pd NP. 
(f) Histogram of particle size distribution. Reproduced from [48] with permission of Elsevier

Characterization Techniques
117
white‐colored clusters, presumably remaining oxygen atoms. Thus, the points of C–C bond 
cleavage are terminated by oxygen functional groups.
Note that the RGO sample analyzed in this study is notably less defective than that in the 
similar work by Erickson et al. [50] (see Figure 2.9). Thus, more HRTEM studies are 
needed to gain more knowledge about the actual structure of GO and RGO.
(a)
(b)
Figure  3.26  Atomic‐resolution, aberration‐corrected TEM image of a single‐layer RGO. 
(a) Original image and (b) the same image color‐coded to highlight different features. The 
defect‐free crystalline graphene area is displayed in the original light‐gray color. Defective areas 
are shaded in dark gray. Blue‐colored regions are the disordered single‐layer carbon networks, 
or extended topological defects, identified as remnants of the oxidation–reduction process. 
Red‐colored areas highlight individual adatoms or substitutions. Green‐colored areas indicate 
isolated topological defects, which are single bond rotations or dislocation cores. Holes and 
their edge reconstructions are colored in yellow. Scale bar (bottom right) is 1 nm. Reproduced 
from [49] with permission of ACS

118
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
References
[1]	 Kolodziejski, W.; Klinowski, J., Kinetics of cross‐polarization in solid‐state NMR: a guide for 
chemists. Chem. Rev. 2002, 102 (3), 613–628.
[2]	 Mermoux, M.; Chabre, Y.; Rousseau, A., FTIR and 13C NMR study of graphite oxide. Carbon 
1991, 29 (3), 469–474.
[3]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[4]	 He, H.; Riedl, T.; Lerf, A.; Klinowski, J., Solid‐state NMR studies of the structure of graphite 
oxide. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 19954–19958.
[5]	 Lerf, A.; Heb, H.; Riedl, T.; et al., 13C and 1H MAS NMR studies of graphite oxide and its 
chemically modified derivatives. Solid State Ionics 1997, 101–103 (2), 857–862.
[6]	 He, H.; Klinowski, J.; Forster, M.; Lerf, A., A new structural model for graphite oxide. Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 1998, 287, 53–56.
[7]	 Gao, W.; Alemany, L.B.; Ci, L.; Ajayan, P.M., New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nature Chem. 2009, 1 (5), 403–408.
[8]	 Casabianca, L.B.; Shaibat, M.A.; Cai, W.W.; et al., NMR‐based structural modeling of graphite 
oxide using multidimensional 13C solid‐state NMR and ab initio chemical shift calculations. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (16), 5672–5676.
[9]	 Cai, W.; Piner, R.D.; Stadermann, F.J.; et al., Synthesis and solid‐state NMR structural charac‑
terization of 13C‐labeled graphite oxide. Science 2008, 321 (5897), 1815–1817.
[10]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi, O.; Dékány, I., DRIFT study of deuterium‐exchanged graphite oxide. 
Carbon 2005, 43 (15), 3186–3189.
(a)
(c)
(b)
(d)
Figure 3.27  (a,b) Pentagon–heptagon dipole observed at two different times (2 min apart) 
in the TEM. The separation between the dislocation pairs has increased, indicating mobility 
of the carbon grid, and a significant amount of strain causing the separation. (c,d) Additional 
defect clusters, indicated by blue dashed lines. Yellow dashed lines indicate regions with a 
hexagonal lattice rotated to the dominant orientation (yellow solid lines for comparison). Red 
dashed lines indicate distortions in the hexagonal lattice. Yellow arrows in (c) indicate 
strongly elongated carbon polygons. All scale bars are 1 nm. Reproduced from [49] with 
permission of ACS

Characterization Techniques
119
[11]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi, O.; Forgó, P.; et al., Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of 
progressively oxidized graphite oxides. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18, 2740–2749.
[12]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Alemany, L.B.; Tour, J.M., Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity, its instability in 
water, and a new dynamic structural model. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 576–588.
[13]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[14]	 Pendolino, F.; Parisini, E.; Lo Russo, S., Time‐dependent structure and solubilization kinetics 
of graphene oxide in methanol and water dispersions. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 (48), 
28162–28169.
[15]	 Seredych, M.; Bandosz, T.J., Combined role of water and surface chemistry in reactive adsorp‑
tion of ammonia on graphite oxides. Langmuir 2010, 26 (8), 5491–5498.
[16]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hof, F.; et al., Sulfur species in graphene oxide. Chem. Eur. J. 2013, 19 
(29), 9490–9496.
[17]	 Hontoria‐Lucas, C.; López‐Peinando, A.J.; López‐González, J.D.D.; et al., Study of oxygen‐
containing groups in a series of graphite oxides: physical and chemical characterization. Carbon 
1995, 33 (11), 1585–1592.
[18]	 Ambrosi, A.; Chua, C.K.; Bonanni, A.; Pumera, M., Lithium aluminum hydride as reducing 
agent for chemically reduced graphene oxides. Chem. Mater. 2012, 24 (12), 2292–2298.
[19]	 Yang, D.Q.; Sacher, E., s–p hybridization in highly oriented pyrolytic graphite and its change 
on surface modification, as studied by X‐ray photoelectron and Raman spectroscopies. Surf. 
Sci. 2002, 504, 125–137.
[20]	 Briggs, D., in Handbook of X‐ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, vol. 3, eds C.D. Wagner, 
W.M. Riggs, L.E. Davis, J.F. Moulder and G.E. Muilenberg. Perkin‐Elmer Corp., Eden 
Prairie, MN, 1979.
[21]	 Hofflund, G.B., Spectroscopic techniques: X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Auger 
electron spectroscopy (AES) and ion scattering spectroscopy (ISS). In Handbook of Surface 
and Interface Analysis. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1998.
[22]	 Chiu, P.L.; Mastrogiovanni, D.D.; Wei, D.; et al., Microwave‐ and nitronium ion‐enabled rapid 
and direct production of highly conductive low‐oxygen graphene. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 
(13), 5850–5856.
[23]	 Ganguly, A.; Sharma, S.; Papakonstantinou, P.; Hamilton, J., Probing the thermal deoxygena‑
tion of graphene oxide using high‐resolution in situ X‐ray‐based spectroscopies. J. Phys. 
Chem. C 2011, 115 (34), 17009–17019.
[24]	 Banwell, C.N.; McCash, E.M., Fundamentals of Molecular Spectroscopy. McGraw‐Hill, 
London, 1983.
[25]	 Bae, S.; Kim, H.; Lee, Y.; et al., Roll‐to‐roll production of 30‐inch graphene films for trans‑
parent electrodes. Nature Nanotechnol. 2010, 5 (8), 574–578.
[26]	 Englert, J.M.; Vecera, P.; Knirsch, K.C.; et al., Scanning‐Raman‐microscopy for the statistical 
analysis of covalently functionalized graphene. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (6), 5472–5482.
[27]	 Stadler, J.; Schmid, T.; Zenobi, R., Nanoscale chemical imaging of single‐layer graphene. ACS 
Nano 2011, 5 (10), 8442–8448.
[28]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Meyer, J.C.; Scardaci, V.; et al., Raman spectrum of graphene and graphene layers. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97 (18), 187401.
[29]	 Graf, D.; Molitor, F.; Ensslin, K.; et al., Spatially resolved Raman spectroscopy of single‐ and 
few‐layer graphene. Nano Lett. 2007, 7 (2), 238–242.
[30]	 Hoffmann, G.G.; de With, G.; Loos, J., Micro‐Raman and tip‐enhanced Raman spectroscopy of 
carbon allotropes. Macromol. Symp. 2008, 265 (1), 1–11.
[31]	 Cançado, L.G.; Jorio, A.; Ferreira, E.H.M.; et al., Quantifying defects in graphene via Raman 
spectroscopy at different excitation energies. Nano Lett. 2011, 11 (8), 3190–3196.
[32]	 Koehler, F.M.; Jacobsen, A.; Ensslin, K.; et al., Selective chemical modification of graphene 
surfaces: distinction between single‐ and bilayer graphene. Small 2010, 6 (10), 1125–1130.
[33]	 Ni, Z.H.; Yu, T.; Lu, Y.H.; et al., Uniaxial strain on graphene: Raman spectroscopy study and 
band‐gap opening. ACS Nano 2008, 2 (11), 2301–2305.
[34]	 Wang, Y.Y.; Ni, Z.H.; Yu, T.; et al., Raman studies of monolayer graphene: the substrate effect. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112 (29), 10637–10640.

120
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[35]	 Das, A.; Pisana, S.; Chakraborty, B.; et al., Monitoring dopants by Raman scattering in an elec‑
trochemically top‐gated graphene transistor. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (4), 210–215.
[36]	 Casiraghi, C.; Hartschuh, A.; Qian, H.; et al., Raman spectroscopy of graphene edges. Nano 
Lett. 2009, 9 (4), 1433–1441.
[37]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Basko, D.M., Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the properties 
of graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2013, 8 (4), 235–246.
[38]	 Lucchese, M.M.; Stavale, F.; Ferreira, E.H.M.; et  al., Quantifying ion‐induced defects and 
Raman relaxation length in graphene. Carbon 2010, 48 (5), 1592–1597.
[39]	 Eigler, S.; Hof, F.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; et al., Statistical‐Raman‐microscopy and atomic‐
force‐microscopy on heterogeneous graphene obtained after reduction of graphene oxide. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 (14), 7698–7704.
[40]	 Eigler, S., Mechanistic insights into the reduction of graphene oxide addressing its surfaces. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16 (37), 19832–19835.
[41]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
[42]	 Eigler, S., Graphite sulphate – a precursor to graphene. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51 (15), 3162–3165.
[43]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hirsch, A., Visualization of defect densities in reduced graphene oxide. 
Carbon 2012, 50 (10), 3666–3673.
[44]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[45]	 Pollard, A.J.; Brennan, B.; Stec, H.; et al., Quantitative characterization of defect size in graphene 
using Raman spectroscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 105 (25), 253107.
[46]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Polson, T.A., Contesting the two‐component structural model of graphene oxide 
and reexamining the chemistry of graphene oxide in basic media. Carbon 2015, 93, 544–554.
[47]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Sinitskii, A.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer removal of graphene for device 
patterning. Science 2011, 331 (6021), 1168–1172.
[48]	 Li, Y.; Yu, Y.; Wang, J.‐G.; et al., CO oxidation over graphene supported palladium catalyst. 
Appl. Catal. B: Environm. 2012, 125, 189–196.
[49]	 Gómez‐Navarro, C.; Meyer, J.C.; Sundaram, R.S.; et al., Atomic structure of reduced graphene 
oxide. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (4), 1144–1148.
[50]	 Erickson, K.; Erni, R.; Lee, Z.; et al., Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene 
oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (40), 4467–4472.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
4
Rheology of Graphene Oxide 
Dispersions
Cristina Vallés
4.1  Liquid Crystalline Behaviour of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
4.1.1  Liquid Crystals and Onsager’s Theory
Anisotropic molecules or particles in fluid states (i.e. in liquid media) have been demon­
strated to be capable of forming highly ordered structures at the mesoscopic scale, which 
are known as liquid crystalline phases. Increasing contents of anisotropic particles in liquid 
media lead to an increasing restriction of the free rotation of the particles. As their free 
rotation becomes more and more difficult, the particles tend to organize themselves, form­
ing ordered structures [1], which are known as colloidal liquid crystals (LCs). Colloidal 
liquid crystals attract a great deal of interest and attention due to their potential in the fab­
rication of highly ordered structures from molecular to higher levels [2] as well as their 
potential use in display devices [2–5], for which the processing of these well‐organized 
materials is extremely important.
In 1940s Lars Onsager predicted that colloidal suspensions of one‐dimensional (1D) 
rod‐like particles and two‐dimensional (2D) plate‐like particles (hard platelets) could go 
from a disordered isotropic phase to an ordered nematic phase when the concentration of 
the 1D rod‐like particles or, alternatively, the 2D hard platelets reached a critical concentra­
tion [6]. When the concentration of rod‐ or plate‐like particles is low, there is no interaction 
between them and they can rotate freely. With increasing concentrations, the free rotation 
of the particles is more and more restricted due to the exclusion of free volume, and the 
rods or platelets are thus forced to orient and organize themselves going towards a nematic 
order [1, 6–8]. This is schematically represented for 2D platelets in Figure 4.1.

122
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Onsager’s theory also predicted a critical concentration in colloidal dispersions of rod‐
like or plate‐like particles in liquid media for the transition from isotropic to nematic phase, 
in which both phases coexist (called a biphase). This critical concentration strongly depends 
on the aspect ratio of the rods (length/diameter) or platelets (diameter/thickness) [6–11].
4.1.2  Nematic Phases in Carbon Nanomaterials
In particular, the formation of lyotropic LC phases (nematic phases) has been observed for 
a wide range of 1D and 2D anisotropic nanoparticles in the concentrated regime, such as 
metal nanorods [13], clays [14], protein fibres [15], carbon nanotubes (CNTs) [16, 17], 
inorganic nanosheets [18] and graphene [7–10, 19, 20], resulting in highly organized 
(aligned) nanostructures. These highly ordered carbonaceous mesophases raise a particu­
lar research interest as they represent effective routes to functional carbon‐based materials 
[21–26].
Among these carbonaceous nanomaterials, graphene oxide (GO) is particularly interest­
ing, as it offers some important advantages with respect to other carbon nanomaterials. 
Graphite oxide is a promising precursor for the bulk production of graphene‐based materi­
als. It is a highly oxidized layered material that exfoliates into ultra‐thin layers of GO when 
it is in contact with water [7–10, 19, 20] and some organic solvents [27–29]. GO sheets are 
not electrically conductive due to the high amount of defects and oxygen‐containing func­
tional groups attached to the surface of the flakes. They can, however, be converted back to 
highly conductive graphene through chemical reduction [30] and thermal annealing [31], 
Figure  4.1  Schematic representation of the formation of highly ordered structures of 2D 
anisotropic platelets in liquid media when the particle concentration is increased. Increasing 
contents of anisotropic particles in liquid media leads to an increasing restriction of their free 
rotation. As a consequence of this restricted free rotation, the particles tend to organize 
themselves, forming highly ordered structures, which are known as colloidal liquid crystals (LCs)

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
123
or alternatively through a simple base washing, which has been demonstrated to remove a 
high amount of oxidative debris attached to the surface to the graphene flakes [32]. In addi­
tion, GO sheets have an extremely high aspect ratio with monoatomic thickness and a lat­
eral size of tens of micrometres [7, 8, 33], which is essential for the formation of highly 
ordered LCs. Aspect ratios as high as 10 000 have been reported for GO sheets [8], which 
are higher than those previously observed for CNTs [21, 23], putting GO materials in a 
better position to form nematic phases and highly ordered carbonaceous structures relative 
to CNTs.
For the formation of LC phases from dispersions, good colloidal stabilities of high 
concentrations of highly anisotropic particles are a strong requirement [10, 34]. GO 
can reach very good colloidal stabilities in water as a consequence of the GO sheets 
being negatively charged (highly oxidized graphene sheets), which can be explained 
using the classic theory of Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek (DLVO) [34, 35]. 
The existence of negative charges on the surface of the GO sheets generates large 
repulsion forces between the negatively charged colloids in water, which work to avoid 
the aggregation of colloidal particles through strong π–π and van der Waals interac­
tions. Recently, lyotropic LC phases have been identified in dispersions of GO and 
reduced GO in water [7–10, 20]. Furthermore, Jalili et al. [28] and Xu et  al. [29] 
reported the formation of nematic LC phases from dispersions of GO in organic 
­solvents, with the transition from isotropic to nematic phase occurring at a very low 
critical concentration of GO sheets (~0.1 wt.%), strongly depending on the aspect ratio 
of the GO sheets (diameter/thickness ratio) in agreement with Onsager’s predictions. 
The formation of these lyotropic LC phases is evidenced by the appearance of a bire­
fringence under polarized light, which means that the light is refracted in two different 
directions (as a consequence of the anisotropy of the LC phases) and it can be easily 
seen using a ­polarized optical microscopy. As an example, Figure 4.2 shows that, for 
very low ­concentrations of GO sheets, no birefringence is observed due to a random 
(a)
(b)
100 μm
100 μm
Figure 4.2  Polarized light optical micrographs of (a) GO sheets randomly oriented in a very 
dilute dispersion, and (b) GO sheets forming an LC phase when the concentration is increased, 
showing the appearance of birefringence under polarized light when, at a higher concentration 
of particles, they organize themselves, forming a nematic LC phase. Reproduced from [12] with 
permission of RSC

124
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
orientation  of the sheets. When the concentration of GO sheets is high enough, a 
nematic LC phase is formed, which is evidenced by the appearance of birefringence 
under polarized light. This finding represents the possibility to design and manufacture 
aligned graphene‐based macrostructures, such as aligned fibres or layered composites 
[7–10, 20, 36–40].
The exceptional mechanical properties (stiffness and strength), high functionality and 
ultra‐high aspect ratio, combined with the recently found capacity to form LC phases not 
only in water but also in some organic solvents leading to perfectly aligned structures, 
makes GO a very promising material to be used in the fabrication of highly ordered, strong 
and conductive graphene‐based structures [34, 41].
4.2  Rheological Behaviour of Aqueous Dispersions of LC‐GO
In order to understand the potential of GO materials to form graphene‐based highly ordered 
structures and become capable to exploit their industrial applications, their rheological 
properties need to be evaluated. Due to its great importance, the rheological behaviour of 
aqueous dispersions of GO in both the diluted and the concentrated regime has been 
recently investigated and reported [12, 42, 43]. They are studied as a model system to 
understand and predict the influence of graphene on the rheological properties and process­
ing of more complex systems (with different and more complex interactions between the 
graphene and either solvent or polymeric matrix). It is also of great importance to under­
stand how GO dispersions can be processed in order to develop fabrication protocols for 
GO dispersions using different processing techniques. The advantage of using water as the 
dispersive medium is that it is a Newtonian fluid, which makes the effect of the graphene 
obvious, eliminating any other additional effects, and that aqueous GO dispersions are 
highly stable up to high concentrations.
The following subsections describe the typical rheological behaviour of GO dispersions 
both under dynamic shear and under steady shear. Rheology studies the behaviour of mate­
rials under an external deformation. Important information about the structure of GO dis­
persions can be obtained by studying how they behave under dynamic and steady shear (i.e. 
sliding deformation). Figure 4.3 describes schematically the dynamic and steady shear 
deformation applied to the GO dispersions to investigate their structure.
(b)
(a)
ω
γ.
Figure 4.3  Schematic representation of (a) dynamic and (b) steady shear measurements, 
showing how the samples are deformed (sliding deformation)

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
125
4.2.1  Dynamic Shear Properties
A typical dynamic shear experiment consists on the application of an increasing strain 
(or, alternatively, stress) on the sample while keeping constant the frequency (ω), as shown 
in Figure 4.3(a). It allows one to follow the variation of the storage modulus (G′) and loss 
modulus (G″) with increasing strain/stress, which gives information about the viscoelastic 
behaviour of the GO network in our case, with G′ and G″ representing the elastic and the 
viscous part of the network, respectively.
Aqueous GO dispersions have been found to show the typical behaviour for space‐filling 
networks of particles. Figure 4.4 shows the typical dynamic strain sweep measurements 
performed on dispersions of GO at different concentrations from 0.1 up to 8 vol.% con­
ducted at a constant frequency of 1 rad s−1 and increasing strain amplitudes. Due to the 
existence of electrostatic interactions between them, the GO flakes form an elastic network 
in the dispersive medium, which shows viscoelastic behaviour under dynamic shear up to 
a critical strain. Within this region, which we refer to as the ‘linear viscoelastic region’ 
(LVR), the values for the storage (G′) and loss (G″) moduli are independent of the applied 
strain, with G′ being higher than G″ (Figure 4.4).
The LVR ends at a critical strain, above which the network of GO flakes breaks, G′ and 
G″ cross and become highly strain‐sensitive (rapidly decreasing with increasing strains). At 
this critical strain the dispersion loses its viscoelastic properties and it represents the transi­
tion from solid‐like behaviour to liquid‐like behaviour. As shown in Figure 4.4, the critical 
strain varies between 0.1% and 10% strain depending on the concentration of GO flakes 
[42]. The solid–liquid transition region, which is entered when G′ and G″ cross, tends to 
occur typically at higher strains for higher GO concentrations. For the high concentrations, 
10–2
106
G′
G″
Vol.%
8
3.9
0.90
0.45
0.20
0.10
104
102
G′, G″ (Pa)
100
10–2
10–1
100
101
Strain (%)
102
103
Figure  4.4  Typical dynamic strain sweeps on GO dispersions at different concentrations 
conducted at a constant frequency (1 rad s−1) and increasing strain amplitude [42], showing 
the presence of a LVR (with G′ and G″ independent of strain and G′ > G″) up to a critical strain, 
which strongly depends on the concentration. Above the critical strain, a liquid‐like behaviour 
region is entered. Reproduced from [42] with permission of Springer

126
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the crossover between the two moduli occurred at a lower strain than expected, which is a 
consequence of the sample forming a gel (orientation, alignment of the flakes).
Similar results have been found under dynamic shear when a stress is applied to the 
dispersions instead of a strain (stress sweep measurements, shown in Figure 4.5a). Both 
G′ and G″ moduli are constant with stress up to a critical stress of 1.27 Pa for a liquid crys­
talline dispersion of GO flakes with a concentration of 1.2 vol.% [43]. Similarly to what 
happens above the critical strain, above the critical stress both G′ and G″ moduli become 
strongly stress‐dependent. The G′ modulus begins to decrease with increasing stress due to 
the rupture of the viscoelastic GO network and eventually crosses G″, leaving the solid‐like 
and entering the liquid‐like behaviour region. Similarly to the critical strain, the critical 
stress strongly depends on the concentration of GO. Figure 4.5(b) shows the variation of 
the critical stress with concentration of GO. It can be seen that, with increasing concentra­
tion, the yield stress first moves to high values (concentration = 0.33 vol.%), then decreases 
at a concentration of 0.45 vol.% and finally increases again to higher values [43].
This minimum observed at 0.45 vol.% corresponds to an alignment or orientation of the 
GO sheets, considerably reducing their entanglement. This variation of the yield stress with 
the concentration of GO flakes is similar to those previously reported for discotic laponite 
gels and concentrated yield stress fluids [44]. Dynamic frequency sweeps conducted at a 
constant strain within the LVR give information about the structure of the dispersions of 
GO before the rupture of the GO elastic network, as they allow one to monitor the variation 
of both G′ and G″ moduli with increasing frequency. Typical dynamic frequency sweeps 
for different concentrations of GO dispersions are represented in Figure 4.6. Within the 
LVR the behaviour of the GO aqueous dispersions under dynamic frequency sweeps 
strongly depends on the concentration:
i.	 For very low concentrations of GO (~0.03 vol.%), the dispersions behave like a typical 
fluid, in which the particles do not interact between themselves. The moduli can be 
observed to increase with increasing frequency.
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.1
1
10
100
Osc. stress (Pa)
G′, G″ (Pa)
G″
G′
(a)
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.1
1
Vol.%
Yield stress (Pa)
(b)
Figure 4.5  (a) Typical dynamic stress sweeps for a 0.83 vol.% GO dispersion, showing the 
LVR up to a critical stress, above which the two moduli cross and the liquid‐like behaviour 
region is entered. (b) Variation of the yield stress with concentration of GO, showing a minimum 
at 0.45 vol.%, which represents an orientation of the sheets [43]. Reproduced from [43] with 
permission of Elsevier

Figure 4.6  Dynamic frequency sweep on aqueous GO dispersions conducted within the LVR 
(at a constant strain amplitude of 0.1%). Variation of (a) G′ and (b) Gʺ with increasing 
frequencies, showing different behaviours depending on the GO concentration. (c) Values of 
the moduli G′ and Gʺ within the LVR at a constant frequency of 0.1 rad s−1 as a function of the 
concentration. Reproduced from [42] with permission of Springer
106
104
102
G′ (Pa)
(a)
100
10–2
10–1
100
101
Frequency (rad/s)
102
103
8 vol.%
3.9 vol.%
1.23 vol.%
0.90 vol.%
0.50 vol.%
0.20 vol.%
0.05 vol.%
0.03 vol.%
106
104
102
100
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
103
G″ (Pa)
(b)
Frequency (rad/s)
8 vol.%
3.90 vol.%
1.23 vol.%
0.90 vol.%
0.50 vol.%
0.20 vol.%
0.05 vol.%
0.03 vol.%
107
105
103
101
10–1
10–3
10–1
100
Concentration (vol.%)
101
G′, G″ (Pa)
(c)
G′
G″

128
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
ii.	 At medium concentrations of GO (0.03–1.2 vol.%), an intermediate response between 
fluid‐like and gel‐like behaviour is found. At low frequencies, G′ and G″ are independ­
ent of the frequency, with G′ being larger than G″, which corresponds to the GO typical 
solid‐like behaviour of an elastic structure. At higher frequencies though, G′ and G″ 
become frequency‐dependent, suggesting the rupture of the GO structure and the entry 
into a liquid‐like behaviour region.
iii.	 At concentrations above 1.2 vol.%, the GO system behaves like a classic strong‐gel 
spectrum, with G′ and G″ being independent of the applied frequency in all the 
frequency range.
Sometimes, a viscoelastic soft solid behaviour can be additionally defined between ­liquid 
behaviour and gel behaviour. The dynamic shear behaviour of GO ‘ultra‐large’ flakes 
(aspect ratio = 45 000) has recently been described as being composed of four different 
regions depending on the concentration: a viscoelastic liquid, a transition state from vis­
coelastic liquid to viscoelastic soft solid, a viscoelastic soft solid (behaving like a solid 
below the yield stress while flowing readily above the yield stress [45]), and a viscoelastic 
gel [12]. The viscoelastic gel behaviour is observed at concentrations above 0.83 vol.% of 
‘ultra‐large’ GO flakes (aspect ratio = 45 000), which is slightly lower than that observed 
for smaller GO flakes (aspect ratio = 800) at a concentration of ~1.2 vol.%. Independently 
of the aspect ratio, GO dispersions typically behave like a percolated network, with the 
low‐frequency moduli values (G′ and G″) depending on the concentration (c) following a 
power‐law relationship [42] as shown in Figure 4.6(c):
	
G G
x
c
y
′
″(
)=
× (
)
,
.%
Pa
vol
	
(4.1)
Exponents (y) of 2.7 and 3 have been found for G′ and G″, respectively, in aqueous disper­
sions of GO flakes with very good quality of the fits (R2 > 0.90) [42]. Similar power‐law 
relationships between moduli and concentration have been found experimentally in other 
percolated networks with index values between 2 and 3.5, which are commonly attributed 
to random three‐dimensional (3D) networks [46]. This suggests the presence of similar 3D 
networks (i.e. liquid crystalline gels) of GO in aqueous dispersions.
Two different types of force between the sheets are competing in the formation of GO‐
LC nematic phases: repulsive flake–flake forces due to the negatively charged functional 
groups (oxygen functional groups) present on their surfaces, and attractive forces through 
π–π and van der Waals interactions among the graphitic regions of the GO flakes. An equi­
librium between the static repulsions and the bonding interactions between the flakes, in 
combination with the large aspect ratio and high flexibility of the 2D GO flakes, is respon­
sible for the formation of GO‐LC gel or 3D GO gel network. Increasing bonding forces 
(i.e. decreasing repulsion forces) between the sheets lead to stronger networks. Thus, at 
high GO concentrations, the strength of attractive forces will dominate due to small inter‐
sheet separation, which will result in the formation of strong interlinked GO gel‐like phase.
4.2.2  Steady Shear Properties
A typical steady shear experiment (Figure 4.3b) consists on the application of an increasing 
shear rate ( γ ) on the sample while monitoring the variation of its viscosity. In systems 
composed of anisotropic colloidal particles, polymers or worm‐like micelles, the 

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
129
application of an external shear can originate some alignment and orientational molecular 
order. Steady‐state shear flow curves help us to understand how the GO flakes dispersed in 
a liquid medium can orient and align under shear.
The typical steady shear behaviour observed for aqueous GO dispersions is shown in 
Figure 4.7. GO dispersions exhibit a Newtonian or non‐Newtonian behaviour under steady 
shear flow depending on the concentration (Figure 4.7a). At low concentrations (~0.08 vol.%), 
the shear viscosity of GO dispersions shows Newtonian behaviour at low and high shear rates. 
With increasing concentrations, typical shear‐thinning behaviours (i.e. viscosities decreasing 
very rapidly with increasing shear rates) are found, which are normally associated with the 
existence of some orientation of the GO flakes forming a nematic phase [43].
The relationship between the viscosities obtained studying the flow behaviour (steady 
shear) and the applied shear rate can be approximated using a power‐law relationship 
(i.e. a power‐law shear‐thinning behaviour) [43]:
	
η
γ
≈
−
k
x
1	
(4.2)
where η is the viscosity, k is a constant, γ  is the shear rate and x is the power‐law exponent 
[47]. An exponent with x = 1 corresponds to Newtonian behaviour, whereas x < 1 is related 
to shear‐thinning fluids. For low concentrations of GO (0.08 vol.%), x has been found to be 
0.9 [43], which fits well with the exponent expected for an isotropic dispersion of low con­
centrated GO flakes showing a Newtonian behaviour. For higher concentrations (1.8 vol.%), 
the power‐law exponent has been found to be 0.29, which corresponds well to the values 
typically attributed to weak gels or concentrated dispersions.
The shear‐thinning behaviour typically found from low to high shear rates at high 
­concentrations of GO can also be described by the simple Carreau equation [43, 48, 49].
Alternatively, as shown in Figure 4.7, two different regions have also been considered by 
some authors to describe the steady shear behaviour typically observed for aqueous GO 
dispersions, depending on the applied shear rate [42]:
i.	 a first region is found at low shear rates, where the dispersions significantly shear‐thin 
(i.e. the viscosity decreases very rapidly with increasing shear rates, while the stress 
remains approximately constant);
ii.	 a second region is found at higher shear rates, where the viscosities remain approxi­
mately constant with increasing shear rates (while the stress increases).
There is a pseudo‐yield stress between these two regions. As shown in Figure 4.7(b), this 
pseudo‐yield stress can be scaled up using the Péclet number (Pe), which is a number that 
gives the relative time scales for Brownian motion of, and for the hydrodynamic forces on, 
the particles. If we approximate the GO flakes to circular hard discs, the Péclet number can 
be defined using the following equation [46]:
	
Pe = time scale for Brownian motion
time scale for convection motion
r
s
=
=


γ
γ
η
D
b
kT
32
3
3
	
(4.3)
where Dr is the rotary Brownian diffusion coefficient, k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is abso­
lute temperature, b is the radius of the disc and ηs is the viscosity of the solvent [46, 50].
In this kind of systems the Brownian forces (working to attract flakes to each other) are 
competing with the hydrodynamic forces (working to set the flakes apart). In the first 

130
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
region (thinning behaviour, before the yield stress), the network re‐forms as it is sheared, 
as the Brownian motion of the particles dominates over the hydrodynamic forces, with 
Pe < 0.3. In the second region (with constant viscosities and increasing stress, observed at 
higher shear rates after the yield stress), the network breaks because the hydrodynamic 
forces are dominating over the Brownian motion. In this second region the shear stress can 
10–3
04
02
00
10–2
10–1
100
Shear rate (s–1)
η (Pa.s)
(a)
(b)
Peclet number
Peclet number
101
102
10–2
10–1
100
101
8 vol.%
3.90 vol.%
1.20 vol.%
0.90 vol.%
0.50 vol.%
0.20 vol.%
0.10 vol.%
0.05 vol.%
0.03 vol.%
101
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
103
101
10–1
Stress (Pa)
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
102
Shear rate (s–1)
8 vol.%
3.9 vol.%
1.23 vol.%
0.90 vol.%
0.50 vol.%
0.20 vol.%
0.10 vol.%
0.05 vol.%
0.03 vol.%
Figure 4.7  (a) Steady shear rate flow behaviour of the GO dispersions at different concentrations, 
showing Newtonian or non‐Newtonian behaviour depending on the concentration. (b) The 
steady shear flow data can be fitted to either the Bingham model (dashed lines) defined by (4.4) 
or the Herschel–Bulkley model (solid lines) defined by (4.5), as both models incorporate a yield 
stress. Reproduced from [42] with permission of Springer

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
131
be described by a power‐law relationship with n ~ 1 at some loadings. The transition 
between these two regions occur at a certain Pe (≥0.3) depending on the concentration of 
GO and indicates the moment from which the hydrodynamic forces on the particles start to 
dominate over their Brownian motion. At high concentrations of GO (≥ 1.2 vol.%) the first 
region extends until very high shear rates and the dispersions do not enter the second 
region, which indicates the formation of a gel (nematic phase).
The Bingham and Herschel–Bulkley models have been widely used in the industrial 
field for pastes, slurries and suspensions [51] and they can also fit well the steady shear 
flow data for aqueous GO dispersions, as they incorporate a yield stress. The Bingham 
model has a zero strain rate at stresses beneath the yield stress whereas the fluid acts as a 
Newtonian one above the yield stress (as expressed in (4.4)); and the Herschel–Bulkley 
model is an Ostwald–de Waele (or power‐law) model with a yield stress added (as expressed 
in (4.5)):
	
Bin hammo
l
y
g
de
τ
τ
η γ
=
+
∞	
(4.4)
	
Herschel
Bulkley
el
y
−
=
+
mod
τ
τ
γ
K
n	
(4.5)
where τ is the shear stress, η∞ is the infinite‐shear‐rate viscosity, n and K are constants 
and τy is the yield stress.
Although these two models fit the data quite well at concentrations of GO below 1.2 
vol.%, they tend to fail to fit the experimental data at higher concentrations where the sam­
ples form a gel and never entered the viscous flow region.
The rheological behaviour of the dispersions of GO sheets at high concentrations is simi­
lar to that of a flocculated network. We have seen so far that, when the dispersions are at 
rest, as a consequence of the electrostatic forces between them, the GO flakes form a space‐
filling elastic network. At very low strain rates (Pe 1), the majority of the network of GO 
flakes remains intact (within the LVR). Above the critical strain (outside the LVR), the 
structure of the GO network breaks down, which causes a very rapid decrease of the viscos­
ity and the moduli with increasing rates. The microstructure of the system is represented in 
Figure 4.8. Some authors use the flocculated networks proposed by Barnes [52] to explain 
this rheological behaviour, as this model can explain the apparent yield stress observed. 
According to Barnes, a flocculated network under shear breaks down into flocs, which 
decrease in size with increasing shear rates. There is a Brownian motion in the system 
(forming the flocs), coexisting and competing with the shear forces (breaking the flocs 
apart). The size of the flocs in the system depends strongly on the competition between the 
Brownian motion and the shear forces, which is given by the Péclet number and leads to an 
equilibrium floc size for each applied shear rate, as mentioned previously.
The increased stress observed at high shear rates can also be explained using this theory. 
With increasing shear rates, the existing flocs break into progressively smaller flocs, which 
require less stress to flow, thus helping to maintain the stress virtually constant even with 
increasing shear rates (Figure 4.7b). Eventually (at a sufficiently high shear rate) the flocs 
break up into fully dispersed GO flakes, which are responsible for the increase observed in 
the stress at high rates.
Figure 4.9 shows the variation of the viscosity with concentration of GO. This variation 
is non‐monotonic because the behaviour of the viscosity of liquid crystalline dispersions 
depends not only on the GO concentration but also on the particle arrangements. At low 

132
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
concentrations of GO (~0.08 vol.%) there is an isotropic phase. Then the viscosities 
increase with increasing concentrations up to a critical volume fraction (~0.33%), reaching 
a maximum value. After the maximum, with further increased concentrations, the viscosi­
ties are reduced due to the formation of a low‐viscosity nematic liquid crystalline phase, 
reaching a viscosity minimum value, which corresponds approximately to the formation of 
the entire nematic phase. After this minimum, the values for the viscosities start increasing 
again (Figure 4.9).
The transition from isotropic to nematic phase can thus be followed under steady shear, 
and typically occurs at a critical GO composition of ~0.33%, which is close to the theoreti­
cal value predicted for polydispersed infinitely thin platelets (0.25%) [11], confirming a 
typical colloidal isotropic–nematic phase transition.
It should be noted at this point that the values found for the viscosities observed for GO 
dispersions with very low concentrations (where the particles do not interact with each 
other) are normally higher than those predicted by the classic Einstein–Stokes equation 
[53, 54] and the classic Brenner prediction for dilute spheres [55], both of which are 
Increasing rates
Increasing rates
Figure 4.8  Schematic representation of the elastic network of GO flakes existing within the 
LVR, which breaks down into flocs by applying increasing rates leaving the LVR. The size of 
the formed flocs decreases as the shear rates increase
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
Vol.%
η (Pa.s)
η (Pa.s)
Isotropic
Isotropic +LC
LC
0.01 S–1
8.5 S–1
92 S–1
LC gel
0.001
0.01
0.1
1
Figure 4.9  Variation of the shear viscosity of aqueous GO dispersions with GO composition, 
showing a non‐monotonic relationship between them, which demonstrates the isotropic–
nematic phase transition. Reproduced from [43] with permission of Elsevier

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
133
employed to describe or predict the behaviour of dilute spheres. These underestimations of 
the viscosities have been related to the high aspect ratio of flexible and negatively charged 
GO sheets, as these theoretical classic models were assuming spherical hard, rigid parti­
cles, with no charges and no attractive forces between them.
4.2.3  Recovery of the Structure
We have seen above that there is an elastic GO network formed in a dispersive medium, 
which is broken under dynamic and steady shear. It is of great importance to evaluate 
whether the GO dispersions can recover their initial structure after their rupture, as well as 
to establish how long the recovery takes. We refer to the dispersions as ‘shear‐thinning’ or 
‘thixotropic’ depending on whether the structure recovers instantly or after a period of 
time, respectively.
The recovery of the structure of the GO can be evaluated by conducting a series of 
dynamic strain sweeps on a GO dispersion and varying the rest time between the sweeps. 
To evaluate the recovery of the structure after steady shear sweeps, a dynamic stress is 
applied after the dispersions are sheared in order to follow the recovery of the structure. 
A sufficiently high dynamic stress must be selected so that the recovery can actually be meas­
ured, but it does not have to be so high that it is actually impeding a complete recovery.
GO dispersions have been found to be ‘thixotropic’, as they can recover their original 
structure with resting after being broken under dynamic strain or steady shear rate sweeps.
After breaking the GO network by applying dynamic strain sweeps, it takes typically 
between 30 and 60 minutes for both the G′ and G″ moduli to recover their initial values. 
We assume the recovery of the moduli values as evidence of the recovery of the flakes 
network structure. As the recovery of the structure is independent of the concentration of 
the dispersion, similar recovery processes are expected with different contents of GO. On 
some occasions, the recovery of the structure may not be complete, which is indicated 
by  higher viscous structures (slightly higher G″ values) for the recovered structure in 
­comparison to the initial one [42].
The structure of the samples is broken down even more severely by applying steady shear 
rate sweeps in comparison to the damage caused by the dynamic strain sweeps. By steady 
shearing a GO dispersion, the structure breaks severely, which is shown by a dramatic 
decrease of the values of both G′ and G″ moduli. Although the structure recovers upon rest­
ing, the recovery process is not linear. Initially, both moduli increase very slowly with time, 
followed by a steeper increase, reaching values that are close to the initial ones after about 
6 hours, although they never reach the original values. This means that, even if it gets close, 
the initial structure of the GO dispersion is never fully recovered after steady shear.
The LC‐GO dispersions exhibit thixotropic fluid‐like features coming from the break­
down of the interconnected elastic network of GO flakes, which is followed by an enhanced 
orientational ordering of the GO flakes in the medium.
4.2.4  Tuning the Rheology of GO Dispersions to Enable Fabrication
Throughout this chapter we have seen that the rheological properties of GO dispersions 
depend strongly on the concentration, which means that they can be tuned and controlled 
by adjusting the concentration of GO particles. The establishment of a correlation between 
the rheological properties and GO concentrations represents an important point for the use 

134
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
of various manufacturing techniques, which will enable us to process and fabricate macro­
scopic GO structures via a wide range of industrial techniques.
Several regions with different rheological behaviours are distinguished depending on the 
GO concentration, in which the dispersions should be processed using different processing 
techniques, as represented in Figure 4.10.
i.	 Although, at very low concentrations, the GO dispersions were thought to be completely 
isotropic and to show only liquid‐like behaviour (only viscous phase), for aqueous dis­
persions of ‘ultra‐large’ GO flakes, considerable elastic components have been found 
recently even in the very low concentration regime (0.25 mg ml−1), which makes them 
behave like a viscoelastic liquid even at very low concentrations (consequence of a high 
aspect ratio). The transition from solid‐like to liquid‐like behaviour (yield stress) in these 
ultra‐large GO dispersions occurs at a very low critical concentration (approximately 
three orders of magnitude lower than the theoretical value for colloidal suspensions) [12], 
due to an extremely large aspect ratio (~45 000). The existence of an important elastic 
Viscoelastic
liquid
100
10
1
0.1
0.05mg ml–1
0.25mg ml–1
2.5mg ml–1
4.5 mg ml–1
13.3 mg ml–1
Dry-spinning
Extrusion printings
Ink-jet printing
Spray coating
Electro spray
Wet-spinning
0.01
1
10
G′/G″
Frequency (Hz)
Transition to
viscoelastic
soft solid
Viscoelastic soft
solid
Viscoelastic gel
Figure 4.10  Variation of the ratio of elastic and storage moduli (G′/G″) with frequency for GO 
dispersions at different concentrations, showing which processing techniques are suitable to allow 
the use of GO dispersions for industrial fabrication. For example, when the viscous component 
(G″) dominates, high‐rate processing methods where the dispersion must spread on a substrate 
are suitable; whereas when the elastic component (G′) dominates, extrusion printing and fibre 
spinning are appropriate fabrication methods. Reproduced from [12] with permission of RSC

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
135
component in addition to the viscous component at such low loadings enables highly 
controlled electro‐spray and spray coating at extremely low concentrations. This makes 
possible the fabrication of ultra‐transparent GO thin films without the typical perturba­
tions found when viscous fluids with no elastic components are sprayed. Spray coating 
of ultra‐large GO dispersions has great potential for a wide range of industrial processes, 
such as electronics, painting, microencapsulation, electroemulsification, fine powder 
production, and micro‐ and nano‐thin‐film deposition [56].
ii.	 At a GO concentration of ~0.25–0.75 mg ml−1, GO dispersions show a biphasic behaviour, 
in which both isotropic and nematic phases coexist. In this range of concentrations, 
because ‘long‐range’ rearrangements tend to occur very slowly, the GO dispersions behave 
like a viscoelastic soft solid over long time scales (with G′ > Gʺ). In an intermediate time 
scale, however, a dominant viscous behaviour (liquid‐like behaviour) is found (with 
Gʺ > G′) because the ‘short‐range’ rearrangements occur fast. The fluid properties of these 
GO dispersions thus seem ideal for inkjet printing. (For good ink formulation, the original 
viscosity has to be recovered quickly (at short time scales) while preserving the shapes and 
structures at long time scales after printing [57]). This is of great importance to formulate 
stable inks from pure dispersions of GO with no need for binders or additives to impart the 
dominant elastic components required for inkjet printing. Recently GO has been success­
fully printed without any clogging side effects as a consequence of the highly flexible 
nature of GO sheets [12], which enables the fabrication of electrode materials to be used 
in electronic applications, such as organic field‐effect transistors (OFETs).
iii.	 At higher concentrations, in the range of 0.75–2.5 mg ml−1, the GO dispersions form 
single‐phase nematic liquid crystals. Despite the low concentration, a network of GO 
flakes is formed in the dispersive medium with a dominant elastic part (i.e. solid‐like 
behaviour). At a concentration of 2.5 mg ml−1 the GO dispersions tend to behave quite 
similarly to cells, soft glassy materials (SGMs), liquid crystals or weak gels [58–60], 
being slightly different from how polymer networks behave (in a purely elastic polymer 
network, G′ shows a frequency‐independent plateau even at low frequencies [59, 61], 
whereas in the typical behaviour of cells G′ would increase slowly with frequency [58]). 
This rheological behaviour at this concentration offers the possibility to use processing 
techniques for GO dispersions, which have been typically used for the processing of 
weak gels, such as wet spinning [62–66].
iv.	 As the concentration increases up to 4.5 mg ml−1, the viscous part (G″) dominates 
only at very short time scales. With increasing concentrations, the network of GO 
flakes becomes more and more robust, showing a gel‐like behaviour (viscoelastic 
gel), with the elastic part (G′) becoming more and more dominant. The crossover 
between the two moduli (G′ = Gʺ) thus shifts to shorter time scales and, eventually, at 
a concentration of GO as high as 13.35 mg ml−1, G′ and Gʺ do not cross at any fre­
quency, which suggests gel‐like behaviour. These viscoelastic liquid crystal gels 
show very high elastic modulus (350–490 Pa), which is considerably higher than 
those calculated for suspensions of single‐walled carbon nanotubes at a similar con­
centration (~60 Pa) [67]. The viscoelastic liquid crystal gels combine the typical 
anisotropy of an LC network with the typical exceptional uniformity of a network 
structure. This range of high concentrations for the GO dispersions make possible the 
use of some industrial processes such as gel extrusion printing and dry spinning for 
GO dispersions for the first time.

136
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The rheological behaviour (viscoelastic behaviour) of GO dispersions is different from 
those observed normally for other viscoelastic materials, such as polymers. This is very 
interesting both from fundamental research perspectives as well as for applications, poten­
tially providing a wide range of processing techniques.
4.2.5  Electro‐Optical Switching of LC‐GO with an Extremely Large Kerr Coefficient
The self‐assembling properties into highly ordered structures in combination with the 
outstanding properties of GO materials (mechanical, thermal and electrical after reduc­
tion) make GO (and reduced graphene oxide) very promising materials for industrial 
applications [41, 68]. In order to maximize the exploitation of graphene‐based materials, 
controllable alignments of GO‐LCs are strongly required [19, 23, 69–71].
The fluidic liquid nature of LCs allows one to control the alignment of their mole­
cules (particles) by applying an electric field [72, 73]. Although electric fields have 
been proved to induce order in LCs in general, the microscopic ordering and the macro­
scopic alignment of GO‐LCs can only be controlled by applying low electric fields 
(~5 V mm−1, which is three orders of magnitude weaker than the electric field typically 
required for molecular LC switching) for very low concentrations of GO (i.e. very weak 
inter‐flake interactions). Induced GO‐LC switching can thus only be observed in the 
low‐concentration nematic phase, the biphase and the isotropic phase) [74]. Under dif­
ferent conditions (higher electric fields and higher GO concentrations), the application 
of an electric field only leads to electrophoretic drift, reduction of the GO and electroly­
sis of water [9], but no induced orientation of the GO. This selective induced GO‐LC 
switching is evidenced by the induced birefringence observed under polarized light, as 
shown in Figure 4.11.
This intrinsic selective sensitivity of GO to high electric fields must be related to the 
viscous rheology, similar to what happens with polymeric liquid crystals [9, 23]. Although 
the removal of the electric field typically leads to the disappearance of the nematic ordering 
of the LCs (including LC‐GO), some weak nematic ordering still remains after the electric 
field is removed. The sensitivity to weak external fields disappears totally however with 
increasing concentration (i.e. decreasing inter‐flake distance).
GO is a Kerr material, due to its capacity to change its refractive index in response to an 
applied electric field. A maximum Kerr coefficient (used to quantify the Kerr effect of any 
material) of approximately 1.8 × 10−5 m V−2 has recently been determined for GO‐LCs [74], 
which is extremely large in comparison to other known systems (for example, the Kerr 
coefficients of nitrobenzene and aqueous 2D gibbsite platelet suspensions are of the order 
of 10−12 and 10−9 m V−2 respectively [75]).
The interactions between the flakes, which are responsible for the nematic ordering 
(related to Onsager’s excluded‐volume effect, described in section 4.1), also contribute 
enormously to the selective sensitivity of GO materials to external fields and their extremely 
large Kerr coefficient below a certain concentration. When the distance between the flakes 
decreases, the π–π and van der Waals attractive forces between the GO flakes became 
dominant [76], which increased the frictional effect, eliminating the extremely high sensi­
tivity of the GO dispersion to external electric fields and preventing the Kerr effect.
The Kerr effect of GO dispersions can also be reduced or even totally prevented 
(desensitization of GO to external electric fields) by adding a salt (e.g. NaCl), as its 

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
137
addition increases the conductivity of the electrolyte and enhances the interactions 
between the flakes.
The performance of an electro‐optic device has recently demonstrated the signifi­
cance of the extremely large Kerr coefficient found for GO materials [74]. Similarly to 
the already known and commonly used interdigitated electrodes in liquid crystal 
­displays (LCDs) including blue‐phase LCDs, a simple GO electro‐optic device has 
recently been achieved using two simple wire electrodes. Wide areas of electrically 
aligned, highly concentrated nematic GO were successfully prepared by slowly evapo­
rating the dispersive water from an isotropic 0.056 vol.% aqueous GO dispersion 
between two electrodes on a substrate while applying an electric field. Once the water 
was completely dried, the obtained uniform GO‐LC alignment on the substrate was 
maintained even after the fields were switched off. In addition, by changing the direc­
tion of the applied electric fields, the director of the field‐induced GO could be easily 
rotated. These GO electro‐optic devices have been found to work very well, showing 
optical switching behaviours that are comparable to those found for typical nematic LC 
devices. The performance of these electro‐optic devices from GO dispersions shows 
that GO‐LC alignment can be achieved easily by designing an appropriate electric field 
and controlling the GO concentration.
Figure  4.11  Field‐induced birefringence generated on an aqueous GO dispersion with 
concentrations of 0.1 and 1.1 vol.% by applying an electric field of 10 Hz, showing the 
appearance of birefringence only for the 0.1 vol.% dispersion. The disappearance of the 
birefringence when the electric field is removed can also be seen [74]. Reproduced from [74] 
with permission of Nature Publishing Group

138
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
4.3  Comparison with Other Systems
4.3.1  Comparison of Aqueous and Polymer Matrix Systems
By adding nano‐sized particles, such as graphene materials, into a polymer matrix, a 
particulate graphene–polymer system is created. An understanding of the rheological 
behaviour of aqueous dispersions of GO flakes considered as a model system (previ­
ously described) is of great importance to understand and predict the rheological and 
processing properties of more complex systems, for example, graphene–polymer com­
posites. This model system allows us to understand how the incorporation of nanoparti­
cles actually influences the rheological and processing properties of a polymer. The 
rheological properties of particulate suspensions are sensitive to the structure, particle 
size, shape and surface modification of the particles. The rheological properties change 
significantly with favourable particle–matrix interactions compared to non‐interacting 
systems or strong particle–particle attractions. When GO flakes are added to a polymer 
melt or any other liquid phase, changes in the rheological behaviour are expected. The 
van der Waals forces and π–π interactions between the flakes tend to form agglomerates, 
which increase the viscosity of the dispersive medium. The rheological properties of a 
system with well‐dispersed flakes are very different from those of a system with the 
flakes forming agglomerates. Particle–particle and particle–matrix interactions (i.e. sur­
face chemistry) thus play an important role in the rheological behaviour of particulate–
polymer systems.
Figure  4.12 shows the typical rheological behaviour of GO–PMMA (poly(methyl 
methacrylate)) melts as a representative GO–polymer system. Figures 4.12(a) and (b) 
show the typical rheological behaviour of GO–PMMA melts with different GO contents 
under dynamic shear. When GO flakes are incorporated into a polymer matrix, both G′ 
and Gʺ moduli increase gradually with increasing GO content (Figures 4.12a,b), which 
indicates a reinforcement of the polymer melt by adding GO. A gradual development of a 
percolating particulate network of GO in the matrix occurs as the GO content is increased. 
The existence of this elastic GO network at rest at very low frequencies is evidenced by 
the low‐frequency plateau found for G′ (where G′ is independent of the frequency).
Figure 4.12(c) shows the variation of the viscosities of GO–PMMA composites with 
different contents of GO at increasing shear rates (determined from steady shear experi­
ments). The increase observed in the value of the viscosity of the host polymer matrix with 
increasing content of GO suggests again a reinforcement of the polymer. Typically, the 
viscosities of the GO–polymer composites present an initial Newtonian plateau, in which 
they are independent of the applied shear rate, which corresponds to the particulate net­
work of GO flakes formed in the matrix. The shear‐thinning region (viscosities decreasing 
very rapidly with increasing shear rates) found following the Newtonian plateau evidences 
the network breakdown.
The addition of GO flakes to a polymer matrix leads to the formation of an intercon­
nected network of GO flakes in the matrix, which remains intact at rest and low shear 
rates. The presence of this network of GO flakes in the polymer matrix is responsible 
for the increases in the viscosity of the host polymer (viscosities increase with increas­
ing contents of GO), which provides a more solid‐like behaviour. We refer to the 

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
139
Figure  4.12  Rheological properties of GO–PMMA melts with different GO contents 
(performed at the polymer melting temperature, i.e. 230 °C). Dependence of (a) G′ and 
(b) Gʺ with frequency (dynamic frequency behaviour at a constant strain amplitude of 1%), 
showing the gradual development of a GO percolated network in the matrix with increasing 
GO content. (c) Dependence of the viscosity with increasing shear rates (steady shear 
behaviour), showing an initial Newtonian plateau, which corresponds to the presence of the 
particulate network of GO flakes in the matrix, followed by a shear‐thinning region, which 
indicates the breakdown of the GO network. Reproduced from [42] with permission of 
Springer
PMMA
GO/PMMA-0.6 vol.%
GO/PMMA-1.2 vol.%
GO/PMMA-5.8 vol.%
10–1
101
102
103
G′ (Pa)
(a)
104
105
106
100
101
Frequency (rad/s)
102
103
PMMA
GO/PMMA-0.6 vol.%
GO/PMMA-1.2 vol.%
GO/PMMA-5.8 vol.%
105
(b)
104
103
102
10–1
100
101
102
103
Frequency (rad/s)
G″ (Pa)

140
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
formation of a long‑range connectivity in graphene–polymer systems as the percolation 
threshold and it corresponds to their optimal (rheological, mechanical or electrical) 
properties. In this graphene–PMMA system the percolation threshold is ~1.2 vol.% 
content of GO [42].
The viscosities and rheological percolation thresholds in graphene–polymer systems 
strongly depend on the dispersion of the flakes in the matrix, as well as on the interac­
tions between graphene and the polymer (graphene/polymer interface). It is thus possible 
to modify the interactions between graphene and the polymer in order to be able to tune 
the viscosities and percolation thresholds of any graphene–polymer systems through 
modifying either the surface chemistry of the flakes or the nature of the polymer. For 
example, the oxygen content at the surface of the graphene flakes strongly influences the 
rheological properties of PMMA composites, due to both a matching polarity between 
the GO flakes and the polymer matrix and the quality of the dispersion of the GO sheets 
in the matrix. Graphene flakes with higher C/O ratios provide a more homogeneous dis­
persion in PMMA, which helps to provide a more effective impact on the viscoelasticity 
of the polymer (i.e. lower rheological percolation threshold and higher storage moduli 
and viscosities) [77].
As an alternative to modifying the surface chemistry of the graphene or GO flakes, the 
rheological properties of graphene–polymer systems can also be tuned by choosing a 
­different matrix, a matrix with which the interactions are different. For example, for 
chemically reduced GO–PP (polypropylene) composites, larger increases in viscosity 
and a transition from liquid‐ to solid‐like behaviour occurring at lower concentrations 
(0.2–0.4 vol.% of graphene) have been found [78] in comparison to those found for a 
GO–PMMA system (~1.2 vol.%). Different degrees of interaction between GO or ­graphene 
materials and polymers are responsible for the different rheological behaviours.
The formation and rheological strength of flocculated networks and hence the viscosities 
can be easily tuned through controlling the degree of interaction between GO sheets and 
the polymer, which is of great importance for practical applications.
PMMA
GO/PMMA-0.6 vol.%
GO/PMMA-1.2 vol.%
GO/PMMA-5.8 vol.%
104
(c)
103
102
101
100
10–3
10–2
10–1
100
101
Shear rate (s–1)
η (Pa·s)
Figure 4.12  (Continued)

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
141
4.3.2  Comparison Between Aqueous Dispersions of GO and Oxidized Carbon 
Nanotubes: Role of Dimensionality
Graphene materials are very often compared to its ‘older brother’, carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs), as they present many similarities in morphology, composition, reactivity, proper­
ties and applications. When the rheological behaviour of aqueous dispersions of GO 
flakes are investigated, it seems natural to compare it with those of aqueous dispersions 
of oxidized CNTs. The rheological behaviour of aqueous dispersions of oxidized CNTs in 
the concentrated regime has already been studied [79].
By refluxing CNTs in concentrated acid, their surfaces are successfully oxidized, which 
leads to the break‐up of the CNT aggregates into individual tubes, as well as to an impor­
tant improvement of their dispersivity in water, other polar dispersive media and polymers 
[80]. Typically the oxygen content in the GO flakes (~33 at.% oxygen) is slightly higher 
than that present in the surface of the CNTs (<20 at.% oxygen). Due to the existence of 
electrostatic interactions between the activated (oxidized) functional groups on both types 
of carbon nanomaterials, the aqueous dispersions of both GO and oxidized CNTs are 
highly stable. Besides, GO and oxidized CNTs are comparable in terms of dimensions, 
with the length of the CNTs being similar to the diameter of the GO flakes. Aqueous dis­
persions of oxidized CNTs can thus be easily compared to aqueous GO dispersions in 
terms of rheological properties.
Many similarities can actually be found between the rheological behaviours of these two 
systems. To start with, both GO and CNT dispersions act as reversible concentrated floc­
culated networks showing an elastic behaviour (LVR, with G′ and G″ being independent of 
the strain or stress applied, and the viscosity being independent of the shear rate applied) 
up to a critical strain (or stress), above which G′ and G″ become highly strain/stress‐sensi­
tive and the viscosity becomes highly shear‐dependent. For GO dispersions, the values 
found for G′, G″ and viscosities within the LVR are slightly higher than those obtained for 
oxidized CNT dispersions with similar concentrations (G′, G″ ~ 105 Pa and η* ~ 106 Pa have 
been reported for aqueous dispersions of 8 vol.% of GO and 9.2 vol.% of CNTs).
Under dynamic shear, the LVR extended to strains one order or magnitude higher for GO 
(up to ~10% strain) than for CNTs (up to ~1% strain). Similarly, the transition from solid‐
like to liquid‐like behaviour occurs at higher strains for dispersions of GO than for oxidized 
CNTs at similar concentrations. In addition, the transition from liquid‐like behaviour to 
strong gel spectrum (shown by dynamic frequency sweeps conducted within the LVR) 
occurs at lower concentrations for GO than for CNTs (1.2 vol.% for GO, 4 vol.% for 
CNTs). In order to break the structure of the GO network formed in aqueous dispersions, 
higher strains (or, alternatively, stress) are thus required relative to those required to break 
the network of oxidized CNTs at similar concentrations. These small differences observed 
in the rheological behaviour of the two systems under dynamic shear can be perfectly 
explained in terms of their charge concentration. The higher oxygen contents present in the 
GO flakes (~33%) relative to the CNTs nanotubes (<20%) must provide different degrees 
of inter‐particle interactions for similar concentrations, which are responsible for the 
slightly different behaviours found for these two systems under dynamic sweeps. The 
behaviours of the two systems are thus comparable.
Under steady shear, the equilibrium floc sizes for GO are smaller than those for CNTs 
for identical shear rates and concentrations, which is evidenced by the apparent yield stress 

142
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
found at a much lower Pe for GO (Pe < 1) than for CNTs (Pe ~ 1–10). Lower shear rates 
are required to reduce the GO flocs to the primary particles (i.e. fully dispersed flakes) 
­relative to those required to reduce the CNT flocs to individual tubes. Despite having com­
parable lengths, the 1D tubes tend to retain an entangled network up to higher shear rates, 
whereas 2D flakes are more easily dispersed from each other. Similarly, although both 
systems are thixotropic, the different dimensionality (and aspect ratio) between 1D CNT 
rods and 2D GO flakes is responsible for the slightly quicker recovery of the structure of a 
CNT network with respect to a GO network after shearing.
4.4  Summary and Perspectives
Anisotropic molecules or particles with high aspect ratio in liquid media are capable of form­
ing highly ordered structures at the mesoscopic scale, known as liquid crystalline (LC) phases. 
Increasing concentrations of anisotropic particles (i.e. rod‐like or plate‐like particles) restrict 
the free rotation of the particles due to the exclusion of free volume. As Onsager’s theory 
predicted, the rods or platelets are thus forced to orient and organize themselves, forming 
highly ordered structures. There is a critical concentration for the transition from isotropic to 
nematic phase with both phases coexisting (biphase), which depends strongly on the aspect 
ratio of the particles. The fabrication of highly organized LC structures from molecular to 
higher levels attracts great interest due to their potential in display devices.
The recently found capacity of GO materials to form LC phases in water and organic 
solvents, leading to perfectly aligned structures, in combination with their exceptional 
mechanical properties (stiffness and strength), high functionality and ultra‐high aspect 
ratio make GO a very promising material for the fabrication of highly ordered, strong and 
conductive graphene‐based structures. Investigating the rheological behaviour of GO dis­
persions is of great importance to understand how GO dispersions can be processed in 
order to develop fabrication protocols using different processing techniques, as well as to 
understand and predict the influence of graphene materials on the rheological properties 
and processing of more complex systems (systems with more complex interactions between 
graphene and solvent or polymeric matrix).
The rheological (viscoelastic) behaviour of GO dispersions is different from that typi­
cally found for other viscoelastic materials, i.e. polymers, which presents GO as a new type 
of soft material. This is very interesting from the points of view of both fundamental 
research on 2D materials and applications (wide range of processing techniques).
Throughout this chapter, we have seen that aqueous GO dispersions show the typical 
behaviour for space‐filling networks of particles. Due to the existence of electrostatic inter­
actions between the GO flakes, an elastic GO network is formed in dispersive media, which 
shows viscoelastic behaviour under dynamic shear up to a critical strain. Within this LVR, 
the values for the storage (G′) and loss (Gʺ) moduli are independent of the applied strain, 
with G′ being higher than Gʺ. The critical strain represents the breakdown of the elastic GO 
network and thus the transition from solid‐like behaviour to liquid‐like behaviour, with G′ 
and Gʺ crossing and starting to decrease rapidly with increasing strains. The liquid‐like 
region is entered when G′ and Gʺ cross, and tends to occur at higher strains for higher GO 
concentrations, except for the very high concentrations in which the sample forms a gel 
(orientation, alignment of the flakes).

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
143
Under steady shear flow, GO dispersions exhibit a Newtonian or non‐Newtonian behav­
iour depending on the concentration. Typically, at very low concentrations the shear viscos­
ity of GO dispersions shows Newtonian behaviour, whereas at higher concentrations they 
show a typical shear‐thinning behaviour (i.e. viscosities decreasing very rapidly with 
increasing shear rates), which is normally associated with the existence of some orientation 
of the GO flakes forming a nematic phase. For ultra‐large GO sheets, however, due to the 
high aspect ratio (~45 000), an elastic component is already found with very low GO con­
tent, showing the strong dependence of the rheological properties on the aspect ratio of the 
particles.
Two different types of force between the sheets are competing in the formation of GO 
liquid crystalline nematic phases: repulsive flake–flake forces due to the negatively charged 
functional groups (oxygenated functional groups) present on their surfaces, and attractive 
forces through π–π and van der Waals interactions among the graphitic regions of the GO 
flakes. The combination of an equilibrium between the two types of interaction between 
the 2D GO flakes, their large aspect ratio and their high flexibility is responsible for the 
formation of GO liquid crystalline gels or 3D GO gel networks. At high GO concentra­
tions, there are increasing bonding forces due to smaller inter‐sheet separation, which will 
lead to stronger networks (stronger interlinked GO gel‐like phases).
This strong dependence of the rheological properties of GO dispersions on the concen­
tration offers the possibility to tune and control their rheological behaviour by adjusting 
the concentration of GO particles. A number of regions with different rheological proper­
ties are distinguished depending on the GO content. In each of these regions, different 
processing techniques should be used for the GO dispersions, such as spray coating, 
inkjet printing, wet spinning, gel extrusion printing or dry spinning, which are of great 
importance for industrial applications.
In addition, the alignment of GO‐LCs can be controlled using external stimuli. The 
microscopic ordering and the macroscopic alignment of GO liquid crystals (LCs) can be 
controlled by applying low electric fields (of 5 V mm−1, which is three orders of magnitude 
weaker than the electric field typically required for molecular LC switching) when the 
inter‐flake interactions are very weak, i.e. for very low concentrations of GO. The sensitive 
response of the nematic GO phase to external stimuli and the extremely large Kerr coeffi­
cient found for GO maximize the exploitation of graphene‐based materials, allowing, for 
example, the fabrication of electro‐optic devices.
The rheological properties of aqueous GO dispersions are compared to other systems, such 
as more complex graphene–polymer systems and aqueous dispersions of oxidized CNTs.
References
[1]	 Hurt, R.H.; Chen, Z.Y., Liquid crystals and carbon materials. Phys. Today 2000, 53 (3), 39–44.
[2]	 Bisoyi, H.K.; Kumar, S., Liquid‐crystal nanoscience: an emerging avenue of soft self‐assembly. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40 (1), 306–319.
[3]	 Lagerwall, J.P.F.; Scalia, G., A new era for liquid crystal research: applications of liquid crystals 
in soft matter nano‐, bio‐ and microtechnology. Curr. Appl. Phys. 2012, 12 (6), 1387–1412.
[4]	 Kaafarani, B.R., Discotic liquid crystals for opto‐electronic applications. Chem. Mater. 2011, 23 
(3), 378–396.
[5]	 Yan, J.; Rao, L.; Jiao, M.; et al., Polymer‐stabilized optically isotropic liquid crystals for next‐
generation display and photonics applications. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (22), 7870–7877.

144
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[6]	 Onsager, L., The effects of shape on the interaction of colloidal particles. Ann. NY Acad. Sci. 
1949, 51 (4), 627–659.
[7]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.B.; Kim, J.K., Spontaneous formation of liquid 
crystals in ultralarge graphene oxide dispersions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21 (15), 2978–2988.
[8]	 Dan, B.; Behabtu, N.; Martinez, A.; et al., Liquid crystals of aqueous, giant graphene oxide 
flakes. Soft Matter 2011, 7 (23), 11154–11159.
[9]	 Kim, J.E.; Han, T.H.; Lee, S.H.; et al., Graphene oxide liquid crystals. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2011, 50 (13), 3043–3047.
[10]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Aqueous liquid crystals of graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (4), 2908–2915.
[11]	 Bates, M.A.; Frenkel, D., Nematic–isotropic transition in polydisperse systems of infinitely thin 
hard platelets. J. Chem. Phys. 1999, 110 (13), 6553–6559.
[12]	 Naficy, S.; Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; et al., Graphene oxide dispersions: tuning rheology to 
enable fabrication. Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1 (6), 326–331.
[13]	 Li, L.S.; Walda, J.; Manna, L.; Alivisatos, A.P., Semiconductor nanorod liquid crystals. Nano 
Lett. 2002, 2 (6), 557–560.
[14]	 Van Der Kooij, F.M.; Lekkerkerker, H.N.W., Formation of nematic liquid crystals in suspen­
sions of hard colloidal platelets. J. Phys. Chem. B 1998, 102 (40), 7829–7832.
[15]	 Jung, J.M.; Mezzenga, R., Liquid crystalline phase behavior of protein fibers in water: experi­
ments versus theory. Langmuir 2010, 26 (1), 504–514.
[16]	 Davis, V.A.; Parra‐Vasquez, A.N.G.; Green, M.J.; et al., True solutions of single‐walled carbon 
nanotubes for assembly into macroscopic materials. Nature Nanotechnol. 2009, 4 (12), 830–834.
[17]	 Behabtu, N.; Young, C.C.; Tsentalovich, D.E.; et al., Strong, light, multifunctional fibers of 
carbon nanotubes with ultrahigh conductivity. Science 2013, 339 (6116), 182–186.
[18]	 Miyamoto, N.; Nakato, T., Liquid crystalline nanosheet colloids with controlled particle size 
obtained by exfoliating single crystal of layered niobate K4Nb6O17. J. Phys. Chem. B 2004, 108 
(20), 6152–6159.
[19]	 Behabtu, N.; Lomeda, J.R.; Green, M.J.; et al., Spontaneous high‐concentration dispersions and 
liquid crystals of graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2010, 5 (6), 406–411.
[20]	 Guo, F.; Kim, F.; Han, T.H.; et al., Hydration‐responsive folding and unfolding in graphene 
oxide liquid crystal phases. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (10), 8019–8025.
[21]	 Zhang, S.; Kumar, S., Carbon nanotubes as liquid crystals. Small 2008, 4 (9), 1270–1283.
[22]	 Ko, H.; Tsukruk, V.V., Liquid‐crystalline processing of highly oriented carbon nanotube arrays 
for thin‐film transistors. Nano Lett. 2006, 6 (7), 1443–1448.
[23]	 Zakri, C.; Blanc, C.; Grelet, E.; et al., Liquid crystals of carbon nanotubes and graphene. Phil. 
Trans. R. Soc. A 2013, 371 (1988), 20120499.
[24]	 Zakri, C., Carbon nanotubes and liquid crystalline phases. Liq. Cryst. Today 2007, 16 (1), 1–11.
[25]	 Lee, S.H.; Lee, D.H.; Lee, W.J.; Kim, S.O., Tailored assembly of carbon nanotubes and graphene. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21 (8), 1338–1354.
[26]	 Maiti, U.N.; Lee, W.J.; Lee, J.M.; et al., Chemically modified/doped carbon nanotubes & 
graphene for optimized nanostructures & nanodevices. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26 (1), 40–67.
[27]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Moghadam, M.H.M.; Sharif, F., Spontaneous exfoliation of graphite oxide in 
polar aprotic solvents as the route to produce graphene oxide–organic solvents liquid crystals. 
Carbon 2013, 64, 403–415.
[28]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Organic solvent‐based graphene oxide liquid 
crystals: a facile route toward the next generation of self‐assembled layer‐by‐layer multifunc­
tional 3D architectures. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (5), 3981–3990.
[29]	 Xu, Z.; Liu, Z.; Sun, H.; Gao, C., Highly electrically conductive Ag‐doped graphene fibers as 
stretchable conductors. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (23), 3249–3253.
[30]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Dommett, G.H.B.; et al., Graphene‐based composite materials. 
Nature 2006, 442 (7100), 282–286.
[31]	 Steurer, P.; Wissert, R.; Thomann, R.; Mülhaupt, R., Functionalized graphenes and thermo­
plastic nanocomposites based upon expanded graphite oxide. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 
2009, 30 (4–5), 316–327.
[32]	 Rourke, J.P.; Pandey, P.A.; Moore, J.J.; et al., The real graphene oxide revealed: stripping the 
oxidative debris from the graphene‐like sheets. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (14), 3173–3177.

Rheology of Graphene Oxide Dispersions
145
[33]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[34]	 Li, D.; Müller, M.B.; Gilje, S.; et al., Processable aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (2), 101–105.
[35]	 Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; Huang, J., Langmuir–Blodgett assembly of graphite oxide single layers. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (3), 1043–1049.
[36]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Graphene chiral liquid crystals and macroscopic assembled fibres. Nature 
Commun. 2011, 2 (1) 571.
[37]	 Hu, X.; Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Multifunctional, supramolecular, continuous artificial nacre fibres. Sci. 
Rep. 2012, 2, 767.
[38]	 Cong, H.P.; Ren, X.C.; Wang, P.; Yu, S.H., Wet‐spinning assembly of continuous, neat, and 
macroscopic graphene fibers. Sci. Rep. 2012, 2, 613.
[39]	 Xu, Z.; Sun, H.; Zhao, X.; Gao, C., Ultrastrong fibers assembled from giant graphene oxide 
sheets. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (2), 188–193.
[40]	 Yousefi, N.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Self‐alignment and high electrical conductivity 
of ultralarge graphene oxide‐polyurethane nanocomposites. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (25), 
12709–12717.
[41]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[42]	 Vallés, C.; Young, R.J.; Lomax, D.J.; Kinloch, I.A., The rheological behaviour of concentrated 
dispersions of graphene oxide. J. Mater. Sci. 2014, 49 (18), 6311–6320.
[43]	 Kumar, P.; Maiti, U.N.; Lee, K.E.; Kim, S.O., Rheological properties of graphene oxide liquid 
crystal. Carbon 2014, 80, 453–461.
[44]	 King Jr, H.E.; Milner, S.T.; Lin, M.Y.; et al., Structure and rheology of organoclay suspensions. 
Phys. Rev. E 2007, 75 (2) 021403.
[45]	 Seth, J.R.; Mohan, L.; Locatelli‐Champagne, C.; et al., A micromechanical model to predict the 
flow of soft particle glasses. Nature Mater. 2011, 10 (11), 838–843.
[46]	 Macosko, C.W., Rheology: Principles, Measurements and Applications. Wiley‐VCH, 
Weinheim, 1994.
[47]	 Bird, R.B.; Armstrong, R.C.; Hassager, O., Dynamics of Polymeric Liquids, vol. 1, Fluid 
Mechanics. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1987.
[48]	 Douglas, J.F., ‘Shift’ in polymer blend phase‐separation temperature in shear flow. 
Macromolecules 1992, 25 (5), 1468–1474.
[49]	 Tanner, R.I., Engineering Rheology. Oxford University Press, New York, 2000.
[50]	 Russel, W.B.; Saville, D.A.; Schowalter, W.R., Colloidal Dispersions. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, 1991.
[51]	 Lapasin, R.; Pricl, S., Rheology of Industrial Polysaccharides: Theory and Applications. 
Chapman & Hall, London, 1995.
[52]	 Barnes, H.A., Thixotropy – a review. J. Non‐Newtonian Fluid Mech. 1997, 70 (1–2), 1–33.
[53]	Einstein, A., Eine neue Bestimmung der Moleküldimensionen. Ann. Phys. 1906, 19, 
289–306.
[54]	 Einstein, A., Berichtigung zu meiner Arbeit: “Eine neue Bestimmung der Moleküldimensionen”. 
Ann. Phys. 1911, 34, 591–592.
[55]	 Brenner, H., Rheology of a dilute suspension of dipolar spherical particles in an external field. 
J. Colloid Interface Sci. 1970, 32, 141–158.
[56]	 Jaworek, A.; Sobczyk, A.T., Electrospraying route to nanotechnology: an overview. 
J. Electrostat. 2008, 66 (3–4), 197–219.
[57]	 Derby, B., Inkjet printing of functional and structural materials: fluid property requirements, 
feature stability, and resolution. Annu. Rev. Mater. Res. 2010, 40, 395–414.
[58]	 Chen, D.T.N.; Wen, Q.; Janmey, P.A.; et al., Rheology of soft materials. Annu. Rev. Condens. 
Matter Phys. 2010, 1, 301–322.
[59]	 Sollich, P.; Lequeux, F.; Hébraud, P.; Gates, M.E., Rheology of soft glassy materials. Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 1997, 78 (10), 2020–2023.
[60]	 Kroon, M.; Vos, W.L.; Wegdam, G.H., Structure and formation of a gel of colloidal disks. Int. J. 
Thermophys. 1998, 19 (3), 887–894.

146
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[61]	 Ovarlez, G.; Barral, Q.; Coussot, P., Three‐dimensional jamming and flows of soft glassy mate­
rials. Nature Mater. 2010, 9 (2), 115–119.
[62]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Scalable one‐step wet‐spinning of graphene 
fibers and yarns from liquid crystalline dispersions of graphene oxide: towards multifunctional 
textiles. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23 (43), 5345–5354.
[63]	 Jalili, R.; Razal, J.M.; Wallace, G.G., Exploiting high quality PEDOT:PSS–SWNT compos­
ite formulations for wet‐spinning multifunctional fibers. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (48), 
25174–25182.
[64]	 Jalili, R.; Razal, J.M.; Innis, P.C.; Wallace, G.G., One‐step wet‐spinning process of poly(3,4‐eth
ylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) fibers and the origin of higher electrical conduc­
tivity. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21 (17), 3363–3370.
[65]	 Jalili, R.; Razal, J.M.; Wallace, G.G., Wet‐spinning of PEDOT:PSS/functionalized‐SWNTs 
composite: a facile route toward production of strong and highly conducting multifunctional 
fibers. Sci. Rep. 2013, 3, 3438.
[66]	 Esrafilzadeh, D.; Razal, J.M.; Moulton, S.E.; et al., Multifunctional conducting fibres with 
electrically controlled release of ciprofloxacin. J. Control. Release 2013, 169 (3), 313–320.
[67]	 Hough, L.A.; Islam, M.F.; Janmey, P.A.; Yodh, A.G., Viscoelasticity of single wall carbon 
nanotube suspensions. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 93 (16), 168102.
[68]	 Williams, G.; Seger, B.; Kamat, P.V., TiO2–graphene nanocomposites. UV‐assisted photo­
catalytic reduction of graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2008, 2 (7), 1487–1491.
[69]	 Hernandez, Y.; Nicolosi, V.; Lotya, M.; et al., High‐yield production of graphene by liquid‐
phase exfoliation of graphite. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (9), 563–568.
[70]	 Eda, G.; Fanchini, G.; Chhowalla, M., Large‐area ultrathin films of reduced graphene oxide as 
a transparent and flexible electronic material. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (5), 270–274.
[71]	 Loh, K.P.; Bao, Q.; Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Graphene oxide as a chemically tunable platform 
for optical applications. Nature Chem. 2010, 2 (12), 1015–1024.
[72]	 Hisakado, Y.; Kikuchi, H.; Nagamura, T.; Kajiyama, T., Large electro‐optic Kerr effect in poly­
mer‐stabilized liquid‐crystalline blue phases. Adv. Mater. 2005, 17 (1), 96–98.
[73]	 Demus, D.; Goodby, J.; Gray, G.W.; Spiess, H.‐W.; Vill, V., Handbook of Liquid Crystals, vol. 1, 
Fundamentals. Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, 1998.
[74]	 Shen, T.‐Z.; Hong, S.‐H.; Song, J.‐K., Electro‐optical switching of graphene oxide liquid 
crystals with an extremely large Kerr coefficient. Nature Mater. 2014, 13 (4), 394–399.
[75]	 Jiménez, M.L.; Fornasari, L.; Mantegazza, F.; et al., Electric birefringence of dispersions of 
platelets. Langmuir 2012, 28 (1), 251–258.
[76]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Alemany, L.B.; Tour, J.M., Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity, its instability in 
water, and a new dynamic structural model. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 576–588.
[77]	 Zhang, H.B.; Zheng, W.G.; Yan, Q.; et al., The effect of surface chemistry of graphene on rheo­
logical and electrical properties of polymethylmethacrylate composites. Carbon 2012, 50 (14), 
5117–5125.
[78]	 El Achaby, M.; Arrakhiz, F.E.; Vaudreuil, S.; et al., Mechanical, thermal, and rheological prop­
erties of graphene‐based polypropylene nanocomposites prepared by melt mixing. Polym. 
Compos. 2012, 33 (5), 733–744.
[79]	 Kinloch, I.A.; Roberts, S.A.; Windle, A.H., A rheological study of concentrated aqueous nano­
tube dispersions. Polymer 2002, 43 (26), 7483–7491.
[80]	 Esumi, K.; Ishigami, M.; Nakajima, A.; et al., Chemical treatment of carbon nanotubes. Carbon 
1996, 34 (2), 279–281.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
5
Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
Anton V. Naumov
5.1  Introduction
Since its Nobel Prize‐winning discovery [1], graphene has been among the frontier topics 
of scientific research in optics, electronics, materials science and biotechnology. Its high 
conductivity and remarkable optical properties have attracted attention toward a number 
of potential applications of graphene in touchscreens, liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and 
light‐emitting diodes [2]. Due to its 97.7% transparency in the visible [3], in these applica-
tions graphene is envisioned to act in the form of transparent conductive electrodes. Other 
optical properties of graphene, including its Raman spectra that vary with the number of 
graphene layers [4], its infrared transitions [5] and optical phonon–electron coupling [6] 
also give rise to important potential applications in electronics. However, despite the ben-
efits of using graphene in optical and electronic devices, in the majority of the above‐
mentioned­ applications, graphene can serve only as a passive non‐emissive element. Such 
a limitation is dictated by its structure: because of two‐dimensional (2D) symmetry, gra-
phene electronically is a zero‐bandgap semiconductor, in which electrons, when excited 
to the higher energy levels, will relax down non‐radiatively.
In order to obtain a detectable emission from graphene, a sizable optical bandgap should 
be opened. This task could be accomplished in principle by decreasing the dimensionality 
of graphene, which leads to a bandgap opening due to quantum confinement. Thus, lower‐
dimensional structures such as graphene nanoribbons and quantum dots are expected to 
show optical emission. Recently a number of such fluorescent structures have been pro-
duced by electrochemical exfoliation [7], hydrothermal scission of graphene sheets [8], 
acidic treatment of carbon fibers [9] and microwave heating [10]. However, a limited 

148
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
particle size and complexity in production often hinders potential applications of these 
novel nanostructures in larger‐scale optoelectronics. Thus, there is a need for a more appli-
cable graphene‐based structure that could be mass‐produced with a specified set of optical 
properties. Functionalized graphene and, specifically, a more common form of it, graphene 
oxide (GO), appear to be more suitable for that role.
Functionalization by oxygen‐containing addends results in a gap between the valence 
and the conduction bands in GO, turning it into a semiconductor, or even an insulator, 
depending on the degree of derivatization [11–13]. Such variability gives GO a significant 
advantage, since its structure can be tailored for a specific microelectronics application by 
additional functionalization or removal of oxygen functionalities through reduction 
[11, 12]. Simple and cost‐effective production of GO from graphite [14, 15] together with 
large size variability and modifiable electronic properties make GO an attractive candidate 
for modern optoelectronics. Modification of the bandgap in GO leads to the change in its 
optical properties, including absorption, photoluminescence and Raman spectra.
5.2  Absorption
The absorption spectra of GO are dictated by its electronic transitions in the ultraviolet 
(UV), with their tail extending into the visible. The most prominent absorption feature in 
all of the GO samples is a π → π* electronic transition, which is common for aromatic C = C 
bonds. The p orbitals of carbon can be combined either in‐phase (Figure 5.1A) or out of 
phase (Figure 5.1B), producing bonding and antibonding combinations. This gives rise to 
π and π* orbitals, where the π orbital is lower in energy than the π*, allowing for a photon‐
induced transition between π and π*. For GO this transition dominates the absorption 
­spectrum and usually occurs at ~230 nm [16–20].
In addition to the π → π* transition, a typical absorption spectrum of the GO prepared by 
the modified Hummers method [14] appears to have a shoulder at ~300 nm (Figure 5.2) that 
is attributed to the n → π* transition in the C = O bonds of oxygen‐containing functional 
groups [16–20]. This transition involves promoting an electron from a lone‐pair non‐­bonding 
n orbital to the antibonding π* orbital via photon absorption. Since, on the energy scale, the 
(A)
(B)
(C)
E
n
n–π*
π–π*
π*
π
Figure 5.1  (A) The π orbitals of a C = C bond. (B) The π* orbitals of a C = C bond. (C) Energy 
diagram of π, π* and n orbitals and the transitions between those

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
149
non‐bonding orbital is between π and π* (Figure 5.1C), the n → π* transition is less ­energetic 
and somewhat red‐shifted from the π → π* absorption feature. The ratio in peak intensities 
between the two features can be explained by a lower molar absorptivity for the n → π* 
transition as opposed to π → π* [21].
Thus, absorption at ~300 nm is characteristic of the presence of carbonyl groups in GO. 
This is also supported by the X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data, according to 
which there are four main oxygen‐containing functionalities of carbon present in a variety 
of GO samples. The dominant addend groups are hydroxyl (–OH) and epoxy, with a smaller 
contribution from carbonyl (C = O) and carboxyl (COOH) groups [16, 18, 22, 23]. The 
presence of these functional groups in GO is also verified by Fourier‐transform infrared 
(FTIR) spectra [23] (Figure 5.3). Vibrations associated with hydroxyl, epoxy and carboxyl 
groups are present below 1500 cm−1, whereas above 1500 cm−1 at ~1700 cm−1 there is a 
detectable band for the C = O stretch of the carbonyl group [19, 24, 25].
Some reports show GO with a greater content of carbonyl groups [26] that become 
depleted upon controllable reduction under a Xe lamp. Absorption spectra could be 
employed to monitor such changes in GO composition. For example, upon chemical 
reduction via acid‐mediated dehydration of GO flakes, the absorption feature at ~300 nm 
corresponding to the n → π* transition in C = O exhibited a gradual decrease in intensity 
[27]. This was followed by spectrum broadening, yielding increased absorption in the 
visible. The main absorption peak experienced a non‐monotonic change in intensity. 
This was explained as the result of two competing processes: decrease in oxygen con-
tent, yielding suppression of the 300 nm absorption feature; and restoration of the sp2 
carbon network, resulting in the absorption broadening throughout the visible and an 
increase in the intensity of the π → π* absorption peak. A different reduction treatment 
of GO with either KOH [23] or hydrazine [28, 29] also caused the loss of the 300 nm 
absorption feature combined with broadening into the visible, that was associated with 
the removal of oxygen‐containing groups. A reverse process involving controlled ozone‐
induced oxidation of reduced graphene oxide (RGO) into GO produced completely 
opposite changes: a blue shift of absorption spectra and significant reduction of 
Wavelength (nm)
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Absorbance
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
n–π*
π–π*
Figure 5.2  Absorption spectrum of GO produced by the modified Hummers method

150
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
absorption background in the visible with oxidation time (Figure  5.4A). That was 
­indicative of the decrease in the sp2 graphitic structure, which is highly absorbing in the 
visible, due to the formation of oxidized sp3 regions. Such descriptive spectral changes 
suggest visible absorption as a possible characterization technique indicating the varia-
tion in the amount of oxygen‐containing functional groups in GO due to oxidation or 
reduction.
Unlike oxidation or reduction, a change in pH of the surrounding medium appeared to 
introduce only slight variations to the UV–visible absorption spectra of GO, which did not 
affect the absolute intensities of the peaks [17, 24] or their positions. This signifies that, 
even though pH change might cause protonation/deprotonation of the oxygen‐containing 
addends [24], the functional groups would still remain intact. Upon passivation of the func-
tional groups with alkylamines [30] again, no change in peak position or loss of absorption 
features was observed; moreover, they became more pronounced due to modification but 
retention of the oxygen functionalities.
Despite the lack of significant change in UV–visible absorption with pH 
(Figure 5.4B), IR absorption showed substantial variation indicative of protonation/
deprotonation of the functional groups, resulting in animation of different vibrational 
transitions [23]. Figure 5.5 illustrates the IR spectra of GO in acidic and basic condi-
tions, showing significant differences between transition energies, and pointing to 
potential differences in oxidation state of the functional groups in either acidic or basic 
environments. A substantial spectral change in the IR is also observed in the case of 
alkylamine passivation of the functional groups [30]. Thus, IR absorption serves as an 
indicator of modification of the functional groups in GO. In addition to the single‐pho-
ton absorption described above, ultrafast pump–probe spectroscopy in GO has shown 
that, in more heavily ­functionalized GO materials with larger sp3 regions, two‐photon 
absorption is possible at high excitation intensities [31]. This effect was attributed to the 
presence of a larger bandgap in sp3 domains, which allows for the absorption of two 
Wavenumber (cm–1)
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
Transmission (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
C = O
C-O
C-OH
O-H
Figure  5.3  Infrared (IR) spectrum of GO prepared by the modified Hummers method. 
Labeled features correspond to vibrational bands in functional groups

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
151
photons. In contrast, the sp2 domains in GO with smaller predicted bandgaps were 
expected to experience only a single‐photon absorption. Thus, varying the ratio of sp2 
to sp3 domains in GO through controlled oxidation/reduction can allow the adjustment 
of its nonlinear optical properties, which is highly desirable for applications in second 
harmonic generation.
Oxidation/reduction treatment altering sp2/sp3 structure could be sufficient to introduce 
substantial changes, which would be reflected in the transient absorption [32, 33]. This was 
probed by experiments involving pump–probe transmission spectroscopy: the pump beam 
was used to excite electrons, altering the electronic configuration in GO, which was further 
monitored with a probe beam. Such spectroscopic experiment through the absorption or 
transmission of the probe beam after the pump event allowed the relaxation kinetics of the 
1.6
(A)
(B)
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
200
300
400
500
11.0
10
8.0
7.35
3.7
2.9
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
Absorbance
Absorbance
0 min
5 min
10 min
15 min
20 min
25 min
Figure 5.4  (A) Absorbance spectra of RGO oxidized via controlled ozone treatment for 0 to 
25 minutes. (B) Absorbance spectra of GO at different pH values [24]. Adapted from [24] with 
permission of Macmillan Publishers Limited

152
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
excited charge carriers to be studied. It was observed that, upon reduction, transient 
absorption experiences substantial changes: the relaxation rates of photoinduced charge 
carriers appeared to be significantly faster for the RGO [32, 33]. In order to properly 
describe that effect, transient absorption spectra were studied in femtosecond spectros-
copy experiments for both GO and RGO with excitation at 400 nm [32]. Transient decay 
kinetics recorded at 670 nm were fitted by exponential components to recover charge 
relaxation rates. The kinetics of RGO were 90% dominated by fast lifetime components 
(0.26 and 2.5 ps) attributed to relaxation due to electron–phonon interactions. Such a fast 
relaxation mechanism was also present in pristine photoexcited graphene, which makes 
the RGO carrier dynamics similar to that of graphene [34]. A slow >400 ps component 
associated with electron traps contributed only 4% of RGO relaxation kinetics, indicating 
low levels of defects and charge traps. Relaxation times in GO had a greater share of the 
slow >400 ps component, suggesting that oxygen‐related traps and defect states control 
the relaxation dynamics in GO. Such behavior is consistent with previous studies on car-
bon nanotubes that have undergone acid purification, indicating that carboxyl and epoxy 
Acidic
800
0.0
0.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
2.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
(A)
(B)
1040
1164
1623
1722
702
829
980 1007
1309
1367
1590
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
Basic
Absorbance
Absorbance
Optical frequency (cm–1)
Figure 5.5  Attenuated total reflectance Fourier‐transform infrared (ATR‐FTIR) spectra of solid 
GO samples isolated from (A) acidic and (B) basic aqueous suspensions. Major bands and 
proposed assignments: (A) 1040 cm−1 (C–O stretch), 1164 cm−1 (C–OH stretch), 1623 cm−1 
(adsorbed water and skeletal vibrations of unoxidized graphitic domains), 1722 cm−1 (C = O 
stretch); and (B) 829 cm−1 (C–H out‐of‐plane wag), 980 cm−1 (possibly epoxide stretch), 
1007 cm−1 (C–H in‐plane bend), 1309 cm−1 (C–O stretch), 1367 cm−1 (COO− symmetric stretch), 
1590 cm−1 (COO− antisymmetric stretch) [24]. Adapted from [24] with permission of Macmillan 
Publishers Limited

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
153
groups can act as charge traps [35]. An ultrafast pump–probe experiment at 790 nm [33] 
showed a similar correlation: GO experienced slower decay rates than RGO, but only fast 
decay components (below 5 ps) were detected for both. The time constants for these com-
ponents associated with interband carrier–carrier scattering and carrier–phonon scatter-
ring were determined to be greater for GO due to its lower carrier density as opposed to 
RGO. As a result, such ultrafast pump–probe absorption experiments allow for optical 
sampling of GO electronic structure, indicating slower photoexcited carrier relaxation in 
GO as opposed to RGO or graphene. They complement steady‐state visible and IR absorp-
tion spectroscopy that provides characterization of GO structure and the state of its func-
tional groups.
5.3  Raman Scattering
Raman spectroscopy of GO can also serve as an effective characterization method 
­elucidating structure‐specific vibrational phonon modes. The Raman spectra of graph-
ite and graphite‐based materials such as GO have several distinctive features, including 
D (~1385 cm−1), G (~1580 cm−1) and G′ or 2D (~2700 cm−1) bands [19, 32, 36–39]. The 
D band originates from a second‐order effect involving a phonon and a defect in the sp2 
graphitic structure; thus it is often attributed to disorder in sp2 carbon material. The G 
band comes from first‐order Raman scattering in graphitic materials involving a single 
phonon from the E2g mode involving doubly degenerate in‐plane optical vibration in sp2 
carbon. The G′, often called 2D, band originates from the two‐phonon process involv-
ing phonons with opposite momenta and depends strongly (inversely) on the number of 
graphene layers.
Other less prominent features such as D′, D + G, D + D′, G + D′, 2D′, etc. are also detect-
able in some cases [40]; however, since the G band describes the sp2 graphitic structure and 
the D band is associated with defects in that structure, in the current discussion we will be 
mostly concerned with the G and D bands. The ratio between their intensities, ID/IG, is thus 
a good measure of the relative defect content in the sp2 carbon lattice. These bands in GO 
(Figure 5.6) are somewhat different from those in graphite and graphene: the D band is 
broad and intense in GO, and the G band is somewhat suppressed, broadened substantially 
[41] and sometimes slightly shifted to higher frequencies [27, 42]. This shift can possibly 
be associated with doping effects [43] in accordance with the doping‐induced G‐band shift-
ing behavior observed in as‐synthesized GO [44, 45]. Another explanation is based on 
theoretical calculations [41] suggesting that an alternating pattern of single‐ and double‐
bonded carbons in GO would result in the blue shift in the Raman G band corresponding to 
those double bonds.
The ID/IG ratio for GO is larger than that for graphene or graphite, where the D band is 
often indistinguishable from the background and ID/IG is on the order of 0.01. In order to 
use this ratio for quantitative assessment of disorder, it is important to take into account two 
defect regimes [47]. As disorder in the graphene lattice begins to increase at low defect 
densities, the ID/IG ratio first also experiences an increase. With further increase in 
the defect densities ultimately leading to the loss of the carbon lattice, the ID/IG ratio starts 
to decrease due to the nonlinear attenuation of all the Raman peaks when the material starts 
turning into amorphous carbon [47]. In the low‐defect‐density regime, ID/IG can be 

154
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
approximated by an empirical formula relating the ratio to the distance between two adja-
cent defects, La:
	
I
I
C
L
D
G
a
=
( )
λ
2
	
(5.1)
Here λ is the Raman excitation wavelength and C(λ) is an empirical parameter: 
C(λ) = 102 nm2 for excitation wavelength λ = 514 nm [47]. For GO, La determines the size 
of the graphitic domains encircled by oxygen‐containing functional groups. For the edge 
defects, another form of (5.1), the Tuinstra–Koenig relation [48], is more appropriate:
	
I
I
C
L
D
G
a
=
( )
λ 	
(5.2)
Here C(λ) = (2.4 × 10−10 nm−3) × λ4 [49] and λ is the Raman excitation wavelength. As 
opposed to the low‐defect‐density, in the high‐defect‐density regime the ID/IG ratio depends 
directly on the graphitic cluster size [50, 51]:
	
I
I
C
L
D
G
a
=
′( )
λ
	
(5.3)
Here C′(514 nm) = 0.55 nm−2 [50, 51]. As a result, the ratio between Raman peak intensi-
ties can serve as an estimate for the density of defects in GO and also the size La of the 
graphitic sp2‐hybridized carbon clusters surrounded by sp3‐hybridized functionalized sites.
Considering this dependence of ID/IG on the density of oxygen‐containing functional 
groups, we expect significant changes in the Raman spectra depending on the oxidation 
200
100
0
300
200
100
0
1300
1400
1500
1600
2600
2700
2800
Raman shift (cm–1)
Intensity (arb. u.)
Pristine
Pristine
Oxidized
Oxidized
1L
X5
2L
X5
G
D
D*
Figure  5.6  Raman spectra of single‐layer (top) and double‐layer (bottom) pristine and 
oxidized graphene. Reproduced from [46] with permission of American Chemical Society

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
155
state of graphene. This was observed in oxidative etching experiments on single‐ and multi‐
layer graphitic substrates [46]: the ID/IG ratio increased with oxidation, indicating the 
decrease in size of the graphitic carbon domains. In addition to that, as discussed above, a 
blue shift of the Raman spectra was observed and quantified. This shift exhibited an 
increase with oxidation treatment and could again be explained by electron transfer doping 
in oxidation etching experiments [46]. A stronger oxidation via oxygen plasma treatment 
[52] resulted in a non‐monotonic change in ID/IG ratio that first experienced a substantial 
decrease and then levelled off at ~0.7 with even a slight increase. This behavior could be 
accounted for by considering both low‐ and high‐defect‐density scenarios. Due to signifi-
cant oxidation, at a certain time a number of defects in the graphitic structure may have 
reached the point at which due to the degradation of six‐membered rings the intensity of the 
Raman D band started to decrease. At such high defect densities the ID/IG ratio would 
decrease with decreasing graphitic cluster sizes according to (5.3). Combining the depend-
ences of the ID/IG ratio on the size of the sp2‐hybridized regions for low‐ and high‐defect‐
density regimes provided a suitable theoretical explanation for the observed behavior and 
allowed to estimate that the size of the graphitic regions La decreased down to ~1 nm upon 
oxidation. Other works report sp2 domain sizes in GO thin films and bulk GO samples 
obtained by Hummers method to be 2.5–6 nm [53, 54].
The reverse process, reduction of GO, has consistently shown red shifts of the G band 
[55, 56], which agrees with previously doping‐attributed blue shifts acquired with oxida-
tion. However, the ID/IG ratio changes differently for various works with different reduction 
procedures and endpoints. Some studies of GO chemical reduction showed no difference 
in the ID/IG ratio [53, 54], implying that, even though oxygen‐containing groups were 
removed by reduction, the defects left in the place of those groups were not cured. Other 
studies indicate a decrease of the ID/IG ratio, suggesting the removal of defects through 
reduction [57–59]. There are also cases where an increase in D : G intensity ratio was 
observed [60–62]. That could arise from bringing more disorder into a system and increas-
ing the D‐band intensity due to random nucleation of small sp2 domains. A non‐monotonic 
trend in ID/IG ratio was also observed for experiments with gradual chemical reduction: at 
first D : G intensity ratio was decreased and then increased [63]. This was attributed to 
growth of sp2 regions upon initial reduction causing the decrease of ID/IG ratio followed by 
random formation of smaller sp2 regions inside sp3 clusters, which increased the disorder in 
the lattice and the ID/IG ratio. Combination of several reduction/oxidation treatments could 
also result in such non‐monotonic behavior [64, 65]. In addition to oxidation and reduction, 
chemical functionalization of GO also affects Raman spectra. Functionalization treatment 
of GO with anthryl moieties has shown a red shift of the G band, possibly indicating a 
change in electronic doping, and an increase in ID/IG ratio, indicating additional disorder 
[66]. Thus Raman spectroscopy of GO can provide important information about the state 
of lattice disorder, the size of sp2 carbon regions and electronic doping from chemical 
addends during oxidation, reduction or functionalization procedures.
5.4  Photoluminescence
Due to functionalization‐induced opening of the energy gap, GO is expected to emit pho-
toluminescence across its optical bandgap. The bandgap in graphitic oxide materials was 
first studied by Hummers [14] in 1958; however, the optical properties of a similar material 

156
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
obtained from graphite by chemical oxidation were studied even earlier, in the mid‐
nineteenth­ century by Brodie [67]. Currently, due to the emergence of a large number of 
potential applications of GO in optoelectronics, its optical properties, including photolumi-
nescence, have been actively studied. At first, two distinct types of emission were observed 
from aqueous suspensions of GO by a number of scientific groups. Photoluminescence in 
the blue (350–450 nm) was observed from few‐layer GO that had been purified by centrifu-
gation [28]. That emission was attributed to electron–hole recombination in microscopic 
sp2 graphitic regions carved out by the oxidation‐induced sp3 structure in GO. At the same 
time, a green to infrared (500–800 nm) emission from chemically oxidized GO was 
reported by a number of groups [24, 52, 68, 69]. Such emission (Figure 5.7) was predicted 
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
400
500
600
700
800
900
Wavelength (nm)
Wavelength (nm)
450
500
550
600
650
700
0
5
10
15
20
Photoluminescence intensity
(103 counts)
Photoluminescence intensity
(103 counts)
(A)
(B)
Figure 5.7  (A) Photoluminescence spectrum of GO produced from graphite by the modified 
Hummers method [14, 70], 440 nm excitation. (B) Photoluminescence of GO produced by 
controlled oxidation from RGO; 440 nm excitation

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
157
to arise from localized electronic structure, surrounding functional groups [24, 52], sp2 
carbon regions encircled by repulsive sp3 carbon hard wall barriers, or bond alteration 
inducing inter‐valley scattering effects [68]. Eda et al. [28] suggested that red GO emission 
is a result of a red shift from interlayer relaxation processes in multi‐layer graphene flakes.
These initial works were further followed by a number of predictions and experi-
mental studies of the origin of GO photoluminescence. In order to understand the 
emission mechanism, a number of factors needs to be considered. Photoluminescence 
itself can be envisioned as an excitation/emission process over the bandgap opened 
in graphene due to functionalization. The schematics of such process is depicted in 
Figure 5.8(A).
Due to the absorption of an incoming photon, an electron is promoted over the bandgap 
to the higher orbital, leaving a positively charged hole behind. Such an electron–hole pair 
created through the absorption of a photon is called an exciton. The creation of the exciton 
is then followed by non‐radiative decay of the electron to the lowest unoccupied molecular 
orbital (LUMO) and of the hole to the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO). This 
process is further concluded by radiative recombination of the exciton. As a result, a photon 
is emitted with the energy lower than that of the excitation light. The efficiency of this 
process is described by the fluorescence quantum yield expressed as a ratio of absorbed to 
emitted photons. Quantum yield is usually below 100% (only 0.02–0.5% reported for GO) 
[20, 23], due to the electron-hole recombination through a number of non‐radiative path-
ways, including charge defects/traps or phonon‐assisted relaxation. Thus, the quantum 
yield could be expressed as the ratio of the decay rates:
	
Q
k
k
k
=
+
r
r
nr
	
(5.4)
(A)
(B)
Egap
Eb
Ets
Valence
Conduction
Excitonic state
λem
λex
Figure 5.8  (A) General schematics of the bandgap photoluminescence process. (B) Simplistic 
schematics of electronic transitions considering excitonic effects, where Egap is a one‐electron 
bandgap energy, Eb is the binding energy of the exciton and Ets is the first allowed optical 
transition energy

158
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
where kr is the radiative decay rate and knr is the non‐radiative decay rate. In this way the 
fluorescence quantum yield is literally the ratio of the rate of radiative emission to the total 
rate of depopulation of the excited state (i.e. the ratio of the number of emitted photons to 
the total number of photons in the excited state). Thus, the time that an electron spends in 
the excited state (fluorescence lifetime, τ) for such a fluorescence process will be the 
inverse of the total (radiative plus non‐radiative) decay rate:
	
τ =
+
1
k
k
r
nr
	
(5.5)
Fluorescence lifetimes of the conventional fluorophores are usually in the nanosecond 
range; however, picosecond lifetimes are not uncommon for nanomaterials [71]. 
Fluorescence lifetimes of several picoseconds to nanoseconds have been reported in differ-
ent studies for GO [16, 17, 28, 72]. Chen et al. [20] reported different fluorescence ­lifetimes 
of the blue and the red emission features with τ for red emission in the picosecond range 
and for the blue-in the nanosecond range.
There are several models describing photoluminescence in GO. A π → π* bandgap 
­photoluminescence mechanism envisioned by Eda et al. [28] implies that GO is split into 
smaller and larger clusters of graphitic sp2 carbon separated by oxidized sp3 regions. These 
clusters experience strong localization by surrounding sp3‐hybridized atoms acting as 
potential barrier walls. Since in graphene electrons act as massless particles, the confine-
ment should induce energy quantization and, therefore, a bandgap [52] on the order of
	
F
gap
2 eV nm
2
v h
E
d
d
≈
≈
	
(5.6)
Here vF is the Fermi velocity of the electron and d is the diameter of the confined sp2 
region. In their work Eda et al. [28] assumed that the photoluminescence process occurs 
in the small sp2 carbon clusters that have a larger bandgap on the order of 3.2 eV and 
enclose roughly about a dozen aromatic rings according to the density functional theory 
(DFT) calculation presented therein. These clusters were localized by surrounding sp3 
oxidized carbon and, possibly, a few larger sp2 clusters with smaller bandgaps. Such a 
model of GO emission is supported by previous theoretical predictions of photolumines-
cence in ­functionalized carbon materials [73, 74] that attribute emission to bandgaps in 
sp2 graphitic domains. The bandgap values calculated in those works by tight‐binding 
molecular dynamics simulation varied from 0.3 to 2.7 eV depending on the degree of 
functionalization. GO bandgap calculations were further performed using the DFT 
method [75]. This rigorous approach yielded π → π* gaps on the order of 0.3–4 eV, 
although it did not consider electronic contributions from surrounding sp3 sites. These 
results were supported by another model [76] accounting for the effects of functional 
groups and suggesting that, due to the specific arrangement of those, a bandgap of up to 
4 eV could arise in GO from localized stripes of graphitic carbon with zigzag edges. Even 
such calculations, though, provide only a general estimate, since they were restricted only 
to epoxide and hydroxyl functional groups.
As opposed to the predictions by Eda et al. [28], the size of the graphitic sp2 islands in 
GO sheets was estimated by high‐resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) 
to be somewhat larger, on the order of 1–2 nm [77]. This would correspond to a smaller 

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
159
bandgap and thus a red‐shifted emission in the green, red (Figure 5.7) or even near‐infrared 
(NIR) parts of the spectra. Such NIR emission was observed in aqueous suspensions of GO 
and described using theoretical modeling [78]. In that scenario, the GO structure was rep-
resented by circular islands of sp2 carbon several nanometers in diameter surrounded by sp3 
functionalized regions acting as potential barriers. The single‐electron bandgap of such 
graphene nanodisks calculated using first‐principles DFT‐based GW approximation and 
Bethe–Salpeter approaches was shown to decrease with the size of the nanodisk. However, 
unlike the previously mentioned works, attributing photoluminescence to the emission 
across the electronic gap, the one by Kozawa et al. [78] suggested also taking into account 
the binding energy of the exciton. The emission energy was found to be less than the 
­bandgap by an amount equal to the exciton binding energy (Figure 5.8B) similarly to the 
exciton‐related fluorescence emission in carbon nanotubes [79]:
	
E
E
E
ts
GW
b
=
−
	
(5.7)
Here EGW is the single‐electron bandgap calculated by the GW approach, Eb is the 
exciton binding energy and Ets is the optical transition energy (emission energy) [78]. 
Consistent with this model, the exciton binding energy in functionalized graphene was 
earlier predicted to constitute a large portion of the bandgap (up to 40%) [80]. The 
exciton binding energy in graphene nanodisks was found to decrease (Figure 5.9A) 
with their size, [78] similarly to the diameter dependence of the exciton binding energy 
in carbon nanotubes. Further calculations of the emission energy (Ets) showed an 
inverse dependence on the nanodisk diameter, resulting in a nearly linear 1/D trend 
(Figure  5.9B). These results allow correlation of GO photoluminescence emission 
energy with the size of the sp2 graphitic circular islands and highlight the importance 
of the excitonic effects in GO.
Based on the preparation of GO, one would expect a wide distribution of sizes of gra-
phitic sp2 regions. This is in part confirmed by the shift in the emission spectra observed in 
a number of studies [16, 72, 78] upon the change in excitation the wavelength (Figure 5.10A). 
When excited in resonance, graphitic regions of particular sizes would be responsible for 
photoluminescence emission. However, when excitation is shifted, for example, to the red, 
the larger sp2 regions would then appear in resonance and exhibit red‐shifted emission. Due 
to the width of the emission spectra, it is likely, though, for photoluminescence to originate 
from different sizes of graphene nanodisks, resulting in a wider distribution of emission 
energies according to Figure 5.9(B). This can be possible with just a single excitation 
by the means of energy transfer between adjacent nanodisks of different size. Such transfer 
between sp2 graphitic regions is suggested by the inverse dependence of photolumines-
cence decay lifetimes on emission energy [78]. The longest decay times were shown by 
emission at low energies, indicating an energy build‐up behavior at large nanodisks with 
low transition energy. That can be explained by cascade energy transfer from smaller 
­nanodisks with higher emission energies to the larger‐diameter ones. Thus in the process of 
minimizing the energy of the excited electron, excitation could be transferred from small 
nanodisks with large gap to larger nanodisks with lower energetic states where the ­emission 
would happen.
This relaxation process involves multiple energy transfer steps and therefore results in 
longer lifetimes for less energetic emission [78]. That also suggests that due to the energy 

160
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
transfer between nanodisks, GO photoluminescence would be more likely to be observed 
in the red or NIR, region.
Thus, the position of the photoluminescence peak could be described by a combination 
of two contributing factors: the relative abundance of sp2 graphitic regions of a particular 
size and the efficiency of energy transfer to the regions of the larger size. The first is 
­governed by the degree of oxidation in GO and, possibly, the type of functionalization 
process. The second factor influencing the energy transfer is given in part by the proximity 
of graphitic regions in the sp3 matrix, which, again, relies on the state of GO functionaliza-
tion and the distribution of sp2 clusters. The dependence of these factors on the degree of 
oxidation is, however, hard to predict: stronger oxidation could result in the decrease of 
graphitic regions in size, or, possibly, the disappearance of smaller sp2 domains, or a com-
bination thereof. These effects could be studied experimentally through either additional 
oxidation or reduction of GO.
Reduction experiments have been carried out by a number of scientific groups [18, 26, 
28, 56, 63, 68, 81]. Even though some of these studies report partly contradicting observa-
tions, most of them agree on the decrease in GO photoluminescence intensity upon 
C24
C54
C96
C150
C216
D
0.74
1.23
1.71
2.20
2.70
2.5
2.0
1.5
0.5
1.0
α1=–0.38
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Eb=A1Dα1
Raw
Fit
D (nm)
Raw
Ets=A2(1/D)
Fit
5
4
3
2
1
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1/D (1/nm)
Ets (eV)
Eb (eV)
(A)
(B)
D
Figure 5.9  Structural models of graphene nanodisks and the scaling characteristics of optical 
properties. (A) Scaling relations for the exciton binding energy (Eb) with the size of the graphene 
nanodisks (D). (B) Transition energy (Ets) as a function of the inverse size (1/D). Reproduced 
from [78] with permission of American Chemical Society

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
161
reduction (Figure 5.10B). In addition to decrease in the emission intensity, a number of 
works also report a blue shift [18, 82] that contradicts the theoretical prediction of bandgap 
shrinkage upon reduction of GO [75]. Such unexpected behavior could be explained by 
reduction‐induced formation of small sp2 islands with larger optical bandgaps: it had been 
suggested that reduction at first does not induce the increase of sp2 cluster size in GO, but 
Emission photon energy (eV)
Emission wavelength (nm)
PL intensity (105 CPS)
PL intensity (arb. units)
350
400
450
500
1.6
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
1.8
2.0
2.2
2.4
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
12
(A)
(B)
10
8
6
4
2
0
1.6
2.0
2.4
Emission (eV)
Excitation (eV)
As-deposited
20 Sec
1 min
3 min
10 min
30 min
60 min
Figure 5.10  (A) PL spectra of aqueous GO suspensions at excitation energies from 1.8 to 2.5 eV 
indicated by arrows. Inset: A photoluminescence emission intensity map of GO. (B) Change of 
photoluminescence spectra of GO with hydrazine reduction time. (A) Reproduced from [78] 
with permission of American Chemical Society. (B) Adapted from [28] with permission of John 
Wiley & Sons

162
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
rather stimulates nucleation of smaller‐sized sp2 domains [26]. According to that, newly 
created sp2 domains with larger bandgaps would indeed shift the emission into the blue. 
This hypothesis is also supported by observation of slightly non‐monotonic behavior of 
emission intensity upon chemical or thermal reduction of GO [28, 56]: in those experi-
ments photoluminescence at first experienced an increase followed by a steady decrease 
with further GO reduction. This may point to the formation of new sp2 regions responsible 
for the increase in photoluminescence at the initial stages of the process. Further reduc-
tion could cause photoluminescence quenching due to percolation between sp2 regions 
allowing for increased exciton migration eventually leading those to non‐radiative recom-
bination sites [28].
GO optical behavior has also shown a dependence on the type of reduction process. 
Thermal reduction resulted in a less abrupt change in GO photoluminescence than chemical 
reduction [81] and appeared to yield less blue‐shifted photoluminescence [22] possibly due 
to a weaker excitonic confinement (larger sp2 clusters). Gradual reduction under the steady‐
state Xe lamp irradiation (500 W) [26] has shown the complex behavior of GO photolumi-
nescence: an initial emission feature in the red has decreased significantly with concurrent 
increase of a sharper emission peak at ~450 nm. The authors attribute this to a dual nature 
of photoluminescence in GO. The red predominant emission feature of as‐produced­ GO 
was suggested to arise from optical transitions in functionalization disorder‐induced 
­localized states (Figure 5.11A) that lie deep within the π → π* gap. The feature in the blue 
­arising as a result of reduction was attributed to the emission from confined sp2 regions 
appearing during the initial reduction of GO (Figure 5.11B) as suggested previously [28]. 
Original GO
Reduced GO
Excitation
Excitation
Reduction
PL/a.u
PL/a.u
400
500
600
700
λ/nm
400
500
600
700
λ/nm
(A)
(B)
π
π
π*
π*
Figure 5.11  Schematics of the dual nature of photoluminescence in reduced GO. (A) The 
predominant emission in GO from disorder‐induced localized states. (B) The predominant 
emission in thermally reduced GO from confined cluster states. Adapted from [26] with 
permission of John Wiley & Sons

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
163
These findings confirm the sp2 cluster‐based model of GO emission in the blue and suggest 
an alternative explanation for the commonly observed GO photoluminescence in the red.
A light chemical reduction was observed to cause a red shift in GO photoluminescence 
spectra [63]. This finding contradicts the reduction‐induced blue shifts observed by others 
[18, 81] and suggests that initially upon a minor reduction some growth of sp2 regions in 
GO could happen. However, based on experimental evidence, such growth was suggested 
to be limited by the domain size of 2 nm, after which the nucleation of new sp2 domains 
would take place [63]. At a greater reduction, as proposed previously [28], photolumines-
cence is quenched because of exciton recombination at the defect sites due to their increased 
migration allowed by reduction‐facilitated percolation of sp2 regions. This model of GO 
reduction is supported by the above‐mentioned Raman spectral changes [63]: the ID/IG ratio 
decreases at a mild reduction corresponding to the initial growth of sp2 domains and, there-
fore, decrease in disorder. At a stronger reduction, the ID/IG ratio starts to rise due to the 
chaotic appearance of multiple newly nucleated sp2 clusters which increase the disorder. 
Different approaches to reduction of GO might yield different behaviors; however, when 
analyzed, they provide a better picture of the complex and variable lattice morphologies 
arising during this process and affecting the optical properties of GO.
In order to achieve a better understanding of the origins of GO photoluminescence, it 
is also critical to study the changes introduced into emission by the reverse process, an 
­oxidation. Different oxidation routines involving plasma treatment of graphene and acid‐
assisted oxidation of graphite have all resulted in bandgap opening [52, 82, 83]. That gap 
in GO could be chemically controlled through timed oxidation treatment with nitric acid 
[83]. As a result, bandgaps of 1.7 to 2.4 eV were controllably produced, with stronger 
oxidation causing larger bandgap. That is consistent with oxidation‐induced decrease of 
the size of graphitic islands down to small ones with higher gap energies. Another proce-
dure allowing controllable oxidation of graphitic materials involves timed ozone ­treatment 
of non‐emissive reduced graphene oxide (RGO) obtained from GO by hydrazine reduc-
tion. Upon oxidation, initially non‐emissive RGO has exhibited bright photoluminescence 
in the visible, with its intensity dependent on the time of ozone treatment (Figure 5.12). 
In that process, a comparatively small shift in the emission energies was observed, pos-
sibly because RGO has already inherited lattice defects that were not removed upon 
reduction. As suggested by Dong et al. [25], confined sp2 domains could still have been 
present in RGO from the previous oxidation. These defects would have predetermined the 
initial size and distribution of oxidation‐induced sp2 islands and thus the emission wave-
length range. The other possibility involves a different photoluminescence mechanism, 
with emission arising from functional groups, which dictates somewhat weaker depend-
ence of emission energy on the degree of oxidation. Such a mechanism, proposed in 
­multiple works studying photoluminescence of GO [22, 24, 52], involves emission from 
localized states at the functional groups. For example, Cuong et al. [22], while observing 
the strong carrier localization in thermally processed GO (tpGO), suggested that photolu-
minescence in thermally treated GO occurs due to exciton recombination in localized 
electronic states rather than from band‐edge transitions. The important role of functional 
groups was also supported by calculation of molecular orbitals in GO [16]. It was 
shown  that photoluminescence is governed by a HOMO–LUMO transition mainly 
­occurring over carbon atoms situated next to oxygen‐containing functional groups. 
According to this work all three kinds of oxygen functionalities, C–O, C = O and 

164
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
O = C–OH, were related to the emission. A similar conclusion was achieved while finger-
printing GO photoluminescence to electronic transitions in functional groups [23]. In that 
study, GO was treated with KOH in order to remove hydroxyl groups and convert epoxy 
groups to hydroxyl, or with HNO3 in order to further oxidize GO and produce additional 
carboxyl groups. Features apparent in the photoluminescence spectra of these variations of 
GO were attributed to particular electronic transitions (Figure 5.13): π* → π transition of 
the C = C bond, π* → n transition of the C = O groups and σ* → n transition of C–OH 
groups. As seen from Figure 5.13, the π* → n transition was amplified for HNO3‐treated 
GO and the σ* → n transition-for KOH‐treated GO as expected due to corresponding 
excess in C = O and C–OH groups in those. Based on that analysis, photoluminescence 
transitions in GO were fingerprinted primarily to oxygen‐containing functional groups.
The width of GO emission spectra was also discussed: short photoluminescence 
­lifetimes suggest that emission proceeds before charge relaxation to the band edge, there-
fore bypassing band‐edge transitions [23]. Due to the wide spectrum of vibrational states 
in GO, there is a variety of possible transitions yielding a broad emission spectrum. 
Similarly to reports discussed above, this work also indicates a dependence of emission 
wavelength on excitation. However, the Stokes shift between those two appeared to be 
constant for a particular electronic transition and, therefore, a particular functional group. 
Such strong correspondence of optical effects in GO with oxygen‐containing ­functional 
groups together with the evidence provided by photoluminescence spectral mapping to 
transitions in those groups sets a solid background for the functional‐group‐related 
­emission model in GO.
Another indication of the functional‐group‐attributed emission is presented in a joint 
work by Novoselov, Geim, Ferrari, Hartschuh and coworkers [52]. In that study, the authors 
confront the emission model based on sp2 cluster confinement on the grounds of spectral 
hole burning in oxygen‐plasma‐oxidized graphene. They predict that, within the frame-
work of the sp2 domain model, upon intense excitation at a particular wavelength a subset 
of sp2 carbon‐cluster‐based emitters of a certain size should be bleached, leaving a spectral 
Wavelength (nm)
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
Emission intensity (counts×104)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0 min
5 min
10 min
15 min 
20 min
25 min
30 min
Ozone treatment
 time
Figure 5.12  Photoluminescence spectra of ozone‐treated RGO

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
165
hole in the piece of plasma‐oxidized graphene. However, experimentally, that did not hap-
pen; instead, the emission across all wavelengths was quenched in that region. Thus, 
photoluminescence was traced to localized electronic states at oxidation sites; and the 
emission spectral width was attributed to homogeneous broadening of the energy states at 
oxygen‐containing emissive species. Such localized electronic states were modeled by 
Galande et al. [24] showing a region of negative electrostatic potential around oxygen‐
containing addends in GO (Figure 5.14A,B). In that work, the authors for the first time 
observe a strong pH dependence of GO photoluminescence: upon pH change from acidic 
to basic a broad GO emission in the red has been quenched and a sharp blue‐shifted 
molecular‐looking photoluminescence peak has emerged (Figure 5.14C).
That transition happened sharply at ~ pH 8 and resembled a spectrophotometric titration of 
molecular fluorophores. From similar excitation spectral features of basic and acidic species, 
the authors inferred a similar ground state of those emitters, indicating that the pH‐induced 
change had to happen in the excited state. This change was reversible and therefore was 
attributed to the excited‐state protonation of oxygen‐containing functional groups. The 
assignment of the functional groups responsible was made on the basis of comparing excited‐
state protonation pKa of GO to the values found previously for organic aromatic compounds 
with oxygen functionalities. The best match was found with aromatic carboxylic acids hav-
ing their pKa* ~ 8 and exhibiting fluorescence in the visible. A model of the graphene sheet 
with a carboxylic group on it (Figure 5.14A) has shown that in the basic conditions there is a 
region of electrostatic potential encircling a carboxylic group. That region carves out about 
34 carbon atoms from the graphene sheet (Figure 5.14B), which is similar to the size of aro-
matic carboxylic acids that have pKa* ~ 8. As a result, pH‐induced variations in GO emission 
ex. 420 nm
π
π
π*
π*
σ
σ*
σ*
Intensity
400
500
600
700
800
Wavelength (nm)
HNO3-GO
GO
n
n
n
π*
n
KOH-GO
σ*
n
π
π*
π*
Figure  5.13  Photoluminescence spectra of GO, KOH‐ and HNO3‐treated GO sheets in 
deionized water (100 mg ml−1) under excitation of 420 nm. Inset: A schematic energy level 
diagram depicting the multiple photoluminescence emissions due to electron transitions 
between different molecular orbitals. Reproduced from [23] with permission of The Royal 
Society of Chemistry

166
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
were attributed to quasi‐molecular fluorophores arising from localized electronic structure at 
the carboxylic functional groups in GO. Further studies also confirm the contribution of car-
boxylic functional groups to pH‐induced changes in GO photoluminescence [17, 19, 72, 84]. 
A blue basic and a red acidic feature enhanced by deprotonation and protonation in their 
corresponding pH ranges were shown by Zhang et al. [17] to exhibit different fluorescence 
lifetimes. Thus, such dual pH‐dependent emission was attributed not to the band‐edge transi-
tions but rather to oxygen‐group‐based quasi‐molecular fluorophores in GO. Other reports of 
pH‐dependent effects have shown a blue emission shift upon the increase in pH, [85] that was 
associated with the change in GO electronic structure. Some researchers also mentioned a 
non‐monotonic response from two emission peaks in the ultraviolet and blue attributed to 
graphitic carbon fragments bound to one or several functional groups [72], but most report 
the decrease of emission intensity of the red emission feature with pH [72, 84]. Such promi-
nent effects of surrounding pH on the optical properties of GO fall in good agreement with 
the model of functional‐group‐related photoluminescence in GO.
Wavelength (nm)
(A)
(B)
(C)
500
600
700
800
0
5
10
15
20
PL intensity (104 counts)
Increasing pH
11.5
10.7
9.6
7.4
6.07
4.6
3.2
0.93
Figure 5.14  (A) Model of graphene sheet fragment with a COO− functional group at the 
edge. (B) Computation of electrostatic potential isosurface for a graphene sheet fragment with 
a COO− functional group at the edge. (C) pH‐dependent photoluminescence spectra of GO 
[24]. Adapted from [24] with permission of Macmillan Publishers Limited

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
167
As a result, we point out two major theories explaining the origins of photoluminescence 
in GO within the framework of confined sp2 cluster‐related the emission and emission 
associated with oxygen‐containing functional groups. However, there are also scientific 
works reporting combined optical effects. For example, Chien et al. [26] observe two emis-
sion peaks in GO with a blue feature attributed to quantum confined graphitic domains and 
the red peak arising from functional‐group‐induced disorder states. Reports of such dual 
fluorescence are not uncommon; however, many of them present different explanations of 
the nature of the blue and red emission features in the work of Chen et al. those emission 
peaks were proposed to have different luminescence origins since they exhibit fluorescence 
lifetimes that differ by nearly three orders of magnitude [20]. Exarhos et al. [86] suggest 
that blue and red emission are tied through spectral migration. In their time‐resolved pho-
toluminescence measurements, GO and GO reduced via Xe lamp irradiation have also 
shown notably different lifetimes. Unreduced GO exhibited significantly longer fluores-
cence lifetimes for its emission in the red versus the blue RGO emission. However, when 
measured right after the excitation pulse, the emissions of both RGO and GO were identi-
cal and detected in the blue region. Such initial similarity suggests that, with time, due to 
non‐radiative spectral relaxation in GO, the emission shifts to the red. This process was 
explained best by the disordered gap model (Figure 5.15), where at certain spatial regions 
in GO the gap energies are in the blue range and in some regions they are in the red. 
Therefore, upon excitation, the exciton in GO could migrate from larger (blue) gap regions 
to smaller (red) gap regions, where it would experience radiative recombination. In RGO, 
due to short carrier lifetimes dictated by photoluminescence quenching through non‐­
radiative decay in newly formed zero‐gap sp2 regions, ­spectral relaxation and shifting 
would not have enough time to occur. As a result, long‐lived excitons that in GO experience 
spectral migration to the red do not survive in RGO, which yields the short‐lived emission 
in the blue.
Thomas et al. [87] even suggested that the blue‐shifted feature in GO photolumines-
cence arises from oxidative debris, heavily oxidized small organic fragments produced 
Blue
emission
Red
emission
Eground
Eg(x)
Eex
X
Figure 5.15  Implied relaxation of excited carriers within the context of a disordered band 
model of GO. Reproduced from [54] with permission of American Chemical Society

168
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
during GO synthesis. Their work indicates that, when washed with a weak base, the oxida-
tive debris could be separated from the slightly oxidized sheets of GO that exhibit weak to 
negligible fluorescence in the red. This effect was suggested to explain the appearance of 
the sharp blue‐shifted fluorescence feature at high pH reported by Galande et al. [24] in 
terms of recovery of the fluorescence of oxidative debris through separation from GO in 
basic conditions. When combined with weakly oxidized GO, due to interaction with the 
large GO matrix, oxidative debris was described to have highly quenched and red‐shifted 
emission that is commonly observed in GO suspensions. Such an unconventional hypoth-
esis provides yet another possible mechanism for the observed photoluminescence in GO; 
however, it does not explain the photoluminescence from oxidized graphene films [52].
Studies of the oxidation and reduction of GO not only elucidate possible mechanisms of 
fluorescence emission in GO but also provide important routes to modifying its optical 
properties. Together with oxidation and reduction, a significant modulation of GO ­emission 
has been reported upon surface derivatization with a variety of functional groups [30, 66, 
88, 89]. A substantial increase in fluorescence quantum yield of GO up to 13% was 
observed upon functionalization of the epoxy and carboxyl groups in GO by alkylamines 
[30]. Such an increase was explained within the framework of localized graphitic domain‐
related GO photoluminescence theory as passivation of epoxy and carboxyl groups that 
were proposed to act as quenching centers, while still retaining the sp2 domain structure in 
GO that, according to the theory, is responsible for the emission. Highly enhanced photo-
luminescence was reported also in anthryl‐functionalized GO [66] and Mn2+‐bonded RGO 
[89], where the increase in emission was assigned to fluorescence resonance energy 
­transfer from Mn ions to emissive sp2 clusters in graphene. Due to the energy level struc-
ture in Mn, resonance energy transfer could significantly enhance the emission of RGO, 
strongly increasing the photoluminescence intensity at ~550 nm. Such photoluminescence 
enhancements suggest that chemical functionalization could serve as an efficient route to 
improve the fluorescence quantum yield of GO.
In summary, photoluminescence from GO was detected in the blue and red, with some 
reports indicating green ultraviolet and near‐infrared emission. The origin of the photolumi-
nescence has been proposed by several theories, including emission from confined domains 
of sp2 graphitic carbon, emission from localized electronic environments surrounding oxy-
gen‐containing functional groups, combinations of these two scenarios, or even emission 
from oxidation‐produced graphitic debris. Controlled reduction, oxidation and functionali-
zation of GO allow for the tailoring of its optical properties for particular applications.
5.5  Graphene Oxide Quantum Dots
In addition to functionalization, cutting GO into quantum dots bears the promise of mod-
ifying its optical properties. Decreasing the dimensionality and the size of GO sheets 
down to several nanometers in diameter could result in quantum‐confined structures, 
whose optical properties would be determined by their size [90]. This opens a range of 
possibilities of controllably adjusting the optical response from quantum dots through 
governing their size distribution. However, there could be a limiting size of GO quantum 
dots, above which their properties would strongly resemble those of GO. For example, 
recently, GO quantum dots obtained by hydrothermal treatment of GO have shown 

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
169
excitation‐ and pH‐dependent photoluminescence in the blue spectral region [8], similar 
to GO, attributed to free zigzag sites, with pH dependence explained by protonation/
deprotonation of zigzag edges. A similar explanation was proposed for emission of 
­quantum dots prepared from GO by ultrasonication combined with thermal treatment 
[91]: their emission in the blue was assigned to zigzag edge states, whereas green 
­photoluminescence was proposed to arise from disordered energy traps. The emission 
wavelength in those quantum dots could be controlled by varying the degree of oxidation 
just like for the GO [83]. Optical properties of such quantum dots appear to be similar to 
those of GO, therefore suggesting that the optical effects in both could originate at a size 
scale that is smaller than the size of quantum dots, i.e. small confined islands of sp2 
­carbon or functionalization‐induced defect states at the oxygen‐containing groups. 
Considering the quantum dot size distribution of 5–13 nm [83], it is plausible that their 
blue and green photoluminescence would arise from smaller confined features. For 
example, Dong et al. [25] specifically attributed emission in quantum dots synthesized 
from citric acid to small confined sp2 clusters within 15 nm GO dots.
However, for smaller (~5 nm) quantum dot sizes [92] studies suggest that such optical 
effects as excitation‐dependent photoluminescence could be attributed not to the wide 
­distribution of sizes of sp2 graphitic regions as in GO, but rather to a distribution of sizes of 
the quantum dots themselves [92]. These GO quantum dots also exhibited strong solvent‐ 
and pH‐dependent emission, with a quantum yield of 11.4%, which is significantly higher 
than the values reported for GO [20, 23]. In general, photoluminescence of graphene quan-
tum dots is often attributed to the effects of oxygen functionalities present in these low‐
dimensional structures [93]. Similarly to GO they can exhibit excitation wavelength‐dependent 
emission explained by a combination of factors, including surface defects, confinement 
effects and edge shapes [94]. Thus, some optical phenomena in GO could be focused upon 
in order to explain the optical properties of graphene quantum dots. Conversely, since GO 
quantum dots can be envisioned as fragments of the GO structure, studies of their photolu-
minescence have a great promise to provide additional information regarding the ­mechanism 
of emission in GO. Finally, the production of GO quantum dots of a particular size may 
allow for a significant improvement of their quantum yield as compared to GO together 
with retaining the general optical properties characteristic of GO.
5.6  Applications
As a result of the recent findings, there is already a large market of applications of the ­optical 
properties of GO in optoelectronics, sensing and biological imaging. The discovery of GO 
photoluminescence suggested a number of its potential uses in photonic devices, including 
electroluminescent cells and photodetectors [42]. Due to its electronic bandgap, GO has also 
been successfully employed as an acceptor material in organic bulk heterojunction (BHJ) 
photovoltaic devices, yielding a power conversion efficiency of 1.1% [95]. Environment‐
dependent effects in GO emission have been utilized in multiple sensing applications: based 
on its photoluminescence quenching due to the attachment of biological molecules and 
viruses, GO was applied as an optical biosensor [20, 96]. The strong pH dependence of GO 
emission also positions it as a nanoscale sensor for extracellular biological pH [24, 84]. 
Potential environmental applications of GO include metal ion sensing by N‐doped GO due 

170
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
to the selective sensitivity of its photoluminescence to normal and transition metal ions [88]. 
In addition to sensing, GO and GO quantum dots have been successfully used as vehicles for 
drug/gene delivery and biological imaging [69, 90, 97–99]. GO is water‐soluble and ­provides 
a large platform for the attachment of multiple drug molecules on both sides of the graphene 
sheets [97]. It has been reported as a high‐capacity carrier for anticancer drugs, genes and 
targeting agents [69, 97]. In addition to that, the intrinsic photoluminescence of GO [69, 98] 
or GO quantum dots [90] could be used for the imaging of drug/gene delivery pathways 
without the need for additional fluorophores. Due to the transparency of biological tissue in 
the near‐infrared, GO photoluminescence in that spectral region [69] makes it highly attrac-
tive for both in vitro and in vivo fluorescence imaging. As a result, GO poses a significant 
advantage to existing delivery/imaging modalities due to its multi‐functionality and large 
transport capacity.
References
[1]	 Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.V.; et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin 
carbon films. Science 2004, 306 (5696), 666–669.
[2]	 Bonaccorso, F.; Sun, Z.; Hasan, T.; Ferrari, A.C., Graphene photonics and optoelectronics. 
Nature Photon. 2010, 4 (9), 611–622.
[3]	 Nair, R.R.; Blake, P.; Grigorenko, A.N.; et al., Fine structure constant defines visual trans-
parency of graphene. Science 2008, 320 (5881) 1308.
[4]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Meyer, J.C.; Scardaci, V.; et al., Raman spectrum of graphene and graphene 
layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 187401.
[5]	 Jiang, Z.; Henriksen, E.A.; Tung L.C.; et al., Infrared spectroscopy of Landau levels of graphene. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 197403.
[6]	 Yan, J.; Zhang, Y.; Kim, P.; Pinczuk, A., Electric field effect tuning of electron–phonon coupling 
in graphene. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2007, 98, 166802.
[7]	 Lu, J.; Yang, J.; Wang, J.; et al., One‐pot synthesis of fluorescent carbon nanoribbons, nanopar-
ticles, and graphene by the exfoliation of graphite in ionic liquids. ACS Nano 2009, 3 (8), 
2367–2375.
[8]	 Pan, D.; Zhang, J.; Li, Z.; Wu, M., Hydrothermal route for cutting graphene sheets into blue‐
luminescent graphene quantum dots. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (6), 734–738.
[9]	 Peng, J.; Gao, W.; Gupta, B.K.; et al., Graphene quantum dots derived from carbon fibers. Nano 
Lett. 2012, 12 (2), 844–849.
[10]	 Tang, L.; Ji, R.; Cao, X.; et al., Deep ultraviolet photoluminescence of water‐soluble self‐
passivated graphene quantum dots. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (6), 5102–5110.
[11]	 Eda, G.; Mattevi, C.; Yamaguchi, H.; et al., insulator to semimetal transition in graphene oxide. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 113 (35), 15768–15771.
[12]	 Loh, K.P.; Bao, Q.; Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Graphene oxide as a chemically tunable platform 
for optical applications. Nature Chem. 2010, 2 (12), 1015–1024.
[13]	 Li, S.‐S.; Tu, K.‐H.; Lin, C.‐C.; et al., Solution‐processable graphene oxide as an efficient hole 
transport layer in polymer solar cells. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (6), 3169–3174.
[14]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R.E., Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 
80 (6), 1339.
[15]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin com-
posite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 11 
(3), 771–778.
[16]	 Shang, J.; Ma, L.; Li, J.; et al., The origin of fluorescence from graphene oxide. Sci. Rep. 2012, 
2, 792.
[17]	 Zhang, X.‐F.; Shao, X.; Liu, S., Dual fluorescence from graphene oxide: a time‐resolved study. 
J. Phys. Chem. A 2012, 116 (27), 7308–7313.

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
171
[18]	 Chen, J.‐L.; Yan, X.‐P., A dehydration and stabilizer‐free approach to production of stable water 
dispersions of graphene nanosheets. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20, 4328–4332.
[19]	 Kochmann, S.; Hirsch, T.; Wolfbeis, O.S., The pH dependence of the total fluorescence of 
graphite oxide. J. Fluoresc. 2012, 22 (3), 849–855.
[20]	 Chen, J.‐L.; Yan, X.‐P.; Meng, K.; Wang, S.‐F., Graphene oxide based photoinduced charge 
transfer label‐free near‐infrared fluorescent biosensor for dopamine. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83 (22), 
8787–8793.
[21]	Ingle, J.D.; Crouch, S.R., Spectrochemical Analysis. Prentice‐Hall, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ, 1988.
[22]	 Cuong, T.V.; Pham, V.H.; Shin, E.W.; et al., Temperature‐dependent photoluminescence from 
chemically and thermally reduced graphene. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 041905.
[23]	 Li, M.; Cushing, S.K.; Zhou, X.; et al., Fingerprinting photoluminescence of functional groups 
in graphene oxide. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (44), 23374–23379.
[24]	 Galande, C.; Mohite, A.D.; Naumov, A.V.; et al., Quasi‐molecular fluorescence from graphene 
oxide. Sci. Rep. 2011, 1, 85.
[25]	 Dong, Y.; Shao, J.; Chen, C.; et al., Blue luminescent graphene quantum dots and graphene 
oxide prepared by tuning the carbonization degree of citric acid. Carbon 2012, 50 (12), 
4738–4743.
[26]	 Chien, C.‐T.; Li, S.‐S.; Lai, W.‐J.; et al., Tunable photoluminescence from graphene oxide. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51 (27), 6662–6666.
[27]	 Chen, J.‐L.; Yan, X.‐P., A dehydration and stabilizer‐free approach to production of stable water 
dispersions of graphene nanosheets. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20 (21), 4328–4332.
[28]	 Eda, G.; Lin, Y.‐Y.; Mattevi, C.; et  al., Blue photoluminescence from chemically derived 
graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (4), 505–509.
[29]	 Li, D.; Müller, M.B.; Gilje, S.; et al., Processable aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (2), 101–105.
[30]	 Mei, Q.; Zhang, K.; Guan, G.; et al., Highly efficient photoluminescent graphene oxide with 
tunable surface properties. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46 (39), 7319–7321.
[31]	 Liu, Z.‐B.; Zhao, X.; Zhang, X.‐L.; et al., Ultrafast dynamics and nonlinear optical responses 
from sp2‐ and sp3‐hybridized domains in graphene oxide. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 2 (16), 
1972–1977.
[32]	 Kaniyankandy, S.; Achary, S.N.; Rawalekar, S.; Ghosh, H.N., Ultrafast relaxation dynamics in 
graphene oxide: evidence of electron trapping. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115 (39), 19110–19116.
[33]	 Kumar, S.; Anija, M.; Kamaraju, N.; et al., Femtosecond carrier dynamics and saturable absorp-
tion in graphene suspensions. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 191911.
[34]	 Ruzicka, B.A.; Werake, L.K.; Zhao, H.; et al., Femtosecond pump–probe studies of reduced 
graphene oxide thin films. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2010, 96, 173106.
[35]	 Zhang, Y.; Shi, Z.; Gu, Z.; Iijima, S., Structure modification of single‐wall carbon nanotubes. 
Carbon 2000, 38 (15), 2055–2059.
[36]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Meyer, J.C.; Scardaci, V.; et al., Raman spectrum of graphene and graphene 
layers. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 187401.
[37]	 Malard, L.M.; Pimenta, M.A.; Dresselhaus, G.; Dresselhaus, M.S., Raman spectroscopy in 
graphene. Phys. Rep. 2009, 473 (5–6), 51–87.
[38]	 Reich, S.; Thomsen, C., Raman spectroscopy of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. A 2004, 362 
(1824), 2271–2288.
[39]	 Ferrari, A.C., Raman spectroscopy of graphene and graphite: disorder, electron–phonon 
coupling, doping and nonadiabatic effects. Solid State Commun. 2007, 143 (1–2), 47–57.
[40]	 Kaniyoor, A.; Ramaprabhu, S., A Raman spectroscopic investigation of graphite oxide derived 
graphene. AIP Advances 2012, 2, 032183.
[41]	 Kudin, K.N.; Ozbas, B.; Schniepp, H.C.; et al., Raman spectra of graphite oxide and functional-
ized graphene sheets. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (1), 36–41.
[42]	 Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Chemically derived graphene oxide: towards large area thin‐film 
electronics and optoelectronics. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (22), 2392–2415.
[43]	 Das, A.; Pisana, S.; Chakraborty, B.; et al., Monitoring dopants by Raman scattering in an 
electrochemically top‐gated graphene transistor. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (4), 210–215.

172
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[44]	 Ang, P.K.; Wang, S.; Bao, Q.; et al., High‐throughput synthesis of graphene by intercalation −  
exfoliation of graphite oxide and study of ionic screening in graphene transistor. ACS Nano 2009, 
3 (11), 3587–3594.
[45]	 Voggu, R.; Das, B.; Rout, C.S.; Rao, C.N.R., Effects of the charge‐transfer interactions of gra-
phene with electron‐donor and ‐acceptor molecules examined by Raman spectroscopy and 
cognate techniques. J. Phys. Condens. Matter 2008, 20, 472204.
[46]	 Liu, L.; Ryu, S.; Tomasik, M.R.; et al., Graphene oxidation: thickness‐dependent etching and 
strong chemical doping. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (7), 1965–1970.
[47]	 Lucchese, M.M.; Stavale, F.; Ferreira, E. H.; et al., Quantifying ion‐induced defects and Raman 
relaxation length in graphene, Carbon 2010, 48 (5), 1592–1597.
[48]	 Tuinstra, F.; Koenig, L., Raman spectrum of graphite. J. Chem. Phys. 1970, 53 (3), 1126–1130.
[49]	 Cançado, L.G.; Takai, K.; Enoki, T.; et al., General equation for the determination of the 
crystallite size La of nanographite by Raman spectroscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2006, 88, 163106.
[50]	 Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.V.; et al., Two dimensional gas of massless Dirac 
fermions in graphene. Nature 2005, 438 (7065), 197–200.
[51]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Robertson, J., Interpretation of Raman spectra of disordered and amorphous 
carbon. Phys. Rev. B 2000, 61, 14095.
[52]	 Gokus, T.; Nair, R.R.; Bonetti, A.; et al., Making graphene luminescent by oxygen plasma 
treatment. ACS Nano 2009, 3 (12), 3963–3968.
[53]	 Mattevi, C.; Eda, G.; Agnoli, S.; et al., Evolution of electrical, chemical, and structural proper-
ties of transparent and conducting chemically derived graphene thin films. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2009, 19 (16), 2577–2583.
[54]	 Gómez‐Navarro, C.; Weitz, R.T.; Bittner, A.M.; et  al., Electronic transport properties of 
individual chemically reduced graphene oxide sheets. Nano Lett. 2007, 7 (11), 3499–3503.
[55]	 Krishnamoorthy, K.; Veerapandian, M.; Mohan, R.; Kim, S.‐J., Investigation of Raman and 
photoluminescece studies of reduced graphene oxide sheets. Appl. Phys. A 2012, 106 (3), 
501–506.
[56]	 Cuong, T.V.; Pham, V.H.; Tran, Q.T.; et al., Optoelectronic properties of graphene thin films 
prepared by thermal reduction of graphene oxide. Mater. Lett. 2010, 64 (6), 765–767.
[57]	 Mohanty, N.; Nagaraja, A.; Armesto, J.; Berry, V., High‐throughput, ultrafast synthesis of 
solution‐dispersed graphene via a facile hydride chemistry. Small 2010, 6 (2), 226–231.
[58]	 Lee, V.; Whittaker, L.; Jaye, C.; et al., Large‐area chemically modified graphene films: electro-
phoretic deposition and characterization by soft X‐ray absorption spectroscopy. Chem. Mater. 
2009, 21 (16), 3905–3916.
[59]	 Wang, S.; Ang, P.K.; Wang, Z.; et al., High mobility, printable, and solution‐processed graphene 
electronics. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (1), 92–98.
[60]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R.D.; et al., Synthesis of graphene‐based nanosheets via 
chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 2007, 45 (7), 1558–1565.
[61]	 Tung, V.C.; Allen, M.J.; Yang, Y.; Kaner, R.B., Throughput solution processing of large‐scale 
graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2009, 4 (1), 25–29.
[62]	 Paredes, J.I.; Villar‐Rodil, S.; Solís‐Fernández, P.; et al., Atomic force and scanning tunneling 
microscopy imaging of graphene nanosheets derived from graphite oxide. Langmuir 2009, 25 
(10), 5957–5968.
[63]	 Xin, G.; Meng, Y.; Ma, Y.; et al., Tunable photoluminescence from graphene oxide from near‐
ultraviolet to blue. Mater. Lett. 2012, 74, 71–73.
[64]	 Gao, W.; Alemany, L.B.; Ajayan, L.C.M., New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nature Chem. 2009, 1 (5), 403–408.
[65]	 Wang, H.; Robinson, J.T.; Li, X.; Dai, H., Solvothermal reduction of chemically exfoliated 
graphene sheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (29), 9910–9911.
[66]	 Lu, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Wei, W.; et al., Novel blue light emitting graphene oxide nanosheets fabricated 
by surface functionalization. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (7), 2929–2934.
[67]	 Brodie, B.C., On the atomic weight of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London 1859, 149, 
249–259.
[68]	 Luo, Z.; Vora, P.M.; Mele, E.J.; et al., Photoluminescence and band gap modulation in graphene 
oxide. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94, 111909.

Optical Properties of Graphene Oxide
173
[69]	 Sun, X.; Liu, Z.; Welsher, K.; et al., Nano‐graphene oxide for cellular imaging and drug delivery. 
Nano Res. 2008, 1 (3), 203–212.
[70]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin 
composite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 
11 (3), 771–778.
[71]	 Gokus, T.; Hartschuh, A.; Harutyunyan, H.; et al., Exciton decay dynamics in individual carbon 
nanotubes at room temperature. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 92, 153116.
[72]	 Kozawa, D.; Miyauchi, Y.; Mouri, S.; Matsuda, K., Exploring the origin of blue and ultraviolet 
fluorescence in graphene oxide. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2013, 4 (12), 2035–2040.
[73]	 Robertson, J., Photoluminescence mechanism in amorphous hydrogenated carbon. Diamond 
Relat. Mater. 1996, 5 (3–5), 457–460.
[74]	 Mathioudakis, C.; Kopidakis, G.; Kelires, P.C.; et al., Electronic and optical properties of a‐C 
from tight‐binding molecular dynamics simulations. Thin Solid Films 2005, 482, (1–2), 151–155.
[75]	 Johari, P.; Shenoy, V.B., Modulating optical properties of graphene oxide: role of prominent 
functional groups. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (9), 7640–7647.
[76]	 Yan, J.‐A.; Xian, L.; Chou, M.Y., Structural and electronic properties of oxidized graphene. 
Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 103, 086802.
[77]	 Erickson, K.; Erni, R.; Lee, Z.; et al., Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene 
oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (40), 4467–4472.
[78]	 Kozawa, D.; Zhu, X.; Miyauchi, Y.; et al., Excitonic photoluminescence from nanodisc states in 
graphene oxides. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2014, 5 (10), 1754–1759.
[79]	 Spataru, C.D.; Ismail‐Beigi, S.; Benedict, L.X.; Louie, S.G., Excitonic effects and optical 
spectra of single‐walled carbon nanotubes. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2004, 92, 077402.
[80]	 Pedersen, T.G.; Jauho, A.‐P.; Pedersen, K., Optical response and excitons in gapped graphene. 
Phys. Rev. B 2009, 79, 113406.
[81]	 Cuong, T.V.; Pham, V.H.; Tran, Q.T.; et al., Photoluminescence and Raman studies of graphene 
thin films prepared by reduction of graphene oxide. Mater. Lett. 2010, 64 (3), 399–401.
[82]	 Nourbakhsh, A.; Cantoro, M.; Vosch, T.; et al., Bandgap opening in oxygen plasma‐treated 
graphene. Nanotechnology 2010, 21 (43), 435203.
[83]	 Jeong, H.K.; Jin, M.H.; So, K.P.; et al., Tailoring the characteristics of graphite oxides by differ-
ent oxidation times. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2009, 42, 065418.
[84]	 Chen, J.‐L.; Yan, X.‐P., Ionic strength and pH reversible response of visible and near‐infrared 
fluorescence of graphene oxide nanosheets for monitoring the extracellular pH. Chem. Commun. 
2011, 47 (11), 3135–3137.
[85]	 Gómez‐Navarro, C.; Weitz, R.T.; Bittner, A.M.; et al., Electronic transport properties of indi-
vidual chemically reduced graphene oxide sheets. Nano Lett. 2007, 7 (11), 3499–3503.
[86]	 Exarhos, A.L.; Turk, M.E.; Kikkawa, J.M., ultrafast spectral migration of photoluminescence in 
graphene oxide. Nano Lett. 2013, 13 (2), 344–349.
[87]	 Thomas, H.R.; Vallés, C.; Young, R.J.; et  al., Identifying fluorescence of graphene oxide. 
J. Mater. Chem. C 2013, 1 (2), 338–342.
[88]	 Qian, Z.; Zhou, J.; Chen, J.; et al., Nanosized N‐doped graphene oxide with visible fluorescence 
in water for metal ion sensing. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (44), 17635–17637.
[89]	 Gan, Z.X.; Xiong, S.J.; Wu, X.L.; et al., Mn2+‐bonded reduced graphene oxide with strong 
radiative recombination in broad visible range caused by resonant energy transfer. Nano Lett. 
2011, 11 (9), 3951–3956.
[90]	 Yan, X.; Li, B.; Cui, X.; et al., Independent tuning of the band gap and redox potential of 
graphene quantum dots. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2011, 2 (10), 1119–1124.
[91]	 Zhu, S.; Zhang, J.; Liu, X.; et al., Graphene quantum dots with controllable surface oxidation, 
tunable fluorescence and up‐conversion emission. RSC Advances 2012, 2 (7), 2717–2720.
[92]	 Zhu, S.; Zhang, J.; Qiao, C.; et al., Strongly‐green‐photoluminescent graphene quantum dots 
for bioimaging applications. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (24), 6858–6860.
[93]	 Lee, J.; Kim, K.; Park, W.I.; et al., Uniform graphene quantum dots patterned from self‐assembled 
silica nanodots. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (12), 6078–6083.
[94]	 Habiba, K.; Makarov, V.I.; Avalos, J.; et al., Luminescent graphene quantum dots fabricated by 
pulsed laser synthesis. Carbon 2013, 64, 341–350.

174
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[95]	 Liu, Q.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, X.; et al., Polymer photovoltaic cells based on solution‐processable 
graphene and P3HT. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19 (6), 894–904.
[96]	 Jung, J.H.; Cheon, D.S.; Liu, F.; et al., A graphene oxide based immuno‐biosensor for pathogen 
detection. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (33), 5708–5711.
[97]	 Liu, Z.; Robinson, J.T.; Sun, X.; Dai, H., PEGylated nanographene oxide for delivery of water‐
insoluble cancer drugs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (33), 10876–10877.
[98]	 Kim, H.; Namgung, R.; Singha, K.; et al., Graphene oxide–polyethylenimine nanoconstruct as 
a gene delivery vector and bioimaging tool. Bioconjug. Chem. 2011, 22 (12), 2558–2567.
[99]	 Wang, Y.; Li, Z.; Wang, J.; et al., Graphene and graphene oxide: biofunctionalization and 
applications in biotechnology. Trends Biotechnol. 2011, 29 (5), 205–212.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
6
Functionalization and Reduction 
of Graphene Oxide
Siegfried Eigler and Ayrat M. Dimiev
6.1  Introduction
The chemical properties of graphene oxide (GO) are the most complex and the most 
­controversial topic in the entire GO field. Chemical reactions must be interpreted in accord-
ance with the chemical structure of the original GO. Since the exact chemical structure is 
still elusive, a clear understanding of chemical transformations is not possible. Another 
reason is GO’s multi‐functionality. In GO, different functional groups are situated in close 
proximity to each other, allowing conjugation and cross‐self‐protection. This is why 
­classical organic chemistry reactions do not run, or run differently, with GO functional 
groups. For the same reason, reactions involving one selective type of functional group, 
while preserving others, are probably not possible. The situation becomes even more com-
plicated due to the heterogeneous nature of GO. It is clear that GO and its derivatives will 
never form monodisperse compounds, especially because every sp3 carbon atom is a chiral 
center. Many theoretically possible reactions are sterically hindered due to the fixed position 
of functional groups on the GO platform. All the obstacles listed above require extra caution 
especially when designing and interpreting results of covalent functionalization reactions.
The chemistry of GO, which was developed in recent years, will be introduced in this 
chapter. First, the diverse chemical structure will be reviewed one more time with special 
focus on the degradation mechanism leading to defective GO (see also Chapter 2). Defects 
generally determine the reactivity of GO, and therefore the structure of GO that can explain 
its chemical reactivity is reviewed here briefly. The non‐covalent chemistry is briefly 
­discussed, and more attention is given to the covalent chemistry. For covalent chemistry, 

176
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
general considerations of the reaction principles are summarized followed by a description 
of chemical approaches. Theoretically, the reaction protocols known from organic chemistry 
should allow one to address the different types of functional groups. However, for GO, it 
was observed that not only one specific functional group is always selectively reacting, and 
therefore the chemistry and reactivity of GO must be critically discussed.
The main functional groups in GO are those situated on basal planes: hydroxyl and 
epoxy groups. The influence of functional groups located at the edges of defects and flakes 
will also be discussed. Another type of functional group is the residual sp2 system that can 
also be utilized for chemical reactions, eventually forming C–C bonds. The portion of C–C 
bonds in GO can be increased by chemical reduction, and thus reduction methods to 
­produce reduced graphene oxide (RGO) will be introduced. Moreover, the discussion of 
the chemical structure of RGO is briefly compared to that of graphene with the aim 
of  understanding the chemical reactivity. Several reaction principles are available to 
­functionalized RGO, leading to soluble RGO, also often called soluble graphene.
Due to the heterogeneity of GO and RGO, the control of their chemistry is challenging. 
The chemical structure of GO depends in part on the preparation conditions. However, 
keeping in mind that the structure of GO has been a matter of discussion for more than a 
century, it is clear that it is still difficult to conduct an analysis of the reaction products after 
chemical modifications. Moreover, it can be expected that functional groups located at 
edges are more reactive than functional groups on the basal plane. Anyhow, it is difficult to 
distinguish between those.
Nevertheless, there are efforts to introduce a controlled chemistry of graphene, based on 
GO. Here, a short overview about the requirements for conducting and developing this con-
trolled chemistry will be given. The synthesis of this type of GO, termed oxo‐functionalized 
graphene (oxo‐G1) is given in Chapter 2. Finally, a discussion about the current results of 
chemical modification and prospects and applications will complete this chapter.
6.2  Diverse Structure of Graphene Oxide
The structure of GO is highly variable and the absolute structure depends to some extent on 
the preparation conditions. Thus, no molecular formula can be given and no precise 
­structure can be formulated. Many different types of GO can be imagined and the type of 
functional groups will therefore vary. Having in mind that every sp3 carbon introduced into 
graphene is a stereo center, it becomes clear that no pure derivative of GO can exist. 
However, to establish a controlled chemistry of GO, it is necessary to know as much as 
possible about the chemical structure of GO. The development of the dynamic structural 
model by Tour and Dimiev can explain many experimental results and therefore the reader 
should also study Chapter 2 [1].
Ideally, graphite of high quality with a hexagonal σ framework of carbon atoms is the 
starting material. This carbon framework can become ruptured during the oxidation 
­procedure, due to over‐oxidation. The most accepted structural model for GO is the Lerf–
Klinowski model that was refined using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy 
[2–5]. However, the dynamic structural model (DSM) provides additional details that can 
also explain the degradation and the acidity of GO [1]. Generally speaking, layers of graph-
ite become oxidized by the oxidant and a series of oxo‐functional groups are introduced, 
while some sp2 clusters remain. The actual oxidizing species remains unclear. Potentially, 

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
177
Mn2O7 or MnO3
+ are the reactive species if potassium permanganate is used. Among epoxy 
and hydroxyl groups, decorating both sides of the basal plane, also ketones and carboxyl 
groups are introduced. However, the latter functional groups require the breaking of C–C 
bonds and are therefore located at the edges of flakes and defects. Note that, according to 
the dynamic structural model, ketones are also located at the points of C–C bond cleavage 
where carbon atoms are not removed; these points are not considered by the model as 
edges, but as features of the basal planes. The toxic and explosive ClO2 is formed when 
potassium chlorate is used as the oxidant and it is important to keep the ­temperature below 
45 °C to avoid detonations. Other oxidants, such as bichromate, have also been used, but 
­over‐­oxidation is reported: carbon atoms can be fully oxidized to CO2. In the sense of GO 
production, this means over‐oxidation. Ideally, carbon loss is prevented at all. Otherwise the 
six‐membered basal plane of C atoms becomes ruptured, and ketones, carboxyl or phenolic 
structures can be formed or even be major species. It is proposed that various oxo‐
functional groups, such as ketones, carboxyl, lactols or phenols, functionalize the edges of 
defects [6–8]. The unoxidized graphene‐like patches are part of the GO structure, but gen-
erally approximately 50% of C atoms remain sp2 carbon. The size of sp2 carbon patches 
increases with time. Therefore, the structure of GO was described as metastable [9]. Also, 
unpaired spins have been reported as part of the structure [10, 11]. Other interesting and in 
part plausible structural models have been proposed by Dékány et al. [12], Nakajima and 
Matsuo [13], Hofmann et al. [14], Ruess [15], Scholz and Boehm [16] and others [6] 
(Figure 6.1).
Oxygen +graphene
Hofmann
Ruess
Scholz-Boehm
Dékány
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
20 nm
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
HO
HO
O
O
O
OH
Lerf-Klinowski
O
O
O
O
HO
HO2C
CO2H
OOH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
O
H
OH
O
O
HO2C
Figure 6.1  Different proposed structural models of GO and graphite oxide. The Hofmann 
model can be applied to the structure of graphene epitaxially grown from SiC and exposed to 
oxygen atoms (scanning tunneling microscopy image displays individual oxygen atoms 
covalently bound to graphene). Reproduced from [17, 18] with permission of ACS and Nature 
Publishing Group

178
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Defects within the carbon framework have been proposed as a structural motif in the 
Clauss, Dékány, Scholz–Boehm and most recently Dimiev–Tour models. The edges of 
defects are functionalized by arbitrary oxo‐groups (Figure 6.1). Also quinoid structures are 
plausible and stable motifs. Flakes of GO that were investigated by high‐resolution trans-
mission electron microscopy display preserved regions of ordered structures with lateral 
dimensions of about 1 nm among about 80% of disordered regions that were correlated to 
functionalized regions [19]. Furthermore, holes with diameters of about 1 nm could be 
identified. With respect to the structure of GO, it can be concluded that the term GO implies 
a partially amorphous structure with respect to the carbon framework.
Several authors realized more than 100 years ago that GO is an amorphous material and 
highly defective with properties related to humic acid. It seems likely that the structure 
models depicted in Figure  6.1 that bear a single carbon framework are all valid to 
describe GO. However, the formed structure motifs depend on the amount of defects and 
the ­preparation conditions.
It can be assumed that some applications may work best for GO with a carbon frame-
work with quinoid‐like motifs, and other applications require an intact carbon ­framework. 
The problem is however that it is difficult to determine the degree of defects and the type 
and concentration of functional groups and structure motifs. The synthetic protocol and 
the grade of graphite has a strong influence on the kinetics of the oxidation and the 
structure. Thus, reliable analysis of the product is required to enable a controlled syn-
thesis [20]. Residual metal impurities in GO were determined by inductively coupled 
plasma mass spectrometry (ICP‐MS) and iron, cobalt, nickel and manganese were 
found, as a consequence of impurities from the natural graphite source or from reagents 
used during the synthesis of GO. While >1000 ppm of iron was found, other metals were 
detected in concentrations of approximately 5–20 ppm. Although this concentration 
seems to be low, the metals can dominate catalytic properties and strongly influence the 
oxygen reduction reaction that was also claimed to work in the absence of metals [21]. 
The isolation of GO from the reaction mixture is normally done by filtration or centrifu-
gation and redispersion in water. Recently, an alternative work‐up procedure was 
­demonstrated for GO that involves the addition of dodecylamine to graphite oxide [22]. 
In the latter example an electrostatic interaction of dodecylammonium is exploited in 
acidic media to isolate individual layers of GO. However, that GO is different from 
normally isolated GO because a composite is already formed by the ammonium 
compound.
6.3  Stability of Graphene Oxide
6.3.1  Thermal Stability of Graphene Oxide
The thermal decomposition of GO was intensively studied by Boehm and Scholz and large 
variations were found [23]. Generally, impurities and metal salts, such as added FeCl3, can 
decrease the thermal stability. The main weight loss for GO prepared with permanganate is 
found at about 180–200 °C. Other investigations revealed that a certain potassium content 
can dramatically decrease the stability of GO and explosive decompositions were observed 
[24–26]. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), coupled with mass spectrometry(MS), 

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
179
gives a first hint toward the decomposition process of GO. Adsorbed water is released up 
to 120 °C followed by CO2 formation, with the main decomposition temperature at about 
180 °C (section 6.8.2). However, GO that bears defects on the few percent scale (>2–3%) 
already decomposes at a temperature of about 45 °C, and is significantly less stable than 
oxo‐G1 that bears an almost intact carbon framework. Films of flakes of GO, placed on 
ZnSe, can be analyzed by infrared spectroscopy. The spectra measured in transmission 
mode on ZnSe between 25 and 150 °C reveal a new absorption at 2336 cm−1. The maximum 
intensity of this new absorption band is found at 120 °C. Also nanometer‐sized blisters 
could be visualized in films of GO during annealing. The infrared signal at 2336 cm−1 can 
be related to the stretching vibration of CO2, intercalated between sheets of GO. The presence 
of the CO2 signal indicates that the carbon lattice of GO starts to decompose at ­temperatures 
as low as 50 °C, although the trapping of CO2 prevents its detection by mass spectrometry 
in the thermogravimetric experiment [27]. The quantification of the CO2 concentration 
indicates that one CO2 molecule is formed on every 2 nm. Moreover, the role of water in 
the decarboxylation process of GO was investigated. Experiments with 18O‐labeled water 
indicate the exchange of 16O water with 18O‐labeled water. TGA‐MS analysis detects CO2 
at m/z 44 (C16O2) and m/z 46 (C16O18O) for 18OH2‐treated GO. Thus, water facilitates the 
formation of CO2 (Figure 6.2A). This experimental evidence can be explained by carbonyl 
chemistry, such as the formation of hydrates from ketones or carboxylic acids, and a mech-
anism for the rearrangement of α,β‐epoxy ketones to α‐hydroxy carboxylic acids is 
­proposed in Figure 6.2(B). The carbonyl chemistry, as proposed in Figure 6.2(B), is also 
supported by this experiment.
6.3.2  Stability and Chemistry of Graphene Oxide in Aqueous Solution
Pristine graphite oxide, a type of graphite oxide that was treated with alcohols instead of 
water during work‐up, was described as bearing cyclic organosulfate groups that hydro-
lyze during water impact [28]. Moreover, it was determined that there is approximately 
one carbonyl group on 10–12 carbon atoms. This high amount of carbonyl groups can 
stem only from functional groups at the edges of defects and not only from functional 
groups at the edges of flakes. It was further determined that about one CO2 molecule is 
formed on 35–55 carbon atoms during the synthesis of GO. The formation of CO2 and the 
formation of carbonyl groups within the carbon lattice require breaking of C–C bonds. 
In relation to recent publications of Dimiev et al., a formation mechanism of CO2 from the 
carbon lattice of GO is proposed and illustrated in Figure 6.3(D), starting from vicinal 
diols (1). The reaction with hydroxide can lead to C–C bond cleavage (2, 3) and further 
base treatment may form carboxylic acids and facilitate CO2 formation (8–10). This expla-
nation also agrees with the observations of TGA‐MS measurements that demonstrated the 
incorporation of 18O in CO2 from 18OH2. Subsequent reactions can further degrade the 
carbon lattice. Moreover, the degradation of GO can lead to acidic functional groups as 
illustrated by the reaction of 1 to 2 and to 7. Therefore, a new dynamic structure model of 
GO was proposed by Dimiev et al. that describes the origin of acidity of GO that is accom-
panied by the degradation of the carbon lattice towards humic acid [1]. This instability of 
GO towards base treatment was further demonstrated to lead to oxidative debris that was 
formed upon etching of flakes of GO [28]. The disintegration of flakes upon base ­treatment 
is depicted in Figure 6.3.

180
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The lability of functional groups in GO is problematic for developing a controlled 
chemistry of GO, because many reactions that could in principle be developed need 
­thermal activation. Moreover it is plausible that batches of GO may have different con-
tributions of functional groups and concentrations of defects, depending on the synthetic 
protocol and especially the degree of degradation. It was observed that GO with almost 
no defects within the carbon framework (oxo‐G1) is thermally more stable, as outlined in 
section 6.3.3.
(A)
(B) a)
b)
c)
GO
GO
GO
GO
GO
HO OH
GO
GO
GO
GO
Base
HO
COOH
O
O
O
O
OH
GO
GO
GO
GO
GO
+ H2
18O
– C16O18O
Decarboxylated
graphene oxide (GO)
– C16O
– C16O18O
– C18O
+ H2
18O
– H2
16O
– H2
16O
16O
18O
GO
GO
GO
GO
H16O
H18O
16OH
18OH
16OH
16OH
18O
100
153.4 °C
Ion current *10–10 (A)
253.8 °C
TG (%)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0
90
80
70
60
50
100
200
300
400
Temperature (°C)
500
600
700
TG (GO)
TG (GO – H2
18O)
m/z 44 (GO – H2
18O)
m/z 46 (GO – H2
18O)
m/z 44 (GO)
m/z 46 (GO)
Figure 6.2  (A) Thermogravimetric analysis coupled with mass spectrometry of GO and GO 
treated with 18O‐labeled water (16OH2 exchanged by 18OH2). C18O16O can be detected, 
evidence for the formation of hydrate species generated from carbonyl or carboxyl groups. 
(B) Suggested reaction pathways of decarboxylation processes in GO. Reproduced from [27] 
with permission of ACS

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
181
10
9
1
6
5
4
2
3
8
7
11
12
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
5μm
1 μm
“OD”
(A)
(D)
(B)
(C)
O
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
OH
O
O
O
O
+
+
OH
HO
HO
O
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
–CO2
–H3O
–H3O
H2O
–H2O
–H2O
H2O
H3O
H3O
O
O
O
OH
O
Figure 6.3  (A) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) image of flakes of GO with smooth 
edges. (B) SEM image of a base‐treated GO flake that shows etched edges and disintegration 
of the flake to form oxidative debris. (C) Schematic model of the disintegration of flakes of 
GO  with holes (white dots), graphitic domains (blue) and oxidized domains (orange). 
(D)  Proposed reaction schemes for the degradation of GO by water and base. Plausible 
reaction mechanisms for CO2 generation and the formation of acidic groups are illustrated. 
Base treatment of 1 can lead to extended π networks with acidic functional groups (2–7). 
Hydrates (3, 4) and C–O–C bonds can be formed and permanent defects (6). Hydroxide can 
react with carbonyl groups to form carboxylic acids after C–C bond breakage (8–10). 
Decarboxylation and subsequent reactions lead to further degradation [1, 28, 29]. Reproduced 
from [28] with permission of Elsevier

182
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
6.3.3  Stability of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
Oxo‐G1 bears only very few defects and is therefore more stable against degradation than 
GO. The thermal stability of oxo‐G1 was probed in films by infrared spectroscopy and, in 
contrast to GO, CO2 formation was not observed at 50 °C in iteratively heated samples. 
Instead, the CO2 trapping in films started at about 90 °C, giving evidence for a higher 
­thermal stability.
With respect to the almost intact carbon framework of oxo‐G1, it is possible to use 
­statistical Raman spectroscopy on thermally treated and subsequently chemically reduced 
films of flakes. The analyses reveal that no additional defects are introduced into the σ 
framework of C atoms for thermal treatment up to 100 °C (Figure 6.4A). Even a slight 
improvement in the quality of graphene was detected after annealing oxo‐G1 at 75–100 °C. 
The plot of the ID/IG ratio versus Γ2D in Figure 6.4(B) illustrates the thermal stability. Up to 
about 100 °C the Γ2D values are between 60 and 70 cm−1 and remain almost constant. 
Treatment of oxo‐G1 at 150 °C, prior to reduction, results in the decomposition of the 
­carbon framework and Γ2D values between 90 and 300 cm−1, and about 200 cm−1 on aver-
age, are found. The worst quality of graphene is measured for samples that had been heated 
to 500 °C. The carbon grid is amorphous and the 2D peak is hardly detectable with Γ2D = 
300 cm−1. Thermal treatment of oxo‐G1 up to 1000 °C can partially restore the carbon lattice 
recovering the six‐membered‐ring structure. However, statistical Raman spectroscopy 
reveals Γ2D between 90 and 190 cm−1. Although thermal annealing at 1000 °C can partially 
increase the quality of graphene, compared to a sample treated at 500 °C, the original 
­quality is not recovered (Figure 6.4B).
It can be concluded that permanent defects are introduced into the carbon lattice of ­oxo‐G1 
by thermal treatment higher than 100 °C. These findings are beneficial for the development 
of the controlled chemistry of oxo‐G1, because a carbon framework that is stable up to 
100 °C allows thermal activation of chemical reactants. Nevertheless, it cannot be ruled out 
that reagents may also disrupt the C–C bonds during thermal activation, as demonstrated in 
section 6.8.3.1.
Chemical reduction of oxo‐G1 that bears a density of defects of about 0.6–0.8%, ­prepared 
from large flakes of natural graphite, leads to an increase of the Raman D peak, combined 
with line sharpening [31]. As outlined in section 3.4.4, the ID/IG ratio follows a relation, 
and on increasing the distance between defects from 2 nm to 3 nm, an increase of the ID/IG 
ratio is expected, accompanied with line sharpening. This quality increase is high enough 
to pattern oxo‐G1 and to visualize the density of defects by Raman microscopy.
A flake of oxo‐G1 was chosen and probed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). 
Afterwards, the middle of the flake was irradiated by a focused laser pulse (532 nm at 
0.06 mW). The flake was chemically reduced after irradiation and first analyzed by AFM 
as illustrated in Figure 6.5. The image shown in Figure 6.5(C) reveals wrinkles in the mid-
dle region of the flakes, the area where the laser pulse was applied. The same flake was 
scanned by scanning Raman microscopy (SRM) and the map of the ID/IG ratio (Figure 6.5D) 
reveals that the quality of the generated graphene decreases by laser irradiation. While the 
ID/IG ratio is constant for untreated samples, a decreased ID/IG ratio of 1.5 in the middle 
region and an ID/IG ratio of 2.2 in a loop region is found. Here the deceased ID/IG ratio is 
accompanied by line broadening, indicating the decreased quality of graphene (see 
­section 3.4.4). Reference flakes show only little variations of the ID/IG ratio.

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
183
Reduction
HO
OXO-G1
4
3
ID/IG
2
1
40
70
100
Γ2D (cm–1)
200
300
HO
Reduction
Defect
<100 °C
>100 °C
O
O
O
O
O
S
G1
(A)
(B)
>1%G1
20 °C
75 °C
100 °C
150 °C
500 °C
1000 °C
Figure 6.4  (A) The carbon framework of oxo‐G1 is thermally stable up to 100 °C, but it is 
unstable at higher temperatures [30]. (B) Statistical Raman analysis of graphene derived from 
oxo‐G1 after thermal treatment and subsequent chemical reduction [30]. Reproduced from [30] 
with permission of John Wiley & Sons

184
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
It can be concluded that the laser pulse heats GO locally and that thermal heating 
­introduces defects in the irradiated area. The differences are detectable after chemical 
reduction and can be visualized by SRM. These experiments reveal that lattice defects that 
are already present in GO and oxo‐G1, respectively, determine the quality of graphene. 
Thus, the reduction method is not necessarily quality‐limiting.
6.4  Non‐Covalent Chemistry
Non‐covalent and covalent functionalization principles were exploited to functionalize 
GO. Approximately 50% of the C atoms of GO are sp2 carbon and thus a non‐covalent 
interaction with π conjugated molecules should be possible (Figure 6.6). Also polar inter-
actions, such as hydrogen bonding, can be exploited to molecules adsorbed on GO. Water 
molecules always interact by hydrogen bonding and therefore GO is dispersible in water. 
The literature on non‐covalent functionalization by π conjugated molecules and by polymers 
is very rich. There is no chance to review all the published reports within one chapter of this 
book. That is why, in this section, we provide only a few examples to give a very general 
idea of this type of GO chemistry.
In one example, the polymer of methylcellulose was used to make hydrogen‐bonded 
composites. The polymer isolates individual sheets and it was found that fluorescence 
properties could be adjusted over a wide range of pH [32]. In accordance with the non‐
covalent functionalization concept, fluorescent dye‐labeled single‐strand DNA (ssDNA) 
can interact with GO, which leads to the quenching of fluorescence. It could be observed 
Laser on
Laser off
Reduction
GO
(B)
(C)
(D)
(A)
GO2b
rGO2b
1.4 μm
1.4 μm
Local laser exposition
GO after laser exposition
Middle
region
Loop
region
4
Raman map
(5s, D2)
1.0
ID/IG
1.3
1.6
1.9
2.2
2.5
2.7
2
0
–2
–4
–2
0
X (μm)
Y (μm)
2
4
Reduced GO
Figure 6.5  (A) Illustration of GO or oxo‐G1 that is damaged by a laser pulse and the locally 
thermally reduced material is further reduced chemically. AFM images of (B) GO and (C) 
RGO after a 5 s laser pulse at 0.06 mW applied to GO. (D) Raman map of the ID/IG ratio of the 
flake of RGO. Reproduced from [31] with permission of Elsevier

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
185
that the fluorescence is restored upon addition of a complementary target, because of the 
stronger target–ssDNA interaction compared to ssDNA–GO interaction (Figure 6.6) [33].
In another approach, a stable dispersion of RGO in water was prepared. First, GO was 
stabilized by non‐covalent interaction with a cationically charged polymer. A dispersion of 
this GO/polymer is prepared by adsorption of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) 
(PDDA) and subsequent chemical reduction of the composite with sodium borohydride led 
to stable dispersions of RGO/PDDA (Figure 6.7) [34]. The interaction of the polymer with 
GO and RGO, respectively, yields stable dispersions of single layers. Without the stabiliz-
ing polymer, the RGO aggregates forming precipitates. It can be assumed that, whereas GO 
and PDDA interact by polar interactions of the oxo‐functional groups of GO with the 
­cationic groups of PDDA, the interaction of RGO and PDDA is due to van der Waals inter-
actions and in part via polar groups that are located at the edges of defects.
The non‐covalent π–π interaction of pyrene derivatives with GO is, however, limited. 
This observation may also be due to solubility incompatibilities. However, RGO offers a 
huge π system and functional groups at defect sites still provide polar groups (Figure 6.8) 
[35]. An anchoring unit of 1‐pyrenebutyric acid was functionalized with a reversible 
­addition − fragmentation chain‐transfer (RAFT) agent that was synthesized from hydroxyl 
HO
HO
O
Defect
GO
O
HO
HO
O
GO/π-system
O
HO
HO
O
Defect
O
O
H
H
H2O
GO/adsorbed molecules
FL
HO
HO
O
Defect
O
HO
HO
O
O
+
Defect
Defect
Figure  6.6  Non‐covalent approaches to functionalized GO with π interactions or polar 
interactions. Example of ssDNA conjugated with a fluorophore (FL, quenched) adsorbed on 
GO exploiting polar and π interactions. A complementary target leads to desorption and 
restores fluorescence [33]

186
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
ethyl disulfide and 2‐(((ethylthio)carbonothioyl)thio)propanoic acid. The pyrene unit 
binds to the π system of RGO and the RAFT agent enables the polymerization of N‐­
isopropylacrylamide. This approach enables the formation of an acryl polymer with 
RGO sheets incorporated.
6.5  Covalent Chemistry
The covalent chemistry of GO is aimed at the reactions with functional groups that are 
located (i) on the basal planes of sheets of GO and (ii) at edges. These edges can either be 
the edges of the flakes or the edges of defect sites. Defects play an important role in GO 
chemistry. Thus, the chemistry of GO is often dominated by the chemistry of the edge 
functional groups, which is reviewed in section 6.5.3.
HO
HO
O
Defect
O
HO
HO
O
Defect
O
N
Cl
N
Cl
Reduction
(NaBH4)
Defect
N
Cl
Figure 6.7  Non‐covalent polar interaction of PDDA with GO as stabilizing agent, followed by 
deoxygenation with NaBH4 to yield stabilized RGO [34]
Defect
O
HN
n
Defect
n
O
O
S
S
O
O
S
S
S
O
O
S
S
O
O
S
S
S
O
HN
Figure  6.8  Non‐covalent polar interaction of pyrene with the π system of RGO enables 
attachment of the RAFT agent for composite formation [35]

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
187
6.5.1  Reactions Mainly at the Basal Plane
Functional groups on the basal plane are hydroxyl groups as well as epoxy groups, and the 
oxidation of graphite with permanganate in sulfuric acid results roughly in a degree of 
functionalization of 50%. Every second C atom is therefore expected to be functionalized. 
Due to the homogeneous functionalization, those groups are located on both sides of 
the basal plane, and NMR spectroscopy reveals that epoxy C atoms and hydroxyl C atoms 
are roughly equally distributed. Thus, about two hydroxyl groups per one epoxy group can 
be expected in a typical GO. In addition, numerous defects of unspecified nature can be 
considered as an important part of GO. Such a structure accounts for the main features of 
GO as illustrated in Figure 6.9.
However, for adopting the properties of GO, it is a good idea to address hydroxyl groups. 
Epoxy groups are in part expected to be sterically hindered and nucleophiles may more 
likely react with carboxylic acids in acid–base reactions or with carbonyl groups located at 
edge groups.
Although the basal plane of GO is ruptured due to some over‐oxidation, there are still 
many functional groups on both sides of the basal plane, in particular, hydroxyl groups, 
which are the major functional species of GO. According to Layek et al. [36], tertiary 
­alcohol groups can be exploited to form ester groups, with activated carboxylic acids. 
The example illustrated in Figure 6.10 illustrates the reaction of the carbonic acid bromide, 
α‐bromoisobutyryl bromide, with GO [36]. The reaction occurs in the presence of pyridine 
to further activate α‐bromoisobutyryl bromide and to act as a scavenger of the HBr formed. 
The formed ester groups now bear the tertiary bromide, which can be exploited for atom 
HO
Defect
OH
GO
O
Figure 6.9  Chemical sketch of GO accounting for functional groups on both sides of the 
basal plane and not well‐defined defects
Br
O
O
HO
Defect
OH
GO
O
O
O
Br
O
Br
Br
O
Defect
O
O
Pyridine
CuCl, PMDETA
O
O
O
O
O
Defect
Br
n
n
Br
O
O
O
O
n
Figure 6.10  Functionalization of GO with α‐bromoisobutyryl bromide to form ester groups 
and the bromo end‐group that can be exploited for ATRP reactions. The ATRP polymerization 
with methyl methacrylate is subsequently initiated by CuCl and N,N,N,N,N‐pentamethyl 
diethylene triamine (PMDETA) [36]

188
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) reactions. The addition of CuCl as catalyst and the 
tertiary amine initiates the polymerization in the presence of methyl methacrylate. 
Hydrazine reduction finally yields polymer‐wrapped RGO.
In fact, the chemical reactions described above might be quite different. Many reactants 
were involved in this process; each of them may play its own role, different from the one 
aimed at by the authors. First of all, it is known that, unlike primary and secondary alco-
hols, the tertiary alcohols are not prone to esterification with acids. It should be noted that 
amines are well known to chemically reduce GO, at least in part. That reduction could 
therefore be a side reaction of this approach. The same is true for Cu(i) that should serve as 
a reducing agent. Tertiary amine, used as polymerization initiator, can also be physisorbed 
electrostatically on GO.
In this regard, a general consideration is shown in Figure 6.11. Hydroxyl groups can be 
tertiary hydroxyl groups bonded either on both sides of the basal plane or in the plane 
bound at defect sites. Ester or ether formation of hydroxyl groups will proceed at all alco-
hol groups where the reaction is sterically possible. However, C–O bonds will behave dif-
ferently upon chemical reduction: C–O bonds are cleaved with reduction of the carbon 
framework and the carbon framework becomes π conjugated. The regeneration of π conju-
gation is the driving force for C–O bond cleavage and in‐plane functional groups can be 
expected to persist upon reduction. Anisole, which is the methyl ether of phenol, will not 
be cleaved upon treatment with hydrazine.
The aim of the approach depicted in Figure 6.12 is the binding of a functional addend 
that allows C–C bond formation and the introduction of further functional groups in GO 
derivatives. Therefore, triethyl orthoacetate is activated by an acid and then an alcohol of 
GO forms first a C–O bond [37]. The ether bond is formed after ethanol cleavage and 
­formation of the C = C double bond. In the second step a [3, 3] sigmatrope rearrangement 
can occur if a C = C double bond of the carbon framework is in the right conformation. 
As illustrated in Figure 6.12, carboxylic acids form under basic conditions. However, 
in‐plane defects may also generate some carboxylic acids. The influence of functional 
groups at defect sites on this reaction protocol is not clear. Nevertheless, it could be dem-
onstrated that carboxylic acids can be formed and that the reduction product forms stable 
dispersions in water. Moreover, X‐ray diffraction (XRD) measurements indicate an 
O
R
HO
HO
OH
O
O
O
R
O
X
–HX
O
R
R
O
O
O
R
Reduction
Ester or ether
formation
Figure 6.11  Hydroxyl groups in GO exist is arbitrary amounts on the basal plane and at 
defect sites. Ester or ether formation with hydroxyl groups will proceed at tertiary hydroxyl 
groups and the more phenol‐like hydroxyl groups located at edges (if the ester and ether 
formation are sterically possible). Chemical reduction is expected to cleave preferably the C–O 
bond on the basal plane

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
189
increased sheet distance in films of flakes, in contrast to as‐synthesized GO. The surface 
properties of GO can be widely altered by this approach (Figure 6.12). The formation of a 
series of amide bonds was reported to be suitable to anchor carbon‐rich molecules or mol-
ecules with triple bonds. The triple bonds were further used to make “click” reactions to 
further functionalize the surface.
However, from the perspective of organic chemistry, it seems to be illusive to prove the 
direct bond formation between one sp2 carbon atom of the carbon lattice and the C atom of 
the addend. Analytical tools must be developed or improved to quantify the amount of 
formed C–C bonds and to evaluate the regiochemistry. It is desirable to be able to distin-
guish between edge functionalization, adsorption and functionalization on the intact ­carbon 
framework. The chemistry of GO is dominated by the intrinsic properties of GO and func-
tionalization is mostly based on C–O bond formation. In contrast to that, the chemistry of 
graphene concentrates on C–C bond formation. Thus, these two worlds merge with C–C 
bond formation, and overcoming structural defects in GO would possibly lead to graphene 
derivatives that cannot be distinguished from derivatives directly prepared from graphene.
It has been reported that the hydroxyl groups of GO sheets can be cross‐linked by con-
densation with benzene‐1,4‐diboronic acid, forming boronic esters. This approach yields a 
porous network that is attractive for gas adsorption [38, 39]. Again, the actual reaction 
mechanism here might be questioned because of the known resistance of the tertiary 
­alcohols toward esterification. Furthermore, organic isocyanates were used for functionali-
zation in the early pioneering work of Stankovich et al. in 2006 [40]. Porous materials are 
of significant importance for applications, such as charge storage or adsorption materials. 
Aerogels can be synthesized by various methods and those approaches are summarized in 
the recent literature [38, 39, 41, 42].
HO
HO
O
Defect
OH
GO
OEt
EtO
EtO
HO
O
O
Defect
OH
EtO
HO
O
O
Defect
OH
EtO
HO
O
O
OH
HO
Saponification
Defect
HO
O
O
OH
HN
Defect
N
HO
O
O
OH
HN
Defect
C2O2Cl2
C2O2Cl2
H2N(CH2)2N(CH3)2
N
N
N
R
NH2
R-N3
Figure 6.12  Illustration of the reaction of hydroxyl groups of GO to form C–C bonds by 
Johnson–Claisen rearrangement. The yielded ester can be saponified, activated and undergoes 
amidation with various amines, including propargyl amine, that can be further exploited for 
alkine–azide reactions. The addition of various groups with ethylene glycol moieties or 
sulfonate groups was reported. Terminal amines can also be protonated to yield positively 
charged derivatives suitable for layer‐by‐layer assembly [37]

190
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Moreover, ketone groups, which are functional groups at either the edges of flakes or the 
edges of defect sites, can in principle be reduced with zinc and an acid (Figure 6.13). Sofer 
et al. [43] claim that deuterium labeling leads to the conclusion that nascent hydrogen 
reduces functional groups on both sides of the carbon lattice. In contrast, the direct contact 
of ketones with zinc allegedly was reported to lead to the formation of C–H bonds. It can 
be assumed that selective engineering of functional groups at defect sites, e.g. by exchang-
ing polar carbonyl with alkyl bonds, can modulate the properties of RGO. In any case, the 
chemical reduction of surface functional groups occurs and RGO is formed. However, it is 
questionable if ketones located at edges are chemically reduced to CH2 groups. The Fourier‐
transform infrared (FTIR) spectra of the HCl/H2O‐RGO and the DCl/D2O‐RGO are almost 
identical. There is no evidence of C–D bond formation. On the contrary, there are weak but 
clear absorption bands at ~2800 and 2900 cm−1 suggesting the presence of C–H bonds. 
However, there is no apparent signal at roughly 1900–2050 cm−1, where the C–D bond 
absorption bands should appear [44]. The absence of such vibrations questions the forma-
tion of any C–D bonds in Zn/HCl‐reduced GO, and further clarification is needed. It remains 
unclear how to conduct the reduction experiment to chemically reduce ketones selectively. 
Otherwise, RGO is formed that may bear a few CH2 groups instead of ketones at edges. 
Moreover, the concept of “nascent hydrogen” and mechanistic evolution and reactivity 
remains questionable [45].
There are efforts to selectively react functional groups of GO. It was found that epoxy 
groups that are located at the basal plane are preferably reduced using a combination of 
In/InCl [46]. The π system of GO can be increased by such a method and the residual 
­functional groups make the product dispersible in solvents. However, the deoxygenation is 
also in part accompanied by the cleavage of hydroxyl groups, and also metal impurities 
may be introduced.
HO
O
O
HO
O
O
O
O
“H •”
O
O
O
O
CH2
CH2
HO
O
O
HO
O
“Zn”
“Zn”
C
H2
C
H2
CH2
CH2
O
Figure 6.13  Clemmensen reduction of carbonyl groups to CH2 groups, proceeding at the 
edges of flakes and defects as proposed by Sofer et al. [43]. Nascent hydrogen instead leads to 
defunctionalization of surface bound oxo‐groups [43]

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
191
The direct reaction of amines with graphite oxide and GO, respectively, was also reported. 
This approach leads to partially reduced and functionalized materials [47, 48]. Although the 
products are dispersible in organic solvents, such as tetrahydrofuran, and although they can 
be mixed with polymers, the type of binding of amines to GO can only be assumed, and func-
tionalized polar edges of defect sites may play a crucial role. Following this approach, stearyl 
amine‐treated GO was incorporated in composite materials with ­styrene [49]. The reaction of 
amines with GO can, however, also lead to electrostatically bound structures of deprotonated 
acidic groups of GO forming alkylammonium counter‐ions, as facilitated in the examples of 
section 6.8.3.3. Ethylene diamine and GO react with each other and form partially RGO as a 
hydrogel. Freeze‐drying yields a porous solvent‐free material that can be further processed by 
microwave irradiation to form a hydrogel with a density of only 3 mg cm−3. The hydrogel has 
the ability to fully recover its original volume after 90% of compression.
Several review articles summarize approaches to functionalized and dispersible GO and 
RGO, respectively [17, 19, 50–52].
Also nanoparticles (NPs) can be formed and deposited onto the sheets of GO and RGO, 
respectively, to form metal–graphene composites [54]. In a typical approach to composites, 
GO is dispersed in ethylene glycol together with, for example, H2PtCl6 or RuCl3, and after 
heating the mixture at 130 °C the product is isolated and tested in applications. The 
­electrocatalytic activity of those composites is beneficial for methanol or ethanol oxidation 
[54]. The as‐formed metal nanoparticles typically have a diameter less than 10 nm, and are 
tightly bound to GO/RGO flakes.
Along these lines, the binding of Fe ions with GO was facilitated to prepare magnetic 
Fe3O4 particles that are bound to GO by using NH4OH to prepare the RGO hybrid 
(Figure  6.14) [53]. A magnet can attract those dispersed GO/NPs materials. However, 
HOOC
HOOC
HOOC
HOOC
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
COOH
COOH
COOH
Fe2+
Fe2+
rGO/Fe3O4
3 Fe2++GO (8OH–)
Fe3O4/rGO
Magnet
GO
Fe3O4+4 H2O+rGO
Fe3O4
GO
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fe2+
Fe2+
Redox
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Fe2+
Figure 6.14  (A) GO functionalized with nanoparticles (NPs). Typically, magnetic Fe3O4 NPs 
are prepared by redox reaction. Fe2+ ions are adsorbed on GO and the NPs form in the presence 
of NH4OH at pH = 9. (B) Dispersion of GO and (C) images of dispersion after redox reaction. 
Reproduced from [53] with permission of RSC

192
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
­crucial questions about the binding and growth mechanism of the particles remain open. 
The interaction between RGO and the metal particles remains uncertain. The particles may 
be non‐covalently bound or alternatively a metal–C bond may be formed. Residual oxygen 
moieties of RGO can also form metal–O–C bonds. It can be assumed that defects play 
a  crucial role in those wet‐chemical approaches to anchor nanoparticles or to limit 
their growth.
6.5.2  Consideration About C–C Bond Formation on the Basal Planes
It was also reported that C–C bonds could be formed to GO. This approach is facilitated 
because approximately 50% of C atoms in GO are sp2‐hybridized. The formation of C–C 
bonds on the surface of graphene is highly desired for the synthesis of molecular architec-
tures. One approach toward C–C bond formation in GO was reported using partially RGO. 
The idea is to increase the π system by partial defunctionalization of functional groups 
from the basal plane, followed by the addition of an aryldiazonium salt that also bears a 
sulfonic acid to provide water solubility. Although this approach is appealing and black 
dispersions were yielded, crucial questions could not be addressed at that time. The quan-
tification of defects and the determination of the degrees of functionalization remained 
unaddressed [55]. It is plausible that aryl ether groups can be formed by the reaction of the 
aryldiazonium salt and hydroxyl groups at the surface or at edges (as illustrated in 
Figure 6.12) [56]. Ether formation may even become the major reaction and C–C bond 
formation could be a side reaction. Also the edges of graphene flakes have been demon-
strated to be more reactive than the graphene basal plane, an effect that has not been well 
investigated for GO [57]. Moreover, the adsorption of aryldiazonium salts on carbon sur-
faces is well known and such additional adsorption also alters the surface properties [58].
Other approaches to C–C bond formation were reported, based on, for example, carbene 
chemistry. Carbon–nucleophile or C–C bond formation by rearrangement reactions have 
also been reported [59–61]. Generally black dispersions are yielded: that observation gives 
evidence for defunctionalization of the surface rather than functionalization. It can be 
expected that the addition of any addend to the π system of GO would lead to a brighter 
material than a darker one. Anyhow, it was demonstrated that soluble graphene can be 
­prepared, e.g. by a chemical approach using rearrangement reactions, based on the Claisen 
reaction, as illustrated in Figure 6.12 by the Johnson–Claisen reaction [37, 62].
6.5.3  Reactions at Edges
6.5.3.1  The Nature and the Fraction of Edge Atoms
The terms “flake edges”, “edge atoms” and “edge functional groups” are very common in 
graphene‐ and GO‐related research. However, there is some confusion in understanding 
these terms. Unlike graphene, with respect to GO, the term “edge” is not very straightfor-
ward, and often a writer and a reader understand it differently. For GO, the term “edge” 
includes both edges of the flakes along the flake perimeter, and also edges of the defect 
sites, or holes.
Defect sites must play an important role for the functionalization of GO, as outlined 
below. Let us assess the content, or fraction, of the different edge atoms in GO flakes. 
Figure 6.15 illustrates how the ratio of edge groups to the total number of framework atoms 

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
193
decreases with increasing flake size. A typical diameter of a flake of GO is a few micrometers 
and therefore the ratio of flake‐edge carbon atoms to in‐plane carbon atoms is low. 
Assuming a flake diameter of 3 µm relates to an area of 7 × 106 nm2.
Further, functional groups at the edges of a flake may have an extent of 0.3 nm, which 
would relate to an area of 2.8 × 103 nm2. Thus the ratio in this example is 0.04%. Note that, 
in very many studies, the size of GO flakes is even larger than 3 µm. Thus, the number of 
flake‐edge atoms is negligible compared to the number of basal‐plane atoms. Any func-
tionalization along the flake perimeter will be undetectable by spectroscopy methods due 
to the low fraction. Thus it is impossible that edge functional groups could possibly dominate 
the overall functionalization of such a flake. In contrast, assuming a flake diameter of 
20 nm, the related area is 314 nm2 and, following the same assumptions as above, 5.7% of 
the area is related to the flake‐edge functional groups and therefore, for example, alkylation 
at edges can plausibly dominate the properties of such a macromolecule. This simple 
­consideration brings us to the conclusion that, in GO, the functionalization of defect sites 
(hole edges), not flake perimeter edges, plays a major role for adopting the properties of 
functionalized GO.
With the oxidation of the carbon framework, many carboxylic acids or ketones may be 
introduced. Moreover, the formation of CO2 due to over‐oxidation has been reported [29]. 
Ketone groups can only be located at the edges of flakes or new edges that are formed upon 
over‐oxidation of the carbon lattice. Thus, the formation of ketones requires breaking of 
C–C bonds of the carbon framework. As illustrated in Figure 6.16, the removal of one 
C atom produces three new edge carbon atoms. Those edge atoms can be oxidized and 
ketones can form. However, the space is limited, and it seems unlikely that three ketones 
are formed. Nevertheless, less space is required if a semi‐acetal was formed from the reac-
tion of the enol form of the ketone with another ketone. Following these considerations, 
when more carbon atoms are missing, more options for functional groups exist. In addition, 
the oxidation may not stop at ketones. Breaking one additional C–C bond of the carbon 
framework can result in the formation of in‐plane carboxylic acids.
C6/6
C24/18
C54/30
C96/42
Figure  6.15  Illustration of the increase of the carbon framework of nano‐graphene with 
zigzag edges (number of C atoms/number of edge atoms). While benzene bears only edges, 
coronene with its C24 unit has 18 edge atoms and six in‐plane atoms. For the C96 unit there are 
more in‐plane atoms that edge atoms

194
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
As depicted in Figure 6.17, a carboxylic acid requires more space, and it does not 
seem possible that a carboxylic acid can be formed at a single‐atom vacancy defect. 
The formation of lactols is also plausible. An adjacent ketone group can react with the 
OH group of the carboxylic acid. Thus, single and double vacancy groups may be too 
small to form carboxylic acids. The situation changes for a more ruptured carbon framework. 
Although it remains difficult to saturate all the edges of the defect site, the formation of 
carboxylic acids is plausible. Other functional groups at the edges of defects may include 
ether groups, hydroxyl groups, ketones and semi‐acetals. However, it must be kept in 
mind that up to now the nature of functional groups at edges is not well understood. 
Therefore, the illustrations of Figure  6.17 are only suitable models for considering 
­plausible possibilities. Here, it is not shown that over‐oxidation may also induce the rear-
rangement of the carbon framework and therefore not only hexagons but also pentagons 
or other structure may be present. See Figure 2.14 for additional possible arrangements 
of edge functional groups.
O
O
O
OH
HO
O
O
O
HO
O
OH
O
OH
O
HO
Figure  6.17  Illustration of the hexagonal carbon framework of graphene that was over‐
oxidized to form carboxylic acids. A certain amount of space is required for the formation of a 
carboxylic acid, and therefore they are more likely to be formed at larger holes. Formation of 
lactol groups at edges is plausible
O
O
O
O
OO
OH
Figure 6.16  Illustration of the hexagonal carbon framework of graphene with one missing C 
atom. Three new edges are produced that may be oxidized to ketone groups. The middle 
structure illustrates that the space required for three ketones is limited. However, the formation 
of an enol structure that is forming a semi‐acetal may solve that problem

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
195
6.5.3.2  Reactions Involving Carboxylic Groups
Edge groups, such as carbonyl or carboxyl groups of GO, can be used for functionalization 
reactions [17, 63]. Most chemical functionalization approaches use protocols suitable for 
reactions with carboxyl groups that are activated and subsequently converted to esters or 
amides [64–66].
Activation agents for carboxylic acids, such as SOCl2 or carbodiimides, were reported. 
Especially, the reaction of SOCl2 with alcohols forming eventually unstable C–Cl bonds on 
the surface according to the SNi mechanism may be a concurrent reaction that cannot be 
ruled out in most approaches.
After activation of carboxylic acids, alcohols or amines are added to form esters and 
amides (Figure 6.18). Although this approach is manifold facilitated, it remains challeng-
ing to quantify the exact fraction of established covalent bonds. Moreover, it is difficult to 
distinguish between carbonyl and carboxyl groups by spectroscopic techniques, and there-
fore quantification of ester groups and amides remains challenging, respectively. Although 
it is plausible that reactions can only occur at defect sites, proving the localization with 
precision remains challenging.
HO
HO
O
Defect
OH
GO
SOCl2
O
OH
O
OH
Cl
HO
O
Defect
Cl
O
Cl
O
Cl
“Cl”
cleavage
HO
O
Defect
O
Cl
O
Cl
HO
O
Defect
O
O
O
N
H
R-OH
or
R-NH2
R
R
Figure 6.18  Functionalization of GO at carboxylic acids, located at the edges of flakes or 
defect sites. Activation of carboxylic acids by thionyl chloride can also activate surface OH 
groups and cause elimination or other side reactions. Acid chlorides can subsequently react 
with alcohols or amines to form esters and amides, respectively

196
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
It is plausible that the edges of flakes and defects of GO are chemically functionalized. 
Carboxyl or carbonyl groups among alcohols can be expected. It remains an unsolved 
problem to address those functional groups selectively without affecting surface functional 
groups. The type of edge groups may, however, also be heterogeneous, which prohibits the 
efficient functionalization of edges [67]. As introduced above, GO bears a high concentra-
tion of defect sites. Moreover, surface functional groups can be removed by reduction and 
functional groups remain at least in part bound to defect sites. It is well documented that 
carboxylic acids can be prepared at the edges of carbon nanotubes by oxidation with nitric 
acid. Carboxylic acids can be activated by reagents such as carbodiimides or thionyl 
­chloride or other reagents and undergo the formation of amides by the reaction with amines.
According to this concept, preparation of the edge‐functionalized RGO was described 
as follows. First, GO was reduced at 100 °C using hydrazine as reducing agent; boiling a 
brown aqueous dispersion of GO leads to aggregated RGO that can be isolated by filtra-
tion (Figure 6.19). This RGO was then oxidized at the edges of flakes and the edges of 
defects by treatment with HNO3 to form carboxylic acid groups. Afterwards boiling 
­carboxylated RGO with thionyl chloride formed the acyl chloride groups that were subse-
quently reacted with octadecylamine. The product is black and soluble in non‐polar 
­solvents, including lube oil.
However, from the chemical point of view it remains challenging to determine the exact 
degree of functionalization. It would be interesting to quantify the amount of carboxylic 
acid groups and formed amide groups, respectively, to calculate a reaction yield for this 
HO
HO
O
Defect
OH
GO
Defect
rGO
Hydrazine
HNO3
HO
O
O
HO
Cl
O
O
Cl
SOCl2
NH2
– 2 HCl
NH
O
O
NH
14
14
14
Figure 6.19  Reaction scheme for an example of edge functionalization of RGO, starting from 
GO with structural defects. Surface functional groups are chemically removed by reduction 
with hydrazine. Mild oxidation with nitric acid causes oxidation at defect sites to introduce 
carboxylic acids. Subsequently carboxylic acids are activated by thionyl chloride to enable the 
reaction with octadecylamine (the defect site is marked as thick black lines and additional 
functional groups are omitted for clarity) [67]

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
197
reaction sequence. Also the evolution of the size of flakes and the level of individualization 
of flakes in the final product are questions of interest.
Although the spectroscopic data for the intermediate and final products have been 
­presented, the visualization and especially quantification of amides is not yet possible. This 
paper [67] is a typical publication claiming covalent functionalization of GO. This is why 
we decided to use it as a model study to show the lack of strong evidence for the claims.
The only way to claim successful reaction in this case is to present spectroscopic 
­evidence showing the formation of the C–N bond. Two types of spectroscopic data were 
presented in the paper [67]: FTIR and X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The FTIR 
spectrum for octadecylated GO (ODC‐GO) contains a broad band centered at 1220 cm−1, 
that was attributed to the stretching mode of the amide C–N linkage. However, the very 
same peak is present in the spectrum of carboxylated RGO, before reacting with octadecyl. 
The other absorption bands such as the 2800–3000 cm−1 only prove the existence of the 
octadecyl on the GO, but not the formation of the amide link (Figure 6.20). No additional 
evidence can be obtained from FTIR in support of the amide linkage.
The strongest evidence from the XPS data is the weak nitrogen signal (content is not quan-
tified). The position of the N 1s signal is at 399.5 eV, which was ascribed to the nitrogen 
atoms bonded to carbon by an amide link. However, octadecylamine itself contains the C–N 
bond as well, and the nitrogen atom from octadecylamine have the N 1s signal exactly at the 
same position at 399.5 eV. The deconvolution of the C 1s envelope, made by the authors [67] 
(Figure 6.21) to show allegedly existing C–N and O = C–N components, is nothing but pure 
speculation. Thus, the XPS data support only the presence of octadecylamine in the sample, 
but not the formation of the amide link.
orGO
ODA-rGO
rGO
GO
υC-H
υC-N
υC-O
υC-O-C
υC = C / H2O
υC = O
δN-H/υC= C
δC-H
δOH
4000
3500
Wavenumber (cm–1)
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
Transmittance (a.u.)
Figure 6.20  FTIR spectra for GO (black), RGO (red), carboxylated GO (green) and ODC‐
GO (blue) with the bands’ assignment as performed by the authors [67]. Reproduced from [67] 
with permission of ACS

198
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
C=O
C=C/C-C
C=C/C-C
C-N/C-O
C-O-C
O=C-N
400 cps
2000 cps
50 cps
C 1s
N 1s
O=C-OH
292
(a)
(b)
(c)
290
288
286
Binding energy, eV
284
282
280
292
290
288
286
Binding energy, eV
284
282
408
406
402
404
400
Binding energy, eV
398
396
394
392
C-OH &
C-O-C
Measured spectra
Fit
Fit components
Measured spectra
Fit
Fit components
Figure 6.21  XPS spectra for GO, RGO, carboxylated GO and ODC‐GO with deconvolution 
of the envelope spectra as performed by the authors [67]. (a) C 1s spectrum for original GO. 
(b) C 1s spectrum for ODC‐GO. (c) N 1s spectrum for ODC‐GO. Reproduced from [67] with 
permission of ACS

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
199
The provided TGA and XRD data do not prove anything either. All the provided experi-
mental data would look absolutely the same if octadecylamine was simply physisorbed on 
the RGO surface. This is what most likely happens in reality. The positively charged amino 
group of octadecylamine strongly physisorbs onto the negatively charged GO. However, 
there is one piece of experimental data that evidences strongly against the covalent func-
tionalization. The authors [67] present pictures showing the solubility of the functionalized 
ODC‐GO in different organic solvents. ODC‐GO is partially soluble in ethanol and 
­non‐soluble in hexane. This is not what one would expect if the claimed functionalization 
mechanism were successful. The hydrophobic hexadecyl tails would render ODC‐GO 
more soluble in hexane, rather than in ethanol. Higher solubility in ethanol, in turn, sug-
gests the presence of unreacted physisorbed hexadecylamine. The solubility of the latter in 
ethanol is three times higher than in hexane. Thus, physisorbed hexadecylamine renders 
ODC‐GO partially soluble in ethanol.
Our discussion above does not minimize the significance of this work in terms of the 
properties of the final product, regardless of the ways of its production. To give credit to 
the authors, this is one of the best reports on the topic. Many works provide even lesser 
­evidence. To tell the truth, proving covalent functionalization of GO is very difficult.
As shown in Figure 6.17, a functional group such as a carboxylic acid needs more space 
than just one carbon atom. Therefore, it is plausible that a single‐atom vacancy defect 
would not be enough for carboxylic acid formation at a defect site. Moreover, if a carboxylic 
acid was formed, the neighboring edges of carbon atoms may become sterically ­hindered. 
This limits the concentration of carboxylic acids at edges. Steric effects and considerations 
about the quantification of functional groups must be taken into account to determine the 
efficiency of a reaction.
Another concept that allows the functionalization of edges, while basal‐plane functional 
groups play a minor role, is realized by decreasing the size of GO flakes [63]. It was 
reported that the lateral size of GO flakes of about 50–500 nm could be further reduced to 
5–50 nm by sonication. Such small GO flakes have a high contribution of functional groups 
at flake perimeter edges and it is plausible that carboxylic acids at these edges play a major 
role (Figure  6.22). Carbodiimide‐mediated coupling of amino‐terminated polyethylene 
glycol led to soluble PEGylated GO.
O
OH
O
OH
OH
O
H2N
O
O
n
O
O
O
N
H
O
O
n
NH
O
O
n
NH
O
O
n
HO
OH
O
O
HO
OH
Flake size: 5–50nm
Figure 6.22  Simplified scheme of GO with a flake size of about 5–50 nm with carboxylic 
acids located at the edges is functionalized by carbodiimide‐mediated amide bond formation 
to introduce polyethylene glycol groups that provide water solubility [63]

200
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
6.5.3.3  Reactions Involving Ketones
The functionalization of ketone groups that are located at the edges of flakes and defect 
sites was demonstrated by a solid‐state NMR (SSNMR) study conducted on 15N‐labeled 
hydrazine‐reduced 13C‐labeled GO [68]. The formation of pyrazole moieties was proved by 
this approach. As shown in Figure 6.23, pyrazole can form upon the condensation of hydra-
zine with two ketone groups. This experiment also gives information about the regiochem-
istry of ketone groups, because pyrazoles can only be formed from ketones located at edges 
in 1,3‐position. Moreover, forming pyrazole moieties requires a certain amount of space. 
Single‐atom vacancies would not provide enough space, which indicates that holes within 
the carbon framework must at least have the size of three or even many more carbon atoms.
6.6  Reduction and Disproportionation of Graphene Oxide
6.6.1  Reduction
Reduction is the best understood and the most obvious reaction in which GO can be 
involved. Unlike many other types of reactions reviewed in this chapter, the signs of 
­successful reduction are obvious. The GO solution immediately changes its color from 
­yellow‐brown to black, signaling the restoration of the conjugated sp2 network and the 
formation of the graphitic structure. However, with typical GO, the original graphene 
­network is never fully restored. This is because GO itself is already highly defective: 
the existing defects cannot be healed during the reduction. Two different types of species 
remain on the RGO planes after reduction: (i) holes and (ii) some oxygen functionalities.
i.	 The holes are formed on GO planes already in the course of its production [29, 69] due 
to the removal of carbon atoms in the form of carbon dioxide. Thus, during the second 
step of GO formation, i.e. conversion of stage‐1 GIC (graphite intercalation compound) 
into PGO (pristine graphite oxide), significant evolution of CO2 gas was detected [29]. 
Additional defects are introduced during the third step of GO formation, i.e. washing 
of as‐prepared PGO with water [1, 28] according to the mechanism presented in 
Scheme 2.3 and Figure 6.2.
GO
HN
N
N
NH
O
O
O
O
HO
OH
O
H2NNH2
Figure 6.23  Edge functionalization after hydrazine reduction of GO. The reduction of GO 
with hydrazine can lead to the formation of pyrazole moieties. Epoxy and hydroxyl groups 
located at the basal plane are removed by this reduction method. The formation of pyrazole at 
the edges of flakes or defect sites gives evidence for adjacent ketones [68]

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
201
ii.	 The oxygen functionalities remaining on GO after chemical reduction are mostly 
­carbonyls. The epoxides and tertiary alcohols are more or less effectively reduced; 
however, carbonyl groups cannot be easily reduced. The formation of carbonyls 
requires rupture of the C–C bonds. These defects cannot be healed. The ketones in GO 
can react with small molecules extrinsic to GO; however, they cannot react with carbon 
atoms from the opposite side of the defects due to the steric hindrance of such a reaction. 
This is why oxygen functionalities at point defects cannot be removed, and the ­graphene 
lattice cannot be fully recovered.
The formation of such point defects is based on the divalent nature of oxygen. The monovalent 
elements such as fluorine can form single C–F bonds only, and the graphene plane can be 
almost fully restored after defluorination. Unlike monovalent fluorine, divalent oxygen 
introduces permanent point defects. This is why, if one aims to obtain non‐defective GO, 
one needs to conduct the oxidation reaction in a way allowing the formation of monovalent 
functionalities, but avoiding the formation of divalent carbonyls. This was the strategy 
employed by Eigler et al. [70]. By conducting reactions at 0–10 °C, they obtained mini-
mally damaged GO, which upon reduction was converted back to almost intact graphene.
In addition to the existing defects, additional holes on GO planes might form during the 
reduction of as‐formed GO. This conclusion can be drawn from comparison of the high‐
resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images of GO and RGO [71]. It is 
apparent from the presented TEM images that the GO samples contain fewer holes than the 
RGO samples (see Figure 2.9). This is why the effectiveness of the reducing agent will 
depend on its ability to reduce epoxides and alcohols to pure carbon with full restoration of 
the sp2 system. Non‐effective reductants will lead to partial reduction with the formation 
of carbonyls and other adducts.
Any substance with more or less pronounced reducing character will reduce GO to some 
extent. The first reductions of GO with copper(i) chloride and iron(ii) sulfate were demon-
strated back in 1919 by Kohlschütter and Haenni [72]. The graphite‐like products of the 
reduction were isolated and characterized. The now popular reduction of GO with hydrazine 
was first demonstrated by Hofmann et al. in 1934 [73]. In the new era, reduction by several 
typical reducing agents has been demonstrated up to the present day. Thus, reduction was 
successfully conducted by: hydrazine [74–77], sodium borohydride [6, 78], hydroquinone 
[79], hydroxylamine [80], zinc and aluminum powder [81, 82], sodium thiosulfate [83] and 
hydrogen iodide [84–86]. In addition to the typical reductants, reduction with some unusual 
and even exotic compounds have been reported. This list includes melatonin, amino acids, 
vitamin C, phyto extracts, supercritical alcohols and even action by several bacteria.
Electrochemical reduction was also demonstrated [87–89]. In principle, electrochemical 
reduction is very attractive for its efficiency and “green” approach. However, the 
­electrochemical reduction is limited by the fact that it might occur only on the surface of 
the negatively charged electrode, but not in the bulk solution. Thus it might be efficient 
for reduction of as‐prepared thin films deposited on the surface of a current collector. 
This method may find application in the preparation of electrodes for batteries and super-
capacitors. To reduce GO in bulk solution, one needs to find a proper system with a media-
tor that will transfer electrons from the electrode to GO by traveling through the solution. 
Until such a mediator is not found, chemical reduction is the only approach to reduce bulk 
­quantities of GO.

202
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Let us consider the theoretical reaction pathways via which different reducing agents 
will react with epoxides and tertiary alcohols. The possible idealized reaction pathway for 
reducing epoxides by hydrazine is represented in Figure 6.24. However, in practice, the 
reaction mechanism is most likely different, because hydrazine does not afford complete 
GO reduction: some oxygen remains, and nitrogen is introduced.
Unlike epoxides, ketones cannot be reduced by hydrazine; reaction leads to the forma-
tion of hydrazones. This is confirmed by the presence of 3–5% nitrogen in RGO samples 
reduced by hydrazine.
The mechanism of reduction by other reducing agents is even less studied. It is thought, 
in general, that sodium borohydride (NaBH4) is a more effective reducing agent than 
­hydrazine. However, the most effective method reported to the present day is the combina-
tion of hydrogen iodide and acetic acid [85].
The effectiveness of reducing agents can be assessed based on the two main parameters: 
(i) C/O ratio of obtained RGO, and (ii) its electrical conductivity. The C/O ratio represents 
the degree of reduction, and is very straightforward. There is little room for mistake with 
this parameter: the higher the ratio, the deeper the reduction. However, one needs to keep 
in mind that elemental content data largely depend on the characterization method. Thus, 
elemental analysis constantly shows higher oxygen content, compared to that determined 
by XPS. Also, the accuracy of the analysis gets lower when the oxygen content becomes 
less than 3%. This is why one needs to be very cautious when reported C/O ratios become 
higher than 30.
The situation is not as simple with electrical conductivity. The conductivity of two‐
dimensional (2D) materials, including RGO, can be measured and expressed in different 
ways. The conductivity of bulk RGO can be measured directly if the material is in a precise 
geometrical form. Shaping bulk solid RGO can be achieved by cutting paper‐like material 
into strips, or by pressing powder material into a tablet. Electrical conductivity obtained in 
this way will be affected by the contact resistance between RGO flakes in the bulk sample. 
It is a function of how densely the flakes are packed into a three‐dimensional (3D) material. 
The contribution of these factors can be eliminated by measuring the conductivity of a 
single GO flake. This can be done by building a four‐terminal micro‐device with the assis-
tance of photo‐ or e‐beam lithography. The data obtained from such a device are the most 
accurate. Conductivity (σ) obtained in such a way is measured in siemens per meter or 
centimeter (S m−1 or S cm−1).
Since GO and RGO are truly 2D materials, their conductivity can also be expressed as 
sheet resistance (Rs) in Ω/☐; Rs is a measure of electrical conductivity of 2D films independ-
ent of their thickness. From this perspective, it is an ideal method for measuring the conduc-
tivity of a few‐layer thin film. The sheet resistance and the conductivity are related by
	
R
d
s = 1
σ
	
(6.1)
O
+ H2N
NH2
HO
NH
H2N
N
NH2
– H2O
– N2H2
Figure 6.24  Possible reaction pathway for the reduction of epoxide groups by hydrazine

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
203
where d is the film thickness. Many researchers employ this relation to obtain conductivity 
(σ): they measure the sheet resistance Rs of RGO films, and divide its reciprocal by the film 
thickness. This is where the uncertainty comes from. Often, researchers do not actually 
measure the film thickness, but estimate it based on the number of layers, transparency, etc. 
In addition, the films are not uniform, comprising different numbers of layers in different 
areas. Moreover, it was shown earlier that the conductivity of bilayer and trilayer RGO 
does not simply double or triple with the number of layers. Thus, the conductivity of mono‐, 
bi‐ and trilayer RGO nanoribbons (NRs) was respectively 35, 115 and 210 S cm−1 [77].
The large difference in conductivity between mono‐ and bilayers is attributed to the strong 
interaction between the bottom layer and the SiO2 substrate. Thus, many different factors need 
to be taken into account when discussing the conductivity of RGO. This is not always done in 
the literature. This is why, in Table 6.1, we have omitted some unreliable literature data, and 
provided averaged values for the methods, where multiple literature data are available.
Chemical reduction alone never yields highly conductive graphene‐like material due to 
the highly defective nature of RGO and the presence of remaining oxygen functionalities. 
To improve conductivity, the as‐obtained RGO needs to be annealed at around 900–1000 °C. 
After annealing, conductivity increases by two or three orders in magnitude and reaches 
values in the order of 200–300 S cm−1. This occurs due to the significant reconstruction of 
the carbon grid at elevated temperatures.
Most importantly, the conductivity of RGO depends not only on the effectiveness of the 
reduction method, but also on the quality (density of defects) of the GO precursor. This is 
why, to compare the effectiveness of different reducing agents, one needs to subject the 
same GO precursor to different reducing agents. Comparing different literature data 
obtained by reducing different GO samples is not representative. The best data on the 
­effectiveness of the different reducing agents can be obtained by reduction of GO with the 
minimal density of defects, which is how it was done by Eigler et al. with oxo‐G1 [90]. This 
will be reviewed in section 6.6.3.
6.6.2  Disproportionation
In addition to chemical reduction, deoxygenation of GO initiated by heat and light have 
been reported. We stress the importance of using the correct word “deoxygenation” instead 
Table 6.1  Effectiveness of reducing agents toward GO
Reducing agent
GO
N2H4 a
NaBH4 a
HI
G
C/O ratio
2.0–2.7
8.1–12.4
8.6
>12
>50
Conductivity 
(S m−1)
Reduced at room 
temperature
1 × 10−4 
to 
1 × 10−2
1.7 × 102 to 
7.2 × 103
4.5 × 102 to 
9.2 × 102
8.3 × 104 
to 
1.6 × 107
Reduced or 
post‐treated at  
100–250 °C
1.2 × 104 to 
1.6 × 104
3.0 × 102 
[21]
Post‐treated at 
500–1100 °C
2.1 × 104 
[12]
2.0 × 104
3.0 × 104 
[22]
a Average literature data are provided.

204
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
of the commonly used “reduction” for this type of transformation, since it is very different 
from true reduction. Reduction can be conducted only by means of a reducing agent, i.e. a 
chemical compound that easily gives up existing electrons. The electron transfer from a 
reducing agent to GO should occur for a transformation to be qualified as “reduction”. 
Electrochemical reduction is the only type of true reduction that is possible in addition to 
chemical reduction. The term “thermal reduction” introduced recently for the thermally 
initiated decomposition of GO is nonsense in a scientific sense. Heat does not have and 
does not supply any electrons to reduce GO. Interestingly, even people with a chemical 
background use the term “thermal reduction” as the established term. Unfortunately, this is 
not simply the wrong terminology: misuse of fundamental scientific terms inevitably leads 
to misunderstanding of the underlying chemical processes. The absolute majority of 
researchers entering the field remain under the impression that by annealing GO one can 
obtain nice flat graphene‐like material. As an example, a colleague of one of us, with a PhD 
in chemistry, argued that only oxygen and hydrogen are removed from GO during thermal 
annealing, while the carbon grid is preserved. The argument in support of this statement 
was that this was written in some publications. Such a transformation, if it were ever 
accomplished, would be against the laws of thermodynamics: it is impossible to reduce 
carbon at the expense of oxygen. In an effort to overcome such a widespread misconception 
in the field, here we present a brief tutorial on the basics of chemistry.
In terms of redox reactions, such thermal degradation of GO during annealing can be 
envisioned as disproportionation. It was demonstrated by TGA‐MS that carbon dioxide and 
carbon monoxide are formed during thermal decomposition of GO (Figure 6.2A). In this 
transformation, the carbon atoms from the GO network in the formal oxidation state +1 
(epoxides and alcohols) are converted to elemental carbon (oxidation state 0) and carbon 
dioxide (oxidation state +4). The respective redox equation can be written as follows, 
where one carbon atom is removed from the GO network with each two oxygen atoms:
	
2
3
2
2
1
2
3
0
4
2
R COC
R
R C
R
C
O
+
(
)
( )
+
(
)
→
+
+
	
(6.2)
In the respective reaction with carbon monoxide as a product, one carbon atom is removed 
per every oxygen atom:
	
R COCR
R C
R
CO
2
2
3
→
+
+
	
(6.3)
For simplicity, (6.2) and (6.3) are written for epoxides as the decomposing groups. Similar 
equations can be written for alcohols, for which water will be an additional decomposition 
product. For the decomposition of ketones, carbon monoxide cannot be formed, since car-
bon in ketones is already in the oxidation state +2, the same as in CO. Only carbon dioxide 
can be a decomposition product, to afford the following disproportionation ­reaction, which 
is supported by experimental data:
	
2
2
2
2
R C
O
R C
CO
=
→
+
	
(6.4)
Considering the 30–35% oxygen content in typical GO samples, the magnitude of the 
­carbon loss and the damage made on the carbon grid are huge. Annealing of GO introduces 
into GO planes numerous vacancy defects, and leads to the formation of very defective, 
holey, net‐like GO planes, because part of the carbon grid is removed in the form of gase-
ous CO2 and CO (see Figure 6.25). In addition to the numerous experimental data, this was 

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
205
also confirmed with theoretical studies [91]. Figure 6.25 demonstrates the structure of GO 
obtained after annealing at 1500 K, obtained by molecular dynamics simulations. The 
­damage made on the carbon grid is proportional to the oxygen content (C/O ratio) in the 
original GO. While the presence of 20% oxygen causes only minor damage, 33% oxygen 
results in very significant degradation of the carbon grid. This is why, to differentiate chem-
ically reduced GO (RGO) from thermally decomposed GO, we introduce the term 
­“thermally processed GO” (tpGO) for the latter.
The main decomposition of GO occurs in the 160–300 °C temperature interval, where 
most of the oxygen is removed. Epoxides and alcohols are almost completely eliminated at 
these temperatures, while carbonyls survive. At temperatures above 500 °C, carbonyls are 
removed. Finally, the carbon grid is restructured at temperatures above 700 °C. Note that, 
after annealing above 900 °C, as‐obtained tpGO does not contain as much oxygen as shown 
in Figure 6.25; the actual oxygen content is <1%.
The same principle applies to the base of GO “reduction” by light. In the same way as 
heat, light triggers the disproportionation reaction, leading to the same products. In terms 
of thermodynamics, the reaction products, i.e. deoxygenated carbon grid and carbon 
­dioxide, are more stable compared to GO. The role of heat, light, radiation, ball‐milling, 
etc. in this transformation is to provide the energy to overcome the activation barrier.
The introduction of numerous holes into the tpGO planes significantly shortens the 
length of the ballistic transport pathway between two defects. Subsequently, the electrical 
properties of tpGO are inevitably inferior not only to those of pristine graphene, but also 
even to those of RGO. For this reason, tpGO is not a good candidate for applications where 
high electrical conductivity is needed. However, it is superior to RGO as an electrode 
­material for lithium‐ion batteries and supercapacitors, since holes increase the surface area 
and provide channels for the transport of ions.
Interestingly, the same disproportionation reaction can be triggered by the action of some 
chemicals, such as strong bases. GO undergoes deoxygenation when heated in aqueous 
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.25  Morphology of tpGO formed during thermal annealing at 1500 K: (a) original 
GO contained 20% oxygen; (b) original GO contained 33% oxygen. The structures are 
obtained by molecular dynamics simulations. Reproduced from [91] with permission of Nature 
Publishing Group

206
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
solutions of strong bases such as NaOH and KOH. This phenomenon caused different specula-
tions concerning the chemistry behind it. In addition to interpreting it as “reduction”, the two‐
component GO structural model was introduced by Rourke [92]. In fact, NaOH and KOH do 
not possess any reducing nature, thus this reaction cannot be considered as reduction in 
­principle. This is the same disproportionation reaction as the one ­triggered by heat. The only 
difference is that the presence of strong base triggers this reaction at significantly lower 
­temperatures (70–100 °C) as opposed to the 160–300 °C for thermal decomposition.
The following transformations were proposed to explain the mechanism of deoxygena-
tion of GO in alkaline solutions [1, 28]. Equation (6.5) represents a formal redox equation, 
where tertiary alcohols (formal oxidation state +1) transform to ketones (oxidation state +2) 
and elemental carbon (oxidation state 0):
	
2
3
2
2
R C
OH
C C
R C O H O
–
½
→
=
(
)+
=
+
	
(6.5)
The reaction mechanism for this transformation can be envisioned as in Figure 6.26. Note 
that, compared to the initial structure (3), the final structure (4) contains one oxygen atom 
less. Thus, in addition to the C–C bond cleavage, this reaction results in deoxygenation 
with an increase of graphitic carbon content. Interestingly, when the same functional group 
(vicinal diol) was used as a reactant by molecular dynamics simulations for the thermal 
decomposition reaction, the same functional groups (ketone and enol at cleaved C–C bond) 
were obtained as the products [91]. This demonstrates the possibility of some common 
principles in the two different routes of deoxygenation.
Conversion of alcohols to ketones (Figure 6.26) constitutes the first step of a complex 
reaction. Further transformation of ketones to carboxyls and carboxylates can be repre-
sented by formal equation (6.6) and Figure 6.27:
	
2
2
R C
O OH
RCOOH
R
=
+
→
+
−
−	
(6.6)
In (6.6) the minus sign on R− represents the negative charge delocalized over the GO 
­fragment. The reaction begins (Figure 6.27) with nucleophilic attack of a hydroxide ion on 
a carbonyl group of the structure (5), and results in C–C bond cleavage and the transforma-
tion of ketone to carboxyl group (6). In basic conditions, the carboxyl group of the structure 
(6) will be present in the ionized form, i.e. as a carboxylate anion.
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
– H2O
O
4
3
Figure  6.26  The reaction scheme showing deoxygenation of GO during base treatment. 
Structure (3) is a GO fragment containing three alcohol groups. Nucleophilic attack of 
hydroxide ion on a hydrogen atom results in C–C bond cleavage and in the formation of a 
ketone. The fragment (4) contains one oxygen atom less compared to structure (3), signifying 
deoxygenation

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
207
In the extreme conditions of high base concentration and high temperature, the reaction 
can progress even further to lead to decarboxylation of the previously formed carboxyls, as 
shown in (6.7) and Figure 6.28. The nature of this transformation can still be considered 
as disproportionation, since here the carboxyl carbon (oxidation state +3) yields carbon 
dioxide (oxidation state +4) and elemental carbon (oxidation state 0):
	
RCOOH OH
R
CO
H O
+
→
+
+
−
−
2
2 	
(6.7)
The reaction mechanism is typical for decarboxylation (Figure 6.28).
6.6.3  Reduction Strategies
The choice between the strategies to process GO (chemical reduction versus thermal 
annealing) depends on the application. When good electrical conductivity is critical, the 
two‐step reduction is the only approach. On the first step, GO is chemically reduced to 
RGO. This step removes most of the oxygen without causing additional damage to the carbon 
plane. On the second step, thermal annealing at 900–1100 °C removes the remaining 
­oxygen atoms, and restructures the carbon grid to solidify the ballistic transport channels. 
Because most of the oxygen is already removed during the chemical reduction step, anneal-
ing does not cause the formation of additional defects; it only removes oxygen at existing 
defects. Figure  6.29 exemplifies how chemical composition and electrical properties 
change with different steps of processing.
OH
HO
HO
HO
HO
6
5
OH
O
O
Figure 6.27  Conversion of ketones to carboxyls during base treatment. Structure (5) is a GO 
fragment containing one ketone and two alcohol groups. Nucleophilic attack of a hydroxide 
ion on a carbonyl group results in C–C bond cleavage and in the transformation of ketone to 
carboxyl group (6)
OH
OH
HO
+
O
C
O
HO
HO
HO
–H2O
O
Figure 6.28  Decarboxylation of GO under strongly alkaline conditions. The reaction mechanism 
is typical for decarboxylation

208
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The C 1s XPS spectrum for as‐prepared GO NRs (Figure 6.29A) is dominated by the 
component at 287 eV, which is attributed to the carbon of epoxides and alcohols. After 
reducing with N2H4 at room temperature, this component is significantly decreased. The 
shoulder at 289 eV is decreased but to a significantly lesser extent, suggesting that carbonyl 
groups mostly survived the reduction. The conductivity increased by three or four orders of 
(B) 10–6
10–8
10–10
10–12
10–14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Isd [A]
Vsd [V]
As-prepared
N2H4-reduced
H2/Ar, 300 °C
H2/Ar, 900 °C
1.0
(A)
0.8
0.6
Intensity [a.u.]
0.4
0.2
0
294
1200 1300 1400 1500
Raman shift [cm–1]
1600 1700
292
As-prepared
As-prepared
N2H4-reduced
N2H4-reduced
H2/Ar, 300°C
H2/Ar, 900°C
H2/Ar, 900°C
290
Binding energy [eV]
288
286
284
282
(D) 150
140
120
Isd [nA]
@ Vsd = 1V
100
80
–40
–20
0
Vg [V]
20
40
100
50
0
–50
–100
–150
–1
–0.5
0
0.5
1
Vsd [V]
Isd [nA]
(C)
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.4
0
–40
–20
0
20
Vg [V]
40
Isd [nA]
@ Vsd = 1V
–1
1.5
1
0.5
0
–0.5
–1
–1.5
–0.5
0
0.5
1
Vsd [V]
Isd [nA]
Vg = –40V
Vg = –30V
Vg = –20V
Vg = –10V
Vg = 0V
Vg = 10V
Vg = 20V
Vg = 30V
Vg = 40V
Vg=–40V
Vg=–30V
Vg=–20V
Vg=–10V
Vg=0V
Vg=10V
Vg=20V
Vg=30V
Vg=40V
Figure 6.29  Three‐step reduction of GO nanoribbons: N2H4 reduction, 300 °C annealing, 
900 °C annealing. (A) C 1s XPS and (inset) Raman spectra. (B) Logarithmic I–V curves for the 
nanoribbons with different degree of reduction; the average data obtained from testing 30 
different devices. (C) and (D) Source–drain current (Isd), source–drain voltage (Vsd) and gate 
voltage (Vg) dependences for the same device build on an N2H4‐reduced monolayer RGO NR 
before (C) and after (D) annealing in H2/Ar at 300 °C for 30 min. Reproduced from [77] with 
permission of ACS

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
209
magnitude compared to as‐prepared GO NRs (Figure 6.29B). After the chemical reduction 
step, the RGO NRs were additionally subjected to annealing at 300 and 900 °C. These two 
steps additionally reduced the content of oxygen. After annealing at 900 °C, even the weak 
π–π* interaction band at 291 eV appears on the C 1s XPS spectrum, suggesting restoration 
of the highly conjugated sp2 network. The conductivity increases by two orders of magni-
tude after annealing at 300 °C, and by one more order of magnitude for a device built on 
reduced graphene oxide nanoribbon (rGONR) annealed at 900 °C.
The increase in conductivity after each reduction step is further illustrated by 
Figure 6.29(C,D), which display the electrical properties for the same device built on an 
N2H4‐reduced monolayer nanoribbon before (Figure  6.29C) and after (Figure  6.29D) 
annealing in H2/Ar at 300 °C for 30 min. The electrical properties of the annealed devices 
were qualitatively the same, though their conductivity increased by 10‐ to 100‐fold after 
annealing.
6.6.4  Reduction of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
Oxo‐G1 exhibits an almost intact carbon framework and therefore it can potentially be 
chemically reduced to a high quality of graphene. Many reducing agents have been used to 
generate black graphite‐like materials from yellowish GO [93]. However, with GO that 
bears too many defects, it is impossible to quantify the efficiency of the chemical reduction. 
An incorporation of nitrogen species is described, for example, in the literature for hydra-
zine RGO and proven by SSNMR on 13C‐ and 15N‐labeled samples [68]. Consequently, it is 
difficult to rank the potential of a reducing agent. The reduction principles of GO are sum-
marized in the sections above. Moreover, a recent review article regarding the reduction of 
GO summarizes various methods and chemical reduction mechanisms. The success of the 
reduction is thereby quantified by means of the C/O ratio according to XPS determination 
or by the measurement of the electrical conductivity of films of flakes [93, 94]. For RGO 
that bears defects of several percent, these methods are indeed suitable. However, with 
concentrations of defects far below 1%, Raman spectroscopy is the best technique to quan-
tify the density of defects and consequently the quality of graphene that was obtained from 
oxo‐G1 that bears less than about 1% of defects. With this technique, the efficiency of some 
reducing agents was probed to visualize variations [90]. Moreover, a general reduction 
mechanism was proposed [95].
6.6.4.1  Efficiency of Reducing Agents
With oxo‐G1 and statistical Raman spectroscopy, the quality of generated graphene can be 
determined using different types of reducing agents. In principle, it is possible to rank the 
efficiency of the reducing agents. Plots of ID/IG versus Γ2D values illustrate the results for 
four reducing methods (Figure 6.30A). A mixture of hydriodic acid (HI) and trifluoroacetic 
acid (TFA) was identified as the most efficient reduction method. The slightly less efficient 
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) can however also produce graphene of high quality. Although, 
hydrazine vapor is often used in the literature, it is a less effective reducing agent. 
The worst quality of graphene is obtained after thermal annealing of oxo‐G1 at 200 °C. The 
­latter method produced amorphous graphene that is dominated by defect sites (HI/TFAΓ2D < 
vitamin CΓ2D < hydrazineΓ2D < 200 °CΓ2D) [90].
The reduction of oxo‐G1 with ascorbic acid yields a similar quality as for graphene 
obtained by reduction with HI/TFA. But, surprisingly, differences could be revealed by 

210
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
(B)
4
3
2
200 °C
1
0
0.3
2.0 μm
2.0μm
2.0 μm
2.0μm
x (μm)
Height (nm)
0.9
1.5
4
3
2
Vitamin C
1
0
0.3
x (μm)
Height (nm)
0.9
1.5
4.0
(A)
Graphene
Graphene dominated by defects
3.5
3.0
2.5
ID/IG
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
30
40
50
70
Γ2D/ cm–1
100
150
200
250
200 °C
Hydrazine
Vitamin C
HI/TFA
4
3
2
Hydrazine
1
0
0.3
x (μm)
Height (nm)
0.9
1.5
4
3
2
HI/TFA
1
0
0.3
x (μm)
Height (nm)
0.9
1.5
Figure 6.30  (A) Statistical Raman analysis of graphene from oxo‐G1 using different reducing 
agents. (B) AFM images of graphene from oxo‐G1 obtained after thermal reduction (at 200 °C) 
or reduction with vitamin C (ascorbic acid), hydrazine or hydriodic acid and trifluoroacetic 
acid (HI/TFA) [90]. Reproduced from [90] with permission from John Wiley & Sons

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
211
AFM regarding the height of samples (Figure 6.30B). A surface with a roughness of about 
2 nm was found for ascorbic acid‐reduced samples, and thus it can be concluded that the 
reaction products of ascorbic acid remain adsorbed on the surface of graphene, even after 
washing procedures. However, a smooth surface is required if further functionalization 
reactions are intended. It should be kept in mind that the stability of graphene, generated in 
dispersion by reduction, might also be strongly influenced by adsorbed species. Properties 
such as the surface tension will be very different from those of pristine graphene and 
adsorbed species also influence the contact resistance between flakes if the conductivity of 
films of flakes are measured.
6.6.4.2  Mechanism of Reduction of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
With the analysis of the efficiency of reducing agents, the question arises of whether the 
quality of the yielded graphene is limited by the efficiency of the reducing agent or by 
the quality of oxo‐G1. In the study that is depicted in Figure 6.31 it is demonstrated that the 
quality is limited by the reducing agent. It can be concluded that an efficient reducing agent 
gives a better quality of graphene. However, the question arises if HI/TFA is the best reducing 
agent or is the quality of graphene limited by other factors, such as kinetic hindrance. 
­Oxo‐G1 is usually deposited on a Si/300 nm SiO2 substrate by, for example, the Langmuir–
Blodgett technique. After deposition, the film of oxo‐G1 flakes is reduced by the reducing 
agents. However, the reducing agent can only access the upper surface of oxo‐G1, because 
the substrate blocks the lower side, as illustrated in Figure 6.31 [95]. It cannot be ruled out 
that an even better quality of graphene would be produced if the reducing agent had access 
to both sides of the oxo‐G1. Therefore, oxo‐G1 was placed on the aqueous subphase, as 
­usually used for Langmuir–Blodgett coatings. In this case, the reducing agent, ascorbic 
acid, or alternatively hydriodic acid, was dissolved in the aqueous subphase.
The reduction starts from the lower side. The surface turns gray after several minutes and 
graphene starts to form and is floating on the aqueous subphase. The graphene can be trans-
ferred onto a substrate and analyzed by statistical Raman spectroscopy. The graphene, 
yielded after subphase reduction, can be further reduced by HI/TFA. The results compared 
to the direct deposition of oxo‐G1 on the substrate, followed by reduction from the top with 
the vapor of HI/TFA, reveals that this direct reduction procedure is the most efficient one. 
The subphase reduction is less efficient, and even the combination of the subphase reduction 
and the gas‐phase reduction is slightly less efficient. This may be due to adsorption 
­processes and hindrance of reaction pathways.
Finally, a reduction mechanism was derived for the reduction of oxo‐G1 that bears no 
defects. Generally, about every second carbon atom of oxo‐G1 is sp2‐hybridized, and thus a 
π system is still present, next to oxo‐functional groups like hydroxyl, epoxy and organosulfate 
groups. The acid can protonate those groups to form oxonium ions. The electron affinity of 
oxo‐G1 increases with protonation and facilitates the electron transfer from iodide to the π 
system. Subsequently, water and sulfuric acid are cleaved to form graphene (Figure 6.31A). 
Oxo‐G1 is a 2D material and therefore it does not matter from which side electrons are 
transferred to the π system. Even protonation of oxo‐groups between the substrate and the 
oxo‐G1 is possible due to the ability of proton hopping from the edges of the flakes. Thus, 
it can be concluded that the reduction of oxo‐G1 is highly efficient and complete using a 
potent reducing agent system such as HI/TFA [95].

212
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
6.7  Reactions with Reduced Form of Graphene Oxide
Here, we want to show some facile approaches toward the functionalization of RGO, 
although this is not the focus of this chapter. Since RGO contains very little oxygen func-
tionalities, reactions with RGO involve the carbon grid. From this perspective, RGO chem-
istry is similar to the chemistry of pristine graphene. One well‐demonstrated type of 
reaction here is diazonium chemistry. Functionalization via diazonium chemistry is 
­normally conducted in water or in acetonitrile. The aryl diazonium salts can be either 
­pre‐synthesized or formed in situ from aromatic aniline derivatives and sodium nitrite. 
In solutions, diazonium salts generate aryl cations followed by an electron transfer from the 
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
S
S
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
HO
3 H
4e
, H
–H2SO4
–2 H2O
oxo-G1 reduced by HI/TFA
oxo-G1 reduced by AS/water
Transfer
2. reduced by HI/TFA
1. oxo-G1 reduced by AS/water
(D)
(C)
(B)
(A)
GAS
GHI/TFA
GAS
HI/TFA
+
+
+
+
+
–
Figure 6.31  (A) Mechanism of the reduction of oxo‐G1 by an electron donor, such as iodide 
and a strong acid. Successive protonation and electron transfer steps remove oxygen functional 
groups to form graphene on a substrate. (B) Reduced on substrate by vapor of HI/TFA (GHI/TFA). 
(C) Reduced by ascorbic acid (AS) from the reductive subphase (GAS). (D) Reduced by the 
combination of both reduction methods (GAS
HI TFA
/
) [95]. Reproduced from [95] with permission 
from ACS

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
213
graphene (or RGO) to form aryl radicals that attack the carbon grid, and establish C–C 
bonds between the carbon grid and the aryl radical (Figure 6.32). Thus, the carbon atom in 
graphene is converted into the sp3‐hybrized state.
With pristine graphene, this type of chemistry was successfully demonstrated with ­several 
diazonium salts [57, 96, 97]. It was demonstrated that the effectiveness of the reaction 
depends on the nature of the substrate holding graphene [97]. Reactions proceed ­rapidly for 
graphene supported on SiO2 and Al2O3 (sapphire), but negligibly on alkyl‐terminated and 
hexagonal boron nitride (hBN) surfaces. Also, a model of reactivity based on substrate‐
induced electron–hole puddles in graphene has been developed [97].
For RGO, this type of reaction was first demonstrated by Lomeda et al. [98] for RGO 
dispersed in 1% solution of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) in water. The SDBS‐
wrapped GO was first reduced by hydrazine, and next the SDBS‐wrapped RGO was 
­functionalized by four different diazonium salts as depicted on the Figure 6.33.
Unlike graphene, RGO contains some remaining oxygen functionalities. In principle, 
one might argue why diazonium salts indeed react with the graphenic domains of RGO, but 
not with those oxygen functional groups. One can only take into account that the ketones 
and carboxyls remaining on RGO are not prone to chemical attack by radicals generated by 
diazonium salts. Thus, the reaction should indeed be on the carbon grid. The challenge here 
F4B–
N≡N
e–
NO2
NO2
H2O (1wt% SDS)
35°C, 7 hours
NO2
+
Figure 6.32  Functionalization of pristine graphene with nitro‐aryl diazonium salts. Reproduced 
from [57] with permission of ACS
OH
OH
OH
SDBS-wrapped GO
1. N2H4 •H2O, pH 10
80 °C, 24 h
2. BF4N2
R
1a-4a
rt, 1 h
1b-4b
1a,b R =Cl
2a,b R =NO2
3a,b R =OCH3
4a,b R =Br
COOH
O
O
O
O
R
H
H
H
R
R
COOH
H
Figure 6.33  Scheme showing sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS)‐wrapped GO, its 
reduction and functionalization of intermediate SDBS‐wrapped RGO with diazonium salts. 
Reproduced from [98] with permission of ACS

214
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
is to prove successful covalent functionalization of RGO. The presence of any distinct parts 
of the diazonium salts on as‐functionalized RGO is not yet strong evidence. As we demon-
strated in section 6.5, such a presence in many cases is due to physisorption of the reactant 
on GO/RGO, but not due to covalent functionalization.
In the case of graphene, the fact of successful covalent functionalization is apparent from 
Raman spectroscopy data. The D peak arising after functionalization is indicative of intro-
duced scattering defects, which in this case are sp3‐hybridized carbon atoms in the other-
wise ideal non‐defective sp2‐hybridized carbon plane. The higher the D peak, the higher the 
degree of functionalization. In the case of RGO, this is not an option since RGO is already 
highly defective with a density of scattering centers beyond the threshold when it can be 
quantified. Note that it is almost impossible to confirm the formation of the C–C bond 
spectroscopically. The only option here is monitoring the electrical conductivity with func-
tionalization. Diazonium functionalization should in principle additionally decrease the 
length of ballistic transport channels; thus the conductivity of RGO should decrease after 
functionalization. This was the approach chosen in the work with RGO nanoribbons (NRs) 
[99]. In contrast to the previous work [98], RGO NRs were not only chemically reduced, 
but also annealed at 900 °C; thus the content of oxygen groups was very low. Functionalization 
was carried with RGO NRs laying flat on a substrate surface and built into a device as 
shown in Figure 6.34. The conductivity of RGO NRs was measured in certain functionali-
zation time intervals. As evident from Figure 6.34, the source–drain current decreased after 
exposing the device to the diazonium salt solution, confirming successful functionalization. 
The most significant functionalization occurred in the first 5 min of grafting (Figure 6.34, 
right), and was almost complete within 60 min. The change in the rate of the chemical 
­reaction, measured as the change in electrical conductivity, was typical for a first‐order 
chemical reaction.
NO2
NO2
NO2
NO2
Isd (nA)
50
40
30
20
10
–40
–20
0
20
As-prepared
Increasing
grafting time
5min
10 min
30min
185min
40
Vg (V)
Vsd= 0.1 V
Figure 6.34  Schematic of the chemical functionalization of devices with 4‐nitrophenyl groups 
(left). Electronic devices consist of monolayer RGO nanoribbons contacted with Pt source (S) 
and drain (D) electrodes. The devices were fabricated on a 200 nm thick thermal SiO2 over 
heavily doped p‐type Si that was used as a back gate. The Isd–Vg curves recorded at Vsd = 0.1 V 
after several consecutive grafting experiments (right). The labels on the curves show the 
total grafting time. Reproduced from [99] with permission of ACS

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
215
Diazonium functionalization is the best‐studied type of covalent functionalization of 
RGO. Many reports, such as “click” chemistry on RGO, can be found in the literature 
[100, 101]. However, such types of reaction are conducted not on RGO itself, but on the 
­functional groups pre‐grafted on RGO by diazonium chemistry. Other functionalization 
concepts are plausible and have been reported in the literature. However, systematic and 
quantitative investigations are demanded to successfully use these chemical approaches in 
future applications.
6.8  Controlled Chemistry with Graphene Oxide
The structure of GO was discussed above, and extended defects in addition to various 
­oxo‐functional groups are part of the structure. Functionalities can be expected to be 
located not only on the basal plane but also at the edges of flakes and defects. Real GO 
would be best described by the structure model of Hofmann, as depicted in Figure 6.1. 
However, such a type of GO has not yet been prepared by wet chemistry. However, it was 
demonstrated that oxygen could chemically bind to graphene on SiC (G1/SiC). A scanning 
tunneling microscopy investigation revealed the reversibility of that oxygen binding 
(Figure 6.1) [18]. Thus, functionalized graphene derivatives can in principle be synthesized 
while preserving the honeycomb lattice of graphene. For developing a controlled chemistry 
of GO and avoiding the analysis of defect structure motifs, it would be ideal to prevent the 
rupture of the carbon framework during oxidative functionalization. Consequently, 
­graphene derivatives with oxo‐functional groups would be yielded. Here, such systems will 
be called oxo‐functionalized graphene, with oxo‐G1 as abbreviation. The synthetic methods 
that lead to oxo‐G1 are summarized in Chapter 2.
6.8.1  Nomenclature of Polydisperse and Functionalized Graphene
In contrast to monodisperse molecules such as C60, graphene is a polydisperse material, 
especially if it was prepared from graphite. Purification procedures do not render possible 
separation techniques to make monodisperse graphene. Therefore, it is necessary to introduce 
a systematic formula that describes the functionalized graphene system. A generalized 
­systematic formula was introduced and developed to characterize graphene and complex 
functionalized systems of graphene [102, 103]:
	
S
G
R
A
/
/
,s d
n
f
f
−( )
	
(6.8)
The notation used in (6.8) is as follows: S = substrate, no S = reactions applied in dispersion; 
G = graphene, s = size of graphene, d = structural defect density of graphene within the 
­carbon framework, n = number of layers of graphene; R = addend, A = non‐covalently bound 
molecules, and f = degree of functionalization.
The number of layers of graphene is indicated by the index n, and graphene (G1) can be 
distinguished from bilayer graphene (G2), trilayer graphene (G3), few‐layer graphene (Gfew‐layer 
or G4–10) and graphite (Gn). Graphene must be stabilized, which can be achieved, for example, 
by placement on a surface, such as SiO2 (SiO2/G1) or boron nitride (BN/G1). Etching Cu away 
from Cu/G1 leads to graphene floating on a surface of water (H2O/G1). The properties of 
materials are well known to change with size and therefore another type of important 

216
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
polydispersity is the size of the flakes of graphene. The analysis of flake size can be ­conducted 
by microscopy, such as AFM, or directly from solution by analytical ultracentrifugation, a 
tool that was just recently developed [104]. Flakes of graphene can be on the nano‐, micro‐ or 
even centimeter scales. Graphene grown on a copper foil with a size of 1 cm × 1 cm can be 
indicated as Cu/1cmG1. Delaminated graphene with a size of flakes of about 5 µm can be placed 
on a SiO2 surface and this type of graphene can be described as SiO2/5μmG1.
Defects within the carbon σ framework of graphene disturb the lattice and change the 
electronic properties. The density of defects can be determined by the analysis of Raman 
spectra. Densities of defects in the range between about 0.001% and 1–3% can be deter-
mined. This means that, for example, if one C atom of the honeycomb lattice was periodically 
missing and the intact areas of graphene consisted of 1000 C atoms, the density of defects 
would be 0.1% and would be indicated by 0.1%G1. The highest sensitivity of Raman spectros-
copy toward defects is between 0.01% and 1%. However, not all types of defects in graphene 
can be identified by Raman spectroscopy, because silent defects are also known [105].
Structural defects within the honeycomb sp2 network can be missing atoms or a rear-
ranged carbon lattice with five‐membered rings, seven‐membered rings or others. Also 
sp3‐hybridized C atoms or clusters of sp3‐hybridized carbon can be identified as defects. 
However, it is not possible to distinguish between those, and therefore the synthetic proce-
dure and origin of graphene must be taken into account to discriminate between them. 
Further analysis may be necessary. Thus, instead of determining the density of defects, the 
degree of functionalization can be derived from Raman spectra [106]. With functionaliza-
tion of graphene, another type of polydispersity of graphene must be faced by means of the 
degree of functionalization and the regiochemistry of addends. The latter is currently 
­difficult to determine and is therefore not indicated by the systematic formula (6.8). The 
product of hydroxyl functionalization, with every twentieth C atom functionalized, would 
be specified as G1‐(OH)5%. Often, N‐methylpyrrolidone is used for the exfoliation of few‐
layer graphene and for a sample where elemental analysis revealed 30 mass% of adsorbed 
organic molecules, the composition would be indicated as G1/NMP30%. With the introduc-
tion of the systematic formula (6.8), it is now possible to display the polydispersity of 
graphene and functionalized derivatives.
6.8.2  Organosulfate in Graphene Oxide – Thermogravimetric Analysis
The preparation of GO in sulfuric acid generally ends up in a product with a certain sulfur 
content that was suspected to be an impurity. However, Boehm and Scholz suggested in 
1966 that some of the sulfur content may be due to sulfonic acids or sulfate esters [107]. 
TGA is a powerful tool to analyze chemical functionalization. The coupling of TGA with 
MS allows the nature of cleaved molecules to be determined. Recently, organosulfate 
groups (sulfate esters) were identified by thermogravimetric analysis in GO and oxo‐G1 as 
structure motifs [108]. Moreover, no indication was found that sulfonic acids are part of 
the structure.
The formation and hydrolysis of cyclic organosulfate groups in pristine graphite oxide 
was proposed in the literature and it seems likely that these species partially hydrolyze to 
form organosulfate (Figure 6.35A) [29]. Organosulfate groups are stable in water at neutral 
pH. Major species cleaved in the TGA experiment are water with m/z 18, CO (and back-
ground N2) with m/z 28, CO2 with m/z 44 and, surprisingly, SO2 with m/z 64. As depicted 
in Figure 6.35(B), up to 120 °C mainly water is removed that may be adsorbed on the 

O
O
O O
O
S
O
HO
OH
O
O
O
HO
HO
HO
O
HO
O
OH
HO
O
OH
S
S
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
OH
O
S
OH
OH
O
(A)
(B)
O
TG (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
100
300
500
700
900
100
300
500
TG
m/z 18
m/z 28
Ion current (a.u.)
m/z 44
m/z 64
700
900
100
300
500
700
900
Temperature (°C)
Temperature (°C)
Temperature (°C)
GO
GO-NaOH
GO-NaHSO4
In
H2SO4
In
H2O
In
H2O
–H2SO4
Figure 6.35  (A) Proposed formation of cyclic organosulfate groups in GO and hydrolytic cleavage to organosulfate 
groups and hydroxyl groups. Acid‐catalyzed epoxide formation of cis‐dihydroxy groups can be assumed [17, 29]. The 
structure of GO therefore bears epoxy, hydroxyl and organosulfate groups as major functional groups. Defects in GO are 
omitted and the structure model is also valid for oxo‐G1 [108]. (B) Thermogravimetric analysis of (left) GO, (middle) GO 
treated with sodium hydroxide to cleave organosulfate groups and (right) GO treated with sodium hydroxide and mixed 
with sodium hydrogensulfate [108]. Reproduced from [108] with permission of John Wiley & Sons

218
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
surface of GO, followed by the main weight loss up to 200 °C, related to the cleavage of 
water, CO and CO2. Another weight loss between 200 and 300 °C can be related to organo-
sulfate and SO2 formed due to the decomposition of organosulfate to SO3 that reacts with 
carbon to form COx and SO2. The formation of SO2 can further be identified by FTIR analysis 
of the evolving gases. The amount of organosulfate can be determined to one organosulfate 
on 20 C atoms in accordance with elemental analysis, and therefore the properties of the 
bulky organosulfate dominate the properties of GO. The organosulfate groups of GO can 
be cleaved by simple treatment with sodium hydroxide, and after purification the thermo-
gravimetric analysis reveals that there is no additional weight‐loss step between 200 and 
300 °C (Figure 6.35B).
The decomposition of inorganic sulfate can be detected by thermogravimetry at 700–800 °C. 
Mixing of GO that was already treated by sodium hydroxide with sodium hydrogensulfate 
and subsequent analysis gives evidence for the decomposition temperature of inorganic 
sulfate in the presence of GO. A broad weight loss between 200 and 350 °C is detected also 
that is most likely due to in situ formation and decomposition of organosulfate. With 
respect to thermogravimetric investigations, the structural model of GO and oxo‐G1 can be 
extended by organosulfate moieties in addition to epoxy and hydroxyl groups, predomi-
nantly covalently bound above and below the carbon skeleton. The acidity of GO can also 
be explained by hydronium ions as counter‐ions of organosulfate groups, as shown in 
Figures 6.35(A) and 6.31(A).
The identification of organosulfate in GO and oxo‐G1 is beneficial for the development 
of controlled chemistry because organosulfate groups can be further used to build molecular 
architectures, as described in section 6.8.3.3.
6.8.3  Synthetic Modifications of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene
The chemical structure of oxo‐G1 bears hydroxyl, epoxy and organosulfate groups as major 
functional groups. Moreover, the size of the flakes is on the micrometer scale. In addition, 
the density of defects is about 0.3% on average. Oxo‐G1 is stable up to 100 °C, and therefore 
the next step is the controlled chemical modification of the functional groups of oxo‐G1.
6.8.3.1  Reactions of Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene with HCl and NaOH
For controlling the chemistry of oxo‐G1, a stable carbon framework is desirable. Chemical 
transformations of oxo‐G1 and subsequent analyses of the integrity of the carbon frame-
work reveal that reactions on the basal plane are possible without rupturing the carbon 
framework [109].
The functional groups of oxo‐G1, such as epoxy, hydroxyl and organosulfate, are stable 
in aqueous HCl at the pH of about 1 at 10 °C (Figure 6.36). However, at an elevated tem-
perature of 40 °C, organosulfate groups are cleaved, while hydroxyl and epoxy groups 
remain chemically bound. Infrared spectroscopy gives evidence for the formation of ether 
groups, due to the evolution of a strong absorption at about 1100 cm−1. The carbon frame-
work was not harmed under these reaction conditions, according to SRM investigations.
GO is not quite stable against base, as outlined in section 6.3, and therefore the chemical 
reactivity of oxo‐G1 against sodium hydroxide was of interest. Surprisingly, the reaction 
conditions can be controlled, and organosulfate and possibly also epoxy groups are cleaved 
to diols upon hydroxide treatment of oxo‐G1 at 10 °C. SRM proves the stability of the 

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
219
carbon framework and the cleavage of organosulfate is identified by elemental analysis and 
TGA. The treatment of oxo‐G1 with sodium hydroxide at 40 °C not only cleaves functional 
groups, but also introduces permanent defects into the carbon framework (Figure 6.36). 
The statistical Raman analysis reveals that Γ2D increases from 72 cm−1 to 120 cm−1. These 
investigations demonstrate that controlled reaction conditions must be maintained to ­enable 
the chemistry on the surface of graphene. The reaction of oxo‐G1 with sodium hydroxide is 
possible and can therefore give synthetic access to hydroxylated graphene (G1‐OH), a 
­suitable precursor for further functionalization reactions.
6.8.3.2  Controlled Synthesis of Azido‐Hydroxyl Graphene
The reactivity of organosulfate groups can be exploited to enable azide functionalization on 
the surface of oxo‐G1. This substitution reaction preserves thermally unstable groups due 
to the mild reaction with sodium azide that proceeds in the solid state upon freeze‐drying 
(Figure 6.36). Experimental evidence indicates the substitution of organosulfate by azide 
anions [110]. This direct functionalization of oxo‐G1 with azide, preserving functional 
groups, is proved by IR spectroscopy, TGA coupled with MS, elemental analysis and 15N 
NMR spectroscopy measured in the solid state. Azide is predominantly located on the 
­surface of oxo‐G1 and not on the edges. The C–N stretching vibration of azide is found at 
2123 cm−1 and shifts by 11 cm−1 upon binding of 15N14N2 to the carbon framework 
(Figure 6.37A). The substitution of organosulfate is also evident by TGA (Figure 6.37B). 
Also the wet‐chemically cleaved sulfate can be identified after precipitation as BaSO4. 
O
O
O
HCl, H2O
HCl, H2O
10 °C
40 °C
NaOH
NaOH
10 °C
40 °C
G1-(OH)
G1-(O)(OH)(OSO3H)
G1-(O)(OH)
G1-(N3)(OH)
G1-(O)(OH)(OSO3H)
NaN3
Freeze
drying
–Na2SO4
O
HO
HO
O
O
HO
HO
HO
>1%G1-(OH)
Defect
HO
HO
OH
N
N
N
N
N
N
HO
HO
HO
HO
HO
HO
OH
O
S
O
O
O
O
O
S
Figure 6.36  Illustration of the reactivity of oxo‐G1. Reactivity at 10 °C (top) and 40 °C (bottom), 
upon treatment with HCl or NaOH is shown. Also the substitution of organosulfate by azide is 
possible under controlled reaction conditions [110]

220
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Substitution is further proved by the absence of the weight‐loss step in the temperature 
range that is related to organosulfate and the decomposition of azide is indicated by 
the ­signal of m/z 29, which is related to 15N14N formation. This investigation is only possible 
using labeled azide, because otherwise N2 with m/z 28 is produced that cannot be 
­distinguished from background N2.
Also NMR spectroscopy in solids could be conducted on 15N‐labeled compounds 
(Figure 6.37D). Two signals at 224 and 91 ppm are found that relate to the two possible 
binding states of 15N14N14N (i.e. R–15N14N14N or R–14N14N15N) and they are in line with 
calculated predictions within the errors of the model (Figure  6.37C). Furthermore, the 
­analyses reveal a concentration of about one azide group per 30 carbon atoms. Further on, 
the azide group in GO‐N3 is hydrolytically stable up to 60 °C. Therefore, GO‐N3 is a 
­suitable precursor for other reactions, opening an avenue for the field of azide chemistry for 
­graphene‐based materials.
GO-N3
GO-15N14N2
Transmittance (a.u.)
(A)
(C)
(D)
(B)
Shift:
11cm–1
2112
107.4ppm
225.8ppm
2123
2200
4000
100
90
80
70
60
50
100 200
15N14N
TG (%)
TG (GO)
TG (GO-N3)
m/z 29 (GO-N3)
m/z 29 (GO-15N14N2)
300 400 500 600
Temperature (°C)
Ion current (a.u.)
700 800
224ppm
400
δ
300
200
100
0
–100ppm
91ppm
3500
3000
2500
2000
1500
1000
Wave number (cm–1)
2000
Figure  6.37  (A) Infrared spectra of GO‐N3 and GO‐15N14N2 (here GO is oxo‐G1). (B) 
Thermogravimetric analysis of GO and GO‐15N14N2, m/z 29 of GO‐N3 and GO‐15N14N2. (C) 
Simplified model of GO‐N3 with an azide and a hydroxyl group connected to the carbon lattice 
in trans‐configuration. 15N NMR shifts are calculated by ab initio methods (107.4 ppm and 
225.8 ppm). (D) The 15N SSNMR MAS (magic angle spinning) spectrum of GO‐15N14N2 with 
two peaks (1 : 1 ratio) [110]. Reproduced from [110] with permission from RSC

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
221
6.8.3.3  Organosulfate in Oxo‐Functionalized Graphene as Anchor Group
The impact of the controlled chemistry of oxo‐G1 was recently demonstrated to enable the 
function of a floating‐gate memory device working at 3 V (Figure 6.38E) [111]. Higher volt-
ages increase the power consumption of devices. A very thin dielectric is necessary to separate 
the charge storage layer from the gate and the semiconductor. The thicker the dielectric layer, 
–H2O
C12H25NH2
sp2 128.2
Hydroxyl
69.2
Epoxy
61.4
Aliphatic
29.6
250
(A)
(B)
(E)
(F)
(G)
(C)
(D)
400
300
200 100
–100 –200
200 150
100
50
–50
15 10
5
0
–5 –10
0
0
200 150 100
50
0
–50
10–5
10–6
2
–0.5
–3
VGS (V)
10–7
IDS (A)
10–8
0
100
200
300
Time (s)
–100
13C chemical shift (ppm)
15N chemical shift (ppm)
13C chemical shift (ppm)
1H chemical shift (ppm)
oxo-G1
oxo-G1/DA
oxo-G1/DA/PSEO
2 μm
Au (source/drain)
IMI-SAM
Si
SiO2
Dec-6T-Dec
oxo-G1/DA/PSEO
Al2O3
Al (gate)
Aliphatic H
0.7
33.5
Aliphatic C
29.4
sp2
~128
COH
~70
COC
~60
H3O
O
O
O
S
O
O
HO
C12H25NH3
O
O
O
S
O
O
HO
Poly(styrene-b-
ethylene oxide)
(PSEO)
C12H25NH3
O
O
O
O
O
S
O
O
HO
COH & NH3+
6.5
Figure 6.38  (A) Reaction scheme illustrating the reaction of oxo‐G1 with dodecylamine 
(oxo‐G1/DA), followed by non‐covalent functionalization with a block copolymer of styrene 
and ethylene oxide (PSEO). Solid‐state NMR spectra of oxo‐G1/DA: (B) 13C NMR, (C) 15N 
NMR and (D) 1H–13C correlation NMR. (E) Device structure of a floating‐gate memory device 
with oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO as charge storage material. (F) Device characteristic: write signal at −3 V, 
erase signal at 2 V and read voltage at −0.5 V. (G) AFM image of flakes of oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO 
composite [111]. Reproduced from [111] with permission from RSC

222
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the higher is the power consumption. Thus, a special molecular architecture was designed to 
overcome this problem. As depicted in Figure 6.38(A), the used ­oxo‐G1 bears epoxy and 
hydroxyl groups in addition to organosulfate groups that are ­complexed with hydronium ions. 
Moreover, about 50% of C atoms are sp2‐hybridized. This oxo‐G1 was titrated with 
dodecylamine (DA) to exchange hydronium ion by dodecylammonium that becomes electro-
statically bound to organosulfate, while the other functional groups remain stable.
This oxo‐G1/DA was thoroughly analyzed by combustion elemental analysis, TGA 
­coupled with IR spectroscopy, gas chromatography (GC) and MS. The data revealed that 
organosulfate and dodecylammonium are structure motifs. As shown in Figure 6.39(A), not 
only can the formation of CO2 be detected by the analysis of the combustion gases, but also 
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
100
200
300
400
Temperature °C
Mass of sample (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
TG
(oxo-G1/DA/PSEO)
Profile at 3080cm–1
40
30
20
Mass of sample (%)
(B)
(A)
Intensity (a.u.)
Intensity (a.u.)
500
600
700
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2 %
2 %
21 %
12 %
39 %
4 %
18 %
13 %
21 %
TG
Profile at 2930cm–1 (Alkyl)
Profile at 2367cm–1 (CO2)
Profile at 1385cm–1 (SO2)
Figure 6.39  (A) TGA of oxo‐G1/DA between 30 and 700 °C and the temperature profiles of 
cleaved alkyl, CO2 and SO2 formation, identified by FTIR. (B) TGA of oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO 
between 30 and 700 °C with the temperature profile of cleaved aromatic compounds (gray) 
identified by FTIR [111]. Reproduced from [111] with permission from RSC

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
223
that of SO2 originating from organosulfate and the signals of alkyl species. Moreover, 
GC‐MS analysis revealed that the alkyl signals stem from dodecylammonium due to the 
identification of dodecene, which is the related elimination product. In addition, SSNMR 
spectroscopy was performed (Figure 6.38). In combination with ab initio calculations, it 
could be shown that only one major nitrogen‐containing species is part of the structure, and 
the data are consistent with the proposed electrostatic binding of dodecylammonium to 
organosulfate (Figure 6.38C). Also information about the regiochemistry of dodecylam-
monium could be identified by 2D SSNMR by measuring 13C–1H correlation spectra 
(Figure 6.38D). The methylene signals of dodecylammonium were found to be close to the 
π system of the carbon framework. This means that the alkyl chain is masking the π system 
of oxo‐G1 and can therefore in part contribute to a dielectric shielding.
The complex of oxo‐G1/DA is well soluble as single layers in tetrahydrofuran and can be 
easily mixed with soluble polymers, such as a block copolymer of styrene and ethylene oxide 
(PSEO) as illustrated in the reaction scheme of Figure 6.38(A). This mixing procedure non‐
covalently functionalizes oxo‐G1/DA flakes to form a composite of oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO and 
almost no free polymer was found by AFM, as shown in Figure 6.38(G). TGA gives evidence 
for the decomposition of the adsorbed polymer at about 450 °C, and FTIR signals that stem 
from aryl groups of the decomposing polymer could be traced (Figure 6.39B). The block 
copolymers function as dielectric layer with a thickness of only 1–2 nm on both sides of the 
flakes. The oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO composite is also the charge storage material and enables the 
function of a floating‐gate memory device. The charge storage layer is deposited as few layers 
on an imidazolium‐terminated self‐assembled monolayer as depicted in Figure  6.38(E). 
A sexithiophene derivative is used as semiconductor on top of oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO. A gate volt-
age of −3 V can introduce charge carriers and this information can be erased at +2 V. The 
read‐out of the information can be accomplished at −0.5 V (Figure 6.38F). Reference experi-
ments reveal that a memory device working at 3 V can only be constructed with the composite 
of oxo‐G1/DA/PSEO. Other materials, such as oxo‐G1, oxo‐G1/DA, defective GO, defective 
GO mixed with DA and PSEO, or reference systems that bear an excess of PSEO, do not 
enable the function of a memory device operated by a floating gate at 3 V. For example, in 
defective GO, about 1% of defects are introduced, organosulfate groups are cleaved and it is 
plausible that epoxy groups are converted in part to diols. This approach revealed that even 
the flat sheet structure could not be preserved and demonstrates the impact of the controlled 
chemistry of oxo‐G1 on the function. Other examples that relate to self‐assembly processes 
and device fabrication with increased performance can be found in the literature [112–114].
6.9  Discussion
Organic chemistry and materials science start to mingle with conducting chemistry on GO. 
A literature survey rapidly reveals that GO is of interest for researchers of many disciplines. 
Synthetic chemists are, however, rarely involved, for one simple reason. Organic chemistry 
is related to molecules that can be exactly characterized. This is possible due to developed 
analytical methods, such as mass spectrometry, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
and single‐crystal X‐ray analysis. When large organic molecules are synthesized and mol-
ecules become less soluble, it becomes challenging to further develop this research and 
come to exact conclusions on the atomic structure. The situation becomes even more 

224
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
complicated due to the heterogeneous nature of graphite and GO. It is clear that GO and its 
derivatives will never form monodisperse compounds, especially because every sp3 carbon 
atom is a chiral center. Moreover, the structure of GO differs by preparation methods, and 
thus the reactivity and contributions of functional groups may vary. This hurdle makes it 
impossible to exactly compare the results of investigations based on GO. As outlined in this 
review chapter, it is necessary to define and simplify the chemical structure of GO to enable 
a controlled chemistry of GO. The first hurdles thereto are defects within the carbon frame-
work. The degree of defects can be increased until the disintegration of the flake structure, 
which also results in the formation of oxidative debris. With minimizing the density of 
defects, it becomes possible to investigate the chemistry of the surface functional groups of 
graphene. Many reactions that were reported to successfully functionalize the surface 
of GO may only be possible due to the activation by functional groups that are located at 
the edges of defects. Furthermore, it must be ensured that the whole surface of GO is acces-
sible for reagents to conduct homogeneous chemistry. A set of analytical tools has already 
been developed to characterize the heterogeneous material GO. Analytical ultracentrifuga-
tion was developed to determine the size of flakes directly from solution. Also thermogravi-
metric analysis was further developed, and coupling with infrared spectroscopy, as well as 
gas chromatography and mass spectrometry, give many more insights and allow conclu-
sions on the success of functionalization of GO. Synthetic concepts that could be learned 
from carbon nanotube chemistry have been transferred to graphene and GO chemistry. 
While paramagnetic impurities in carbon nanotubes commonly preclude analysis by NMR, 
the analysis of GO is possible by SSNMR. Although this method developed in recent years, 
it is not yet fully implemented for the analysis of functionalized GO, because SSNMR is 
still a method for the specialist. Nevertheless, SSNMR has the potential to push the field of 
functionalized materials, especially when addends are labeled with NMR‐active nuclei. 
With improving both analytical methods and synthetic protocols, the controlled synthesis 
of GO and its derivatives becomes possible and opens the field for the precise synthesis of 
novel molecular architectures with outstanding properties. With the development of the 
controlled chemistry of GO and oxo‐G1, respectively, it will become possible to overcome 
the performance limits of conventional GO.
References
[1]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Alemany, L.B.; Tour, J.M., Graphene oxide. Origin of acidity, its instability in 
water, and a new dynamic structural model. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (1), 576–588.
[2]	 He, H.; Riedl, T.; Lerf, A.; Klinowski, J., Solid‐state NMR studies of the structure of graphite 
oxide. J. Phys. Chem. 1996, 100, 19954–19958.
[3]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Riedl, T.; et al., 13C and 1H MAS NMR studies of graphite oxide and its chem-
ically modified derivatives. Solid State Ionics 1997, 101–103 (2), 857–862.
[4]	 He, H.; Klinowski, J.; Forster, M.; Lerf, A., A new structural model for graphite oxide. Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 1998, 287, 53–56.
[5]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[6]	 Gao, W.; Alemany, L.B.; Ci, L.; Ajayan, P.M., New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nature Chem. 2009, 1 (5), 403–408.
[7]	 Cai, W.; Piner, R.D.; Stadermann, F.J.; et al., Synthesis and solid‐state NMR structural character-
ization of 13C‐labeled graphite oxide. Science 2008, 321 (5897), 1815–1817.

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
225
[8]	 Casabianca, L.B.; Shaibat, M.A.; Cai, W.W.; et al., NMR‐based structural modeling of graphite 
oxide using multidimensional 13C solid‐state NMR and ab initio chemical shift calculations. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (16), 5672–5676.
[9]	 Kim, S.; Zhou, S.; Hu, Y.; et al., Room‐temperature metastability of multilayer graphene oxide 
films. Nature Mater. 2012, 11 (6), 544–549.
[10]	 Hou, X.‐L.; Li, J.‐L.; Drew, S.C.; et al., Tuning radical species in graphene oxide in aqueous 
solution by photoirradiation. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (13), 6788–6793.
[11]	 Yang, L.; Zhang, R.; Liu, B.; et al., π‐Conjugated carbon radicals at graphene oxide to initiate 
ultrastrong chemiluminescence. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (38), 10109–10113.
[12]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi, O.; Forgó, P.; et al., Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of 
progressively oxidized graphite oxides. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18, 2740–2749.
[13]	 Nakajima, T.; Matsuo, Y., Formation process and structure of graphite oxide. Carbon 1994, 32 
(3), 469–475.
[14]	 Clause, A.; Plass, R.; Boehm, H.P.; Hofmann, U., Untersuchungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxyds. 
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1957, 291 (5–6), 205–220.
[15]	 Ruess, G., Über das Graphitoxyhydroxyd (Graphitoxyd). Monatsh. Chem. 1947, 76 (3–5), 
381–417.
[16]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Betrachtungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1969, 369 (3–6), 327–340.
[17]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Todd, A.D.; Bielawski, C.W., Harnessing the chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (15), 5288–5301.
[18]	 Hossain, M Z.; Johns, J.E.; Bevan, K.H.; et al., Chemically homogeneous and thermally reversible 
oxidation of epitaxial graphene. Nature Chem. 2012, 4, 305–309.
[19]	 Chen, D.; Feng, H.; Li, J., Graphene oxide: preparation, functionalization, and electrochemical 
applications. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112 (11), 6027–6053.
[20]	 Kozhemyakina, N.V.; Eigler, S.; Dinnebier, R.E.; et al., Effect of the structure and morphology 
of natural, synthetic and post‐processed graphites on their dispersibility and electronic properties. 
Fuller. Nanotub. Carbon Nanostruct. 2013, 21 (9), 804–823.
[21]	 Wang, L.; Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M., “Metal‐free” catalytic oxygen reduction reaction on heter-
oatom‐doped graphene is caused by trace metal impurities. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52 
(51), 13818–13821.
[22]	 Feicht, P.; Kunz, D.A.; Lerf, A.; Breu, J., Facile and scalable one‐step production of organically 
modified graphene oxide by a two‐phase extraction. Carbon 2014, 80, 229–234.
[23]	 Boehm, H.P.; Scholz, W., Der “Verpuffungspunkt” des Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1965, 335 (1–2), 74–79.
[24]	 Kim, F.; Luo, J.Y.; Cruz‐Silva, R.; et al., Self‐propagating domino‐like reactions in oxidized 
graphite. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (17), 2867–2873.
[25]	 Krishnan, D.; Kim, F.; Luo, J.; et al., Energetic graphene oxide: challenges and opportunities. 
Nano Today 2012, 7 (2), 137–152.
[26]	 Qiu, Y.; Guo, F.; Hurt, R.; Kulaots, I., Explosive thermal reduction of graphene oxide‐based 
materials: mechanism and safety implications. Carbon 2014, 72, 215–223.
[27]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hirsch, A.; et  al., Formation and decomposition of CO2 intercalated 
­graphene oxide. Chem. Mater. 2012, 24 (7), 1276–1282.
[28]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Polson, T.A., Contesting the two‐component structural model of graphene 
oxide and reexamining the chemistry of graphene oxide in basic media. Carbon 2015, 93, 
544–554.
[29]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[30]	 Eigler, S.; Grimm, S.; Hirsch, A., Investigation of the thermal stability of the carbon framework 
of graphene oxide. Chem. Eur. J. 2014, 20 (4), 984–989.
[31]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hirsch, A., Visualization of defect densities in reduced graphene oxide. 
Carbon 2012, 50 (10), 3666–3673.
[32]	 Kundu, A.; Layek, R.K.; Nandi, A.K., Enhanced fluorescent intensity of graphene oxide–methyl 
cellulose hybrid in acidic medium: sensing of nitro‐aromatics. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (16), 
8139–8144.

226
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[33]	 Lu, C.H.; Yang, H.H.; Zhu, C.L.; et al., A graphene platform for sensing biomolecules. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48 (26), 4785–4787.
[34]	 Wang, S.; Yu, D.; Dai, L.; et al., Polyelectrolyte‐functionalized graphene as metal‐free electro-
catalysts for oxygen reduction. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (8), 6202–6209.
[35]	 Liu, J.; Yang, W.; Tao, L.; et  al., Thermosensitive graphene nanocomposites formed using 
­pyrene‐terminal polymers made by RAFT polymerization. J. Polym. Sci. A: Polym. Chem. 
2010, 48 (2), 425–433.
[36]	 Layek, R.K.; Samanta, S.; Chatterjee, D.P.; Nandi, A.K., Physical and mechanical properties of 
poly(methyl methacrylate)‐functionalized graphene/poly(vinylidine fluoride) nanocomposites: 
piezoelectric β polymorph formation. Polymer 2010, 51 (24), 5846–5856.
[37]	 Sydlik, S.A.; Swager, T.M., Functional graphenic materials via a Johnson − Claisen rearrange-
ment. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23 (15), 1873–1882.
[38]	 Burress, J.W.; Gadipelli, S.; Ford, J.; et al., Graphene oxide framework materials: theoretical 
predictions and experimental results. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (47), 8902–8904.
[39]	 Burress, J.W.; Gadipelli, S.; Ford, J.; et al., Graphene oxide framework materials: theoretical 
predictions and experimental results. Angew. Chem. 2010, 122 (47), 9086–9088.
[40]	 Stankovich, S.; Piner, R.D.; Nguyen, S.T.; Ruoff, R.S., Synthesis and exfoliation of isocyanate‐
treated graphene oxide nanoplatelets. Carbon 2006, 44 (15), 3342–3347.
[41]	 Sun, H.; Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Multifunctional, ultra‐flyweight, synergistically assembled carbon 
aerogels. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (18), 2554–2560.
[42]	 Chabot, V.; Higgins, D.; Yu, A.; et  al., A review of graphene and graphene oxide sponge: 
­material synthesis and applications to energy and the environment. Energy Environ. Sci. 2014, 
7 (5), 1564–1596.
[43]	 Sofer, Z.; Jankovsky, O.; Libanska, A.; et al., Definitive proof of graphene hydrogenation by 
Clemmensen reduction: use of deuterium labeling. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (23), 10535–10543.
[44]	 Schäfer, R.A.; Englert, J.M.; Wehrfritz, P.; et al., On the way to graphane – pronounced fluores-
cence of polyhydrogenated graphene. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52 (2), 754–757.
[45]	 Laborda, F.; Bolea, E.; Baranguan, M.T.; Castillo, J.R., Hydride generation in analytical 
­chemistry and nascent hydrogen: when is it going to be over? Spectrochim. Acta B: At. Spectrosc. 
2002, 57 (4), 797–802.
[46]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Regeneration of a conjugated sp2 graphene system through selective 
defunctionalization of epoxides by using a proven synthetic chemistry mechanism. Chem. Eur. J. 
2014, 20 (7), 1871–1877.
[47]	 Bourlinos, A.B.; Gournis, D.; Petridis, D.; et al., Graphite oxide: chemical reduction to graphite 
and surface modification with primary aliphatic amines and amino acids. Langmuir 2003, 19 
(15), 6050–6055.
[48]	 Yang, H.; Shan, C.; Li, F.; et  al., Covalent functionalization of polydisperse chemically‐­
converted graphene sheets with amine‐terminated ionic liquid. Chem. Commun. 2009, 19 (26), 
3880–3882.
[49]	 Beckert, F.; Rostas, A.M.; Thomann, R.; et al., Self‐initiated free radical grafting of styrene 
homo‐ and copolymers onto functionalized graphene. Macromolecules 2013, 46 (14), 
5488–5496.
[50]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Huang, J., Two dimensional soft material: new faces of graphene oxide. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 2012, 45 (8), 1356–1364.
[51]	 Loh, K.P.; Bao, Q.; Ang, P.K.; Yang, J., The chemistry of graphene. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20 
(12), 2277–2289.
[52]	 Kuila, T.; Bose, S.; Mishra, A.K.; et al., Chemical functionalization of graphene and its applica-
tions. Prog. Mater. Sci. 2012, 57 (7), 1061–1105.
[53]	 Xue, Y.; Chen, H.; Yu, D.; et al., Oxidizing metal ions with graphene oxide: the in situ formation 
of magnetic nanoparticles on self‐reduced graphene sheets for multifunctional applications. 
Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (42), 11689–11691.
[54]	 Dong, L.; Gari, R.R.S.; Li, Z.; et al., Graphene‐supported platinum and platinum–ruthenium 
nanoparticles with high electrocatalytic activity for methanol and ethanol oxidation. Carbon 
2010, 48 (3), 781–787.
[55]	 Si, Y.; Samulski, E.T., Synthesis of water soluble graphene. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (6), 1679–1682.

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
227
[56]	 DeTar, D.F.; Kosuge, T., Mechanisms of diazonium salt reactions. VI. The reactions of diazo-
nium salts with alcohols under acidic conditions; evidence for hydride transfer. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 1958, 80 (22), 6072–6077.
[57]	 Sharma, R.; Baik, J.H.; Perera, C.J.; Strano, M.S., Anomalously large reactivity of single gra-
phene layers and edges toward electron transfer chemistries. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (2), 398–405.
[58]	 Pinson, J.; Podvorica, F., Attachment of organic layers to conductive or semiconductive surfaces 
by reduction of diazonium salts. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2005, 34 (5), 429–439.
[59]	 Xiao, L.; Liao, L.; Liu, L., Chemical modification of graphene oxide with carbethoxycarbene 
under microwave irradiation. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2013, 556, 376–379.
[60]	 Collins, W.R.; Lewandowski, W.; Schmois, E.; et  al., Claisen rearrangement of graphite 
oxide: a route to covalently functionalized graphenes. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (38), 
8848–8852.
[61]	 Collins, W.R.; Schmois, E.; Swager, T.M., Graphene oxide as an electrophile for carbon nucle-
ophiles. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (31), 8790–8792.
[62]	 Johnson, W.S.; Werthemann, L.; Bartlett, W.R.; et al., Simple stereoselective version of the 
Claisen rearrangement leading to trans‐trisubstituted olefinic bonds. Synthesis of squalene. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1970, 92 (3), 741–743.
[63]	 Liu, Z.; Robinson, J.T.; Sun, X.; Dai, H., PEGylated nanographene oxide for delivery of water‐
insoluble cancer drugs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (33), 10876–10877.
[64]	 Zhang, X.; Huang, Y.; Wang, Y.; et al., Synthesis and characterization of a graphene–C60 hybrid 
material. Carbon 2009, 47 (1), 334–337.
[65]	 Xu, Y.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, X.; et al., A graphene hybrid material covalently functionalized with 
porphyrin: synthesis and optical limiting property. Adv. Mater. 2009, 21 (12), 1275–1279.
[66]	 Yu, D.; Yang, Y.; Durstock, M.; et al., Soluble P3HT‐grafted graphene for efficient bilayer‐­
heterojunction photovoltaic devices. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (10), 5633–5640.
[67]	 Mungse, H.P.; Khatri, O.P., Chemically functionalized reduced graphene oxide as a novel 
­material for reduction of friction and wear. J. Phys. Chem. C 2014, 118 (26), 14394–14402.
[68]	 Park, S.; Hu, Y.; Hwang, J.O.; et al., Chemical structures of hydrazine‐treated graphene oxide 
and generation of aromatic nitrogen doping. Nature Commun. 2012, 3, 638.
[69]	 Charpy, G., Sur la formation de l’oxyde graphitique et la définition du graphite. C. R. Hebd. 
Séances Acad. Sci. 1909, 148 (5), 920–923.
[70]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[71]	 Erickson, K.; Erni, R.; Lee, Z.; et al., Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene 
oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (40), 4467–4472.
[72]	 Kohlschütter, V.; Haenni, P., Zur Kenntnis des graphitischen Kohlenstoffs und der Graphitsäure. 
Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 1919, 105 (1), 121–144.
[73]	 Hofmann, U.; Frenzel, A.; Csalán, E., Die Konstitution der Graphitsäure und ihre Reaktionen. 
Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1934, 510 (1), 1–41.
[74]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R. D.; et al., Synthesis of graphene‐based nanosheets via 
chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 2007, 45, 1558–1565.
[75]	 Li, D.; Müller, M.B.; Gilje, S.; et al., Processable aqueous dispersions of graphene nanosheets. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (2), 101–105.
[76]	 Park, S.; An, J.; Jung, I.; et al., Colloidal suspensions of highly reduced graphene oxide in a 
wide variety of organic solvents. Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (4), 1593–1597.
[77]	 Sinitskii, A.; Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Tour, J.M., Graphene nanoribbon devices produced 
by oxidative unzipping of carbon nanotubes. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (9), 5405–5413.
[78]	 Shin, H.‐J.; Kim, K.K.; Benayad, A.; et al., Efficient reduction of graphite oxide by sodium boro-
hydride and its effect on electrical conductance. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19 (12), 1987–1992.
[79]	 Wang, G.; Yang, J.; Park, J.; et al., Facile synthesis and characterization of graphene nanosheets. 
J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 112 (22), 8192–8195.
[80]	 Zhou, X.; Zhang, J.; Wu, H.; et al., Reducing graphene oxide via hydroxylamine: a simple and 
efficient route to graphene. J. Phys. Chem. C 2011, 115 (24), 11957–11961.
[81]	 Mei, X.; Ouyang, J., Ultrasonication‐assisted ultrafast reduction of graphene oxide by zinc 
powder at room temperature. Carbon 2011, 49 (15), 5389–5397.

228
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[82]	 Fan, Z.; Wang, K.; Wei, T.; et al., An environmentally friendly and efficient route for the reduc-
tion of graphene oxide by aluminum powder. Carbon 2010, 48, 1686–1689.
[83]	 Chen, W.; Yan, L.; Bangal, P.R., Chemical reduction of graphene oxide to graphene by sulfur‐
containing compounds. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114 (47), 19885–19890.
[84]	 Cataldo, F.; Ursini, O.; Angelini, G., Graphite oxide and graphene nanoribbons reduction with 
hydrogen iodide. Fuller. Nanotub. Carbon Nanostruct. 2011, 19 (5), 461–468.
[85]	 Pei, S.; Zhao, J.; Du, J.; et al., Direct reduction of graphene oxide films into highly conductive 
and flexible graphene films by hydrohalic acids. Carbon 2010, 48 (15), 4466–4474.
[86]	 Moon, I.K.; Lee, J.; Ruoff, R.S.; Lee, H., Reduced graphene oxide by chemical graphitization. 
Nature Commun. 2010, 1, 73.
[87]	 Zhou, M.; Wang, Y.; Zhai, Y.; et al., Controlled synthesis of large‐area and patterned electro-
chemically reduced graphene oxide films. Chem. Eur. J. 2009, 15 (25), 6116–6120.
[88]	 Shao, Y.; Wang, J.; Engelhard, M.; et al., Facile and controllable electrochemical reduction of 
graphene oxide and its applications. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20 (4), 743–748.
[89]	 Ambrosi, A.; Pumera, M., Precise tuning of surface composition and electron‐transfer proper-
ties of graphene oxide films through electroreduction. Chemistry 2013, 19 (15), 4748–4753.
[90]	 Eigler, S.; Grimm, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; et al., Graphene oxide: efficiency of reducing 
agents. Chem. Commun. 2013, 49 (67), 7391–7393.
[91]	 Bagri, A.; Mattevi, C.; Acik, M.; et al., Structural evolution during the reduction of chemically 
derived graphene oxide. Nature Chem. 2010, 2 (7), 581–587.
[92]	 Rourke, J.P.; Pandey, P.A.; Moore, J.J.; et al., The real graphene oxide revealed: stripping the 
oxidative debris from the graphene‐like sheets. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (14), 3173–3177.
[93]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Chemical reduction of graphene oxide: a synthetic chemistry view-
point. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (1), 291–312.
[94]	 Pei, S.; Cheng, H.‐M., The reduction of graphene oxide. Carbon 2012, 50 (9), 3210–3228.
[95]	 Eigler, S., Mechanistic insights into the reduction of graphene oxide addressing its surfaces. 
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16 (37), 19832–19835.
[96]	 Bekyarova, E.; Itkis, M.E.; Ramesh, P.; et al., Chemical modification of epitaxial graphene: 
spontaneous grafting of aryl groups. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (4), 1336–1337.
[97]	 Wang, Q.H.; Jin, Z.; Kim, K.K.; et al., Understanding and controlling the substrate effect on 
graphene electron‐transfer chemistry via reactivity imprint lithography. Nature Chem. 2012, 4 
(9), 724–732.
[98]	 Lomeda, J.R.; Doyle, C.D.; Kosynkin, D.V.; et al., Diazonium functionalization of surfactant‐
wrapped chemically converted graphene sheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (48), 16201–
16206.
[99]	 Sinitskii, A.; Dimiev, A.; Corley, D.A.; et  al., Kinetics of diazonium functionalization of 
chemically converted graphene nanoribbons. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (4), 1949–1954.
[100]	 Wang, H.X.; Zhou, K.G.; Xie, Y.L.; et al., Photoactive graphene sheets prepared by “click” 
chemistry. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (20), 5747–5749.
[101]	 Castelain, M.; Martinez, G.; Merino, P.; et al., Graphene functionalisation with a conjugated 
poly(fluorene) by click coupling: striking electronic properties in solution. Chem. Eur. J. 2012, 
18 (16), 4965–4973.
[102]	 Koehler, F.M.; Stark, W.J., Organic synthesis on graphene. Acc. Chem. Res. 2013, 46 (10), 
2297–2306.
[103]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
[104]	 Walter, J.; Nacken, T.J.; Damm, C.; et al., Determination of the lateral dimension of graphene 
oxide nanosheets using analytical ultracentrifugation. Small 2015, 11 (7), 814–825.
[105]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Basko, D.M., Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the properties 
of graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2013, 8 (4), 235–246.

Functionalization and Reduction of Graphene Oxide
229
[106]	 Englert, J.M.; Vecera, P.; Knirsch, K.C.; et al., Scanning‐Raman‐microscopy for the statistical 
analysis of covalently functionalized graphene. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (6), 5472–5482.
[107]	 Boehm, H.‐P.; Scholz, W., Untersuchungen am Graphitoxyd, IV. Vergleich der 
Darstellungsverfahren für Graphitoxyd. Liebigs Ann. Chem. 1966, 691 (1), 1–8.
[108]	 Eigler, S.; Dotzer, C.; Hof, F.; et al., Sulfur species in graphene oxide. Chem. Eur. J. 2013, 19 
(29), 9490–9496.
[109]	 Eigler, S.; Grimm, S.; Hof, F.; Hirsch, A., Graphene oxide: a stable carbon framework for 
functionalization. J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1 (38), 11559–11562.
[110]	 Eigler, S.; Hu, Y.; Ishii, Y.; Hirsch, A., Controlled functionalization of graphene oxide with 
sodium azide. Nanoscale 2013, 5 (24), 12136–12139.
[111]	 Wang, Z.; Eigler, S.; Ishii, Y.; et al., A facile approach to synthesize an oxo‐functionalized 
graphene/polymer composite for low‐voltage operating memory devices. J. Mater. Chem. C 
2015, 3 (33), 8595–8604.
[112]	 Wang, Z.; Eigler, S.; Halik, M., Scalable self‐assembled reduced graphene oxide transistors on 
flexible substrate. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2014, 104 (24), 243502.
[113]	 Kirschner, J.; Wang, Z.; Eigler, S.; et al., Driving forces for the self‐assembly of graphene 
oxide on organic monolayers. Nanoscale 2014, 6 (19), 11344–11350.
[114]	 Wang, Z.; Mohammadzadeh, S.; Schmaltz, T.; et al., Region‐selective self‐assembly of func-
tionalized carbon allotropes from solution. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (12), 11427–11434.

Part II 
Applications

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
7
Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors 
and Transparent Conductive Films
Samuele Porro and Ignazio Roppolo
7.1  Field‐Effect Transistors
Graphene was suggested as a perfect candidate for fabricating channels in next‐generation 
field‐effect (field‐emission) transistor (FET) devices, due to its peculiar band structure and 
electronic properties, like the fact that carriers (both electrons and holes) can be continu-
ously tuned by a gate electric field [1], and behave as massless relativistic particles, leading 
to mean free paths of up to 300 nm even at room temperature [2]. Moreover, due to its two‐
dimensional characteristics, nanometer‐scale devices may be patterned to create single‐
electron or few‐electron transistors, making graphene suitable also for ultra‐high‐frequency 
transistors [3, 4]. In particular, reduced graphene oxide (RGO) can be used for these devices, 
due to the simplicity of deposition and processing, starting from solution‐based techniques 
using graphene oxide (GO) dispersions and subsequent reducing treatments [5, 6].
In principle, due to the intrinsic nature of pristine graphene, which is basically an electrical 
conductor, FET devices made from pristine graphene typically show low on/off current 
ratios [1]. The introduction of an energy bandgap in graphene can be engineered by several 
routes in order to achieve a semiconducting behavior of the material, which makes it more 
suitable for the fabrication of electronic devices such as transistors [7]. Among these routes, 
the most common feature is the generation of graphene strips having ultra‐thin width 
(<50 nm), making quasi‐one‐dimensional structures, which are called graphene nanorib-
bons, by constricting the lateral dimension of the graphene sheets. Graphene nanoribbons 
show semiconducting properties and are assumed to represent a technological alternative to 

234
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
silicon for the fabrication of field‐effect transistors less than 10 nm wide, with on/off cur-
rent ratios exceeding 106 at room temperature [4, 8]. For instance, FET devices can be 
fabricated using graphene nanoribbons produced by chemical routes, sonicating exfoliated 
graphite in organic solvents [9], or unzipping carbon nanotubes by plasma etching [10] or 
chemical oxidation [11], obtaining structures with widths below 10 nm having a 0.4 eV 
energy bandgap and on/off current ratio of 107. Graphene nanoribbons are normally 
p‐doped due to surface adsorbed water, but it is possible to achieve n‐type characteristics 
by electrochemical reaction in a reducing environment [12]. Moreover, the synthesis of 
n‐doped graphene‐based materials by annealing GO at relatively high temperatures in a 
reducing environment has been demonstrated [13].
A very simple transistor device can be fabricated by depositing metallic source and drain 
electrodes on top of RGO sheets sprayed from a solvent dispersion on an insulating ­substrate, 
to form a continuous film of overlapping platelets [14]. In that work [14], the conductivity 
of the original GO was increased by four or five orders of magnitude after chemical reduc-
tion of the sheets by exposure to hydrazine vapor, on more than 100 devices. Using a Si 
substrate as the back gate, the field‐effect responses of the devices were tested by varying 
the gate bias values and obtaining an increase in conductivity as the voltage lowered, as 
shown in Figure 7.1(a), indicating the p‐type semiconducting characteristic of RGO films. 
Figure 7.1(b) shows that the resistance of the device increases as the temperature decreases, 
which is a typical semiconducting‐type behavior. The I/T2 versus inverse temperature plot 
fits with a Schottky contact model, confirming a semiconductor/metal interface.
GO can be used for the fabrication of field‐effect transistors even without reduction. The 
electronic structure of GO can be simply tuned by varying the oxygen content of the layers, 
which can be controlled by the oxidation time during the synthesis [15], with a bandgap 
variation from 1.7 to 2.1 eV. In particular, GO with a bandgap of 1.7 eV shows a p‐type 
semiconducting behavior in air and was used for the fabrication of FETs without reduction 
of the layers by simply spray coating a dispersion on metallic electrodes [16]. These devices 
show low on/off ratio due to the presence of localized defect states, with p‐type behavior in 
air and ambipolar behavior under vacuum, due to the removal of oxygen‐related functional 
groups and water from GO.
Another aspect of using graphene‐based materials in electronic devices is their 
­application as electrodes. Graphene‐based thin films of different fabrication, including 
solution‐processed RGO, can be employed as flexible electrodes in various optical and 
electronic applications, including FETs, due to their high flexibility and transparency. 
For example, several works report the fabrication of FETs with all‐graphene electrodes 
using solution‐processable RGO. In Chen et al. [17], a flexible organic FET with all‐­
graphene electrodes obtained from chemical reduction of GO shows performances 
­comparable to conventional silicon‐based devices with metal electrodes. Wang et al. [18] 
report the use of thermally reduced GO as both source and drain electrodes (thick gra-
phene layers) and active channel (thin graphene layer) in a FET device. In this case, a 
particular method for isolation of large GO flakes with lateral size above 25 µm was 
applied, to improve the electrical characteristics of the layers. The thin‐film graphene 
device, obtained via solution‐processed fabrication, shows intrinsic carrier mobility 
greater than 5000 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is in the same order of magnitude as devices based on 
mechanically cleaved graphene. A schematic representation of the microfabrication of 
this device is reported in Figure 7.2. This example is particularly interesting because a 

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
235
solution process is employed for the fabrication of a FET based on RGO, opening the way 
for the possibility to fabricate large‐scale all‐carbon electrodes via two‐dimensional addi-
tive techniques such as inkjet printing, with the advantage of avoiding the pre‐patterning 
of catalysts that is needed, for instance, in chemical vapor deposition (CVD). The benefits 
of using inkjet printing technology for direct fabrication of devices are greatly advanta-
geous compared to conventional clean‐room‐based techniques [19, 20]. RGO can also be 
used as a conducting interlayer in organic field‐effect transistors to improve the electrical 
characteristics at the interface between the metallic electrodes and the organic active 
­layers [21]. The insertion of RGO layers allows one to improve the charge injection, to 
0
0
5
10
15
–10
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
Id (μA)
Id (μA)
1.8
2.0
0
10
20
25
(a)
(b)
1
2
3
Vds (V)
Vg(V)
4
5
5
10–12
Id/T2
10–13
2
4
6
8
2
10
1000/T
15
20
Figure 7.1  (a) The I–V characteristics of an RGO‐based FET device (gate biases of 15, 0, −5, −10 
and −15 V, respectively, from bottom to top). As the gate voltage changes from +15 to −15 V, 
the conductance of the device increases, indicating a p‐type semiconductor behavior. 
(b) Temperature‐dependent measurements, confirming the semiconducting behavior of the 
RGO film. Reproduced from [14] with permission of ACS

236
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
lower the losses at the metal/organic interface, and to increase the effective carrier mobility. 
Figure 7.3 reports a comparison of the linear mobility of a FET device made with and 
without an RGO interlayer between the Au electrodes and the pentacene organic active 
layer, showing the increased carrier mobility with the presence of RGO.
Similarly to SiO2, which is used in silicon‐based electronic devices as the gate insulator 
layer, GO was recently suggested as a suitable gate dielectric for graphene channels [22]. 
An example of an all‐graphene‐based thin‐film transistor has been reported [23], where a 
flexible and transparent all‐RGO device was fabricated on a polymeric substrate, making it 
suitable for application in flexible electronics and biomolecular sensing. In this work, rela-
tively thick RGO film (>9 nm) electrodes were deposited by spin coating on thin RGO 
films (2–4 nm) patterned by microfluidic techniques and used as active channels 
(Figure 7.4). The average on/off ratio was measured to be about 3.8 on many so‐fabricated 
Bare silicon wafer
(a)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(i)
(j)
(k)
Photo lithography
Drop-casting
or printing
GO solution
as electrodes
Drop-casting
or printing
GO solution
as active channel
Anneal at
1000 °C
Drop-casting
or printing
Go solution
as active channel
Silicon wafer with photoresist
Drop-casting
or printing
GO solution
as electrodes
Anneal at
150 °C
Lift-off
photoresits
2 μm
channels 
Printable graphene
active channel
Printable graphene electrode
SiO2
Si
Figure 7.2  (a–d) Microfabrication of an all‐carbon graphene FET device. Both GO active 
channel and electrodes are deposited onto an SiO2/Si substrate by drop‐casting or printing. 
(e–h) Device fabrication using conventional photolithography. Schemes and optical microscopy 
images of the RGO electrodes (i) and the whole device (j,k). Reproduced from [18] with 
permission of ACS

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
237
devices, showing field‐effect characteristics similar to RGO devices with metal electrodes, 
with better repeatability than single‐layer graphene FETs. These devices also showed 
excellent flexibility without modification of performances, as no variation of resistance 
was reported even after 5000 bending cycles. Another example was reported [24] where a 
100 nm GO film is employed as a gate dielectric and graphene as a channel, source/drain 
and gate electrodes in a flexible device fabricated on a plastic substrate. The suitability of 
GO as gate material is confirmed by the very stable measured capacitance without dielectric 
dispersion up to 1 MHz, and a relative permittivity of about 5 at room temperature. 
The measured capacitance and relative permittivity confirm that GO films are suitable as 
gate dielectric in graphene‐based FETs.
7.2  Sensors
GO and GO‐based materials have an exceptional importance in current sensors science. 
Based on Scopus data, at the time of writing more than 1500 original research articles have 
been published in international journals in this field in less than 10 years, positioning GO 
not so far from graphene itself. One of the reasons for this explosion consists in the fact that 
many sensors are actually based on RGO, which for some aspects could be considered an 
analog of graphene, and thus used in sensors for its exceptional electrical conductivity and 
superior mechanical strength. Nevertheless, also unreduced GO represents an important 
alternative for some applications due to its high number of reactive groups, which could 
easily interact with the environment. Moreover, GO solution processability meets the 
requirements of most thin‐film technologies [25].
In this section an overview of the sensors based on GO is reported, principally divided by the 
application rather than the mechanism, which is discussed for each case. These types of devices 
find their main application principally in three fields: gas, humidity and biological sensing.
0
0.0
–500.0n
–1.0 μ
–1.5 μ
–2.0 μ
ID(A)
–2.5 μ
–3.0 μ
Au electrode
–10
VDS(V)
–20
–30
–40
Slope = 0.05(μA/V)
μlinear= 0.007(cm2/V.s)
Slope = 0.16(μA/V)
μlinear= 0.022(cm2/V.s)
Au+HRG electrode
(VG=–20V)
Figure  7.3  Increase of carrier mobility in Au/pentacene organic FET devices due to the 
presence of a highly reduced GO (HRG) interlayer. Reproduced from [21] with permission of 
AIP Publishing LLC

238
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
7.2.1  Gas Sensors
Graphene is known to be sensitive to both electron‐acceptor (NO2, moisture, etc.) and 
­electron‐donor (CO, alcohols, ammonia, etc.) gases [26]. Since solution‐processed GO and 
RGO represent a relatively cheap alternative to epitaxial and CVD graphene, they were 
largely employed as gas sensing materials [27]. Differently from graphene, RGO still 
­possesses oxygen defects that, interacting with gases, could enhance its sensitivity towards 
such molecules [28, 29].
From the early stage of graphene‐based sensing, much attention was devoted to control-
ling the level of reduction in order to optimize the efficiency of the devices [30–32]. 
For instance, thermally processed GO may present p‐type semiconductor characteristics, 
and thus the interaction with a strong oxidizer such as NO2 leads to enrichment of the hole 
concentration and thus to an increase of electrical conductance [33]. In this context, sens-
ing devices were fabricated by direct laser reduction: by tuning the laser exposure, both 
electrodes and sensing material can be engineered, controlling the level of reduction 
(Figure 7.5) [34]. The semiconductor behavior can be further improved by ozone treatment 
on CVD‐grown graphene to tune the surface oxidation [35]. Leaving simple GO chemistry, 
the sensitivity toward NO2 can also be improved by using alternative methods such as the 
synthesis of mesocrystals by conjugating RGO and Cu2O [36] or RGO functionalization 
with different moieties such as sulfonated groups or ethylene diamine groups [37].
GO film
Spin-coating
APTES coated PET
of GO solution
Scratching
PDMS stamp
1. Reduction with hydrazine
Vg
Vds
1. Vacuum-assistant drying
2. Removal of PDMS stamp
2. Insulation of electrodes
GO solution
Buffer solution
Insulation
Pt electrode
GO micropattern
Figure 7.4  Fabrication of an all‐RGO thin‐film transistor. A GO solution is spin‐coated onto a 
flexible polymeric substrate, and subsequently scratched to make two separated electrodes. 
Between the electrodes, another GO film is micro‐patterned using the microfluidics technique. 
RGO films are then obtained via exposure to hydrazine vapor. A silicone rubber is finally used 
to insulate the RGO electrodes. Reproduced from [23] with permission of ACS

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
239
As previously mentioned, GO is used also as detecting material for electron‐donor gases 
such as alcohols and ammonia. In particular, the presence of epoxy and hydroxyl groups on 
the GO surface promotes the absorption of these gases: molecules adsorbed so close to the 
carbon matrix enhances the charge transfer and modifies the electrical conductivity [29]. 
Different approaches were used in the literature for the detection of electron‐donor gases: 
from simple chemical reduction [38–40] to nanoparticle decoration [41–43], metal organic 
framework (MOF) decoration [44, 45] and polymer functionalization of GO [46]. A par-
ticularly interesting alternative to resistive sensors consists in optical sensors for ammonia 
detection that exploit the change of reflectivity of silver‐decorated RGO by absorbing 
ammonia molecules [47].
An important effort was also devoted to develop H2 sensors, since hydrogen is a hazard-
ous gas but very strategic in many industrial applications as a power source, reducing agent 
or carrier gas. RGO can be used as the active layer for H2 detection in an acoustic wave 
sensor showing sensitivity down to 100 ppm [48]. Hydrogenated GO can also be used to 
0
0.97
0.98
0.99
Normalized resistance (R/R0)
1.00
50
100
Time (min)
150
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
GO
hr-LSG
(a)
(c)
(b)
Transferred hr-LSG
Figure 7.5  Example of an NO2 sensor. (a) All‐organic flexible set of interdigitated electrodes 
generated from highly reduced laser‐scribed graphene (hr‐LSG). (b) The same interdigitated 
electrodes transferred onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). (c) NO2 detection using the all‐
organic flexible interdigitated electrodes. Here the sensor uses hr‐LSG as the active electrodes 
and marginally laser‐reduced graphite oxide as the detecting medium. The NO2 concentration 
is 20 ppm in dry air. Reproduced from [34] with permission of ACS

240
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
realize a resistive H2 sensor, showing different behavior depending on the reduction degree 
[49]. However, the most exploited strategy to develop hydrogen sensors consists in the 
decoration of GO with noble metal or metal oxide nanoparticles [50]. For instance, hydro-
gen sensors based on palladium [51, 52], tin oxide [53], titanium dioxide [54], zinc oxide 
[55] or composite systems [56, 57] are described in the recent scientific literature.
7.2.2  Humidity Sensors
Among the various types of gases for which GO can be used as sensor, moisture is certainly 
one of the most important. This property is intrinsically related to the chemistry of GO: 
since GO, differently from graphene, is a hydrophilic material, its interaction with water 
molecules could modify its conduction properties and thus be a building block for moisture 
sensors [29].
As previously mentioned, the ratio between oxidized reduced moieties is a key issue for 
the realization of moisture sensors [30]. A selective reduction was recently performed via 
laser‐induced reduction. Using this technique, it is possible to fabricate a complete sensor 
from a single GO deposition: unreduced GO is used as the sensing part and RGO as the 
electrode material [58]. An interesting alternative simply using RGO has been proposed 
[59]: a thick film of GO is reduced via sunlight‐induced photoreduction. By this technique 
it is possible to produce a gradient reduction profile in the layer inducing responsive behavior 
to humidity related to the different hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity along the thickness of 
the material.
Similarly to other gas sensors, also for humidity sensors, more sensitive materials were 
exploited by functionalizing RGO sheets with polymers [60, 61] or nanoparticle decoration 
[62]. Layer‐by‐layer techniques were used to improve the adhesion between the electrodes 
and the RGO sheets (Figure 7.6) [63, 64].
As a final note on the performance of the devices, it should be noted that this has been 
improved dramatically over the past few years: in one of the first literature examples of 
RGO sensing, the fabricated sensor showed good sensitivity only at relative humidity 
higher than 70%, with an electrical response time of a few seconds [65]. In more recent 
works the sensitivity was drastically improved, with levels of detectable relative humidity 
down to 30% and evaluated response time of 30 ms [66].
7.2.3  Biological Sensors
GO is a material that is particularly interesting for the development of biosensors because 
it shows tunable electrical characteristics (insulator, semiconductor or semimetal) depend-
ing on the degree of reduction, and many chemically active moieties at the surface can be 
exploited for the anchoring of suitable reactive molecules. Moreover, it presents peculiar 
optical properties in terms of photoluminescence, which makes it very promising for 
­biosensor application [67, 68].
A technique that is very widespread for the development of biosensors is based on 
Förster (or fluorescence) resonance energy transfer phenomenon (FRET), which occurs 
when photoexcitation is transferred from a donor fluorophore to an acceptor molecule. 
FRET is nowadays applied to different fields such as in vivo monitoring in cellular research, 
structural elucidation of biological molecules and their interactions, nucleic acid analysis, 
signal transduction and light harvesting [69]. The efficiency of this process is six times 
inversely proportional to the distance of the donor/acceptor molecules and depends also on 
the excitation/emission spectral overlap and orientation of the dyes [70].

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
241
Due to its heterogeneous structure, which depends strongly on the degree of oxidation, 
GO can have a fluorescence [71] ranging from the near‐infrared to the ultraviolet part of 
the spectrum [72–74]. Moreover, it can behave as donor (since it possesses photolumines-
cent characteristics) and as acceptor (since it can behave as a semimetal) as well for devel-
oping FRET‐based sensors [67].
Sensing film
IDE
Rinse
Dry
Rinse
Dry
(a)
(b)
Rinse
Dry
Rinse
Dry
Rinse
Dry
10 min
10 min
10 min
Repeat once
PDDA
PSS
15min
Repeat for
5 times
GO
PDDA
Figure  7.6  (a) Layer‐by‐layer fabrication process of a humidity GO nanocomposite film. 
(b) Optical image of 4 × 6 sensor array on a flexible polyimide substrate. Reproduced from [63] 
with permission of Elsevier

242
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Regarding the interaction with biomolecules, as previously mentioned, the presence of 
reactive moieties (epoxy, ester, carboxylic and hydroxyl groups) on the basal planes and 
edges of GO allows an easy decoration with biomolecules or biomarkers. Moreover, the 
hydrophilic characteristic of GO sheets permits secondary interactions with polar moieties 
such as diols, amines and phenyls. On the other hand, the hexagonal lattice of GO allows 
π–π interactions with similar ring structures in nucleotides. Therefore, a large range of 
biomolecules can be monitored using GO as a sensing platform [75].
Going into details, GO is an excellent photoluminescence quencher and thus it has been 
widely used for biomolecule detection. The general approach is the following. A reactive 
molecule bearing a fluorescent group is adsorbed onto GO surfaces via non‐covalent bond-
ing. In the presence of the target, the molecule is desorbed from the GO surface, thus 
recovering the fluorescence, allowing target recognition and quantification (Figure 7.7). 
This approach was reported in many applications such as DNA [76, 77] or protein [78] 
recognition, thrombin detection [79] and imaging living cells [80].
GO photoluminescence was also used to develop label‐free biological sensors for drug 
delivery [81] and intracellular imaging [82]. Moreover, devices for sensing other complex 
molecules or biological materials can be found in the literature, for instance, for polydopa-
mine [83] or viruses [84].
cDNA
Adsorption
(A)
(B)
(C)
Direct hybridization,
no cDNA adsorption
Displacement
Hybridization
in solution
Hybridization
on GO, then
desorption
Figure 7.7  Three possible mechanisms of hybridization between a probe DNA adsorbed by 
GO and its cDNA (target DNA): (A) Langmuir − Hinshelwood mechanism; (B) Eley − Rideal 
mechanism; and (C) displacement mechanism. In all three cases, the probe DNA with a 
fluorophore label is pre‐adsorbed and the cDNA is added afterwards. The tendency of GO to 
adsorb double‐stranded ds‐DNA is lower than that to adsorb single‐stranded ss‐DNA. 
Reproduced from [76] with permission of ACS

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
243
Finally, RGO can also be used as a transducer for bio‐induced signals [85]. Examples of 
an electrical approach to bio‐detection can be found for glucose sensing [86], H2O2 delivery 
to cancer cells [87] or uric acid [88, 89].
7.3  RGO Transparent Conductive Films
Transparent conductive films (TCFs) are of fundamental importance for producing trans-
parent electrodes for optoelectronic devices such as organic light‐emitting diodes (OLEDs), 
organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs), liquid crystal displays (LCDs) and touch panels. With 
the rapid development of the portable electronics market, TCFs are predicted to have a 
growing role in future technology [90]. RGO, with its electrical conductivity, high carrier 
mobility, optical transparency in the visible range and superior mechanical properties, is 
considered one of the best candidates for replacing indium tin oxide (ITO) as lead material 
in the realization of TCFs [91]. Moreover, methodologies based on the colloidal solution of 
GO are suitable for high production volumes at low cost and are compatible with flexible 
substrate technologies [92].
Among the various parameters necessary for producing high‐quality TCFs, the control 
of film thickness and the homogeneity of deposition are key issues. Since an increase of 
RGO film thickness leads to an increase of conductivity, but, at the same time, to a decrease 
of transparency, the strategy consists in a trade‐off between conductivity and transparency 
(Figure  7.8). Different techniques have been developed to produce TCFs such as spin 
­coating [93], dip coating [94], spray coating [95], inkjet printing [96], transfer printing 
[97], electrophoretic deposition [98] and Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) techniques [99].
All those techniques present some advantages as well as drawbacks. Spin coating and 
dip coating are relatively cheap techniques and useful for mass production, but present 
­difficulties regarding uniformity in distribution and stacking of GO sheets. Spray coating 
could lead to partial aggregation of sheets during heat drying. Inkjet printing does not allow 
close packing of sheets and involves the use of surfactants that could reduce electrical 
­conductivity. Transfer printing, although guaranteeing high deposition quality, suffers from 
lack of transparency due to too thick depositions. Electrophoretic deposition is also suita-
ble for mass production but it is limited to application on conductive substrates. Finally, LB 
techniques are the most sophisticated and precise, and guarantee high orientation and pack-
ing and a superior lateral resolution; moreover, by controlling properly the deposition 
parameters, it is possible to produce very thin TCFs. The main drawback consists in the low 
deposition rate, which presently makes those methodologies not desirable for large‐scale 
production [92].
A thermal or chemical reduction process usually follows deposition in order to achieve 
the desired electrical conductivity. This process is clearly of fundamental importance in 
order to obtain sheets with low resistivity; however, it must be taken into account that in 
TCFs the total resistance suffers from inter‐sheet carrier diffusion and thus, even if the 
sheets are well reduced, a very high resistance could be measured [100].
Although TCFs prepared by deposition and reduction of GO suspension possess 
­sufficient transparency and conductivity for most applications, a large effort has been 
devoted to further improve these properties. The most used approaches include the reali-
zation of RGO composites with metal nanowires (NWs) or nanogrids [101] or carbon 

244
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
0
300
600
0.0
20.0
40.0
% Transmittance at 550 nm
% Transmittance at 550 nm
60.0
Hydrazine + 400 C
1100 C
80.0
100.0
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
80.0
100.0
1E+01
1E+02
1E+03
Sheet resistance
(Ω/square)
1E+04
1E+01
1E+02
1E+03
Film conductivity
(S/cm)
1E+04
1E+05
1E+06
900
Wavelength (nm)
1200
1500
1800
10
20
30
40
50
60
% Transmittance
70
80
90
100
9 nm (non-reduced)
6 nm
8 nm
27 nm
41 nm
(A)
(B)
(C)
(D)
Figure 7.8  Example of dependence of different properties of RGO on film thickness. (A) 
Photograph of films with increasing thickness. (B) Ultraviolet–visible spectra of films with 
increasing thickness. (C, D) Dependence of the electrical behavior on transparency with 
different reduction processes. Reproduced from [93] with permission of ACS

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
245
nanotubes (CNTs) [102, 103], RGO electrode doping [104] and increasing the dimen-
sions of GO sheets [105].
Going into the details, the realization of hybrid materials with metal nanowires or 
nanogrids allows one to decrease the contact barrier due to bridging of RGO sheets induced 
by the presence of the metal structures [106] (Figure 7.9). A similar effect can be achieved 
by creating TCFs with CNTs [107]. Different techniques for the deposition of TCFs with 
RGO and CNTs are reported in the literature, such as LB techniques [108], solution mixing 
[109], layer‐by‐layer self‐assembly [110] and solvent–water surface self‐assembly [111].
RGO sheet doping can be achieved by treatment with different acids or halogenating 
agents such as HNO3 [112], SOCl2 [113], SOBr2 [104] or AuCl3 [114].
Finally, the last approach involves the exploitation of large‐area GO sheets. The RGO 
sheets normally used show a relatively small surface area (a few tens of square microme-
ters) and thus higher inter‐sheet contact resistance. Different techniques can be employed 
to obtain large‐area GO sheets (up to some square millimeters) through edge selective 
graphite functionalization [115], sonication in sulfuric acid [116] or other modified 
­solution‐phase processes that do not involve sonication [117].
7.4  Memristors Based on Graphene Oxide
As a last example of devices that exploit the peculiar properties of GO, a particular type of 
nanoscale electronic device is reported in this section: the memristor.
Memristive devices can generate intense fields by the application of relatively low 
­voltages, relying purely on the properties at the nanoscale level of the active material layer. 
They are predicted to find application in the fabrication of fast, non‐volatile and low‐energy 
Substrate (PET)
Pull out
Heating
GO solution
Evaporation
The GO thin ﬁlm
Reduction
by HI acid
T-AgNW solution
The GN/AgNW thin ﬁlm
Pull out
Dip-coating
T-AgNW
The GN thin ﬁlm
T-AgNW
GN
π-π interaction
Figure  7.9  Preparation process of RGO‐Ag nanowire TCFs. Reproduced from [106] with 
permission of RSC

246
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
electrical switching. In addition, as they are able to retain the internal resistance state 
according to the history of the applied voltage and current, memristors can be used as resistive 
random access memory [118], programmable logic [119] and neural networks, and 
­represent the building block for neuromorphic devices and artificial intelligence [120].
The existence of a fourth two‐terminal fundamental passive component was already 
­postulated in 1971 by Chua [121], to complete the picture of the three classical circuit 
­elements (resistor, capacitor and inductor). Merely by logic deduction, he introduced a 
sixth differential relation to couple the four fundamental circuit variables (current, voltage, 
magnetic flux and charge), in addition to the already known five relations. The sixth miss-
ing relation, connecting current and magnetic flux, was sustained by the introduction of a 
resistor with memory, that is, the memristor. From Chua’s equations, it was clear that the 
value of memristance depended on the time integral of the current, thus on the past history 
of the device. Memristors are fundamental elements because they cannot be reproduced by 
combining other passive components. The memristor exhibits two stable resistance states: 
a high‐resistance state (HRS) in which the device shows low electrical conductance, and a 
low‐resistance state (LRS) of high conductance. The device can switch from HRS to LRS 
(or vice versa) by applying a SET (or RESET) voltage. The performance of a memristor 
can be evaluated by its values of retention and endurance [122]. The retention indicates 
how long the internal state of a device can be held when it is not powered, with typical 
required values for non‐volatile memory applications exceeding 10 years. The endurance 
indicates how many cycles can be supported by the device before reaching breakdown, 
with typical values being between 103 and 107 cycles depending on the application.
In order to understand the potential for an application of GO in this field, it is important 
to note that the most significant feature of memristors is their nanoscale dimension. 
Therefore, the application of relatively low voltages can generate very intense fields induc-
ing nonlinear and reversible transport of charge carriers, which typically can be either 
metal ions or oxygen vacancies. The evidence for this effect increases on reducing the 
thickness of memristive materials. The first working memristor was fabricated in 2008 by 
HP Labs [123], basing the switching on the formation of a filament of oxygen vacancies in 
a very thin layer of TiO2 sandwiched between two Pt electrodes. Since then, many materials 
and systems have been tested for the fabrication of memristors, such as various perovskite 
oxide materials, binary transition metal oxides (like TiO2, Ta2O5, NiO), chalcogenides and 
organic materials [124, 125]. In the last few years, graphene‐based nanostructures have 
also been tested in memristive switching systems [126], and in particular those based on 
GO [127, 128]. In fact, the oxygen functionalities randomly placed over GO basal planes 
(hydroxyl and epoxide) and at the sheet edges (carbonyl and carboxyl) [129] are responsi-
ble for the electrically insulating behavior of GO, and make it a suitable candidate for the 
fabrication of memristive devices in substitution of other thin‐layered oxide materials. 
Moreover, being only about 1 nm thick, the scalability of GO‐based devices is better than 
that of organic and inorganic thin‐film memristors, and allows scaling beyond the current 
limits of semiconductor technology for high‐density fabrication of memristive devices.
7.4.1  Fabrication of Devices
The most developed structure for the fabrication of memristors is the metal/insulator/metal 
(MIM), which can be used for an extremely wide range of insulating materials, including 
GO, sandwiched between two metal electrodes (Figure 7.10). GO can be easily dispersed 

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
247
in common polar solvents, including water, and deposited on metallic electrodes with a 
precise control of GO layer thickness by spin coating, drop casting, vacuum filtration, 
inkjet printing or LB deposition. This is usually followed by thermal annealing to improve 
crystallinity and uniformity, at relatively low temperatures in an inert environment to avoid 
GO reduction. The metallic top electrode is usually deposited by thermal evaporation or 
sputtering through a shadow mask.
The choice of materials for the metallic electrodes is very important, because it affects 
the properties of the fabricated device and the switching mechanisms [130]. The metal 
electrodes sandwiching GO are usually asymmetric, with the work function of the active 
electrode lower than that of the inert electrode. Switching may also arise due to local oxidation 
of one of the metal electrodes at the interface with GO. MIS (metal/insulator/semiconduc-
tor) devices can also be fabricated using bottom electrodes of semiconducting nature, like 
p‐doped silicon instead of the metal. Semiconductors are intrinsically rectifying, ­having the 
advantage of suppressing cross‐talk between adjacent devices, for instance in a crossbar 
configuration, without the need to introduce any additional rectifying element (e.g. diodes) 
Top electrode
HRS
(a)
(b)
(d)
(c)
LRS
Graphene
oxide
Bottom electrode
Top electrode
Graphene
oxide
Bottom electrode
Top electrode
Graphene
oxide
Bottom electrode
Top electrode
Graphene
oxide
Bottom electrode
Metal
cations
Metal
cations
Figure  7.10  Schematic representation of a MIM memristive structure based on a GO 
switching layer, with mechanism based on metal filament formation. (a) Device in pristine 
state. (b) A positive bias induces the oxidation of the top electrode, originating metal cations 
that migrate towards the bottom electrode, where the formation of metal filaments is promoted 
after the reduction. (c) The grown filament reach the top electrode with the generation of a 
local short‐circuit (device switches from HRS to LRS). (d) On inverting the external bias, the 
opposite process is achieved. Reproduced from [127] with permission of Elsevier

248
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
like in many MIM devices. In general, for the fabrication of memristive devices based on 
GO, particular care should be taken about the surface roughness of the metallic electrodes, 
because the contact resistance can have great importance in determining the switching 
­proprieties of devices. Low roughness is preferable, in order to avoid surface cracks at the 
metal–GO interface, which can facilitate the penetration of metal atoms into the oxide layer 
and influence the switching performance or even short‐circuit the device.
One of the advantages of using GO as the switching layer is that it can be easily depos-
ited also on flexible substrates and used for electronic flexible applications, without 
­displaying any appreciable degradation of the memristive behavior [131]. Another branch 
of memristors based on graphene can be developed using composite materials based on 
polymeric matrices filled with graphene or GO, which may improve not only the electrical 
but also the structural characteristics of flexible devices. Like in the case of pure GO, the 
composites can be used as an active layer sandwiched between conductive electrodes. 
The oxygen functionalities present on GO surfaces can be engineered to form covalent 
bonds with the polymeric matrices [132], with memristive properties associated with elec-
tron transfer between GO and the polymer [133]. Finally, GO can also be combined with 
other mixed oxide materials as active layers, to create multi‐layer structures. In this case, 
the memristive switching arises from an exchange of oxygen ions between GO and the 
other insulating layer. This combination ensures a switching behavior even using symmetric 
electrodes, with temperature stability up to 85 °C and without degradation of materials.
7.4.2  Switching Mechanisms
The electrical behavior of the metal oxide‐based memristors, including devices based on 
GO, can be explained by two different mechanisms [134]. One is related to oxygen ion 
­diffusion driven by the electric field and Joule heating, while the other is driven by the 
formation of a metal nanofilament due to the diffusion of species from the top electrode 
under a bias voltage (Figure 7.10). Most devices show a bipolar switching behavior, where 
SET and RESET depend on the polarity of the applied voltage, typically in the order of a 
few volts, also displaying a great retention (higher than 104 s) and good endurance. Other 
devices show unipolar switching, with dependence on the amplitude of the applied voltage 
rather than on its polarity. An initial stage during which the formation of a percolative path 
inside the GO layer, named “forming”, is often required to stabilize the switching operation 
and to determine the consequent electrical behavior (unipolar or bipolar) [135]. Generally, 
fabrication parameters, such as the choice of deposition technique for GO and top elec-
trode, choice of electrode materials, etc., influence the hybridization state of GO, thus 
contributing to determine the differences in the behavior of devices and influencing the 
choice of switching mechanism.
The most frequently reported mechanism for resistive switching of GO‐based devices is 
oxygen ion diffusion. However, different interpretations of the physical phenomenon can 
be given, depending on the scale at which the phenomenon is considered. The memristive 
behavior can be related to a transition happening in the bulk of the material, which involves 
a structural modification of the entire GO layer. However, this effect can happen also 
locally and be associated with a modification of the contact resistance with the top 
­electrode, which greatly influences the characteristics of devices, as previously discussed. 
As‐fabricated devices are normally in their HRS due to the presence of insulating metal 

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
249
oxide layers. The application of a negative bias induces a migration of oxygen ions from 
the oxide interface layer into the GO layer, with the formation of metal‐like conductive 
path in the metal oxide insulating layer. The thickness reduction causes the device to switch 
to LRS. By applying a positive voltage, the back‐diffusion of the ions from GO restores the 
original resistance state. A typical I–V characteristic curve of a GO‐based MIM memristive 
structure is reported in Figure  7.11, together with data on endurance and retention of 
the device [131].
As previously explained, in a MIM structure based on GO sandwiched between two 
metal electrodes (e.g. aluminum [136]), the switching may not be directly related to the 
presence of GO, which does not participate directly in the switching phenomenon. These 
conversely depend on the presence of a metal oxide insulating film at the interface with 
one of the electrodes. This creates a contact resistance between GO and the metal, and GO 
acts as an oxygen ion reservoir for the switching processes. In this case, the switching 
occurs locally when redox reactions between GO and the metal oxide layer take place and 
cause physical adsorption of oxygen in the GO layers.
On the other hand, rather than being attributed to the presence of a metal oxide film, 
resistive switching can also be associated with local reversible rearrangement of highly 
resistive thin regions of the GO film near the interface with the metallic electrode. Also in 
this case the as‐fabricated device is in HRS, with the area at the interface mainly composed 
of a continuous GO layer that is heavily sp3‐hybridized. The application of an external 
­voltage causes the migration of oxygen ions, providing the formation of sp2‐hybridized 
cluster filaments inside the highly resistive thin regions, which allows switching to LRS.
The memristive behavior of GO‐based devices can also be associated with the modification 
of the hybridization state of the entire GO layer, rather than to the interface between GO 
and electrodes, for example with the presence of oxygen vacancies and electron traps in the 
GO layers that act as preferential conductive paths. Differently from previously analyzed 
devices, in this case the as‐fabricated device is in LRS, and changes to HRS after the appli-
cation of an external bias. The application of a positive voltage leads to recombination 
between oxygen ions and vacancies with oxidation of the graphene layer. The initial 
­conductive state can then be restored by reversing the bias polarity, achieving back‐­
diffusion of the oxygen ions.
–4
(a)
(b)
(c)
10–12
106
103
104
Time (s)
@ –0.5V
@ –0.5V
Resistance (Ω)
Current (A)
Resistance (Ω)
Cycle number
0
20
40
60
80
100
105
106
108
1010
108
1010
10–10
10–8
10–6
10–4
–3 –2 –1
0
Voltage (V)
1
4
1
2
3
2
3
4
HRS
LRS
HRS
LRS
Figure 7.11  Typical characteristics of a symmetric MIM device based on GO switching layer, 
showing switching based on oxygen ion diffusion and bipolar behavior: (a) I–V characteristic 
curve, (b) endurance and (c) retention tests. Reproduced from [131] with permission of ACS

250
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
All the devices illustrated so far have in common the oxygen ion drift mechanism, which 
often shows a different speed of SET and RESET operations, with the SET speed (typical 
value of 100 µs) significantly slower than the RESET speed (about 100 ns) [137]. The 
­oxygen diffusivity is strictly related to the hopping energy barrier, which depends on the 
injection and extraction of electrons from the GO layer, which in turn is strictly related to 
the electron density in the insulating layer. In particular, when a negative bias is applied 
to the top electrode (RESET), electrons are injected into the GO, increasing the energy 
­barrier, and thus reducing the oxygen diffusivity and speed. In the same way, when the bias 
voltage is reversed (SET), the electrons are extracted from the GO, reducing the energy 
barrier, and thus increasing the ions movement speed [138].
The other and less common mechanism for GO‐based memristors is based on the forma-
tion of a metal filament within the insulating layer [139]. In this case the HRS and LRS 
states show nonlinear and linear resistance variations with respect to temperature, respec-
tively. A positive bias applied to the top electrode induces a high electric field inside the 
device (SET). During the oxidation of the top electrode, metal ions migrate to the bottom 
electrode through the GO film, and accumulate at the bottom electrode interface, inducing 
a reduction process through the insulating layer, with the eventual formation of a metal 
­filament. The resistance of the device switches abruptly from HRS to LRS as soon as the 
growing filament reaches the top electrode. An inversion of the bias voltage causes the 
rupture of the filament with the back‐diffusion of the metal ions, restoring the HRS.
References
[1]	 Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.V.; et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin 
­carbon films. Science 2004, 306 (5696), 666–669.
[2]	 Geim, A.K.; Novoselov, K.S., The rise of graphene. Nature Mater. 2007, 6 (3), 183–191.
[3]	 Brey, L.; Fertig, H.A., Electronic states of graphene nanoribbons studied with the Dirac equa-
tion. Phys. Rev. B 2006, 73 (23), 235411.
[4]	 Son, Y.W.; Cohen, M.L; Louie S.G., Energy gaps in graphene nanoribbons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
2006, 97 (21), 216803.
[5]	 Giardi, R.; Porro, S.; Chiolerio, A.; et al., Inkjet printed acrylic formulations based on UV‐RGO 
nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. 2013, 48 (3), 1249–1255.
[6]	 Porro, S.; Giardi, R.; Chiolerio, A., Real‐time monitoring of GO reduction in acrylic printable 
composite inks. Appl. Phys. A 2014, 117 (3), 1289–1293.
[7]	 Zhu, Y.; Murali, S.; Cai, W.; et al., Graphene and GO: synthesis, properties, and applications. 
Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (35), 3906–3924.
[8]	 Barone, V.; Hod, O.; Scuseria, G.E., Electronic structure and stability of semiconducting 
­graphene nanoribbons. Nano Lett. 2006, 6 (12), 2748–2754.
[9]	 Li, X.L.; Wang, X.R.; Zhang, L.; et al., Chemically derived, ultrasmooth graphene nanoribbon 
semiconductors. Science 2008, 319 (5867), 1229–1232.
[10]	 Jiao, L.Y.; Zhang, L.; Wang, X.R.; et al., Narrow graphene nanoribbons from carbon nanotubes. 
Nature 2009, 458 (7240), 877–880.
[11]	 Kosynkin, D.V.; Higginbotham, A.L.; Sinitskii, A.; et al., Longitudinal unzipping of carbon 
nanotubes to form graphene nanoribbons. Nature 2009, 458 (7240), 872–876.
[12]	 Wang, X.R.; Li, X.L.; Zhang, L.; et al., N‐doping of graphene through electrothermal reactions 
with ammonia. Science 2009, 324 (5928), 768–771.
[13]	 Li, X.; Wang, H.; Robinson, J.T.; et al., Simultaneous nitrogen doping and reduction of GO. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (43), 15939–15944.
[14]	 Gilje, S.; Han, S.; Wang, M.; et al., A chemical route to graphene for device applications. Nano 
Lett. 2007, 7 (11), 3394–3398.

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
251
[15]	 Jeong, H.K.; Jin, M.H.; So, K.P.; et al., Tailoring the characteristics of graphite oxides by dif-
ferent oxidation times. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2009, 42 (6), 065418.
[16]	 Jin, M.; Jeong, H.K.; Yu, W.J.; et al., GO thin film field effect transistors without reduction. 
J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 2009, 42 (13), 135109.
[17]	 Chen, Y.; Xu, Y.; Zhao, K.; et al., Towards flexible all‐carbon electronics: flexible organic field‐
effect transistors and inverter circuits using solution‐processed all‐graphene source/drain/gate 
electrodes. Nano Res. 2010, 3 (10), 714–721.
[18]	 Wang, S.; Ang, P.K.; Wang, Z.; et al., High mobility, printable, and solution‐processed graphene 
electronics. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (1), 92–98.
[19]	 Bocchini, S.; Chiolerio, A.; Porro, S.; et al., Synthesis of polyaniline‐based inks, doping thereof and 
test device printing towards electronic applications. J. Mater. Chem. C 2013, 1 (33), 5101–5109.
[20]	 Chiolerio, A.; Bocchini, S.; Porro, S., Inkjet printed negative supercapacitors: synthesis of 
­polyaniline‐based inks, doping agent effect, and advanced electronic devices applications. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2014, 24 (22), 3375–3383.
[21]	 Lee, C.G.; Park, S.; Ruoff, R.S.; Dodabalapur, A., Integration of RGO into organic field‐effect transis-
tors as conducting electrodes and as a metal modification layer. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95 (2), 023304.
[22]	 Sharma, B.K.; Ahn, J.H., Graphene based field effect transistors: efforts made towards flexible 
electronics. Solid‐State Electronics 2013, 89, 177–188.
[23]	 He, Q.; Wu, S.; Gao, S.; et al., Transparent, flexible, all‐RGO thin film transistors. ACS Nano 
2011, 5 (6), 5038–5044.
[24]	 Lee, S.K.; Jang, H.Y.; Jang, S.; et al., All graphene‐based thin film transistors on flexible plastic 
substrates. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (7), 3472–3476.
[25]	 He, Q.; Wu, S.; Yin, Z.; Zhang, H., Graphene‐based electronic sensors. Chem. Sci. 2012, 3 (6), 
1764–1772.
[26]	 Llobet, E., Gas sensors using carbon nanomaterials: a review. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2013, 
179, 32–45.
[27]	 Kochmann, S.; Hirsch, T.; Wolfbeis, O.S., Graphenes in chemical sensors and biosensors. 
Trends Anal. Chem. 2012, 39, 87–113.
[28]	 Zhang, J.; Song, L.; Zhang, A.; et al., Environmentally responsive graphene systems. Small 
2014, 10 (11), 2151–2164.
[29]	 Toda, K.; Furue, R.; Hayami, S., Recent progress in applications of GO for gas sensing: a 
review. Anal. Chim. Acta 2015, 878, 43–53.
[30]	 Robinson, J.T.; Perkins, F.K.; Snow, E.S.; et al., RGO molecular sensors. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 
(10), 3137–3140.
[31]	 Fowler, J.D.; Aleen, M.J.; Tung, V.C.; et al., Practical chemical sensors from chemically derived 
graphene. ACS Nano 2009, 3 (2), 301–306.
[32]	 Lu, G.; Park, S.; Yu, K. et al., Toward practical gas sensing with highly RGO: a new signal 
processing method to circumvent run‐to‐run and device‐to‐device variations. ACS Nano 2011, 
5 (2), 1154–1164.
[33]	 Lu, G.; Ocola, L.E.; Chen, J., Gas detection using low‐temperature RGO sheets. Appl. Phys. 
Lett. 2009, 94 (8), 083111.
[34]	 Strong, V.; Dubin, S.; El‐Kady, M.F.; et al., Patterning and electronic tuning of laser scribed 
graphene for flexible all‐carbon devices. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (2), 1395–1403.
[35]	 Chung, M.G.; Kim, D.H.; Lee, H.M.; et al., Highly sensitive NO2 gas sensor based on ozone 
treated graphene. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2012, 166–167, 172–176.
[36]	 Deng, S.; Tjoa, V.; Fan, H.M.; et al., RGO conjugated Cu2O nanowire mesocrystals for high‐
performance NO2 gas sensor, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134 (10), 4905–4917.
[37]	 Yuan, W.; Liu, A.; Huang, L.; et  al., High‐performance NO2 sensors based on chemically 
­modified graphene. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (5), 766–771.
[38]	 Ghosh, R.; Midya, A.; Santra, S.; et  al., Chemically RGO for ammonia detection at room 
­temperature. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2013, 5 (15), 7599–7603.
[39]	 Ghosh, R.; Singh, A.; Santra, S.; et al., Highly sensitive large‐area multi‐layered graphene‐
based flexible ammonia sensor. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 205, 67–73.
[40]	 Kavinkumar, T.; Sastikumar, D.; Manivannan, S., Effect of functional groups on dielectric, optical gas 
sensing properties of GO and RGO at room temperature, RSC Advances 2015, 5 (14), 10816–10825.

252
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[41]	 Xia, X.; Guo, S.; Zhao, W.; et al., Carboxyl functionalized gold nanoparticles in situ grown on 
RGO for micro‐gravimetric ammonia sensing. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 202, 846–853.
[42]	 Meng, H.; Yang, W.; Ding, K.; et al., Cu2O nanorods modified by RGO for NH3 sensing at room 
temperature. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3, 1174–1181.
[43]	 Lin, Q.; Li, Y.; Yang, M., Tin oxide/graphene composite fabricated via a hydrothermal method 
for gas sensors working at room temperature. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2012, 173, 139–147.
[44]	 Zhou, X.; Wang, X.; Wang, B.; et al., Preparation, characterization and NH3‐sensing properties 
of RGO/copper phthalocyanine hybrid material. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 193, 340–348.
[45]	 Travlou, N.A.; Singh, K.; Rodríguez‐Castellón, E.; Bandosz, T.J., Cu–BTC MOF–graphene‐based 
hybrid materials as low concentration ammonia sensors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3 (21), 
11417–11429.
[46]	 Hu, N.; Yang, Z.; Wang, Y.; et al., Ultrafast and sensitive room temperature NH3 gas sensors 
based on chemically RGO. Nanotechnology 2014, 25 (2), 025502.
[47]	 Sansone, L.; Malachovska, V.; La Manna, P.; et al., Nanochemical fabrication of a GO‐based 
nanohybrid for label‐free optical sensing with fiber optics, Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 202, 
523–526.
[48]	 Arsat, R.; Breedon, M.; Shafiei, M.; et al., Graphene‐like nano‐sheets for surface acoustic wave 
gas sensor applications. Chem. Phys. Lett. 2009, 467 (4–6), 344–347.
[49]	 Zhang L.S.; Wang, W.D.; Liang, X.Q.; et  al., Characterization of partially RGO as room 
­temperature sensor for H2. Nanoscale 2011, 3 (6), 2458–2460.
[50]	 Tan, C.; Huang, X.; Zhang, H., Synthesis and applications of graphene‐based noble metal nano-
structures. Mater. Today 2013, 16 (1–2), 29–36.
[51]	 Du, Y.; Xue, Q.; Zhang, Z.; Xia, F., Great enhancement in H2 response using graphene‐based 
Schottky junction. Mater. Lett. 2014, 135, 151–153.
[52]	 Hong, J.; Lee, S.; Seo, J.; et al., Highly sensitive hydrogen sensor with gas selectivity using a 
PMMA membrane‐coated Pd nanoparticle/single‐layer graphene hybrid. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2015, 7 (6), 3554–3561.
[53]	 Russo, P.A.; Donato, N.; Leonardi, S.G.; et  al., Room‐temperature hydrogen sensing with 
­heteronanostructures based on RGO and tin oxide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51 (44), 
11053–11057.
[54]	 Dutta, D.; Hazr, S.K.; Das, J.; et al., Studies on p‐TiO2/n‐graphene heterojunction for hydrogen 
detection. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2015, 212, 84–92.
[55]	 Anand, K.; Singh, O.; Singh, M.P.; et al., Hydrogen sensor based on graphene/ZnO nanocom-
posite. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 195, 409–415.
[56]	 Esfandiar, A.; Ghasemi, S.; Irajizad, A.; et  al., The decoration of TiO2/RGO by Pd and Pt 
­nanoparticles for hydrogen gas sensing. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2012, 37 (20), 15423–15432.
[57]	 Esfandiar, A.; Irajizad, A.; Akhavan, O.; et al., Pd–WO3/RGO hierarchical nanostructures as 
efficient hydrogen gas sensors. Int. J. Hydrogen Energy 2014, 39 (15), 8169–8179.
[58]	 Guo, L.; Jiang, H.B.; Shao, R.Q.; et  al., Two‐beam‐laser interference mediated reduction, 
­patterning and nanostructuring of GO for the production of a flexible humidity sensing device. 
Carbon 2012, 50 (4), 1667–1673.
[59]	 Han, D.D.; Zhang, Y.L.; Jiang, H.B.; et al., Moisture‐responsive graphene paper prepared by 
self‐controlled photoreduction. Adv. Mater. 2014, 27 (2), 332–338.
[60]	 Yu, H.W.; Kim, H.K.; Kim, T.; et al., Self‐powered humidity sensor based on GO composite 
film intercalated by poly(sodium 4‐styrenesulfonate). ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6 (11), 
8320–8326.
[61]	 Hwang, S.H.; Kang, D.; Ruoff, R.S.; et al., Poly(vinyl alcohol) reinforced and toughened with 
poly(dopamine)‐treated GO, and its use for humidity sensing. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (7), 6739–6747.
[62]	 Mao, S.; Cui, S.; Lu, G.; et al., Tuning gas‐sensing properties of RGO using tin oxide nanocrystals. 
J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 11009–11013.
[63]	 Zhang, D.; Tong, J.; Xia, B., Humidity‐sensing properties of chemically reduced grapheneox-
ide/polymer nanocomposite film sensor based on layer‐by‐layer nano self‐assembly. Sens. 
Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 197, 66–72.
[64]	 Su, P.; Chiou, C., Electrical and humidity‐sensing properties of RGO thin film fabricated by 
layer‐by‐layer with covalent anchoring on flexible substrate. Sens. Actuators B: Chem. 2014, 
200, 9–18.

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
253
[65]	 Zhang, J.; Shen, G.; Wang, W.; et al., Individual nanocomposite sheets of chemically RGO and 
poly(N‐vinyl pyrrolidone): preparation and humidity sensing characteristics. J. Mater. Chem. 
2010, 20 (48), 10824–10828.
[66]	 Borini, S.; White, R.; Wei, D.; et al., Ultrafast GO humidity sensors. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (12), 
11166–11173.
[67]	 Morales‐Narváez, E.; Merkoçi, A., GO as an optical biosensing platform. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24 
(25), 3298–3308.
[68]	 Chartuprayoon, N.; Zhang, M.; Bosze, W.; et al., One‐dimensional nanostructures based ­bio‐
detection. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2015, 63, 432–443.
[69]	 Li, Z.; He, M.; Xu, D.; Liu, Z., Graphene materials‐based energy acceptor systems and sensors. 
J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev. 2014, 18, 1–17.
[70]	 Selvin, P.R., The renaissance of fluorescence resonance energy transfer. Nature Struct. Biol. 
2000, 7 (9), 730–734.
[71]	 Loh, K.P.; Bao, Q.; Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., GO as a chemically tunable platform for optical 
applications. Nature Chem. 2010, 2 (12), 1015–1024.
[72]	 Luo, Z.; Vora, P.M.; Mele, E.J.; et al., Photoluminescence and band gap modulation in GO. 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 94 (11), 111909.
[73]	 Chen, J.L.; Yan, X.P., A dehydration and stabilizer‐free approach to production of stable water 
dispersions of graphene nanosheets. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20 (21), 4328–4332.
[74]	 Peng, J.; Gao, W.; Gupta, B.K.; et al., Graphene quantum dots derived from carbon fibers. Nano 
Lett. 2012, 12 (2), 844–849.
[75]	 Wang, Y.; Li, Z.; Wang, J.; et al., Graphene and GO: biofunctionalization and applications in 
biotechnology. Trends Biotechnol. 2011, 29 (5), 205–212.
[76]	 Liu, B.; Sun, Z.; Zhang, X.; Liu, J., Mechanisms of DNA sensing on GO. Anal. Chem. 2013, 85 
(16), 7987–7993.
[77]	 Liu, X.; Wang, F.; Aizen, R.; et al., GO/nucleic‐acid‐stabilized silver nanoclusters: functional 
hybrid materials for optical aptamer sensing and multiplexed analysis of pathogenic DNAs. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (32), 11832–11839.
[78]	 Wang, X.; Wang, C.; Qu, K.; et al., Ultrasensitive and selective detection of a prognostic indicator 
in early‐stage cancer using graphene oxide and carbon nanotubes. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 
(22), 3967–3971.
[79]	 Lu, C.H.; Yang, H.H.; Zhu, C.L.; et al., A graphene platform for sensing biomolecules. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48 (26), 4785–4787.
[80]	 Shi, Y.; Pramanik, A.; Tchounwou, C.; et al., Multifunctional biocompatible GO quantum dots 
decorated magnetic nanoplatform for efficient capture and two‐photon imaging of rare tumor 
cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2015, 7 (20), 10935–10943.
[81]	 Sun, X.; Liu, Z.; Welsher, K.; et al., Nano‐GO for cellular imaging and drug delivery. Nano Res. 
2008, 1 (3), 203–212.
[82]	 Peng, C.; Hu, W.; Zhou, Y.; et al., Intracellular imaging with a graphene‐based fluorescent 
probe. Small 2010, 6 (15), 1686–1692.
[83]	 Chen, J.L.; Yan, X.P.; Meng, K.; Wang, S.F., GO based photoinduced charge transfer label‐free 
near‐infrared fluorescent biosensor for dopamine. Anal. Chem. 2011, 83 (22), 8787–8793.
[84]	 Kumar, S.; Ahlawat, W.; Kumar, R.; Dilbaghi, N., Graphene, carbon nanotubes, zinc oxide and 
gold as elite nanomaterials for fabrication of biosensors for healthcare. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2015, 70, 498–503.
[85]	 Kotanen, C.N.; Moussy, F.G.; Carrara, S.; Guiseppi‐Eli, A., Implantable enzyme amperometric 
biosensors. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012, 35 (1), 14–26.
[86]	 Luo, Z.; Yuwen, L.; Han, Y.; et  al., Reduced graphene oxide/PAMAM–silver nanoparticles 
nanocomposite modified electrode for direct electrochemistry of glucose oxidase and glucose 
sensing. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012, 36 (1), 179–185.
[87]	 Xiao, F.; Li, Y.; Zan, X.; et al., Growth of metal–metal oxide nanostructures on freestanding 
graphene paper for flexible biosensors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012, 22 (12), 2487–2494.
[88]	 Xue, Y.; Zhao, H.; Wu, Z.; et al., The comparison of different gold nanoparticles/graphene 
nanosheets hybrid nanocomposites in electrochemical performance and the construction of a 
sensitive uric acid electrochemical sensor with novel hybrid nanocomposites. Biosens. 
Bioelectron. 2011, 29 (1), 102–108.

254
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[89]	 Sheng, Z.; Zheng, X.; Xu, J.; et al., Electrochemical sensor based on nitrogen doped graphene: 
simultaneous determination of ascorbic acid, dopamine and uric acid. Biosens. Bioelectron. 
2012, 34 (1), 125–131.
[90]	 Du, J.; Pei, S.; Ma, L.; Cheng, H.M., Carbon nanotube‐ and graphene‐based transparent 
­conductive films for optoelectronic devices. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26 (13), 1958–1991.
[91]	 Zhu, Y.; Murali, S.; Cai, W.; et al., Graphene and graphene oxide: synthesis, properties, and 
applications. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (35), 3906–3924.
[92]	 Zheng, Q.; Li, Z.; Yang, J.; Kim, J.K., Graphene oxide‐based transparent conductive films. 
Prog. Mater. Sci. 2014, 64, 200–247.
[93]	 Becerril, H.A.; Mao, J.; Liu, Z.; et al., Evaluation of solution‐processed reduced graphene 
oxide films as transparent conductors. ACS Nano 2008, 2 (3), 463–470.
[94]	 Dong, X.C.; Su, C.Y.; Zhang, W.J.; et al., Ultra‐large single‐layer graphene obtained from 
solution chemical reduction and its electrical properties. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2010, 12 
(9), 2164–2169.
[95]	 Pham, V.H.; Cuong, T.V.; Hur, S.H.; et al., Fast and simple fabrication of a large transparent 
chemically‐converted graphene film by spray‐coating. Carbon 2010, 48 (7), 1945–1951.
[96]	 Choi, H.W.; Zhou, T.; Singh, M.; Jabbour, G.E., Recent developments and directions in printed 
nanomaterials. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (8), 3338–3355.
[97]	 Yamaguchi, H.; Eda, G.; Mattevi, C.; et al., Highly uniform 300 mm wafer‐scale deposition of 
single and multilayered chemically derived graphene thin films. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (1), 524–528.
[98]	 An, S.J.; Zhu, Y.W.; Lee, S.H.; et al., Thin film fabrication and simultaneous anodic reduction 
of deposited graphene oxide platelets by electrophoretic deposition. J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 
1 (8), 1259–1263.
[99]	 Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; Huang, J.X., Langmuir–Blodgett assembly of graphite oxide single layers. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (3), 1043–1049.
[100]	 Wang, S.; Ang, P.K.; Wang, Z.Q.; et  al., High mobility, printable, and solution‐processed 
­graphene electronics. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (1), 92–98.
[101]	 Kholmanov, I.N.; Magnuson, C.W.; Aliev, A.E.; et al., Improved electrical conductivity of 
graphene films integrated with metal nanowires. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (11), 5679–5683.
[102]	 Hong T.K.; Lee, D.W.; Choi, H.J.; et al., Transparent, flexible conducting hybrid multilayer 
thin films of multiwalled carbon nanotubes with graphene nanosheets. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (7), 
3861–3868.
[103]	 Huang, J.H.; Fang, J.H.; Liu, C.C.; Chu, C.W., Effective work function modulation of 
­graphene/carbon nanotube composite films as transparent cathodes for organic optoelectron-
ics. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (8), 6262–6271.
[104]	 Zheng, Q.B.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Wang, S.J.; et al., Improved electrical and optical characteristics 
of transparent graphene thin films produced by acid and doping treatments. Carbon 2011, 49 
(9), 2905–2916.
[105]	 Lin, X.Y.; Shen, X.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Fabrication of highly‐aligned, conductive, and strong 
graphene papers using ultralarge graphene oxide sheets. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (12), 10708–10719.
[106]	 Hsiao, S.T.; Tien, H.W.; Liao, W.H.; et al., A highly electrically conductive graphene–silver 
nanowire hybrid nanomaterial for transparent conductive films, J. Mater. Chem. C 2014, 2 
(35), 7284–7291.
[107]	 Huang, J.H.; Fang, J.H.; Liu, C.C.; Chu, C.W., Effective work function modulation of gra-
phene/carbon nanotube composite films as transparent cathodes for organic optoelectronics. 
ACS Nano 2011, 5 (8), 6262–6271.
[108]	 Zheng, Q.B.; Zhang, B.; Lin, X.; et al., Highly transparent and conducting ultralarge graphene 
oxide/single‐walled carbon nanotube hybrid films produced by Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. 
J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (48), 25072–25082.
[109]	 Tung, V.C.; Chen, L.M.; Allen, M.J.; et al., Low‐temperature solution processing of graphene–
carbon nanotube hybrid materials for high‐performance transparent conductors. Nano Lett. 
2009, 9 (5), 1949–1955.

Field‐Effect Transistors, Sensors and Transparent Conductive Films
255
[110]	 Yu, D.S.; Dai, L.M., Self‐assembled graphene/carbon nanotube hybrid films for supercapacitors. 
J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 2010, 1 (2), 467–470.
[111]	 Azevedo, J.; Costa‐Coquelard, C.; Jegou, P.; et al., Highly ordered monolayer, multilayer, and 
hybrid films of graphene oxide obtained by the bubble deposition method. J. Phys. Chem. C 
2011, 115 (30), 14678–14681.
[112]	 Kasry, A.; Kuroda, M.A.; Martyna, G.J.; et al., Chemical doping of large‐area stacked gra-
phene films for use as transparent, conducting electrodes. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (7), 3839–4344.
[113]	 Eda, G.; Lin, Y.Y.; Miller, S.; et  al., Transparent and conducting electrodes for organic 
­electronics from reduced graphene oxide. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2008, 92 (23), 233305.
[114]	 Gunes, F.; Shin, H.J.; Biswas, C.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer doping of few‐layer graphene film. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4 (8), 4595–4600.
[115]	 Bae, S.Y.; Jeon, I.Y.; Yang, J.; et al., Large‐area graphene films by simple solution casting of 
edge selectively functionalized graphite. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (6), 4974–4980.
[116]	 Su, C.Y.; Xu, Y.P.; Zhang, W.J.; et al., Electrical and spectroscopic characterizations of ultra‐
large reduced graphene oxide monolayers. Chem. Mater. 2009, 21 (23), 5674–5680.
[117]	 Zhou, X.F.; Liu, Z.P., A scalable, solution‐phase processing route to graphene oxide and 
­graphene ultralarge sheets. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46 (15), 2611–2613.
[118]	 Chua, L.O., Resistance switching memories are memristors. Appl. Phys. A 2011, 102 (4), 
765–783.
[119]	 Borghetti, J.; Snider, G.S.; Kuekes, P.J.; et  al., Memristive switches enable stateful logic 
­operations via material implication. Nature 2010, 464 (7290), 873–876.
[120]	 Sah, M.P.; Hyongsuk, K.; Chua, L.O., Brains are made of memristors. IEEE Circuits Syst. 
Mag. 2014, 14 (1), 12–36.
[121]	 Chua, L.O., Memristor – the missing circuit element. IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory 1971, 18 (5), 
507–519.
[122]	 Waser, R.; Dittmann, R.; Staikov, G.; Szot, K., Redox‐based resistive switching memories – 
nanoionic mechanisms, prospects, and challenges. Adv. Mater. 2009, 21 (25–26), 2632–2663.
[123]	 Strukov, D.B.; Snider, G.S.; Stewart, D.R.; Williams, R.S., The missing memristor found. 
Nature Lett. 2008, 453 (7191), 80–83.
[124]	 Yang, Y.; Choi, S.H.; Lu, W., Oxide heterostructure resistive memory. Nano Lett. 2013, 13 (6), 
2908–2915.
[125]	 Chen, Y.; Liu, G.; Wang, C.; et al., Polymer memristor for information storage and neuromor-
phic applications. Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1 (5), 489–506.
[126]	 Chen, Y.; Zhang, B.; Liu, G.; et al., Graphene and its derivatives: switching ON and OFF. 
Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 (13), 4688–4707.
[127]	 Porro, S.; Accornero, E.; Pirri, C.F.; Ricciardi, C., Memristive devices based on graphene 
oxide. Carbon 2015, 85, 383–396.
[128]	 Porro, S.; Ricciardi, C., Memristive behaviour in inkjet printed graphene oxide thin layers. 
RSC Advances 2015, 5 (84), 68565–68570.
[129]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. 
Chem. B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[130]	 Hong, S.K.; Kim, J.E.; Kim, S.O.; et al., Flexible resistive switching memory device based on 
graphene oxide. IEEE Electron Device Lett. 2010, 31 (9), 1005–1007.
[131]	 Jeong, H.Y.; Kim, J.Y.; Kim, J.W.; et al., Graphene oxide thin films for flexible nonvolatile 
memory applications. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (11), 4381–4386.
[132]	 Liu, G.; Zhuang, X.; Chen, Y.; et al., Bistable electrical switching and electronic memory 
effect in a solution‐processable graphene oxide–donor polymer complex. Appl. Phys. Lett. 
2009, 95 (25), 253301.
[133]	 Zhuang, X.; Chen, Y.; Liu, G.; et  al., Conjugated‐polymer‐functionalized graphene oxide: 
­synthesis and nonvolatile rewritable memory effect. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (15), 1731–1735.
[134]	 Waser, R.; Aono, M., Nanoionics‐based resistive switching memories. Nature Mater. 2007, 6 
(11), 833–840.

256
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[135]	 Hong, S.K.; Kim, J.E.; Kim, S.O.; Cho, B.J., Non‐volatile memory using graphene oxide for 
flexible electronics. In Proc. 2010 10th IEEE Conf. on Nanotechnology (IEEE‐NANO), 
pp. 604–606. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2010.
[136]	 Nho, H.W.; Kim, J.Y.; Wang, J.; et al., Scanning transmission X‐ray microscopy probe for in 
situ mechanism study of graphene‐oxide‐based resistive random access memory. J. Synchrotron 
Radiat. 2014, 21 (1), 170–176.
[137]	 Wang, L.H.; Yang, W.; Sun, Q.Q.; et al., The mechanism of the asymmetric SET and RESET 
speed of graphene oxide based flexible resistive switching memories. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2012, 
100 (6), 063509.
[138]	 Porro, S., Graphene nanostructures for memristive devices. Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology, 
ed. B. Bhushan (Living Reference Work Entry), 10 pp. Springer Science, Dordrecht, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-6178-0_101030-1; Online ISBN: 978-94-007-6178-0.
[139]	 Zhuge, F.; Hu, B.; He, C.; et al., Mechanism of nonvolatile resistive switching in graphene 
oxide thin films. Carbon 2011, 49 (12), 3796–3802.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
8
Energy Harvesting and Storage
Cary Michael Hayner
8.1  Solar Cells
Solar cells are a very promising technology to convert light into electricity by harvesting 
solar energy. However, while current solar cells have become cost‐competitive with con­
ventional energy sources, there is still much room for new technologies with increased 
energy conversion efficiency and lower cost. Increasing the efficiency of the solar cell can 
provide an opportunity to lower the cost by increasing the incident spectral range available 
to reach the absorption layer, thereby increasing the electron collection. The conventional 
transparent conducting oxide films used as transparent electrodes in solar cells often strug­
gle with transmitting light near the infrared (IR) band in the solar spectrum. Additionally, 
current transparent electrode materials such as indium tin oxide (ITO) are mechanically 
brittle, unstable at high temperatures, incompatible with strong acids and extremely expen­
sive due to the inclusion of the rare element indium.
In order to overcome the cost and performance limitations of existing transparent 
conducting oxides, as well as to add new functionality, such as device flexibility, there has 
been a strong push to develop new transparent conducting films. Graphene is regarded as 
an ideal alternative to ITO due to its high electron mobility and ability to contribute to 
absorption from a broad spectrum. Indeed, graphene materials have already shown promise 
in a wide‐ranging variety of solar cell types, including conventional silicon solar cells, thin‐
film cells and dye‐sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Within these applications, graphene‐based 
materials can serve a variety of roles, including as transparent layers, electron acceptors, hole 
conductors and conductive inks, among others. Most remarkably for DSSCs, graphene 
materials – with their wide range of properties – have been applied to almost all aspects of 

258
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the device, including as transparent conductors, in the semiconducting layer and as the 
sensitizer itself.
Due to the far‐reaching application of graphene‐based materials to solar cell technologies, 
a comprehensive review is beyond the scope of this chapter. Overviews of the major 
approaches and advancements have recently been examined in several publications. 
A number of concise review articles have discussed the use of graphene oxide (GO) and 
its reduced counterparts for solar cell applications, and the author directs the reader 
to those articles for more complete analysis [1–6]. Although still in a nascent stage, 
graphene‐type materials are attractive candidates to improve the efficiency and lower 
the cost of solar cell technologies. Graphene‐based materials show great promise for 
enabling practical commercialization of advanced solar cells to harvest solar energy.
8.2  Lithium‐Ion Batteries
8.2.1  Introduction
Lithium‐ion batteries are by far the most widespread form of electrical energy storage for 
portable applications such as electric vehicles, consumer devices and aerospace. The 
rechargeable Li‐ion battery was first commercialized by Sony in 1991 and began to displace 
the incumbent nickel–metal hydride (NiMH) batteries that were used previously. Compared 
to the incumbent NiMH batteries, Li‐ion batteries offered longer cycle life, no memory 
effect, low self‐discharge rate, and higher gravimetric and volumetric energy densities. 
Whereas NiMH batteries could store ~60 W h kg−1 in the early 1990s, the lithium‐ion 
batteries were able to store over 100 W h kg−1 when they first entered the market. Since 
they were first commercialized, the lithium‐ion battery industry has grown to a market size 
of $10 billion dollars globally in 2014 and is expected to grow over 10% annually to over 
$25 billion by 2025 [7]. Every year, four billion lithium‐ion battery cells are constructed 
and sold. Much of the current growth has been due to the rapid proliferation of portable 
electronic devices, including cameras, cell/mobile phones and laptops. In addition to the 
continued growth of portable electronics, the promise of clean‐powered electric vehicles 
has the potential to completely transform the battery market, with some estimates suggesting 
that the electric vehicle (EV) market could grow to over $10 billion by 2030 [7].
In order to power the improvements necessary to sustain the future demands of batteries, 
the charge storage that can be packed into these batteries must be continually improved. 
Remarkably, the energy density of lithium‐ion batteries has been steadily improved at a 
rate of 3–5% annually. Although steady improvements have been made since entering the 
market in the early 1990s, very little innovation has occurred within the fundamental 
energy storage components, termed the anode and the cathode for the negative and positive 
electrodes, respectively. The following section will describe the operation of a lithium‐ion 
battery and how graphene‐containing materials can enable significant advancements com­
pared to state‐of‐the‐art commercial cells.
8.2.2  Electrochemistry Fundamentals
In its simplest form, a lithium‐ion battery consists of two electrodes – anode and cathode – 
and an electrolyte (Figure 8.1). These cells make use of the difference in reduction or 

Energy Harvesting and Storage
259
oxidation potential (the driving force to accept or give away electrons, respectively) 
between the two electrodes to generate electrical energy. By convention, reduction (gain of 
electrons) occurs at the cathode while oxidation (loss of electrons) occurs at the anode 
during a discharge reaction. To control the rate of electron transfer, the cathode must be 
physically and electrically isolated from the anode using an ionically conductive, but 
electrically insulating, medium, typically a liquid electrolyte. Often a polymer separator is 
also used for mechanical separation between the two electrodes to prevent a short‐circuit 
[8]. Since its introduction in the early 1990s, almost all commercial lithium‐ion batteries 
have consisted of a carbonaceous anode and a lithiated metal oxide cathode. The most com­
monly used anode material for commercial applications is graphite, the three‐dimensional 
layered version of graphene. Lithium cobalt oxide, LiCoO2 or LCO, is the most common 
choice for the cathode material. The non‐aqueous electrolyte is typically composed of a 
lithium salt (such as LiPF6) dissolved in a mixture of polar organic solvents such as ethyl­
ene carbonate (EC) and dimethyl carbonate (DMC).
Figure 8.1 shows the schematic of a Li‐ion battery in standard discharge mode. For the 
Li‐ion battery system in its charged state, Li+ ions are initially stored in the anode material 
(e.g. graphite). During discharge, an external electrical connection is made between the 
two electrodes, allowing Li+ ions to be removed from the anode and to travel through the 
electrolyte to insert into the cathode (e.g. LiCoO2). Simultaneously, electrons are removed 
from the anode (oxidation) and transferred through an external circuit, creating current to 
power a load, and then enter the cathode (reduction). The discharge process will continue 
to occur until the potential difference between the two electrodes becomes too low, at 
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
e
Electrolyte
Anode
Cathode
A
Cu current
collector
Graphene
structure
Solvent
molecule
AI current
collector
LiMO2 layer
structure
Li+
Figure 8.1  Schematic of a Li‐ion battery in discharge mode (graphite anode, LiMO2 cathode). 
Reproduced from [9] with permission of American Chemical Society

260
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
which point the cell is fully discharged. In secondary batteries, external energy can be 
applied to transfer electrons (and hence Li+ ions) from the cathode back to the anode, 
thereby oxidizing the “cathode” and reducing the “anode”. This process is commonly 
known as charging the battery. Simply put, lithium‐ion batteries are able to supply power 
by converting chemical energy into electrical energy through controlled, thermodynami­
cally favorable chemical reactions. In order to be used for commercial applications, these 
reactions must also be highly reversible and repeatable for hundreds of times without 
noticeable degradation or changes to the material.
Additionally, during the initial discharge of a battery, a necessary phenomenon wherein 
a thin formation layer film (<50 nm) containing a complex combination of chemical 
species spontaneously forms on the surface of the anode electrode due to the reductive 
decomposition of electrolyte. This film is termed the solid–electrolyte interface (SEI), and 
is electrically insulating but ionically conductive. Formation of the layer occurs at the 
anode, which operates at voltage potentials where the electrolyte is thermodynamically 
unstable, creating a complex heterogeneous collection of phases and layers having many 
secondary interfaces. The SEI phase contains a combination of inorganic lithium‐containing 
species, including Li2CO3, Li2O, LiOH, LiX (X = F, Cl), as well as an organic species such 
as ROCO2Li, ROLi, (ROCO2Li)2 and oligomeric compounds [10]. SEI formation is required 
for stable operation of the lithium‐ion battery and consumes a portion of the limited Li+ avail­
able for reversible storage. The amount of Li+ ion consumption is dependent on a variety of 
factors, including the surface area of the electrode. To minimize the irreversible capacity 
loss (ICL) due to the film formation, it is critical that lithium‐ion battery anodes are 
designed to have low accessible surface areas. Therefore, with the integration of GO‐based 
materials into lithium‐ion batteries, its high surface area potential can be seen as a negative 
and must be managed.
Graphite, the most common anode material, is able to store one Li+ ion (and hence 
contribute one electron) for every C6 ring, forming a lithiated material with the formula 
LiC6. With this amount of Li+ storage, the theoretical gravimetric and volumetric capac­
ities can be calculated as 372 mA h g−1 and 830 mA h cm−3. On the cathode side, LiCoO2, 
a common representative cathode material, has a practical gravimetric and volumetric 
capacity of 140 mA h g−1 and ~330 mA h cm−3, respectively. In general, the total capac­
ity of a Li‐ion cell (Ctotal) may be expressed in terms of anode and cathode capacities as 
follows:
	
C
C
C
Q
total
A
C
M
=
+
+
1
1
1
1 	
(8.1)
Here CA and CC are the theoretical capacities of the anode and cathode materials, respec­
tively, and 1/QM is the specific mass of the other cell components (electrolyte, separator, 
current collectors, case, etc.) in mA h g−1 [11]. For anodes such as graphite, CA is 372 mA 
h g−1, and for LiCoO2, CC is 140 mA h g−1. For a Sony cylindrical cell (2550 mA h, 46 g), 
QM may be calculated to be ~130 mA h g−1. Using (8.1), it is possible to construct a plot of 
total cell capacity as a function of anode specific capacity (CA) as shown in Figure 8.2. As 
can be seen from Figure 8.2, there are large improvements in total cell capacity with an 
increase in anode specific capacity up to ~1200 mA h g−1.

Energy Harvesting and Storage
261
In order to meet the increasing demands for portable applications, new anode and cathode 
materials capable of storing more Li ions per unit mass and volume are highly desired. 
Consequently, significant attention has been paid to developing better electrode materials 
for advanced rechargeable Li‐ion batteries. Particularly, electrode materials with signifi­
cantly greater capacity, improved rate capability, better cycling stability, enhanced safety 
and environmental friendliness have been extensively pursued. The emergence of graphene 
has generated considerable attention within the Li‐ion battery community, mainly due to its 
extremely high electrical conductivity, unique two‐dimensional (2D) morphology and 
large surface area. Since its first reported battery application in 2008 [12], GO materials for 
battery applications have been extensively reported and developed. In this section, we will 
describe some of the important achievements and developments of GO‐based materials for 
lithium‐ion batteries and strategies that can be used to further extend their development.
8.2.3  Anode Applications
8.2.3.1  Pure Reduced Graphene Oxide Anode Materials
Graphite has been the most significant carbon form studied for commercial lithium‐ion 
battery applications. Graphite’s dominance is due to its combination of long cycle life, low 
cost and abundance, and decent gravimetric and volumetric capacities. However, graphite 
also has drawbacks that limit its use in future applications. Chiefly, the limited gravimetric 
and volumetric capacities afforded by graphite cannot meet the demands for next‐generation 
lithium‐ion battery applications. Therefore, in order to improve the performance of future 
cells, anode materials with higher capacity and discharge rate behavior must be developed.
Graphene, the highly researched monolayer of graphite, has the potential to contribute to 
the development of advanced anode applications due to its plethora of extraordinary 
0
0
20
40
60
Total specific capacity/mAh g–1
80
100
120
1000
2000
Anode specific capacity, CA/mAh g–1
3000
4000
Cc 400 mAh/g
Cc 200 mAh/g
Cc 135 mAh/g
Figure 8.2  Total capacity of a Li‐ion cell as a function of anode capacity (CA), including 
masses of other required internal components and case (QM = 130 mA h g−1). Capacities of 
cathodes considered were 135, 200 and 400 mA h g−1

262
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
properties. Most critically, graphene and its related materials are chemically stable, and 
exhibit high electrical and thermal conductivity, high surface area and excellent mechanical 
properties. Of all the possible methods to achieve “graphene‐like” materials, the synthesis 
of GO and subsequent transformation to reduced graphene oxide (RGO) is highly regarded 
as one of the most promising routes due to its synthetic flexibility and scalability.
Indeed, a large number of reports on the application of GO‐derived anodes exist, and the 
resulting performance of the materials varies greatly [13, 14]. The significant discrepancies 
in performance highlight the importance that the preparation methods and the resulting struc­
tural parameters play in dictating electrochemical performance. Particularly, processing 
parameters, such as the oxidation degree and the reduction method, as well as structural 
parameters, such as sheet size, functionality, surface area, electrical conductivity, dopants and 
porosity, are highly likely to affect the overall performance of the GO‐derived material. 
Consequently, a critical understanding of the factors that affect electrochemical performance 
is required in order to understand the energy storage mechanism and advance the engineering 
design of graphene‐based electrodes. GO reduction methods via hydrazine chemical reduc­
tion, thermal treatment and electron‐beam irradiation were studied by Pan et al. [15]. It was 
determined that the thermal treatment and electron‐beam irradiation processing provided 
higher reversible capacities for the electrode material compared to chemical reduction. The 
explanation for the discrepancy in performance was attributed to the degree of disorder, 
which arose from the reduction methods. Thermal treatment and e‐beam irradiation gener­
ated structures with a higher degree of disorder, including edge and other defects that could 
act as additional Li‐ion storage sites and provide the surplus capacity. More recently, the 
effect of GO oxidation degree on electrochemical performance was examined by Lee et al. 
[16] using a thermally processed GO (tpGO) electrode. To synthesize GOs with different 
oxidation degrees, the number of times the material was oxidized was controlled from one to 
three times. It was determined that, as the extent of oxidation increased, the reversible capac­
ity of the tpGO increased from 1252 to 2311 mA h g−1, for one and three oxidation cycles, 
respectively. The reported capacities attained were extremely large and much greater than 
would be expected from a pure carbon material. The large capacity values were attributed 
to the increased surface area as well as defect and edge sites that provide additional Li+ 
storage sites.
The unique 2D sheet‐like morphology of GO offers an extraordinary opportunity to form 
flexible and freestanding electrodes. These binder‐free materials are formed via the vacuum 
filtration of either GO or its chemically reduced counterpart. In either case, liquid solvents 
of the dispersions are removed, providing a self‐directed assembly of graphene‐based 
materials along the c‐direction. An example of the flexible, freestanding RGO paper is 
shown in Figure 8.3 [17]. As shown in Figure 8.3, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) 
shows that the freestanding RGO papers consist of densely packed, aligned sheets with a 
thickness on the order of 10 µm. X‐ray diffraction (XRD) measurements indicated that 
the average interlayer spacing was 0.37 nm, which is greater than the graphite interlayer 
spacing of 0.334 nm. Additionally, the presence of a broad peak around 26° indicated a 
well‐ordered but non‐highly graphitized structure. When applied as an anode material, the 
freestanding electrode exhibited a significantly lower specific capacity of 84 mA h g−1 at 
50 mA g−1 compared to 288 mA h g−1 for a graphene‐powder control electrode. The poor 
performance of the freestanding paper electrode was attributed to densely packed sheets 
that created a kinetic barrier for the diffusion of Li ions. This behavior was later further 

Energy Harvesting and Storage
263
explored by examining the rate dependence of freestanding electrodes as a function of 
electrode thickness [18]. When the freestanding paper electrode thickness increased from 
1.5 to 10 µm, the reversible capacity decreased from ~200 mA h g−1 to ~80 mA h g−1, 
respectively. Additionally, when the cycling rate is increased from 50 mA g−1 to 500 mA 
g−1, the reversible capacity of a 3 µm paper decreased from ~175 mA h g−1 to ~100 mA h 
g−1, demonstrating significant rate limitations due to insufficient ion diffusion through the 
film. It was determined that the thinner papers always outperform the thicker films due to 
the dense restacking of graphene sheets and the large aspect ratio of the paper. For practical 
implementation into commercial applications, thick electrodes are required to provide high 
energy density. Therefore, it is not feasible to circumvent the issue by simply decreasing 
the electrode thickness.
To overcome these rate‐limitation issues, researchers have developed methods to generate 
pores in freestanding graphene papers. With the 2D non‐porous morphology, the Li+ ion 
diffusion proceeds predominantly in the in‐plane direction, and cross‐plane diffusion is 
hindered due to the large aspect ratio of GO and limited defect and edge sites. By generating 
pores, new ion diffusion channels are generated that can substantially increase the efficiency 
of carbon utilization during charge/discharge. Zhao and colleagues developed a method to 
introduce in‐plane defects into the basal planes (“holes”), providing enhanced ion diffusion 
pathways [19]. In‐plane defects were generated by the combination of nitric acid (HNO3) 
oxidation and sonication energy applied to GO suspensions (Figure 8.4).
The size and density of the pores could be tuned by the acid concentration, and could be 
controlled from ~5 nm to hundreds of nanometers in size. After generating the in‐plane 
defects, the holey GO materials were vacuum filtered and thermally treated to render them 
as holey tpGO materials. Electrochemically, the holey tpGO electrodes exhibited higher 
reversible capacities of up to 403 mA h g−1 compared to only 336 mA h g−1 for the control 
(A)
(B)
5 μm
10 μm
Figure 8.3  SEM images of a chemically reduced graphene oxide (RGO) paper showing the 
(A) rolling paper‐like electrode surface and (B) non‐uniformity and cracking along a fractured 
edge. Reproduced from [17] with permission of American Chemical Society

Thermal reduction
Filtration
Ar or H2/Ar
Li+
HGO
washing
GO
H2O
HNO3 sonication
air drying
HGO paper
rHGO paper
0
0.0
0.5
Voltage (V vs Li/Li+)
1.0
1.5
(A)
(B)
50
5.4C
5.4C
4C 2.7C 1.3C C/1.5 C/3.7 C/7.4
4C 2.7C
1.3C
C/1.5
C/3.7
Ar-rGO
Ar-rHGO-III
C/7.4
100
150
200
250
300
0
1.5
1.0
0.5
Voltage (V vs Li/Li+)
0.0
50
100
150
200
Specific capacity (mAh/g)
Specific capacity (mAh/g)
250
300
350
Figure 8.4  Schematic drawing (left) of the process to introduce in‐plane pores into the GO material and subsequent 
formation into freestanding holey tpGO paper material. The electrochemical performance (right) of (A) a traditional tpGO 
paper (no holes) and (B) holey tpGO paper are compared. Adapted from [19] with permission of American Chemical 
Society

Energy Harvesting and Storage
265
sample without in‐plane defects. More importantly, the holey tpGO samples exhibited far 
superior rate performance, delivering a reversible capacity of 178 mA h g−1 at a 2 A g−1 rate 
compared to ~70 mA h g−1 for the control sample (~44% versus ~20% capacity retention). 
The improvement in Li‐ion diffusion kinetics and charge transfer due to the introduction of 
the holes was confirmed via electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Additionally, 
a preferred hole size of 20–70 nm was observed in order to achieve the best electrochemical 
performance. Further increase in hole size resulted in a comparatively lower capacity, 
perhaps due to decreased electrical conductivity resulting from the highly defective struc­
ture. Nonetheless, this report highlighted the novel approach to generate holes into the 
basal plane of graphene materials as an effective method to improve the energy and power 
density of lithium‐ion batteries.
Another effective strategy to increase the energy and power density of graphene‐based 
materials and to tailor the physicochemical properties is to chemically dope the materials. 
One simple method to accomplish this is to introduce a dopant precursor gas during a high‐
temperature thermal treatment step to fabricate tpGO electrodes [20]. In one instance, nitro­
gen and boron doping was successfully achieved using ammonia (NH3) and boron trichloride 
(BCl3) as precursor molecules. Spectroscopic analysis confirmed that the N species existed 
in pyridinic and pyrrolic forms, whereas the boron existed as BC3 and BC2O domains within 
the doped structure. In both cases, the dopant species predominantly substituted carbon 
atoms on defect or edge sites, as shown in Figure 8.5. Electrochemically, the doped materi­
als exhibited improved performance compared to the pristine, undoped sample. The N‐ and 
B‐doped electrodes achieved reversible capacities of 1043 and 1549 mA h g−1, respectively, 
compared to 955 mA h g−1 for the pristine sample. Additionally, the doped samples offered 
significantly better rate performance and capacity retention. The improved energy and 
power density of the doped materials was attributed to the increased electrical conductivity 
of the samples, as well as due to a more disordered surface morphology that provides addi­
tional Li+ storage sites.
At this point, it is important to recall from section 8.2.2 that, during the initial cycling 
formation of a practical battery, a complex thin film is formed on the anode electrode 
C
C
C
O
N-graphene
B-graphene
101
101
102
103
102
103
Power density (W kg–1)
0.36 s
3.6 s
B-doped graphene
Energy density (Wh kg–1)
N-doped graphene
Graphene
GO500
GO
36 s
0.1 h
1 h
10 h
100 h
104
105
B2
B1
Graphene
O
O
B
N
N1
N2
N-doping
B-doping
Figure 8.5  Schematic showing the nitrogen and boron doping into the graphene plane, and 
resulting high energy and power performance of doped materials compared to the undoped 
control samples. Reproduced from [20] with permission of American Chemical Society

266
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
surface, consuming limited Li+ ions and leading to a decrease in overall energy density. 
This SEI layer contains a combination of inorganic Li+‐containing species, as well as a 
variety of oligomeric organic species. This film passivation layer is formed on all accessible 
surfaces, and, consequently, the larger the surface area of an electrode material, the greater 
the loss of capacity in a practical cell. Indeed, for the previously described study of oxida­
tion extent by Lee and colleagues [16], the highest oxidized sample irreversibly consumed 
55% of the Li+ charges upon initial cycling due to its high surface area of 991 m2 g−1. In 
order to minimize these losses, it is important to keep the electrode surface area low, 
often <5 m2 g−1. Therefore, for composites that integrate graphenic materials, it is critical 
to determine the overall electrode surface area to ensure the values are reasonable. High‐
surface‐area anodes will exhibit large ICLs in the initial few cycles and will translate into 
practical cells with low reversible energy densities. For this reason, graphene‐based 
materials are often combined with electroactive materials that can store much greater 
charge in order to develop hybrid materials with synergistic properties.
8.2.3.2  Reduced Graphene Oxide Composite Anode Materials
To create optimal high‐performance energy storage materials, graphene is commonly inte­
grated as part of a composite material, wherein it serves a synergistic purpose to enhance 
the overall properties of an electrode. These composite structures are able to highlight and 
emphasize attractive GO properties while mitigating some of the shortcomings of RGO 
by itself. The formation of a continuous three‐dimensional (3D) electrically conductive 
network created by the graphenic structure can substantially improve the battery’s proper­
ties via enhanced electron and ion transportation within the electrode materials. Indeed, it is 
clear from section 8.2.3.1 that there is a critical relationship between graphenic architec­
ture and its available chemical, conductive, mechanical and other properties. Additionally, 
improved electrodes containing advanced anode materials allow for greater storage of Li+ 
ions and therefore increased battery capacity. Graphene’s high thermal conductivity can 
also dissipate local hot spots and resistive heating generated within the electrode during 
operation, thereby stabilizing battery temperature and improving cell safety. Therefore, 
electrodes containing forms of graphene (included RGO, annealed tpGO and others) have 
the potential to last significantly longer than conventional batteries. Hybrid structures can 
therefore be tuned for certain applications requiring a combination of long cycle life, 
energy delivery and rate performance.
Silicon is considered as one of the most attractive next‐generation anode materials to 
form composite electrodes with RGO, because it is inexpensive, abundant and possesses 
the highest gravimetric capacity (3579 mA h g−1 for Li15Si4) known – nearly 10 times 
higher capacity than the incumbent graphite anode. Unfortunately, silicon undergoes a 
large volume change (up to 300%) during cycling due to the accommodation of the Li+ ions 
required during operation. This extreme and repeated fluctuation causes severe pulveriza­
tion of silicon particles, leading to particle isolation and significant capacity fade within 
dozens of cycles. Therefore, the conventional cycle life of silicon‐based anode materials 
is much too short for commercial applications. To overcome the large volume change and 
obtain better capacity retention for Si anodes, various approaches have been used. These 
approaches include the use of nanoparticles [21], thin films [22, 23], nanowires [24], 
dispersing into an inactive/active matrix [25, 26], preparing 3D porous structures [27, 28] 

Energy Harvesting and Storage
267
and carbon coating [29, 30]. Graphene, however, with its flexible 2D morphology, high 
surface area and good electrical conductivity, has many properties that lends itself to be a 
very promising composite material to improve the stability of the silicon system.
One of the first reported Si‐RGO systems was developed by Lee and colleagues by 
combining silicon nanoparticles with the freestanding graphene paper structure [31]. Silicon 
nanoparticles were mixed with an aqueous GO suspension, vacuum filtered and thermally 
treated under inert gas to form flexible Si–tpGO composite paper anodes. With this format, 
the graphene sheets formed a 3D electrically conductive network that also provided a 
mechanically robust scaffold to anchor and stabilize the embedded silicon nanoparticles 
(Figure 8.6). The resulting Si–tpGO materials exhibited significantly enhanced cycling 
stability compared to bare silicon particles. The Si–tpGO materials were able to achieve 
reversible capacities > 2500 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and were able to retain nearly ~60% capac­
ity after 300 cycles. The improved performance was attributed to the unique 3D network 
that buffered the volumetric expansion of Si during cycling as well as the high electrical 
conductivity provided by the network. Later, Zhao et al. introduced in‐plane carbon vacan­
cies into the GO structure prior to composite formation in order to provide additional ion 
diffusion pathways to increase the energy and power density of the composite material 
(Figure 8.7) [32]. As expected, the holey Si–tpGO composite materials offered enhanced 
reversible capacity compared to the non‐holey counterpart. Notably, the rate performance 
Figure 8.6  Cross‐sectional schematic (not to scale) of the Si–tpGO composite structure (top). 
Digital image of prepared Si‐GO composite paper (bottom left). Transmission electron 
microscopy (TEM) image of Si nanoparticles encapsulated between tpGO sheets (bottom 
right). Adapted from [31] with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry

268
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
of the holey Si–tpGO materials was significantly improved. When cycled at a very high 
rate of 8 A g−1, the holey Si–tpGO material was able to deliver ~1100 mA h g−1 capacity, 
which was 34% of the capacity that could be delivered at 1 A g−1.
Another promising route to the synthesis of composite materials is through the fabrica­
tion of RGO‐encapsulated nanoparticle composites. Taking advantage of the anionic charge 
of GO in aqueous suspensions, co‐assembly with cationically charged nanoparticles can 
lead to an encapsulated structure. This co‐assembly process is driven by mutual electro­
static interactions and results in a flexible and atomically thin GO shell that effectively 
envelops the nanoparticle. This unique structure provides a number of advantages, including 
suppression of particle agglomeration, accommodation of volumetric change during cycling 
and fast electron transport via the highly conductive graphene wrapping. One approach is 
shown in Figure 8.8 and can be accomplished by modifying the surface of metal oxide 
nanoparticles with an available amine species [33]. This approach is especially useful for 
metal oxide anode materials, which suffer from numerous issues that limit their cyclability, 
including substantial volumetric change during cycling and low electrical conductivity. In 
one example, cobalt oxide (Co3O4) particles were treated with aminopropyltrimethox­
ysilane (APS) to generate a positively charged surface, followed by co‐assembly with the 
negatively charged GO in aqueous suspension. The resulting GO‐wrapped Co3O4 particles 
were then treated with hydrazine to chemically reduce the GO material to an electrically 
conductive support (Figure 8.8). The electrochemical performance of the co‐assembled 
composites demonstrated far superior performance compared to bare Co3O4 particles. The 
Co3O4‐RGO composite achieved a very high and stable reversible capacity of ~1100 mA h 
g−1 and were nearly completely stable for over 130 cycles. The superior performance was 
attributed to the synergistic effect between the flexible RGO wrapping that stabilized the 
particles, and EIS confirmed that the composite possessed lower contact and charge‐transfer 
resistances than the bare Co3O4 particle electrode. As an additional control, a physical mix­
ture of Co3O4 and RGO was constructed and showed worse capacity and stability compared 
to the co‐assembled structure.
50 nm
10 nm
Figure 8.7  Cross‐sectional schematic (not to scale) of the holey Si–tpGO composite structure 
(left). TEM image (right) depicting the highly defective tpGO structure (scale bar: 50 nm). 
Inset: Zoomed‐in view of the tpGO structure. Adapted from [32] with permission of Wiley‐VCH 
Verlag GmbH

Graphene-encapsulated
metal oxide (GE-MO)
3) Reduction
1 μm
Graphene oxide
(GO)
APS-modified metal oxide
APS=(CH3O)3Si(CH2)2NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
NH2
+
2) Assembly
Metal oxide
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
(a)
OH
OH
1) Modification with APS
(b)
0
0
500
1000
1500
(c)
(d)
0
0
20 40 60 80 100 120 140
0
10
Coloumbic efficiency/%
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
500
1000
Capacity/mAh g–1
Capacity/mAh g–1
1500
2000
5
10
15
Cycle number
Cycle number
20
25
30
Figure  8.8  (a) Fabrication of the RGO‐wrapped metal oxide particles. (b) SEM image 
demonstrating the Co3O4 particles embedded in the flexible RGO structure. (c) Electrochemical 
cycling of co‐assembled Co3O4‐RGO composites (squares), physically mixed Co3O4‐RGO 
composite (circles) and bare Co3O4 electrodes (triangles). (d) Cycle performance of the  
co‐assembled Co3O4‐RGO electrode for 130 cycles at 74 mA g−1. Adapted from [33] with 
permission of Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH

270
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
8.2.4  Cathode Applications
In addition to enhancing features on the anode electrode, RGO and its panacea of attractive 
properties can also be applied to improve the electrochemical performance of cathode 
materials. For cathode applications, RGO often serves as an improved carbon additive to 
replace activated carbon, due to its extremely high conductivity and surface area. The 
combination of those two properties makes RGO a wonderful material to wire cathode 
materials, which typically suffer from low electrical conductivity themselves.
8.2.4.1  Transitional Metal Phosphates
One such material that has garnered significant attention is lithium iron phosphate 
(LiFePO4). LiFePO4 is an important cathode material that has been widely used in com­
mercial lithium‐ion batteries due to its good capacity (~170 mA h g−1), outstanding 
reversibility, inexpensive cost, low toxicity and high safety. However, LiFePO4 exhibits 
very low electrical conductivity (10−9 S cm−1), which causes poor cycling performance 
if not properly designed. Traditionally, nanostructuring and carbon coating are employed 
in order to enhance the electrochemical performance of LiFePO4. However, with tradi­
tional carbon‐coating procedures, an amorphous carbon with limited electrical conduc­
tivity coats the surface of the particle. Therefore, significant room for improvement can 
be achieved by structuring LiFePO4 with much more electrically conductive graphenic 
materials.
The first demonstration of a LiFePO4–RGO composite was reported by Ding and 
colleagues in 2010 [34]. In the seminal work, LiFePO4 nanoparticles were co‐precipitated 
with RGO to form a composite structure. The material was then isolated and thermally 
treated at 700°C under inert gas to form the final product. It was determined that inclusion 
of the RGO material resulted in a decrease in the LiFePO4 particle size to 20 nm, com­
pared to 70 nm for LiFePO4 particles synthesized under identical procedures except for 
RGO addition. Electrochemical cycling of the materials demonstrated that the reversible 
capacity of the LiFePO4 was considerably improved with RGO addition. When cycled at 
a rate of 35 mA g−1, the LiFePO4–RGO composite achieved near‐theoretical reversible 
capacities of 160 mA h g−1 compared to only 113 mA h g−1 for the bare particles. Later, 
Zhou and colleagues further improved the performance of LiFePO4–RGO composites 
using a novel composite structure formed via spray drying and thermal annealing ­processes 
[35]. Through this process, LiFePO4 primary nanoparticles were structured into micro‐
sized spherical secondary particles, which were wrapped by an electrically conductive 
thermally RGO 3D network (Figure 8.9). This unique RGO wrapping facilitated electron 
transport throughout the structure, while the voids between primary particles provided 
easy routes for Li+ diffusion. Electrochemical analysis confirmed that the RGO‐wrapped 
materials exhibited significantly better cycling stability and rate capability compared to 
an amorphous carbon‐coated composite. Surprisingly, combining the amorphous carbon‐
coated LiFePO4 material into the unique process scheme afforded an even better‐perform­
ing material than just achieved with the RGO wrapping alone, demonstrating that there 
may have been rate limitations arising from individual LiFePO4 particle connections. For 
the RGO‐wrapped, carbon‐coated LiFePO4 sample, a maximum reversible capacity of 
~150 mA h g−1 was achieved at a low rate of 0.1C (~15 mA g−1), which is noticeably lower 
than the theoretical value (here C is the C‐rate related to battery charging). However, these 

Energy Harvesting and Storage
271
composite materials exhibited an excellent rate performance, still delivering ~130 mA h 
g−1 at 10C (~1.7 A g−1) and over 70 mA h g−1 at an extremely high discharge rate of 60C 
(~10 A g−1). Additionally, these composites were able to retain ~95% capacity after 1000 
cycles at a high rate of 10C–20C (1.7–3.4 A g−1) asymmetric charging–discharging 
procedure.
Although these mentioned reports are limited only to LiFePO4, numerous other cathode 
materials such as LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, LiNixMnyCozO2 and LiMnPO4 can also be improved 
using similar methodologies. In order to sufficiently improve the electrode performance in 
composite structures, it is critical to ensure that the graphene structure is well distributed and 
that electroactive particles are intimately connected to the graphene layers. Often this can be 
successfully achieved through in situ nanoparticle synthesis and thermal annealing processes.
(B)
(C)
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
250
200nm
500
Capacity (mAh/g)
750
1000
LFP/(G+C)
LFP/G
LFP/C
(A)
Cycle number
Graphene
oxide
Mixing
Li+
e–
e–
e–
Li+
Spray
drying
Annealing
LiFePO4/graphene oxide
LiFePO4/graphene
LiFePO4
Figure 8.9  (A) Preparation process and microscale structure of LiFePO4–RGO composite. (B) SEM 
image showing LiFePO4 primary particles wrapped by the RGO structure. (C) Electrochemical 
cycling of LiFePO4 composite electrodes at a 10C–20C asymmetric charge–discharge process. 
Adapted from [35] with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry

272
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
8.2.4.2  Lithium–Sulfur Batteries
The unique properties of GO have proven to be even more useful for more advanced cathode 
materials such as sulfur. The lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery is an especially attractive system 
that has received significant attention from researchers due to its high theoretical energy 
density (2600 W h kg−1 and 2800 W h l−1). However, the commercial application of Li–S 
batteries has been hindered due to a few issues, including the insulating nature of sulfur, 
volume change during the charge–discharge process, and the severe capacity fade observed 
due to high polysulfide dissolution during cycling (termed the “shuttle effect”).
In order to overcome these issues, the 2D structure, high conductivity, elastic and 
mechanically strong properties of GO and RGO have been explored as potential options to 
bring Li–S batteries to market. One of the most promising routes is to use the unique 2D 
structure as a carbon net to wrap the sulfur particles and prevent polysulfide dissolution. 
The oxygen‐containing groups on the basal planes can further provide strong anchoring 
points while the high‐surface‐area structure absorbs polysulfides and promotes the forma­
tion of Li2S films. In 2011, Wang and colleagues reported a sulfur–GO composite that was 
formed by coating sulfur particles with polyethylene glycol (PEG) and then wrapping the 
particles with lightly oxidized GO sheets that had been decorated with carbon particles 
(Figure 8.10) [36]. The PEG and GO coating layers served multiple roles, including to 
accommodate the volumetric expansion of sulfur, trap soluble polysulfide intermediates 
and provide an electrically conductive network for the sulfur particles. The resulting com­
posites demonstrated high reversible specific capacities up to ~600 mA h g−1 after an initial 
capacity drop from 1000 mA h g−1, and remained stable over 100 cycles when cycled at up 
to 0.5C. The performance of the composite material was superior to both sulfur–PEG and 
sulfur–GO electrodes alone, demonstrating the validity of the synthesized architecture to 
provide robust support for the sulfur cathode.
More recently, CTAB (cetyl‐trimethyl ammonium bromide) has been utilized as an alter­
native surfactant to PEG to improve the electrochemical performance of GO/S composite 
cathodes (Figure 8.11) [37]. The CTAB‐modified sulfur–GO nanocomposite cathodes can 
achieve close to theoretical capacity values of ~1400 mA h g−1 when cycled at 0.2C and up 
to ~800 mA h g−1 capacity at a high rate of 1C. Additionally, the composites are extremely 
robust and were able to cycle more than 1500 times with more than 300 mA h g−1 remaining 
capacity. It was estimated that the practical cell‐level energy density of the cell could be 
as great as ~500 W h kg−1, more than doubled compared to the existing energy density of 
current Li‐ion cells (~200 W h kg−1). The surprising rate performance of the insulating 
sulfur material suggests that these materials may also be suitable for high‐power applica­
tions in addition to high‐energy applications.
Sulfur–RGO composites have also been significantly investigated since RGO possesses 
similar advantages to GO while also providing the addition of electrical conductivity. Very 
recently, Wang and colleagues [38] reported a method to impregnate lithium polysulfide 
(Li2S) into thermally annealed RGO papers (Figure 8.12). Similar to its anode counterparts, 
the Li2S–tpGO papers are flexible and freestanding and can be used directly as cathode 
electrodes without requiring additional binders, which can lead to substantial weight 
savings if implemented into a commercial cell. Due to the method of impregnation, the 
lithium sulfide particles were formed as very small 25–50 nm nanospheres rather than the 
micrometer‐sized particles observed without the presence of tpGO. With the freestanding 

Graphene oxide
(GO) suspension
Carbon
black (CB)
GO/CB
suspension
Na2S2O3
+
HCI
+
Triton x-100
S/PEG
particles
Graphene-sulfur
composite
Graphene coating to
render electrical
conductivity
Graphene
wrapping to trap
polysulfides
PEG layer to trap
polysulfides and
accommodate
volume change
Sulfur
0
0
200
Specific capacity (mAh/g)
400
600
800
1000
20
40
60
Graphene-sulfur with PEG
80
Cycle number
100
120
140
C/2
C/5
Figure 8.10  Schematic representation of the synthesis scheme to fabricate the sulfur–PEG–GO architecture (left). Cycling 
performance of the composite at rates of C/5 and C/2. Reproduced from [36] with permission of American Chemical Society

0
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Discharge capacity (mAh/gsulfur)
Discharge capacity (mAh/gelectrode)
1200
1400
1600
250
500
750
Number of cycle
1000
1250
1500
0
100 
200 
300 
400 
500 
600 
700 
800 
900 
3100
3000
Transmittance (%)
2900
Wavenumber (cm–1)
2800
2700
Discharge (1C)
CTAB
CTAB
Sulfur
Graphene oxide
Discharge (0.05C)
Charge (0.5C)
Figure 8.11  Schematic of the CTAB‐modified sulfur–GO composite material (top) and accom­
panying composite electrochemical cycling performance (bottom). Reproduced from [37] 
with permission of American Chemical Society
0
0
200
400
600
800
Capacity (mAh g–1 Li2S)
1000
1200
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
25
50
75
Discharge
5 C
Discharge
rGO paper
S sphere
Li2S sphere
Li2S solution
Dried
Charge
100
Cycle number
125
150
170
200
Figure 8.12  Illustrative schematic depicting the fabrication of the freestanding Li2S–tpGO 
composite paper (top). Electrochemical cycling performance of the Li2S–tpGO cathode when 
cycled at 5C (~6 A/g−1). Reproduced from [38] with permission of American Chemical Society

Energy Harvesting and Storage
275
structure, the high surface area of the tpGO paper provides good polysulfide retention, 
and the porous nature can accommodate the volumetric changes required during cycling. 
The prepared composites exhibited excellent cycling characteristics, initially achieving 
the full theoretical capacity of Li2S (~1166 mA h g−1) indicating complete participation 
of  the electroactive material. Additionally, it was determined that the composites had 
­excellent rate performance and could still deliver ~600 mA h g−1 at a very high rate of 7C 
(~8 A g−1), more than 50% of the theoretical value. Moreover, when continuously cycled at 
a high rate of 5C (~6 A g−1), the composite was able to cycle more than 200 times while 
maintaining ~70% of its initial capacity. Not only does this particular report demonstrate 
an impressive high‐capacity and high‐rate cathode material, but it also extends the tremen­
dous versatility that can be achieved using the 3D flexible RGO paper support.
8.2.5  Emerging Applications
Besides showing great promise for conventional anode and cathode applications, GO and 
its derivatives have also recently been commissioned for more novel forms of lithium‐ion 
battery applications. One such application was termed the “all‐graphene battery” due to its 
integration of GO materials for both the anode and cathode electrodes [39]. The thermal 
processing temperature of GO was tuned to control the extent of oxygen moieties for each 
electrode. This energy storage system utilized a partially reduced tpGO as the cathode 
material and a more reduced tpGO as the anode material. Figure 8.13 illustrates the cell 
design and mechanism for charge storage on anode and cathode electrodes. The partially 
reduced tpGO cathode material contained a significant amount of carbonyl (C ═ O) func­
tional groups that served as redox centers for Li+ charge storage at high potentials. The 
electrode stability was attributed to C ═ O/C–O Faradaic surface reactions that resembled 
pseudo‐capacitive storage mechanisms. This format allowed the system to utilize fast 
surface reactions on both electrodes, leading to high simultaneous energy and power 
density. The system was able to deliver an energy density of 225 W h kg−1, and could also 
provide a high power density 6450 W kg−1. When cycled at 500 mA g−1, the system was 
able to deliver >50% of its initial capacity after 2000 cycles (Figure 8.13). The performance 
of this system demonstrates the use of GO to form hybrid energy storage systems that 
merge the conventional storage mechanisms of batteries and capacitors.
A second emerging use of GO exists as the battery separator membrane for improved 
safety. A battery separator is the insulating barrier that separates the anode and cathode 
electrodes and provides pathways for Li+ ions to travel between electrodes. In a conven­
tional cell, the separator material consists of a porous polymer material that allows electro­
lyte and Li+ ion diffusion. As a safety feature, if a cell heats up to a predetermined elevated 
temperature, the polymer separator material undergoes an irreversible phase transition that 
closes its pores, which blocks Li+ ion diffusion and terminates cell operation. Shen and 
colleagues demonstrated that an insulating GO film could also be used as a separator 
material [40].
Additionally, the GO films were functionalized with a temperature‐sensitive polymer 
that can undergo a reversible conformation change based upon its temperature (Figure 8.14). 
The temperature‐sensitive polymer, a poly(sulfobetaine) (PMABS), is grafted onto the GO 
sheets through surface‐initiated atom transfer radical polymerization reaction. PMABS 
exhibits an upper critical solution temperature (UCST), and thus effectively reversibly 

276
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
changes its permeability and its adsorptive properties above or below its UCST point. 
When the temperature of the cell containing the GO‐PMABS separator extends above the 
critical point (80°C), the permeability to Li+ ions is considerably reduced, which leads to a 
significant decrease in capacity. Shen and colleagues demonstrated that this phenomenon 
is reversible, and lowering the cell temperature to 20°C returned the cell to its original 
charge capacity (Figure 8.14). Overall, it was demonstrated that the GO‐PMABS membrane 
was capable of decreasing the storage capacity of the cell by >50% upon heating the cell 
from 20°C to 80°C. For energy storage applications, this novel GO membrane is useful as 
a means to mitigate thermal runaway in batteries by decreasing Li+ permeability at elevated 
temperatures, and can also act as an internal cell balance to restrict local ion flow in regions 
that exhibit concentrated heating.
In summary, GO‐derived electrodes offer significant promise for applications in advanced 
lithium‐ion battery applications. An extremely eclectic mix of interesting approaches 
have been undertaken, ranging from flexible freestanding papers to complex hierarchical 
3D porous composites. Graphene oxide’s unique properties render it useful for all types 
of anode and cathode materials, with different structural properties being advantageous 
for individual applications. Additionally, its amphiphilic properties afford the unique 
0
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
Separator
Functionalized graphene cathode
(delithiated state)
Current collector (AI)
Reduced graphene oxide
anode (lithiated state)
Current collector (Cu)
500
1000
Number of cycles
1500
2000
0
20
40
60
Coulombic efficiency (%)
Capacity retention (%)
80
100
Reaction in anode:
LiC3 ↔ 3C +Li++e–
Reaction in cathode:
-C=O+Li++e– ↔ -C-O-Li
Li
Li
C
O
C
Li+
e–
Li+
e–
Figure  8.13  Illustrative schematic depicting the fabrication of the “all‐graphene battery” 
(top). Electrochemical cycling performance of the system when cycled at 500 mA g−1 (bottom). 
Reproduced from [39] with permission of Macmillan Publishers Limited

OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
O
O
O
O
O
H2N
and
H2O, 60°C
OH
OH
NO
O
O
R1·NH3
+
R1·NH3
+
R1
NH3
+
R1
R1
O
O
Br
O
Br
O
O
R1
R1
R1
R1
R1
R1=
R1
R1
R1
OH
OH
GO-OH
GO-PMABS membrane
THF
Et3N
H3N
HO
HO
OH
HN
R1
R1
R1
R1
O–
O–
O
O–
O–
O–
R3
R3
O
O
O
O
GO
O
O
·
R1
NH3
+
+
·
OH
O
R2 NH3
+
R2 NH3
+
R2
NH3
+
R2
R2
O
O
O
O
O
GO-Br
Br
O
R2
R2
R2
R2
R2
R2
R2
R2
OH
H3N
HO
HO
OH
NH
R2
R2
R2=
R2
R2
O–
O–
O
O–
O–
O–
·
R2
NH3
+
+
·
OH
O
R3NH3
+
R3NH3
+
R3
NH3
+
R3
O
O
O
N
O
O
O
O
O
GO-PMABS
Cu(I), Cu(II), bipyridine
(ATRP process)
O O
n
–N+–
O
O
S
R3
R2
R
NH
R3
R2
R3
R3
OH
H3N
HO
HO
OH
R3
R3
R3
R3
R3
O–
O–
O
O–
O–
O–
O–
R3
NH3
+
+
Li+
O
O
SO–
Figure 8.14  Synthetic scheme for the preparation of GO functionalized with PMABS to form a GO‐PMABS membrane 
(top). Electrochemical cycling at 20°C and 80°C demonstrating the reversible charge storage behavior of the thermally 
responsive membrane (bottom) when cycled at 200 mA g−1. Adapted from [40] with permission from The Royal Society of 
Chemistry

278
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
opportunity to conduct a variety of synthetic strategies to grow an assortment of particles. 
Moreover, the unique 2D structure with large sheet size can accommodate a variety of 
particle morphologies. Due to the extreme interest in the topic, the examples described 
herein represent only a fraction of the effort that has been applied to solve the world’s 
energy storage problems. However, the overarching themes presented demonstrate the 
improvements that are possible when microstructural engineering approaches result in 
well‐designed electrode materials.
8.3  Supercapacitors
8.3.1  Introduction
Supercapacitors are complementary to lithium‐ion batteries in many respects and have 
attracted significant attention owing to their high power density and long cycle life. They 
are a new type of electrical energy storage system that can be applied for harvesting energy 
and to deliver bursts of high power within short time periods. Compared to lithium‐ion 
batteries, which are ideal in applications required to be powered on the order of minutes 
and hours, supercapacitors are ideal for applications that must have very short bursts of 
high power delivery on the order of seconds. These properties have attracted attention for a 
wide variety of applications, including regenerative braking for electric vehicles, power 
grids and aerospace applications, as well as the growing fields of consumer devices such as 
wearable technology. The global market size for supercapacitors was $3.8 billion in 2014 
and is expected to grow at over 15% annually into 2020 as capacitors are increasingly used 
in the transportation and consumer electronics markets [41].
Supercapacitors offer a combination of high power density (~10 kW kg−1), excellent 
cycling stability and rapid response to external load sources. The rapid response of super­
capacitors allows them to be implemented in conjunction with batteries where they can 
Cycle number
Specific capacity (mAhg–1)
GO-P Membrane
Charge (Delithiation)
Discharge (Lithiation)
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
0
5
10
20°C
20°C
20°C
20°C
80°C
80°C
80°C
15
20
25
30
35
40
Figure 8.14  (Continued)

Energy Harvesting and Storage
279
serve as charge conditioners assisting with load balancing and optimize the method to 
charge batteries. However, compared to other forms of electrical energy storage, capacitors 
suffer from relatively low energy density (<10 W h kg−1), which is more than an order 
of magnitude lower than the rechargeable lithium‐ion battery (200 W h kg−1). Significant 
effort has been undertaken to increase the storage capabilities of supercapacitors. Many 
reports focus on investigating assorted structures of porous carbons, including activated 
carbons, aerogels, carbon nanotubes and mesoporous carbons. Nonetheless, practical 
implementation of improved supercapacitor performance has been elusive. This section 
will focus on the recent developments in electrodes utilizing GO materials.
8.3.2  Electrochemistry Fundamentals
Supercapacitors are a type of electrochemical capacitor that can store electrical energy 
via two different mechanisms – electrical double‐layer capacitance (EDLC) and pseudo‐
capacitance. With the EDLC mechanism, electrical storage of energy is achieved via 
separation of charges at the surface of electrode materials in a Helmholtz double layer. 
Therefore, the charge is stored electrostatically and leads to performance that is extremely 
reversible for hundreds of thousands of charge–discharge cycles (>100 000 cycles). In order 
to maximize the storage by this method, the electrodes must be designed to have extremely 
high specific surface area and good electrical conductivity for rapid cycling. Therefore, 
high‐surface‐area porous carbons are the material of choice for EDLC capacitors.
In contrast to EDLC, with pseudo‐capacitance the charge storage is achieved through 
Faradaic charge‐transfer redox reactions between the electrolyte and electroactive species 
on the electrode surface. Most commonly, this phenomenon is achieved with conducting 
polymers such as polyaniline (PANI) and polypyrrole (PPy), or with metal oxide materials, 
such as Co3O4, MnO2 and RuO2. Generally, these reactions can provide significantly higher 
capacitance, up to 1000 F g−1, which is ~10× greater than is typically achieved by the 
EDLC mechanism alone. Unfortunately, these reactions can often degrade the electrode 
material much quicker, leading to severe capacitance degradation. In addition, many 
pseudo‐capacitive materials suffer from low power density due to the relatively low electrical 
conductivity compared to EDLC materials. In order to apply these materials for capacitor 
applications, pseudo‐capacitive materials are often combined with porous carbon materials 
to form hybrid materials that can provide the desired combination of high capacitance, 
good electrical conductivity and adequate cycling stability.
It should be noted that both of the storage methods used for supercapacitors are different 
from the electrochemical redox reactions employed for the lithium‐ion battery storage 
mechanism. In simple terms, lithium‐ion batteries store charge in the bulk of the electrode 
materials, allowing for high‐energy applications, whereas supercapacitors store charge 
predominantly on the surface only, allowing for high power applications.
Supercapacitors, similar to lithium‐ion batteries, consist of two electrodes that are 
physically separated by a separator and are connected by an ionically conductive electro­
lyte. When an external voltage is applied, the electrode surfaces are polarized and the ions 
in the electrolyte form an electric double layer consisting of opposite‐polarity ions to the 
electrode’s polarity. As an example, a positively polarized electrode surface will attract a 
layer of negative ions at the electrode–electrolyte interface followed by an additional 
layer of positive ions (cations) to act as a charge‐balancing layer (hence the “electrical 

280
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
double‐layer” terminology). With the negatively polarized electrode surface, a layer of posi­
tive ions will be present at the electrode–electrolyte interface, followed by an additional 
adsorbed layer of negative ions to balance charges.
In general, the total capacitance (Ctotal) of supercapacitors can be expressed in terms of 
the capacitance of the two individual capacitors (CA and CB) as follows:
	
C
C
C
C
C
total
A
B
A
B
=
×
+
	
(8.2)
Supercapacitors allow for either symmetric or asymmetric electrode design. For sym­
metric design, both of the electrodes have the same capacitance value and hence Ctotal is 
equal to half the value for a single electrode (i.e. Ctotal = 0.5CA). In the case of asymmetric 
design, Ctotal will be limited by the electrode with the smaller capacitance due to the 
mathematical equation (8.2), and is therefore roughly taken to be the capacitance value of 
the smaller electrode (i.e. 
≈
total
B
C
C  if C
C
A
B

).
The energy stored in a supercapacitor, E, can be calculated according to the following 
relationship:
	
E
CV
= 1
2
2	
(8.3)
where C is the specific capacitance and V is the voltage potential window for operation. 
As can be seen, energy is a function of the cell capacitance and voltage. Therefore, in order 
to improve the energy delivery of supercapacitors, either the capacitance or the cell voltage 
can be modified to allow for greater performance. From (8.3), it is apparent that increasing 
the accessible voltage window provides a more significant opportunity to improve the 
energy density due to its quadratic relationship. However, the cell voltage is determined 
more by the electrolyte system, and the various carbon materials are found to have a lower 
influence. This section will not examine methods to broaden the potential window. Rather, 
this section will focus on improving cell capacitance by developing new electrode materi­
als as the key to provide capacitor energy delivery. Therefore, this section will describe 
how various graphene‐containing structures can be developed to maximize its specific 
capacitance (F g−1), rate performance and cycle life. Particularly, this section will highlight 
some of the important achievements in GO‐based materials for supercapacitors and strate­
gies that can be used to further their development.
8.3.3  Carbon‐only Electrodes
There are a number of crucial factors that are necessary in order to create promising electrode 
performance. Supercapacitor electrodes must have high specific surface area, appropriate 
pore size distribution, high electrical conductivity and good surface wettability. Additionally, 
electrodes must have high thermal stability, long‐term chemical stability, high corrosion 
resistance, low cost and be environmentally friendly. Due to the capacitive energy storage 
mechanism, the entire electrode surface needs to be wetted by the electrolyte in order for it 
to store charge. Additionally, in order for the electrolyte to reach all the accessible surfaces, 
pores must be large enough to accommodate the variety of electrolyte compositions that 

Energy Harvesting and Storage
281
may be employed. Therefore, pore sizes and additional ion pathways must be considered 
and characterized when optimizing the performance of the supercapacitor electrodes.
In general, the quantity of electrical double‐layer and pseudo‐capacitive charges are 
predominantly a function of the accessible surface area of the electrode. Therefore, super­
capacitor electrodes are commonly made of porous materials with extremely high surface 
areas such as activated carbon. Commonly used activated carbon electrodes have specific 
surface areas ranging from 1000 to 3000 m2 g−1 and can achieve specific capacitances of 
100 F g−1. For reference, the electrical conductivity of activated carbon is also on the order 
of 1000–2000 S m−1. To improve the capacitance and energy, significant efforts have been 
undertaken. Many studies have focused on investigating assorted structures of porous 
carbons, including activated carbons (ACs) [42, 43], aerogels [44–46], carbon nanotubes 
(CNTs) [47–51] and mesoporous carbons [52–54], among others. For practical consideration, 
it is important to note that, although most supercapacitor materials report specific capaci­
tance per mass as the value to measure performance, the specific capacitance per volume is 
more important for commercial implementation since the space available for components 
is limited. Therefore, many of these materials, which offer extremely high specific surface 
areas, cannot be implemented commercially due to their low packing densities. This point 
should be taken into consideration when embarking on new electrode designs to ensure 
materials have both high specific surface area and high packing density.
Graphene, due to its myriad of extraordinary properties, including high surface area and 
broad electrochemical stability window (>4 V), has been an outstanding candidate as the 
electrode material for supercapacitors. Additionally, the amphiphilic surfaces provided by 
RGO are ideal to ensure that the entire active surface is accessible to the electrolyte. 
Already to date, a tremendous amount of graphene‐containing materials have been reported 
for supercapacitors [50, 51, 55–57]. However, all of the reported specific capacitance values 
are significantly lower than the theoretical value of 550 F g−1 due to non‐ideal electrode 
design, processing and fabrication. Strong π–π interactions between graphene sheets can 
cause flakes to restack to form graphite‐like stacks, severely crippling the accessible surface 
area and reducing ion diffusion rates. This combination of properties translates to limited 
specific capacitances and relatively poor rate performance [58, 59]. To enhance the perfor­
mance of the capacitance of GO‐derived materials, researchers have utilized different 
morphologies, such as wrinkled and 3D networks, composites with different carbon materials 
such as CNTs or polymers, and forming in‐plane pores within the graphene basal planes.
In order to maximize performance, electrode architectures must be well designed to 
provide the right combination of high specific surface area, appropriate pore size distribution, 
good electrical conductivity, high rate performance, high packing density and stable long‐term 
cycling, among others. In this section, rather than providing a comprehensive enumeration 
of all the approaches to RGO‐based supercapacitor materials, we will highlight and 
summarize a few key examples of methods employed to design high‐performance elec­
trodes that solve many of these key issues.
One of the first studies of RGO as a supercapacitor electrode was reported in 2008 by 
Stoller et al. [60]. In that seminal study, GO was reduced using hydrazine hydrate to form 
agglomerated particles ranging from 15 to 25 µm in diameter with a specific surface area 
(SSA) of 705 m2 g−1. However, due to the partial agglomeration and limited surface area, 
the specific capacitance of the material was relatively low, only reaching 135 and 99 F g−1 
in aqueous and organic electrolytes, respectively. One of the reasons that this structure did 

282
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
not exhibit higher capacitance was due to the inability of the electrolyte to penetrate all 
available active graphene sheet surfaces due to the agglomeration. Additionally, the lack of 
engineered pore structure further hindered ion diffusion throughout the structure and pre­
vented electrolyte access to the interior surfaces. Nonetheless, the RGO material exhibited 
good electrical conductivity, large surface area and chemical stability, positioning RGO as 
an exciting candidate for supercapacitor applications.
In order to improve the accessible surface areas, Ruoff and his team later developed a 
chemical activation transformation of exfoliated graphite oxide to synthesize a porous carbon 
material referred to as “activated graphene” [61]. Chemical activation is a common approach 
that is used to obtain porous carbon‐based materials, and generally involves mixing the 
carbon precursor with chemical activating agents such as KOH [62], ZnCl2 [63] and H3PO4 
[64] followed by carbonization at high temperatures (400–900°C). Although this activation 
process had been applied to many carbon materials previously, Ruoff and his coworkers 
were one of the first to apply this treatment to GO materials. Remarkably, the unique structure 
consisted of a continuous 3D network of highly curved, atomically thin walls that formed 
meso‐ and micropores. These materials offered an extremely high SSA of up to 3100 m2 g−1, 
greater than the theoretical value for graphene. The higher‐than‐theoretical surface area was 
ascribed to the generation of the extremely small (<5 nm) pores due to the KOH activation 
process. When tested as supercapacitor electrodes, one of the activated RGO materials with 
~2400 m2 g−1 SSA was able to achieve 166 F g−1 capacitance at a high current density of 
5.7 A g−1 in an ionic liquid with 3.5 V working voltage, far superior to earlier reports. 
Additionally, the volumetric capacitance was calculated to be 60 F cm−3. This material was 
also extremely stable and retained 97% capacitance after 10 000 cycles. Surprisingly, 
increasing the SSA of 3100 m2 g−1 resulted in a lower capacitance of 150 F g−1, perhaps 
limited by the electrical conductivity of the highly porous structure (reported as 500 S m−1). 
It was estimated that these materials could provide a practical packaged energy density of 
20 W h kg−1 and a power density of 75 kW kg−1, a significant improvement over the existing 
values for AC‐based supercapacitors (5 W h kg−1, ~7.5 kW kg−1). Thus, Ruoff and coworkers 
demonstrated that the simple and well‐known chemical activation process already employed 
for activated carbons can be applied to GO‐based materials with the potential to realize 
advanced electrochemical energy storage devices in a short period of time.
Later, Ruoff and his team further refined their processing to fabricate the modified GO 
materials into hollow spheres in order to generate macropores prior to the chemical activa­
tion step [65]. Figure 8.15 outlines the improved route to the formation of highly porous 
Activated sMEG-O
(asMEG-O)
KOH
activation
Microwave
expansion
(a)
(b)
(c)
Crumpled G-O
Microwave expanded
G-O sphere (sMEG-O)
Figure  8.15  Fabrication schematic for the formation of highly porous graphene‐derived 
carbons with hierarchical pore structures. Reproduced from [65] with permission of American 
Chemical Society

Energy Harvesting and Storage
283
GO‐derived carbons with hierarchical pore structure. With the improved method, the SSA of 
the carbon material could be further increased upon previous reported results to 3290 m2 g−1. 
These carbons exhibited an improved gravimetric and volumetric specific capacitance of 
174 F g−1 and 100 F cm−3, respectively, and retained 94% capacitance after 1000 cycles. 
With a high packing density of 0.59 g cm−3 and an estimated volumetric energy and power 
density of 44 W h l−1 and 210 kW l−1, these materials represent a promising route for 
advanced supercapacitor applications. From the analysis, it is clear that control over the 
structure and morphology of carbon electrode materials is an effective strategy to develop 
high‐surface‐area materials with efficient paths for ion diffusion into the interior surfaces 
of bulk electrode particles.
Another method to increase the surface area of the electrode is through the development 
of novel 3D graphene architectures. Huang and his team demonstrated that transforming 
2D GO sheets into a 3D crumpled ball structure was an attractive method to prevent sheet 
aggregation and maintaining high electron and ion transport [66]. As shown in Figure 8.16, 
crumpled materials are generated through an aerosol spray pyrolysis process wherein a GO 
suspension is atomized via ultrasonication and then carried into a heated electric furnace 
for thermal processing [67]. During the atomization process, crumpled GO balls are formed 
by isotropic capillary compression due to the rapid evaporation of the carrier solvent. The 
morphology of the resulting crumpled ball can be controlled by varying the GO concentra­
tion and atomization parameters. Crumpled tpGO materials exhibited relatively limited 
SSA of 567 m2 g−1. However, it was noted that, unlike other GO sheet morphologies, which 
tend to undergo substantial decrease in accessible surface areas due to the compressive 
forces required during electrode processing (e.g. from 407 to 66 m2 g−1 before and after 
compression, respectively), the crumpled morphology still maintained an accessible sur­
face area of 255 m2 g−1 after compression. Additionally, after compression, the crumpled 
tpGO materials had relatively high density of 0.5 g cm−3, demonstrating that the crumpled 
morphology can consist of well‐wrinkled GO sheets with uniformly distributed free space 
inside and between particles. Crumpled tpGO materials offered good specific capacitance 
values of up to 150 F g−1 and 60 F cm−3 when cycled at 0.1 A g−1. For reference, similar 
materials formed with a 2D flat structures and 2D wrinkled structures exhibited lower val­
ues of 122 and 142 F g−1, respectively. Compared to flat or wrinkled morphologies for 
tpGO electrodes, the crumpled morphology provides higher energy and power densities. 
Additionally, unlike with the flat and wrinkled morphologies, the crumpled materials can 
provide high performance at high electrode mass and areal loading without substantial 
decrease in energy or power output. EIS further showed that the 3D crumpled porous struc­
ture exhibited improved charge‐transfer kinetics compared to the flat and wrinkled mor­
phologies. Compared to other graphene structures, the crumpled tpGO architecture 
demonstrates an encouraging route to 3D structures with high packing density and there­
fore high volumetric energy and power density.
Another route to the formation of high‐surface‐area RGO‐containing electrodes for 
supercapacitor applications was accomplished using a hydrothermal treatment combined 
with a thermal activation step [68]. With this method, dispersed GO was first hydrother­
mally treated with biomass and/or polymer materials to form a partially reduced 3D hybrid 
precursor composite. This material was then mixed with potassium hydroxide (KOH) and 
thermally activated at 800°C to form a highly porous 3D structure. Figure 8.17 depicts the 
processing to form the material, as well as the electron microcopy images characterizing 

284
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the morphology. The resulting material exhibited an unusually high surface area of 3523 m2 g−1, 
which is higher than the theoretical surface area for pristine graphene. Electron microscopy 
demonstrated that the structure is highly distorted, with carbonized material providing 
separation for individual graphene layers. The 3D interconnected layers provided a high 
0
0
30
Scale up
Scale up
60
Specific capacitance (F/g)
90
120
150
(A)
(B)
Filter
Ultrasonic
atomizer
Tube furnace
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
Carrier
gas
Exhaust
0.5 μm
2 μm
5 μm
1
2
3
4
0.2 μm
4
Mass loading (mg/electrode)
8
0.1 A/g
Crumpled balls
Flat sheets
12
16
Figure 8.16  (A) Schematic illustrating the formation of (B) the crumpled sheet morphology. 
Illustration (bottom) of the flat sheet (purple) and crumpled ball (golden) morphologies and 
their respective capacitive performance. Reproduced from [66, 67] with permission of 
American Chemical Society

Energy Harvesting and Storage
285
electrical conductivity up to 303 S m−1. When examined as a supercapacitor electrode, 
these materials exhibited up to 231 F g−1 specific capacitance and exhibited almost no fade 
after 5000 cycles at 1 A g−1. Compared to the porous 3D structure, a reference treated RGO 
material without the addition of the extra carbon (either biomass or polymer) exhibited a 
surface area of 1810 m2 g−1 and correspondingly achieved a specific capacitance of only 
132 F g−1. This transformation demonstrates the benefit of high surface area and electrode 
design for achieving high‐performance supercapacitors.
Very recently, another approach to the application of “holey graphene” has been devel­
oped for supercapacitor applications. Three‐dimensional porous tpGO materials with 
in‐plane pores that generated a “holey” structure were developed by Xu and colleagues 
[69]. A schematic of the material is shown in Figure 8.18. The structure was prepared using 
hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) to etch nanopores into the GO material while a simultaneous 
hydrothermal treatment was employed to self‐assemble the materials into a 3D high‐surface‐
area, interconnected hydrogel structure. The nanopores were controlled by the amount of 
hydrogen peroxide and exhibited pore sizes on the order of a few nanometers that were 
distributed throughout the basal plane of GO. In order to highlight the impact of the nano­
pores, a control material processed without the use of the hydrogen peroxide etchant was 
also fabricated. The tpGO macropores generated via the hydrothermal reaction ranged 
from submicrometers to several micrometers and the walls consisted of one‐ or few‐layer 
tpGO sheets with defective carbon sites in the basal plane. In order to improve the packing 
Hydrothermal
Activation
Intermediate product
GO sheets
or
+
(b)
(a)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Porous 3D
graphene-based material
Polymer
Biomass
Carbonization
2 μm
200 nm
20 nm
5 nm
Figure 8.17  (a) Schematic detailing the synthesis method for the combined hydrothermal 
and chemical activation processes. (b, c) SEM images demonstrate that the material has a 
sponge‐like and porous structure. (d, e) TEM images show the material is composed of a dense 
3D porous structure with a highly curved or wrinkled surface. Reproduced from [68] with 
permission of Macmillan Publishers Limited

286
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
density to a level that would be required for commercial applications and to demonstrate 
the adaptability of the holey scaffold, the highly porous hydrogel material was compressed 
using a hydraulic press to form a compact “holey” material with significantly improved 
packing density. After compression, the surface area of the holey materials was measured 
to be 810 m2 g−1, compared to 830 m2 g−1 before compression, demonstrating that almost no 
graphene restacking occurred during the compression step. The lack of graphene restacking 
was attributed to the robust interconnection of graphene sheets that permitted mechanical 
compression without requiring sheet agglomeration. After compression, the packing 
density of the material was determined to be 0.71 g cm−3. Comparing the holey material to 
its control counterpart, it was determined that the holey structure provided much greater 
surface area (810 versus 260 m2 g−1), but with a slightly lower electrical conductivity (1000 
versus 1400 S m−1) due to the presence of carbon defects. Although the electrical conduc­
tivity of the non‐porous material was greater than the porous material, the introduction of 
pores decreased the voltage drop observed in the electrode during cycling due to improved 
ion diffusion. Additionally, EIS indicated that the addition of the nanopores led to 
more efficient electrolyte diffusion within the electrode, as demonstrated by a lower 
Compress
Compress
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 8.18  Illustration of the “holey graphene” material (b, d, f) and reference non‐holey 
material (a, c, e) as idealized electrodes for supercapacitor applications. Reproduced from [69] 
with permission of Macmillan Publishers Limited

Energy Harvesting and Storage
287
charge‐transfer resistance. When examined as a supercapacitor electrode in aqueous 
electrolyte, the porous holey tpGO material achieved extremely high gravimetric capaci­
tance of up to 310 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, in contrast to the control case, which demonstrated 208 
F g−1 capacitance under equivalent test conditions. Therefore, the introduction of pores into 
the basal plane provided a 50% boost to capacitance through the improved diffusion path­
ways. Upon increasing the charge–discharge current density by a factor of 100 (100 A g−1), 
the holey material was able to retain 76% of its initial capacitance, while the control sample 
only retained 63%, demonstrating improved rate retention upon the introduction of the pores 
into the basal planes. Additionally, these materials exhibited extreme cycling stability, 
retaining ~90% capacitance after 20 000 charge–discharge cycles at 25 A g−1. Even more 
impressive, these materials were able to achieve an unprecedented volumetric capacitance 
of 212 F cm−3, one of the highest reported values to date. It was calculated that these highly 
densified materials, when assembled into a fully packaged capacitor cell, would be able to 
provide 35 W h kg−1 energy density and a 49 W h l−1 volumetric density, approaching the 
value provided by the lead–acid battery. This report demonstrates the significant improve­
ment available by increasing pathways for ions to migrate and access electrode surface 
areas as well as the extremely high energy densities that are feasible for supercapacitors 
when high packing densities are taken into consideration.
Overall, RGO electrodes have been shown to be stable but exhibit relatively limited 
capacitance (200–300 F g−1) since the main charge storage method is through the EDLC 
mechanism. Additionally, since activated carbon and related materials can achieve similar 
results due to high surface area but at a much lower cost, pure RGO electrodes have not yet 
replaced activated carbon as the material of choice for commercial applications. In order to 
increase the capacitance of RGO‐containing supercapacitor electrodes, hybrid materials 
containing pseudo‐capacitive materials are often investigated as alternatives.
8.3.4  Pseudo‐Capacitive GO–Composite Electrodes
As mentioned in section 8.3.2, pseudo‐capacitive materials offer significantly higher specific 
capacitance values due to the addition of Faradaic reactions for charge storage. However, 
these materials also suffer from significantly worse cycling stability. Combining RGO with 
these promising materials offers a route to combine the advantages of both types to form 
hybrid structures with combined high capacitance and good cycling stability. Performance 
improvements that arise from this synergy include significantly increased capacitance 
values, faster charge–discharge rates, improved stabilization at high‐voltage operation and 
extended cycle life. Most commonly this can be achieved using conductive polymers such 
as polyaniline (PANI) [70, 71] and polypyrrole (PPy) [72, 73], as well as metal oxide 
materials such as Co3O4 [74, 75], MnO2 [75, 76], Ni(OH)2 [77], RuO2 [78] and others. 
With these hybrid composite materials, many of the design schemes discussed in section 8.3.3 
can be applied to these systems, except for the addition of the pseudo‐capacitive compo­
nent material. Therefore, this section will highlight specific examples of how different 
types of pseudo‐capacitive materials can be integrated into carbon architectures in order to 
develop high‐performance composite supercapacitors.
PANI is an electrically conductive polymer that is commonly employed for supercapacitors 
due to its pseudo‐capacitive behavior. PANI is considered the most promising conductive 
polymer for supercapacitors due to its combination of good environmental stability, ease of 

288
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
synthesis, doping chemistry and unique method of electron conduction. PANI, like other 
pseudo‐capacitive materials, also suffers from poor stability during the charge–discharge 
process. To overcome this problem, PANI is generally combined with carbon‐based materials 
such as activated carbons and CNTs to prepare composite electrode materials. GO provides 
a good scaffold for PANI synthesis due to the presence of a large amount of oxygen func­
tional groups that can help act as nucleation sites for in situ polymerization and doping 
mechanisms [71]. Although reports exist for the use of GO in its insulating state with PANI 
[79], the oxidative state of GO is not an appropriate choice to improve the electrochemical 
performance of PANI. Rather, the reduced, electrically conductive RGO material offers 
much more favorable interactions with PANI composites.
Recently, Meng and colleagues reported the use of calcium carbonate (CaCO3) as a sacri­
ficial template to synthesize a 3D PANI–RGO composite material, as shown in Figure 8.19 
[80]. With their method, CaCO3 particles were first formed in situ in the GO dispersion and 
then dried in order to template GO into a 3D porous structure. After chemical reduction via 
hydrazine vapor treatment, the calcium carbonate template was removed, providing a porous 
RGO skeleton structure. The resulting freestanding film had high flexibility and intercon­
nected pores that facilitated electrolyte ion transport within the structure and provided high 
rate performance. After forming the porous RGO structure, PANI nanowires were then 
grown on the surface of the structure, creating a hierarchical PANI–RGO composite material. 
When tested as a supercapacitor material, the presence of the pseudo‐capacitive PANI 
material afforded a high specific capacitance of up to 385 F g−1 and excellent rate perfor­
mance. Additionally, due to the stability provided by the RGO structure, the composite was 
able to retain 90% of its initial capacitance after 5000 cycles, demonstrating cycling stability 
similar to the bare RGO porous skeleton. The performance of the structure is attributed to 
the interconnected porous structure of the film, highlighting the importance of 3D structure 
when designing a supercapacitor electrode material.
In addition to PANI, numerous other polymer–RGO composites have recently been 
explored for supercapacitor applications. PPy is another attractive conductive polymer that 
has been used as a pseudo‐capacitive material due to its similar properties of high charge 
capacitance, good electrical conductivity and inexpensive synthesis. Due to the many 
Graphene
Polymerization
ii) Filtration
i) Reduction
ii) Remove
    the template
PANI nanowire arrays
GO/CaCO3 composite ﬁlm
3D-RGO
3D-RGO/PANI
i) Form CaCO3
   template
GO
Ca2+
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 8.19  Synthetic formation of hierarchical PANI–RGO composites with 3D interconnected 
pores. Reproduced from [80] with permission of Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH

Energy Harvesting and Storage
289
similarities between PANI and PPy, it is expected that many of the synthetic schemes 
developed for the former polymer can be applied to the latter system. Indeed, multi‐layer 
graphene–PPy composites have already been reported, with promising results [72].
Transition metal oxide materials are another promising class of pseudo‐capacitive 
materials for supercapacitor applications. The mechanism of energy storage in metal oxides 
is mainly attributed to a combination of fast and reversible electron transfer combined with 
an electroadsorption of protons on the surface of electroactive materials. Among the metal 
oxide particles, nickel hydroxide has received a significant amount of attention for use in 
supercapacitors due to its high theoretical capacitance value (~3750 F g−1), ease of synthe­
sis and low cost [81]. Unfortunately, nickel hydroxide suffers from a few challenges that 
limit its performance, including low rate capability and therefore low capacity due to the 
inability to provide adequate electron transport. Due to these shortcomings, combining this 
material with a highly conductive support such as GO is extremely attractive. Indeed, 
numerous studies have been performed focusing on the integration of nickel hydroxide 
with graphene‐based electrodes [82–86]. In many of these reports, the synthesis method 
is varied in order to achieve the best dispersion and size control of particles within the 
structure. However, in some of these structures, the graphenic material suffers from sheet 
aggregation, leading to poor particle dispersion and low accessible surface area. This in 
turn can hinder ion and electron diffusion through the structure and thereby limit the 
improvement observed under electrochemical testing.
To date, the highest specific capacitance reported was accomplished using a nickel 
hydroxide‐coated 3D porous tpGO, hollow‐sphere composite material [87]. In order to create 
this material, as shown in Figure 8.20, Zhang and colleagues layered GO sheets around a 
sacrificial silica (SiO2) spherical template that had been modified with 3‐aminopropyl­
trimethoxysilane (APS) to improve GO adhesion, followed by thermal reduction and 
template removal. Afterwards, nickel hydroxide nanoparticles were electrochemically 
deposited onto the porous tpGO scaffold using a nickel nitrate (Ni(NO3)2) precursor solution. 
The resulting thermally processed GO formed a porous 3D scaffold that provided rapid 
electron and ion transport to the pseudo‐capacitive material. The engineered nickel hydrox­
ide–tpGO composite achieved a very high specific capacitance of 2815 F g−1 at a scan rate 
of 5 mV s−1, and high stability for 1000 cycles with less than 8% deterioration. Although 
the surface area of the composite material, which was 1159 m2 g−1, was not as high as 
reported for other 3D RGO structures, the excellent performance was attributed to the high 
dispersion of small, 4 nm Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles that were anchored to the graphene struc­
ture. Additionally, to demonstrate that the high specific capacitance is due to the metal 
oxide material, control 3D porous tpGO scaffolds prior to nickel hydroxide coating were 
examined as a supercapacitor material. With this control, the maximum achievable specific 
capacitance was limited to ~210 F g−1, more than an order of magnitude lower than the 
capacitance reached with the addition of the nickel hydroxide material.
In addition to Ni(OH)2, MnO2 is another outstanding metal oxide candidate due to its 
significant environmental abundance, low cost and safety. However, without proper nano­
structuring, MnO2 suffers from low specific capacitance due to poor electrical conductivity 
and low surface area. Even with nanostructured MnO2 composites, the microstructure can 
be easily damaged during cycling, leading to rapid capacity fade. In a hybrid system with 
RGO, the graphene scaffold can impart high electrical conductivity and a robust 3D network 
to protect the microstructure and prevent capacity fade. Therefore, properly designed 

290
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Ni(OH)2-coated 3D porous graphene
hollow sphere framework
Modified with APS
COOH
OH
-OH
OH
Ni(OH)2
Electrodeposited
550°C
Etched with HF
SiO2
-OH
HO-
HO-
HO-
HO-
HO-
HO-
-NH2
NH2
-NH2
-NH2
-NH2
-NH2
H2N-
H2N-
H2N-
COOH
GO
O
A
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(g)
(f)
B
C
D
E
Assembly
APS-modified SiO2
APS = (CH3O)3Si(CH2)3NH2
3D porous graphene hollow
sphere framework
Graphene-encapsulated
SiO2
O-KA
O-KA
Ni-KA
Figure  8.20  Synthetic scheme (top) for the template procedure to form Ni(OH)2–tpGO 
composite framework; and (bottom) TEM images at different magnifications (a–c) and STEM 
mapping of the elemental components (d–g). Reproduced from [87] with permission from the 
PCCP Owner Societies, Copyright 2014

Energy Harvesting and Storage
291
MnO2–RGO composites are considered a promising route for improved pseudo‐capacitance 
and cycling stability. Indeed, many reports on MnO2–RGO hybrid composites exist and 
have demonstrated methods to successfully overcome the low accessible capacitance 
and cycling stability of MnO2 materials. One of the strengths of the MnO2 material is 
the extensive list of known chemical routes to generate nanomaterials with a wide variety 
of morphologies, including nanowires, nanosheets, needle‐like and hollow‐sphere 
morphologies. In one example, MnO2–RGO composites with different morphologies were 
obtained by a self‐assembly method [88]. From electrochemical testing, it was determined 
that a flower‐like nanosphere shape exhibited better capacitive performance (405 F g−1) 
than that of the nanowire shape (318 F g−1) when examined at a current density of 1.0 A g−1. 
At a lower current density of 0.2 A g−1, the specific capacitance of the flower‐like MnO2 
composite further improved to ~510 F g−1. Additionally, it was determined that the flower‐
like shape provided improved rate performance and cycling stability compared to the 
nanowire counterpart. After 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1, the flower‐like composite retained ~350 
F g−1, corresponding to a retention of ~86%. Therefore, in addition to the importance of 3D 
structuring of the RGO scaffold, this example demonstrates the importance of morphologi­
cal control and manipulation of the pseudo‐capacitive material in order to extend the cycle 
life and capacitance of the hybrid composite material.
In summary, these examples highlight the need for microscopic control of electrode design 
in order to ensure high surface area, uniform particle dispersion and porous 3D structuring 
that can lead to much greater supercapacitor performance. Pseudo‐capacitive materials 
such as conductive polymers and metal oxides offer attractive routes to high‐performance 
advanced supercapacitor materials. Conductive polymers offer advantages such as flexibility, 
high conductivity and high specific capacitance, but still suffer from limited cycle life com­
pared to their EDLC counterparts. Metal oxide materials suffer from poor rate performance 
and limited cycle life as well. Although the presence of graphene significantly improves 
the cycling stability of pseudo‐capacitive materials, the performance is not satisfactory for 
commercial integration. As future work, further improvements in electrochemical stability 
of pseudo‐capacitive composite materials are required for enabling high‐energy and high‐
power supercapacitors.
8.4  Outlook and Future Development Opportunities
Graphene oxide possesses a wide variety of useful properties derived from its unique 
atomically thin structure, which separates itself from other multi‐layer graphene platelet 
and graphite systems. For electrochemical systems such as lithium‐ion batteries and 
supercapacitors, the myriad of properties includes high surface area, mechanical strength, 
electrical conductivity, variable sheet size, flexible nature and tailorable morphology. 
Particularly, the oxygen group present on GO and its reduced versions provides a unique 
surface for a rich variety of chemical reactions for further functionalization or to synthesize 
unparalleled hybrid materials. The combination of these properties paired with advanced 
materials offers a promising route to accelerate the development of next‐generation energy 
storage technologies. Since its emergence in the literature less than a decade ago, a number 
of dramatic innovations have already been demonstrated and limitless exciting discoveries 
are still on the horizon.

292
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
References
[1]	 Bonaccorso, F.; Sun, Z.; Hasan, T.; Ferrari, A.C., Graphene photonics and optoelectronics. 
Nature Photon. 2010, 4 (9), 611–622.
[2]	 Roy‐Mayhew, J.D.; Aksay, I.A., Graphene materials and their use in dye‐sensitized solar cells. 
Chem. Rev. 2014, 114 (12), 6323–6348.
[3]	 De, S.; Coleman, J.N., Are there fundamental limitations on the sheet resistance and transmittance 
of thin graphene films? ACS Nano 2010, 4 (5), 2713–2720.
[4]	 Wassei, J.K.; Kaner, R.B., Graphene, a promising transparent conductor. Mater. Today 2010, 13 
(3), 52–59.
[5]	 Brownson, D.A.C.; Kampouris, D.K.; Banks, C.E., An overview of graphene in energy produc­
tion and storage applications. J. Power Sources 2011, 196 (11), 4873–4885.
[6]	 Vilatela, J.J.; Eder, D., Nanocarbon composites and hybrids in sustainability: a review. 
ChemSusChem 2012, 5 (3), 456–478.
[7]	 Pillot, P., The rechargable battery market and main trends, 2012–2025. Presentation at Batteries 
2012. Avicenne Energy, 2012.
[8]	 Winter, M.; Brodd, R.J., What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors? Chem. Rev. 2004, 
104 (10), 4245–4269.
[9]	 Xu, K., Nonaqueous liquid electrolytes for lithium‐based rechargeable batteries. Chem. Rev. 
2004, 104 (10), 4303–4417.
[10]	 Nie, M.Y.; Chalasani, D.; Abraham, D.P.; et al., Lithium ion battery graphite solid electro­
lyte interphase revealed by microscopy and spectroscopy. J. Phys. Chem. C 2013, 117 (3), 
1257–1267.
[11]	 Kasavajjula, U.; Wang, C.S.; Appleby, A.J., Nano‐ and bulk‐silicon‐based insertion anodes for 
lithium‐ion secondary cells. J. Power Sources 2007, 163 (2), 1003–1039.
[12]	 Yoo, E.; Kim, J.; Hosono, E.; et al., Large reversible Li storage of graphene nanosheet families 
for use in rechargeable lithium ion batteries. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (8), 2277–2282.
[13]	 Zhu, J.X.; Yang, D.; Yin, Z.Y.; et al., Graphene and graphene‐based materials for energy storage 
applications. Small 2014, 10 (17), 3480–3498.
[14]	 Mahmood, N.; Zhang, C.Z.; Yin, H.; Hou, Y.L., Graphene‐based nanocomposites for energy 
storage and conversion in lithium batteries, supercapacitors and fuel cells. J. Mater. Chem. A 
2014, 2 (1), 15–32.
[15]	 Pan, D.Y.; Wang, S.; Zhao, B.; et al., Li storage properties of disordered graphene nanosheets. 
Chem. Mater. 2009, 21 (14), 3136–3142.
[16]	 Lee, W.; Suzuki, S.; Miyayama, M., Lithium storage properties of graphene sheets derived from 
graphite oxides with different oxidation degree. Ceram. Int. 2013, 39 (Suppl. 1), S753–S756.
[17]	 Abouimrane, A.; Compton, O.C.; Amine, K.; Nguyen, S.T., Non‐annealed graphene paper as a 
binder‐free anode for lithium‐ion batteries. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114 (29), 12800–12804.
[18]	 Hu, Y.H.; Li, X.F.; Geng, D.S.; et al., Influence of paper thickness on the electrochemical 
performances of graphene papers as an anode for lithium ion batteries. Electrochim. Acta 
2013, 91, 227–233.
[19]	 Zhao, X.; Hayner, C.M.; Kung, M.C.; Kung, H.H., Flexible holey graphene paper electrodes 
with enhanced rate capability for energy storage applications. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (11), 
8739–8749.
[20]	 Wu, Z.S.; Ren, W.C.; Xu, L.; et al., Doped graphene sheets as anode materials with superhigh 
rate and large capacity for lithium ion batteries. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (7), 5463–5471.
[21]	 Sandu, I.; Moreau, P.; Guyomard, D.; et al., Synthesis of nanosized Si particles via a mechano­
chemical solid–liquid reaction and application in Li‐ion batteries. Solid State Ionics 2007, 178 
(21–22), 1297–1303.
[22]	 Maranchi, J.P.; Hepp, A.F.; Evans, A.G.; et al., Interfacial properties of the a‐Si/Cu:active–inactive 
thin‐film anode system for lithium‐ion batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2006, 153 (6), 
A1246–A1253.
[23]	 Zhang, T.; Zhang, H.P.; Yang, L. C.; et al., The structural evolution and lithiation behavior of 
vacuum‐deposited Si film with high reversible capacity. Electrochim. Acta 2008, 53 (18), 
5660–5664.

Energy Harvesting and Storage
293
[24]	 Chan, C.K.; Peng, H.L.; Liu, G.; et al., High‐performance lithium battery anodes using silicon 
nanowires. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (1), 31–35.
[25]	 Ahn, H.J.; Kim, Y.S.; Kim, W.B.; et al., Formation and characterization of Cu–Si nanocompos­
ite electrodes for rechargeable Li batteries. J. Power Sources 2006, 163 (1), 211–214.
[26]	 Liu, W.R.; Wu, N.L.; Shieh, D.T.; et al., Synthesis and characterization of nanoporous NiSi–Si 
composite anode for lithium‐ion batteries. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2007, 154 (2), A97–A102.
[27]	 Kim, H.; Han, B.; Choo, J.; Cho, J., Three‐dimensional porous silicon particles for use in high‐
performance lithium secondary batteries. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2008, 47 (52), 10151–10154.
[28]	 Magasinski, A.; Dixon, P.; Hertzberg, B.; et al., High‐performance lithium‐ion anodes using a 
hierarchical bottom‐up approach. Nature Mater. 2010, 9 (4), 353–358.
[29]	 Beattie, S.D.; Larcher, D.; Morcrette, M.; et al., Si electrodes for Li‐ion batteries – a new way 
to look at an old problem. J. Electrochem. Soc. 2008, 155 (2), A158–A163.
[30]	 Xu, W.L.; Flake, J.C., Composite silicon nanowire anodes for secondary lithium‐ion cells. 
J. Electrochem. Soc. 2010, 157 (1), A41–A45.
[31]	 Lee, J.K.; Smith, K.B.; Hayner, C.M.; Kung, H.H., Silicon nanoparticles–graphene paper 
composites for Li ion battery anodes. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46 (12), 2025–2027.
[32]	 Zhao, X.; Hayner, C.M.; Kung, M.C.; Kung, H.H., In‐plane vacancy‐enabled high‐power 
Si–graphene composite electrode for lithium‐ion batteries. Adv. Energy Mater. 2011, 1 (6), 
1079–1084.
[33]	 Yang, S.B.; Feng, X.L.; Ivanovici, S.; Mullen, K., Fabrication of graphene‐encapsulated oxide 
nanoparticles: towards high‐performance anode materials for lithium storage. Angew. Chem. 
Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (45), 8408–8411.
[34]	 Ding, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Xu, F.; et al., Preparation of nano‐structured LiFePO4/graphene composites 
by co‐precipitation method. Electrochem. Commun. 2010, 12 (1), 10–13.
[35]	 Zhou, X.F.; Wang, F.; Zhu, Y.M.; Liu, Z.P., Graphene modified LiFePO4 cathode materials for 
high power lithium ion batteries. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (10), 3353–3358.
[36]	 Wang, H.L.; Yang, Y.; Liang, Y.Y.; et al., Graphene‐wrapped sulfur particles as a rechargeable 
lithium–sulfur battery cathode material with high capacity and cycling stability. Nano Lett. 
2011, 11 (7), 2644–2647.
[37]	 Song, M.K.; Zhang, Y.G.; Cairns, E.J., A long‐life, high‐rate lithium/sulfur cell: a multifaceted 
approach to enhancing cell performance. Nano Lett. 2013, 13 (12), 5891–5899.
[38]	 Wang, C.; Wang, X.; Yang, Y.; et al., Slurryless Li2S/reduced graphene oxide cathode paper for 
high‐performance lithium sulfur battery. Nano Lett. 2015, 15 (3), 1796–1802.
[39]	 Kim, H.; Park, K.Y.; Hong, J.; Kang, K., All‐graphene‐battery: bridging the gap between super­
capacitors and lithium ion batteries. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 5728.
[40]	 Shen, J.M.; Han, K.; Martin, E.J.; et al., Upper‐critical solution temperature (UCST) polymer 
functionalized graphene oxide as thermally responsive ion permeable membrane for energy 
storage devices. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2 (43), 18204–18207.
[41]	 China Market Research Reports, Global supercapacitor market to see 21% CAGR: China Focus 
2014–2020 research report. PR Newswire. See http://www.prnewswire.com/news‐releases/
global‐supercapacitor‐market‐to‐see‐21‐cagr‐china‐focus‐2014‐2020‐research‐report‐ 
290009141.html (accessed 9 May 2016).
[42]	 Raymundo‐Pinero, E.; Leroux, F.; Beguin, F., A high‐performance carbon for supercapacitors 
obtained by carbonization of a seaweed biopolymer. Adv. Mater. 2006, 18 (14), 1877–1882.
[43]	 Qu, D.Y., Studies of the activated carbons used in double‐layer supercapacitors. J. Power 
Sources 2002, 109 (2), 403–411.
[44]	 Fischer, U.; Saliger, R.; Bock, V.; et al., Carbon aerogels as electrode material in supercapacitors. 
J. Porous Mater. 1997, 4 (4), 281–285.
[45]	 Probstle, H.; Wiener, M.; Fricke, J., Carbon aerogels for electrochemical double layer capacitors. 
J. Porous Mater. 2003, 10 (4), 213–222.
[46]	 Liu, D.; Shen, J.; Liu, N.P.; et al., Preparation of activated carbon aerogels with hierarchi­
cally porous structures for electrical double layer capacitors. Electrochim. Acta 2013, 89, 
571–576.
[47]	 Xu, G.H.; Zheng, C.; Zhang, Q.; et al., Binder‐free activated carbon/carbon nanotube paper 
electrodes for use in supercapacitors. Nano Res. 2011, 4 (9), 870–881.

294
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[48]	 Frackowiak, E.; Beguin, F., Electrochemical storage of energy in carbon nanotubes and nano­
structured carbons. Carbon 2002, 40 (10), 1775–1787.
[49]	 Frackowiak, E.; Jurewicz, K.; Delpeux, S.; Beguin, F., Nanotubular materials for supercapacitors. 
J. Power Sources 2001, 97 (8), 822–825.
[50]	 Yan, J.; Wei, T.; Fan, Z.J.; et al., Preparation of graphene nanosheet/carbon nanotube/polyani­
line composite as electrode material for supercapacitors. J. Power Sources 2010, 195 (9), 
3041–3045.
[51]	 Yan, J.; Wei, T.; Shao, B.; et al., Preparation of a graphene nanosheet/polyaniline composite 
with high specific capacitance. Carbon 2010, 48 (2), 487–493.
[52]	 Zhao, J.C.; Lai, C.Y.; Dai, Y.; Xie, J.Y., Pore structure control of mesoporous carbon as super­
capacitor material. Mater. Lett. 2007, 61 (23–24), 4639–4642.
[53]	 Lei, Z.B.; Christov, N.; Zhang, L.L.; Zhao, X.S., Mesoporous carbon nanospheres with an 
excellent electrocapacitive performance. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (7), 2274–2281.
[54]	 Wang, Q.; Yan, J.; Wei, T.; et al., Two‐dimensional mesoporous carbon sheet‐like framework 
material for high‐rate supercapacitors. Carbon 2013, 60, 481–487.
[55]	 Du, X.A.; Guo, P.; Song, H.H.; Chen, X.H., Graphene nanosheets as electrode material for 
electric double‐layer capacitors. Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55 (16), 4812–4819.
[56]	 Du, Q.L.; Zheng, M.B.; Zhang, L.F.; et al., Preparation of functionalized graphene sheets by a 
low‐temperature thermal exfoliation approach and their electrochemical supercapacitive behaviors. 
Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55 (12), 3897–3903.
[57]	 Chen, S.; Zhu, J.W.; Wang, X., One‐step synthesis of graphene–cobalt hydroxide nanocompos­
ites and their electrochemical properties. J. Phys. Chem. C 2010, 114 (27), 11829–11834.
[58]	 Zhu, Y.W.; Murali, S.; Cai, W.W.; et al., Graphene and graphene oxide: synthesis, properties, 
and applications. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (35), 3906–3924.
[59]	 Sun, Y.Q.; Wu, Q.O.; Shi, G.Q., Graphene based new energy materials. Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011, 4 (4), 1113–1132.
[60]	 Stoller, M.D.; Park, S.J.; Zhu, Y.W.; et al., Graphene‐based ultracapacitors. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 
(10), 3498–3502.
[61]	 Zhu, Y.W.; Murali, S.; Stoller, M.D.; et al., Carbon‐based supercapacitors produced by activa­
tion of graphene. Science 2011, 332 (6037), 1537–1541.
[62]	 Kierzek, K.; Frackowiak, E.; Lota, G.; et al., Electrochemical capacitors based on highly porous 
carbons prepared by KOH activation. Electrochim. Acta 2004, 49 (4), 515–523.
[63]	 Yue, Z.R.; Mangun, C.L.; Economy, J., Preparation of fibrous porous materials by chemical 
activation 1. ZnCl2 activation of polymer‐coated fibers. Carbon 2002, 40 (8), 1181–1191.
[64]	 Toles, C.; Rimmer, S.; Hower, J.C., Production of activated carbons from a Washington lignite 
using phosphoric acid activation. Carbon 1996, 34 (11), 1419–1426.
[65]	 Kim, T.; Jung, G.; Yoo, S.; et al., Activated graphene‐based carbons as supercapacitor electrodes 
with macro‐ and mesopores. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (8), 6899–6905.
[66]	 Luo, J.Y.; Jang, H.D.; Huang, J.X., Effect of sheet morphology on the scalability of graphene‐
based ultracapacitors. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (2), 1464–1471.
[67]	 Luo, J.Y.; Jang, H.D.; Sun, T.; et al., Compression and aggregation‐resistant particles of 
crumpled soft sheets. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (11), 8943–8949.
[68]	 Zhang, L.; Zhang, F.; Yang, X.; et al., Porous 3D graphene‐based bulk materials with excep­
tional high surface area and excellent conductivity for supercapacitors. Sci. Rep. 2013, 3, 1408.
[69]	 Xu, Y.X.; Lin, Z.Y.; Zhong, X.; et al., Holey graphene frameworks for highly efficient capaci­
tive energy storage. Nature Commun. 2014, 5, 4554.
[70]	 Wang, Y.G.; Li, H.Q.; Xia, Y.Y., Ordered whiskerlike polyaniline grown on the surface of 
mesoporous carbon and its electrochemical capacitance performance. Adv. Mater. 2006, 18 
(19), 2619–2623.
[71]	 Zhang, K.; Zhang, L.L.; Zhao, X.S.; Wu, J.S., Graphene/polyaniline nanofiber composites as 
supercapacitor electrodes. Chem. Mater. 2010, 22 (4), 1392–1401.
[72]	 Biswas, S.; Drzal, L.T., Multilayered nanoarchitecture of graphene nanosheets and polypyr­
role nanowires for high performance supercapacitor electrodes. Chem. Mater. 2010, 22 (20), 
5667–5671.

Energy Harvesting and Storage
295
[73]	 Fan, L.Z.; Maier, J., High‐performance polypyrrole electrode materials for redox supercapacitors. 
Electrochem. Commun. 2006, 8 (6), 937–940.
[74]	 Yan, J.; Wei, T.; Qiao, W.M.; et al., Rapid microwave‐assisted synthesis of graphene nanosheet/
Co3O4 composite for supercapacitors. Electrochim. Acta 2010, 55 (23), 6973–6978.
[75]	 Liu, J.P.; Jiang, J.; Cheng, C.W.; et al., Co3O4 nanowire@MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet core/shell 
arrays: a new class of high‐performance pseudocapacitive materials. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 (18), 
2076–2081.
[76]	 Yan, J.; Fan, Z.J.; Wei, T.; et al., Fast and reversible surface redox reaction of graphene–MnO2 
composites as supercapacitor electrodes. Carbon 2010, 48 (13), 3825–3833.
[77]	 Zhang, X.J.; Shi, W.H.; Zhu, J.X.; et al., Synthesis of porous NiO nanocrystals with controllable 
surface area and their application as supercapacitor electrodes. Nano Res. 2010, 3 (9), 643–652.
[78]	 Wu, Z.S.; Wang, D.W.; Ren, W.; et al., Anchoring hydrous RuO2 on graphene sheets for high‐
performance electrochemical capacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (20), 3595–3602.
[79]	 Wang, H.L.; Hao, Q.L.; Yang, X.J.; et al., Graphene oxide doped polyaniline for supercapacitors. 
Electrochem. Commun. 2009, 11 (6), 1158–1161.
[80]	 Meng, Y.N.; Wang, K.; Zhang, Y.J.; Wei, Z.X., Hierarchical porous graphene/polyaniline com­
posite film with superior rate performance for flexible supercapacitors. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 
(48), 6985–6990.
[81]	 Jayashree, R.S.; Kamath, P.V., Suppression of the α → β‐nickel hydroxide transformation in 
concentrated alkali: role of dissolved cations. J. Appl. Electrochem. 2001, 31 (12), 1315–1320.
[82]	 Wang, H.L.; Casalongue, H.S.; Liang, Y.Y.; Dai, H.J., Ni(OH)2 nanoplates grown on graphene 
as advanced electrochemical pseudocapacitor materials. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132 (21), 
7472–7477.
[83]	 Lee, J.W.; Ahn, T.; Soundararajan, D.; et  al., Non‐aqueous approach to the preparation of 
reduced graphene oxide/α‐Ni(OH)2 hybrid composites and their high capacitance behavior. 
Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (22), 6305–6307.
[84]	 Yan, J.; Fan, Z.J.; Sun, W.; et al., Advanced asymmetric supercapacitors based on Ni(OH)2/
graphene and porous graphene electrodes with high energy density. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012, 22 
(12), 2632–2641.
[85]	 Yan, J.; Sun, W.; Wei, T.; et al., Fabrication and electrochemical performances of hierarchical 
porous Ni(OH)2 nanoflakes anchored on graphene sheets. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (23), 
11494–11502.
[86]	 Yang, S.B.; Wu, X.L.; Chen, C.L.; et al., Spherical α‐Ni(OH)2 nanoarchitecture grown on 
graphene as advanced electrochemical pseudocapacitor materials. Chem. Commun. 2012, 48 
(22), 2773–2775.
[87]	 Zhang, F.Q.; Zhu, D.; Chen, X.; et al., A nickel hydroxide‐coated 3D porous graphene hollow 
sphere framework as a high performance electrode material for supercapacitors. Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2014, 16 (9), 4186–4192.
[88]	 Feng, X.M.; Chen, N.N.; Zhang, Y.; et al., The self‐assembly of shape controlled functionalized 
graphene–MnO2 composites for application as supercapacitors. J. Mater. Chem. A 2014, 2 (24), 
9178–9184.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
9
Graphene Oxide Membrane 
for Molecular Separation
Ho Bum Park, Hee Wook Yoon and Young Hoon Cho
9.1  Rise of Graphene‐Based Membranes: Two Approaches
Recently, membrane science and technology have played a significant role in many 
­separation industries, such as water purification and gas separation processes [1], and new 
membrane materials and processes have been extensively developed due to urgent needs 
for much more economic separation processes. Definitely, to separate specific molecules 
and ions from mixtures with high productivity, two intrinsic properties of any membrane 
materials should be taken into account in corresponding membrane separation perfor-
mance: one is membrane permeability and the other is membrane selectivity. Typically, 
polymeric membranes dominate the current global membrane market because of their low 
cost, mass production by roll‐to‐roll process, and ease of membrane formation and modu-
lation. However, theoretical and semi‐empirical upper bounds exist in terms of permeability 
and selectivity [2, 3]. Namely, highly permeable polymeric membranes show low selectiv-
ity, and vice versa. To overcome such strong trade‐off relations between permeability and 
selectivity in polymeric membranes, many new membrane materials such as carbons, 
ceramics and inorganics have been developed for better membrane separation performance 
and new membrane processes. However, scale‐up into membrane modules is still problem-
atic, compared with polymeric membranes. For example, carbon molecular sieve (CMS) 
membranes, which can be prepared from inert pyrolysis of organic polymers, commonly 
show much better membrane‐based gas separation performance than organic polymer 
membranes. However, thermal conversion is an energy‐intensive process, and also natural 

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
297
cracks in and the brittleness of the resultant CMS membranes prevent the membrane 
industries from adopting these membranes in the practical field.
Basically, graphene is one type of carbon materials, and graphene and its derivatives are 
kinds of new membrane materials to be actively considered in the present day. So why are 
graphene and graphene‐based materials now popular in the membrane science community? 
This is mainly due to the fact that graphene has many merits as a membrane material, such 
as one‐atom thickness (note that membrane flux is inversely proportional to membrane 
thickness), scalable two‐dimensional (2D) nature (related to membrane area for high flux) 
and excellent mechanical properties (related to membrane formation). However, perfect gra-
phene (here “perfect graphene” means a single‐crystal graphene sheet without any structural 
defects, such as point and line defects) cannot allow any gases or ions to penetrate through 
the graphene plane due to the hexagonal aromatic rings with high electron density [4]. That 
is to say, to make use of graphene as a selective membrane material, it is certainly necessary 
to create nanoscale or subnanoscale pores in a graphene membrane (Figure 9.1a). Such 
porous graphene would be the most ideal porous membrane that has ever existed in the 
world if precise pore engineering techniques were developed. In fact, porous graphene 
membranes with a few nanometric pores have been reported, largely by ion‐beam irradia-
tion or oxidation etching [5–7], showing ultrapermeable and more selective properties. 
However, the pore size is still too large to separate gases or ions selectively, and engineer-
ing subnanoscale pore size on a graphene sheet, direct synthesis of a porous graphene 
membrane [8] and scale‐up will be a great challenge for its practical use in the future.
As an alternative to such porous graphene, permselective membranes can be prepared 
by  using a concept to use interlayer space (slit‐like pores) between graphene sheets 
(Figure 9.1b). However, the interlayer distance between graphitic layers is as narrow as 
0.334 nm, so any gases or ions of interest in separation science cannot diffuse thorough the 
interlayer space. In this regard, graphene oxide (GO), a highly oxidized graphene sheet, 
can be considered as a graphene‐based, new membrane material that employs the 2D inter-
layer spacing for a selective diffusion or sorption channel, because the interlayer distance 
between GO sheets is in the range from 0.6 to 1.2 nm, which can allow specific molecules 
Drilling!
Stacking!
d~10 μm
(a)
(b)
L~∞
/<0.6–1.2 nm
Graphene–selective gas
and water transport through
small pores on one-atom-
thick graphene
Graphene oxide – selective
gas and water transport
through empty 2D-spacing
between layered sheets
Figure 9.1  Two distinct approaches to use graphene‐based materials as selective membrane: 
(a) porous graphene and (b) layered GO membrane

298
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
or ions to travel through the free space. In addition to this, GO has many features that 
enhance its potential utilization as a membrane material: (i) easy membrane formation as 
either freestanding or thin‐film composite, (ii) solution‐processable casting (GO is well 
dispersed in water), (iii) size controllable, (iv) possible pore engineering, and (v) further 
surface or edge modification. In general, GO has also been studied as a reinforcing nano-
material in the form of polymer composites to give excellent gas‐barrier properties because 
of its high aspect ratio [9]. However, rather than graphene itself, GO will also be a promis-
ing candidate for a membrane material if the pore width, diffusional channel and porosity 
can be easily engineered from the practical point of view.
9.2  GO Membrane: Structural Point of View
Basically, GO is a monolayer of graphite oxide. Graphite oxide was already synthesized a 
century ago via strong oxidation processes (Chapter 2) [10, 11]. GO sheets can be easily 
obtained by exfoliating graphite oxide in polar solvents such as water. Since monolayer 
graphene was experimentally discovered in 2004, the study of GO has become more popu-
lar because GO is an important raw material to mass produce graphene by eliminating the 
oxygen‐containing functional groups via chemical or thermal reduction. In general, graph-
ite oxide can be synthesized by various methods. Three major methods, in particular, 
namely (i) Brodie’s method [12], (ii) Staudenmaier’s method [13] and (iii) the Hummers–
Offeman or Hummers method [14], are well known, and these methods lead to different 
oxidation levels. These days, the Hummers method has been widely used, with many 
advantages, but impurities such as permanganate ions should be completely removed by 
hydrogen peroxide treatment and then further dialysis to obtain high‐purity GO sheets. 
Still, there are no clear comparative studies of GOs obtained from different methods for 
desirable applications, including membranes, and different oxidation levels, amounts of 
impurities and the presence of defects might arise from the various methods, and also lead 
to different properties.
Studies on the membrane applications of GO seem to be triggered by the fact that thick 
GO papers (or membranes) can be easily prepared from well‐dispersed, aqueous GO solu-
tion via vacuum filtration [15]. Ruoff’s group reported the preparation of strong, robust, 
thick GO membrane from well‐dispersed GO solution by focusing on the mechanical 
properties of the GO membranes, not any transport studies. However, in the early 1990s, 
Japanese scientists reported the presence of graphite oxide membranes (they called them 
polymerized membranes using graphite oxide suspension) [16] and carbon nanofilms 
(CNFs) of nanometer thickness, starting from the oxidation of graphite [17]. Moreover, in 
1960 Boehm, Clauss and Hofmann published the membrane properties of graphite oxide 
and found that the membranes are permeable to water [18].
The various physical and chemical properties of GO are mainly due to its complex and 
variable structure [10]. Many sketch models for GO have been proposed, but they do not 
define the exact chemical model because of the inherent heterogeneity due to the complex 
oxidation mechanism. In general, a structural model with epoxides and hydroxyls arranged 
in an orderly way in chain form on the graphene basal plane, while carboxylic groups lie at 
the GO edges, is regarded to be thermodynamically stable for GO. Basically, it is hard to 
assure or predict the intrinsic permeation properties of any gases or molecules through 

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
299
GO membranes because the chemistry of GO is not as simple as in some proposed ­structural 
models. For example, the coverage rate of hydroxyl and/or epoxide on the GO basal plane 
and the amount of carboxylic groups at the GO edges may affect the diffusion or sorption 
of molecules or ions, competing with water molecules having strong affinity for such 
­oxygen‐containing groups. Definitely, there should be still more systematic studies on 
structure–property relations for membrane applications, but in this chapter we simplify the 
layered GO membrane structure as shown in Figure 9.2. That is, we assume that a GO 
membrane has slit‐like pores formed by randomly stacking GO sheets, and that a GO sheet 
consists of sp2 (hydrophobic graphitic regions) to sp3‐hybridized carbon atoms (hydrophilic 
oxidized regions) by degree of oxidation. More generally speaking, highly oxidized GO 
shows three major regions, which are defects (or holes) (ca. 2%), graphitic regions 
(ca. 16%) and highly oxidized regions (ca. 82%). The defects in GO are due to the evolu-
tion of CO and CO2 during the aggressive oxidation and exfoliation. The graphitic regions 
are due to incomplete oxidation of the graphene basal plane, while the amorphous regions 
of the basal plane result from abundant oxygen‐containing groups (e.g. hydroxyls, epox-
ides and carbonyls) aggregated in these domains. Such different structures and the chemis-
try of GO may result in many variations for the diffusion, sorption and permeation 
properties of the resultant GO membranes.
9.3  GO Membrane for Gas Separation
Common sense suggests that 2D layered materials such as GO are usually considered for 
barrier applications [9] because of their high aspect ratio and tortuosity for molecular dif-
fusion, even if room for molecular diffusion exists in the interlayer spacing. A simple 
molecular diffusion model for regularly stacked 2D platelets was proposed by Nielsen [19] 
0.6– 1.2nm
=Hydrophobic domain
A
A
B
B
=Hydrophilic domain
=Intercalated water
=Oxygen function groups at edge
I
II
III
IV
V
Functional groups at edge
Pore entrance
=Oxygen functional groups on basal plane
Figure 9.2  Simplified GO membrane structure to be considered for molecular separation

300
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
for the case where gas molecules diffuse through a layered structure in the perpendicular 
direction. Perpendicularly oriented layered platelets increase the gas diffusion path length, 
giving rise to significant reduction of gas permeability through layered composite 
­membranes. As such, numerous studies to improve the gas‐barrier properties (e.g. oxygen 
barrier) of polymeric films have been extensively made by incorporating GO (or reduced 
GO) into the polymer matrix, and, in many cases, the gas‐barrier properties are signifi-
cantly improved by adding a small amount of GO [9]. In 2012, Geim’s group reported that 
a dry (or anhydrous) GO thick membrane (thickness ~ 500 nm) is completely impermeable 
to some liquids, vapors and gases, including helium [20], while very fast permeation of 
water through the same GO membranes was observed (Figure 9.3a) because GO is hydro-
philic due to oxygen‐containing groups and the water molecules can be readily sorbed into 
GO layers in the humidified feed conditions. As the relative humidity increases, the 
­interlayer spacing of GO layers also increases due to more intercalation of water mole-
cules, as a result, allowing the diffusion of small gas molecules through the vacant space by 
a water‐driven diffusion process. It was assumed that the GO laminates consist of crystal-
lites stacked on top of each other, and hydroxyl and epoxy groups attached to the graphene 
sheets increase the spacing between the GO sheets. Thus, the pristine graphene capillaries 
are wide open to accommodate the water molecules and the capillaries becomes narrow at 
a low relative humidity, which does not provide enough van der Waals distance to accom-
modate water molecules. As a result, water molecules can permeate through GO layers 
much faster relative to the dry state. More specifically, according to a study on the state of 
water in GO membranes, revealed by X‐ray diffraction (XRD) [21], non‐oxidized and 
hydrophobic graphitic and oxidized and hydrophilic regions coexist in GO sheets. In addi-
tion, the interlayer distance of oxidized and hydrophilic regions in GO are very susceptible 
to relative humidity during the wet–dry switching, but non‐oxidized and hydrophobic 
domains are unchanged, as shown in Figure 9.3(b). Generally, the interlayer distance of 
graphite is about 0.334 nm while that of GO is 0.6–1.2 nm due to the epoxy, hydroxyl and 
Humid helium
Helium leak rate (a. u.)
d-spacing (Å)
Dry helium
Time (h)
Time (mins)
Hydrophilic
Dry
Dry
(b)
(a)
Humid
Hydrophobic
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0
25
50
75
100 125 150
Figure 9.3  (a) Illustration (generalized) of the helium leak rate through GO film under dry 
and humidified feed conditions [20]. (b) Change of interlayer distance of hydrophilic and 
hydrophobic domains in GO under wet–dry switching. (b) Reproduced from [21] with 
permission of ACS

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
301
carbonyl groups attached to the graphene surface. Therefore, it is hard to overcome the van 
der Waals force between hydrophobic graphene sheets, so water molecules cannot diffuse 
through the capillary at a low relative humidity. However, when the hydrophilic regions in 
GO are widely opened at high relative humidity, mono‐ and bilayers of water networks 
would be formed in GO layers.
In sharp contrast, in 2013, Kim et al. [22] and Li et al. [23] simultaneously reported that 
ultrathin GO membranes, prepared on different porous media, exhibit the desired gas 
separation characteristics, and selective gas diffusion can be achieved by controlling the 
gas flow channels and pores via different stacking arrangements. At this point, many ques-
tions arise: Where does the difference come from? Is dry GO membrane a barrier or a 
selective membrane? The answer will be different, depending on GO size, GO thickness, 
amount of intercalated water, GO stacking manner, degree of oxidation and measuring 
conditions, which strongly affect the transport properties of the resultant GO membranes. 
Average GO platelet size can be tuned by original graphite size, oxidation level [24] and 
sonication [25]. Commonly, sonicated graphite oxide in water can be much exfoliated, but 
causes substantial damage to the GO platelets, which rather helps to make more permea-
ble GO membranes by reducing the diffusional path in GO membranes. As such, to 
improve gas permeability through GO membranes, small GO platelet sizes are much pre-
ferred for minimizing the pathway for permeating gases. Kim et al. [22] reported the 
change of gas permeability (in barrer unit, 1 barrer = 1 × 10−10 cm3(STP) cm cm−2 s−1 
cmHg−1) of thick GO membranes (~5 µm) in the dry state as a function of average GO size 
(300, 500 and 1000 nm). They measured the gas permeability by using a high‐vacuum 
time‐lag method, which is usually used for measuring the intrinsic gas permeability of 
dense membranes. As shown in Figure 9.4(a), the permeability of gases of interest signifi-
cantly increases as the GO size decreases, mainly due to the much shortened diffusional 
pathway for gases. In most cases, the order of gas permeability in these GO membranes 
follows the kinetic diameter of the gases (He > H2 > CO2 > O2 > N2 > CH4), indicating that 
the separation mechanism can be elucidated by molecular sieving as in typical carbon 
membranes. Only the GO membrane prepared with the GO size of 300 nm shows that the 
H2 permeability is slightly higher than the He permeability, meaning that the stacking of 
smaller GO platelet size leads to high porous structures in GO membrane. This behavior 
is often observed for CMS membranes. Based on a solution–diffusion mechanism, the 
diffusion coefficients of He and H2 are very similar, but the solubility coefficient of H2 in 
porous media is slightly higher than that of He because He is an inert gas. Roughly, by 
reducing the size by half, gas permeability becomes one order of magnitude higher. 
Moreover, the gas permeability through GO membranes with slit‐like pores or channels 
should be carefully measured by considering the potential energy barrier for gas diffusion. 
When the pressure difference (or pressure ratio) between the feed and the permeate side is 
smaller than the potential resistance for gas diffusion in the pore width, the driving force 
for gas entrance is insufficient to overcome the resistance for gas diffusion. Figure 9.4(b) 
shows H2 permeance (in GPU unit, 1 GPU = 1 × 10−6 cm3(STP) cm−2 s−1 cmHg−1) through 
thin GO‐coated microporous membranes as a function of applied feed pressure with dif-
ferent platelet GO sizes. In regions with low pressure difference, even small gases are hard 
to diffuse into the GO membrane. In addition, steric hindrance at the entrances to small 
pores significantly affects the surface barrier resistance to mass transfer, depending on the 
barrier height on the slit width.

302
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
L: average GO size
L: average GO size
Kinetic diameters of gases (Å)
Permeance (GPU)
Permeability (Barrer)
L =1000nm
3.5
101
100
10–1
10–2
10–3
2.2
2.4
H2
He
L=300nm
L=500nm
L=1000nm
CO2 O2
N2 CH4
2.6
2.8
3.0
3.2
3.4
3.6
3.8
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
90mbar
190 mbar
30
(b)
(a)
60
90
120
150
180
Applied feed pressure (mbar)
210
60mbar
L=500nm
L=3000 nm
Figure 9.4  (a) Gas permeability of thick GO membranes with different GO platelet sizes [22]. 
(b) H2 permeance of thin GO‐coated microporous membranes as a function of applied feed 
pressure [22]. Reproduced from [22] with permission of AAA Science

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
303
The GO membranes with several GO layers exhibit different selective gas transport 
behaviors, depending on the stacking arrangement of the platelets and the presence of inter-
calated water molecules in GO layers [22]. To obtain ultrathin GO layers (3–10 nm), a 
microporous polymeric membrane was used as a mechanical support layer. Also, to control 
stacking manner and the amount of intercalated water, two different coating methods were 
used. Several layered GO thin‐film composite membranes were prepared by contacting the 
support membrane surface to the air–liquid interface of a GO solution, followed by spin 
casting (method 1). The gas transport mechanism through the GO membrane shows typical 
Knudsen diffusion for which the permeance order is H2 > He > CH4 > N2 > O2 > CO2, and 
selectivity is proportional to the square root of the molecular weight ratio, except for CO2 
(Figure 9.5a). Interestingly, the permeance of CO2 is drastically reduced and reaches a 
constant value during the measurement. The GO membrane prepared by method 1 includes 
nanopores surrounded by carboxylic group‐functionalized GO edges, due to a less inter-
locked layer structure caused by preferential face‐to‐face stacking of different GO sizes 
[26, 27], meaning that most of the gas molecules diffuse through such nanopores rather 
than through the interlayer space between the GO layers. Free carboxylic acid groups or 
carboxylic anions at edges play a significant role in the strong binding with CO2 molecules 
in the presence of water, thus leading to low CO2 permeance at a low feed pressure (~1 bar). 
Although the theoretical Knudsen selectivity of H2/CO2 is 4.67, in the case of GO, the 
permselectivity increases up to 30. Similar results with GO membranes made via method 1 
were also demonstrated by other groups. Li et al. prepared an 18 nm thick GO membrane 
on an anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) support layer with 20 nm pore size by a filtration 
method, and they reported that H2/CO2 selectivity increases up to 3400 due to low CO2 
permeance, as shown Figure 9.5(b) [23]. Such low CO2 permeance is seldom observed in 
microporous or nanoporous membranes without any strong adsorption sites [28]. Polar 
groups such as carboxyl or hydroxyl at GO edges provide a relatively strong interaction 
with CO2, giving rise to the retardation of CO2 transport.
Molecular weight (amu)
Temperature (°C)
Permeance (GPU)
Log permeance (a. u.)
Log selectivity (a. u.)
1
10–1
100
101
102
103
(a)
(b)
H2
H2
Selectivity
1st coating
3ed coating
5th coating
CH4 N2O2 CO2
CO2
He
10
100
0
20
40
60
80
100
Figure  9.5  (a) Change of gas permeances of GO membrane prepared by method 1 as a 
function of coating times [22]. (b) Illustration of the H2 and CO2 permeances and selectivity of 
GO as a function of temperature [23]. (a) Reproduced from [22] with permission of AAA Science

304
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
On the other hand, other GO thin‐film composite membranes were prepared by drop-
ping a constant volume of GO solution directly onto spinning polymeric support (called 
method 2). The GO membrane formed by this method possesses a highly interlocked struc-
ture, like a brick model, including a relatively higher amount of intercalated water mole-
cules as compared to GO membranes prepared via method 1. In Figure 9.6(b), the gas 
transport mechanism shows the highest CO2 permeance, and the gas permeance order is 
CO2 > He > H2 > CH4 > O2 > N2. The CO2 permeance through the highly interlocked layered 
GO membrane is the most permeable as compared to other gases due to the water‐enhanced 
separation process and CO2/N2 selectivity reaches about 20. Interestingly, by increasing 
the relative humidity (RH) in the feed gas (0 to 85% RH), water molecules can interact 
preferentially with polar groups via hydrogen bonds, and then nanopores and interlayers 
between GO sheets can be filled with water molecules. As a result, the CO2 permeance 
drastically increases in the hydrated state because CO2 is more soluble in water than any 
other gases, based on solution–diffusion mechanism (Figure 9.6a). In addition, CO2/N2 
selectivity increases up to 60 with increasing CO2 permeance at 85% RH, as shown in 
Figure 9.6(b). That behavior is not often observed in conventional gas separation mem-
brane materials. Since many industrial gas streams (e.g. post‐combustion, natural gas puri-
fication and syngas adjustment) contain water vapor, the effect of water vapor on membrane 
separation performance still remains a significant issue to be considered in the evaluation 
of the mass transport properties of polymeric membranes. In general, water vapor strongly 
deteriorates conventional membrane performance [29]; with reduction of both permeabil-
ity and selectivity by water condensation on membrane surfaces or in membrane pores, an 
energy costly water vapor removal unit before the membrane unit is necessary. In this 
regard, water‐enhanced CO2 separation in GO membranes will be a great advantage in 
post‐combustion CO2 capture design because dehydration by condensation in the permeate 
side is easier than dehydration in the high‐pressure feed side [30, 31].
Molecular weight (amu)
Kinetic diameters of gases (A)
Gas permeance (GPU)
Selectivity (relative to He)
Gas permeance (GPU)
10–1
10–1
100
100
101
101
10–2
102
103
104
(a)
(b)
100
101
102
103
104
1
2.6 2.8 3.0
3.2 3.4
3.6 3.8
10
H2
H2
CH4
CH4
N2 O2 CO2
CO2 O2 N2
He
Uncoated PES
Uncoated PES
Dry state
Dry state
Hydrated state (85%)
Hydrated state (85%)
He
Figure 9.6  Gas permeance of GO membranes prepared by (a) method 1 and (b) method 
2 under dry and humidified feed conditions (based on single gas permeation measurement) 
[22]. Reproduced from [22] with permission of AAA Science

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
305
9.4  GO Membrane for Water Purification and Desalination
Owing to the hydrophilic nature of GO, GO membranes have also been extensively inves-
tigated for water purification and desalination applications. Joshi et al. reported the per-
meation of different ionic charges through micrometer‐thick, freestanding GO membranes 
[32]. Using a simple two‐chamber diffusion cell, they initially measured permeation rates 
with different liquids such as water, glycerol, toluene, ethanol, benzene and dimethyl sul-
foxide. No permeation was measured over a long time by monitoring liquid levels and 
using chemical analysis. However, water molecules can permeate rapidly through the GO 
membrane by osmotic pressure when the permeate side is filled with water and the feed 
side is filled with a 1 M sucrose solution. In addition, the permeability of various ions and 
organic molecules was measured by using a conductivity meter and total organic carbon 
analyzer. Several salt solutions with different ion sizes were employed to examine the salt 
permeability through GO membranes as a function of ionic size. As shown in Figure 9.7, 
relatively small sized ions such as potassium or magnesium ions can permeate fast through 
GO membranes and their permeabilities are almost the same, whereas ions with larger sizes 
and organic molecules showed no detectable permeation rate through the same GO mem-
branes. They proposed that ions or molecules dissolved in water can permeate rapidly 
through the graphene nanocapillaries until the physical size of the ions or molecules 
exceeds the critical one, which is approximately 4.5 Å. To explain this observation, they 
used the same model previously suggested to elucidate the unimpeded evaporation of water 
through GO membranes [20]; in a GO crystallite, highly oxidized domains act as spacers 
that keep adjacent crystallites apart and also prevent them from being dissolved. These 
spacers let water molecules insert easily in the interlayer of GO, but hydrophobic graphitic 
domains provide a network of capillaries that allow nearly frictionless flow of correlated 
water. Similar results can be found in the water transport through carbon nanotubes [33]. 
Magnesium ions
Time (h)
Chloride
0
5
10
15
20
3
(a)
(b)
4
5
6
Ions permeated (a. u.)
Permeation rate (a. u.)
Hydrated radius (Å)
Glycerol
[Ru(biby)3]2+
[Fe(CN)6]3–
Propanol
AsO4
3–
K+
Mg2+
Figure 9.7  (a) Illustration of the permeation through a 5 mm thick GO membrane from the 
feed compartment with a 0.2 M solution of MgCl2. (b) Illustration of the permeation rate 
through the GO membrane as a function of hydrated ion radius [32]

306
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Generally, the model seems to be in a good agreement with their experimental data. 
However, this model is still too simplified to reflect the complicated chemistry and structure 
of the real GO membrane structure related to water and ion permeability.
Hu et al. prepared a GO thin‐film composite (TFC) membrane for nanofiltration (NF) 
applications. Thin GO was coated on a microporous polysulfone support membrane that was 
treated with polydopamine to become hydrophilic and then cross‐linked by trimesoyl chlo-
ride (TMC) [34]. Because the polysulfone membrane is hydrophobic, hydrophilic surface 
modification is necessary to coat the hydrophilic GO layer on the polysulfone membrane. 
Polydopamine is a bio‐inspired material that is widely used for hydrophilic surface modifi-
cation, resulting in much improved adhesion properties with the hydrophilic GO layer.
In addition, for strong integrity of the GO thin layer and increasing interlayer space, 
TMC was used as a cross‐linking agent. The water flux though the cross‐linked GO TFC 
membrane was in the range from 8 to 27.6 l m−2 h−1 bar−1, as shown in Figure  9.8(a). 
0
1400
(a)
1200
1000
Water flux (l\m2 -h-MPa)
200
0
5
7
15
25
100
(c)
(b)
(b)
80
60
40
Rejection (%)
20
0
0
5 7
15
Number of GO layers
25
Na2SO4
NaCl
40
Number of GO layers
50
0.1
100
80
60
40
Rejection (%)
20
0
(c) 15 GO layers
NaCl
Na2SO4
Concentration (mM)
R-WT
MB
1
10
Figure 9.8  (a) Water flux through a GO thin membrane as a function of number of GO layers. 
(b) Rejection of monovalent and divalent ions in a GO thin membrane as a function of salt 
concentration. (c) Rejection of dye (MB, methylene blue; R‐WT, rhodamine‐WT) and salts in a 
GO thin membrane as a function of number of GO layers. Reproduced from [34] with 
permission of ACS

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
307
Those values are roughly 4–10 times higher than that of most conventional NF membranes. 
However, as depicted in Figure 9.8(b) and (c), the rejection of monovalent and divalent 
salts is relatively low (6–46%), while exhibiting moderate rejection of methylene blue, and 
a high rejection of rhodamine‐WT.
Thin base‐refluxing reduced GO (bRGO) membranes were prepared by filtering bRGO 
flakes on porous support substrates [35]. Differing from RGO synthesized using a strong 
reduction agent such as hydrazine, the bRGO was partially reduced by adding base solution 
such as NaOH or KOH. Based on XRD data, as shown in Figure 9.9(a), there are two dis-
tinguishable peaks of GO and RGO, meaning that hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains 
coexist in bRGO. Although hydrophobic domains are increased by partial reduction, thin 
bRGO membranes still exhibit high water flux (21.8 l m−2 h−1 bar−1, as shown in Figure 9.9b), 
with high dye rejection. Supposedly, the high water flux through partially reduced GO 
membranes might be due to slip flow between hydrophobic graphene sheets, as happens 
inside carbon nanotubes. To determine the effect of charge, the fluxes of solvents such as 
isopropanol, ethanol, hexane, cyclohexane and toluene were measured. Among them, hex-
ane, the most hydrophobic liquid, shows the lowest flux, mainly due to the slip flow theory 
that a more hydrophobic liquid would lead to lower flux under the same pressure owing to 
greater interaction between the hydrophobic liquid and the hydrophobic graphene planes. 
However, the molecular size of the liquid, as compared with that of water, should be con-
sidered along with the interlayer spacing (or pore width), and also hydrophilic–hydrophobic 
repulsion should be considered for that phenomenon. In addition, oxygen moieties in 
hydrophilic domains would impede the transport of water due to the strong interaction 
between them. On the other hand, the graphene domains without any oxygen functional 
groups would be responsible for the rapid water transport.
The nanostrand‐channeled GO (NSC‐GO) membranes for ultrafiltration (UF) prepared 
by Huang et al. [36] were formed by filtering a mixed dispersion with electronegative GO 
and positively charged copper hydroxide nanostrands (CHNs). The 3–5 nm of nanostrand 
brGO loading/mg m–2
Intensity
1: brGO
2: Thermally treated brGO
3: Hydrazine-reduced GO
Flux/L m–2 h–1 bar–1
10
20
30
40
50
60
2 θ
15
25
(a)
(b)
20
15
10
5
3
2
1
0
20
25
30
35
Figure  9.9  (a) XRD patterns of base‐refluxing reduced GO, hydrazine‐reduced GO and 
thermally treated bRGO at 220 °C in vacuum. (b) Variation of pure water flux as a function of 
bRGO loading coated on the membranes. Reproduced from [35] with permission of John 
Wiley & Sons

308
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
channels are created in GO layers by removing the CHNs. The membrane performance 
showed extremely high water flux (695 l m−2 h−1 bar−1) with high rejection properties 
(Figure 9.10a). Interestingly, water flux and rejection in GO membranes exhibited pressure‐
dependent character. Water flux does not increase linearly with increasing feed pressure, 
and also the dye rejection of Evans blue (EB) gradually decreases with increasing feed 
pressure, and the rejection increases again at a certain pressure. Since water molecules are 
trapped between GO layers, water pockets are formed by increasing pressure. The shape of 
the water pockets changes from round into a flattened rectangle as the pressure is increased 
as high as 7.5 bar. The flattened rectangle is continuously compressed into round ripples as 
the pressure further increases to as high as 15 bar, as shown in Figure 9.10(b) and (c). When 
0.0
0.2 0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0 1.2
1.4
1.6
100
2,500
Zone I
Zone II
Zone III
2,250
2,000
1,750
1,500
1,250
1,000
750
500
90
80
70
60
50
40
Pressure (MPa)
Water ﬂux (I m–2 h–1 bar–1)
Rejection rate (%)
(a)
Loading
Unloading
40
35
30
0.5
I
II
III
1.0
Pressure (MPa)
(b)
Cross-sectional area (nm2)
1.5
Water
(c)
Pressure
Figure 9.10  (a) Pressure‐dependent flux and rejection of EB molecules of NSC‐GO membrane 
under different pressure. The curves marked by black solid squares and red solid circles 
represent the flux variation during the first and third pressure‐loading processes, respectively. 
The curve marked by blue solid triangles denotes the rejection rate of EB during the first 
pressure‐loading process. (b) Simulated changes in the cross‐sectional area of a nanochannel 
by varying the applied pressure. (c) The response of a half cylindrical GO nanochannel 
modelled in molecular dynamics simulation. Reproduced from [36] with permission of Nature 
Publishing Group

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
309
the channel is flattened, the cross‐sectional area increases, and thus the permeation of EB 
molecules is significantly enhanced. During further compression, consecutive shrinkage of 
the nanochannels will reduce the cross‐sectional area and increase the rejection rate again. 
Also, the compressed small nanochannels will almost recover to the original state after the 
pressure is released, which is reasonable because the strain energy stored in the water‐
containing curved GO sheets is high enough to overcome the van der Waals forces at the 
contact region of the newly formed smaller nanochannels.
GO composite polyamide (PA) TFC membranes were prepared by Bano et al. [37] for 
NF applications. In membrane preparation, GO was dispersed in aqueous amine monomer 
(e.g. 1,3‐phenylene diamine (MPD)) solution. After soaking a porous support layer in 
MPD/GO solution, the excessive solution on the support layer was removed. Then, the 
interfacial polymerization was performed by contacting the membrane surface with TMC 
solution. As a result, GO composite PA TFC membranes with various GO compositions 
were obtained. The water flux of GO composite PA TFC membrane increases with increas-
ing GO composition, while the salt rejection was maintained at a high level due to the 
hydrophilicity of GO. In addition, hydrophilic GO composite PA TFC membranes showed 
improved anti‐fouling properties compared to pristine PA TFC membranes.
A few simulation studies on mass transport through GO membranes as well as porous 
graphene membranes have been reported. However, it is hard to perform simulations on 
GO membranes since the structure and chemistry of GO are much more complicated than 
those of graphene or porous graphene. As shown in Figure 9.11(a), a simulation on water 
and ion transport through graphene oxide framework (GOF) membranes were performed 
by Nicolaï et al. [38]. GOF is a recently synthesized nanoporous material prepared with 
GO layers cross‐linked by linear linker molecules (boronic acid). In Figure 9.11(b), the 
effect of linear linker concentration and membrane thickness on the transport properties of 
GOF membranes were investigated by using molecular dynamics simulations. The simu-
lated ultrathin GOF membranes show better water desalination properties with excellent 
water flux and salt rejection properties compared to conventional desalination membranes. 
However, the preparation of such thin GOF membranes might be a great challenge; current 
polymeric desalination membranes are still keeping their top position in existing desalination 
technologies.
9.5  Other Membrane Applications
9.5.1  Fuel Cell Membrane
In general, every fuel cell consists of an anode, cathode and electrolyte. Currently, polymer 
electrolyte fuel cells (so‐called PEMFC) are one of the most commercially available fuel 
cell technologies owing to their simplicity, rapid start‐up and low operation temperature. 
A polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) is a key component in a PEMFC, and most PEMs 
are sulfonated ionomers, such as Nafion, because they have high proton conductivity and 
act as a separator between anode and cathode. Recently, GO has been considered as a 
­proton‐exchange membrane for fuel cells by using pure GO membranes or by incorporat-
ing GO into conventional ionomers. Interestingly, Tateishi et al. [39] reported the fuel 
cell performance by employing a GO thick membrane, showing proton conductivities of 

310
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
10−2 to 10−1 S cm−1 at 60–100% RH at room temperature, which is comparable to that of 
current Nafion membranes. Of course, proton conduction mechanisms through dry or 
hydrated GO membranes are not clear yet and also partial reduction during electrochemical 
reaction or at elevated temperature could be problematic. In addition, chemical, mechani-
cal and long‐term stability in severe fuel cell operation conditions should be further checked 
for practical applications, but the early result is very promising to explore a new type of 
fuel cell based on GO.
9.5.2  Ion‐Selective Membrane for Next‐Generation Batteries
Electrochemical energy storage systems such as rechargeable batteries have been 
­extensively used to store electrical energy. Every electrochemical energy storage device 
generally ­consists of electrodes (i.e. cathode and anode), electrolytes and separators 
Water permeability [L/cm2/day/MPa]
100
101
102
103
GOF
CNT
nG
Gy
100
(a)
Water permeability [L/cm2/day/MPa]
Membrane thickness [nm]
10-5 10-4 10-3 10-2 10-1
100
101
102
103
104
103
102
101
n=16
n=32
n=64
MFI
SWRO
BWRO
HFRO
NF
GOF
100
(b)
80
60
40
Salt rejection [%]
CNT-(8,8)
Gy–5
CNT-(5,5)
CNT-(6,6)
CNT-(7,7)
nG-H nG-OH
Gy–4
Gy–3
Figure 9.11  (a) Water desalination performance chart for GOF membranes compared to 
existing theoretical work on carbon‐based materials. The labels are: CNT, carbon nanotube; 
nG, nanoporous graphene; and Gy, graphyne. (b) Water desalination performance chart for 
GOF membranes compared to existing organic and inorganic membrane technologies. 
Reproduced from [38] with permission of RSC

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
311
(i.e. ion‐selective membrane). Since the great success of Li‐ion batteries in the 1990s, 
many portable electronic devices and electrical vehicles have been developed, and in the 
future the development of rechargeable energy storage systems with high energy density 
will be urgently needed for next‐generation transportation and energy harvesting/storage 
from renewable energy resources. Recently, lithium–air and lithium–sulfur batteries have 
been considered for next‐generation high‐energy‐density batteries. However, these ­batteries 
suffer from rapid capacity degradation and poor cycling stability. To solve this problem, 
Huang et al. [40] used permselective GO membranes in a lithium–sulfur battery configura-
tion for high stability. They reported that high permselectivity of lithium ions over 
­polysulfide anions of GO membranes helps to improve anti‐self‐discharging properties, 
mainly due to both the physical barrier effect and the chemical barrier effect with oxygen-
ated functional groups of GO membranes.
9.5.3  Dehydration
Pervaporation (PV) is an effective membrane separation process for diluting solutions con-
taining trace or minor amounts of the component to be removed. Based on the solution–­
diffusion mechanism, the PV process can separate mixtures of liquids by partial vaporization 
through non‐porous membranes. Usually, hydrophilic polymeric membranes are used for 
dehydration of alcohols containing small amounts of water, while hydrophobic polymeric 
membranes are employed for removal of trace amounts of volatile organic compounds 
from aqueous solutions. Differing from other experiments, Huang and coworkers [41] pre-
pared GO‐coated ceramic hollow fiber membranes by a vacuum suction method and they 
tried to separate water from dimethyl carbonate (DMC)/water mixtures by using a PV 
process. As a result, the GO‐coated hollow fiber membranes showed efficiently selective 
water permeation performance for low‐toxicity and degradable DMC. To explain the high 
water/DMC selectivity, they applied a typical solution–diffusion mechanism, that is, GO 
can sorb water more preferentially than DMC because of the presence of polar groups for 
hydrogen bonding with water, and also the water diffusivity is much faster than for other 
molecules; thus, selective and faster water permeation is the result of contributions of both 
enhanced diffusivity and solubility. As such, a solution–diffusion mechanism is effective to 
elucidate current results. That is, the permeants dissolve in the membrane material and then 
diffuse through the membrane down a concentration gradient. An effective separation can 
be achieved between different permeants because of differences in the amount of material 
that dissolves in the membrane and the rate at which the material diffuses through the 
membrane. Here, diffusion through the membrane is the rate‐limiting step in the mass 
transport across a membrane.
9.6  Conclusions and Future Prospects
Membrane‐based gas and liquid separation processes have several advantages over conven-
tional separation technologies in industry. However, new membrane platforms still need 
further development due to exacting criteria for competing with other separation technolo-
gies. High permeability and selectivity of separation are the keys to membranes suitable for 
applications. At this point, graphene and its derivatives are promising membrane materials 

312
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
among various nanomaterials due to their 2D platform, ease of thin‐film formation and 
scalability. In particular, GO has emerged as a rising star material that can separate mole-
cules and ions with high precision. Owing to its excellent membrane properties, we believe 
that GO will be a promising carbon material for a wide variety of membrane applications, 
as several research groups have reported outstanding separation properties related to GO or 
modified GO membranes to support the versatile future of the GO membrane. Compared 
with other membrane materials, the GO membrane is definitely quite a new and promising 
membrane material due to easy membrane formation, scalability and versatile applications. 
However, several important issues need to be solved before membrane applications become 
reality. Precise diffusion channel engineering with high porosity and coating on large‐area 
porous mechanical support layers are key challenges. Both theoretical and experimental 
mass transport or separation properties of GO membranes have to be studied more intensely, 
considering thicker and thinner membranes. Although GO membranes are more feasible 
for practical membrane applications, long diffusion paths due to high aspect ratio lead to 
low permeance. Moreover, the membrane performance of GO can be significantly affected 
by platelet size, thickness, the presence of intercalated water and surface chemistry. To 
improve the separation performance of current GO membranes, smaller flake size, reduced 
thickness, controlled interlayer spacing and precise pore engineering with high porosity on 
GO sheets should be further considered for real applications. Furthermore, the chemical 
and mechanical stability of GO membranes should be further investigated under some 
harsh membrane operation conditions.
References
[1]	 Baker, R.W., Membrane Technology and Applications, 3rd edn. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 
Chichester, 2012.
[2]	 Robeson, L.M., The upper bound revisited. J. Membrane Sci. 2008, 320 (1–2), 390–400.
[3]	 Geise, G.M.; Park, H.B.; Sagle, A.C.; et  al., Water permeability and water/salt selectivity 
­tradeoff in polymers for desalination. J. Membrane Sci. 2011, 369 (1), 130–138.
[4]	 Bunch, J. S.; Verbridge, S. S.; Alden, J. S.; et  al., Impermeable atomic membranes from 
­graphene sheets. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (8), 2458–2462.
[5]	 Fischbein, M.D.; Drndić, M., Electron beam nanosculpting of suspended graphene sheets. Appl. 
Phys. Lett. 2008, 93 (11), 113107.
[6]	 Bell, D.C.; Lemme, M.C.; Stern, L.A.; et al., Precision cutting and patterning of graphene with 
helium ions. Nanotechnology 2009, 20 (45), 455301.
[7]	 Celebi, K.; Buchheim, J.; Wyss, R.M.; et al., Ultimate permeate across atomically thin porous 
graphene. Science 2014, 344 (6181), 289–292.
[8]	 Bieri, M.; Treier, M.; Cai, J.; et al., Porous graphenes: two‐dimensional polymer synthesis with 
atomic precision. Chem. Commun. 2009, 2009 (45), 6919–6921.
[9]	 Yoo, B.M.; Shin, H.J.; Yoon, H.W.; Park, H.B., Graphene and graphene oxide and their uses in 
barrier polymers. J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2014, 131 (1), 39628.
[10]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[11]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Chemical reduction of graphene oxide: a synthetic chemistry view-
point. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (1), 291–312.
[12]	 Brodie, B.C., On the atomic weight of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. London 1859, 14, 249–259.
[13]	 Staudenmaier, L., Verfahren zur Darstellung der Graphitsäure. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1898, 31 
(2), 1481–1487.
[14]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R. E., Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 
80 (6), 1339.

Graphene Oxide Membrane for Molecular Separation
313
[15]	 Dikin, D.A.; Stankovich, S.; Zimney, E.J.; et al., Preparation and characterization of graphene 
oxide paper. Science 2007, 448 (7152), 457–460.
[16]	 Hwa, T.; Kokufuta, E.; Tanaka, T., Conformation of graphite oxide membranes in solution. 
Phys. Rev. A 1991, 44, R2235–R2238.
[17]	 Horiuchi, S.; Gotou, T.; Fujiwara, M.; et al., Carbon nanofilm with a new structure and property. 
Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 2003, 42, L1073–L1076.
[18]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Hofmann, U., Graphite oxide and its membrane properties. J. Chim. 
Phys. 1960, 58 (12), 110–117.
[19]	 Nielsen, L.E., Models for the permeability of filled polymer systems. J. Macromol. Sci. Chem. 
1967, 1 (5), 929–942.
[20]	 Nair, R.; Wu, H.; Jayaram, P.; et al., Unimpeded permeation of water through helium‐leak‐tight 
graphene‐based membranes. Science 2012, 335 (6067), 442–444.
[21]	 Zhu, J.; Andres, C.M.; Xu, J.D.; et al., Pseudonegative thermal expansion and the state of water 
in graphene oxide layered assemblies. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (9), 8357–8365.
[22]	 Kim, H.W.; Yoon, H.W.; Yoon, S.‐M.; et  al., Selective gas transport through few‐layered 
­graphene and graphene oxide membranes. Science 2013, 342 (6154), 91–95.
[23]	 Li, H.; Song, Z.; Zhang, X.; et al., Ultrathin, molecular‐sieving graphene oxide membranes for 
selective hydrogen separation. Science 2013, 342 (6154), 95–98.
[24]	 Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Graphene‐based composite thin films for electronics. Nano Lett. 2009, 
9 (2), 814–881.
[25]	 Zhang, L.; Liang, J.; Huang, Y.; et al., Size‐controlled synthesis of graphene oxide sheets on a 
large scale using chemical exfoliation. Carbon 2009, 47 (14), 3365–3368.
[26]	 Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; Huang, J., Langmuir − Blodgett assembly of graphite oxide single layers. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 131 (3), 1043–1049.
[27]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; et al., Graphene oxide sheets at interfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 
132 (23), 8180–8186.
[28]	 Boffa, V.; ten Elshof, J.E.; Petukhov, A.V.; Blank, D.H., Microporous niobia–silica membrane 
with very low CO2 permeability. ChemSusChem 2008, 1 (5), 437–443.
[29]	 Scholes, C.A.; Kentish, S.E.; Stevens, G.W., Effects of minor components in carbon dioxide 
capture using polymeric gas separation membranes. Sep. Purif. Rev. 2009, 38 (1), 1–44.
[30]	 Park, H.B., Graphene‐based membranes  –  a new opportunity for CO2 separation. Carbon 
Managem. 2014, 5 (3), 251–253.
[31]	 Kim, H.W.; Yoon, H.W.; Yoo, B.M.; et al., High‐performance CO2‐philic graphene oxide mem-
branes under wet‐conditions. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50 (88), 13563–13566.
[32]	 Joshi, R.; Carbone, P.; Wang, F.; et al., Precise and ultrafast molecular sieving through graphene 
oxide membranes. Science 2014, 343 (6172), 752–754.
[33]	 Holt, J.K.; Park, H.G.; Wang, Y.; et al., Fast mass transport through sub‐2‐nanometer carbon 
nanotubes. Science 2006, 312 (5776), 1034–1037.
[34]	 Hu, M.; Mi, B., Enabling graphene oxide nanosheets as water separation membranes. Environ. 
Sci. Technol. 2013, 47 (8), 3715–3723.
[35]	 Han, Y.; Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Ultrathin graphene nanofiltration membrane for water purification. 
Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23 (29), 3693–3700.
[36]	 Huang, H.; Song, Z.; Wei, N.; et al., Ultrafast viscous water flow through nanostrand‐channelled 
graphene oxide membranes. Nature Commun. 2013, 4, 2979.
[37]	 Bano, S.; Mahmood, A.; Kim, S.‐J.; Lee, K.‐H., Graphene oxide modified polyamide nanofil-
tration membrane with improved flux and antifouling properties. J. Mater. Chem. A 2015, 3 (5), 
2065–2071.
[38]	 Nicolaï, A.; Sumpter, B.G.; Meunier, V., Tunable water desalination across graphene oxide 
framework membranes. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2014, 16 (18), 8646–8654.
[39]	 Tateishi, H.; Hatakeyama, K.; Ogata, C.; et al., Graphene oxide fuel cell. J. Electrochem. Soc. 
2013, 160 (11), F1175–F1178.
[40]	 Huang, J.‐Q.; Zhuang, T.‐Z.; Zhang, Q.; et al., Permselective graphene oxide membrane for 
highly stable and anti‐self‐discharge lithium–sulfur batteries. ACS Nano 2015, 9 (3), 3002–3011.
[41]	 Huang, K.; Liu, G.; Lou, Y.; et al., A graphene oxide membrane with highly selective molecular 
separation of aqueous organic solution. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (27), 6929–6932.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
10
Graphene Oxide‐Based 
Composite Materials
Mohsen Moazzami Gudarzi, Seyed Hamed Aboutalebi and Farhad Sharif
10.1  Introduction
The discovery of the extraordinary properties of two‐dimensional (2D) materials, espe-
cially those of graphene, in 2004 shook the physics community, and soon after the world 
of materials science [1, 2]. The recent graphene‐related research in chemistry was inspired 
by the earlier research on carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphite [2, 3]. Digging through 
those studies led the Nobel Prize winners to the first concrete observation of “real atomi-
cally thin” graphene. Similar material had been reported well before 2004 by chemists who 
were working on graphite oxide. However, at that time, the significance of their report was 
not recognized [3]. Graphene research in chemistry has roughly 150 years of historical 
background but it has only been in the past 10 years that research in this area has boomed. 
We begin this chapter with a review of the earlier research on graphite (oxide). We then 
briefly discuss research on graphene oxide (GO). Next, the research on GO is compared 
with that of CNTs. This brief review at the beginning of the chapter aims to provide an 
insight into the opportunities and challenges we are dealing with in GO‐based materials 
and composites.
Graphite is a natural form of carbon, which was discovered more than five centuries ago. 
The unique physical and mechanical properties of graphite create many opportunities for 
this form of carbon to be used in a wide range of applications, such as refractories, batter-
ies, lubricants, etc. [4, 5]. The cornerstone of the unique properties of graphite lies in its 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
315
atomic structure, with layers of honeycomb carbon atoms. Carbon atoms bond together 
with sp2 hybridization, on a layer plane (graphene), generating π electrons with high mobil-
ity. As a result, the carbon atoms in the basal plane bond covalently whereas the carbon 
layers in the c‐direction (perpendicular to the basal plane) are held together by van der 
Waals interactions, which are orders of magnitude weaker than covalent bonds [6]. 
Figure 10.1 illustrates the atomic structure of graphite. More information on the structure 
and physical properties of graphite can be found elsewhere [4–6].
The aim of this section is to provide an oversight on the evolution of graphite‐based 
composite materials, due to their potential impact on the development of the next gen-
eration of this class of materials, i.e. graphene‐based composites. To this end, a brief 
history is presented on the attempts made to harness the unique properties of graphite to 
improve a wide range of polymeric matrices. In fact, many recent studies on graphenic 
composites are similar to the previous attempts [7–9]. Developing new routes to synthe-
size and functionalize graphene sheets is just a new tool for the same design principles 
and purposes.
Introducing fullerenes and CNTs also had a tremendous impact on the field of polymer 
nanocomposites [10–13]. Over the past three decades, efforts on designing and developing 
composite materials based on these two forms of carbon have provided generic principles 
that can be employed for formulating their graphene‐based counterparts [12, 13]. This 
is even more valid for the functionalization and assembly of carbonic particles [12–15]. 
There are many strategies for treating graphene that are simply duplicated from the 
work on CNTs [9, 15]. Reviewing and analyzing these similarities and differences give 
more insights, in general, into material design, and, more specifically, into carbon‐based 
composites.
B′
3.35 Å
1.42 Å
A′
Y
Z
A
B
X
Figure  10.1  The crystal structure of graphite. Reproduced from [6] with permission of 
Springer

316
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
10.1.1  How Graphite Met Polymers?
Graphite’s physical properties, such as very high thermal and electrical conductivity, were 
known even before the advent of synthetic polymers [4, 5]. With the advent of polymers, 
polymeric resins and graphite were mixed together with the goal of producing novel com-
posite materials. Much focus in this regard was made on the fabrication of electrically and/
or thermally conductive composites or improving the tribomechanical properties of poly-
meric resins [4, 5, 16, 17]. These efforts led to the development of commercially available 
graphite‐based composites.
Graphite is the most abundant natural form of carbon (the annual production of graphite 
exceeds 106 tonnes), and as a result it is an inexpensive mineral (a few US dollars per kilo-
gram) [18]. The in‐plane conductivity of graphite is in the order of 104 S cm−1, which is 
more than 10 orders of magnitude higher than that for general‐purpose polymers [6]. Other 
common choices that are used to improve a polymer’s conductivity include metal particles, 
carbon black or carbon fibers. However, graphite exhibits some advantages over those 
options. It has lower density, higher chemical resistivity and lower cost compared to metal 
particles. It is also less expensive compared to other carbon forms [6, 16, 17]. This makes 
graphite an attractive candidate for the fabrication of electrically conductive resins and 
adhesives. Graphite‐based conductive coatings and inks are the most commercially avail-
able form of this class of composites [19].
The first effort to make polymer–graphite composites dates back to 1915 by Aylsworth 
[20, 21]. As a general rule, in particulate composites, the use of finer particles, which are 
less agglomerated and well exfoliated, results in better properties. This was true even for 
the earliest attempt in which they used expanded graphite instead of graphite flakes [21]. 
The main objective of the later attempts was to improve the state of dispersion of graphite 
flakes in polymer matrices, and the interfacial interaction between the two phases [21, 22]. 
Difficulties in tuning the interaction of graphite and polymers originate from the relatively 
inert nature, and also high surface energy of the graphite. The latter became a topic of gen-
eral interest because the principles of engineering the graphite–polymer interface could be 
applied to other classes of carbon‐based composites [23].
From the very beginning of the research on graphite, the flaky appearance of graphite 
was attributed to its layered structure [24]. However, it was not till the 1930s that the X‐ray 
diffraction (XRD) technique was introduced and confirmed the layered structure of graph-
ite, with an interlayer distance of ~3.4 Å [25]. Similar to many layered materials, graphite 
can be intercalated with small molecules or atoms. These intercalated structures are called 
graphite intercalated compounds (GICs). Progress in the synthesis and understanding of 
the chemical structure of GICs made a big contribution to the current understanding of 
chemically derived graphene [3, 26, 27]. Wide ranges of chemicals can intercalate into the 
graphite interlayer, such as inorganic acids, alkali metals and halogens [26]. Observation of 
peculiar electronic and physical properties, such as superconductivity in alkali‐metal‐based 
GICs, attracted a great deal of attention from the physics community [26, 28]. These stud-
ies brought inspiration and the basis for the graphene era after 2004 [3].
The synthesis of acid‐based GICs, which dates back to 1841, is done by treating graphite 
flakes with strong acids or mixtures of strong oxidizers [29]. It was then discovered that the 
sudden vaporization of the intercalate molecules results in the expansion of graphite [30]. 
The expansion ratio (the ratio of the initial volume to the final volume) can easily exceed 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
317
300. In fact, due to the confinement of the intercalate within the graphene layers, a thermal 
shock provides significant pressure, which eventually can overcome the van der Waals 
interaction and exfoliate the graphite into thinner pieces [31]. It should be noted that GICs 
can be exfoliated by other chemicals or by electrochemical methods, but thermal expansion 
is the most common route for the exfoliation of graphite [32] (Figure 10.2). More details 
about GICs and the exfoliation of graphite can be found elsewhere [30–34].
Although the fabrication of polymer–graphite composites began in the mid‐nineteenth 
century [20, 21], it was the renewed interest and research of the early 1990s inspired by 
Toyota’s breakthroughs in nanocomposites that introduced a new paradigm to polymer 
composites [36, 37]. With the goal of perfect exfoliation and dispersion of graphite mon-
olayers, i.e. graphene, in polymeric matrices, many studies were conducted mostly by 
chemical intercalation and exfoliation of graphite [22, 33, 38]. At the same time, the dis-
covery of CNTs triggered the second hit for the development of science and technology 
needed for polymer nanocomposites [11]. Therefore, in the early 2000s, the reasons for 
studying composites based on graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs) were motivated by the 
DC bias
GNP
Exfoliation
EtOH
KOEt
K
100 μm
100 nm
(a)
(c)
(b)
Pt wire
Electrolyte
HOPG or
graphite
Figure  10.2  Graphite exfoliation. (a) A scanning electron microscope image of thermally 
expanded graphite, resulting in “accordion‐like” morphology consisting of graphite 
nanoplatelets with a thickness of a few nanometers (inset). (b) Intercalation of graphite with 
metal atoms and subsequent chemical reaction result in exfoliation and delamination of 
graphite into thin nanoplatelets. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [34]. Copyright 2005 
Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) A typical setup for electrochemical exfoliation of a graphite 
electrode. Reproduced from [35] with permission of ACS

318
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
following fact: GNPs are layered and inexpensive, like clay, and at the same time they are 
thermo‐electrically conductive like CNTs [22]. However, despite some promising results, 
the performance of GNP‐based composites did not rule out the use of its two counterparts 
because of the lack of systematic routes to disintegrate graphite into graphene and incorpo-
rate it into polymers [22, 39, 40]. In fact, many of those recent works on GNPs borrowed 
the dispersion and functionalization strategies from the two other counterparts. More 
details on these classes of composites are now available in several books and review reports 
[22, 39–42].
During the 1960s, a German team led by Ulrich Hofmann performed systematic studies 
on an old form of graphite (even at that time, it was old!), i.e. graphite oxide [42–44]. Those 
studies barely caught the attention for the fabrication of composite materials and if it were 
not for the “discovery” of graphene, they would still have been forgotten [3, 44, 45]. In fact, 
graphene is an example in the history of science where its first observation was too early to 
be digested by the scientific communities [3]. In the next subsection, a brief history of 
graphite oxide‐based composites and realization of GO is discussed.
10.1.2  Graphite Oxide‐Based Composites
Since the report on the synthesis of graphite oxide (GrO) in the mid‐nineteenth century 
[24], it has been found that GrO is much more hydrophilic than graphite. It was well known 
that GrO can be easily dispersed in water especially in basic media [43, 44]. Further studies 
also showed that the layered structure of graphite is retained in GrO but the interlayer dis-
tance is much higher than that of graphite [45, 46]. Due to the heavily oxidized nature of 
GrO, it does have acidic properties and GrO is deoxygenated by chemical reducing agents 
or by “thermal reduction” [43, 44]. The exact chemical structure of GrO was not clear 
(which it is still not – recent studies propose that GrO is chemically amorphous and meta-
stable!), but the nature of the main oxygen groups and the level of oxidation were known 
by the 1990s [43–49]. Despite of very old historical background and having a general pic-
ture of the chemical structure and properties of GrO, the amount of work on GrO‐based 
composites was not noticeable till recently. However, these early works and ideas on GrO‐
based materials were revived in the graphene era [44, 45]. There were two main reasons for 
the lack of success of GrO‐based composites: cost and performance.
Although GrO was synthesized more than a century and a half ago, to the best of our 
knowledge, there was no large‐scale (even pilot‐scale) production of this form of graphite 
derivative. A back‐of the‐envelope calculation shows the price of GrO can easily be one 
order of magnitude higher than that of graphite. This probably explains why the use of GrO 
did not attract a great deal of attention. The recent interest in GrO‐based composites is 
mainly due to the improvement in the performance of the so‐called high‐tech products, 
which makes using GrO economically feasible [45].
As mentioned before, great interest in layered silicate‐based nanocomposites moved 
researchers’ attention to employing other layered materials, including GrO [37, 45]. Similar 
to the layered silicates, the main objective of GrO–polymer hybrid synthesis was gaining 
the maximum level of exfoliation and dispersion. Another similarity is the hydrophilic 
nature of both GrO and clays, which make them incompatible with organic polymers. As a 
result, the dispersion of oxidized layered graphite created a bottleneck in the fabrication 
process.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
319
To make GrO less hydrophilic, surface functionalization was used. Due to the acidic 
nature, basic functional molecules, such as amines, are proper candidates for tailoring the 
surface properties. Several studies showed that GrO can be intercalated and functionalized 
by aliphatic amines (again, a common surface modifier for clays) [37, 50, 51]. Increasing 
the interlayer distance facilitates the diffusion of polymer molecules where the presence of 
organic surface modifier increases the compatibility. By reviewing the reports on this class 
of composites, one can realize that the generic feature of the research is the same as it is for 
the clay‐based composites. Therefore, it is not surprising that, if the performance of GrO 
for improving the mechano‐physical properties of the matrix is lower or the same as clays, 
the choice will be clay, as it is less expensive and does not blacken the matrix. Therefore, 
using GrO for making composite materials was not considered a breakthrough.
Another merit of using a carbon‐based filler is improving the electrical and transport 
properties of insulating matrices. Traditionally, graphite and conductive forms of carbon 
black were the candidates. Studies by Hofmann and his colleagues showed that GrO 
assumes a conductive form upon chemical or thermal reduction [43, 44]. However, using 
GrO to improve the electrical conductivity of polymer matrices was rare till 2006 [52]. As 
a result, GrO rarely surfaced as a material for making electrically conductive composites.
Probably the main contribution of the pre‐graphene era research on GrO‐based materials 
was the discovery of “ultra‐thin” layers of oxidized graphene in basic aqueous solutions 
[43–45, 53]. Such dispersions were used to fabricate layered nanocomposites through layer‐
by‐layer assembly [53]. The presence of oxygen functional groups, especially carboxyl 
groups, makes GrO particles negatively charged and they can be adsorbed on positively 
charged substrates via electrostatic interaction [53, 54]. These facts were then widely 
employed for the assembly of GrO though the electrostatic interaction.
Suggested by Boehm, research on GrO (and its composites) was originally more a labo-
ratory curiosity [44], which later became the basis for recent studies. The realization of the 
superior and unusual properties of 2D materials expanded the interest in many forms of 
layered materials [3, 55, 56]. Due to the ease of processing and the rich functionality of 
GrO, it became the centre of attention for the materials science community. Revisiting the 
synthesis approach of GrO composites and creating novel strategies for the assembly of 
monolayers of carbon into other matrices revealed the high potential of these old graphite‐
based products [45].
10.1.3  CNTs Versus Graphene (Oxide)
From the very beginning, graphene was introduced as a rival to CNTs, with many shared 
potential applications [1]. By the time of the arrival of graphene in 2004, research on CNTs 
was gaining a hold in different fields, from nanoelectronics to photonics, biomedical appli-
cations and advanced materials [57]. Despite the fact that the pioneers of graphene research, 
Geim and Novoselov, were newcomers to the carbon nanomaterials field, the expert groups 
on carbon nanomaterials followed the lead soon after [58]. Many of the ideas and methods 
developed for the synthesis, analysis and application were borrowed from, or at least 
inspired by, research on CNTs [45, 57].
One of the general challenges in the field of particulate composites is proper functionali-
zation and dispersion of the particles in matrices [22, 37, 57]. In particular, it was the dis-
covery of a systematic route of “dissolution” of carbon sheets, i.e. graphene, which heated 

320
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
up the field of graphene‐based composites [52]. According to the science and technology 
of CNT dispersion, in order to disperse graphene, it is necessary to decorate it with proper 
functional groups, depending on the target matrix, to keep them separated and compatible 
with the host matrix [59]. Soon after, due to the similar surface chemistry of CNTs and 
graphene (and also GO), many of the chemical protocols used for functionalization of 
nanotubes were tried for their 2D counterpart [1, 60, 61] (Figure 10.3). This includes, but 
is not limited to, aryl diazonium functionalization [62], acylation of carboxyl groups and 
subsequent esterification [63], radical addition [64, 65], polymer grafting [66], amidation 
[67], non‐covalent π–π bonding [68, 69], halogenation [70] and subsequent modification, 
and oxidation [71, 72]. One can tailor the surface polarity and functionality of carbon 
nanomaterials to almost any degree.
The dispersion of graphene in liquid media was inspired by the successful work on 
CNTs, with a few exceptions [75–78]. The types of surfactant and organic solvents that are 
suitable for CNTs are also used for graphene [75–79]. The liquid‐phase exfoliation of 
expanded graphite into graphene happens in media also suitable for CNTs. Due to the same 
surface chemistry and assuming that CNTs (especially single‐walled CNTs) and graphene 
“dissolve” in the solvent, the “good solvent” for both classes should have the same surface 
energy [75, 76]. This turns out to be true, as most of the good solvents for CNTs can dis-
solve graphene as well. Polar aprotic solvents such as N‐methylpyrrolidone (NMP), dime-
thyl sulfoxide (DMS) or N‐cyclohexyl‐2‐pyrrolidone (CHP) are found to be proper media 
for dispersing both graphene and CNTs [75, 76, 79, 80]. With the same reasoning, sur-
factants that can interact and stabilize the surface of CNTs were found to be effective for 
exfoliation and stabilization of graphene as well [77, 78]. Generally, surfactants having 
benzene rings are more effective due to the capability of forming π–π interactions with the 
surface [77, 78, 81, 82]. However, it appears that the surfactants with planar molecular 
structure, like pyrene‐based surfactants, are more effective for exfoliation of graphite [81]. 
The story is also valid for the case of graphene structures derived from GO. Chemical 
reduction and thermal annealing of GO usually leaves GO derivatives, which cannot be 
dispersed easily [31, 52, 83, 84]. Similar classes of solvents and surfactants work well in 
further processing.
The term “graphene” can be seen in many post‐2004 publications where the nanotubes 
are described as a rolled form of graphene, and the well‐known example is the scheme for 
the description of single‐walled nanotube (SWNT) chirality (Figure 10.4). Many of the 
physical properties of CNTs are similar to those of graphite (and/or graphene), namely their 
thermal and electrical conductivity, mechanical properties, thermal stability and chemical 
properties [6, 9]. As a result, many applications that were forecast for CNTs were potential 
application fields for graphene‐based materials as well [3, 6, 9, 57]. These applications 
include energy storage, flexible electronics, composite materials, optics, biomedical appli-
cations, etc. [85].
Realization of chemical methods for the production of bulk quantities of GO and its 
conductive forms, i.e. reduced GO (RGO) and thermally processed GO (tpGO), during 
2006–2008 turned graphene into a practical material rather than a laboratory material 
available for physicists [3, 45, 52, 58]. Many of the initial efforts on the acknowledgment 
of the above‐mentioned applications was based on the employment of GO [87–90]. For 
instance, both CNTs and GO can be used in the fabrication of transparent conductors 
through the wet transfer technique [87, 91]. In this technique, a dispersion of CNTs or GO 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
321
1. covalent addition
(strong interaction)
Carbon rehybridization
from sp2 to sp3
Graphene as electron
donating π ligand
π-π interactions
Graphene as electron
acceptor
2. complexation
(moderate, weak)
3. charge transfer
adsorption (weak)
Zigzag edge
Covalent
Li
Non-covalent
polymer wrapping
Armchair
edge
A
c
b
(a)
(b)
a
B
C
D
Figure 10.3  Chemical pathways for functionalization of CNTs and graphene. (a) CNTs can be 
modified through different interactions. (b) Origin of chemical reactivity of graphene and 
possible strategies for functionalization of graphene. (a) Reproduced from [73] with permission 
of Nature Publishing Group. (b) Reproduced from [74] with permission of RSC

Armchair
Zig-Zag
(8,8)
Armchair
(14,0)
Zig-Zag
(9,7)
Chiral
(1,1)
(1,0)
(2,1)
(3,2)
(4,3)
(5,4)
(6,5)
(7,6)
(8,7)
(9,7)
(10,6)
(9,5)
(8,4)
(7,3)
(6,2)
(5,1)
(4,0)
(5,0)
(6,1)
(7,0)
(8,0)
(8,1)
(9,1)
(10,0)
(11,1)
(11,0)
Semi-conducting
(12,1)
(12,2)
(13,3)
(13,2)
(13,0)
(14,1)
(14,0)
(15,1)
(16,0)
(9,2)
(10,2)
(10,3)
(11,3)
(11,4)
(12,4)
(7,2)
(8,3)
(9,4)
(10,5)
(8,6)
(7,5)
(6,4)
(5,3)
(4,2)
(3,1)
(2,0)
(3,0)
(4,1)
(5,2)
(6,3)
(7,4)
(8,5)
(9,6)
(11,5)
(12,3)
(11,2)
(10,1)
(12,0)
Metallic
n
m
x
y
(n,m)
(n,m)
(13,1)
(14,2)
(15,0)
(9,0)
(10,4)
(9,3)
(8,2)
(7,1)
(6,0)
(2,2)
(3,3)
(4,4)
(5,5)
(6,6)
(7,7)
(8,8)
Figure 10.4  SWNT helicity map on graphene sheet and examples of (n,m) chiral vectors that give rise to armchair, 
zigzag and chiral nanotube structures. Reproduced from [86] with permission of RSC

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
323
(or reduced forms) is filtered through a membrane and the thin film on the membrane is 
then transferred onto the target substrate [87, 90, 91] (Figure 10.5a,b). Another example is 
“graphene oxide paper” inspired by “buckypapers” [91, 92] (Figure 10.5c,d). For making 
both, dispersions of GO or CNTs pass through a porous membrane filter, leaving a paper‐
like material on top. Many other fabrication and processing methods are also related to the 
synthesis of graphene‐based materials, such as doping and post‐treatment of graphene thin 
films [93–95], sorting and fractionation of graphene using density gradient centrifugation 
[96, 97], spinning into fibers [98–101], and mixing and dispersion protocols [102, 103].
Focusing more on composite materials, by the time of the arrival of graphene, research 
on CNT‐based composites had matured and many challenges in design and processing had 
been solved [59, 102]. One of the main challenges for employing CNTs as filler was the 
high cost of their production, which made them less attractive for low‐tech applications. 
The processing of CNTs is not straightforward and normally requires timely and costly 
purification and post‐treatments [102]. Making graphene from inexpensive graphite gave 
hope that graphene could be a cost‐effective replacement [84]. However, when the perfor-
mance of graphene was evaluated and compared with that of CNTs, it was found that the 
cost/performance of graphene‐based composites is not superior in all the cases. Although 
graphene brings some new functionality due to the planar geometry, depending on the 
problem and application that is to be dealt with, graphene still might be not the best candi-
date [87–103, 106].
Apart from the cost/performance ratio, another concern with CNTs and graphene (objec-
tively, any nanomaterials) is their safety and toxicity. It is now widely accepted that the level 
of toxicity of graphene is lower than that of nanotubes [107–109]. Moreover, graphite is an 
inert “natural” material, which lowers the concern in this regard if one assumes that gra-
phene and its derivatives are naturally derived. However, as discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 11, the toxicity of different forms of graphene, namely monolayer graphene (G1), 
few‐layer graphene (Gfew), multi‐layer graphene (Gmulti), RGO, tpGO, GO and GrO, with 
different lateral sizes, has not been thoroughly researched, and, before the toxicity level and 
danger are established, it is not wise to introduce these materials into commercial produc-
tion and real applications, especially in large quantities like composite fabrication [18, 110].
10.2  Why Mix Graphene Oxide and Polymers?
In the realm of materials science, the discovery and development of synthetic polymers 
made the breakthrough in the design of novel functional materials possible. Polymers are 
in general less expensive than ceramics and metals, they are easy to manufacture, chemi-
cally resistant and lightweight, and their mechanical and physical properties can be altered 
widely [22]. The molecular design of the polymeric backbone gives chemists the opportu-
nity to systematically control the final properties of polymers. For instance, polymers with 
a “soft and flexible” backbone (like hydrocarbon) show rubber‐like behaviour (if the poly-
mer molecules do not crystallize), whereas polymers with a “rigid” backbone (like aro-
matic rings) are tough, such as polyimides [111]. Polymers with conjugated backbones can 
be electrically conducting, whereas typical polymers are insulating. Great advances in 
polymer chemistry in the twentieth century made molecular design principles available for 
polymer design [112]. However, these sorts of structural manipulations of polymeric 

(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
1 cm
20 μm
2 μm
300nm
Figure  10.5  Analogous concepts for the fabrication of GO‐ and CNT‐based materials. (a) Fabrication of GO‐based 
transparent conductive films by filtering a GO dispersion through a filter (top) and then wet transfer to a plastic substrate. 
(b) Thin film of SWNTs using filtration and wet transfer on different substrates with controlled thickness. (c) Fabrication of 
GO paper by filtration and drying of a GO dispersion through a filter, which results in strong flexible paper‐like material 
(inset, top). The GO paper possesses a layered structure due to the stacking of GO sheets over each other. (d) Photograph 
of “buckypaper” (top); the paper (left) is tough and flexible enough to fold into an origami plane (right). Scanning electron 
microscope images of SWNT‐based buckypaper fabricated by filtration of an aqueous dispersion of SWNTs over a filter. 
(a,b) Reproduced from [92] with permission of Nature Publishing Group. (c,d) Reproduced from [105] with permission of 
Nature Publishing Group

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
325
materials are costly, not efficient and more importantly cannot assure multi‐functionalities. 
As an example, making polymers conductive through the chemical pathway (conjugated 
polymers) results in fragile compounds that are difficult to process [113]. Therefore, incor-
porating new functionalities into polymer matrices without significant changes of chemistry 
becomes interesting.
As a rule of thumb, in an ideal case, mixing two (or more) compounds should produce a 
“composite” compound that possesses the properties of both (or all) ingredients at least 
partly. In the simplest case, if the rule of mixing is valid, the final property of the composite 
is linearly related to the content of the reinforcing phase, although, in reality, this is not 
often the case. With the goal of approaching this ideal case, compounding polymers with 
other materials becomes a centre of attention for materials scientists to develop functional 
composites with improved properties while saving the advantages of the matrices [114]. 
For instance, in line with the above examples, another possible route to make polymers 
electrically conducting is to mix them with a conductive material such as metals or carbon 
(nano)materials [52, 57, 103, 115].
The superior properties of graphene and its derivatives make them a tempting option for 
making composite materials [52]. Being the strongest, toughest and thinnest material ever 
known, being impermeable (even to helium) and having an extremely high thermo‐electrical 
conductivity are some of the most prominent characteristics of graphene [3, 41]. However, 
putting these outstanding properties into polymeric matrices is not straightforward and 
requires the development of new routes of production and, more importantly, careful 
assembly of atomically thin sheets in matrices. The ideal chemistry and arrangement of 
graphenic sheets depend very much on functionalities. For instance, usually perfect disper-
sions and perfect alignment of nanosheets is desired when reinforcing matrices [116]. For 
improving electrical conductivity, it may be more efficient to have segregated networks of 
graphene and not necessarily homogeneous dispersions [117, 118]. The following dis-
cusses the function of graphenic sheets as a component for polymer‐based composites on 
the basis of these functionalities.
GO is nominally considered as the best candidate for synthesizing chemically derived 
single‐layered graphene on large scales [18, 61, 84]. As a result, most of the attempts to 
incorporate graphene into polymeric matrices revolve around graphite oxide and GO 
[52, 106]. The method used to disperse and functionalize graphite oxide depends very 
much on the chemistry of the matrix, the mixing procedure and the desired morphology of 
the final composite [103, 119]. In the following section, we discuss in detail the function-
alities and properties that can be incorporated into polymers upon the addition of GO.
10.2.1  Making Stronger Polymers: Mechanical Properties
Polymers have wide ranges of mechanical properties, from soft and elastic (e.g. rubbers), 
through tough and strong (e.g. ultrahigh‐molecular‐weight polyethylene), to hard and brit-
tle (e.g. polystyrene) [111]. These properties give rise to different classes of polymers 
depending on requirements. For instance, where damping of continuous loads is desired, 
rubbers are employed; whereas, for structural applications, tough and strong resins such as 
epoxy are used. Regardless of the final application, if the mechanical properties are the key 
parameters in functioning, improving those properties becomes a necessity. This becomes 
more significant if this improvement pushes the limit of the current state of the art. For 

326
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
example, increasing the toughness of epoxy resins, which already have high toughness, is 
fascinating as it introduces new paradigms for materials design [120, 121]. For instance, 
this may lead to the fabrication of carbon‐fiber‐reinforced polymers with higher mechanical 
performance [122]. Reaching this goal is challenging in the sense that carbon‐fiber‐­
reinforced composites already occupy the top spot in the map of mechanical performance 
of all materials, and higher performance means pushing this boundary further [123].
Along the same line of aspiration, the design of some sort of “dream materials” is the 
final destination of this kind of effort. The prominent example in the realm of nanoscience 
is the “space elevator”, which is made of a super‐strong fiber, probably carbon‐based, 
which can enable the transfer of cargo directly into space [124] (Figure 10.6). Apart from 
these science fiction‐like examples, filling the gap between particulate composites and 
fiber‐based composites is another paradigm of design with novel super‐materials like GO 
[92, 125]. In fact, fiber‐based composites are difficult to manufacture and expensive. From 
the mechanical properties point of view, having a non‐fibrous composite with the same 
mechanical properties might bring new opportunities to fabricate cost‐effective substitutes. 
For instance, the Young’s modulus of pristine graphene is about 1 TPa [126]. By assuming 
the mixture law and perfect bonding and unidirectional dispersion, at 10 vol.% loading of 
graphene, a composite with modulus in the order of 100 GPa is expected. This is far beyond 
the modulus of conventional polymers (>5 GPa) and close to those of general‐purpose 
fiber‐based composites [111, 122]. Another goal (closer to achieving) of strengthening 
(a)
(b)
Figure  10.6  The extraordinary mechanical properties of CNTs raised hopes to achieve a 
“space elevator”, a conceptual infrastructure that turns out to be unrealistic, at least at the 
current level of technology. Reproduced from [124] with permission of Elsevier

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
327
polymers is reducing the cost of manufacturing and/or improving the performance of poly-
meric products bearing loads and mechanical stress. In fact, upon increasing the critical 
stress that a polymeric matrix can withstand, one can reduce the size, weight and cost of the 
final product [114]. However, it is a prerequisite that hybridizing the polymer with a nano-
material should be economical. This requirement was indeed fulfilled from the very begin-
ning of the research on GO‐reinforced composites, as GO seems to be a cost‐effective 
replacement for expensive CNTs [84]. This becomes more crucial if one can significantly 
enhance the mechanical properties of inexpensive polymers such as polyolefins, which are 
inherently mechanically weak. In this case, improving the stiffness without degrading the 
toughness is very favorable. Another challenging task would be increasing the mechanical 
performance of polymers that are already considered as high‐performing, such as polyim-
ides and epoxies [120, 121, 127].
The core principles behind reinforcing the matrix with GO (or any other reinforcing 
phase) are high intrinsic mechanical properties of the nanosheets themselves and good 
load transfer from the matrix to the reinforcing phase [128–130]. In an ideal case, the 
“mixture law” should predict the final properties of the composites. However, in reality, 
there is deviation, which can be modeled by an “efficiency coefficient” (ξ) as follows 
[116, 131, 132]:
	
E
E
E
composite
matrix
matrix
GO
GO
=
+
ν
ξ
ν
	
(10.1)
where E and v are the investigated mechanical property (e.g. modulus) and volume frac-
tion, respectively. Normally, ξ varies between zero and one, and the higher the ξ value, the 
higher the reinforcing efficiency. However, ξ can be negative, which means that the addi-
tion of the filler degrades the matrix properties. On the other hand, in some rare cases, ξ can 
be larger than one, which indicates a synergistic effect of the addition of the filler to the 
polymer matrix [131, 133]. The most common explanation for such an observation is the 
formation of some “inter‐phase” at the boundary of the filler and the matrix (usually due to 
strong interaction or orientation of the polymer chains at the interface), which provides 
higher mechanical properties compared to the base matrix [133]. Such a synergistic effect 
is very favorable to achieve, but requires molecular design of the interface. However, for 
the most frequent cases (0 < ξ < 1), answering the question about what causes the deviation 
from perfect additivity (ξ = 1) would help us to understand the principles of the design of 
GO‐based composites.
Analyzing composite materials attracted attention in the middle of the previous century 
with the advent of high‐performance fibers such as glass and carbon fibers. Continuum 
mechanics can be employed to model the behavior of fiber‐based (both long and short fib-
ers) composites to a high degree [114, 116, 133]. However, going to the nanoscale and 
eventually, with the advent of graphene, to the atomic scale may break down the validity of 
continuum models [130]. Using a more sophisticated computational model such as molec-
ular dynamics is very expensive and does not guarantee accuracy at the macroscopic level. 
Many studies have shown that continuum models work well for predictions of mechanical 
properties of graphene‐based composites (or at least can capture the general picture of the 
behavior) [130–133]. In this regard, one simply needs to view graphene (or GO) as a rigid 
disk with a certain thickness that is dispersed in a continuum phase. Then some geometrical 
and material parameters are ascribed to each phase (filler and matrix). There are a number 

328
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
of models used for the modeling of particulate composites (as is the case for GO) [114, 
119, 130–133]. However, the Halpin–Tsai model is the most common, which works quite 
well [133–139].
Now let us assume a case where nanosheets (with a length of L and thickness of t) are 
unidirectionally dispersed (with a volume fraction of vs) in a matrix with a Young’s modulus 
of Em. Then the Young’s modulus of the composite is given as [136, 137]
	
E
E
v
v
c
m
s
s
=
+
−
1
1
αβ
β
	
(10.2)
	
β
α
=
−
+
E
E
E
E
p
m
p
m
1
	
(10.3)
where α is 2L/t and is a measure of the aspect ratio. It is apparent from these equations that 
increasing α improves the reinforcing efficiency. This critical aspect ratio depends very 
much on the ratio of the modulus of the particles Ep to that of the polymer matrix [133, 
135]. It should be noted that the same principles can be applied for one‐dimensional (1D) 
fillers such as CNTs. In the case of GO, EGO is about 250 GPa [128]. Now we consider a 
typical Young’s modulus of 1 GPa for the polymer matrix. Then, if the aspect ratio of the 
GO sheets exceeds 1000 (equivalent to a lateral size around 1 µm), the modulus of the 
composites is just 8% lower than that calculated from the mixture law; whereas for an 
aspect ratio of 100, it is 40% lower. This implies the same concept of the “critical length” 
for fiber composites where the center of fibers can reach the highest strength [133, 140]. 
This observation suggests that, for efficient load transfer from GO (or in general any elon-
gated particles), the size of the sheets should be in the order of 10 µm (this is true for a wide 
ranges of polymers) and monolayer GO and not GrO is preferred [130, 133, 134, 136]. 
Despite the fact that such gigantic monolayer GO sheets can now be synthesized, their 
subsequent processing and accommodation into polymer matrices are difficult tasks. It 
should be noted that the mixing process is associated with some obstacles, such as break-
age of the sheets, gelation and the rise in viscosity of the composite [100, 116, 141–143]. 
However, large size GO (lateral size of a few micrometers at least) is recommended in 
order to stiffen the polymeric matrix in general.
Before discussing the sources of the deviation from the above prediction, it is interesting 
to discuss another subject on graphenic sheets for reinforcements, i.e. the flake thickness. 
The above analysis implies that a higher aspect ratio is always preferred to improve modu-
lus (and some other properties). Therefore, one may consider single‐layer sheets as the 
ultimate candidate in this regard. However, the ultra‐thin nature of graphene (oxide) induces 
huge confinement to polymer chains when the filler content increases [136, 137]. Despite 
the fact that the exact behavior of confined polymer chains is not known, confined poly-
mers have different mechanical properties and usually make the composites fragile [134, 
135, 144]. In addition, there is a limit for confining the polymer between the graphenic 
sheets. When there is no strong interaction between the polymer chains and graphenic 
sheets, the polymer chains prefer to phase‐separate from graphene [134, 144]. On the other 
hand, increasing the number of layers of graphene sheets will decrease the effective 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
329
modulus of the nanosheets themselves [134]. As a result, these two effects are opposing 
each other, as few‐layered graphene induces less confinement at the same volume fraction. 
Such a simple analysis suggests that the monolayer graphene (oxide) is not necessarily the 
best candidate for reinforcing.
In fact, depending on the confinement limit and the efficiency of the stress transfer 
between the layers, the optimum number of layers may vary from bilayer up to five‐layer 
sheets [134, 135]. However, it is difficult to prove this statement experimentally, since 
making mono‐sized graphene (oxide) (both lateral and thickness) is an impossible task. 
Layer‐by‐layer assembly may work to design layered polymer–graphene arrangements, if 
one deposits a favorable number of graphene sheets on top of each other, and then deposits 
a polymer layer on that [145, 146]. Beside the experimental proof, looking carefully at the 
analysis done by Gong et al. [135] demonstrates that this issue is important at very high 
concentration of graphene and the difference between monolayer and few‐layer graphene 
is not significant (Figure 10.7). Subsequently, one need not worry about “full exfoliation” 
into single‐layer level, but instead focus more on preserving the lateral size, even at the 
expense of partial exfoliation. The assumption of Gong et al. [135] made in the above 
analysis (i.e. decreasing effective modulus by increasing the number of layers) is actually 
opposing the experimental observation of Suk et al. [129] where they found that the effec-
tive modulus of mono‐, bi‐ and trilayer GO remains constant. However, this observation 
actually supports the above statement. We are not aware of any experimental evidence 
whether few‐layer GO is a more effective reinforcing agent than its monolayer counterpart, 
but still this analysis suggests that preserving the lateral size is more important than exfo-
liation down to a single layer. This fact is not usually considered in the design principles for 
nanocomposites.
All the analyses above are for the ideal case, where graphene sheets are aligned and the 
load transfer from the matrix is perfect. However, in reality, the composite behavior deviates 
from the ideal case. The first and most clear reason for this is the misalignment issue. The 
Halpin–Tsai analysis shows that the modulus of a composite becomes around three times 
lower when the platelets are dispersed randomly in the matrix [136–140]. Therefore, there 
have been numerous efforts to align graphene (oxide) in the polymeric matrix [138, 141, 
142, 146–148]. This is important especially where the load to the composite is maximum in 
one direction. In general, the alignment of graphene (or 2D fillers) just requires putting 
them in parallel with each other, whereas for CNTs the ideal alignment requires alignment 
in two dimensions [132, 133]. In reality, perfect alignment of graphenic sheets is difficult to 
achieve and some deviation from the ideal case is inevitable. The situation is worse when 
polymer melt is used, which is indeed the most common system for general‐purpose ther-
moplastic polymers. In these cases, mixing the polymer melt leads to random dispersion of 
sheets and, due to the very high viscosity of the polymer melt, alignment is not possible 
except by inducing shear [149, 150]. (Shear‐induced alignment is very common for making 
polymeric fibers or sheets, but has not been explored widely in the case of graphene.)
Another very important source of deviation of the mechanical properties of graphene 
composites from the ideal situation is the “agglomeration” or bad dispersion of GO in the 
host matrix. This must be differentiated from the incomplete exfoliation to monolayers. As 
stated above, not having perfect exfoliation may even be useful for stiffening the matrix. 
However, agglomeration means inhomogeneous distribution of the filler throughout the 
matrix. In fact, one could have a perfect “dispersion” but not perfect exfoliation 

330
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Monolayer
(a)
(b)
(c)
Trilayer
Polymer
2nm
1 nm
0.34nm
1000
900
800
700
600
500
400
300
500
400
300
200
100
0
0
Effective graphene Young’s
modulus (GPa)
Effective graphene Young’s
modulus (GPa)
Maximum composite
modulus (GPa)
Maximum composite
modulus (GPa)
2
4
6
Number of layers, n1
Number of layers, n1
8
10
10
1 nm
1 nm
2 nm
2 nm
4 nm
4 nm
0
2
44
6
Number of layers, n1
Number of layers, n1
8
10
10
0.0
Maximum graphene volume fraction
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1 nm
2 nm
4 nm
Figure 10.7  (a) Graphenic sheets with lower thickness induce higher confinement to polymer 
chains. By keeping the inter‐sheet distance constant, the effective volume fraction of graphene 
increases on increasing the number of layers. (b) Effective graphene Young’s modulus and 
maximum graphene volume fraction for different indicated polymer layer thicknesses, as a 
function of the number of layers in the graphene flakes. (c) Maximum nanocomposite modulus 
predicted for different indicated polymer layer thicknesses as a function of the number of 
layers in the graphene flakes. Reproduced from [135] with permission of ACS

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
331
(e.g. homogeneous dispersion of few‐layered graphene). On the other hand, monolayer 
graphene (oxide) can form agglomerates. The task of homogeneous dispersion of 
nanosheets in the matrix is one of the main objectives of the production process [52, 106, 
121]. Due to the very high surface area of GO (~2600 m2 g−1) [151] and high surface 
energy, GO flakes tend to stack together in non‐polar media. Apart from the techniques that 
are used for proper dispersion, for matrix reinforcement, agglomeration of GO usually 
results in the catastrophic degradation of the toughness of the matrix, especially if the 
matrix itself possesses high toughness [121, 134, 137]. In fact, the matrix starts to fail upon 
inducing the load due to the failure of the stress transfer. This sort of failure is very com-
mon when the loading of GO increases [121]. As a result, researchers are often looking for 
an “optimum loading” of graphene where the stiffness and toughness are maximized [39–
41, 119–121]. This optimum loading can be as low as a few tenths of one percent of GO 
[120, 121]. It is not clear if the degradation of the mechanical properties (mainly toughness 
and stress at break) is due to the poor dispersion, or if other parameters are involved. For 
instance, one can assure perfect dispersion (or “molecular‐level” dispersion) of GO in a 
polymer matrix through “wet‐chemical” methods even at very high loadings [152]. 
However, degradation of the toughness and brittleness of composites is still observed.
Interfacial interaction between the graphene and the polymer matrix is the dominating 
parameter that controls the level of reinforcement [119, 130]. Imagine a single sheet of GO 
in a polymer medium. The work that is required to pull it out is related to the interfacial 
strength [130, 135]. The action of pulling out requires an amount of energy that depends on 
the type of interaction at the interface. Weak interfacial energy leads to the failure of the 
composite due to fracture at the interface and its subsequent propagation into the matrix 
[137]. Subsequently, engineering of the interface is an important part of composite design. 
Usually there is a common tendency among researchers to make the interfacial strength as 
high as possible. The typical way of doing that is grafting chemical moieties with the same 
or similar chemical structure and polarity on the surface GO sheets (or its other derivatives) 
[52, 65, 66, 137, 153, 154]. In the case of thermoplastic polymers, if the so‐called moieties 
are polymer chains, entanglement between the grafted chains and polymer chains in the 
matrix provide such a strong bond that de‐bonding at the GO–polymer interface is unlikely 
[65, 66, 153]. In the case of thermoset polymers, attaching “reactive” moieties is a more 
popular strategy. These moieties are “reactive” in the sense that they can participate in the 
reaction of prepolymers (e.g. epoxy resins and hardeners), and as a result they become part 
of the polymer network [137]. This also leads to covalent bonding of the filler to the matrix. 
GO itself possesses some reactive groups such as epoxide, carboxyl and hydroxyl and even 
conjugated C–C bonds; this makes engineering of the interface less complicated [60]. This 
is especially apparent once we deal with polar matrices. We do not intend to expand on GO 
chemistry here, and refer the reader to Chapter 6 and also to additional reviews on this 
subject [22, 41, 59–61, 102, 119].
GO and its derivatives exhibit high potential as reinforcing agents in high‐performance 
composites. The ease of processing and better dispersion are advantages compared with 
other functional nanomaterials. In addition, tunable surface chemistry and size can over-
come classical challenges in particulate composites, i.e. weak interfacial interaction and 
load transfer. However, enjoying these profits is usually limited to low loading of GO and, 
moreover, the highly polar nature of GO makes it challenging to hybridize it with low‐
polarity polymers [52, 102, 103, 106, 119–121]. Thanks to the rich history of work on 

332
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
tailoring the interface, compatibilization of GO and graphene with almost any polymer is 
possible, unless the processing costs increase [41, 45, 57, 102]. While discussing the 
mechanical performance of GO‐based composites, one may wonder what the optimal inter-
face would look like? The typical strategy that is followed by many researchers is to 
increase the bonding between graphene and the matrix, preferably by covalent bonding 
[66, 153]. This indeed leads to enhancement of many mechanical properties, especially 
toughness. However, when it comes to some practical applications, enhancing stiffness or 
even toughness is not always the priority. For instance, when load damping is favorable, the 
stiffness of the polymer (composite) matters less [155–157]. In such cases, incorporation 
of new modes of energy dissipation is more welcome. As a result, having a strong interface 
(and even perfect dispersion) might not be preferred, as energy damping at the polymer–
filler interface would be more helpful [157]. Another example could be the fabrication of 
tough composites out of stiff constituents. In such cases, creating sacrificial bonds (or 
interactions) is more appreciated [158, 159]. However, as the molecular origin of the 
mechanical properties is still not clear, usually fabricating even more complex composites 
demands creativity in the molecular design of composites. The advantage of GO over many 
nanoparticles is the ease of processing and the rich chemistry toward functionalization 
whether with chemical species or even with nanoparticles. By giving a challenging exam-
ple on complex composite design, we finish the discussion on mechanical properties of 
GO‐based composites. However, further details on this issue can be found in some recent 
reviews [7, 22, 39, 41, 119, 132, 134].
Inspired by the microstructure of the naturally occurring composite, mother of pearl 
(nacre), many efforts have been focused to turn the mixture of a soft binder and brittle 
particles into stiff and tough composites [160–164]. The first step would be to mimic the 
microstructure of nacre, which looks like “brick and mortar” [164] (Figure 10.8a,b). GO 
has played the role of “brick” in such structures with different polymers and other mole-
cules have been used as the binder [165–167]. The first challenge in this regard is the 
assembly of GO into such a layered structure. To perform this task, methods such as layer‐
by‐layer assembly [146, 163, 164], vacuum filtration [92, 148, 166], evaporation induced‐
orientation [165, 167] and liquid‐crystal‐mediated assembly [138, 141, 142, 168] have 
been used. Apart from the level of GO orientation (Figure 10.8c), in almost all cases the 
final composites suffered from brittleness, unless the loading level of GO is low (<5 vol.%) 
[136, 138, 152]. Although the mechanical properties of those nacre‐mimicking GO‐based 
composites are impressively higher than that for conventional polymers, they are however 
still far behind the main goal, i.e. high toughness [169]. The key element of success in 
designing such a structure is to design inter‐brick interaction, making the constituent parts 
capable of sliding over each other, at the expense of energy dissipation [160, 161]. 
Following nature’s way, inducing some asperities on the surface of GO and using the proper 
binder with an internal means of energy dissipation (such as auxetic molecules) might help 
to toughen the GO‐based layered composites [160, 170, 171] (Figure 10.8d). This will not 
only lead to the fabrication of ultra‐strong artificial composite materials, but also help 
develop new principles for strain engineering of composites materials [169–173]. Filling 
the gap between the principles at the nanoscale and the classical macroscale mechanics will 
enable us to enjoy the outstanding mechanical properties of GO and graphene, not only 
under the tiny probe of an atomic force microscope (AFM) [128, 129] but also under mac-
roscopic loads in real life!

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
333
10.2.2  Electrical Properties
As pointed out in the introduction, increasing the electrical conductivity of polymeric matri-
ces has been a subject of interest for many studies on GO‐based composites [41, 52, 84]. 
However, in the pre‐graphene era, due to the intrinsically low conductivity of GO, this aspect 
was not pursued [45]. Effective reduction of GO into a conductive form is necessary to pro-
duce conductive composites. The reduction methods are not the main focus of this section, as 
reduction is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6. The main concern here is the factors con-
trolling the final conductivity of the resulting composites [154, 174]. Additional properties 
such as electron mobility [175], dielectric constant [176] and electrochemical capacitance 
[177] might also be interesting to manipulate depending on the final use of the composite. 
Applications such as organic electronics [175], energy storage (batteries and supercapacitors) 
[177], sensors [178], electro(chemical)‐responsive materials [179] or actuators [180] are 
some examples where GO‐based composites may have a chance to be employed as func-
tional materials. However, readers are referred to other parts of this book (Chapters 7 and 8) 
and other references [175–181] to follow the principles of design in those areas.
(a)
(b)
Nacre
Calcite
2 μm
(c)
(d)
Fracture
Tensile
Mother
of
pearl
Stress
Figure 10.8  Nacre‐inspired design of GO‐based composites. (a) Red abalone shell. Inset: A 
cross‐section cut from the shell. (b) Scanning electron micrograph showing the micro/
nanostructure of natural nacre (the so‐called “brick and mortar” structure). Scale bar, 1 µm. (c) 
Scanning electron micrograph of a GO paper resembling the layered structure of nacre. (d) 
Improved fracture mechanism of GO paper by inserting flexible polymer molecules at interlayer. 
More complex strain engineering of such composites is presumed to result in tough and strong 
GO‐based composites. (a,b) Reproduced from [160] with permission of Nature Publishing 
Group. (c) Reproduced from [92] with permission of Nature Publishing Group. (d) Reproduced 
from [166] with permission of Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH & Co

334
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Adding conductive fillers to the insulating matrix is the most common approach that can 
be efficiently used to design and produce a new set of functional composite materials. In 
this regard, graphene offers great opportunities, owing to its remarkable conductivity. The 
core idea of fabrication of conductive graphene‐based composites is to let electrons pass 
through the insulating matrix with much less resistance [52]. Therefore, the graphenic 
sheets act as conductive wires, and the main task is the proper “wiring” of them through the 
matrix. The proper way of wiring (or, in other words, the assembly of graphenic sheets in 
the matrix) very much depends on the type of final application and the processing method. 
Although homogeneous dispersion of conductive sheets is required for the formation of 
interconnected networks of the filler, it is not the most efficient state in most cases [117, 
118] (Figure 10.9). However, homogeneous dispersion of graphene in the matrix is still 
critical for improving other properties such as thermo‐mechanical ones [106, 119–121]. In 
addition, from the processing point of view, the design of three‐dimensional (3D) networks 
of graphenic sheets is costly and may not be compatible with many matrices.
The conductivity of a composite increases suddenly once the graphene sheets percolate 
throughout the matrix and form a so‐called interconnected network, which is called the “perco-
lation threshold” [52, 116, 118, 137, 183]. At this point, the conductivity obeys the scaling law
	
σ
σ
c
f
c
=
−
(
)
ϕ ϕ
t	
(10.4)
where φ is the filler volume fraction, φc is the percolation threshold, σf is the nominal filler 
conductivity, σc is the composite conductivity and t is a scaling exponent. There is a rich 
theoretical background on the percolation theory and on composite materials [183, 184]. 
Generally, we would like to have lower φc and higher σf in order to achieve higher conduc-
tivity at the lowest possible graphene content. Simple analytical modeling suggests that, in 
the case of perfect dispersion of the 2D filler in the matrix, φc depends very strongly on the 
aspect ratio of the filler [184]. For instance, Celzard et al. [185] predicted an experimental 
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.9  Schematic representation of percolated networks of anisotropic filler. (a) A random 
network of filler results in a lengthy path for electrons and so a higher resistance is expected. 
(b) Segregation of filler into wire‐like structure lowers the percolation threshold and enhances 
the conductivity at lower filler content. Reproduced from [182] with permission of RSC

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
335
dependence of φc on the aspect ratio of the filler. The higher the aspect ratio, the lower the 
φc attained. As discussed previously, the aspect ratio is a crucial parameter for the mechani-
cal properties as well [134–138]. An aspect ratio in the order of 104 is favorable. Later in 
this section, we will discuss that this value of the aspect ratio is also a threshold to gain high 
barrier resistivity from graphenic sheets in composites. At this value of the aspect ratio, 
both theoretical and experimental observations report φc values of less than 0.1 vol.% [52, 
106, 116, 175, 183–185]. Therefore, the task of preserving the size of graphene (or GO) 
during processing becomes vital from other perspectives.
The effect of GO size on the electrical properties of composites (and even GO itself) 
has also been examined experimentally. For example, Eda and Chhowalla [175] showed 
that both the electrical conductivity and mobility of polystyrene (PS)–RGO composites 
increase by around an order of magnitude when the aspect ratio increases by a factor of 
50 (Figure 10.10). Although the composites were studied at RGO concentration much 
20
(a)
(d)
(e)
(b)
(c)
10
Count
Count
Count
0
16
8
0
30
20
10
0
10
1
0.1
1
10
100
Au electrode
FGS-PS
composite
SiO2
S
D
L
G
p-Si
0.1
1
10
100
σ (S/m)
L(μm)
0.1
1
10
Maximum lateral size (μm)
100
10
100
20 μm
2 μm
2 μm
Figure 10.10  Impact of GO aspect ratio on the electrical conductivity of PS–RGO composites. 
(a–c) Size distribution of GO sheets used for composite fabrication. (d) Schematic of PS–RGO 
composite thin‐film field‐effect devices employed for conductivity measurements. (e) Device 
conductivities measured in ambient conditions as a function of channel length for different 
aspect ratios, clearly demonstrating the high potential for large GO sheets to improve the 
electrical conductivity of the composites. Reproduced from [175] with permission of ACS

336
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
higher than φc, this still indicates that breakage of nanosheets creates a huge obstacle for 
electron conduction. Also, though they did not discuss the optimum (or saturation) aspect 
ratio, the best result was achieved at an aspect ratio of 2 × 104, the golden regime (see 
above) [175].
Another issue that arises from (10.4) is the influence of the conductivity of the filler (σf), 
which theoretically controls the absolute value of conductivity [183]. In the case of GO‐
based composites, this seems to be very true, as GO itself is not highly conductive (although 
more conductive than insulating polymers, σGO ≈ 10−3 S m−1). Therefore, to fabricate con-
ductive composites, reduction of GO is critical [52, 84]. The level of reduction determines 
the σf value. Several studies proved that better reduction of GO at the same volume fraction 
of GO leads to higher electrical conductivity [142, 186–188]. However, it seems that the 
maximum conductivity (the saturation value that is obtained after passing the percolation 
threshold) of composites does not depend solely on σf, and it is a complex function of addi-
tional parameters, such as the type of matrix, filler–matrix interaction, the state of disper-
sion, etc. [183]. However, efficient reduction (and even doping) of GO is the way to enhance 
the final conductivity.
As we talked about the “proper wiring” of the matrix with conductive filler, it is very 
insightful to elaborate upon this general idea. Consider two pieces of blocks with the same 
size, one being conductive and the other not. Applying a voltage when the blocks are wired 
in parallel to the current results in easy passage of the electrons. But when they are placed 
in series, the insulator stops the current. This simple example explains graphene‐based 
composites. On top of that, graphite itself follows this picture, and the in‐plane conductiv-
ity is more than 104 higher than the conductivity perpendicular to the plane [189]. This 
anisotropy can be incorporated into the composites of graphene when the nanosheets 
assemble in parallel [116, 147]. Parallel assembly of graphene sheets not only provides 
anisotropy in conductivity, but also enhances the efficiency of the filler and improves the 
final conductivity. The level of anisotropy depends on the level of alignment and indirectly 
on the aspect ratio [116]. Electrical anisotropy is desirable for some applications [149, 190] 
and, due to the very high aspect ratio of GO, it is an excellent candidate for this purpose.
When there is a current of electrons traveling through the composite, it mainly passes 
through the conductive part (filler). When two conductive particles are close enough (typ-
ically 10 nm), electrons can hop from one particle to another, and continue to pass 
(namely as they are in contact) [184]. If the particles are distributed homogeneously, the 
density of these contact points decreases. In fact, these contact points form resistances for 
the current and we do not want them to form “series”. The first option is to use longer 
fillers (which act as wires). However, for macroscale samples, the presence of these so‐
called resistances is inevitable. Another solution is to decrease the overall resistance by 
“parallel circuit” design! In practice, to do so, one can add additional anisotropic conduc-
tive filler, such as CNTs or metal nanowires, to the graphene composites [191–194]. This 
could help improve the linkage throughout the entire conductive network of fillers. This 
strategy has been shown to enhance the electrical conductivity and reduce the percolation 
threshold.
In all the above cases, we assumed that the composites possess a homogeneous distribu-
tion of the filler. However, if the increase of the electrical conductivity is the main goal, is 
it a good idea to have such a morphology? To give an illustrative example, we do not make 
a whole building conductive to protect it against lightning, we just need to use a lightning 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
337
rod. The same logic can be applied for composites. If the graphene sheets (or any other 
conductive filler) segregate into a continuous interconnected network, they still increase 
the conductivity [117, 187, 188]. In this situation, the rich phase (segregated network) con-
tains much more filler and subsequently has higher conductivity. If this phase is continuous 
through the matrix, the overall conductivity is determined by this phase. Therefore, a much 
lower amount of filler is required to enhance the conductivity [117, 149, 190]. Fabricating 
the segregated network of graphene in a matrix usually demands innovative design of the 
composite‐making process. Here, we briefly introduce three methods: latex blending, 
polymer blending and using foam‐like graphene.
i.	 If GO or RGO are dispersed in water and mixed with polymer latex particles, graphene 
sheets cannot enter into the polymer beads, and form segregated networks upon drying 
(if polymer particles are glassy at processing temperature) [187, 188, 195, 196]. It is 
noteworthy that polymer particles with a size comparable to the size of GO (in the 
micrometer range) are preferred. This method has been widely used for many fillers, 
including RGO, to fabricate conductive composites [195, 197] (Figure 10.11). Normally 
this method gives one of the lowest percolation thresholds and very high conductivity 
after passing the threshold [188].
ii.	 The second method is polymer blending. As discussed above, the idea is to force the 
conductive filler to jam into the 3D interconnected network in the polymer matrix [188]. 
From the pioneering works of Pickering [198] and Ramsden [199], we know that solid 
particles have a high tendency to accumulate at an interface, which can also be a polymer–
polymer interface [200, 201]. From the polymer physics we know that a blend of two 
PS microsphere
HOOC
HOOC
HOOC
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
HOOC
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
OH
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
Mixing
Reducing with
Vitamin C
in water
80 °C
200 °C
Ordered rGO network
PS matrix
rGO sheets
GO sheets
HOOC
OH
HO
OH
OH
OH
O
O
O
O
O
+
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
COOH
Hot pressing
Figure  10.11  Schematic illustration for the preparation of PS–RGO composites with an 
ordered three‐dimensional segregated network, by mixing GO sheets and PS microspheres, 
followed by GO reduction with vitamin C and hot pressing. Reproduced from [197] with 
permission of RSC

338
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
immiscible polymers can form a co‐continuous phase in which, our goal will be achieved 
if the graphenic sheets (or any other conductive filler) go to the interface [111]. This has 
indeed been proven experimentally [200]. Adding an immiscible polymer to a compos-
ite of conductive filler–polymer lowers the percolation threshold [202, 203]. Getting a 
co‐continuous morphology may not even be necessary if the filler has higher affinity to 
the matrix polymer in the blend. From a technical point of view, it is better not to look 
at the situation as “adding another polymer” to a polymer–graphene composite, but 
rather to keep the traditional view of “adding graphene” to a polymer blend. Polymer 
blends are promising materials in the polymer industries [204]. Overcoming the chal-
lenges associated with their processing is industrially very attractive. Graphene and 
especially GO derivatives can be considered as multi‐functional additives (probably 
inducing conductive filler), as they can help to overcome such challenges as weak poly-
mer–polymer interfacial interaction, proper dispersion of polymers in each other, reduc-
ing the cost of processing and improving the final properties. But graphene’s capacity as 
a multi‐functional additive has not been well explored in this area.
iii.	 Cheng et  al. [205] introduced another method to make polymers conductive, by 
producing foam‐like graphene. They synthesized a 3D interconnected graphene net-
work first, and then incorporated an elastomer to gain an impressive conductivity of 
1000 S m−1 at a graphene loading of ~0.5 wt.% [205] (Figure 10.12). In this approach, 
the continuity of the conductive network is not a concern as it is macroscopically 
(a)
Ni foam
(b)
(c)
(f)
(e)
(d)
CH4/H2/Ar
1,000°C
PMMA
Ni–G
Ni–G–PMMA
FeCl3/HCl
Ni etching
GF–PMMA
Coating
PDMS
Inﬁltration
GF/PDMS
GF
Acetone
PMMA
dissolving
Figure 10.12  Incorporating graphene foam (GF) into a polymer matrix with high conductivity 
at very low loading. (a,b) CVD growth of graphene films (Ni–G) using a nickel foam as a 3D 
scaffold template. (c) An as‐grown graphene film after coating a thin polymethyl methacrylate 
(PMMA) supporting layer (Ni–G–PMMA). (d) A graphene foam coated with PMMA (GF–
PMMA) after etching the nickel foam with hot HCl (or FeCl3/HCl) solution. (e) A freestanding 
GF after dissolving the PMMA layer with acetone. (f) A GF–PDMS composite after infiltration 
of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) into a GF. All the scale bars are 500 µm. Reproduced from 
[205] with permission of Nature Publishing Group

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
339
robust from the beginning. Despite the fact that this method uses graphene grown by 
chemical vapor deposition (CVD), the concept can be used for GO‐based compos-
ites as well. GO‐based aerogel can be a candidate for this purpose [206]. However, 
one should bear in mind that there are processing limits for this method (at least at 
the current state of technology!).
The above‐mentioned short guidelines may assist us in formulating electrically conductive 
composites; however, the final design depends on the application of the composites. For 
instance, the requirement for antistatic coatings is to achieve a certain surface resistance 
(105–109 Ω/Υ) [183]. In other words, the task is to decrease the resistance to that level. 
However, if the goal is to make a strain sensor, the network of graphene sheets in the matrix 
should be sensitive to mechanical stress and probably break and re‐form (or deform) revers-
ibly [207]. In this situation, the level of conductivity should be high enough that detectors 
can sense the current. However, even more important is that the response, which is usually 
the change of resistivity, should be high enough upon inducing strain [207]. This tells us 
that the design principles of composites should be innovatively implemented in the devel-
opment of the final composites.
10.2.3  Thermal Conductivity
Graphene possesses the record thermal conductivity (κ) of ~5000 W m−1 K−1 [208]. 
Graphene is stable in air atmosphere up to 450 °C and has a low anisotropic thermal expan-
sion coefficient [41]. These properties motivate us to mix graphene and its derivatives with 
polymers for improving thermal properties such as thermal conductivity, thermo‐mechani-
cal properties and dimensional stability [119]. Graphene inherits these properties from its 
native form, graphite [209]. As mentioned in the introduction, the thermal properties of 
graphite are at the core of many its commercial applications [209–211]. Can these thermal 
properties be translated into GO‐based composites?
First we discuss κ of composites based on GO. Usually, polymer materials have low κ (in 
the range of 0.1–0.5 W m−1 K−1), which is two orders of magnitude lower than that for met-
als. There is a demand for composite materials with moderately high κ (~10 W m−1 K−1), 
high processability and chemical resistance (and in some cases with low electrical conduc-
tivity) [9, 209–212]. These criteria eliminate the metals and many ceramic materials from 
the list and make polymeric materials potential candidates. In addition, coolant fluids need 
to possess high κ, and the performance of cooling systems can be significantly improved by 
increasing the thermal properties of the fluids used [213, 214].
A simple rule of mixing tells us that κ of polymeric composites containing materials 
such as CNTs or graphene can easily attain the above‐mentioned limit (~10 W m−1 K−1) 
even at loadings as low as 1 vol.%. However, in reality, the final results show that κ is much 
lower than the value predicted from the rule of mixing [212]:
	
κ
κ
κ
c
f
f
m
m
=
+
ϕ
ϕ 	
(10.5)
On the other hand, there is a lower boundary for hybrid properties of composites, which is 
expressed as the series model, as follows [212]:
	
κ
κ
κ
c
f
f
m
m
/
/
/
=
+
(
)
1 ϕ
ϕ
	
(10.6)

340
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
This tells us that, even at loadings as high as 50 vol.% (close to the packing volume 
­fraction!), the value of κc cannot be higher than twice the value of κm, which is much lower 
than the goal of 10 W m−1 K−1. Fortunately, the experimental results fall between these two 
predictions, and closer to what the series model suggests [9, 209, 212, 215]. As a result, to 
attain high conductivity values, very high loadings of fillers are inevitable. This is why 
more than half of the content of commercially available thermal greases are conductive 
fillers [216, 217].
Now, let us focus on the question of why κc is far from the value suggested by the ideal 
rule of mixing. The answer lies in thermal conduction at the interface. In fact, during the 
transport of phonons through the composite, there is a strong resistance as they meet the 
interface [212–214, 216]. Although one expects to observe a percolating behavior and a 
sudden jump of conductivity upon the formation of a 3D network in the matrix, the experi-
mental data do not support this, at least at lower filler contents [213–216]. Mainly κc is a 
linear function of φf rather than exponential [216]. There are still no certain rules and 
mechanisms that determine the slope of this linear function. But to understand it, or at least 
use it as a starting point, one needs to understand which factors dominate the interfacial 
(Kapitza) resistance (RK) [9, 209, 212–214]. One can imagine the interfacial resistance as 
follows. At a fixed heat flux (Q) applied to an interface, the temperature drop at the inter-
face (ΔT) is proportional to the interfacial resistance (RK ~ Q ΔT) [218]. The Kapitza resist-
ance RK depends on the composition of the interface and the lattice parameters of the 
materials at the interface [219]. For instance, the resistance between highly conductive 
metals (e.g. Cu/Al) is low because both possess similar heat carriers (electrons) [219]. 
However, the story about graphenic compounds becomes more complicated. The sp2 struc-
ture places them at the top of the κ table, but this unique atomic structure results in huge 
mismatches with other materials, especially insulating ones [209, 214, 219]. Therefore, 
despite the extremely high κ for graphenic materials, the κc of their composites is often 
dominated by their interfacial resistance with the matrix. Engineering these interfaces 
remains a challenge [212–214, 216, 217, 219].
Now, let us go back to the main topic of the chapter, GO‐based composites. Severe oxi-
dation of the graphenic lattice makes GO not only electrically but also thermally insulating. 
The κGO value is less than a few W m−1 K−1, yet κGO can be recovered upon efficient reduc-
tion. For instance, Balandin and coworkers [220] reported an enhancement of κGO from 3 to 
61 W m−1 K−1 upon annealing at 1000 °C, and predicted κ as high as 500 W m−1 K−1 with 
more efficient reduction. In another effort, Wallace and coworkers [100] reported an 
impressively high κRGO of 1435 W m−1 K−1 at room temperature for RGO fibers (along the 
axis) spun from a liquid crystalline phase of large‐sized GO (Figure 10.13). This is one of 
the highest values reported for any macroscopic carbon material [221]. These reports give 
us hope that GO can also be treated as a filler for enhancing κ. However, additional work is 
needed on the factors controlling κGO by making functionalized graphenic structures.
Looking at the thermally conductive composites, most of the studies on carbon materials 
have been focused on CNTs and graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs) [9, 209, 212, 217]. GNPs 
were found to be the most efficient filler to improve κ. For instance, Shahil and Balandin [216] 
report a 23‐fold increase in κ for an epoxy matrix merely by adding 10 vol.% of a mixture of 
graphene and GNPs. This level of enhancement is only achieved at loadings of around 
50 vol.% of a conventional filler (such as metal (oxide) particles) [216, 217]. There is huge 
interest in the hybridization of graphene (and RGO) with other conductive fillers such as 

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
341
CNTs or metal (oxide) particles [212, 215, 216, 222, 223]. This can lead to synergistic increase 
of κ or in some cases to reduction of electrical conductivity and retaining high κ [222].
It is also proven experimentally that fillers (CNTs, GNPs and probably RGO) with 
higher aspect ratio have a higher efficiency for increasing κ [214, 222]. As the filler–filler 
interface (especially in the case of graphenic fillers) has very high interfacial resistance, it 
is advantageous to use high‐aspect‐ratio fillers. It is proposed that engineering the interface 
by chemical bonding of polymer molecules to fillers decreases the interfacial resistance 
[209, 219], but at the same time the intrinsic κ of the filler is reduced. It actually remains an 
open question how and to what extent a chemical interaction between the filler and the 
matrix can affect κc. In the case of GO, where the graphene network is already damaged 
during oxidation, the covalent bonding of RGO to the matrix seems to be a logical strategy. 
However, reports on GO‐based composites with the goal of improving κ are limited, and 
the results so far are not as promising as with GNPs [9, 215, 216]. There is an idea that 
hybrids of RGO–GNPs can be good candidates, as the chemical structure (and probably 
lattice parameters!) of GOs is somewhere between pure graphene and polar polymers 
[224]. Placing GO at the interface of graphene (or graphite) and polymers may reduce the 
interfacial resistance. However, this idea is yet to be examined.
10.2.4  Barrier Properties
Transport of liquid and gas molecules through a polymeric film is a vital phenomenon for 
many applications, such as membranes, protective coatings, chemically resistive polymers, 
etc. Engineering the transport of small molecules through a polymer is crucial for those 
applications. GO turns out to show fascinating transport properties, especially selective 
10000
Thermal conductivity (W m–1K–1)
1000
100
10
0
100
200
Temperature (K)
300
400
200 μm
Figure 10.13  Temperature‐dependent thermal conductivity of RGO fiber fabricated from wet 
spinning of liquid crystalline dispersion of ultra‐large GO. Inset: Scanning electron micrograph 
of RGO fiber showing its flexibility. Reproduced from [100] with permission of Wiley‐VCH 
Verlag GmbH & Co

342
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
transport [225–229]. We will not discuss the details here, as they have been discussed in 
previous chapters. In the following, we consider GO as a disk‐shaped filler in polymeric 
media, and its impact on barrier properties in general.
Imagine that a molecule tries to penetrate through a matrix, and the graphene sheets 
block its way [230, 231]. This makes a “tortuous path” for the diffusion of a penetrant 
[232]. This is the case when graphenic sheets have no affinity to the penetrant; otherwise 
even faster (even ultrafast!) diffusion of penetrant is possible [225]. In the case of a tortu-
ous path, a simple analytical model suggests the highest impermeability by aligning the 
layered fillers perpendicular to the penetrant diffusion path (a “nematic‐phase” morphol-
ogy) [232] (Figure 10.14). In addition, the aspect ratio of the graphene sheets has a huge 
effect on the diffusion coefficient of composites, and an aspect ratio of 103 (ratio length to 
thickness) is shown to have high performance.
GO and its derivatives have a high chance to be used in composites for barrier applica-
tions as their orientation and size can be easily controlled. For instance, Kim et al. [230] 
S =– 1
2
S = 0
ϕs = 0.05
W = 1 nm
50
L (nm)
100
150
250
500
1000
S = 1
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Relative permeability (Ps/Pp)
0.0
–0.50
–0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
Order parameter (S)
0.75
1.00
Figure  10.14  Effect of sheet orientation and aspect ratio of nanoplatelets on the relative 
permeability in composites containing layered fillers. Illustrations (top) for three values of the 
order parameter, S = −½, 0 and 1. Relative permeability of composites at fixed content of filler 
increases with increasing filler orientation and aspect ratio (bottom). Reproduced from [232] 
with permission of ACS

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
343
reported an 80‐fold decrease in nitrogen permeability of a polyurethane matrix upon 
addition of 1.6 vol.% of functionalized GO. Recent reports also support the success of GO 
to enhance the barrier properties of polymer matrices [41, 103, 138, 230].
Apart from general‐purpose applications as a gas barrier (such as protective coatings or 
packaging), there is a need for fabrication of transparent super gas barriers mainly for the 
organic light‐emitting diode (OLED) industry and especially for flexible OLEDs [233, 
234]. The current technology is based on ceramic‐based fillers and these films are usually 
fragile and non‐flexible. Graphene‐based composites should meet the limit of about 
10−5 cm3 m−2 day−1 atm−1 for oxygen permeability to reach industrial acceptance [233, 234]. 
The design of such composites has challenged researchers for years, however; recent 
results have raised the hope that layered composites using 2D fillers including GO could 
serve as flexible super gas barriers [234–239] (Figure 10.15). Beside these breakthroughs, 
Substrate
PEI
1
4
GO
Anionic mixture
Uncoated
(PEI/GO0.05)10
(PEI/GO0.05)20
3
2
Cationic mixture
Rinse
&
Dry
Rinse
&
Dry
Branched polyethylenimine (PEI)
Graphene oxide (GO)
Figure 10.15  Developing a super gas barrier based on GO composites through layer‐by‐layer 
assembly on a plastic substrate resulting in a gas barrier with the performance of commercial 
ceramic gas barriers. Reproduced from [234] with permission of Wiley‐VCH Verlag GmbH & Co

344
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the fundamentals of molecular transport and even ions through atomically thin membranes 
challenge our current knowledge about the transport properties of materials [240, 241]. 
These lines of study need to be further pursued to complete our understanding of the 
graphene‐based barrier mechanisms and to suggest appropriate guidelines.
10.3  Graphene Oxide or Graphene Oxides?
The most crucial factor to process any material for composite production, apart from its 
cost effectiveness, is the existence of a consistent, reliable and standardized method for the 
production. This is, in fact, the factor that severely hindered the growth of CNT application 
for use in different sectors for more than a decade. To this end, many research efforts have 
been devoted to understanding GO formation [242], and consequently its final chemistry 
and structure [60, 243]. So far, however, most studies in the field have been theoretical 
[244, 245], lacking the experimental verification and prone to simple models. As such, 
there is an immediate need to launch production guidelines for certain sets of material qual-
ity specifications. This baseline, if established, can, in principle, enable the optimization 
and real‐time process control of GO production, leading to validated models for specific 
applications as required by different sectors.
To realize such a goal, a set of standard characterization procedures should be developed 
as an enabling platform to study the final properties of as‐prepared GO structures. It should 
be noted that there are various factors governing GO production that determine GO struc-
ture, its final properties and consequently the standardization of GO production. The most 
common of those include the size of the as‐prepared GO sheets, the medium in which the 
final material has been prepared and the purification process.
10.3.1  Size Effect
It has been shown that the size of GO has unprecedented effects on the final material struc-
ture properties, as it can be used to fine‐tune its amphiphilicity (Figure 10.16). This effect, 
first observed by Kim et al. [246], opened up an avenue of opportunities for the formula-
tion of GO‐based composite materials, as the amphiphilic GO can also act as a molecular 
dispersing agent to process insoluble materials such as graphite and carbon nanotubes in 
water [247–251]. This discovery opened the way toward GO/CNT composite formula-
tions with strong synergistic effect [248, 249, 251], and which showed unrivaled hydrogen 
storage capacity at room temperature [248]. Moreover, self‐assembling of GO sheets at 
the liquid–liquid interface paved the way for environmentally benign processes for the 
production of high‐quality polymer–graphene nanocomposites that are water‐based (no 
organic solvent is employed) and soap‐free (Figure 10.17) [252]. In these examples, the 
mixture of monomer, GO suspension and azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) can be emulsified 
using ultrasound to promote GO exfoliation and create emulsion droplets, which can be 
further polymerized [195, 253].
It should be noted that the dispersibility of GO in water and its hydrophilicity have been 
mainly attributed to the oxidized domains. In contrast, graphenic domains are hydrophobic 
[47, 246–248, 255]. With decreasing oxidation level of GO, the fraction of hydrophobic 
graphenic domains increases, rendering the structure less hydrophilic and leading to an 

O
O
O
OH
(a)
(b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
OH
OH
Go
Air
Water
CO2
8
Carbonated water subphase
Dl water subphase
7
6
5
4
3
2
Surface pressure (mN/m)
1
0
240 220 200 180 160 140
Area (cm2)
120 100 80
60
DI water subphase
Carbonated water
subphase
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
HO
HO
0.5 mm
0.5 mm
50 μm
50 μm
Figure 10.16  GO at the air − water interface. (a) GO can be viewed as a 2D molecular amphiphile, with hydrophobic π 
domains interspersed on its basal plane and hydrophilic − COOH groups on the edges, as shown in the structural model [47, 
246]. (b) Schematic illustration showing the flotation of GO in carbonated water. GO is first captured by the rising CO2 bubbles 
and then transported to the water surface. (c) Flotation experiment in a Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) trough, in which boiling stones 
were added to promote the evolution of bubbles, as shown in the inset. After flotation, the increased surface pressure (dashed 
red line) during isothermal compression indicates the presence of GO at the water surface. In contrast, the surface pressure of 
GO in deionized (DI) water remained nearly constant (solid blue line). Both (d) the in situ Brewster angle microscopy (BAM) 
images of the water surface and (e) the fluorescence quenching microscopy (FQM) images of GO sheets collected by dip 
coating show a massive increase of GO at the surface after flotation. Reproduced from [201] with permission of ACS

346
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
amphiphilic structure, which can serve as both a molecular amphiphile and a colloidal 
surfactant, simultaneously [247, 248, 255, 256]. GO sheets with extended lateral size have 
also been shown to exhibit overall better mechanical properties [257], electrochemical 
capacitance [248], hydrogen storage properties [249] and electrical properties after reduc-
tion [257], arising from the lower degree of non‐stoichiometric oxygen in their struc-
ture [249]. In contrast, the dominant hydrophilic nature of small GO sheets makes them an 
ideal material of choice for the preparation of GO–bioactive molecule composites for cel-
lular delivery [258]. Nevertheless, this important finding, for the first time, demonstrated 
the possibility of the existence of different non‐stoichiometric GO structures based on the 
size of the final GO sheets.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
PMMA
PMMA
PMMA
PMMA
300 nm
300nm
500 nm
1μm
Figure 10.17  Transmission electron micrographs of a PMMA–GO colloidal hybrid showing 
various arrangements of polymer particle–GO nanolayers. Insets show speculative schemes of 
the colloidal hybrids. Reproduced from [254] with permission of Elsevier

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
347
The size‐dependent properties of GO sheets also played an important role in the discov-
ery of GO liquid crystals [255, 259–261], and in subsequent processing of these materials 
in almost all industrially scalable fabrication methods [262], including but not limited to 
electrospraying, spray coating, a range of wet‐spinning techniques [262–266], inkjet print-
ing, 3D printing and dry spinning [262]. The discovery of GO liquid crystals then proved 
to be instrumental in guiding macroscopic, large‐scale, material self‐assembly at the atomic 
level through π–π stacking and hydrogen bonding interactions for composite formulations 
[254, 267–271].
10.3.2  Effect of Medium on GO Structure
The preparation of GO in organic solvents, first reported by Paredes et al. [272], facili-
tated the introduction of this material, beyond the original aqueous media solution‐phase 
manipulation, to new composite formulations with water‐sensitive metallic particles 
[273, 274], and water‐insoluble polymers [250]. However, this brought up a new chal-
lenge regarding mainly the structure of the new material. It is pertinent to mention that, 
although all these materials are conveniently called GO, the characterization techniques 
reveal that their structures might be different. As an example, it was shown that the cor-
responding layer‐by‐layer distance (d‐spacing) of each GO sample prepared in different 
organic solvents is varied consistent with the size of the organic solvent molecules 
(Figure 10.18).
XRD patterns of GO films prepared from dispersions in other organic solvents (N‐meth-
ylpyrrolidone, NMP) also showed similar results [142], further suggesting that individual 
GO sheets in organic solvents are interlinked via a non‐uniform network of hydrogen bonds 
mediated by oxygen functional groups and solvent molecules [250]. Thermogravimetric 
analysis (TGA) also showed that GO papers cast from organic solvents with high boiling 
points (154 °C for N‐cyclohexyl‐2‐pyrrolidone (CHP) and 153 °C for dimethylformamide 
(DMF), respectively) exhibit higher decomposition temperatures compared to GO paper 
cast from water. In contrast, GO papers cast from GO dispersions in volatile solvents (ace-
tone, tetrahydrofuran (THF) and ethanol) experienced weight loss at much lower tempera-
tures. This behavior can pinpoint possible confinement of solvent molecules during film 
formation. This, fundamentally, proposes that the structure of the so‐called GO in organic 
media is substantially different from that in water [142, 250]. Another interesting aspect, in 
this regard, is again the effect of the lateral size of the GO sheets. It has been shown that the 
extension of the size of the GO sheets to the range of a few to tens of micrometers can sup-
port the formation of fully dispersed, mostly monolayer GO sheets in polar aprotic solvents 
such as DMF with high stability [142, 250, 272–275], whereas small GO sheets cannot be 
exfoliated in such solvents [8, 276].
Nevertheless, the change in structure does not impose any significant problems regarding 
the performance of the final composite materials prepared from GO dispersions in organic 
solvents, at least from the mechanical properties point of view [250]. However, the applica-
tion of GO dispersions in organic solvents should be investigated more fundamentally.
10.3.3  The Purification Process
The purification process is also another factor that is often neglected by groups working 
in this field. This process, although playing an important key role in the exfoliation of 
graphite oxide, has been mostly simplified in an effort to scale up production without 

348
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
undertaking the proper and adequate systematic investigation required to fully understand 
the fundamentals. Quenching and purification processes have been shown to significantly 
affect the structure and properties of GO [277]. Dimiev et al. [277] demonstrated that, in 
contrast to common belief, there is a threshold oxidation degree (TOD) and the TOD does 
not change significantly upon the addition of excess oxidizing agents (i.e. the variation of 
the oxidation level has some upper limit). Moreover, they showed that prolonged purifica-
tion times are required if one wishes to remove the covalent sulfate moieties which can 
serve as a guideline for the scale‐up of the GO production processes [277]. As such, the 
oxidation protocol should not contribute considerably to any substantial change in the final 
structure [277]. The type of the initial graphite, however, can affect the final structure, as 
different graphite types yield different GO flake lateral sizes [255, 257, 264].
1.4
(a)
(b)
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Normalized intensity (a.u.)
0.2
0.0
100
90
80
70
60
50
50
100
150
200
250
Temperature (°C)
Weight loss (%)
7
8
9
10
2 Theta (°)
11
Water
Ethanol THFAcetone
CHP
CHP
THF
Acetone
Water
Ethanol
DMF
DMF
12
Figure 10.18  (a) XRD patterns and (b) TGA of GO films as a function of solvents. Reproduced 
from [250] with permission of American Chemical Society

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
349
10.3.4  Thermal Instability
GO is a highly energetic material with a high amount of stored chemical energy that can be 
readily released [278]. It has been demonstrated that, upon thermal reduction, GO is sub-
jected to disproportionation reactions. During these reactions, some part of the carbon 
atoms, typically around 10% of C atoms, will be fully oxidized to CO2, and the rest of the 
structure will be reduced to sp2 graphenic products [278]. However, this introduces carbon 
vacancies in the basal planes, leading to a defective graphene structure [279] (Figure 10.19).
This, in essence, means that the “thermal reduction” of GO cannot lead to high‐quality 
graphene, unless carbon atoms are added to the missing points through a carbonaceous 
atmosphere, or the arrangements of the carbon atoms are altered at elevated temperature 
(usually above 800 °C) [281, 282]. Another complication arising from the thermal instabil-
ity of GO is the limited shelf‐life of its solid form. Moreover, heating chunks of GO on a 
hotplate results in an explosive reaction as a direct consequence of the evolution of gaseous 
H2O and CO2 during the deoxygenation process (Figure 10.20).
These results suggest that the storage of large quantities of GO in its solid form can lead 
to fire hazards [278]. Additionally, it should be noted that, although GO is reported to have 
flame‐retarding properties, the remains of any residue salts in the structure can make the 
material highly flammable, as shown by Krishnan et al. [278]. This imposes other prob-
lems, as it suggests the wet storage, transport, processing and distribution of GO sheets, to 
make them safe [283]. Nevertheless, this suggests some additional opportunities for com-
posite making processes, as chemical reduction methods are not typically feasible for pre-
paring RGO–polymer composites. Heating of the final composites is not a good solution, 
either, as typically most polymers are unstable at elevated temperatures. However, in these 
cases, flash photothermal irradiation can serve as the reduction method of choice for 
“reducing” the GO structure into RGO with minimal penalty effect on the surrounding 
polymer [278, 284, 285].
10.3.5  Health Issues
For the safe production, handling and application of any materials, it is essential to thor-
oughly assess the possibility of human exposure to that material through inhalation, diges-
tion, skin contact, etc. However, as a direct result of the rapid development and growth of 
GO in different fields, the assessment of its potential health risks/hazards has not yet been 
methodically investigated. Nevertheless, with the introduction of more GO‐based compos-
ites to the market, and the development of new research applications, many in vitro studies 
have been devoted to evaluate its potential biohazards [286, 287]. It has been reported that 
the toxicity of GO is concentration‐dependent. It is suggested that the cytotoxicity stems 
from direct interactions between the cell membrane and GO nanosheets, leading to physi-
cal damage to the cell membrane [288]. However, it should be noted that the GO sheet sizes 
used here were all in the nanometer region. In contrast, in another study, it was shown that 
the size of the GO sheets plays an important role in its toxicity to A549 cells, a widely used 
model cell line for toxicity studies [289]. It was demonstrated that small GO sheets could 
cause the most serious oxidative stress to the cells, at a concentration as low as 10 µg ml−1. 
In contrast, no meaningful difference between cells exposed to large GO and medium GO 
was found [289]. Interestingly, in another account, in which the low cytotoxicity of GO was 
reported, the size of the GO sheets was found to be in the micrometer region [290]. 

350
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
Unfortunately, apart from one study that has shown the cytotoxicity of both medium GO 
sheets and small GO sheets [291], for other studies regarding GO‐induced cytotoxicity, 
genotoxicity and oxidative stress, the effect of size and consequently the structural differ-
ence of GO sheets with different sizes have not been investigated [226, 292–294]. However, 
the composites of GO with polyvinylpyrrolidone have been considered as an available 
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure  10.19  Synthesis, structural model and microstructures of GO sheets. (a) GO is 
typically synthesized by reacting graphite powder with strongly oxidizing agents such as 
KMnO4 in concentrated H2SO4, followed by purification and exfoliation in water to yield a 
colloidal dispersion of single layers. (b) Structural model of graphene (left), GO (middle) and 
its reduction product RGO. GO is insulating due to broken conjugation in the basal plane. 
After reduction, RGO becomes conductive, but it is still a very defective structure compared 
to graphene. Reproduced with permission from Ref. [278]. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. (c) Color‐
coded high‐resolution TEM images showing the atomic structures of graphene (left), GO 
(middle) and RGO (right). The green, purple and blue areas depict ordered graphitic sp2 
domains, disordered highly oxidized sp3 domains, and holes on the sheet, respectively. 
Reproduced from [280] with permission of John Wiley & Sons

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
351
candidate as an immunoadjuvant to promote vaccine efficacy, just like the colloid alu-
minum hydroxide [295]. As such, the health effects of different structures of GO sheets is 
still unclear and should be more carefully investigated, which requires an interdisciplinary 
effort. Until such studies are performed, precaution in handling and application of GO in 
different sectors is suggested.
10.3.6  Environmental Impact
Recent research efforts have revealed the negative environmental impact of small and 
medium GO sheets on the wastewater microbial community, signifying the potential of GO 
to impede the crucial microbial functions needed in activated sludge processes, such as 
removal of organic matter and other nutrients from wastewater [296]. However, more stud-
ies in this regard should be conducted, as the environmental impact of GO is an important 
factor determining the application of this material in various fields.
10.4  Conclusion
Constructing multi‐functional hybrid nanocomposites, which exhibit simultaneous 
improvement in mechanical, thermal, electrical, electrochemical and optical aspects with 
no or minimal environmental and health impact penalties, is an ambitious frontier research 
that is yet to be realized. In this regard, GO and its derivatives enjoy a unique tunable 
amphiphilic structure that gives them an edge in a wide range of composite making 
0.01 s
0.01 s
0.01 s
0.01 s
0.01 s
Figure 10.20  Snapshots showing the explosion of a piece of GO solid inside a Petri dish a few 
seconds after being placed on a hotplate preheated to 300 °C. Before explosion, water vapor 
was driven out of the GO paper and condensed on the top cover as highlighted by the white 
broken circle. Reproduced from [278] with permission of Elsevier

352
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
strategies. It has been successfully demonstrated that GO and its derivatives can have 
immense positive impact on the final properties of the matrix in almost all areas mentioned 
above, especially when the high lateral size of GO is preserved. However, there are still 
many fundamental questions that should be answered before harnessing the full potential 
of this exciting material for real‐life applications. These questions range from a complete 
systematic study of the toxicity of all these different types of GO‐based structures (RGO, 
tpGO, GO, GrO) with different lateral sizes and oxidation levels, to a more fundamental 
understanding of the structure and the consequent processing pathways.
References
[1]	 Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.; et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon 
films. Science 2004, 306 (5696), 666–669.
[2]	 Geim, A.K.; Novoselov, K.S., The rise of graphene. Nature Mater. 2007, 6 (3), 183–191.
[3]	 Geim, A.K., Nobel Lecture: Random walk to graphene. Rev. Mod. Phys. 2011, 83 (3), 851.
[4]	 Pierson, H.O., Handbook of Carbon, Graphite, Diamonds and Fullerenes: Processing, 
Properties and Applications. William Andrew, Park Ridge, NJ, 1994.
[5]	 Zabel, H.; Solin, S.A. (eds), Graphite Intercalation Compounds I: Structure and Dynamics. 
Springer Series in Materials Science, vol. 14. Springer, Berlin, 1990.
[6]	 Chung, D.D.L., Review: Graphite. J. Mater. Sci. 2002, 37 (8), 1475–1489.
[7]	 Li, B.; Zhong, W.‐H., Review on polymer/graphite nanoplatelet nanocomposites. J. Mater. Sci. 
2011, 46 (17), 5595–5614.
[8]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R.D.; et al., Synthesis of graphene‐based nanosheets via 
chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 2007, 45 (7), 1558–1565.
[9]	 Sadasivuni, K.K.; Ponnamma, D.; Thomas, S.; Grohens, Y., Evolution from graphite to graphene 
elastomer composites. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2014, 39 (4), 749–780.
[10]	 Kroto, H.W.; Heath, J.R.; O’Brien, S.C.; et al., C60: buckminsterfullerene. Nature 1985, 318 
(6042), 162–163.
[11]	 Iijima, S., Helical microtubules of graphitic carbon. Nature 1991, 354 (6348), 56–58.
[12]	 Thompson, B.C.; Fréchet, J.M.J., Polymer–fullerene composite solar cells. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed. 2008, 47 (1), 58–77.
[13]	 Spitalsky, Z.; Tasis, D.; Papagelis, K.; Galiotis, C., Carbon nanotube–polymer composites: 
chemistry, processing, mechanical and electrical properties. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2010, 35 (3), 
357–401.
[14]	 Richard, C.; Balavoine, F.; Schultz, P.; et al., Supramolecular self‐assembly of lipid derivatives 
on carbon nanotubes. Science 2003, 300 (5620), 775–778.
[15]	 Gogotsi, Y.; Presser, V., Carbon Nanomaterials, 2nd edn. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2013.
[16]	 Chung, D., Exfoliation of graphite. J. Mater. Sci. 1987, 22 (12), 4190–4198.
[17]	 Pan, Y.X.; Yu, Z.Z.; Ou, Y.C.; Hu, G.H., A new process of fabricating electrically conducting 
nylon 6/graphite nanocomposites via intercalation polymerization. J. Polym. Sci. B: Polym. 
Phys. 2000, 38 (12), 1626–1633.
[18]	 Zurutuza, A.; Marinelli, C., Challenges and opportunities in graphene commercialization. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 730–734.
[19]	 Feytis, A., The bright side of graphite. Indust. Miner. 2010, July (514), 31–39.
[20]	 Aylsworth, J.W., Expanded graphite and composition thereof. US Patent 1137373, 1915.
[21]	 Anderson, S.; Chung, D., Exfoliation of intercalated graphite. Carbon 1984, 22 (3), 253–263.
[22]	 Sengupta, R.; Bhattacharya, M.; Bandyopadhyay, S.; Bhowmick, A.K., A review on the 
mechanical and electrical properties of graphite and modified graphite reinforced polymer 
composites. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2011, 36 (5), 638–670.
[23]	 Li, J.; Kim, J.‐K.; Sham, M.L., Conductive graphite nanoplatelet/epoxy nanocomposites: effects 
of exfoliation and UV/ozone treatment of graphite. Scr. Mater. 2005, 53 (2), 235–240.
[24]	 Brodie, B.C., On the atomic weight of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 1859, 149, 249–259.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
353
[25]	 Olsen, L.C.; Seeman, S.E.; Scott, H.W., Expanded pyrolytic graphite: structural and transport 
properties. Carbon 1970, 8 (1), 85–93.
[26]	 Dresselhaus, M.; Dresselhaus, G., Intercalation compounds of graphite. Adv. Phys. 1981, 30 (2), 
139–326.
[27]	 Weller, T.E.; Ellerby, M.; Saxena, S.S.; et al., Superconductivity in the intercalated graphite 
compounds C6Yb and C6Ca. Nature Phys. 2005, 1 (1), 39–41.
[28]	 Hannay, N.; Geballe, T.; Matthias, B.; et al., Superconductivity in graphitic compounds. Phys. 
Rev. Lett. 1965, 14 (7), 225.
[29]	 Schweizer, E., Analyse des Porphyrs von Kreuznach im Nahethale. J. Prakt. Chem. 1841, 22 
(1), 155–158.
[30]	 Jang, B.Z.; Zhamu, A., Processing of nanographene platelets (NGPs) and NGP nanocompos-
ites: a review. J. Mater. Sci. 2008, 43 (15), 5092–5101.
[31]	 McAllister, M.J.; Li, J.‐L.; Adamson, D.H.; et al., Single sheet functionalized graphene by 
oxidation and thermal expansion of graphite. Chem. Mater. 2007, 19 (18), 4396–4404.
[32]	 Cai, M.; Thorpe, D.; Adamson, D.H.; Schniepp, H.C., Methods of graphite exfoliation. J. Mater. 
Chem. 2012, 22 (48), 24992–25002.
[33]	 Viculis, L.M.; Mack, J.J.; Kaner, R.B., A chemical route to carbon nanoscrolls. Science 2003, 
299 (5611), 1361.
[34]	 Viculis, L.M.; Mack, J.J.; Mayer, O.M.; et al., Intercalation and exfoliation routes to graphite 
nanoplatelets. J. Mater. Chem. 2005, 15 (9), 974–978.
[35]	 Su, C.‐Y.; Lu, A.‐Y.; Xu, Y.; et al., High‐quality thin graphene films from fast electrochemical 
exfoliation. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (3), 2332–2339.
[36]	 Usuki, A.; Kojima, Y.; Kawasumi, M.; et al., Synthesis of nylon 6–clay hybrid. J. Mater. Res. 
1993, 8 (5), 1179–1184.
[37]	 Okada, A.; Usuki, A., Twenty years of polymer–clay nanocomposites. Macromol. Mater. Eng. 
2006, 291 (12), 1449–1476.
[38]	 Mack, J.J.; Viculis, L.M.; Ali, A.; et al., Graphite nanoplatelet reinforcement of electrospun 
polyacrylonitrile nanofibers. Adv. Mater. 2005, 17 (1), 77–80.
[39]	 Ajayan, P.M.; Schadler, L.S.; Braun, P.V., Nanocomposite Science and Technology. Wiley‐VCH, 
Weinheim, 2003.
[40]	 Krishnamoorti, R.; Vaia, R.A., Polymer Nanocomposites: Synthesis, Characterization, and 
Modeling. ACS Symposium Series 804. American Chemical Society, Washington, DC, 2002.
[41]	 Mukhopadhyay, P.; Gupta, R.K., Graphite, Graphene, and Their Polymer Nanocomposites. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2013.
[42]	 Choi, W.; Lee, J.‐W., Graphene: Synthesis and Applications. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2012.
[43]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Fischer, G.; Hofmann, U., Surface properties of extremely thin graph-
ite lamellae. In Carbon: Proceedings of the Fifth Conference, vol. 1, pp. 73–80. Pergamon 
Press, Oxford, 1962.
[44]	 Boehm, H.‐P., Graphene – how a laboratory curiosity suddenly became extremely interesting. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (49), 9332–9335.
[45]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Ruoff, R.S.; Bielawski, C.W., From conception to realization: an historial account 
of graphene and some perspectives for its future. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (49), 9336–9344.
[46]	 Jeong, H.‐K.; Lee, Y.P.; Lahaye, R.J.W.E.; et al., Evidence of graphitic AB stacking order of 
graphite oxides. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (4), 1362–1366.
[47]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J., Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[48]	 Cai, W.; Piner, R.D.; Stadermann, F.J.; et al., Synthesis and solid‐state NMR structural charac-
terization of 13C‐labeled graphite oxide. Science 2008, 321 (5897), 1815–1817.
[49]	 Gao, W.; Alemany, L.B.; Ci, L.; Ajayan, P.M., New insights into the structure and reduction of 
graphite oxide. Nature Chem. 2009, 1 (5), 403–408.
[50]	 Matsuo, Y.; Miyabe, T.; Fukutsuka, T.; Sugie, Y., Preparation and characterization of alkylamine‐
intercalated graphite oxides. Carbon 2007, 45 (5), 1005–1012.
[51]	 Bourlinos, A.B.; Gournis, D.; Petridis, D.; et al., Graphite oxide: chemical reduction to graphite 
and surface modification with primary aliphatic amines and amino acids. Langmuir 2003, 19 
(15), 6050–6055.

354
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[52]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Dommett, G.H.; et  al., Graphene‐based composite materials. 
Nature 2006, 442 (7100), 282–286.
[53]	 Kotov, N.A.; Dékány, I.; Fendler, J.H., Ultrathin graphite oxide–polyelectrolyte composites 
prepared by self‐assembly: transition between conductive and non‐conductive states. Adv. 
Mater. 1996, 8 (8), 637–641.
[54]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin com-
posite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 11 
(3), 771–778.
[55]	 Novoselov, K.; Jiang, D.; Schedin, F.; et al., Two‐dimensional atomic crystals. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 2005, 102 (30), 10451–10453.
[56]	 Geim, A.; Grigorieva, I., Van der Waals heterostructures. Nature 2013, 499 (7459), 419–425.
[57]	 Baughman, R.H.; Zakhidov, A.A.; de Heer, W.A., Carbon nanotubes – the route toward applica-
tions. Science 2002, 297 (5582), 787–792.
[58]	 Ruoff, R., Graphene: calling all chemists. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (1), 10–11.
[59]	 Grossiord, N.; Loos, J.; Regev, O.; Koning, C.E., Toolbox for dispersing carbon nanotubes into 
polymers to get conductive nanocomposites. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18 (5), 1089–1099.
[60]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[61]	 Chen, D.; Feng, H.; Li, J., Graphene oxide: preparation, functionalization, and electrochemical 
applications. Chem. Rev. 2012, 112 (11), 6027–6053.
[62]	 Lomeda, J.R.; Doyle, C.D.; Kosynkin, D.V.; et al., Diazonium functionalization of surfactant‐
wrapped chemically converted graphene sheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (48), 16201–16206.
[63]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Friedel–Crafts acylation on graphene. Chemistry – Asian J. 2012, 7 
(5), 1009–1012.
[64]	 Hamilton, C.E.; Lomeda, J.R.; Sun, Z.; et al., Radical addition of perfluorinated alkyl iodides to 
multi‐layered graphene and single‐walled carbon nanotubes. Nano Res. 2010, 3 (2), 138–145.
[65]	 Lee, S.H.; Dreyer, D.R.; An, J.; et al., Polymer brushes via controlled, surface‐initiated atom 
transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) from graphene oxide. Macromol. Rapid Commun. 2010, 
31 (3), 281–288.
[66]	 Fang, M.; Wang, K.; Lu, H.; et al., Covalent polymer functionalization of graphene nanosheets 
and mechanical properties of composites. J. Mater. Chem. 2009, 19 (38), 7098–7105.
[67]	 Collins, W.R.; Lewandowski, W.; Schmois, E.; et al., Claisen rearrangement of graphite oxide: 
a route to covalently functionalized graphenes. Angew. Chem. 2011, 123 (38), 9010–9014.
[68]	 Xu, Y.; Bai, H.; Lu, G.; et al., Flexible graphene films via the filtration of water‐soluble nonco-
valent functionalized graphene sheets. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (18), 5856–5857.
[69]	 Zhang, M.; Parajuli, R.R.; Mastrogiovanni, D.; et al., Production of graphene sheets by direct 
dispersion with aromatic healing agents. Small 2010, 6 (10), 1100–1107.
[70]	 Jankovsky, O.; Simek, P.; Klimova, K.; et  al., Towards graphene bromide: bromination of 
graphite oxide. Nanoscale 2014, 6 (11), 6065–6074.
[71]	 Jeon, I.‐Y.; Shin, Y.‐R.; Sohn, G.‐J.; et al., Edge‐carboxylated graphene nanosheets via ball 
milling. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2012, 109 (15), 5588–5593.
[72]	 Dai, L., Functionalization of graphene for efficient energy conversion and storage. Acc. Chem. 
Res. 2012, 46 (1), 31–42.
[73]	 Ajayan, P.M.; Tour, J.M., Materials science: nanotube composites. Nature 2007, 447 (7148), 
1066–1068.
[74]	 Yan, L.; Zheng, Y.B.; Zhao, F.; et al., Chemistry and physics of a single atomic layer: strategies 
and challenges for functionalization of graphene and graphene‐based materials. Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2012, 41 (1), 97–114.
[75]	 Hernandez, Y.; Nicolosi, V.; Lotya, M.; et al., High‐yield production of graphene by liquid‐
phase exfoliation of graphite. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (9), 563–568.
[76]	 Bergin, S.D.; Sun, Z.; Rickard, D.; et al., Multicomponent solubility parameters for single‐
walled carbon nanotube − solvent mixtures. ACS Nano 2009, 3 (8), 2340–2350.
[77]	 Lotya, M.; Hernandez, Y.; King, P.J.; et al., Liquid phase production of graphene by exfoliation 
of graphite in surfactant/water solutions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (10), 3611–3620.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
355
[78]	 Islam, M.; Rojas, E.; Bergey, D.; et al., High weight fraction surfactant solubilization of 
single‐wall carbon nanotubes in water. Nano Lett. 2003, 3 (2), 269–273.
[79]	 Coleman, J.N., Liquid‐phase exfoliation of nanotubes and graphene. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 
19 (23), 3680–3695.
[80]	 Zhou, K.G.; Mao, N.N.; Wang, H.X.; et al., A mixed‐solvent strategy for efficient exfoliation 
of inorganic graphene analogues. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (46), 10839–10842.
[81]	 Backes, C.; Hauke, F.; Hirsch, A., The potential of perylene bisimide derivatives for the solu-
bilization of carbon nanotubes and graphene. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 (22–23), 2588–2601.
[82]	 Moore, V.C.; Strano, M.S.; Haroz, E.H.; et al., Individually suspended single‐walled carbon 
nanotubes in various surfactants. Nano Lett. 2003, 3 (10), 1379–1382.
[83]	 Park, S.; An, J.; Potts, J.R.; et  al., Hydrazine‐reduction of graphite‐ and graphene oxide. 
Carbon 2011, 49 (9), 3019–3023.
[84]	 Kotov, N.A., Materials science: carbon sheet solutions. Nature 2006, 442 (7100), 254–255.
[85]	 Editorial, Ten years in two dimensions. Nature Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 725.
[86]	 Hodge, S.A.; Bayazit, M.K.; Coleman, K.S.; Shaffer, M.S.P., Unweaving the rainbow: a 
review of the relationship between single‐walled carbon nanotube molecular structures and 
their chemical reactivity. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 (12), 4409–4429.
[87]	 Wang, X.; Zhi, L.; Müllen, K., Transparent, conductive graphene electrodes for dye‐sensitized 
solar cells. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (1), 323–327.
[88]	 Stoller, M.D.; Park, S.; Zhu, Y.; et al., Graphene‐based ultracapacitors. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 
(10), 3498–3502.
[89]	 Liu, Z.; Robinson, J.T.; Sun, X.; Dai, H., PEGylated nanographene oxide for delivery of water‐
insoluble cancer drugs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2008, 130 (33), 10876–10877.
[90]	 Eda, G.; Fanchini, G.; Chhowalla, M., Large‐area ultrathin films of reduced graphene oxide as 
a transparent and flexible electronic material. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (5), 270–274.
[91]	 Wu, Z.; Chen, Z.; Du, X.; et al., Transparent, conductive carbon nanotube films. Science 2004, 
305 (5688), 1273–1276.
[92]	 Dikin, D.A.; Stankovich, S.; Zimney, E.J.; et al., Preparation and characterization of graphene 
oxide paper. Nature 2007, 448 (7152), 457–460.
[93]	 Bae, S.; Kim, H.; Lee, Y.; et al., Roll‐to‐roll production of 30‐inch graphene films for transpar-
ent electrodes. Nature Nanotechnol. 2010, 5 (8), 574–578.
[94]	 Zheng, Q.B.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Wang, S.J.; et al., Improved electrical and optical characteristics 
of transparent graphene thin films produced by acid and doping treatments. Carbon 2011, 49 
(9), 2905–2916.
[95]	 Dettlaff‐Weglikowska, U.; Skákalová, V.; Graupner, R.; et al., Effect of SOCl2 treatment on 
electrical and mechanical properties of single‐wall carbon nanotube networks. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2005, 127 (14), 5125–5131.
[96]	 Arnold, M.S.; Green, A.A.; Hulvat, J.F.; et al., Sorting carbon nanotubes by electronic struc-
ture using density differentiation. Nature Nanotechnol. 2006, 1 (1), 60–65.
[97]	 Green, A.A.; Hersam, M.C., Solution phase production of graphene with controlled thickness 
via density differentiation. Nano Lett. 2009, 9 (12), 4031–4036.
[98]	 Behabtu, N.; Lomeda, J.R.; Green, M.J.; et al., Spontaneous high‐concentration dispersions 
and liquid crystals of graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2010, 5 (6), 406–411.
[99]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Graphene chiral liquid crystals and macroscopic assembled fibres. Nature 
Commun. 2011, 2, 571.
[100]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Scalable one‐step wet‐spinning of graphene 
fibers and yarns from liquid crystalline dispersions of graphene oxide: towards multifunctional 
textiles. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 23 (43), 5345–5354.
[101]	 Ericson, L.M.; Fan, H.; Peng, H.; et al., Macroscopic, neat, single‐walled carbon nanotube 
fibers. Science 2004, 305 (5689), 1447–1450.
[102]	 Tasis, D.; Tagmatarchis, N.; Bianco, A.; Prato, M., Chemistry of carbon nanotubes. Chem. 
Rev. 2006, 106 (3), 1105–1136.
[103]	 Kuilla, T.; Bhadra, S.; Yao, D.; et al., Recent advances in graphene based polymer composites. 
Prog. Polym. Sci. 2010, 35 (11), 1350–1375.

356
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[104]	 Zhang, D.; Ryu, K.; Liu, X.; et al., Transparent, conductive, and flexible carbon nanotube films 
and their application in organic light‐emitting diodes. Nano Lett. 2006, 6 (9), 1880–1886.
[105]	 Endo, M.; Muramatsu, H.; Hayashi, T.; et al., Nanotechnology: “buckypaper” from coaxial 
nanotubes. Nature 2005, 433 (7025), 476.
[106]	 Ramanathan, T.; Abdala, A.A.; Stankovich, S.; et al., Functionalized graphene sheets for 
polymer nanocomposites. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (6), 327–331.
[107]	 Sanchez, V.C.; Jachak, A.; Hurt, R.H.; Kane, A.B., Biological interactions of graphene‐family 
nanomaterials: an interdisciplinary review. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2012, 25 (1), 15–34.
[108]	 Akhavan, O.; Ghaderi, E., Toxicity of graphene and graphene oxide nanowalls against bacteria. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4 (10), 5731–5736.
[109]	 Lacerda, L.; Bianco, A.; Prato, M.; Kostarelos, K., Carbon nanotubes as nanomedicines: from 
toxicology to pharmacology. Adv. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2006, 58 (14), 1460–1470.
[110]	 Kostarelos, K.; Novoselov, K.S., Graphene devices for life. Nature Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 
744–745.
[111]	 Gedde, U.W., Polymer Physics. Springer, Dordrecht, 1995.
[112]	 Cowie, J.M.G.; Arrighi, V., Polymers: Chemistry and Physics of Modern Materials, 3rd edn. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2008.
[113]	 Chandrasekhar, P., Conducting Polymers, Fundamentals and Applications: A Practical 
Approach. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, 1999.
[114]	 Tsai, S.W.; Hahn, H.T., Introduction to Composite Materials. Technomic, Lancaster, PA, 1980.
[115]	 Yu, Z.; Li, L.; Zhang, Q.; et al., Silver nanowire–polymer composite electrodes for efficient 
polymer solar cells. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 (38), 4453–4457.
[116]	 Yousefi, N.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Self‐alignment and high electrical conductivity 
of ultralarge graphene oxide–polyurethane nanocomposites. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (25), 
12709–12717.
[117]	 Yu, C.; Kim, Y.S.; Kim, D.; Grunlan, J.C., Thermoelectric behavior of segregated‐network 
polymer nanocomposites. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (12), 4428–4432.
[118]	 Du, J.; Zhao, L.; Zeng, Y.; et al., Comparison of electrical properties between multi‐walled 
carbon nanotube and graphene nanosheet/high density polyethylene composites with a segre-
gated network structure. Carbon 2011, 49 (4), 1094–1100.
[119]	 Kim, H.; Abdala, A.A.; Macosko, C.W., Graphene/polymer nanocomposites. Macromolecules 
2010, 43 (16), 6515–6530.
[120]	 Park, Y.T.; Qian, Y.; Chan, C.; et al., Epoxy toughening with low graphene loading. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2015, 25 (4), 575–585.
[121]	 Rafiee, M.A.; Rafiee, J.; Wang, Z.; et al., Enhanced mechanical properties of nanocomposites 
at low graphene content. ACS Nano 2009, 3 (12), 3884–3890.
[122]	 Ning, H.; Li, J.; Hu, N.; et al., Interlaminar mechanical properties of carbon fiber reinforced 
plastic laminates modified with graphene oxide interleaf. Carbon 2015, 91, 224–233.
[123]	 Walther, A.; Bjurhager, I.; Malho, J.‐M.; et al., Large‐area, lightweight and thick biomimetic 
composites with superior material properties via fast, economic, and green pathways. Nano 
Lett. 2010, 10 (8), 2742–2748.
[124]	 Pugno, N.M., Space elevator: out of order? Nano Today 2007, 2 (6), 44–47.
[125]	 Chen, H.; Müller, M.B.; Gilmore, K.J.; et al., Mechanically strong, electrically conductive, 
and biocompatible graphene paper. Adv. Mater. 2008, 20 (18), 3557–3561.
[126]	 Lee, C.; Wei, X.; Kysar, J.W.; Hone, J., Measurement of the elastic properties and intrinsic 
strength of monolayer graphene. Science 2008, 321 (5887), 385–388.
[127]	 Luong, N.D.; Hippi, U.; Korhonen, J.T.; et al., Enhanced mechanical and electrical properties 
of polyimide film by graphene sheets via in situ polymerization. Polymer 2011, 52 (23), 
5237–5242.
[128]	 Gómez‐Navarro, C.; Burghard, M.; Kern, K., Elastic properties of chemically derived single 
graphene sheets. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (7), 2045–2049.
[129]	 Suk, J.W.; Piner, R.D.; An, J.; Ruoff, R.S., Mechanical properties of monolayer graphene 
oxide. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (11), 6557–6564.
[130]	 Gong, L.; Kinloch, I.A.; Young, R.J.; et al., Interfacial stress transfer in a graphene monolayer 
nanocomposite. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (24), 2694–2697.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
357
[131]	 Cadek, M.; Coleman, J.N.; Ryan, K.P.; et al., Reinforcement of polymers with carbon nano-
tubes:  the role of nanotube surface area. Nano Lett. 2004, 4 (2), 353–356.
[132]	 Coleman, J.N.; Khan, U.; Gun’ko, Y.K., Mechanical reinforcement of polymers using carbon 
nanotubes. Adv. Mater. 2006, 18 (6), 689–706.
[133]	 Coleman, J.N.; Khan, U.; Blau, W.J.; Gun’ko, Y.K., Small but strong: a review of the mechanical 
properties of carbon nanotube–polymer composites. Carbon 2006, 44 (9), 1624–1652.
[134]	 Young, R.J.; Kinloch, I.A.; Gong, L.; Novoselov, K.S., The mechanics of graphene nanocom-
posites: a review. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2012, 72 (12), 1459–1476.
[135]	 Gong, L.; Young, R.J.; Kinloch, I.A.; et al., Optimizing the reinforcement of polymer‐based 
nanocomposites by graphene. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (3), 2086–2095.
[136]	 Liang, J.; Huang, Y.; Zhang, L.; et al., Molecular level dispersion of graphene into poly(vinyl 
alcohol) and effective reinforcement of their nanocomposites. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2009, 19 
(14), 2297–2302.
[137]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Sharif, F., Enhancement of dispersion and bonding of graphene–polymer 
through wet transfer of functionalized graphene oxide. Express Polym. Lett. 2012, 6 (12), 
1017–1031.
[138]	 Yousefi, N.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Highly aligned, ultralarge‐size reduced gra-
phene oxide/polyurethane nanocomposites: mechanical properties and moisture permeability. 
Composites A 2013, 49, 42–50.
[139]	 Rafiee, M.A.; Lu, W.; Thomas, A.V.; et  al., Graphene nanoribbon composites. ACS Nano 
2010, 4 (12), 7415–7420.
[140]	 Mallick, P.K., Fiber‐Reinforced Composites: Materials, Manufacturing, and Design, 3rd edn. 
CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2008.
[141]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.B.; Kim, J.‐K., Spontaneous formation of liquid 
crystals in ultralarge graphene oxide dispersions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21 (15), 2978–2988.
[142]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Moghadam, M.H.M.; Sharif, F., Spontaneous exfoliation of graphite oxide in 
polar aprotic solvents as the route to produce graphene oxide–organic solvents liquid crystals. 
Carbon 2013, 64, 403–415.
[143]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S. H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Formation and processability of liquid 
crystalline dispersions of graphene oxide. Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1 (1), 87–91.
[144]	 Crosby, A.J.; Lee, J.Y., Polymer nanocomposites: the “nano” effect on mechanical properties. 
Polym. Rev. 2007, 47 (2), 217–229.
[145]	 Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; Huang, J., Langmuir − Blodgett assembly of graphite oxide single layers. 
J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (3), 1043–1049.
[146]	 Kulkarni, D.D.; Choi, I.; Singamaneni, S.S.; Tsukruk, V.V., Graphene oxide − polyelectrolyte 
nanomembranes. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (8), 4667–4676.
[147]	 Ansari, S.; Kelarakis, A.; Estevez, L.; Giannelis, E.P., Oriented arrays of graphene in a poly-
mer matrix by in situ reduction of graphite oxide nanosheets. Small 2010, 6 (2), 205–209.
[148]	 Putz, K.W.; Compton, O.C.; Palmeri, M.J.; et al., High‐nanofiller‐content graphene oxide–
polymer nanocomposites via vacuum‐assisted self‐assembly. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (19), 
3322–3329.
[149]	 Xie, X.‐L.; Mai, Y.‐W.; Zhou, X.‐P., Dispersion and alignment of carbon nanotubes in polymer 
matrix: a review. Mater. Sci. Eng. R – Rep. 2005, 49 (4), 89–112.
[150]	 Kim, H.; Macosko, C.W., Processing–property relationships of polycarbonate/graphene com-
posites. Polymer 2009, 50 (15), 3797–3809.
[151]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Jalili, R.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., High‐performance multifunctional graphene 
yarns: toward wearable all‐carbon energy storage textiles. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (3), 2456–2466.
[152]	 Xu, Y.; Hong, W.; Bai, H.; et al., Strong and ductile poly(vinyl alcohol)/graphene oxide com-
posite films with a layered structure. Carbon 2009, 47 (15), 3538–3543.
[153]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., In situ polymerization approach to graphene‐reinforced nylon‐6 composites. 
Macromolecules 2010, 43 (16), 6716–6723.
[154]	 Huang, X.; Qi, X.; Boey, F.; Zhang, H., Graphene‐based composites. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 
(2), 666–686.
[155]	 Suhr, J.; Victor, P.; Ci, L.; et al., Fatigue resistance of aligned carbon nanotube arrays under 
cyclic compression. Nature Nanotechnol. 2007, 2 (7), 417–421.

358
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[156]	 Koratkar, N.A.; Suhr, J.; Joshi, A.; et al., Characterizing energy dissipation in single‐walled 
carbon nanotube polycarbonate composites. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2005, 87 (6), 063102.
[157]	 Suhr, J.; Koratkar, N.; Keblinski, P.; Ajayan, P., Viscoelasticity in carbon nanotube composites. 
Nature Mater. 2005, 4 (2), 134–137.
[158]	 Ash, B.J.; Siegel, R.W.; Schadler, L.S., Mechanical behavior of alumina/poly(methyl meth-
acrylate) nanocomposites. Macromolecules 2004, 37 (4), 1358–1369.
[159]	 Koratkar, N.; Wei, B.Q.; Ajayan, P.M., Carbon nanotube films for damping applications. Adv. 
Mater. 2002, 14 (13–14), 997–1000.
[160]	 Espinosa, H.D.; Juster, A.L.; Latourte, F.J.; et al., Tablet‐level origin of toughening in abalone 
shells and translation to synthetic composite materials. Nature Commun. 2011, 2, 173.
[161]	 Jackson, A.; Vincent, J.; Turner, R., The mechanical design of nacre. Proc. R. Soc. B: Biol. Sci. 
1988, 234 (1277), 415–440.
[162]	 Bonderer, L.J.; Studart, A.R.; Gauckler, L.J., Bioinspired design and assembly of platelet rein-
forced polymer films. Science 2008, 319 (5866), 1069–1073.
[163]	 Podsiadlo, P.; Kaushik, A.K.; Arruda, E.M.; et al., Ultrastrong and stiff layered polymer nano-
composites. Science 2007, 318 (5847), 80–83.
[164]	 Tang, Z.; Kotov, N.A.; Magonov, S.; Ozturk, B., Nanostructured artificial nacre. Nature Mater. 
2003, 2 (6), 413–418.
[165]	 Cui, W.; Li, M.; Liu, J.; et al., Strong integrated strength and toughness artificial nacre based 
on dopamine cross‐linked graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (9), 9511–9517.
[166]	 Cheng, Q.; Wu, M.; Li, M.; et al., Ultratough artificial nacre based on conjugated cross‐linked 
graphene oxide. Angew. Chem. 2013, 125 (13), 3838–3843.
[167]	 Zhang, M.; Huang, L.; Chen, J.; et al., Ultratough, ultrastrong, and highly conductive graphene 
films with arbitrary sizes. Adv. Mater. 2014, 26 (45), 7588–7592.
[168]	 Liu, Z.; Xu, Z.; Hu, X.; Gao, C., Lyotropic liquid crystal of polyacrylonitrile‐grafted graphene 
oxide and its assembled continuous strong nacre‐mimetic fibers. Macromolecules 2013, 46 
(17), 6931–6941.
[169]	 Wang, J.; Cheng, Q.; Tang, Z., Layered nanocomposites inspired by the structure and mechan-
ical properties of nacre. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2012, 41 (3), 1111–1129.
[170]	 Xu, Z.‐H.; Li, X., Deformation strengthening of biopolymer in nacre. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 
21 (20), 3883–3888.
[171]	 Wang, L.; Boyce, M.C., Bioinspired structural material exhibiting post‐yield lateral expansion 
and volumetric energy dissipation during tension. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (18), 3025–3030.
[172]	 Shyu, T.C.; Damasceno, P.F.; Dodd, P.M.; et al., A kirigami approach to engineering elasticity 
in nanocomposites through patterned defects. Nature Mater. 2015, 14 (8), 785–789.
[173]	 Gao, H.; Ji, B.; Jäger, I.L.; et al., Materials become insensitive to flaws at nanoscale: lessons 
from nature. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 2003, 100 (10), 5597–5600.
[174]	 Pei, S.; Cheng, H.‐M., The reduction of graphene oxide. Carbon 2012, 50 (9), 3210–3228.
[175]	 Eda, G.; Chhowalla, M., Graphene‐based composite thin films for electronics. Nano Lett. 
2009, 9 (2), 814–818.
[176]	 Kim, J.Y.; Lee, W.H.; Suk, J.W.; et al., Chlorination of reduced graphene oxide enhances the 
dielectric constant of reduced graphene oxide/polymer composites. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (16), 
2308–2313.
[177]	 Raccichini, R.; Varzi, A.; Passerini, S.; Scrosati, B., The role of graphene for electrochemical 
energy storage. Nature Mater. 2015, 14 (3), 271–279.
[178]	 Pumera, M.; Ambrosi, A.; Bonanni, A.; et al., Graphene for electrochemical sensing and 
biosensing. Trends Anal. Chem. 2010, 29 (9), 954–965.
[179]	 Yin, J.; Chang, R.; Shui, Y.; Zhao, X., Preparation and enhanced electro‐responsive character-
istic of reduced graphene oxide/polypyrrole composite sheet suspensions. Soft Matter 2013, 9 
(31), 7468–7478.
[180]	 Zhao, Y.; Song, L.; Zhang, Z.; Qu, L., Stimulus‐responsive graphene systems towards actuator 
applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 2013, 6 (12), 3520–3536.
[181]	 Zhang, J.; Song, L.; Zhang, Z.; et al., Environmentally responsive graphene systems. Small 
2014, 10 (11), 2151–2164.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
359
[182]	 Zakri, C.; Poulin, P., Phase behavior of nanotube suspensions: from attraction induced perco-
lation to liquid crystalline phases. J. Mater. Chem. 2006, 16 (42), 4095–4098.
[183]	 Bauhofer, W.; Kovacs, J.Z., A review and analysis of electrical percolation in carbon nanotube 
polymer composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2009, 69 (10), 1486–1498.
[184]	 Li, J.; Kim, J.‐K., Percolation threshold of conducting polymer composites containing 3D 
randomly distributed graphite nanoplatelets. Compos. Sci. Technol. 2007, 67 (10), 2114–2120.
[185]	 Celzard, A.; McRae, E.; Deleuze, C.; et al., Critical concentration in percolating systems 
containing a high‐aspect‐ratio filler. Phys. Rev. B 1996, 53 (10), 6209–6214.
[186]	 Zhang, H.‐B.; Zheng, W.‐G.; Yan, Q.; et al., The effect of surface chemistry of graphene on 
rheological and electrical properties of polymethylmethacrylate composites. Carbon 2012, 50 
(14), 5117–5125.
[187]	 Pham, V.H.; Dang, T.T.; Hur, S.H.; et  al., Highly conductive poly(methyl methacrylate) 
(PMMA)‐reduced graphene oxide composite prepared by self‐assembly of PMMA latex and 
graphene oxide through electrostatic interaction. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2012, 4 (5), 
2630–2636.
[188]	 Wu, C.; Huang, X.; Wang, G.; et al., Highly conductive nanocomposites with three‐dimen-
sional, compactly interconnected graphene networks via a self‐assembly process. Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 2013, 23 (4), 506–513.
[189]	 Krishnan, K.; Ganguli, N., Large anisotropy of the electrical conductivity of graphite. Nature 
1939, 144 (3650), 667.
[190]	 Kimura, T.; Ago, H.; Tobita, M.; et al., Polymer composites of carbon nanotubes aligned by a 
magnetic field. Adv. Mater. 2002, 14 (19), 1380–1383.
[191]	 Li, J.; Wong, P.‐S.; Kim, J.‐K., Hybrid nanocomposites containing carbon nanotubes and 
graphite nanoplatelets. Mater. Sci. Eng. A 2008, 483–484, 660–663.
[192]	 Safdari, M.; Al‐Haik, M., Electrical conductivity of synergistically hybridized nanocomposites 
based on graphite nanoplatelets and carbon nanotubes. Nanotechnology 2012, 23 (40), 405202.
[193]	 Xu, Q.; Song, T.; Cui, W.; et al., Solution‐processed highly conductive PEDOT:PSS/AgNW/
GO transparent film for efficient organic–Si hybrid solar cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2015, 7 (5), 3272–3279.
[194]	 Liang, J.; Li, L.; Tong, K.; et al., Silver nanowire percolation network soldered with graphene 
oxide at room temperature and its application for fully stretchable polymer light‐emitting 
diodes. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (2), 1590–1600.
[195]	 Bourgeat‐Lami, E.; Faucheu, J.; Noel, A., Latex routes to graphene‐based nanocomposites. 
Polym. Chem. 2015, 6 (30), 5323–5357.
[196]	 Tkalya, E.; Ghislandi, M.; Alekseev, A.; et al., Latex‐based concept for the preparation of 
graphene‐based polymer nanocomposites. J. Mater. Chem. 2010, 20 (15), 3035–3039.
[197]	 Long, G.; Tang, C.; Wong, K.‐W.; et al., Resolving the dilemma of gaining conductivity but 
losing environmental friendliness in producing polystyrene/graphene composites via optimiz-
ing the matrix–filler structure. Green Chem. 2013, 15 (3), 821–828.
[198]	 Pickering, S.U., CXCVI – Emulsions. J. Chem. Soc., Trans. 1907, 91, 2001–2021.
[199]	 Ramsden, W., Separation of solids in the surface‐layers of solutions and “suspensions” (obser-
vations on surface‐membranes, bubbles, emulsions, and mechanical coagulation). – Preliminary 
account. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 1903, 72 (477–486), 156–164.
[200]	 Cao, Y.; Zhang, J.; Feng, J.; Wu, P., Compatibilization of immiscible polymer blends using 
graphene oxide sheets. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (7), 5920–5927.
[201]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; et al., Graphene oxide sheets at interfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010, 132 (23), 8180–8186.
[202]	 Kim, H.; Kobayashi, S.; AbdurRahim, M.A.; et al., Graphene/polyethylene nanocompos-
ites: effect of polyethylene functionalization and blending methods. Polymer 2011, 52 (8), 
1837–1846.
[203]	 Nair, S.T.; Vijayan, P.P.; Xavier, P.; et al., Selective localisation of multi walled carbon nano-
tubes in polypropylene/natural rubber blends to reduce the percolation threshold. Compos. Sci. 
Technol. 2015, 116, 9–17.
[204]	 Paul, D.R.; Newman, S. (eds), Polymer Blends, vol. 1 Academic Press, New York, 1978.

360
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[205]	 Chen, Z.; Ren, W.; Gao, L.; et al., Three‐dimensional flexible and conductive interconnected 
graphene networks grown by chemical vapour deposition. Nature Mater. 2011, 10 (6), 424–428.
[206]	 Jun, Y.‐S.; Sy, S.; Ahn, W.; et al., Highly conductive interconnected graphene foam based 
polymer composite. Carbon 2015, 95, 653–658.
[207]	 Zhao, J.; Zhang, G.‐Y.; Shi, D.‐X., Review of graphene‐based strain sensors. Chin. Phys. B 
2013, 22 (5), 057701.
[208]	 Balandin, A.A.; Ghosh, S.; Bao, W.; et al., Superior thermal conductivity of single‐layer 
graphene. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (3), 902–907.
[209]	 Balandin, A.A., Thermal properties of graphene and nanostructured carbon materials. Nature 
Mater. 2011, 10 (8), 569–581.
[210]	 Hermann, A.; Chaudhuri, T.; Spagnol, P., Bipolar plates for PEM fuel cells: a review. Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy 2005, 30 (12), 1297–1302.
[211]	 Marotta, E.E.; Mazzuca, S.J.; Norley, J., Thermal joint conductance for flexible graphite mate-
rials: analytical and experimental study. IEEE Trans. Components Packaging Technol. 2005, 
28 (1), 102–110.
[212]	 Han, Z.; Fina, A., Thermal conductivity of carbon nanotubes and their polymer nanocompos-
ites: a review. Prog. Polym. Sci. 2011, 36 (7), 914–944.
[213]	 Huxtable, S.T.; Cahill, D.G.; Shenogin, S.; et al., Interfacial heat flow in carbon nanotube 
suspensions. Nature Mater. 2003, 2 (11), 731–734.
[214]	 Alexeev, D.; Chen, J.; Walther, J.H.; et al., Kapitza resistance between few‐layer graphene and 
water: liquid layering effects. Nano Lett. 2015, 15 (9), 5744–5749.
[215]	 Im, H.; Kim, J., Thermal conductivity of a graphene oxide–carbon nanotube hybrid/epoxy 
composite. Carbon 2012, 50 (15), 5429–5440.
[216]	 Shahil, K.M.; Balandin, A.A., Graphene–multilayer graphene nanocomposites as highly effi-
cient thermal interface materials. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (2), 861–867.
[217]	 Sarvar, F.; Whalley, D.C.; Conway, P.P., Thermal interface materials – a review of the state of 
the art. In 2006 1st Electronic System Integration Technology Conference, Dresden, 5–7 
September 2006, vol. 2, pp. 1292–1302. IEEE, Piscataway, NJ, 2006.
[218]	 Pollack, G.L., Kapitza resistance. Rev. Mod. Phys. 1969, 41 (1), 48.
[219]	 Pop, E., Energy dissipation and transport in nanoscale devices. Nano Res. 2010, 3 (3), 147–169.
[220]	 Renteria, J.D.; Ramirez, S.; Malekpour, H.; et al., Strongly anisotropic thermal conductivity of 
free‐standing reduced graphene oxide films annealed at high temperature. Adv. Funct. Mater. 
2015, 25 (29), 4664–4672.
[221]	 Xin, G.; Yao, T.; Sun, H.; et al., Highly thermally conductive and mechanically strong gra-
phene fibers. Science 2015, 349 (6252), 1083–1087.
[222]	 Shtein, M.; Nadiv, R.; Buzaglo, M.; et al., Thermally conductive graphene–polymer compos-
ites: size, percolation, and synergy effects. Chem. Mater. 2015, 27 (6), 2100–2106.
[223]	 Du, F.‐P.; Yang, W.; Zhang, F.; et al., Enhancing the heat transfer efficiency in graphene–epoxy 
nanocomposites using a magnesium oxide–graphene hybrid structure. ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 2015, 7 (26), 14397–14403.
[224]	 Tian, L.; Anilkumar, P.; Cao, L.; et al., Graphene oxides dispersing and hosting graphene 
sheets for unique nanocomposite materials. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (4), 3052–3058.
[225]	 Nair, R.R.; Wu, H.A.; Jayaram, P.N.; et al., Unimpeded permeation of water through helium‐
leak‐tight graphene‐based membranes. Science 2012, 335 (6067), 442–444.
[226]	 Qu, G.; Liu, S.; Zhang, S.; et al., Graphene oxide induces toll‐like receptor 4 (TLR4)‐dependent 
necrosis in macrophages. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (7), 5732–5745.
[227]	 Kim, H.W.; Yoon, H.W.; Yoon, S.‐M.; et al., Selective gas transport through few‐layered 
graphene and graphene oxide membranes. Science 2013, 342 (6154), 91–95.
[228]	 Mi, B., Graphene oxide membranes for ionic and molecular sieving. Science 2014, 343 (6172), 
740–742.
[229]	 Joshi, R.K.; Carbone, P.; Wang, F.C.; et al., Precise and ultrafast molecular sieving through 
graphene oxide membranes. Science 2014, 343 (6172), 752–754.
[230]	 Kim, H.; Miura, Y.; Macosko, C.W., Graphene/polyurethane nanocomposites for improved gas 
barrier and electrical conductivity. Chem. Mater. 2010, 22 (11), 3441–3450.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
361
[231]	 Choudalakis, G.; Gotsis, A., Permeability of polymer/clay nanocomposites: a review. Eur. 
Polym. J. 2009, 45 (4), 967–984.
[232]	 Bharadwaj, R.K., Modeling the barrier properties of polymer–layered silicate nanocompos-
ites. Macromolecules 2001, 34 (26), 9189–9192.
[233]	 Priolo, M.A.; Gamboa, D.; Holder, K.M.; Grunlan, J.C., Super gas barrier of transparent poly-
mer − clay multilayer ultrathin films. Nano Lett. 2010, 10 (12), 4970–4974.
[234]	 Yang, Y.H.; Bolling, L.; Priolo, M.A.; Grunlan, J.C., Super gas barrier and selectivity of 
graphene oxide–polymer multilayer thin films. Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (4), 503–508.
[235]	 Su, Y.; Kravets, V.; Wong, S.; et al., Impermeable barrier films and protective coatings based 
on reduced graphene oxide. Nature Commun. 2014, 5, 4843.
[236]	 Kim, J.; Song, S.H.; Im, H.G.; et al., Moisture barrier composites made of non‐oxidized gra-
phene flakes. Small 2015, 11 (26), 3124–3129.
[237]	 Wang, L.; Sasaki, T., Titanium oxide nanosheets: graphene analogues with versatile function-
alities. Chem. Rev. 2014, 114 (19), 9455–9486.
[238]	 Wong, M.; Ishige, R.; White, K.L.; et al., Large‐scale self‐assembled zirconium phosphate 
smectic layers via a simple spray‐coating process. Nature Commun. 2014, 5, 3589.
[239]	 Dou, Y.; Pan, T.; Xu, S.; et al., Transparent, ultrahigh‐gas‐barrier films with a brick–mortar–
sand structure. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54 (33), 9673–9678.
[240]	 Hu, S.; Lozada‐Hidalgo, M.; Wang, F.C.; et al., Proton transport through one‐atom‐thick 
crystals. Nature 2014, 516 (7530), 227–230.
[241]	 Karnik, R.N., Materials science: breakthrough for protons. Nature 2014, 516 (7530), 173–175.
[242]	 Dimiev, A.M.; Tour, J.M., Mechanism of graphene oxide formation. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (3), 
3060–3068.
[243]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
[244]	 Sun, T.; Fabris, S., Mechanisms for oxidative unzipping and cutting of graphene. Nano Lett. 
2012, 12 (1), 17–21.
[245]	 Li, J.‐L.; Kudin, K.N.; McAllister, M.J.; et al., Oxygen‐driven unzipping of graphitic materi-
als. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 96 (17), 176101.
[246]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Kim, F.; et al., Graphene oxide sheets at interfaces. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2010, 132 (23), 8180–8186.
[247]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Chidembo, A.T.; Salari, M.; et al., Comparison of GO, GO/MWCNTs com-
posite and MWCNTs as potential electrode materials for supercapacitors. Energy Environ. Sci. 
2011, 4 (5), 1855–1865.
[248]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Aminorroaya‐Yamini, S.; Nevirkovets, I.; et al., Enhanced hydrogen storage 
in graphene oxide–MWCNTs composite at room temperature. Adv. Energy Mater. 2012, 2 
(12), 1439–1446.
[249]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Organic solvent‐based graphene oxide 
liquid crystals: a facile route toward the next generation of self‐assembled layer‐by‐layer mul-
tifunctional 3D architectures. ACS Nano 2013, 7 (5), 3981–3990.
[250]	 Qiu, L.; Yang, X.; Gou, X.; et al., Dispersing carbon nanotubes with graphene oxide in water 
and synergistic effects between graphene derivatives. Chem. Eur. J. 2010, 16 (35), 10653–10658.
[251]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Sharif, F., Self assembly of graphene oxide at the liquid–liquid interface: a new 
route to the fabrication of graphene based composites. Soft Matter 2011, 7 (7), 3432–3440.
[252]	 Kim, S.D.; Zhang, W.L.; Choi, H.J., Pickering emulsion‐fabricated polystyrene–graphene 
oxide microspheres and their electrorheology. J. Mater. Chem. C 2014, 2 (36), 7541–7546.
[253]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Sharif, F., Molecular level dispersion of graphene in polymer matrices using 
colloidal polymer and graphene. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 2012, 366 (1), 44–50.
[254]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.B.; Kim, J.‐K., Spontaneous formation of liquid 
crystals in ultralarge graphene oxide dispersions. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2011, 21 (15), 2978–2988.
[255]	 Nakajima, T.; Matsuo, Y., Formation process and structure of graphite oxide. Carbon 1994, 32 
(3), 469–475.
[256]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Huang, J., Two dimensional soft material: new faces of graphene oxide. 
Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45 (8), 1356–1364.

362
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[257]	 Lin, X.; Shen, X.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Fabrication of highly‐aligned, conductive, and strong gra-
phene papers using ultralarge graphene oxide sheets. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (12), 10708–10719.
[258]	 Hung, A.H.; Holbrook, R.J.; Rotz, M.W.; et al., Graphene oxide enhances cellular delivery of 
hydrophilic small molecules by co‐incubation. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (10), 10168–10177.
[259]	 Kim, J.E.; Han, T.H.; Lee, S.H.; et al., Graphene oxide liquid crystals. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2011, 50 (13), 3043–3047.
[260]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Aqueous liquid crystals of graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (4), 2908–2915.
[261]	 Dan, B.; Behabtu, N.; Martinez, A.; et al., Liquid crystals of aqueous, giant graphene oxide 
flakes. Soft Matter 2011, 7 (23), 11154–11159.
[262]	 Naficy, S.; Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; et al., Graphene oxide dispersions: tuning rheology to 
enable fabrication. Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1 (6), 326–331.
[263]	 Xu, Z.; Gao, C., Graphene chiral liquid crystals and macroscopic assembled fibres. Nature 
Commun. 2011, 2, 571.
[264]	 Aboutalebi, S.H.; Jalili, R.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., High‐performance multifunctional gra-
phene yarns: toward wearable all‐carbon energy storage textiles. ACS Nano 2014, 8 (3), 
2456–2466.
[265]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Scalable one‐step wet‐spinning of gra-
phene fibers and yarns from liquid crystalline dispersions of graphene oxide: towards multi-
functional textiles. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2013, 10 (6), 5345–5354.
[266]	 Jalili, R.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Esrafilzadeh, D.; et al., Formation and processability of liquid 
crystalline dispersions of graphene oxide. Mater. Horiz. 2014, 1 (1), 87–91.
[267]	 Islam, M.M.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Cardillo, D.; et al., Self‐assembled multifunctional hybrids: 
toward developing high‐performance graphene‐based architectures for energy storage devices. 
ACS Central Sci. 2015, 1 (4), 206–216.
[268]	 Chidembo, A.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Konstantinov, K.; et al., Globular reduced graphene oxide–
metal oxide structures for energy storage applications. Energy Environ. Sci. 2012, 5 (1), 
5236–5240.
[269]	 Yousefi, N.; Gudarzi, M.M.; Zheng, Q.; et al., Self‐alignment and high electrical conductivity 
of ultralarge graphene oxide‐polyurethane nanocomposites. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (25), 
12709–12717.
[270]	 Gudarzi, M.M.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Yousefi, N.; et al., Self‐aligned graphene sheets–polyure-
thane nanocomposites. MRS Proc. 2011, 1344 (1), mrss11‐1344‐y02‐06.
[271]	 Chidembo, A.T.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Konstantinov, K.; et al., Liquid crystalline dispersions of 
graphene‐oxide‐based hybrids: a practical approach towards the next generation of 3D iso-
tropic architectures for energy storage applications. Part. Part. Syst. Charact. 2014, 31 (4), 
463–473.
[272]	 Paredes, J.I.; Villar‐Rodil, S.; Martínez‐Alonso, A.; Tascón, J.M.D., Graphene oxide disper-
sions in organic solvents. Langmuir 2008, 24 (19), 10560–10564.
[273]	 De Silva, K.S.B.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; Xu, X.; et al., A significant improvement in both low‐ and 
high‐field performance of MgB2 superconductors through graphene oxide doping. Scr. Mater. 
2013, 69 (6), 437–440.
[274]	 Mustapić, M.; De Silva, K.S.B.; Aboutalebi, S.H.; et al., Improvements in the dispersion of 
nanosilver in a MgB2 matrix through a graphene oxide net. J. Phys. Chem. C 2015, 119 (19), 
10631–10640.
[275]	 Cai, D.; Song, M., Preparation of fully exfoliated graphite oxide nanoplatelets in organic 
solvents. J. Mater. Chem. 2007, 17 (35), 3678–3680.
[276]	 Wang, Y.; Shi, Z.; Fang, J.; et al., Graphene oxide/polybenzimidazole composites fabricated 
by a solvent‐exchange method. Carbon 2011, 49 (4), 1199–1207.
[277]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[278]	 Krishnan, D.; Kim, F.; Luo, J.; et al., Energetic graphene oxide: challenges and opportunities. 
Nano Today 2012, 7 (2), 137–152.
[279]	 Erickson, K.; Erni, R.; Lee, Z.; et al., Determination of the local chemical structure of graphene 
oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (40), 4467–4472.

Graphene Oxide‐Based Composite Materials
363
[280]	 Izadi‐Najafabadi, A.; Yasuda, S.; Kobashi, K.; et al., Extracting the full potential of single‐
walled carbon nanotubes as durable supercapacitor electrodes operable at 4 V with high power 
and energy density. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (35), E235–E241.
[281]	 Zheng, Q.; Ip, W.H.; Lin, X.; et al., Transparent conductive films consisting of ultralarge gra-
phene sheets produced by Langmuir–Blodgett assembly. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (7), 6039–6051.
[282]	 Su, C.‐Y.; Xu, Y.; Zhang, W.; et al., Highly efficient restoration of graphitic structure in gra-
phene oxide using alcohol vapors. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (9), 5285–5292.
[283]	 Zurutuza, A.; Marinelli, C., Challenges and opportunities in graphene commercialization. 
Nature Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 730–734.
[284]	 Cote, L.J.; Cruz‐Silva, R.; Huang, J., Flash reduction and patterning of graphite oxide and its 
polymer composite. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (31), 11027–11032.
[285]	 Gilje, S.; Dubin, S.; Badakhshan, A.; et al., Photothermal deoxygenation of graphene oxide for 
patterning and distributed ignition applications. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (3), 419–423.
[286]	 Seabra, A.B.; Paula, A.J.; de Lima, R.; et al., Nanotoxicity of graphene and graphene oxide. 
Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2014, 27 (2), 159–168.
[287]	 Guo, X.; Mei, N., Assessment of the toxic potential of graphene family nanomaterials. Food 
Drug Anal. 2014, 22 (1), 105–115.
[288]	 Hu, W.; Peng, C.; Lv, M.; et al., Protein corona‐mediated mitigation of cytotoxicity of graphene 
oxide. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (5), 3693–3700.
[289]	 Chang, Y.; Yang, S.‐T.; Liu, J.‐H.; et al., In vitro toxicity evaluation of graphene oxide on A549 
cells. Toxicol. Lett. 2011, 200 (3), 201–210.
[290]	 Yuan, J.; Gao, H.; Sui, J.; et al., Cytotoxicity evaluation of oxidized single‐walled carbon 
nanotubes and graphene oxide on human hepatoma HepG2 cells: an iTRAQ‐coupled 2D LC‐
MS/MS proteome analysis. Toxicol. Sci. 2012, 126 (1), 149–161.
[291]	 Chen, G.‐Y.; Yang, H.‐J.; Lu, C.‐H.; et al., Simultaneous induction of autophagy and toll‐like 
receptor signaling pathways by graphene oxide. Biomaterials 2012, 33 (27), 6559–6569.
[292]	 Lv, M.; Zhang, Y.; Liang, L.; et al., Effect of graphene oxide on undifferentiated and retinoic 
acid‐differentiated SH‐SY5Y cells line. Nanoscale 2012, 4 (13), 3861–3866.
[293]	 Wang, A.; Pu, K.; Dong, B.; et al., Role of surface charge and oxidative stress in cytotoxicity 
and genotoxicity of graphene oxide towards human lung fibroblast cells. J. Appl. Toxicol. 
2013, 33 (10), 1156–1164.
[294]	 Kang, S.‐M.; Kim, T.‐H.; Choi, J.‐W., Cell chip to detect effects of graphene oxide nanopellet 
on human neural stem cell. J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 2012, 12 (7), 5185–5190.
[295]	 Zhi, X.; Fang, H.; Bao, C.; et al., The immunotoxicity of graphene oxides and the effect of 
PVP‐coating. Biomaterials 2013, 34 (21), 5254–5261.
[296]	 Ahmed, F.; Rodrigues, D.F., Investigation of acute effects of graphene oxide on wastewater 
microbial community: a case study. J. Haz. Mater. 2013, 256–257, 33–39.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
11
Toxicity Studies and Biomedical 
Applications of Graphene Oxide
Larisa Kovbasyuk and Andriy Mokhir
11.1  Introduction
Graphene oxide (GO) is a carbon‐rich material that is derived from graphene. Similarly to 
the parent material, GO contains flat regions made of sp2‐hybridized carbon atoms. In 
­contrast to graphene, it also contains non‐flat regions and modified edges, which can be 
formally considered as products of the partial oxidation of the sp2 system (Figure 11.1). 
Such non‐flat GO sections carry a rich plethora of chemical fragments, including rather 
abundant epoxides, alcohols, carboxylic acids, carbonyl groups and sulfate esters, as well 
as a number of less abundant fragments and ions, whose role in GO properties relevant to 
its biological activity is often poorly understood. The presence of these groups explains the 
good solubility of GO in aqueous solutions at pH close to 7 and its substantially lower 
tendency to aggregation than that observed for graphene. Though GO has a lower area of 
flat, sp2‐hybridized sections, it seems to be sufficient to provide for the efficient interaction 
with biomolecules of different types, including small molecules and biopolymers such as 
nucleic acids, as well as with unnatural biologically active compounds, e.g. drugs and fluo-
rescent dyes. Finally, GO exhibits substantial cell membrane permeability and relatively 
low toxicity both in cellular assays and in vivo. This combination of properties, which is 
rather unusual for carbon‐rich materials, makes GO an interesting material for biomedical 
and medicinal applications.

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
365
11.2  Toxicity of Graphene Oxide
Graphene oxide is an amphiphilic material, which has an overall negative charge at physi-
ological conditions. The charge can be reversed by covering GO with polycationic ­reagents, 
e.g. polymers or dendrimers. Correspondingly, in cells, GO can potentially interact with 
hydrophobic, positively charged and negatively charged surfaces, e.g. membranes, proteins 
and nucleic acids, thereby inducing toxicity. In this section, we will discuss known toxic 
effects of GO observed in cellular assays (in vitro) and in vivo, and, where possible, outline 
reasons for the toxicity. Biological effects of GO and analogous materials, including their 
cytotoxicity, have been previously reviewed [1–8].
Data on the toxicity of GOs in cellular assays found in the literature are often contradictory 
[1–9]. This is partially explained by the large number of parameters that have to be 
­controlled to be able to compare the results obtained in different laboratories. In particular, 
the source of the starting materials as well as the method of synthesis and purification of 
GO affect the size, the number of sheets in the material, surface charge, oxidative state and 
the presence of low‐molecular‐weight impurities and different functional groups on the 
surface. Substantial efforts have to be invested to account for all of these parameters to 
obtain standardized GO materials. Unfortunately, this is not yet done routinely. Moreover, 
GO can interfere with cell viability assays, producing false positive results. For example, 
Macosko, Haynes and coworkers have observed that methylthiazolyldiphenyl‐tetrazolium 
bromide (MTT), which is used as a reagent in the popular cell viability assay, is efficiently 
reduced in the presence of GO with the formation of a blue‐colored product [9]. A product 
of the same color is produced when MTT is reduced in viable cells. Therefore, MTT‐based 
Figure 11.1  A cartoon illustrating the presence of a variety of functional chemical groups, flat 
graphene‐like regions and non‐flat regions on the surface of graphene oxide (GO)

366
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
assays will fail to indicate GO cytotoxicity. The same authors have found that another 
­tetrazole‐based reagent, the water‐soluble tetrazolium salt WST‐8, as well as trypan blue 
exclusion, allow for accurate estimation of the number of viable and dead cells [9].
GO toxicity in cells is usually moderate at low concentrations (≤10 µg ml−1). At higher 
doses, it is dependent upon GO size, aggregation state, oxygen content and surface charge. 
For example, toxic effects of GO have been observed for:
i.	 human fibroblast (HDF) cells (>50 µg ml−1) – decreasing cell adhesion, cell apoptosis; 
GO obtained by Hummers method [10];
ii.	 human lung carcinoma (A549) cell line  –  concentration‐dependent increase of the 
amount of reactive oxygen species (ROS); GO obtained by Hummers method and 
­fractionated by size [11];
iii.	 red blood cells (RBCs) (>25 µg ml−1) – hemolysis; GO obtained by Hummers method 
and sonicated to obtain GOs of different sizes [9];
iv.	 human skin fibroblasts (≥12.5 µg ml−1)  –  cell viability decreased; GO obtained by 
Hummers method and sonicated to obtain GOs of different sizes [9].
A number of other studies on the toxicity of GO, nano‐GO (NGO) and related materials 
toward various cell lines have appeared recently [1–3, 12–19].
Interestingly, Fiorillo et al. have observed that GO inhibits the proliferative expansion 
of single cancer stem cells in the tumor‐sphere assay [19]. The effect has been confirmed 
for six different cancer types, including breast, pancreatic, prostate, ovarian, lung cancer 
and glioblastoma. Surprisingly, GO has been found to be only weakly toxic to mature 
(non‐stem) cancer cells. This is a significant result, since cancer stem cells are tumor‐
initiating cells, which are practically insensitive to conventional chemotherapy and 
­radiation. The survival of a few cells of this type after treatment leads to tumor recurrence 
and distant metastasis.
Toxicity of GO in vivo depends on the experimental settings selected and the parameters 
investigated. For example, it has been found that NGO at a dose of 25 mg kg−1 (injected via 
the tail vein) exhibits practically no toxicity for reproductive function of male mice [20], 
and GO‐derived carrier of Stat3 siRNA is practically non‐toxic in mice, as shown in studies 
with a mouse model of melanoma [21]. However, at ~14 mg kg−1, chronic toxicity of GO 
has been observed for Kunming mice [10], whereas oral exposure to a dose ~0.8 mg GO 
per day per mouse in the lactating period strongly delayed the development of offspring 
and caused many other negative effects in the development of mice [22]. Furthermore, a 
systematic study of Li et al. on the distribution and toxicity of NGO in C57BL/6 mice for 
three months after the exposure has revealed that NGO can be retained in the lungs, thereby 
resulting in acute lung injury and chronic pulmonary fibrosis [23].
11.3  On the Toxicity Mechanism
11.3.1  Membrane as a Target
Graphene is known to enter cells by the edge‐first uptake mechanism, which can lead to 
membrane damage [24]. An analogous mechanism can be assumed for GO and other 
GO‐derived materials, since they have graphene‐like regions, including edges, whose extent 

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
367
depends on the C/O ratio and other factors. Other mechanisms of GO‐induced ­membrane 
damage are possible [1–3]. The current literature on the subject indicates that the effect of 
GO on outer cellular membranes is strongly dependent upon the cell type. For example, 
Cao, Wang and coworkers have observed that the incubation of human alveolar adenocar-
cinoma A549 cells with GO at concentrations of up to 200 µg ml−1 does not significantly 
modulate the level of the extracellular lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity, which is a 
common marker for membrane damage [11]. Similar results have been obtained by Dai, 
Lu, Liu and coworkers, who studied the effect of GO on eyesight both in vitro and in vivo 
[17]. In particular, they have observed that the level of LDH did not exceed 8% in the in 
vitro assay with ARPE‐19 cells (a cell line derived from human retinal pigment epithelium) 
incubated for a variable time (24–72 h) with variable GO concentrations (5–100 µg ml−1). 
For comparison, ~2–3% LDH have been released from the untreated cells. Furthermore, 
Mullick Chowdhury et al. have studied the toxicity of oxidized graphene nanoribbons 
(O‐GNR, width ~125–220 nm) stabilized with 1,2‐distearoyl‐sn‐glycero‐3‐phosphoethan-
olamine‐N‐[amino(polyethylene glycol) (PEG‐DSPE) in several selected cancer cell lines: 
cervical cancer cells HeLa and breast cancer cells SKBR3 and MCF‐7 [25]. Upon the 
incubation of MCF‐7 cells for 24 h with 0.4 mg ml−1 of O‐GNR–PEG‐DSPE (the highest 
concentration used), the cells release ~55% LDH compared to the LDH activity in the lysed 
cells. For SKBR3 cells, the effect was comparable. In a negative control experiment (cells 
not treated with anything), ~40% and ~55% LDH activity was observed for MCF‐7 and 
SKBR3, respectively. These data indicate that the membrane is not significantly affected by 
the treatment of the breast cancer cells with O‐GNR–PEG‐DSPE. In contrast, the mem-
brane of HeLa cells has been found to be substantially more sensitive: 95% LDH release in 
the presence of O‐GNR–PEG‐DSPE versus ~50% in its absence. Moreover, the membrane 
of RBCs has been found to be highly sensitive to GO. For example, Jiang and coworkers 
have investigated the toxic effects of GO and nitrogen‐doped graphene quantum dots 
(N‐GODs) on RBCs. By using infrared (IR) spectroscopy in combination with monitoring 
hemolysis, observing morphological changes and detecting the adenosine triphosphate 
(ATP) content of RBCs, they have confirmed that the GO materials were first adsorbed on 
the external part of the lipid bilayer of the RBC membrane, which led to its disintegration, 
hemolysis and aberrant forms [16]. Haynes and coworkers have found that hemolysis of 
RBCs was especially pronounced for GOs of small size [9]. In particular, pGO‐30 with a 
hydrodynamic diameter d = 324 ± 17 nm at 50 µg ml−1 induced hemolysis of >90% RBCs, 
whereas the usual GO obtained by the Hummers method (d = 765 ± 19 nm) applied at the same 
concentration affected only ~25% RBCs. Finally, the membranes of a variety of bacterial cells 
have been found to be sensitive to graphene‐based materials [26–28].
The interaction of GO with cellular membranes can be further modulated by proteins 
present in biological fluids, since some of them bind to the GO surface with high affinity. 
For example, serum albumins (SAs) are present in large quantities in blood and can 
potentially affect GO toxicity. One example of such an influence has been reported by 
Ge, Zhou and coworkers. By using electron microscopy, these authors have observed that 
bovine serum albumin (BSA) reduced the cell membrane permeation of GO, inhibited 
the cellular damage induced by GO and reduced its cytotoxicity [29]. Based on molecu-
lar dynamics studies, they have concluded that the protein–GO interaction weakens the 
GO–phospholipid interaction due to the reduction of the surface available for binding. 
In other work, the effect of GO on human serum albumin (HSA) properties has been 

368
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
reported by Ding et al. [30]. In particular, they have observed that GO inhibited the 
­interaction of HSA with bilirubin. Thus, GO and serum albumins mutually affect 
the properties of each other.
11.3.2  Oxidative Stress
A number of reports confirm that GO treatment results in an increase in the amount of ROS 
in cells. The latter can be detected, for example, by using a variety of commercially avail-
able leuco‐dyes, including dichlorodihydrofluorescein diacetate or dihydroethidium, in 
combination with flow cytometry or fluorescence microscopy. In particular, Chang et al. 
[11] have observed that incubation of A549 cells with GO induced a dose‐​dependent intra-
cellular oxidative stress that leads to a slight loss of cell viability at high concentrations. 
Moreover, GO toxicity toward human multiple myeloma RPMI 8226 cells has been found 
to be closely associated with an elevated amount of ROS [14]. A similar effect has been 
observed by Lammel and Navas [31], who studied the influence of GO and carboxyl 
­graphene (CXYG) on fish hepatoma cell line PLHC‐​1. For example, they found that 
­graphene materials penetrated spontaneously through the cellular membrane and in the 
cytosol they interacted with mitochondrial and nuclear membranes. The treated PLHC‐​1 
cells demonstrated significantly reduced mitochondrial membrane potential and increased 
ROS levels at 16 µg ml−1 GO and CXYG (72 h incubation). Other reports confirming the 
GO‐induced oxidative stress in cellular assays have been reviewed elsewhere [1–3].
The data obtained in in vitro assays are supported by in vivo data. For example, the 
effects of prolonged exposure of the roundworm Caenorhabditis elegans to GO have been 
evaluated by Wu et al. [32]. Caenorhabditis elegans is especially well suited as a model 
organism for evaluation of the biological effects (including toxicity) of chemical com-
pounds in vivo, since this organism is transparent and can be monitored/studied by using 
fluorescence imaging. Wu et al. [32] have found that prolonged exposure of this organism 
to 0.5–​100 mg l−1 of GO caused a negative effect on the functions of both primary (intestine) 
and secondary (neuron and reproductive organ) targeted organs. Interestingly, in the 
intestine, the production of ROS was detected, which correlated with the adverse effects 
observed. Furthermore, Li et al. [23] have proven that NGO‐induced acute lung injury 
(ALI) and chronic pulmonary fibrosis were related to the oxidative stress and could be 
relieved with dexamethasone treatment, which is a steroid drug with anti‐inflammatory 
properties. In another model organism, zebrafish, GO induced a significant hatching delay 
and cardiac edema during embryogenesis [33]. Moreover, its treatment led to the exces-
sive production of ROS (e.g. hydroxyl radicals) and changes in the secondary structure 
of proteins.
The question of why GO induces oxidative stress in cells is currently being actively 
investigated. For example, Nie’s group has reported that the ROS‐generating ability of GOs 
in mouse embryo fibroblasts (MEFs) is dependent upon the oxidation degree of GOs [34]. 
In particular, the least oxidized GO exhibited the highest ROS‐enhancing ability, which 
was explained by the conversion of less toxic H2O2 into highly toxic HO• radicals in cells. 
The theoretical simulations by the same authors revealed the involvement of carboxyl 
groups and planar domains of GO in varying the energy barrier of the H2O2 reduction reac-
tion. Furthermore, using a fluorogenic, DNA‐based probe, Mokhir and colleagues have 
confirmed that GOs obtained either by the Hummers method or by the milder method first 

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
369
reported by Eigler contained low amounts of surface‐bound endoperoxides: one moiety per 
~104 carbon atoms (Figure 11.2) [35].
These GOs were efficiently taken up by HeLa cells, which was accompanied by an 
increase in the intracellular ROS concentration and a decrease in cell viability. Interestingly, 
endoperoxide‐free GOs, obtained by irradiation of the GOs with ultraviolet light of low 
power, were also taken up by the cells, but neither increased the intracellular ROS amount 
nor affected cell viability. These data allowed the authors to conclude that endoperoxides 
play an important role in the ROS‐generating ability of GOs. Next, Chen and coworkers 
have investigated the effects of GO on T‐lymphocytes and HSA [30]. In particular, they 
have observed that the treatment of T‐lymphocytes with GO led to an increase in ROS 
generation, damage to DNA, cell apoptosis and limited suppression of the immune 
response of T‐lymphocytes. Based on these data, they suggested that GO interacts directly 
with ­protein receptors, which inhibits their ligand binding ability, thereby leading to 
ROS‐dependent passive apoptosis through the B‐cell lymphoma‐2 (Bcl‐2) pathway.
11.3.3  Other Factors
New information about the toxicity of GO in relation to gene expression in cells has 
recently become available in the literature. These data may contribute to further under-
standing of the mechanism of GO toxicity in vivo. In particular, Wu et al. [36] have observed 
that mutations in several genes, including hsp‐​16.48, gas‐​1, sod‐​2, sod‐​3, aak‐​2 as well as 
isp‐​1 and clk‐​1, strongly affected translocation of GO into the body of C. elegans, its toxicity 
on both primary and secondary targeted organs compared with wild ​type, the intestinal 
permeability and the mean defecation cycle length. Furthermore, Wang and coworkers 
have investigated the role of micro‐RNAs (miRNAs) in GO toxicity [37]. They have 
F
O
O
O
O
F
F
+
ON
GO-UV:
does not generate ROS in cells;
is not toxic to cells
EP probe
GO-EP:
generates ROS in cells; is toxic to cells
GO-EP: Endoperoxide-containing GO
GO-UV: Endoperoxide-free GO
F: Fluorescein
ROS: reactive oxygen species
Figure 11.2  Detection of endoperoxides (EP) on the graphene oxide (GO–EP) surface using 
fluorogenic probes (EP probe) consisting of an oligonucleotide (ON), which binds strongly to the 
GO–EP, a reactive moiety (an anthracene derivative) and a fluorescent dye (fluorescein, F) [35]

370
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
identified 23 up‐regulated and eight down‐regulated miRNAs in GO‐treated C. elegans, 
and provided evidence to suggest that GO may reduce the lifespan of nematodes by affect-
ing insulin/IGF (insulin‐like growth factor) signaling, TOR (target of rapamycin) signaling 
as well as germline signaling pathways. Finally, the same authors have established the role 
of innate immunity in regulating chronic toxicity of GO in C. elegans [38].
11.4  Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
11.4.1  Graphene Oxide in Treatment of Cancer and Bacterial Infections
In general, disease therapy relies on the selective action of a drug on disease‐associated 
cells, biomolecules (e.g. enzymes, nucleic acids) or biochemical states (e.g. inflammation), 
which ideally occurs without affecting healthy organs and normal cells. The currently 
applied therapies for cancer treatment, including chemotherapy (using, for example, 
Pt(ii)‐based drugs, bleomycin and 5‐fluorouracil) and radiotherapy, are not sufficiently 
cancer‐cell‐specific. Therefore, such treatments exhibit characteristic dose‐limiting toxici-
ties. Moreover, repeat treatments lead to the development of resistance. This partially 
explains why cancer is still one of the most common causes of death (together with cardio-
vascular disease) in developed countries. Therefore, the search for new approaches to 
­cancer ­treatment is warranted. Targeted therapy is an advanced, recently introduced method, 
in which cancer‐specific drugs (or prodrugs) are applied. GO is used in several approaches 
for ­cancer targeting, including photothermal and photodynamic therapy and as a nano‐sized 
carrier to improve the cell membrane permeability of drugs and achieve their accumulation 
in tumors due to the enhanced permeability and retention (EPR) effect [6–8].
11.4.2  Photothermal Therapy
In photothermal therapy (PTT), disease‐causing cells, including cancer cells in tumors and 
bacteria in wounds, are loaded with a reagent that absorbs near‐infrared (NIR) light. Then 
subsequent exposure to NIR light heats up the system, inducing hyperthermia and thereby 
causing cell death. However, human tissues contain large amounts of hemoglobin and 
water, which strongly absorb visible and NIR light. To avoid unspecific heating of healthy 
tissues, for PTT, light is used that is practically not absorbed by the tissues: in the first bio-
logical window, 700–980 nm (BW1); and in the second biological window, 1000–1400 nm 
(BW2) [39]. Such light can penetrate through several centimeters of human tissue [40], 
whereas deeper located sites can be accessed by delivery of the light via optical fibers in 
combination with endoscopy [41]. Since the light beam can be focused on a specified area 
(e.g. tumor location) and its intensity (dose) can be easily controlled, PTT allows ­surgery‐
free tumor ablation practically without affecting healthy tissues.
Single‐layered GO is suitable for PTT, since, in addition to its excellent water solubility, 
membrane permeability and stability, this material absorbs light in the NIR range [42–44]. 
It has been reported that the NIR absorptivity of GO can be improved by optimization of 
its size. For example, small GOs (less than 300 nm in size) absorb NIR light more effi-
ciently than the conventional material. In particular, extinctions at 808 and 1200 nm have 
been found to be between about five‐ and eight‐fold higher for small GOs [45]. The latter 
material is often called nano‐GO (NGO) in the scientific literature.

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
371
GO of optimal size accumulates in tumors due to the EPR effect. Additionally, the accu-
mulation can be achieved by decoration of GO with ligands that bind to cancer‐specific 
receptors. These aspects will be discussed in the next subsection. A number of excellent 
reviews on PTT have been published, which cover the literature on the subject up to 2014 
[1, 46, 47]. Here we will discuss only two selected reports, which demonstrate the applica-
bility of GO‐based materials as sensitizers for PTT of bacterial infections and cancer.
In 2013 bacterial infections affected over 48 million people in the USA and caused 80 
deaths. They are especially dangerous for people with compromised immune systems and 
patients having extensive wounds following surgery [48]. Moreover, chronic infections are 
known to develop resistance against conventional organic drugs (antibiotics) and cause can-
cer: e.g. infection of Helicobacter pylori often leads to stomach cancer [49]. Therefore, novel 
antibacterial drugs are necessary. Wu and coworkers have explored the applicability of con-
ventional GO obtained by the Hummers method in combination with PTT for the treatment 
of bacterial infection in wounds [50]. This is a rare example demonstrating the biological 
activity of conventional, chemically unmodified GO in vivo. The authors have conducted 
their investigation on healthy albino mice. Each mouse received three wounds, all of which 
were infected with Staphylococcus aureus: the first wound was left untreated; another one 
was exposed to the light from a Nd:YAG laser (λ = 1064 nm, 3 min irradiation, every day for 
12 days); and the third wound was treated with GO and exposed to the same light under the 
same conditions. The healing of the wounds treated with both GO and the laser irradiation 
was accelerated in comparison to the control wounds. These data ­indicate that GO combined 
with PTT can potentially be used as an efficient and cheap alternative to antibiotics.
PTT in combination with GO or other NIR‐absorbing nanomaterials has the potential to 
improve the side effects that occur during conventional chemotherapy. Moreover, when 
applied together, PTT and chemotherapy have been shown to exhibit synergistic effects 
[51]. For example, Guo and coworkers have prepared a hybrid material NGO–PEG–DOX 
containing NGO covalently modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG) residues and doxoru-
bicin (DOX) [52]. The PEG fragment stabilizes NGO in the serum‐containing media, 
­enabling the application of this material in vivo. DOX is an anthracycline antitumor drug, 
which exhibits its activity due to binding of genomic DNA via intercalation. This fragment 
binds the NGO–PEG via non‐covalent π–π interactions. The antitumor activity of 
NGO–PEG–DOX in vivo has been studied on a xenograft tumor mouse model, balb/c 
female mice, which carried tumors derived from murine mammary tumor cell line EMT6. 
In particular, the solution of the NGO construct was injected intravenously and the tumor 
was irradiated for 5 min (24 h post‐injection) by a laser with λem = 808 nm (2 W cm−2) focused 
on a 6 × 8 mm spot. The authors have reported a strong synergistic antitumor effect of DOX 
and PTT: the tumors were completely destroyed 30 days after the beginning of treatment. 
Interestingly, DOX alone exhibited substantially stronger side effects than the nano‐sized 
construct NGO–PEG–DOX. These data demonstrate that PTT combined with chemotherapy 
can be a feasible approach for the improvement of current methods of cancer treatment.
11.4.3  Graphene Oxide as a Drug Carrier
In GO, every atom is exposed to the surface. Therefore, its surface area is very large (for 
graphene, 2600 m2 g−1). Correspondingly, one can densely load GO with cargo, e.g. drugs, 
cell‐surface‐directing fragments, nucleic acids and proteins. Though GO is soluble in 

372
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
water, it can aggregate in the presence of salts and components of serum. Therefore, this 
material is often chemically modified to improve its bioavailability, which includes either 
non‐covalent (electrostatic or π–π interactions) or covalent modification [53]. For example, 
mixing GO with poly(ethyleneimine) (PEI) of different sizes (1.2–10 kDa) leads to facile 
formation of hybrid GO–PEI materials, which, in contrast to GO, are retained in the physi-
ological solution and the serum‐containing medium in the monomeric state. Moreover, 
such constructs have lower toxicity than free PEI [54]. In this case, the electrostatic interac-
tion at neutral pH between positively charged PEI and negatively charged GO is the driving 
force for the GO–PEI formation. Furthermore, π–π interactions can be applied to modify 
GO and reduced GO (RGO). For example, planar aromatic molecules, such as porphyrins, 
pyrenes, perylenes and coronenes, have been used as anchors for attaching different 
­functionalities to GO and RGO [55]. Since GO contains a variety of reactive functional 
groups, one often applies covalent chemistry to modify the GO surface. The most popular 
reactions include the formation of amide bonds, which typically occurs between a 
GO‐bound –COOH group and a modifier‐bound –NH2 group [42, 53]. For example, the 
attachment of polymers like PEG, poly‐l‐lysine and polyacrylamide (PAA) to GO has been 
conducted by using such reactions.
11.4.3.1  Low‐Molecular‐Weight Drugs as a Cargo
Organic drugs containing extended π systems are common. For example, such compounds 
can act as intercalators of genomic DNA (e.g. anthracycline antibiotics), inhibit specific 
kinases (e.g. imatinib) and act as antimetabolites (e.g. methotrexate). Many such drugs are 
not well soluble in water. This problem can be solved by loading them onto well soluble 
GO‐based materials. Moreover, GO–drug hybrids often enter the cells via pathways that 
are different from those of the free drugs. The same is the case for the removal of the drugs 
from the cell: hybrids may be retained in cells longer. Therefore, the activity of hybrids is 
often higher and they can be used to overcome the resistance of cells to particular drugs. 
Resistance is an important problem in the chemotherapy of cancer. It is developed as a 
result of repeated treatments with the same drug.
A number of reports were devoted to the transport of DOX and its analogs with the help 
of graphene‐based carriers, as reviewed elsewhere [45–47, 53]. One such example has 
already been described in section  11.4.2 devoted to PTT [52]. Despite being a potent 
­anticancer drug, DOX has an extended aromatic polycyclic structure and can, therefore, 
interact with sp2‐hybridized regions of GO due to π–π stacking interactions. This interac-
tion is so strong that it is sufficient for the immobilization of DOX onto GO and no 
­additional covalent attachment is usually required. Moreover, DOX is a fluorescent mole-
cule that allows easy monitoring of its loading into cells by using either fluorescence 
microscopy or flow cytometry. In particular, Wang, Zhang and colleagues have used as a 
carrier NGO with sheet size below 100 nm and thickness between 0.8 and 1.5 nm, suggest-
ing single‐ and ­double‐layered structure [56]. By simple incubation of the components and 
removal of excess drug by centrifugation, high cargo loading could be achieved, 0.468 g 
DOX per 1 g NGO. Interestingly, the interaction strength between the NGO and DOX was 
strongly ­modulated by the pH of the solution. In particular, at neutral (pH 7.2) and basic 
(pH 9.0) conditions, less than 6.5% of the drug was released after standing for over 40 h in 
the correspondingly buffered phosphate saline (PBS) solutions. In contrast, at slightly 

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
373
acidic conditions (pH 5.0) ~15% of DOX was released within the same time. This effect has 
been attributed to the presence of hydrogen bonding between the functional groups on the 
NGO (–OH, –COOH) and those of DOX (–OH, –NH2) in addition to the π–π stacking. 
The former bonds were expected to be destabilized under the acidic conditions. Since the 
microenvironment in tumors is often acidic, this property of NGO–DOX can be used for 
the selective release of DOX at the cancer‐specific conditions, which should improve the 
therapeutic index of the nano‐drug. Zhang and colleagues have explored whether NGO–
DOX can reverse the DOX resistance of cells that overexpress multi‐drug‐resistant (MDR) 
gene [56]. In particular, they have tested the cytotoxicity of NGO–DOX toward DOX‐
sensitive MCF‐7 and DOX‐resistant MCF‐7/ADR cell lines and compared the data obtained 
with the effects of free DOX. They have observed that NGO–DOX exhibited a toxicity 
toward MCF‐7 cells (~1 µg ml−1) that was comparable to DOX, but was substantially more 
toxic toward MCF‐7/ADR than DOX: IC50 ≈ 1 and 14 µg ml−1 respectively. These data 
indicate that application of the NGO‐based hybrid drug allows reversal of the resistance of 
MCF‐7/ADR cells toward DOX. Other examples of graphene‐based hybrids containing 
organic and metal‐containing anticancer drugs, photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy 
(PDT) and receptor‐targeting fragments include PEGylated reduced NGO carrying natural 
phenol resveratrol [57], unmodified NGO carrying bioactive flavonoid quercetin [58], 
GO‐PEG loaded with chlorin e6 (Ce6) [59], RGD‐motif‐containing reduced NGO [60] and 
others [45–48, 53].
11.4.3.2  Oligonucleotide‐Based Drugs as a Cargo
Nucleic acids play a central role in the storage of genetic information, protein synthesis and 
regulation. Due to the recent scientific and technological advancements in the field of 
genome wide sequencing, knowledge of the role of nucleic acids in cellular biology is 
rapidly expanding. For example, apart from messenger RNAs (mRNAs), ribosomal RNAs 
(rRNAs) and transfer RNAs (tRNAs), which have been known for a long time, many new 
RNA types have recently been discovered, and further discoveries of this type are certainly 
under way. They include micro‐RNAs (miRNAs), pseudo‐genes, circular RNAs, long non‐
coding RNAs and others. These biomolecules are termed non‐coding RNAs (ncRNAs). 
Synthesis, processing, mode of action and targets of miRNAs are mostly well understood. 
They participate in the regulation of gene expression, regulation of protein synthesis and 
are often overexpressed or down‐regulated in diseases (e.g. cancer) with respect to the 
normal state. However, functions of other ncRNAs are less well understood and are still 
actively being investigated.
Binders of intracellular RNAs can inhibit their biological activity (via antisense effect or 
RNA interference), which can help in the elucidation of the functions of newly discovered 
ncRNAs. Moreover, binders of the RNAs, which are fluorescently labelled with dyes and 
are responsive to the hybridization state (e.g. molecular beacons, MBs), can be used to 
monitor ncRNAs and mRNAs directly in cells. Oligonucleotides (ONs) are highly specific 
and strong binders of complementary RNA sequences. However, due to their polyanionic 
character, these reagents are not permeable through the cellular membrane. Moreover, they 
are not stable in cells due to their efficient cleavage by abundant intracellular endo‐ and 
exonucleases. To improve these properties, a number of chemically modified oligonucleo-
tides have been prepared. They include phosphorothioate DNAs (PTOs), 2′‐OMe RNAs, 

374
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) and others. These compounds are more stable to nucleases 
than unmodified ONs. However, with few rare exceptions (e.g. PTOs), ON analogs are not 
cell‐membrane‐permeable.
Apart from inhibiting the RNA function, it can be required to upregulate (increase) the 
RNA amount in cells. This goal can be achieved by the introduction of circular, double‐
stranded nucleic acids (plasmids). The genes within the plasmids are expressed, producing 
the corresponding mRNAs and proteins, which can be used for determination of gene 
­functions and design of cellular reporters, e.g. fluorescent proteins or luciferases. Moreover, 
required RNAs can also be introduced directly. However, in both cases the problem of cell 
membrane permeability exists. Typically, nucleic acids (plasmids, RNAs) and nucleic acid 
inhibitors (ONs, analogs of ONs, small interfering RNAs, siRNA) are brought into cells by 
reversible membrane permeabilization using streptolysin O (SLO), electroporation, trans-
fection with positively charged oligomers or dendrimers and direct microinjection. These 
approaches are toxic or damage cells to some extent, are not applicable to all cell types and 
their possible applications in vivo are limited. Therefore, studies of new approaches for 
improving cell membrane permeation of nucleic acids are warranted.
GO-based materials can potentially evolve as true alternatives to the usually used 
­transfection reagents. For example, it has already been demonstrated that they are applica-
ble for transfection of plasmids and siRNAs into cells. In particular, Liu and coworkers 
have modified GO covalently with cationic PEI polymers of different sizes: 1.2 and 10 kDa 
[54]. They have found that both GO–PEI‐1.2 kDa and GO–PEI‐10 kDa induce the efficient 
transfection of a plasmid carrying enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP), which could 
be followed by monitoring the EGFP expression via fluorescence microscopy. In contrast, 
PEI‐1.2 kDa itself is not functional. Though PEI‐10 kDa is an efficient transfection agent, 
it has been found to be toxic. In contrast, the toxicity of the hybrid GO–PEI‐10 kDa was 
reduced.
Zhang et al. [61] have designed a hybrid consisting of GO that was covalently modified 
with PEI‐25 kDa and contained an siRNA targeting an mRNA of the Bcl‐2 gene. The latter 
reagent was adsorbed onto the GO–PEI‐25 kDa due to electrostatic interactions. The 
authors have confirmed that, in human cervical cancer cell line (HeLa cells) incubated with 
the GO–PEI‐25 kDa–siRNA hybrid, which had the optimal ratio of nitrogen (proportional 
to the PEI) to phosphorus (proportional to the RNA) of 20, the expression of the Bcl‐2 gene 
was suppressed down to ~30%. The inhibition observed using the PEI‐25 kDa–siRNA 
associate under the same conditions was significantly weaker, ~60%. Additionally, the tox-
icity of the GO–PEI‐25 kDa has been found to be negligible up to a concentration of 4 ng l−1, 
whereas only ~50% of cells remained viable after their incubation with the same amount of 
PEI‐25 kDa. Switching off the Bcl‐2 gene was expected to overcome the MDR system of 
cancer cells and make them more sensitive to chemotherapeutic agents. To prove this 
hypothesis, the authors treated HeLa cells first with GO–PEI‐25 kDa–siRNA, which was 
followed by DOX. In a control experiment, they used the hybrid containing a scrambled 
siRNA, which was not targeting any gene in the cells. The authors observed that the cells 
become more sensitive to DOX after the inhibition of the Bcl‐2 gene by the siRNA‐­
containing hybrid. These data confirm the applicability of GO as a carrier for the transport 
of siRNAs into cells. Moreover, Yin et al. [21] have demonstrated the delivery of a plasmid‐
based Stat3 siRNA in a mouse model of melanoma, which resulted in the significant 
­inhibition of tumor growth without any toxicity.

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
375
Since GO has a large surface area, many different components can be introduced onto it 
simultaneously to obtain multi‐functional drugs or prodrugs. A demonstration of this 
­possibility has been described in the publication of Yang, Xiang, Chen and coworkers [62]. 
In particular, they have prepared PEGylated GO, which carried at the terminus of each PEG 
residue one folic acid (FA) fragment. FA was attached to direct (target) the hybrid to cancer 
cells overexpressing the FA receptor. Next, 1‐pyrenemethylamine was adsorbed via strong 
non‐covalent π–π interactions with flat regions of GO that provided an overall positive 
charge for the resulting construct. Finally, siRNA targeting a human telomerase reverse 
transcriptase (hTERT) gene was attached via electrostatic interactions. The authors have 
demonstrated that the obtained hybrid is not toxic to HeLa cells, but acts as a strong inhibi-
tor of hTERT expression, as evidenced by monitoring the corresponding transcript and 
the protein.
Both plasmids and siRNAs act by catalytic mechanisms. Therefore, one molecule of the 
plasmid can generate many equivalents of mRNAs, whereas one molecule of siRNA can 
induce cleavage of many equivalents of mRNAs. Thus, delivery of even small amounts of 
these reagents in cells will cause dramatic changes of the concentration of the targeted 
nucleic acids. Correspondingly, experiments that rely on detection of gene expression from 
plasmids or target inhibition using siRNAs allow one to answer the question whether the 
carriers transport their cargo through the cell membrane or not. However, they do not pro-
vide an accurate estimate of how much cargo crosses the membrane and stays in the active 
form in the cell. It should be mentioned that the large proportion of ONs that cross the 
­cellular membrane are trapped in intracellular compartments and remain inactive. A more 
accurate experiment for determination of the delivery efficiency would be the transport of a 
labelled ON, e.g. molecular beacons (MBs) or another hybridization‐sensitive probe, which 
binds to its intracellular target and causes changes of the fluorescence of the probe. The 
latter reaction is stoichiometric and the fluorescence intensity is expected to correlate with 
the concentration of the target in the cell. Chen, Yang and coworkers have reported on the 
transport of a DNA‐based MB containing Dabcyl as a quencher and Cy5 as a reporter fluo-
rophore [63]. This probe was designed to bind a survivin mRNA. The authors have observed 
that the NGO protected the MB from nucleases and substantially reduced the background 
signal of the MB in the absence of its target. Moreover, the NGO brought this MB into cells 
where it bound the survivin mRNA, as indicated by the increase of the ­fluorescence intensity 
in cells. A construct containing NGO and control MB has been found to generate a 2.4‐fold 
lower fluorescence signal in cells. These results confirm some selectivity of the survivin 
MB, which is, however, still not sufficient for practical applications. Therefore, further 
optimizations of the delivery of MBs or other hybridization‐­sensitive probes are warranted.
Aptamers are short ON sequences (RNA or DNA) that bind specifically small ­molecules. 
These reagents can be applied as drugs and for imaging of biomolecules both in cell‐free 
conditions and directly in cells. For example, Li, Lin and coworkers have explored the 
­possibility for the delivery of an ATP‐aptamer (ON) to cells using GO [64]. To be able to 
monitor the reagent delivery as well as its binding to intracellular ATP, the authors have 
labelled the aptamer with a fluorescent dye (Fl) to obtain ON‐Fl. The GO‐bound ON‐Fl 
remained weakly fluorescent due to strong quenching of the Fl with the GO. However, 
upon binding of ATP, the aptamer was folded with the formation of the structure, which 
does not have the high affinity to GO. Therefore, the aptamer was released from the GO in 
the presence of ATP, which was reflected in the dequenching of the fluorescence of the 

376
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
ON‐Fl. Thus, the fluorescence of ON‐Fl/GO correlates with the concentration of ATP in 
solution. Li, Lin and coworkers have observed this behavior both in cell‐free assays and in 
cells, thereby confirming that GO is a suitable carrier of aptamers.
11.5  Bioanalytical Applications
Graphene oxide has been used in a variety of electrochemical and optical assays for the 
detection of biomolecules and xenobiotics, as reviewed elsewhere [65]. In this section we 
will concentrate on the detection of nucleic acids by using fluorescence‐based approaches, 
which is mainly due to the current research interests of the authors of this chapter.
Oligonucleotides (ONs) interact strongly with GO. In particular, Maheshwari, Liu 
and coworkers have studied in detail the binding of fluorescein‐labeled oligonucleotides 
(Fl‐ONs) of different length with GO [66]. The GO used in that work was obtained by a 
modified Hummers method, including oxidation with potassium persulfate and phosphorus 
pentoxide at 90 °C. The binding was studied by fluorescence spectroscopy monitoring the 
fluorescence quenching upon the addition of the GO to the Fl‐ONs. The authors observed 
that the binding efficiency decreased with increasing ON length (12‐ to 32‐mers have been 
investigated). Moreover, the kinetics of this interaction has been found to be substantially 
faster for shorter strands (12‐ to 24‐mers) than for the longer one (36‐mer). Since both the 
nucleobases of ONs and the flat regions of the GO are planar aromatics, they are able to get 
engaged in π–π interactions with each other analogously to those found between single‐
walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and nucleic acids [67]. However, this does not seem to be the 
only factor defining the affinity of the GO to ONs. For example, it has been observed that 
the binding of Fl‐ONs to GO was strongly salt‐dependent, which allowed the formation of 
salt bridges GOn−–Na+–ONm− between the reacting partners to be suggested. Furthermore, 
the GO–ON interaction is highly sensitive to the hybridization state of the nucleic acids. 
For example, single‐stranded nucleic acids bind GO efficiently, whereas folded ones, 
including double‐stranded nucleic acids, quadruplexes [68] or aptamers [64] bound to their 
target molecules, do not bind GO. This property of GO has been used in a number of 
­bioanalytical applications for detection of nucleic acids and, in combination with aptamers, 
for the detection of small molecules.
In early assays, a single‐stranded ON containing a fluorophore was loaded onto GO or 
NGO, leading to fluorophore quenching (Figure 11.3). Adding a complementary nucleic 
acid to the resulting mixture caused the formation of dsDNA, its release from the GO 
­surface and, consequently, fluorophore dequenching (pathway A, Figure 11.3).
For example, in this way Yang and coworkers have detected a DNA with an HIV1 
sequence [69]. Ai and coworkers have recently optimized this assay for detection of single 
mismatches in nucleic acids [70]. However, since GO binding to single‐stranded nucleic 
acids is in general strong and weakly sequence‐specific, an alternative activation mecha-
nism can occur. In particular, a mismatched nucleic acid can replace the probe from the GO 
surface by an unspecific interaction with the GO that leads to a strong background signal 
(false positive, pathway B in Figure 11.3). For example, Yang and coworkers have observed 
[69] that an MHIV1 target, containing a single mismatch, also enhances the fluorescence 
of the solution containing the probe–GO construct. In the latter case, the signal was only 
about half that observed in the presence of the fully matching target. Recently, Liu and 
coworkers have provided experimental evidence that the unspecific probe displacement 

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
377
from the GO followed by the hybridization of the probe with the target in solution is a 
major pathway of activation of the probe–GO sensors. They have also confirmed that only 
a small portion of the target is hybridized to the probe, whereas the majority of it remains 
bound to the GO [71]. The solution to this problem has been suggested by the research 
groups of Kitamura and Ihara, who separated a target‐binding DNA sequence from the 
GO‐binding element (Figure 11.4) [72]. The latter can in principle be any GO‐binding 
chemical moiety that has a substantially stronger affinity toward GO than any analyte 
Sequence speciﬁc
Unspeciﬁc
Complementary RNA
GO
B
F
F
F
F
A
+
+
Figure 11.3  An approach for detection of nucleic acids by making use of quenching and 
ON‐binding properties of GO. Binding of the probe via pathway A leads to the sequence‐
specific fluorescence increase, whereas when pathway B is realized the fluorescence increase 
is not specific [66, 69, 70]
GO
Complementary
RNA
+
F
Figure 11.4  An improved method of nucleic acid analysis using GO as a quencher and probe 
binder. A toehold sequence of the probe was selected [72]

378
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
­present in solution. In the original work, DNA dA20 (magenta colored in Figure 11.4) has 
been selected as a GO‐binding sequence and a toehold construct, containing a double‐
stranded part covalently connected to the dA20 and a single‐stranded DNA overhang for 
anchoring the target. The reporter fluorophore in the resulting sensor has been placed in the 
proximity to the GO and was, therefore, strongly quenched. In this case the target cannot 
displace the sensor (dA20–toehold sequence) from the GO. Rather, it hybridizes with one of 
the strands of the toehold sequence, thereby replacing another strand and leading to the 
fluorescence dequenching. In this system, the target‐induced fluorescence enhancement 
with respect to that obtained in the presence of a mismatched target has been found to be 
about 7‐fold higher than the same parameter for the parent system with a simple, single‐
stranded probe.
Another important factor to account for in GO‐based DNA detection assays is the 
level of oxidation of GO (C/O ratio). This factor has not been considered in earlier 
reports. For example, Nguyen and coworkers have reported that the C/O ratio strongly 
affects the fluorescence quenching ability of GO as well as its affinity toward single‐
stranded ONs [73].
Acknowledgments
We thank Dr. Siegfried Eigler for drawing the GO structure shown in Figure 11.1 and 
Serghei Chercheja for drawing the GO structures shown in Figures 11.2, 11.3 and 11.4.
References
[1]	 Bianco, A., Graphene: safe or toxic? Two faces of the medal. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 
4986–4997.
[2]	 Nezakati, T.; Cousins, B.G.; Seifalian, A.M., Toxicology of chemically modified graphene‐
based materials for medical application. Arch. Toxicol. 2014, 88, 1987–2012.
[3]	 Jachak, A.C.; Creighton, M.; Giu, Y.; et al., Biological interactions and safety of graphene mate-
rials. MRS Bull. 2012, 37 (12), 1307–1313.
[4]	 Guo, X.; Mei, N., Assessment of the toxic potential of graphene family nanomaterials. J. Food. 
Drug. Anal. 2014, 22 (1), 105–115.
[5]	 Seabra, A.B.; Paula, A.J.; de Lima, R.; et al., Nanotoxicity of graphene and graphene oxide. 
Chem. Res. Toxicol. 2014, 27 (2), 159–168.
[6]	 Goenka, S.; Sant, V.; Sant, S., Graphene‐based nanomaterials for drug delivery and tissue engi-
neering. J. Control. Release 2014, 173, 75–88.
[7]	 Krishna, K.V.; Ménard‐Moyon, C.; Verma, S.; Bianco, A., Graphene‐based nanomaterials for 
nanobiotechnology and biomedical applications. Nanomedicine 2013, 8 (10), 1669–1688.
[8]	 Skoda, M.; Dudek, I.; Jarosz, A.; Szukiewicz, D., Graphene: one material, many possibili-
ties – application difficulties in biological systems. J. Nanomater. 2014, 2014, 890246.
[9]	 Liao, K.‐H.; Lin, Y.‐S.; Macosko, C.W.; Haynes, C.L., Cytotoxicity of graphene oxide and ­graphene 
in human erythrocytes and skin fibroblasts. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2011, 3, 2607–2615.
[10]	 Wang, K.; Ruan, J.; Song, H.; et al., Biocompatibility of graphene oxide. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 
2011, 6, 8.
[11]	 Chang, Y.; Yang, S.‐T.; Liu, J.‐H.; et al., In vitro toxicity evaluation of graphene oxide on A549 
cells. Toxicol. Lett. 2011, 200, 201–210.
[12]	 Nguyen, T.H.D.; Lin, M.; Mustapha, A., Toxicity of graphene oxide on intestinal bacteria and 
caco‐2 cells. J. Food Protect. 2015, 78 (5), 996–1002.

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
379
[13]	 Jaworski, S.; Sawosz, E.; Kutwin, M.; et al., In vitro and in vivo effects of graphene oxide and 
reduced graphene oxide on glioblastoma. Int. J. Nanomed. 2015, 10, 1585–1596.
[14]	 Wang, Y.; Wu, S.; Zhao, X.; et al., In vitro toxicity evaluation of graphene oxide on human 
RPMI 8226 cells. Biomed. Mater. Eng. 2014, 24 (6), 2007–2013.
[15]	 Chng, E.L.K.; Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Graphene oxide nanoribbons exhibit significantly 
greater toxicity than graphene oxide nanoplatelets. Nanoscale 2014, 6 (18), 10792–10797.
[16]	 Wang, T.; Zhu, S.; Jiang, X., Toxicity mechanism of graphene oxide and nitrogen‐doped 
­graphene quantum dots in RBC revealed by surface‐enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy. 
Toxicol. Res. 2015, 4 (4), 885–894.
[17]	 Yan, L.; Wang, Y.; Xu, X.; et al., Can graphene oxide cause damage to eyesight? Chem. Res. 
Toxicol. 2012, 25 (6), 1265–1270.
[18]	 Wojtoniszak, M.; Chen, X.; Kalenczuk, R.J.; et al., Synthesis, dispersion, and cytocompatibility 
of graphene oxide and reduced graphene oxide. Colloids Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 2012, 89, 
79–85.
[19]	 Fiorillo, M.; Verre, A.F.; Iliut, M.; et al., Graphene oxide selectively targets cancer stem cells, 
across multiple tumor types: implications for non‐toxic cancer treatment, via “differentiation‐
based nano‐therapy”. Oncotarget 2015, 6 (6), 3553–3562.
[20]	 Liang, S.; Xu, S.; Zhang, D.; et al., Reproductive toxicity of nanoscale graphene oxide in male 
mice. Nanotoxicity 2015, 9 (1), 92–105.
[21]	 Yin, D.; Li, Y.; Lin, H.; et al., Functional graphene oxide as a plasmid‐based Stat3 siRNA 
­carrier inhibits mouse malignant melanoma growth in vivo. Nanotechnology 2013, 24, 105012.
[22]	 Fu, C.; Liu, T.; Li, L.; et al., Effects of graphene oxide on the development of offspring mice in 
lactation period. Biomaterials 2015, 40, 23–31.
[23]	 Li, B.; Yang, J.; Huang, Q.; et al., Biodistribution and pulmonary toxicity of intratracheally 
instilled graphene oxide in mice. NPG Asia Materials 2013, 5, e44.
[24]	 Li, Y.; Yuan, H.; von dem Bussche A.; et al., Graphene microsheets enter cells through sponta-
neous membrane penetration at edge asperities and corner sites. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 
2013, 110 (30), 12295–12300.
[25]	 Mullick Chowdhury, S.; Lalwani, G.; Zhang, K.; et al., Cell specific cytotoxicity and uptake of 
graphene nanoribbons. Biomaterials 2013, 34 (1), 283–293.
[26]	 Liu, S.; Zeng, T.H.; Hofmann, M.; et al., Antibacterial activity of graphite, graphite oxide, 
­graphene oxide, and reduced graphene oxide: membrane and oxidative stress. ACS Nano 2011, 
5, 6971–6980.
[27]	 Akhavan, O.; Ghaderi, E., Toxicity of graphene and graphene oxide nanowalls against bacteria. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4, 5731–5736.
[28]	 Chen, J.; Wang, X.; Han, H., A new function of graphene oxide emerges: inactivating ­phytopathogenic 
bacterium Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae. J. Nanopart. Res. 2013, 15, 1658–1671.
[29]	 Duan, G.; Kang, S.; Tian, X.; et al., Protein corona mitigates the cytotoxicity of graphene oxide 
by reducing its physical interaction with cell membrane. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (37), 15214–15224.
[30]	 Ding, Z.; Zhang, Z.; Ma, H.; Chen, Y., In vitro hemocompatibility and toxic mechanism of 
graphene oxide on human peripheral blood T lymphocytes and serum albumin. ACS Appl. 
Mater. Interfaces 2014, 6 (22), 19797–19807.
[31]	 Lammel, T.; Navas, J.M., Graphene nanoplatelets spontaneously translocate into the cytosol 
and physically interact with cellular organelles in the fish cell line PLHC‐1. Aquatic Toxicol. 
2014, 150, 55–65.
[32]	 Wu, Q.; Yin, L.; Li, X.; et al., Contributions of altered permeability of intestinal barrier and 
defecation behavior to toxicity formation from graphene oxide in nematode Caenorhabditis 
elegans. Nanoscale 2013, 5 (20), 9934–9943.
[33]	 Chen, Y.; Ren, C.; Ouyang, S.; et al., Mitigation in multiple effects of graphene oxide toxicity 
in zebrafish embryogenesis driven by humic acid. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 49 (16), 
10147–10154.
[34]	 Zhang, W.; Yan, L.; Li, M.; et al., Deciphering the underlying mechanisms of oxidation‐state 
dependent cytotoxicity of graphene oxide on mammalian cells. Toxicol. Lett. 2015, 237, 61–71.
[35]	 Pieper, H.; Chercheja, S.; Eigler, S.; et al., Endoperoxides revealed as origin of toxicity of 
­graphene oxide. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55 (1), 405–407.

380
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[36]	 Wu, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, D., Molecular signals regulating translocation and toxicity of 
graphene oxide in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Nanoscale 2014, 6 (19), 11204–11212.
[37]	 Wu, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Zhao, G.; Wang, D., microRNAs control of in vivo toxicity from graphene 
oxide in Caenorhabditis elegans. Nanomedicine 2014, 10 (7), 1401–1410.
[38]	 Wu, Q.; Zhao, Y.; Fang, J.; Wang, D., Immune response is required for the control of in vivo 
translocation and chronic toxicity of graphene oxide. Nanoscale 2014, 6 (11), 5894–5906.
[39]	 Jaque, D.; Martínes Maestro, L.; del Rosal, B.; et al., Nanoparticles for photothermal therapies. 
Nanoscale 2014, 6, 9494–9530.
[40]	 Helmchen, F.; Denk, W., Deep tissue two‐photon microscopy. Nature Meth. 2005, 2, 932–940.
[41]	 Olivo, M.; Fu, C.Y.; Raghavan, V.; Lau, W.K., New frontier in hypericin‐mediated diagnosis of 
cancer with current optical technologies. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2012, 49 (2), 460–473.
[42]	 Lai, Q.; Zhu, S.; Luo, X.; et  al., Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy of graphene oxides. AIP 
Advances 2012, 2, 032146.
[43]	 Saxena, S.; Tyson, T.A.; Shukla, S.; et al., Investigation of structural and electronic properties 
of graphene oxide. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2011, 99, 013104.
[44]	 Li, M.; Yang, X.; Ren, J.; et al., Using graphene oxide high near‐infrared absorbance for photo-
thermal treatment of Alzheimer’s disease. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24, 1722–1728.
[45]	 Sun, X.; Liu, Z.; Welsher, K.; et al., Nano‐graphene oxide for cellular imaging and drug ­delivery. 
Nano Res. 2008, 1 (3), 203–212.
[46]	 Liu, J.; Cui, L.; Losic, D., Graphene and graphene oxide as new nanocarriers for drug delivery 
applications. Acta Biomater. 2013, 9, 9243–9257.
[47]	 Orecchiono, M.; Cabizza, R.; Bianco, A.; Delogu, L.G., Graphene as cancer theranostic tool: 
progress and future challenges. Theranostics 2015, 5 (7), 710–723.
[48]	 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Estimates of foodborne illness in the United States. 
See http://www.cdc.gov/foodborneburden/trends‐in‐foodborne‐illness.html (accessed 11 May 
2016).
[49]	 Kim, W.; Moss, S.F., The role of Heliobacter pylori in the pathogenesis of gastric malignancies. 
Oncol. Rev. 2008, 2 (3), 131–140.
[50]	 Khan, M.S.; Abdelhamid, H.N.; Wu, H.‐F., Near infrared (NIR) laser mediated surface activa-
tion of graphene oxide nanoflakes for efficient antibacterial, antifungal and wound healing 
treatment. Colloids Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 2015, 127, 281–291.
[51]	 Hauck, T.S.; Jennings, T.L.; Yatsenko, T.; et al., Enhancing the toxicity of cancer chemothera-
peutics with gold nanorod hyperthermia. Adv. Mater. 2008, 20, 3832–3838.
[52]	 Zhang, W.; Guo, Z.; Huang, D.; et al., Synergistic effect of chemo‐photothermal therapy using 
PEGylated graphene oxide. Biomaterials 2011, 32, 8555–8561.
[53]	 Shi, S.; Chen, F.; Ehlerding, E.B.; Cai, W., Surface engineering of graphene‐based nanomateri-
als for biomedicinal applications. Bioconjug. Chem. 2014, 25, 1609–1619.
[54]	 Feng, L.; Zhang, S.; Liu, Z., Graphene based gene transfection. Nanoscale 2011, 3, 1252–1257.
[55]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 7720–7738.
[56]	 Wu, J.; Wang, Y.; Yang, X.; et al., Graphene oxide used as a carrier for adriamycin can reverse 
drug resistance in breast cancer cells. Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 355101.
[57]	 Chen, J.; Liu, H.; Zhao, C.; et al., One‐step reduction and PEGylation of graphene oxide for 
photothermally controlled drug delivery. Biomaterials 2014, 35, 4986–4995.
[58]	 Rahmanian, N.; Hamishehkar, H.; Dolatabadi, J.E.N., Nano graphene oxide: a novel carrier for 
oral delivery of flavonoids. Colloids Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 2014, 123, 331–338.
[59]	 Tian, B.; Wang, C.; Zhang, S.; et al., Photothermally enhanced photodynamic therapy delivered 
by nano‐graphene oxide. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (9), 7000–7009.
[60]	 Robinson, J.T.; Tabakman, S.M.; Liang, Y.Y.; et  al., Ultrasmall reduced graphene oxide 
with high near‐infrared absorbance for photothermal therapy. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 
6825–6831.
[61]	 Zhang, L.; Lu, Z.; Zhao, Q.; et al., Enhanced chemotherapy efficacy by sequential delivery of 
siRNA and anticancer drugs using PEI‐grafted graphene oxide. Small 2011, 7 (4), 460–464.
[62]	 Yang, X.; Niu, G.; Cao, X.; et al., The preparation of functionalized graphene oxide for targeted 
intracellular delivery of siRNA. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22, 6649–6654.

Toxicity Studies and Biomedical Applications of Graphene Oxide
381
[63]	 Lu, C.‐H.; Zhu, C.‐L.; Li, J.; et al., Using graphene to protect DNA from cleavage during 
­cellular delivery. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46, 3116–3118.
[64]	 Wang, Y.; Li, Z.; Hu, D.; et al., Aptamer/graphene oxide nanocomplex for in situ molecular 
probing in living cells. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 9274–9276.
[65]	 Tang, L:, Wang, Y.; Li, J., The graphene/nucleic acid nanobiointerface. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 
44, 6954–6980.
[66]	 Wu, M.; Kempaiah, R.; Huang, P.‐J.J.; et al., Adsorption and desorption of DNA on graphene 
oxide studied by fluorescently labeled oligonucleotides. Langmuir 2011, 27, 2731–2738.
[67]	 Zheng, M.; Jagota, A.; Semke, E.D.; et al., DNA‐assisted dispersion and separation of carbon 
nanotubes. Nature Mater. 2003, 2, 338–342.
[68]	 Wang, H.; Chen, T.; Wu, S.; et al., A novel biosensing strategy for screening G‐quadruplex 
ligands based on graphene oxide sheets. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2012, 34, 88–93.
[69]	 Lu, C.‐H.; Yang, H.‐H.; Zhu, C.‐L.; et  al., A graphene platform for sensing biomolecules. 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 4785–4787.
[70]	 Huang, Y.; Yang, H.Y.; Ai, Y., DNA single‐base mismatch study using graphene oxide 
nanosheets‐based fluorometric biosensors. Anal. Chem. 2015, 87, 9132–9136.
[71]	 Liu, B.; Sun, Z.; Zhang, X.; Liu, J., Mechanisms of DNA sensing on graphene oxide. Anal. 
Chem. 2013, 85 (16), 7987–7993.
[72]	 Miyahata, T.; Kitamura, Y.; Futamura, A.; et al., DNA analysis based on toehold‐mediated 
strand displacement on graphene oxide. Chem. Commun. 2013, 49, 10139–10141.
[73]	 Hong, B.J.; An, Z.; Compton, O.C.; Nguyen, S.B., Tunable biomolecular interaction and 
­fluorescence quenching ability of graphene oxide: application to “turn‐on” DNA sensing in 
biological media. Small 2012, 8 (16), 2469–2476.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
12
Catalysis
Ioannis V. Pavlidis
12.1  Introduction
The catalytic potential of graphene oxide (GO) and graphite oxide is nothing new. The 
reactivity of graphite oxide as a solid‐phase heterogeneous catalyst was cited in 1962 
for the first time [1], catalyzed on the production of HBr, just four years after Hummers’ 
publication on the method of production of GO [2]. It is astonishing that the authors were 
able to estimate that 100 carbon atoms in the layer plane catalyze the formation of 10 HBr 
molecules per hour and that the carbon atoms at the periphery functionalized as oxides are 
the active sites. Moreover, they were able to estimate that the GO consists of two or three 
layers, with about 80% carbon and 20% oxygen atoms, and most of the oxygen was identi-
fied as bound hydroxyl and ether groups. However, it took more than 40 years for carboca-
talysis to draw the attention that it deserves. In the meantime, two Nobel Prizes were 
awarded for research in the field (the 1996 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for the discovery of 
fullerenes, and the 2010 Nobel Prize in Physics for the groundbreaking experiments regard-
ing the two‐dimensional material graphene). Just recently the catalytic properties of GO 
have started to be harnessed for chemical reactions, and the potential of GO and its deriva-
tives in synthetic chemistry still remains unexplored to a great extent.
As its name indicates, GO is related to graphene, in that they are both two‐dimensional 
(2D) carbon nanomaterials. However, despite this basic similarity, these materials differ sig-
nificantly in their intrinsic properties. Graphene is composed of sp2‐hybridized carbon atoms, 
while GO comprises a mixture of sp2‐ and sp3‐hybridized carbon atoms, with the latter being 
functionalized with oxygen. This particular difference has a profound impact on the proper-
ties of the final material [3], as will be discussed later, while it provides a lot of groups 

Catalysis
383
acting as active sites. It is known that the performance of a catalyst is influenced by the 
nature of the material, the concentration and the accessibility of the active sites [4]. Taking 
this into account, the catalytic potential of GO is far greater than that of pristine graphene. 
GO is used already in several oxidative reactions, but also in polymerization reactions and 
Friedel–Crafts or Michael additions, just to mention some of the reactions that GO can 
catalyze. However, there are still some obstacles to surpass due to the difficulty of the not 
fully understood structure, and thus the elucidation of the catalytic mechanism is difficult 
in most cases. These topics are going to be discussed in detail in the following sections.
12.2  Graphene Oxide Properties
In order to elaborate the catalytic potential of GO, one needs to understand the unique 
properties that GO and similar or derived materials possess. It is a common trend that 
researchers in the field mention vaguely its unique properties in the introductions of their 
publications; however, in most cases, they never define the distinctive property of the mate-
rial that makes it proper for the specific reaction or use. In this section, the most interesting 
properties of GO – concerning its catalytic behavior, which is the focus of the present 
chapter – are going to be discussed.
In order to be fair about the criticism raised in the introduction concerning the length 
of time needed to rediscover GO as a catalyst, there is a huge barrier that hindered its 
exploitation: the structure of GO is still under debate. Several structural models have 
been proposed [5–8], with the one proposed by Lerf et al. [9] being the most widely 
accepted. This model proposes that there are two kinds of regions: an aromatic region 
with non‐oxidized benzene rings; and regions with oxidized aliphatic six‐membered 
rings that have epoxy and hydroxyl functionalities on both sides of the monolayer. Of 
importance is the slightly distorted configuration of the hydroxylated carbon centers, 
which results in wrinkling of the layers, and thus increasing the distance between the 
lattice planes. The grid terminates with carboxyl or hydroxyl groups. However, even if 
this model was universally accepted (which it is to a great extent), it does underline an 
uncertainty about the level of oxidation, something that relies heavily on the prepara-
tion method.
Apart from the structure of GO, there are significant properties that need to be taken into 
account when GO is used as a catalyst. The most important properties for the catalytic 
activity are the following.
●
●Carbon‐to‐oxygen (C/O) atomic ratio. The abundance of oxygen atoms in the material 
reflects the number of functional groups that were implanted on the carbon grid upon 
oxidation of the parent material. As mentioned in the description of the structure, there 
is a significant variation, in terms of functional groups, as well as their localization. The 
C/O ratio can vary between 2 : 1 and 3 : 1 depending on the manufacturing method 
[2, 10], while further thermal and/or chemical treatment can increase the ratio to 14 : 1, 
by decreasing the oxygen concentration due to reduction [11, 12]. The strict reproduc-
ibility of the C/O ratio, as well as the quality of the functional groups incorporated, is 
of utmost importance, as in most cases these functional groups are the ones responsible 
for the catalytic activity of GO, as discussed later. For this reason, synthesis techniques 

384
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
like the ones proposed by Compton et al. [13], which allows the fine tuning of the C/O 
ratio, and Marcano et al. [14], which allows high oxidation rate (up to 70%), are of 
extreme importance.
●
●High surface area. One of the major benefits of nanomaterials, which makes them so 
appealing not only for catalysis but also for other applications, is their high specific sur-
face area, as usually determined by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method. This 
provides a high interaction area, compared to bulk materials, and – in combination with 
the abundance of functional groups on the surface of GO – a high proportion of catalyti-
cally active moieties per unit weight of material. The theoretical surface area of mon-
olayer graphene is 2630 m2 g−1 [15]. At the same time, the one calculated for GO is 
890 m2 g−1, while the experimentally determined value in aqueous solution is 736.6 m2 g−1 
[16]. The apparent value is in line with the theoretical one, once the agglomeration level 
is taken into account. The surface area can be increased again by reduction of the mate-
rial, at the expense of the oxygen functionalities. For instance, activated reduced GO 
(RGO) films have a much higher specific area, of about 2400 m2 g−1 [12], quite close to 
the theoretical value for monolayer graphene. Extremely high surface areas of up to 
3100 m2 g−1 were reported for microwave‐exfoliated graphite oxide, activated after treat-
ment with KOH [15]. The authors suggest that the fine‐tuning of the surface area relies 
on the ratio of KOH to graphite oxide. Although it seems a paradox, higher surface areas 
compared to graphene are possible, by introducing heptagons and octagons into the car-
bon lattice, thus disrupting the typical six‐membered rings – the sheet acquires a negative 
curvature and adopts a saddle shape [17].
●
●Conductivity/capacitance. The conductivity of GO and its derivatives is one of the prop-
erties that are easily tunable [18]. The fine‐tuning of these properties is highly desirable 
for applications such as the design of supercapacitors and fuel cells. The high electrical 
conductivity and electron mobility of graphene results from a very small effective mass. 
The electrons behave as massless particles in the graphene lattice, traveling with a speed 
of about 106 m s−1, granting an exceptional in‐plane conductivity of about 20000 S cm−1 
[19] and an intrinsic mobility limit of 2 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1, significantly higher compared 
to any silicon conductor [20]. Due to the disruption of the sp2 bonding network, the con-
ductivity of GO (of C/O ratio 2 : 1) is quite low, at the level of some μS cm−1 [4, 21]; thus 
GO is often described as an insulator. The removal of the oxygen atoms via reduction can 
regain a significant portion of the conductivity, up to 5880 S m−1 [12]. The removal of the 
oxygen functionalities of GO can significantly increase its capacitance, to levels compa-
rable to those for pristine graphite or graphene (about 100–300 F g−1) [22]. As a result of 
the fine‐tuning of the C/O ratio, as well as the functionalization, GO and its derivatives 
are appealing materials for energy storage or supercapacitor fabrication.
12.3  Oxidative Activity
12.3.1  Oxidation Reactions of GO
Although the fact that pristine graphene can be used as a catalyst, using the delocalized π 
electron system to drive complexation reactions [23], the oxygen functionalities on the 
surface of GO make it much more appealing as a catalyst. These functional groups 

Catalysis
385
facilitate the catalysis of oxidation reactions, either by using other oxidizing agents, or by 
using their own oxygen atoms, as will be discussed later in this chapter. The reactivity is 
attributed to the high acidity of GO (pH 4.5 in aqueous media at 0.1 mg ml−1) [11], and thus 
GO is often described as acting as a Lewis acid. Due to the nature of the functional groups 
of GO, most of the first studies concerning carbocatalysis with graphitic compounds 
focused on redox processes [24]. The reactions are performed at mild conditions, highlight-
ing the potential of GO and its derivatives as catalysts. However, there are also some draw-
backs in the use of GO as a catalyst. For instance, the catalytic efficiency in several cases 
is not high, requiring high loading (up to 400%) in typical oxidative reactions, while the 
non‐stoichiometric and inhomogeneous nature of GO hinder the understanding of the 
detailed mechanism, thus making it more difficult to design novel reactions [25]. A signifi-
cant part of the studies on the catalytic reactivity of GO has been performed by Dreyer, 
Bielawski and their coworkers, who evaluated the substrate spectrum of GO, as well as 
optimizing the processes for some of these reactions [26–31].
One of the typical examples of the oxidative reactivity of GO is the oxidation of ben-
zyl alcohol to benzaldehyde (Table 12.1, entry 1), attaining conversions over 90% at 
100 °C, and at the same time avoiding over‐oxidation to benzoic acid [27]. Conversions 
to ­benzoic acid were observed mostly at higher temperatures (>100 °C). The non‐pre-
ferred by‐product could be avoided by performing the reaction at lower temperatures and 
using higher catalyst loadings to compensate for the lower productivity. Apart from 
­benzyl alcohol, GO was found to be able to oxidize a broad spectrum of alcohols to the 
corresponding aldehydes or ketones [27]. Some of the compounds synthesized are pre-
sented in Table 12.1 (entries 1–6). Aromatic groups on the substrate are not a necessity 
for the catalytic activity of GO, as it also exhibits high catalytic activity toward cyclohex-
anol, a cyclic but not aromatic substrate. More interestingly, GO seems to be a selective 
catalyst, as it oxidized 2‐thiophenemethanol into the respective aldehyde, but without 
any ­detectable sulfur oxidation (despite the fact that GO can oxidize sulfur compounds, 
as discussed later).
However, the oxidative potential of GO is not restricted only to alcohols. In the same 
work [27], the authors highlighted that GO can oxidize unsaturated hydrocarbons, as exem-
plified by the production of benzil from cis‐stilbene, via a Wacker–Tsuji type of oxidation 
(Table 12.1, entry 7). The optimization showed that, for increased product yield, high GO 
loading up to 400% is needed and moderately high temperatures of about 100–120 °C, as 
minimal conversion was observed at lower temperatures (<60 °C) [30]. At temperatures 
over 120 °C, the conversion also decreases, something that the authors attribute to the ther-
mal degradation/reduction of GO [26]. Interestingly, GO was inert toward trans‐stilbenes, 
showcasing its selectivity as a catalyst. GO could also catalyze the oxidation of substituted 
cis‐stilbenes with generally high yields (between 38% and 68%), once the substrates had 
electron‐donating or moderately electron‐withdrawing groups (Table 12.1, entries 8–11). 
Modest yield (25%) was observed for a substrate substituted with a strong electron‐­
withdrawing nitro group, such as 4,4′‐dinitro‐cis‐stilbene (Table  12.1, entry 12) [30]. 
Despite the fact that the yields attained are far from perfect, the catalytic potential of GO 
was exemplified in a broad set of substrates, and it seems to have potential as a substitute 
for metal catalysts, like selenium(iv) oxide, or chromate‐containing catalysts, for the 
­oxidation of stilbenes and 1,2‐disubstituted olefins [30]. The low cost of GO and its avail-
ability are two of the advantages that could favor its use compared to metal catalysts.

Table 12.1  Oxidative reactions catalyzed by GO. The efficiency is presented either in conversion [c] or yield [y], as described in the literature
Entry
Substrate
Product
Efficiency Ref. Entry
Substrate
Product
Efficiency Ref.
1
OH
O
>90%
[c]
[27]
14
~40%
[y]
[34]
2
OH
O
>98%
[c]
[27]
15
O
72%
[y]
[30]
3
OH
HO
O
O
96%
[c]
[27]
16
O
O
17%
[y]
[30]
4
OH
O
26%
[c]
[27]
17
O
59%
[y]
[30]
5
OH
O
>98%
[c]
[27]
18
NO2
N
O
NO2
N
80%
[y]
[30]

6
OH
S
O
S
18%
[c]
[27]
19
O
O
49%
[y]
31%
[y]
[30]
7
O
O
68%
[y]
[30]
20
85%
[y]
[30]
8
Cl
Cl
O
O
50%
[y]
[30]
21
24%
[y]
[30]
9
OMe
OMe
O
O
38%
[y]
[30]
22
26%
[y]
[30]
(Continued)

Entry
Substrate
Product
Efficiency Ref. Entry
Substrate
Product
Efficiency Ref.
10
MeO
OMe
MeO
OMe
O
O
48%
[y]
[30]
23
CHO
6%
[y]
[30]
11
tBu
O
O
tBu
68%
[y]
[30]
24
MeO
MeO
CHO
16%
[y]
[30]
12
NO2
O2N
NO2
O2N
O
O
25%
[y]
[30]
25
O2N
CHO
O2N
4%
[y]
[30]
13
S
O
O
S
12%
[y]
[30]
Table 12.1  (Continued)

Catalysis
389
In the aforementioned works, it was suggested that GO does not act as the oxidant, but it 
activates O2 molecules, which in turn act as the final oxidant in these reactions. This 
hypothesis was based on the observation that the reaction does not proceed in a nitrogen 
atmosphere, and the oxygen content of the material remains intact after it catalyzed the 
reaction. Interestingly, the reaction was also not catalyzed by graphite or RGO, even in the 
presence of oxygen, highlighting the role of the functional groups on the surface of GO. It 
is suggested that the oxygen‐rich groups that are abundant on the surface of GO promote 
the adsorption of O2 [32]. However, there are also cases where GO acts not only as a cata-
lyst but also as a co‐substrate, implying a different catalytic mechanism. GO catalyzes the 
hydration of alkynes and aryl alkynes to the respective methyl ketones in solvent‐free sys-
tems at ambient temperatures – a very interesting reaction and an alternative to the estab-
lished oxymercuration reaction. However, in this case, a significant decrease of the oxygen 
content is observed, providing hints on the consumption of surface‐bound oxygen during 
the reaction [27]. Although a competing thermal degradation process can occur at high 
loadings of GO [33], the diminishing of oxygen functionalities in catalytic reactions at 
ambient temperatures suggests that probably GO is also used as a co‐substrate or oxidant.
In order to expand the study of the substrate scope, the catalytic efficiency of GO was 
tested toward more challenging substrates such as hydrocarbons that possess sp3‐hybridized 
C–H bonds. The oxidative dehydrogenation of hydrocarbons (ODH) is catalyzed by nucle-
ophilic oxygen atoms on the carbon surface, located on prismatic edges of stacked gra-
phene sheets or at defect surfaces, such as in the case of GO [35]. Most works in the field 
focus on the production of styrene via oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene, which 
is an industrially interesting reaction [35]. After further investigation of the specific reac-
tion, it was found that the quinone groups of the GO are the ones responsible for the cata-
lytic activity [34]. It needs to be mentioned, however, that this specific reaction is not 
challenging, as the stable conjugated system of styrene drives the reaction [4]. On the 
contrary, ODH of light alkanes has low selectivity and it is more challenging, as the C–H 
bond produced is weaker than the one present in the substrate [36]. GO is an efficient cata-
lyst also for these substrates. For some substrates, the result of the oxidation was the 
­corresponding ketone (Table 12.1, entries 15–18), while in other cases dehydrogenative 
aromatization was observed (Table 12.1, entries 20–22) [30]. Several substrates with ben-
zylic methylene groups were successfully converted (Table 12.1, entries 23–25). When 
compounds with double activated benzylic positions were used as substrates, the corre-
sponding ketone was formed as a product in good yields. The efficiency of GO as a catalyst 
for ODH reactions and its potential as a catalyst in industrial processes is highlighted by a 
very recently published patent [31]. The inventors suggest a process for the production of 
propene from propane, at 1 atm pressure, but high temperatures (400 °C). Using 250 mg of 
catalyst, only 15% conversion was observed after 48 h, but there were hints that equilib-
rium was not reached and that higher yields could be attained, to grant the system more 
efficiency. It is expected that the process can be more efficient than that described so far.
The elucidation of the catalytic mechanism from Tang and Cao [37] could help to achieve 
higher yields and push the barriers of industrial application. First‐principles calculations 
were used to explore the plausible mechanisms for the oxidative dehydrogenation of propane 
to propene. As presented in Figure 12.1, two epoxide groups at the right distance on GO are 
needed, in order to activate the C–H bond of the substrate. In this proposed mechanism, the 
proton from one carbon of the substrate is initially abstracted by the first epoxide group, 

390
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
yielding the first transition state (TS1) with the intermediate radical C3H7. Then, the second 
epoxide abstracts the second proton from the radical, in order to release the final product. 
Propene is physically adsorbed on the GO surface after its release. In order to regenerate 
the GO catalyst, the hydroxyl groups formed on the surface of the GO can form H2O and 
epoxy or a carbonyl group due to their physical vicinity [38].
Supporting the proposed mechanism, the calculations led to the conclusion that GO with 
modified oxygen‐containing groups can afford high catalytic activity [37]. More specifi-
cally, it was calculated that the presence of hydroxyl groups around the epoxy groups, 
which act as the catalytic centers of the material, can enhance the C–H bond activation of 
the propane by lowering the energy barrier (Figure 12.1b). Thus, it was suggested that an 
0.0
0.0
GO2-C3H8
GO1-C3H8
TS3
15
H2
2.93
1.46
4.6
GO2-C3H6
GO1-C3H6
14.7
–27.1
GO2-C3H7
GO1-C3H7-1
GO1-C3H7-2
1.3
(b)
(a)
1.86
1.69
TS4
H1
H1
H2
3.38
22.5
TS1
TS2
1.37
1.2
2.74
1.45
27.6
1.78
–14.9
15.9
16.3
1.98
2.71
2.71
Figure  12.1  Relative energy profiles for ODH of propane to propene on (a) GO1 and 
(b) GO2 (GO1 with one added hydroxyl group at the opposite side). All energies (kcal mol−1) 
in (a) and (b) are relative to the reactants GO1–C3H8 and GO2–C3H8, respectively, and the 
optimized configurations (distances, Å) of species involved in ODH are shown. Reproduced 
from [37] with permission of RSC

Catalysis
391
external electric field can be applied to facilitate the diffusion of the oxygen functional 
groups on the surface, and subsequently orient them better for catalysis. This should lead 
to increased reactivity of GO toward oxidative dehydrogenation of propane.
The various oxidative reactions that are catalyzed by GO can be combined in tandem 
one‐pot reactions to provide more complex compounds. In such an example, alcohol 
­oxidation and alkyl hydration were combined to produce chalcones. Electron‐rich and 
­electron‐poor aryl alkenes or methyl ketones were coupled with aryl alcohols or aldehydes 
to form the desired products, in acceptable isolated yields (>60%) [28]. For instance, the 
simultaneous oxidation of 4‐phenylbenzyl alcohol and 4‐ethynyl‐1,1′‐biphenyl leads to the 
spontaneous condensation of the products. It has been suggested that GO acts in the afore-
mentioned reaction as an acid catalyst, in a Claisen–Schmidt condensation [39]. Another 
condensation reaction that is catalyzed by GO is the condensation of pyrroles with dialkyl 
ketones [40]. Typically, this reaction is catalyzed by Lewis acids [41]. However, GO was 
proven to be an efficient catalyst, changing also the product specificity depending on the 
organic solvent in which the reaction is performed. Another advantage of GO catalysis is 
the fact that GO is a heterogeneous catalyst, which facilitates the isolation of the products. 
For instance, in the previous example, the synthesized chalcones are soluble in CH2Cl2, and 
thus they can be easily separated from the hydrophilic GO, which would remain in the 
aqueous phase [28].
It needs to be highlighted that in all these reactions high loadings of the GO were used 
(in most cases a GO loading of 200%); however, the authors suggest that the low cost of GO 
as a catalyst – compared to classic transition metal catalysts – compensates for the higher 
loading. It remains to be proven if the downstream processing of such amounts would be 
economically affordable and that GO will find its way to industrial applications. So far 
there are some examples that show the potential of the application of GO as a catalyst. For 
instance, the selective oxygenation of acrolein to acrylic acid is described with no oxidation 
of the double bond. This reaction was performed quite efficiently using surface oxygen‐
functionalized graphitic carbon. The production rate exceeded 26 mmol g−1 h−1 [35].
Graphene oxide can also catalyze the oxidative coupling of amines to imines, with excel-
lent yields (up to 98%) and, particularly in this case, low catalyst loading (5 wt.%) [25]. 
The high activity in this case seems to arise from the synergistic effect of the carboxylic 
acid groups and unpaired electrons that are located at the edge defects, facilitated by the 
sequential base–acid treatment of GO. The base reduction of GO generates nanovoids that 
are surrounded by conjugated domains. Thus, even more edge defects are generated in the 
center of the sheet and thus more carboxylic functionalities can form. Also, more unpaired 
electrons can be found [25]. The carbocatalyst is not reduced upon the reaction and can be 
used for several cycles. Using trapping molecules, the authors were able to prove the for-
mation of superoxide radicals, leading to the conclusion that hydrogen peroxide is formed 
as an intermediate, as usually occurs in aerobic oxidation reactions. The suggested mecha-
nism is presented at Figure 12.2.
12.3.2  Oxidation of Sulfur Compounds
GO and its derivatives have been successfully used for the oxidation of sulfur compounds. 
GO foam and dispersions of GO in aqueous medium were used to oxidize SO2 to SO3 in an 
environmentally friendly way, avoiding noble metal catalysts [42]. The oxidation of the 

392
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
gaseous SO2 proceeds using both molecular oxygen and the oxygen functionalities of the 
GO as oxidant, resulting in SO3, which in water transforms spontaneously to sulfuric acid. 
The authors base their suggestion that GO acts as an oxidant on two macroscopic observa-
tions: (i) a gradual change of color, from brown to black; and (ii) precipitation, which was 
assigned to increase of hydrophobicity due to the reduction. Both indications lead to the 
conclusion that the functional groups are consumed and the GO is gradually reduced.
The application of GO for the oxidation of sulfur compounds was also exemplified in the 
oxidation of thioanisole, an industrially interesting reaction used for the desulfurization of 
liquid fuels. GO is a perfect catalyst for this reaction, as high yields are attained at room 
temperature, with a catalyst‐to‐substrate weight ratio of about 0.11 [43]. Interestingly, the 
final oxidant in this case was not the GO itself, but the H2O2 supplied. It was proven that 
the reaction proceeds via •OH radicals, formed from the homolytic GO‐mediated cleavage 
of H2O2. The free radicals produced are then able to oxidize the organosulfur compounds 
[43]. Interestingly, the three‐dimensional (3D) GO foam is a more efficient catalyst com-
pared to the 2D GO, reaching conversions of about 85%, while the 2D material had only 
65% conversion under the same conditions. In addition to that, the selectivity of the 3D GO 
was better compared to the 2D counterpart, as it produced the sulfoxide in high excess, 
Figure 12.2  Schematic representation of the oxidation mechanism of basified GO‐catalyzed 
oxidative coupling of primary amines. Reproduced from [25] with permission of Nature 
Publishing Group

Catalysis
393
compared to the over‐oxidized sulfone (about 90% of the total products, in most cases). 
Although the mechanism of the selectivity is unclear, a hypothesis was proposed that the 
3D GO is a milder catalyst than the 2D GO, as it undergoes reduction to some extent during 
the formation of the 3D foam. On the contrary, 2D GO has more oxygen functional groups 
on its surface, thus being more reactive and leading to over‐oxidation of the substrate. The 
3D GO foam was proved to be an efficient catalyst also for the oxidation of diphenyl 
sulfide, although yielding lower conversions (about 45% in the same time interval and 
under the same conditions), probably due to steric hindrance. It is still unclear if steric 
hindrance or partial reduction is responsible for the lower activity. However, Dreyer and 
coworkers could reach an isolated yield of 86% with 2D GO [29]. In fact, in this specific 
work, the potential of GO as oxidant was exemplified with a set of several sulfides, always 
leading to the corresponding sulfoxide, with high yields (>51%).
More than that, GO has a good potential for use as an oxidant in the oxidation of thiols 
[29]. First, GO was used for the oxidation of thiophenol, in order to produce diphenyl 
disulfide quantitatively in only 10 min, which is a significantly lower reaction time com-
pared to the reaction with metal catalysts, and with a moderate catalyst loading of 60%. 
After proving the benefit of the use of GO as a catalyst in this reaction, the oxidation of 
several aliphatic and aromatic thiols was showcased [29]. In all cases, a fast reaction was 
observed with high conversion rates (>75% in less that 30 min). The deoxygenation of GO 
was confirmed, so the catalyst was used also as an oxidant, hindering its reuse.
12.3.3  Functionalized Materials
Apart from unmodified GO, its derivatives can also exhibit interesting oxidizing activities. 
GO has a variety of oxygen‐rich functional groups, which can be used for further function-
alization in order to incorporate interesting groups for catalysis. Herein, some examples are 
presented to show the potential of functionalized GO.
Carboxyl‐modified GO (GO‐COOH) has intrinsic peroxidase‐like activity, catalyzing 
the oxidation of 3,3,5,5‐tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) in the presence of hydrogen perox-
ide [44]. The catalytic activity of this material is dependent on pH and temperature, while 
the hydrogen peroxide concentration also affects the activity. Interestingly, the catalytic 
efficiency of GO‐COOH was higher than that observed for the same reaction using horse-
radish peroxidase, despite the fact that they share the same “ping‐pong” catalytic mecha-
nism. As long as the catalytic activity was affected linearly by the H2O2 concentration, the 
material was used for the detection of peroxide released from enzymes. For instance, a 
glucose oxidase released hydrogen peroxide from the oxidation of glucose, which was 
subsequently detected by GO‐COOH. A glucose detector was fabricated in this way, with 
a detection limit of 1 μM and a linear range of 1–20 μM [44]. Taking advantage of the same 
principle, other detectors could be fabricated (e.g. for the detection of uric acid or xan-
thine), once the proper oxidase is used. Compared to the enzymatic electrodes that use 
horseradish peroxidase for the detection of hydrogen peroxide, GO‐COOH is more stable 
and much cheaper to produce. Concerning the catalytic mechanism, it was suggested that 
TMB is adsorbed on the surface of the GO‐COOH and donates the lone‐pair electrons of 
the amino groups to the GO‐COOH, which increases the electron density and mobility 
[45]. This increases the Fermi level and therefore the electrochemical potential from the 
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital of H2O2; this leads to the acceleration of the electron 
transfer from GO‐COOH to H2O2.

394
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
While carboxyl functional groups are also present in pristine GO, other functional 
groups can be incorporated. For instance, RGO was sulfonated using 4‐benzenediazonium 
sulfonate, in order to perform hydrolytic reactions [46]. The functionalized GO was tested 
for the hydrolysis of ethyl acetate. Sulfuric acid was a better catalyst, but the reuse of sul-
fonated GO and the ease of separation makes it an interesting alternative for hydrolysis or 
esterification reactions.
In a more sophisticated approach, the intrinsic peroxidase activity of GO was utilized to 
prepare a detector of cancer cells [47]. Taking into consideration the fact that folate recep-
tors are overexpressed in several types of cancer cells, GO functionalized with folic acid 
was prepared, in order to be recognized by the cells. At the same time, the nanomaterial was 
also functionalized with hemin to increase the catalytic activity, especially at physiological 
values of pH, where the peroxidase activity of GO‐COOH is negligible [44]. Hemin func-
tionalization is facilitated by effective binding via π–π interactions [48], while a synergistic 
effect is observed for the activity of the hybrid system (Figure 12.3) [49]. This detector was 
able to detect as few as 1000 cells.
12.4  Polymerization
The acidity of GO is exploited by using this nanomaterial as a Lewis or Brønsted acid cata-
lyst for the formation of polymers. The mechanism of polymerization may vary and, to 
date, three different ways of preparing polymers have been reported. As the GO is active 
Hemin
Folic acid
EDC, NHS
1) PAH, KOH
2) NaBH4
Cancer cell
GO
GFH
TMB
TMB
oxTMB
COOH
HOOC
HO
HO
O
O
O
OH
NH2
N
N
N
N
N
N
H
Cl–
N
N
N
N
Feth
H2O2
H2O2
H2O
Folate receptor
Cancer cell
Figure 12.3  Illustration of graphene–hemin composite (GFH) preparation and cancer cell 
detection by using target‐directed GFH. Reproduced from [49] with permission of RSC

Catalysis
395
toward olefins, an acid‐initiated polymerization process of n‐butyl vinyl ether in a solvent‐
free system was established [50], which is typical for the first described mechanism. The 
polymerization is a rapid and exothermic reaction, which without optimization was com-
pleted after 14 h with 100% conversion of the monomer, yielding a polymer with an aver-
age molecular weight of 5.2 kDa (about 50 monomers combined) and a polydispersity 
index (PDI) of 9.42. After optimization, the reaction time could be significantly decreased 
to 4 h, while polymers with average molecular weight up to 8.1 kDa were obtained. 
Interestingly, and in contrast to the oxidative reactivity toward olefins, the loading of the 
heterogeneous catalyst was quite low (0.1–5.0 wt.%). The GO does not seem to act as a 
co‐substrate, as the catalyst could be used consecutively five times while retaining about 
90% of its initial conversion rate. As in the case of the oxidative reactivity toward olefins, 
neither pristine graphite nor RGO were able to catalyze the polymerization reaction. The 
potential of GO as a heterogeneous acid catalyst for the polymerization of olefins via cati-
onic pathways was exemplified also with other substrates. For example, N‐vinylcarbazole 
was polymerized as efficiently as n‐butyl vinyl ether, with completion of the reaction after 
4 h and an average molecular weight of 1.9 kDa. Styrene was also polymerized using GO 
as a catalyst; however, despite the high conversion of the monomer (>90%), only low‐
molecular‐weight oligomers were formed (about four monomers per molecule).
GO was also used for the polymerization of benzyl alcohol, in order to produce 
poly(phenylene methylene) (PPM). PPM is usually produced using strong acids [51], 
yielding highly branched products due to the presence of multiple reactive sites on the 
aromatic ring [52]. The polymerization takes place through a step‐growth dehydrative 
polymerization reaction, the second polymerization mechanism catalyzed by GO, which is 
presented in Figure 12.4. In the end, a highly branched product is yielded with an average 
molecular weight of 2.3 kDa and a PDI of 1.26 [53]. The process is quite straightforward 
and requires only 10 wt.% of GO; the water produced creates a second phase and can be 
easily removed, while the GO can be separated from the polymer by extraction in organic 
solvents. In this case of polymerization reactions, the reduction of GO is observed, proba-
bly due to its use as oxidant, as in the case of the oxidation of benzyl alcohol.
The potency of GO to catalyze polymerization reactions is not restricted to substrates that 
were transformed also in oxidative reactions. GO can catalyze the ring‐opening polymeriza-
tion of several lactones and lactams, yielding the respective polyesters and polyamides, 
using the third mechanism of polymerization described. Using only 2.5 wt.% GO, poly(ε‐
caprolactone) was produced with an average molecular weight of 5.1 kDa and a PDI of 2.1, 
with yields up to 91% [54]. Although polymers up to 50 kDa were produced using metal 
catalysts, their fine‐tuning is challenging, and in most cases a comparable product is 
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
H+
–H2O
H
B :
n
Reaction on either
ring possible
+
+
Figure 12.4  Proposed structure and formation of poly(phenylene methylene) synthesized via 
an acid‐catalyzed dehydration process [51]. Reproduced from [53] with permission of ACS

396
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
generated (typically less than 5 kDa) [55]. Optimization of the process did not lead to the 
increase of the polymer size and thus the authors concluded that the polymer reaches an 
equilibrium chain length under the given conditions [54]. GO is an efficient catalyst for the 
polymerization of other lactones also. Poly(δ‐valerolactone) with an average molecular 
weight of 10.2 kDa and a PDI of 1.6 was prepared with a yield of 86.2%, using only 2.5 wt.% 
of GO. The ring‐opening polymerization reactivity of GO can also be expanded to lactams, 
for the preparation of aliphatic polyamides. However, the acidity and the hygroscopicity of 
GO is a hindering factor, as, for instance the water can lead to premature termination. To 
surpass this problem, GO basified with triethylamine (TEA) was prepared for such reac-
tions. This functionalization retained the oxygen functional groups on the surface of the GO, 
granting the material neutrality while retaining the oxygen functional groups. Nylon‐6 of 
about 15 kDa could be produced from the polymerization of ε‐caprolactam, at a yield of 
70%, using this TEA‐treated GO [54]. A really interesting aspect of this work is that, during 
the catalysis, GO adopted a different conformation and transformed to multi‐walled fuller-
enes during the catalysis, a fact that probably also affected the efficiency of these reactions.
12.5  Oxygen Reduction Reaction
Fuel cells are electrochemical devices that convert hydrogen and oxygen to water and heat 
in order to produce energy. In a simple form, a fuel cell has an anode and a cathode, with 
electrolyte in between. At the anode, supplied hydrogen reacts with the catalyst, producing 
a proton and an electron. The proton passes to the electrolyte, while the electron travels 
through a circuit to produce current. In the cathode, oxygen reacts with the hydrogen cation 
and the electron, to form water and heat. The oxygen reduction reactions (ORRs) can fol-
low two distinctive pathways: either the four‐electron transfer pathway, or the peroxidase 
pathway, as described in Table 12.2. The strong bond between the atoms of molecular 
oxygen makes the ORRs kinetically very sluggish, and therefore efficient catalysts for the 
reduction of oxygen are needed for the fabrication of the cathode [56]. Usually, metal cata-
lysts are used (especially Pt); however, the diminishing supply of such metals used in 
industrial processes creates a need for novel materials to substitute them. More than the 
high price and the diminishing availability, there are also other serious disadvantages that 
come with the use of metal catalysts, such as their CO poisoning and sintering [4].
Originally, GO derivatives were used as support materials for the fabrication of elec-
trodes. A fuel cell was prepared with a hybrid catalyst composed of Pt/RGO as the cathode 
material, and Pt dispersed on carbon black as the anode. The partially discharged Pt/RGO‐
based fuel cell delivered up to 161 mW cm−2, significantly more than the analog without 
RGO as support material, highlighting the benefit of RGO usage [57].
Table 12.2  Reaction pathways of ORR in aqueous electrolytes
Alkaline medium
Acidic medium
Four‐electron transfer pathway
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
Peroxidase pathway
O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2
− + OH−
HO2
− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O

Catalysis
397
To use 2D carbon materials for ORR applications, the electroneutrality of the sp2‐­
hybridized carbons of graphene or pristine graphite needs to be broken, but at the same time 
the π electrons of the lattice need to be used efficiently [58]. The abundant functional 
groups of GO make this carbon nanomaterial really appealing as a catalyst for ORRs. GO 
is favorable for the design of cathodes, as the abundant oxygen‐containing groups facilitate 
the adsorption and subsequent reduction of O2 [32]. The electrocatalytic activity was also 
decreased significantly when the oxygen functionalities were removed by thermal treat-
ment, suggesting that these are responsible for facilitating the electrocatalysis of O2.
The atoms that disrupt electroneutrality do not necessarily need to be oxygen atoms. At 
this point, a clear distinction between doping and functionalization is needed, as in the 
literature there seems to be some confusion between the two terms. Doping implies the 
substitution of sp2‐hybridized carbon atoms for a heteroatom. However, not all heteroatoms 
can be conjugated. For instance, phosphorus atoms are not coplanar, so they cannot be 
conjugated on the lattice, while oxygen atoms have π electrons. However, none of them are 
“graphitic” or “quaternary” in GO and thus we are speaking about functionalization 
[59, 60]. Taking this into consideration, the materials will be referred to as in the original 
publications, subject to reservations, due to the insufficient characterization in some cases, 
which does not allow us to distinguish between functionalization and doping.
S‐doped graphenes, with a sulfur content of 1.3–1.5%, were produced by annealing GO 
with benzyl disulfide [61]. In another work, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) 
(PDDA) was used to functionalize RGO [62]. These materials exhibited a better catalytic 
activity (9.3 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V for the S‐doped graphene; 8 mA cm−2 at −1.0 V for the PDDA/
RGO) than the commercial Pt/C catalyst (4.5 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V). The onset potentials for both 
carbon‐based nanomaterials were similar and the number of electrons transferred was about 
3.8, underlying the superior catalytic efficiency of the S‐doped graphene compared to the 
widely used metal catalysts. However, the advantages do not stop only at catalytic efficiency. 
Both modified GO materials were stable in 3 M methanol or 0.1 M KOH, exhibiting no cross-
over effects, while PDDA/RGO is also tolerant to CO poisoning [62]. In an effort to explain 
the beneficial effect of PDDA/RGO, Wang and coworkers suggested that the PDDA charges 
the surface positively, thus increasing the diffusion of oxygen to the surface of the cathode 
[62]. The functionalized RGO was superior to graphene, as graphene had an electron transfer 
number of only 1.5, while at the same voltage PDDA/RGO could transfer 3.5 electrons.
In another work, Lee and coworkers suggested that ORR activity is increased after 
reduction of GO with hydrazine [63], albeit this seems in contrast to what was suggested 
before about the disruption of electroneutrality. It was shown that the reduction of GO with 
hydrazine catalyzes also the incorporation of nitrogen atoms on the graphitic layer, with a 
mechanism that until now is not fully understood [64]. The nitrogen content is much lower 
than the oxygen content of the pristine material (GO); however, the nitrogen atoms facili-
tate the oxygen reduction when inserted into carbon‐based nanomaterials. The elucidation 
of the mechanism (Figure 12.5) [65] revealed that the edge structures lower the oxygen 
adsorption barrier and the first electron transfer barrier significantly, which are rate‐limiting 
factors for ORRs. However, this effect is also observed for GO. The nitrogen doping 
improves the ORR performance by further enhancing the first electron transfer rate, as well 
as the preference for the four‐electron reduction pathway. Thus nitrogen inserted next to 
the edge carbon (N0) was proposed to be the main active site in N‐doped RGO, compared 
to nitrogens that are further from the edge.

398
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The advantage of GO and other graphene derivatives as cathode catalysts was exempli-
fied in fuel cells, but the application of these materials is not restricted to those. GO in a 
mixture with carbon nanotubes was tested as the cathode in aprotic aqueous hybrid electro-
lyte Li–air batteries, with the mixture of GO and carbon nanotubes in the ratio 1 : 4 yielding 
the best results [32]. To underline the significance of the oxygen‐bearing functional groups, 
thermal treatment was applied and the C/O ratio increased, diminishing at the same time 
the efficiency of the cathode. This result highlights the fact that the presence of oxygen 
atoms on the carbon lattice seems to be beneficial, and supports the theory of better adsorp-
tion of O2 on such nanomaterials.
A correlated application in the energy field is the use of 2D carbon‐based nanomaterials 
as supercapacitors. In this case, the material needs to have the ability to store electrons, 
which can be released upon discharge. Supercapacitors are advantageous compared to the 
conventional lithium‐ion batteries, as they have large power delivery capability, fast charge 
and discharge rates and long life cycles [66]. Their major problem is low energy density; 
however, novel nanomaterials can overcome this by their high specific surface area. For 
instance, in the case of single‐layer graphene, the maximum electric capacitance was esti-
mated at ~550 F g−1 [67]. For this application, RGO is a better material compared to as‐
prepared GO, due to its surface area and the capacity to store electrons and discharge them 
in a non‐Faradaical way. For this reason, several protocols for the reduction of GO were 
investigated in order to find the optimum for capacitor fabrication [22]. The production 
H
e–
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
N
N
N
N
N
C
(3a)
(4)
(5)
(1)
(2)
(I)
(II)
(III)
(IV)
(V)
C
C
C
Cʹ
C
O
O
O
H++e–
H++ e–
H++ e–
ΔE‡=0.35eV
O
OH
dO–O=1.49Å
dC–O=1.43Å
dC–N=1.91 Å
dC–O=1.25 Å
dC–Cʹ=1.51 Å
OH
OH–
H2O
O2
Figure  12.5  The proposed ORR catalytic cycle for the N0 structure, showing only the 
catalytically active part of the graphene nanoribbon edge. Reproduced from [65] with 
permission of RSC

Catalysis
399
method of the RGO significantly alters the performance of the material. As just as one 
example of this differentiation, two works will be mentioned. On the one hand, thermally 
processed GO (tpGO) obtained by annealing at 200 °C exhibited a maximum specific 
capacity of 315 F g−1, one of the highest values reported so far [68]. On the other hand, RGO 
prepared with hydrazine had a maximum specific capacity of only 205 F g−1, but was stable 
for over 1200 charge–discharge cycles, maintaining 90% of its initial capacitance [69]. The 
use of imidazole‐based ionic liquids facilitated the reuse of the electrodes, and electrodes 
in butyl methyl imidazolium with hexafluorophosphate or tetrafluoroborate retained their 
initial specific capacity even after 3000 cycles [70].
12.6  Friedel–Crafts and Michael Additions
The Friedel–Crafts reaction is an important reaction for the formation of new C–C bonds 
on aromatic systems, which is usually catalyzed by Lewis acids. GO was successfully 
used to catalyze the Friedel–Crafts addition of indoles to α,β‐unsaturated ketones [71]. 
The existing methods require metal catalysts that yield low turnovers and need stoichio-
metric amounts of the reagents, while the downstream processing is cumbersome [72, 73]. 
GO was used as catalyst to perform the indole addition to methyl vinyl ketone. High iso-
lated yields of over 90% were attained within 3 h with only 20 wt.% of catalyst in an H2O/
THF (tetrahydrofuran) system, while the increase of the catalyst loading to 50% signifi-
cantly reduced the reaction time needed [71]. Interestingly, the addition took place only on 
the β‐position, while the NH moiety was not protected. The superior catalytic activity of 
GO was exemplified by comparing its activity with the performance of several other cata-
lytic systems. Several substituted indoles were tested and the complete conversion was 
monitored. At latest after 8 h the reaction was complete, without the formation of poly-
mers of dimerization products. The only exception was the case of α‐substituted indoles, 
where no conversion was detected. The reaction could also be performed with the much 
less reactive electron‐deficient substituted nitrostyrenes. However, to get moderate yields, 
a rather long reaction time was required. In all these reactions, GO does not seem to be 
reduced, and it could be reused up to five times without losing any of its activity, reflecting 
high recovery rates.
The catalytic efficiency of GO as a phase transition catalyst in a Michael addition reac-
tion was tested for the nucleophilic addition of 2,4‐pentanedione to trans‐β‐nitrostyrene, 
and was compared to an established catalyst for this reaction, namely 18‐crown‐6 ether 
[74]. In general, GO was a better catalyst than the crown ether, which was attributed to the 
affinity to the cation, making the hydroxide a stronger base in an organic phase. The method 
was further explored with other substrates, such as several substituted trans‐β‐olefins and 
1,3‐dicarbonyl compounds, yielding fairly good conversions but only a mediocre enantio-
meric excess of ~7% [74].
GO can also be used to form new carbon–heteroatom bonds via Michael addition. The 
catalytic activity was highlighted for the addition of amines to activated alkenes via aza‐
Michael addition [75]. It needs to be stated that the model reactions that were selected for 
the study needed no activation and also proceed under the suggested experimental condi-
tions within 35 min, without the addition of GO. However, GO could significantly speed 
up the addition of diethylamine to acrylonitrile, while RGO was almost unreactive. The 

400
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
GO facilitated the reaction without getting reduced and retaining its catalytic efficiency 
even after nine runs. The GO can be used also for the addition of other primary and sec-
ondary amines to several α,β‐unsaturated compounds, such as acrylamide, methyl acrylate, 
acrylonitrile, etc., to yield the corresponding β‐amino compound, without any indication 
of by‐products.
12.7  Photocatalysis
Graphene oxide with an appropriate oxidation level can be used to catalyze water splitting 
under ultraviolet (UV) or visible irradiation, for stable H2 generation [76]. The hydrophilic 
character of GO facilitates good dispersion in aqueous media. Despite the fact that GO is 
reduced through the process, the energy level of the conduction band edge is high enough 
to supply overpotential for H2 generation and thus the productivity of hydrogen is not 
diminished [76]. The reactivity of GO with sunlight is so high that GO can undergo spon-
taneous photolysis, yielding CO2 and RGO [77]. It is of utmost importance to tame this 
reactivity for the benefit of some interesting reactions. For instance, GO was used with 
Rose Bengal to facilitate the photo‐oxidation of tertiary amines [78]. Although the GO by 
itself is a very poor catalyst (yielding only 10%), it has synergistic effects with Rose 
Bengal, an organic dye that has a strong absorption at about 550 nm. With this hybrid the 
photo‐oxidation of tertiary amines is driven to completion. The photo‐reactivity of GO 
with Rose Bengal was proven in a diverse set of cyclic tertiary amines and trialkyl amines, 
yielding the respective α‐cyanide. In general, the potential of graphite and graphene materi-
als for photocatalysis is recognized and possible applications (for instance, in solar cells) 
are expected to emerge in the years to come.
12.8  Catalytic Activity of Other Layered Carbon‐Based Materials 
and Hybrid Materials of GO
12.8.1  Non‐Functionalized Carbon‐Based Nanomaterials
Despite the fact that graphite and graphene consist only of sp2‐hybridized carbon, they can 
also exhibit some catalytic activity. A very interesting review about the biological and envi-
ronmental applications of graphene and some of its derivatives was recently published [79]. 
Here, only some examples of catalytically active graphite will be mentioned to highlight the 
potential of this layered carbon‐based material as a catalyst. Graphite is known to catalyze 
the cleavage of alkyl or aromatic ethers using acyl halides to yield the corresponding ester 
[80]. It was suggested that the cationic intermediates are stabilized by π–π interactions and 
the reaction is catalyzed through a Lewis acid type of mechanism [80]. This suggestion is 
also supported by the fact that graphite can efficiently catalyze (yield up to 99%) an effect 
similar to the one that graphite has in alkylation of aromatic compounds and primary alco-
hols, which furnished different diphenyl methanes [81]. However, Schaetz et al. [24] sug-
gest that the reactions are SN1‐type reactions, as graphite was not able to cleave the primary 
and secondary alkyl ethers. Moreover, graphite is able to catalyze the [4 + 2]‐cycloaddition 
reaction of anthracene with various electron‐deficient dienophiles, facilitated by microwave 

Catalysis
401
irradiation [82]. In this case the advantage of graphite is its high thermal conductivity of 
19 W cm−1 K−1 at 300 K [83]. Finally, graphite can catalyze the reduction of nitroarenes, 
using hydrazine hydrate as the terminal reductant [84].
12.8.2  Hybrid Catalysts and Alternative Applications
Although the main focus of this book is GO, the catalytic applications of hybrid materials 
made with GO or its derivatives will also be discussed. Some hybrid materials were already 
described in the previous subsection. Interesting properties of this nanomaterial can be 
combined with other catalysts, leading to new hybrid catalysts. In this subsection, some 
indicative works in important fields of research will be discussed to highlight the potential 
of such systems. However, there are far more research reports in each field available that 
describe the hybrids in detail.
12.8.2.1  Metal Clusters
GO and other layered carbon‐based nanomaterials are perfect supports for the deposition 
of metallic catalysts to prepare heterogeneous hybrid catalysts. The production of such 
hybrids, as well as their applications, have been well reviewed [56, 85–87]. In general, GO 
and other functionalized carbon‐based materials are preferred for such applications, as they 
are better for the attachment of metal or metal oxide particles, compared to the chemically 
inert graphene. The formation of hybrids is supported by the defect sites of GO [56]. For 
instance, palladium nanoparticles dispersed on GO were able to catalyze a Suzuki–Miyaura 
cross‐coupling reaction, with a turnover frequency (TOF) of more than 39 000 per hour 
[88]. This excellent TOF value is a result of the high surface area of GO, something that 
would not be possible with other carbon nanomaterials, even with graphene, due to the 
high agglomeration of the individual sheets. However, one needs to be clear that the active 
catalyst is the transition metal, while GO is used as a support only.
In a similar work studying the same reaction, microwaves were used for the preparation 
of the hybrid catalyst, in order to disperse a Pd salt on the GO surface and at the same time 
to reduce the GO, subsequently forming a Pd/RGO catalyst [89]. In this case, the TOF was 
up to 108 000 h−1, assisted by microwave irradiation during the reaction. The higher TOF 
value was attributed to the high concentration of well‐dispersed Pd on RGO. As dispersion 
seems to be the limiting factor, an alternative approach was applied for the preparation of 
the hybrid catalyst, by using a pulsed laser of 532 nm for irradiation of the GO dispersion 
in the presence of a palladium source [89]. The hybrid catalyst had the best TOF value 
reported so far, with 230 000 h−1. However, it needs to be stated that again microwave irra-
diation was used during the reaction to facilitate the dispersion.
Recently, a composite material was prepared with CdSe quantum dots of several sizes, 
varying from 2 to 4 nm diameter, and GO, in order to be used on conducting glass 
­electrodes. The difference in the size of the quantum dots allows the modulation of the 
photoresponse [90]. However, questions about the applicability of RGO for photocatalytic 
reactions arose, as the RGO is vulnerable to OH• attack [91]. Hence, it should be stated 
that these radicals are the primary oxidant generated when TiO2 (which is used for these 
solar cells) are excited with UV in aqueous media.
Carbon nanomaterial could also be used as an electron donor. Nitrogen‐doped graphene 
was used as an electron donor for the CO hydrogenation of light olefins with an iron 

402
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
catalyst [92]. The nitrogen content could be fine‐tuned, up to 16 wt.%, something that leads 
to higher conversions, as the doping with nitrogen atoms produces more defect sites on the 
sheet and allows a better distribution of the iron catalyst. The reaction could not take place 
without the use of the metal catalyst, proving that the graphene derivative did not possess 
any catalytic activity. However, iron does not possess selectivity for light olefins; the attrib-
ute probably derives from the N atoms of the graphene.
Another field for GO–metal catalyst hybrids is the fabrication of glucose biosensors. 
Previously, electrochemical glucose sensors have been developed that incorporate enzymes, 
such as glucose oxidase, for the detection of glucose. However, the use of enzymatic detec-
tors still has several drawbacks. The main problems are related to the stability of the 
enzymes, the low reproducibility and the influence of oxygen limitation in the vicinity of 
the enzyme and its active site. More sophisticated systems have been developed in recent 
years, but this significantly raises the cost. Thus, in the last few years research has focused 
toward the production of non‐enzymatic electrochemical sensors [93]. In one of these 
works, RGO nanosheets were used as a matrix for the deposition of Ni(OH)2 nanoplates 
[94]. In alkaline media, the following reaction is observed:
	
Ni OH
OH
NiO OH
H O e
(
) +
→
(
)+
+
2
2
−
−
	
	
NiO OH
glucose
Ni OH
glucolactone
(
)+
→
(
) +
2
	
Although RGO does not directly contribute to the catalytic mechanism, the authors claim 
that the catalytic current is much higher when RGO is present. Synergistic effects of the 
two materials are proposed, in addition to the increased conductivity and surface area of 
the composite film on the electrode [95]. This hybrid catalyst possesses a low detection 
limit of 0.6 mM with a linear range of 2.0 to 3.1 mM in alkaline media [94]. In another 
biosensor application, nanocomposites of RGO and PtNi alloy nanoparticles (NPs) have 
been reported [96]. Under physiological conditions, the response current of the sensor is 
linear to glucose concentrations up to 35 mM, with a sensitivity of 20.42 μA cm−2 mM−1 at 
a substantially negative potential (i.e. 0.35 V). Compared to PtNi alloy NPs, PtNi–chemi-
cally RGO and PtNi–SWNT (single‐walled nanotube) nanocomposites, the PtNi–electro-
chemically RGO modified electrodes exhibit smaller electron transfer resistances with a 
larger electrochemically active surface area, which makes it an ideal electrode material for 
electrocatalytic application.
12.8.2.2  Hybridization with Nucleic Acids
Graphene materials and especially GO have a high affinity toward single‐stranded nucleo-
tides. Although this application is not catalytic, the affinity is used to manufacture detec-
tors. For instance, hemin–graphene hybrid materials were prepared via π–π stacking to 
detect single nucleotide polymorphisms [47]. The principle of the detector is as follows. 
Graphene has significantly higher affinity to single‐stranded DNA (ssDNA) compared to 
double‐stranded DNA (dsDNA). When graphene interacts with ssDNA, no precipitation is 
observed, while with the dsDNA significant precipitation is observed. The single nucleo-
tide polymorphism gives only a small precipitation and can be differentiated from the two 
other states. As the hemin–graphene hybrid possesses peroxidase activity, the activity on 
the supernatant – after the interaction and centrifugation – is directly related to the amount 

Catalysis
403
of the hybrid catalyst that remained soluble. A simple colorimetric assay can be used to 
evaluate the activity and thus detect the polymorphism.
The same principle was used in later work to detect pathogenic DNA, using GO in this 
case [97, 98]. The GO can be deposited on a glassy carbon electrode and the interaction 
with DNA molecules changes the behavior in experiments of electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopy and differential pulse voltammetry. With the proper design of oligonucleo-
tides, it is possible to detect the hepatitis B virus genes, without the need for any fluores-
cent molecule, or any labeling [97]. This is due to the fact that silver nanoclusters, which 
are functionalized with ssDNA of several pathogenic viruses (like the hepatitis B virus 
gene, the immunodeficiency virus gene and the syphilis gene), are intrinsically fluorescent 
[98]. However, when the ssDNA/Ag hybridizes with GO, then the fluorescence is quenched. 
In the presence of the virus in the sample, the ssDNA/Ag could form a dsDNA, and thus 
lose the affinity to GO; this results in an increase of the fluorescence.
A more specific colorimetric immunoassay was developed for the detection of prostate 
cancer through the identification of prostate specific antigen (PSA) [99]. GO functional-
ized with a secondary antibody was used in this assay to label magnetic beads (MBs) 
functionalized with the primary anti‐PSA antibody. Once the antibodies interact with PSA, 
the complexes can be isolated from the solution using a magnetic field. Then GO can be 
tested for peroxidase activity by the oxidation of hydroquinone with the use of H2O2 
(Figure 12.6). As in all previous assays described, the authors underline the advantages of 
GO due to the higher stability and lower cost compared to enzymatic detectors based on 
horseradish peroxidase.
Magnetic seperation
MB
MB
MB
MB
Hydroquinone
GO-Ab2
PSA
Ab1
H2O2
+
+
Figure 12.6  Schematic representation of the immunoassay procedure for the detection of 
prostate cancer. Reproduced from [99] with permission of Elsevier

404
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
The approach is applicable also for RNA molecules. GO can distinguish between single‐ 
and double‐stranded RNA, an attribute that was used to develop a fluorometric method for 
the detection of single nucleotide changes, with the use of RNA cleaving DNAzyme [100]. 
The method requires three steps: (i) the specific DNAzyme cleaves the target mutant RNA, 
and RNA fragments are produced; (ii) these fragments are hybridized with a fluorescent‐
probe‐labeled DNA, to prepare an RNA–DNA duplex with no single‐strand areas; and (c) 
GO is used to quench the fluorescence of the single‐stranded long wild‐type RNA. The 
mutant fragment in this case is totally hybridized and thus does not interact with GO. 
Although the high affinity leads to quantitative results, the method is highly specific, 
requiring the development of a specific DNAzyme, as well as the production of ­fluorescent‐
probe‐labeled DNA, something that definitely cannot be used in a high‐throughput manner. 
However, this method underlines the potential of such approaches for fast and accurate 
tests for the detection of single nucleotide polymorphisms.
12.8.2.3  Enzyme–GO Hybrids
Graphene oxide and its derivatives can be used efficiently as immobilization matrices for 
the anchoring of biocatalysts, like enzymes. However, not only do they provide the support 
and facilitate the reuse of the biocatalyst, but also its intrinsic properties are important for 
the process to enhance the catalytic behavior in several cases. Although the field of enzyme 
immobilization on GO for biocatalytic processes is still in progress, recent developments 
have been summarized in a recently published review [101]. The applications of these 
hybrid bioconjugates are mainly focused on the development of biosensors, on biofuel 
cells, the degradation of pollutants and some applications in proteomic analysis. However, 
careful evaluation of the enzyme–nanomaterial interactions is expected to give a new per-
spective on the field in the next few years. For instance, it is known that GO can facilitate 
the wiring of the redox centers of proteins to electrodes for the preparation of biosensors, 
bioelectronics or biofuel cells [102]. The electron transfer was facilitated for several 
enzymes, such as cytochrome c [103], horseradish peroxidase and myoglobin [102]. This 
enhancement does not arise from structural changes, and the further functionalization of 
the GO did not lead to further improvement, underlining the significance of the oxygen‐
rich surface for the electron transfer. The peroxidase activity of GO was also validated in 
the oxidation of pyrogallol, assisted by hemoglobin. Hydrogels of GO and hemoglobin 
were formulated as hybrid catalysts and they were stable in several organic solvents. These 
hydrogels possessed higher catalytic activity than each component separately (GO or 
hemoglobin), underlining the beneficial effect that the immobilization of enzymes have on 
GO [104]. This finding further underlines the potential of GO as immobilization support 
for redox enzymes, and thus it is expected that more research on redox enzyme immobili-
zation for biosensing applications will emerge in the next few years.
12.9  Outlook
Carbocatalysis has attracted attention over the last few years. GO and its derivatives are 
versatile catalysts that can be used in several processes, mostly related to redox reactions. 
In particular, GO is quite reactive, due to the abundant functional groups on its surface, 

Catalysis
405
serving as active sites, combined with the high surface area and the hydrophilicity of the 
material. These properties allow its dispersion in aqueous media. From all the aforemen-
tioned applications that were described in this chapter, it seems that GO and all 2D carbon‐
based nanomaterials have the potential to play a major role in carbocatalysis in the years 
to come.
However, there are some pitfalls in the field that need to be addressed in future studies, 
in order to facilitate the exponential growth of the field. One of the major points is that the 
preparation of GO is prone to metal contamination. In several cases, manganese and other 
metals were found at low, but still detectable, levels (ppb level) [27, 30]. Despite their low 
concentration, it cannot be excluded that these metal traces contribute to the catalytic reac-
tivity of the final material [105]. Thus, the first point to be taken into consideration is to 
identify the metal contaminants, in order to know the exact composition of the final mate-
rial. The second barrier has to do with the unelucidated structure of GO [106]. Without a 
universal model and the defined structure of the catalyst, the field lacks reproducibility, 
mechanism understanding, as well as proper comparison between different studies. 
Techniques for the production of GO that heavily disrupt the carbon lattice should be 
avoided, and more mild and reproducible techniques should be used. Recently, a new syn-
thesis procedure for GO that preserved the honeycomb lattice and only caused a minor 
number of σ hole defects (as low as 0.01%) was established [107]. Full advantage of such 
techniques should be taken, in order to be able to exploit the GO materials and their proper-
ties to a greater extent. Moreover, the suggestion to use an electric field for beneficial ori-
entation of the functional groups on the surface of the 2D material may lead to significant 
improvement of the catalytic efficiency of these materials [38, 108], something that has not 
been well studied until now.
From all the aforementioned, it is highlighted that the key for the application of GO in 
synthetic chemistry and other catalytic applications is the careful characterization of the 
material. This step is crucial for the reproducibility of the experiments, and it is expected to 
lead faster to new and more efficient processes that will reach industrial application soon.
References
[1]	 Boehm, H.P.; Clauss, A.; Fischer, G.; Hofmann, T., Surface properties of extremely thin graphite 
lamellae. In Carbon: Proceedings of the Fifth Conference, vol. 1, pp. 73–80. Pergamon Press, 
Oxford, 1962.
[2]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R.E., Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80 (6), 
1339.
[3]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Todd, A.D.; Bielawski, C.W., Harnessing the chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (15), 5288–5301.
[4]	 Machado, B.F.; Serp, P., Graphene‐based materials for catalysis. Catal. Sci. Technol. 2012, 2 (1), 
54–75.
[5]	 Hofmann, U.; Holst, R., Über die Säurenatur und die Methylierung von Graphitoxyd. Ber. Dtsch. 
Chem. Ges. 1939, 72, 754–771.
[6]	 Ruess, G., Über das Graphitoxyhydroxyd (Graphitoxyd). Monatsh. Chem. 1947, 76 (3–5), 
381–417.
[7]	 Scholz, W.; Boehm, H.P., Betrachtungen zur Struktur des Graphitoxids. Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem. 
1969, 369, 327–339.
[8]	 Nakajima, T.; Yoshiaki, M., Formation process and structure of graphite oxide. Carbon 1994, 32 
(3), 469–475.

406
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[9]	 Lerf, A.; He, H.; Forster, M.; Klinowski, J. Structure of graphite oxide revisited. J. Phys. Chem. 
B 1998, 102 (23), 4477–4482.
[10]	 Szabó, T.; Berkesi, O.; Forgó, P.; et al., Evolution of surface functional groups in a series of 
progressively oxidized graphite oxides. Chem. Mater. 2006, 18 (11), 2740–2749.
[11]	 Yang, D.; Velamakanni, A.; Bozoklu, G.; et al., Chemical analysis of graphene oxide films after 
heat and chemical treatments by X‐ray photoelectron and micro‐Raman spectroscopy. Carbon 
2009, 47 (1), 145–152.
[12]	 Zhang, L.L.; Zhao, X.; Stoller, M.D.; et al., Highly conductive and porous activated reduced 
graphene oxide films for high‐power supercapacitors. Nano Lett. 2012, 12 (4), 1806–1812.
[13]	 Compton, O.C.; Jain, B.; Dikin, D.A.; et al., Chemically active reduced graphene oxide with 
tunable C/O ratios. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (6), 4380–4391.
[14]	 Marcano, D.C.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Berlin, J.M.; et al., Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. ACS 
Nano 2010, 4 (8), 4806–4814.
[15]	 Zhu, Y.; Murali, S.; Stoller, M.D.; et al., Carbon‐based supercapacitors produced by activation 
of graphene. Science 2011, 332 (6037), 1537–1541.
[16]	 Montes‐Navajas, P.; Asenjo, N.G.; Santamaría, R.; et al., Surface area measurement of gra-
phene oxide in aqueous solutions. Langmuir 2013, 29 (44), 13443–13448.
[17]	 Ruoff, R., Perspective: A means to an end. Nature 2012, 483 (7389), S42–S42.
[18]	 Jung, I.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R.D.; Ruoff, R.S., Tunable electrical conductivity of individual 
graphene oxide sheets reduced at “low” temperatures. Nano Lett. 2008, 8 (12), 4283–4287.
[19]	 Wei, D.; Kivioja, J., Graphene for energy solutions and its industrialization. Nanoscale 2013, 5 
(21), 10108–10126.
[20]	 Chen, J.‐H.; Jang, C.; Xiao, S.; et al., Intrinsic and extrinsic performance limits of graphene 
devices on SiO2. Nature Nanotechnol. 2008, 3 (4), 206–209.
[21]	 Punckt, C.; Muckel, F.; Wolff, S.; et al., The effect of degree of reduction on the electrical prop-
erties of functionalized graphene sheets. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2013, 102, 023114.
[22]	 Kuila, T.; Mishra, A.K.; Khanra, P.; et al., Recent advances in the efficient reduction of gra-
phene oxide and its application as energy storage electrode materials. Nanoscale 2013, 5 (1), 
52–71.
[23]	 Sarkar, S.; Niyogi, S.; Bekyarova, E.; Haddon, R.C., Organometallic chemistry of extended 
periodic π‐electron systems: hexahapto‐chromium complexes of graphene and single‐walled 
carbon nanotubes. Chem. Sci. 2011, 2 (7), 1326–1333.
[24]	 Schaetz, A.; Zeltner, M.; Stark, W.J., Carbon modifications and surfaces for catalytic organic 
transformations. ACS Catal. 2012, 2 (6), 1267–1284.
[25]	 Su, C.; Acik, M.; Takai, K.; et al., Probing the catalytic activity of porous graphene oxide and 
the origin of this behaviour. Nature Commun. 2012, 3, 1298.
[26]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[27]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Jia, H.‐P.; Bielawski, C.W., Graphene oxide: a convenient carbocatalyst for facil-
itating oxidation and hydration reactions. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (38), 6813–6816.
[28]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Bielawski, C.W., Carbocatalysis: heterogeneous carbons finding utility in syn-
thetic chemistry. Chem. Sci. 2011, 2 (7), 1233–1240.
[29]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Jia, H.‐P.; Todd, A.D.; et al., Graphite oxide: a selective and highly efficient 
oxidant of thiols and sulfides. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2011, 9 (21), 7292–7295.
[30]	 Jia, H.‐P.; Dreyer, D.R.; Bielawski, C.W., C–H oxidation using graphite oxide. Tetrahedron 
2011, 67 (24), 4431–4434.
[31]	 Bielawski, C.W.; Dreyer, D.R.; Miller, R., Production of propene. US Patent US2015/025289 
A1, 2015.
[32]	 Wang, S.; Dong, S.; Wang, J.; et  al., Oxygen‐enriched carbon material for catalyzing 
­oxygen reduction towards hybrid electrolyte Li–air battery. J. Mater. Chem. 2012, 22 (39), 
21051–21056.
[33]	 Zhu, Y.; Stoller, M.D.; Cai, W.; et al., Exfoliation of graphite oxide in propylene carbonate and 
thermal reduction of the resulting graphene oxide platelets. ACS Nano 2010, 4 (2), 1227–1233.
[34]	 Pereira, M.F.R.; Orfao, J.J.M.; Figueiredo, J.L., Oxidative dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene on 
activated carbon catalysts: 2. Kinetic modelling. Appl. Catal. Gen. 2000, 196 (1), 43–54.

Catalysis
407
[35]	 Frank, B.; Blume, R.; Rinaldi, A.; et al., Oxygen insertion catalysis by sp2 carbon. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50 (43), 10226–10230.
[36]	 Frank, B.; Zhang, J.; Blume, R.; et al., Heteroatoms increase the selectivity in oxidative dehy-
drogenation reactions on nanocarbons. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48 (37), 6913–6917.
[37]	 Tang, S.; Cao, Z., Site‐dependent catalytic activity of graphene oxides towards oxidative dehy-
drogenation of propane. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2012, 14, 16558–16565.
[38]	 Tang, S.; Zhang, S., Adsorption of epoxy and hydroxyl groups on zigzag graphene nanoribbons: 
insights from density functional calculations. Chem. Phys. 2012, 392 (1), 33–45.
[39]	 Hamwi, A.; Marchand, V. Some chemical and electrochemical properties of graphite oxide. 
J. Phys. Chem. Solids 1996, 57 (6–8), 867–872.
[40]	 Singh Chauhan, S.M.; Mishra, S., Use of graphite oxide and graphene oxide as catalysts in the 
synthesis of dipyrromethane and calix[4]pyrrole. Molecules 2011, 16 (12), 7256–7266.
[41]	 Shao, S.; Wang, A.; Yang, M.; et al., Synthesis of meso‐aryl substituted calix[4]pyrroles. Synth. 
Commun. 2001, 31 (9), 1421–1426.
[42]	 Long, Y.; Zhang, C.; Wang, X.; et al., Oxidation of SO2 to SO3 catalyzed by graphene oxide 
foams. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 (36), 13934–13941.
[43]	 Gonçalves, G.A.B.; Pires, S.M.G.; Simões, M.M.Q.; et al., Three‐dimensional graphene oxide: 
a promising green and sustainable catalyst for oxidation reactions at room temperature. Chem. 
Commun. 2014, 50 (57), 7673–7676.
[44]	 Song, Y.; Qu, K.; Zhao, C.; et al., Graphene oxide: intrinsic peroxidase catalytic activity and its 
application to glucose detection. Adv. Mater. 2010, 22 (19), 2206–2210.
[45]	 Song, Y.; Wei, W.; Qu, X., Colorimetric biosensing using smart materials. Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 
(37), 4215–4236.
[46]	 Ji, J.; Zhang, G.; Chen, H.; et al., Sulfonated graphene as water‐tolerant solid acid catalyst. 
Chem. Sci. 2011, 2 (3), 484–487.
[47]	 Guo, Y.; Deng, L.; Li, J.; et al., Hemin − graphene hybrid nanosheets with intrinsic peroxidase‐
like activity for label‐free colorimetric detection of single‐nucleotide polymorphism. ACS Nano 
2011, 5 (2), 1282–1290.
[48]	 Xu, Y.; Zhao, L.; Bai, H.; et al., Chemically converted graphene induced molecular flattening of 
5,10,15,20‐tetrakis(1‐methyl‐4‐pyridinio)porphyrin and its application for optical detection of 
cadmium(ii) ions. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131, 13490–13497.
[49]	 Song, Y.; Chen, Y.; Feng, L.; et al., Selective and quantitative cancer cell detection using target‐
directed functionalized graphene and its synergetic peroxidase‐like activity. Chem. Commun. 
2011, 47 (15), 4436–4438.
[50]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Bielawski, C.W., Graphite oxide as an olefin polymerization carbocatalyst: 
applications in electrochemical double layer capacitors. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2012, 22 (15), 
3247–3253.
[51]	 Montaudo, G.; Finocchiaro, P.; Caccamese, S.; Bottino, F., Polycondensation of benzyl chloride 
and its derivatives: a study of the reaction at different temperatures. J. Polym. Sci. 1970, 8 (9), 
2475–2490.
[52]	 Lenz, R.W., Organic Chemistry of Synthetic High Polymers. Interscience, New York, 1967.
[53]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Jarvis, K.A.; Ferreira, P.J.; Bielawski, C.W., Graphite oxide as a dehydrative 
polymerization catalyst: a one‐step synthesis of carbon‐reinforced poly(phenylene methylene) 
composites. Macromolecules 2011, 44 (19), 7659–7667.
[54]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Jarvis, K.A.; Ferreira, P.J.; Bielawski, C.W., Graphite oxide as a carbocatalyst for 
the preparation of fullerene‐reinforced polyester and polyamide nanocomposites. Polym. Chem. 
2012, 3 (3), 757–766.
[55]	 Arbaoui, A.; Redshaw, C., Metal catalysts for ε‐caprolactone polymerisation. Polym. Chem. 
2010, 1 (6), 801–826.
[56]	 Liang, Y.; Li, Y.; Wang, H.; Dai, H., Strongly coupled inorganic/nanocarbon hybrid materials 
for advanced electrocatalysis. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (6), 2013–2036.
[57]	 Seger, B.; Kamat, P.V. Electrocatalytically active graphene–platinum nanocomposites. Role of 
2‐D carbon support in PEM fuel cells. J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 113 (19), 7990–7995.
[58]	 Su, D.S.; Perathoner, S.; Centi, G. Nanocarbons for the development of advanced catalysts. 
Chem. Rev. 2013, 113 (8), 5782–5816.

408
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[59]	 Strelko, V.V., Role of carbon matrix heteroatoms at synthesis of carbons for catalysis and energy 
applications. J. Energy Chem. 2013, 22 (2), 174–182.
[60]	 Wang, D.‐W.; Su, D., Heterogeneous nanocarbon materials for oxygen reduction reaction. 
Energy Environ. Sci. 2014, 7 (2), 576.
[61]	 Yang, Z.; Yao, Z.; Li, G.; et al., Sulfur‐doped graphene as an efficient metal‐free cathode cata-
lyst for oxygen reduction. ACS Nano 2012, 6 (1), 205–211.
[62]	 Wang, S.; Yu, D.; Dai, L.; et al., Polyelectrolyte‐functionalized graphene as metal‐free electro-
catalysts for oxygen reduction. ACS Nano 2011, 5 (8), 6202–6209.
[63]	 Lee, K.R.; Lee, K.U.; Lee, J.W., et al., Electrochemical oxygen reduction on nitrogen doped 
graphene sheets in acid media. Electrochem. Commun. 2010, 12 (8), 1052–1055.
[64]	 Park, S.; An, J.; Potts, J.R.; et al., Hydrazine‐reduction of graphite‐ and graphene oxide. Carbon 
2011, 49 (9), 3019–3023.
[65]	 Kim, H.; Lee, K.; Woo, S.I.; Jung, Y., On the mechanism of enhanced oxygen reduction reaction 
in nitrogen‐doped graphene nanoribbons. Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2011, 13 (39), 17505–17510.
[66]	 Dong, L.; Chen, Z.; Yang, D.; Lu, H., Hierarchically structured graphene‐based supercapacitor 
electrodes. RSC Advances 2013, 3 (44), 21183–21191.
[67]	 Zhai, Y.; Dou, Y.; Zhao, D.; et al., Carbon materials for chemical capacitive energy storage. 
Adv. Mater. 2011, 23 (42), 4828–4850.
[68]	 Ye, J.; Zhang, H.; Chen, Y.; et al., Supercapacitors based on low‐temperature partially exfoli-
ated and reduced graphite oxide. J. Power Sources 2012, 212, 105–110.
[69]	 Wang, Y.; Shi, Z.; Huang, Y.; Ma, Y.; Chen, M.; Chen, Y., Supercapacitor devices based on gra-
phene materials. J. Phys. Chem. C 2009, 113 (30), 13103–13107.
[70]	 Chen, Y.; Zhang, X.; Zhang, D.; Ma, Y., High power density of graphene‐based supercapacitors 
in ionic liquid electrolytes. Mater. Lett. 2012, 68, 475–477.
[71]	 Vijay Kumar, A.; Rama Rao, K., Recyclable graphite oxide catalyzed Friedel–Crafts addition of 
indoles to α,β‐unsaturated ketones. Tetrahedron Lett. 2011, 52 (40), 5188–5191.
[72]	 Gu, Y.; Ogawa, C.; Kobayashi, J.; et al., A heterogeneous silica‐supported scandium/ionic liquid 
catalyst system for organic reactions in water. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2006, 45 (43), 7217–7220.
[73]	 Hagiwara, H.; Sekifuji, M.; Hoshi, T.; et al., Sustainable conjugate addition of indoles catalyzed 
by acidic ionic liquid immobilized on silica. Synlett 2008, 2008 (4), 608–610.
[74]	 Kim, Y.; Some, S.; Lee, H., Graphene oxide as a recyclable phase transfer catalyst. Chem. 
Commun. 2013, 49 (50), 5702–5704.
[75]	 Verma, S.; Mungse, H.P.; Kumar, N.; et al., Graphene oxide: an efficient and reusable carbo-
catalyst for aza‐Michael addition of amines to activated alkenes. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 
(47), 12673–12675.
[76]	 Yeh, T.‐F.; Syu, J.‐M.; Cheng, C.; et al., Graphite oxide as a photocatalyst for hydrogen produc-
tion from water. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (14), 2255–2262.
[77]	 Hou, W.‐C.; Chowdhury, I.; Goodwin, D.G.; et al., Photochemical transformation of graphene 
oxide in sunlight. Environ. Sci. Technol. 2015, 49 (6), 3435–3443.
[78]	 Pan, Y.; Wang, S.; Kee, C.W.; et al., Graphene oxide and Rose Bengal: oxidative C–H function-
alisation of tertiary amines using visible light. Green Chem. 2011, 13 (12), 3341–3344.
[79]	 Sreeprasad, T.S.; Pradeep, T., Graphene for environmental and biological applications. Int. J. 
Mod. Phys. B 2012, 26 (21), 1242001.
[80]	 Suzuki, Y.; Matsushima, M.; Kodomari, M., Graphite‐catalyzed acylative cleavage of ethers 
with acyl halides. Chem. Lett. 1998, 27 (4), 319–320.
[81]	 Sereda, G.A.; Rajpara, V.B.; Slaba, R.L. The synthetic potential of graphite‐catalyzed alkyla-
tion. Tetrahedron 2007, 63 (34), 8351–8357.
[82]	 Garrigues, B.; Laporte, C.; Laurent, R.; et al., Microwave‐assisted Diels–Alder reaction sup-
ported on graphite. Liebigs Ann. 1996, 1996 (5), 739–741.
[83]	 Klemens, P.G.; Pedraza, D.F., Thermal conductivity of graphite in the basal plane. Carbon 
1994, 32 (4), 735–741.
[84]	 Han, B.H.; Shin, D.H.; Cho, S.Y., Graphite catalyzed reduction of aromatic and aliphatic nitro 
compounds with hydrazine hydrate. Tetrahedron Lett. 1985, 26 (50), 6233–6234.
[85]	 Krishnan, D.; Kim, F.; Luo, J.; et al., Energetic graphene oxide: challenges and opportunities. 
Nano Today 2012, 7 (2), 137–152.

Catalysis
409
[86]	 Samy El‐Shall, M., Heterogeneous catalysis by metal nanoparticles supported on graphene. In 
Graphene: Synthesis, Properties and Phenomena, eds C.N.R. Rao and A.K.Sood, pp. 303–338. 
Wiley‐VCH, Weinheim, 2013.
[87]	 Julkapli, N.M.; Bagheri, S., Graphene supported heterogeneous catalysts: an overview. Int. J. 
Hydrogen Energy 2015, 40 (2), 948–979.
[88]	 Scheuermann, G.M.; Rumi, L.; Steurer, P.; et al., Palladium nanoparticles on graphite oxide 
and its functionalized graphene derivatives as highly active catalysts for the Suzuki − Miyaura 
coupling reaction. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2009, 131 (23), 8262–8270.
[89]	 Siamaki, A.R.; Khder, A.E.R.S.; Abdelsayed, V.; et al., Microwave‐assisted synthesis of pal-
ladium nanoparticles supported on graphene: a highly active and recyclable catalyst for car-
bon–carbon cross‐coupling reactions. J. Catal. 2011, 279 (1), 1–11.
[90]	 Krishnamurthy, S.; Kamat, P.V., CdSe–graphene oxide light‐harvesting assembly: size‐
dependent electron transfer and light energy conversion aspects. ChemPhysChem 2014, 15 
(10), 2129–2135.
[91]	 Radich, J.G.; Krenselewski, A.L.; Zhu, J.; Kamat, P.V., Is graphene a stable platform for pho-
tocatalysis? Mineralization of reduced graphene oxide with UV‐irradiated TiO2 nanoparticles. 
Chem. Mater. 2014, 26 (15), 4662–4668.
[92]	 Chen, X.; Deng, D.; Pan, X.; et al., N‐doped graphene as an electron donor of iron catalyst for 
CO hydrogenation to light olefins. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 217–220.
[93]	 Wang, G.; He, X.; Wang, L.; et  al., Non‐enzymatic electrochemical sensing of glucose. 
Microchim. Acta 2013, 180 (3–4), 161–186.
[94]	 Zhang, Y.; Xu, F.; Sun, Y.; et al., Assembly of Ni(OH)2 nanoplates on reduced graphene oxide: 
a two dimensional nanocomposite for enzyme‐free glucose sensing. J. Mater. Chem. 2011, 21 
(42), 16949–16954.
[95]	 Liu, C.; Wang, K.; Luo, S.; et al., Direct electrodeposition of graphene enabling the one‐step 
synthesis of graphene–metal nanocomposite films. Small 2011, 7 (9), 1203–1206.
[96]	 Gao, H.; Xiao, F.; Ching, C.B.; Duan, H., One‐step electrochemical synthesis of PtNi nanopar-
ticle–graphene nanocomposites for non‐enzymatic amperometric glucose detection. ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces 2011, 3 (8), 3049–3057.
[97]	 Muti, M.; Sharma, S.; Erdem, A.; Papakonstantinou, P., Electrochemical monitoring of nucleic 
acid hybridization by single‐use graphene oxide‐based sensor. Electroanalysis 2011, 23 (1), 
272–279.
[98]	 Liu, X.; Wang, F.; Aizen, R.; et al., Graphene oxide/nucleic acid‐stabilized silver nanoclusters: 
functional hybrid materials for optical aptamer sensing and multiplexed analysis of pathogenic 
DNAs. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135 (32), 11832–11839.
[99]	 Qu, F.; Li, T.; Yang, M., Colorimetric platform for visual detection of cancer biomarker based on 
intrinsic peroxidase activity of graphene oxide. Biosens. Bioelectron. 2011, 26 (9), 3927–3931.
[100]	 Hong, C.; Kim, D.‐M.; Baek, A.; et al., Fluorescence‐based detection of single‐nucleotide changes 
in RNA using graphene oxide and DNAzyme. Chem. Commun. 2015, 51 (26), 5641–5644.
[101]	 Pavlidis, I.V.; Patila, M.; Bornscheuer, U.T.; et al., Graphene‐based nanobiocatalytic systems: 
recent advances and future prospects. Trends Biotechnol. 2014, 32 (6), 312–320.
[102]	 Zuo, X.; He, S.; Li, D.; Peng, C.; Huang, Q.; Song, S.; Fan, C., Graphene oxide‐facilitated 
electron transfer of metalloproteins at electrode surfaces. Langmuir 2010, 26 (3), 1936–1939.
[103]	 Patila, M.; Pavlidis, I.V.; Diamanti, E.K.; et al., Enhancement of cytochrome c catalytic behav-
iour by affecting the heme environment using functionalized carbon‐based nanomaterials. 
Process Biochem. 2013, 48 (7), 1010–1017.
[104]	 Huang, C.; Bai, H.; Li, C.; Shi, G., A graphene oxide/hemoglobin composite hydrogel for 
enzymatic catalysis in organic solvents. Chem. Commun. 2011, 47 (17), 4962–4964.
[105]	 Leadbeater, N.E., Cross coupling: when is free really free? Nature Chem. 2010, 2, 1007–1009.
[106]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
[107]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[108]	 Sun, P.; Zheng, F.; Wang, K.; et al., Electro‐ and magneto‐modulated ion transport through 
graphene oxide membranes. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 6798.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
13
Challenges of Industrial‐Scale 
Graphene Oxide Production
Sean E. Lowe and Yu Lin Zhong
13.1  Introduction
It is no longer a question of whether graphene can transform industries, but a question of 
when. The answer comes down to when graphene can be produced on an industrial scale, 
at low cost and with controllable quality. There are multiple routes toward producing gra-
phene industrially, each route producing a somewhat different graphene product [1–4]. 
For high‐end electronics industries, the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method is the 
most suited, as it allows precise control of graphene defects and layers but, more impor-
tantly, the process can be easily integrated into the lucrative semiconductor industries. 
For industries that require massive amounts of graphene, such as energy storage, energy 
conversion and coatings, the scalable top‐down approaches employing wet‐chemical exfo-
liation of graphite seem to be most promising [2]. Wet‐chemical exfoliation makes use of 
the abundant raw material graphite and has potentially low production costs. These are 
pivotal considerations for replacing currently employed materials, particularly those that 
are already inexpensive. Out of the wet‐chemical methods, the graphite oxide route is by 
far the most popular. This is due to its ability to produce single‐layer graphene oxide (GO) 
in high yield and with excellent dispersibility in water, which facilitates graphite oxide 
processing and use in downstream applications.
In this chapter, we discuss the technical and economic aspects of large‐scale GO produc-
tion. While there has been robust discussion of the scientific aspects of GO in this volume 
and by others [5–13], there have been few in‐depth reviews about large‐scale production 

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
411
from an industrial perspective. The current chapter aims in part to fill this gap, highlighting 
some of the key scientific, engineering and economic challenges that will be faced by 
large‐scale GO producers. Firstly, to provide an economic backdrop, an introduction to the 
GO market is provided in section 13.2. Secondly, the major methods of GO synthesis are 
outlined in section 13.3. The key considerations and challenges associated with large‐scale 
GO production are then delineated in section 13.4. These challenges range from sourcing 
appropriate graphite starting material to cost‐effectively producing GO and then storing 
and handling the product. Finally, some future directions for industrial‐scale GO produc-
tion are considered in section 13.5.
13.2  Scope and Scale of the Graphene Market
Only a decade on from Novoselov and Geim’s breakthrough isolation and characterization 
of graphene [14–16], the graphene industry is still nascent, with different types of graphene 
seeing different rates of commercialization and market uptake. The scale of graphene 
­production is small relative to other industrial materials, which may be manufactured in 
tens of thousands of tonnes per year or more. For example, graphene production is orders 
of magnitude lower than its carbon nanomaterial counterparts, carbon fibers and carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs), as shown in Figure 13.1.
In 2014, Ren and Cheng [4] reported on the global growth of large‐scale graphene 
­production with targeted industrial applications (Table 13.1). Examining Table 13.1, it is 
not surprising that the large‐scale production of CVD graphene film (up to 200 000 m2 per 
year) is progressing rapidly, with well‐defined quality benchmarks (e.g. conductivity and 
transparency), given its application in the fast‐paced and lucrative electronics market. This 
growth is aided by the fact that the most common transparent conductive film currently 
C-Fibres
CNTs
Graphene
Year
Air/Space
Sports
Industry
Automotive
Regenerative
energies
Production rate (kt/a)
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
0.1
1
10
100
Figure  13.1  Annual production rates of carbon fibers, carbon nanotubes and graphene, 
1970–2014. The industries in which carbon fibers found a market and approximate uptake 
times are also plotted. Adapted from [17] with permission from John Wiley & Sons

Table 13.1  Synthesis method, product, production capacity and main application products of several large graphene manufacturers. Reproduced from [4] 
with permission from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2014
Graphene 
manufacturer
Basic synthesis 
method
Basic product
Production 
capacity
Main application products
Angstron 
Materials 
(USA)
Liquid 
exfoliation
Pristine nano‐graphene platelets
Thickness: <100 nm
Carbon content: ≥95% (for product under three 
layers in average thickness)
300 tonnes yr−1
Graphene/silicon anode materials
Thomas 
Swan (UK)
Liquid 
exfoliation
Graphene nanoplatelets
Thickness: 5–7 layers (average)
Size: 0.5–2 µm
Sheet resistance: 10 ± 5 Ω/Υ (25 µm film, equal to 
27–80 S cm−1)
Impurity: ~8 wt.%
kg day−1 
(September 2014)
—
Vorbeck 
Materials 
(USA)
Oxidation–
thermal 
exfoliation
Functionalized graphene
Thickness: mostly 1–3 layers
Morphology: wrinkled
40 tonnes yr−1 
(October 2012)
Conductive inks and coatings, graphene 
rubbers, flexible battery straps
Sixth Element 
Materials 
(China)
Oxidation–
exfoliation–
reduction
Graphene oxide, reduced GO
Thickness: ≤10 nm
Carbon content: ≥95%
Electrical conductivity: ≥2 S cm−1 (for electrically 
conductive type product)
100 tonnes yr−1 
(November 2013)
Mechanical/thermally enhanced composites, 
anticorrosion coatings
XG Sciences 
(USA)
Intercalation–
exfoliation
Graphene nanoplatelets
Thickness: 2–15 nm (average)
Electrical and thermal conductivity: 3800 S cm−1 and 
500 W mK−1, respectively (for 30 µm thick graphene 
paper product)
80 tonnes yr−1 
(August 2012)
Graphene/silicon anode composite, 
supercapacitor electrode materials, 
conductive inks and coatings, graphene 
paper (for thermal spreading, and electrically 
conductive applications, and so on)

Ningbo 
Morsh 
(China)
Intercalation–
expansion–
exfoliation
Graphene nanoplatelets
Average thickness: 3 nm
300 tonnes yr−1 
(December 2013)
Graphene conductive additives and 
graphene‐coated current collector for 
lithium‐ion batteries, conductive inks, 
heat‐radiating coatings, anticorrosion 
coatings, thermally/electrically conductive 
master batch
Deyang 
Carbonene 
Tech (China)
Intercalation–
expansion–
exfoliation
Graphene sheets (few‐layer)
Thickness: ≤10 layers
Electrical conductivity: ~1000 S cm−1 (for ~15 µm 
thick membrane)
1.5 tonnes yr−1 
(October 2012)
300 tonnes yr−1 
(2017–2019)
Battery materials, thermal management 
materials, conductive inks, conductive 
anticorrosion coatings
Bluestone 
Global Tech 
(USA)
CVD
Graphene films on Cu, SiO2/Si, polyethylene 
terephthalate (PET)
Film on PET: available maximum size 8 × 10 inch2, 
<30 Ω/Υ at >85% transmittance (excluding 
substrate), <800 Ω/Υ at 95% transmittance 
(excluding substrate)
Film on SiO2/Si: available maximum size 4 inch 
wafer, monolayer >95%, average Hall mobility: 
2000–4000 cm2 V−1 s−1
—
Field‐effect transistors, touch panels
2D Carbon 
Tech (China)
CVD
Graphene films on Cu, SiO2/Si, glass, PET
Film on PET: available maximum size 450 × 550 
mm2, monolayer >90%, 200–400 Ω/Υ at >85% 
transmittance (including substrate)
30 000 m2 (May 
2013)
200 000 m2 
(December 2014)
Touch panels
Wuxi 
Graphene 
Film (China)
CVD
Graphene films on Cu, PET
Film on PET: ~600 Ω/Υ at >97% transmittance 
(excluding substrate)
80 000 m2 
(December 2013)
Touch panels, touch sensors (5 million 
pieces, December 2013)
Power 
Booster 
(China)
CVD
Graphene films on Cu, PET
Film on Cu: available maximum size 7.5 m2 (2013)
Film on PET: 50–140 Ω/Υ at 95.5% transmittance
—
Touch panels

414
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
used, indium tin oxide (containing 74% indium), is costly and has limited supply. 
Table 13.1 also highlights another class of graphene, graphene nanoplatelets, which are 
capable of being produced at large scale (up to 300 tonnes per year), typically via an 
­intercalation–expansion–exfoliation process. Such a process is akin to the age‐old technology 
of expandable graphite combined with a breaking‐down process to yield graphene nano-
platelets. One concern is whether these graphene nanoplatelets exhibit properties closer to 
graphene or graphite. In contrast, there are fewer large companies producing GO, despite 
the fact that GO is the most processable and versatile graphene precursor. Commercialization 
of GO is not as straightforward as CVD graphene, as GO is usually further processed or 
used in conjunction with other materials, rather than as an end‐product for a market with 
specific demand.
Graphene oxide is likely to find applications in composite materials and polymer blends 
[9, 18], conductive inks [19], energy storage [20] and other applications where defect‐free 
graphene is not required [3]. In many cases, GO will need to undergo further transforma-
tion depending on the application, such as reduction for conductivity, film forming for 
desalination membranes, bioconjugation for bio‐related applications, etc. Hence, GO is 
expected to be produced in a way that caters to the demands of a variety of industrial 
­sectors. As with other industrial chemicals that are produced at different grades, purities 
and mixtures, there is a remarkable range of GO qualities that can be produced, including 
variations in flake sizes, oxidation degree, porosity and purity. It will be a significant 
advantage for GO if all these qualities can be controllably produced – but, if not, it will be 
a significant setback.
13.3  Overview of Graphene Oxide Synthesis
Graphene oxide is a single layer of oxidized graphene, typically obtained from the disper-
sion of bulk graphite oxide in neutral or alkaline water, assisted by stirring or, more often, 
sonication. It is noteworthy that even the simple process of dispersing bulk graphite oxide 
in water may lead to GO with varying flake sizes. Although there are applications involving 
the direct use of bulk graphite oxide, such as the formation of thermally processed GO 
(tpGO) [21], most applications seek to capitalize on the large surface area available with 
single‐layer GO. Over time, synthetic methods for GO synthesis have become safer, more 
environmentally friendly and more scalable.
The first example of graphite oxide synthesis was demonstrated by Brodie in 1859 [22] 
when bulk graphite was oxidized via potassium perchlorate in fuming nitric acid. However, 
this process is very hazardous due to the formation of highly explosive chlorine dioxide gas 
when potassium perchlorate is added to concentrated acid. In 1898, Staudenmaier [23] 
made improvements to the Brodie method by replacing about two‐thirds of the fuming 
nitric acid with concentrated sulfuric acid and adding potassium perchlorate in aliquots 
over four days. This modification reduces the explosion hazard, increases the overall oxi-
dation degree of the graphite oxide and allows the production to be carried out in a single 
reaction vessel as compared to Brodie’s approach. A revolutionary method for graphite 
oxide production was developed by Charpy [24] and later by Hummers and Offeman in 
1958 [25], where one weight equivalent of graphite is oxidized by three weight equivalents 
of potassium permanganate and a half weight equivalent of sodium nitrate in concentrated 

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
415
sulfuric acid. The Hummers method is currently the most widely adopted one for the 
­production of graphite oxide, as it eliminates the evolution of explosive gas and, more 
importantly, reduces the total reaction time to just a few hours or less.
A typical process based on the Hummers or comparable method is shown in Figure 13.2. 
In this process, molecules of sulfuric acid (H2SO4) are thought to first intercalate between 
Reaction slurry
Graphite oxide with
impurities
Reaction 
quenching
Oxidation
H2O2, water
Graphite oxide
Drying and/or
dispersion
Product delivered to
user
Single or few layered
graphene oxide
Treated water
recycled, sent to
neighbouring
industry, or
disposed of
Purification
Exfolatiation/
Delamination
Wastewater
treatment
Solids further
processed or
disposed of
HCl, water, or other
solvent
Reaction media
Reaction media
(e.g. H2SO4, NaNO3,
KMnO4 for Hummers
Method)
Pre-oxidation or
expansion
Pre-oxidised or
expanded graphite
(Optional stage)
Graphite
Figure 13.2  Block flow diagram of a possible process for the production of GO

416
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
the stacked layers of graphene making up graphite [7, 26]. An oxidant, potassium perman-
ganate (KMnO4), and sodium nitrate (NaNO3) are also added to the reaction mixture. In 
concentrated sulfuric acid, potassium permanganate reacts to form manganese heptoxide 
(Mn2O7), a strong oxidant thought to be the active species in graphene oxidation, although 
other species such as the permanganate ion may also play a role [26]. Because of the inter-
calation of the graphite with sulfuric acid, the oxidant mixture has access to the space 
between the graphene layers. It can then react with the graphene, adding functional groups 
such as hydroxyl (–OH), epoxide (–O–) and carboxylic acids (–COOH) to form GO. 
Because in some cases the oxidation procedure does not lead to complete conversion of the 
graphite to graphite oxide, a pre‐oxidation step may be added before the main oxidation 
(e.g. using P2O5 and K2S2O8 in H2SO4) [27].
In the work‐up procedure, the reaction is quenched with water and hydrogen peroxide 
(H2O2). The water reacts with the potassium heptoxide to form HMnO4, effectively stop-
ping the oxidation reaction. The hydrogen peroxide further reacts with manganese oxides 
in the mixture, reducing them to manganese ions. In a subsequent purification process, 
manganese and other ions in the solution are removed, along with any unoxidized or under‐
oxidized graphite. The graphite oxide also needs to be exfoliated to single‐layered or 
few‐layered GO. This is generally accomplished by mechanical means (e.g. stirring or 
sonication), although thermal expansion is also possible [28]. At the conclusion of the pro-
cess, the product is prepared for further use by drying or dispersion in water or other media.
13.4  Challenges of Graphene Oxide Production
There are several challenges that a potential large‐scale producer of GO may face. Although 
the Hummers method should be scalable for industrial production, there are nonetheless 
some scientific questions that should be addressed before a large‐scale operation is put into 
place (e.g. the optimal parameters for graphite exfoliation and GO storage). In addition to 
these technical issues, large‐scale production brings with it a host of economic considera-
tions, such as the need to acquire large quantities of starting materials at low cost. The vari-
ous technical and economic challenges associated with each stage of the process, shown in 
Figure 13.2, are discussed below.
13.4.1  Graphite Sources
The graphite source is a particularly important consideration in the process, as it will affect 
not only the cost of the operation, but also the subsequent processing steps required and the 
final product quality.
Graphene oxide can be synthesized from naturally occurring graphite, as well as from 
synthetic graphite. Three forms of natural graphite are mined: vein graphite, flake graphite 
and amorphous/microcrystalline graphite. Vein graphite is the purest ore, with the highest 
carbon content before treatment (>90%). However, vein graphite is currently only pro-
duced by two mines in Sri Lanka with limited capacity [29], making up only 1% of the 
world’s total natural graphite production [30].
Flake graphite has been the main source of natural graphite used in GO research and 
development. The world’s largest producer of flake graphite is China, although increasing 

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
417
demand from the electronics industry has encouraged exploration in Canada, Brazil, 
Australia and elsewhere [31]. After mineral extraction, flake graphite is typically purified 
by mechanical separation and flotation to remove hetroatom contamination [29]. It is then 
supplied in dry form in various mesh sizes and purity.
World production capacity of flake graphite is increasing, following a 2011 exploration 
boom, and there are not expected to be supply shortages in the near future [30]. After a peak 
in graphite prices in 2011–2012, prices for flake graphite have been trending downward 
[32]. In 2014, prices ranged from $750 to $1350 per tonne, based on the carbon percentage, 
flake size, delivery location and quantity purchased [33]. There is speculation that graphite 
prices could increase with contracting supply from China [34], and rising prices may pose 
a challenge to GO commercialization.
Graphene oxide can also be synthesized from amorphous graphite (also known as micro-
crystalline graphite) [35]. Amorphous graphite is the cheapest and most abundant form of 
the mineral. As its name implies, amorphous graphite lacks the large, stacked lamellar 
graphene sheets characteristic of flake graphite [29, 36]. There is some evidence that the 
disordered stacking in amorphous graphite may impede intercalation by the commonly 
used intercalating agent, sulfuric acid (see Figure 13.3) [35].
Expanded graphite (EG) is also a suitable precursor for GO synthesis [35, 37]. Expanded 
graphite is natural graphite that has been pretreated with intercalating agents and heat, such 
that its specific volume is greatly increased. Using expanded graphite can assist in the 
­oxidation process [35], but has the disadvantage of requiring an additional step and cost for 
graphite expansion.
In addition to natural graphite, synthetic graphite may also be used to produce GO [28, 38, 39]. 
Synthetic graphite is formed by heating unstructured carbon to very high temperatures 
EGO
FGO
MGO
Oxidation
Oxidation
Oxidation
Intercalation
Concentrated H2SO4
Intercalation
Concentrated H2SO4
Intercalation
Concentrated H2SO4
EG
FG
MG
Figure 13.3  Intercalation and oxidation of three forms of graphite: expanded graphite (EG), 
flake graphite (FG) and microcrystalline graphite (MG). EG has been pretreated with sulfuric 
acid, and is therefore most readily intercalated and oxidized in the Hummers process. In 
contrast, the microcrystalline structure of MG appears to impede intercalation/oxidation, 
leading to a greater amount of under‐oxidized graphite in a given time period. Reproduced 
from [35]: “Effect of graphite precursor on oxidation degree, hydrophilicity and microstructure 
of graphene oxide”, Hu, X.; Yu, Y.; Zhou, J.; Song, L., Nano 2014, 9 (3) 1450037. Copyright 
2014, World Scientific

418
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
(greater than 2500 °C). Synthetic graphite has a somewhat less crystalline structure than 
naturally occurring graphite [29], which will affect the kinetics of the oxidation reaction. 
While the batch‐to‐batch reliability of synthetic graphite can be expected to be higher than 
that of mined graphite, synthetic graphite is significantly more expensive. Synthetic graphite 
prices are generally at least 50% higher than comparable grades of flake graphite [33], and 
can be higher for more processed forms.
Thus, the type and size of the graphite used in the process affects the course of the oxida-
tion and exfoliation reactions. All else being equal, the graphite feed will affect the extent 
of the reaction (see section 13.4.2.3), the number of layers in the product and the degree of 
oxidation [28, 35]. In addition, defects occurring in mined graphite can influence the qual-
ity and properties of the final material. Therefore, the selection of graphite needs to take 
into account not only the cost, but also the starting materials’ effect on the entire process 
and final product.
13.4.2  Reaction Conditions
There are several challenges associated with the graphite oxidation process: economically 
sourcing reaction media, health and safety issues, challenges in increasing yield/conver-
sion, and challenges in achieving reproducible high product quality. However, for the most 
part, these challenges are not intractable, and recent work has moved to address them.
13.4.2.1  Selecting Cost‐Effective Reaction Media
To produce GO from graphite, chemicals need to be sourced to assist with intercalation and 
oxidation. With some exceptions, most of the chemicals required for the process are widely 
and cheaply available.
In the original Hummers method, sulfuric acid is used as an intercalating agent, with 
potassium permanganate as the oxidant and sodium nitrate facilitating the oxidation 
­process. Most modern variations of this method continue to rely primarily on the use of 
sulfuric acid for its intercalating effect, although phosphoric acid (H3PO4) may optionally 
be added [40]. Fortunately, these intercalating chemicals (sulfuric acid and phosphoric 
acid) are readily available on an industrial scale. Indeed, the primary component of the 
reaction mixture, sulfuric acid, is one of the most heavily traded chemicals in the world 
[41]. At $75–80/tonne in April 2015 [42], it will be a relatively inexpensive material input.
From an industrial perspective, the use of potassium permanganate poses its own 
­challenges. Firstly, the chemical can be hazardous, as discussed in section  13.4.2.2. 
Secondly, the use of potassium permanganate will likely be costly. In 2008–2009, 
potassium permanganate sold at an average price of $2.16/lb ($4768/tonne) from US 
producers [43]. Potassium permanganate can also be sourced at significantly lower cost 
from China, but imports to the USA have been limited as part of anti‐dumping measures 
[44, 45]. Given that the typical modified Hummers process uses a potassium permanganate 
to graphite mass ratio of 3 : 1 [10], it can be expected that the oxidant will be a significant 
component of operating costs. Sourcing affordable oxidant will be important to reducing 
the overall cost of GO, making it cost competitive with alternative industrial materials.
Alternatives to potassium permanganate have also recently been examined [44, 46]. 
Notably, Gao and colleagues [44] have shown that potassium ferrate (​K2FeO4) in sulfuric 
acid has promise. Highly oxidized, single‐layer GO could be produced with shorter 

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
419
reaction times, fewer dangerous waste by‐products (e.g. no heavy metal manganese pro-
duced), and without the need to cool the reactor. They further showed that the reaction 
media could be recycled at least 10 times. However, despite this plethora of benefits, potas-
sium ferrate is not currently produced on an industrial scale. Prices are on the order of 
magnitude of $2/gram [47]. Moreover, potassium ferrate decomposes quickly in water, 
which could lead to its decomposition in the process, particularly if the reaction medium is 
recycled. These challenges will need to be overcome in order to use this attractive alterna-
tive oxidant for large‐scale GO production.
13.4.2.2  Managing Hazards
There are at least two sources of hazards characteristic of the Hummers method: the toxic 
and explosive gas evolving from sodium nitrate; and the explosion risk arising from the use 
of potassium permanganate in sulfuric acid.
●
●Evolution of dangerous nitrogenous gas. The addition of sodium nitrate, NaNO3, can be 
a safety issue. Adding it to the reaction can lead to the evolution of toxic and hazardous 
gases, NO2 and N2O4. This gas can be managed, although a more recent strategy is to 
prevent it entirely. It has been shown that NaNO3 can be omitted from the reaction 
­mixture because of the strong intercalating nature of sulfuric acid and the oxidizing 
nature of potassium permanganate. The strategy was first demonstrated by Tour and 
­colleagues [40] and has since been employed by others [37, 48, 49]. Removing sodium 
nitrate has the added advantage of eliminating the need to purify the wastewater of 
sodium and nitrate ions.
●
●Explosion risk from manganese heptoxide. When potassium permanganate is added to 
the solution of sulfuric acid, a dangerous heptoxide is formed [50] according to the 
­following reaction:
	
2
2
4
2
7
2
MnO
H
Mn O
H O
−
+
+
→
+
	
Manganese heptoxide is an extremely oxidizing compound, which can readily react and 
combust with most organic compounds at temperatures above 55 °C [51]. Further, potas-
sium heptoxide itself can explode at temperatures greater than 95 °C. At the same time, 
the oxidation reaction is highly exothermic, and reaction mixtures can increase to 60 °C 
without cooling [52].
Therefore, appropriate temperature control systems, alarms and other safety mechanisms 
are essential to reduce the risk of explosion. For example, reactors can be jacketed with 
cooling water and the flow rate of cooling water controlled appropriately. Risk may be 
further mitigated by staggering the addition of reactants across multiple reactors, reduc-
ing the exothermic load at each reactor (see Figure 13.4).
13.4.2.3  Increasing Yield/Conversion
In the conventional Hummers process, the oxidation reaction does not go to completion, 
and there is typically unoxidized or under‐oxidized graphite remaining in the reactor. It is 
desirable to increase the conversion of graphite to GO. Firstly, this maximizes use of input 
materials and reduces waste. Secondly, achieving 100% conversion would eliminate the 
need to separate out unoxidized graphite in the subsequent purification.

420
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
It is difficult to achieve complete conversion, although it can be achieved by adding a 
pre‐oxidation step [27]. Conversion may also be increased by increasing the reaction time 
to several hours or by sequentially adding a large excess of KMnO4. None of these proce-
dures, however, is particularly desirable from an industrial standpoint, as they would require 
increased reagents, significantly larger equipment in a continuous process (to achieve larger 
residence times), or additional unit operations altogether.
One strategy that may be effective, however, is changing the size of the input graphite 
particles. Chen et al. [49] showed that using flake graphite with sizes less than 20 µm in a 
modified Hummers process could lead to complete oxidation of the graphite within 30 min. 
They showed that the reaction is mass‐transfer‐limited, and, with larger flakes (e.g. 100 µm), 
30 min was not enough time for the oxidant to completely permeate the graphite.
In an alternative approach, mass transfer can be improved by changing the mixing 
regime within the oxidation reactor. Park et al. [54] designed a reactor with a rotating inner 
cylinder which created a Couette–Taylor flow pattern (see Figure 13.5). Using 50 µm flake 
graphite, they found the increased turbulent mixing allowed for complete conversion and 
the production of highly oxidized GO within 30 min.
Graphite
addition
KMnO4
addition
Cooling
water out
Cold
H2SO4
Cooling
water in
Pre-reacted
solution
Cold water
addition
Cooling
water out
Reacted
GO slurry
Main
reactor
Water
addition
Cooling
water in
H2O2
addition
Figure 13.4  Schematic diagram of a continuous process for the oxidation of graphite. In this 
process, graphite and sulfuric acid are first premixed in a continuous stirred‐tank reactor 
(CSTR). Potassium permanganate is added in a second CSTR, followed by further cooling in a 
third CSTR. This mixture is pumped to the main oxidation reactor. After cooling in a heat 
exchanger, the reaction is quenched with hydrogen peroxide in a final CSTR. Reproduced from 
[53] with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2013

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
421
13.4.2.4  Tuning Product Quality
The reaction conditions will have an effect on the quality of the GO produced [1]. For 
example, the amount of oxidant used and the reaction time will affect the degree of oxida-
tion and the number of layers that can be exfoliated [1, 55]. In many cases, the reaction 
conditions of a large‐scale Hummers process may be modified and optimized to achieve 
the desired product.
However, there are some forms of GO made using synthetic procedures that present 
more challenges to scale up. For example Eigler et al. [56] describe GO with a more 
pristine, undamaged structure. They found that the reaction conditions of the traditional 
Hummers method can introduce hole defects in the GO lattice. These defects arise 
because some of the graphene’s carbon in fact is removed in the form of carbon dioxide. 
This can change the carbon arrangement in the lattice from hexagonal to pentagonal or 
other forms, rendering the holes irreparable. Eigler et al. showed that this CO2 formation 
could be minimized by using longer oxidation times (16 h as opposed to 30 min), and 
maintaining temperatures below 10 °C. However, there would be added challenges to 
economically scale up this procedure, given the increased reaction time, increased oxi-
dant costs and the need for process cooling. Similar difficulties would be faced by other 
improved forms of GO [40] that rely upon longer reaction times under milder condi-
tions. Even though there may be some trade‐offs between GO quality and production 
costs, the target applications for such low‐defect, but processable, GO are typically 
Filter press
washing
Freeze
drying
Taylor vortex
Stationary outer
cylinder
Rotating inner
cylinder
Graphite
+
NaNO3, KMnO4, H2SO4
(a)
(b)
Figure 13.5  Illustration of the oxidation reaction of graphite flakes in a Couette–Taylor flow 
reactor. (a) Schematic diagram of the Couette–Taylor flow reactor system. (b) Conceptual 
diagram of the vortex structure in the Couette–Taylor reactor. Reproduced from [54] with 
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015

422
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
high‐end (e.g. transparent conductive electrodes). Hence, the increased production cost 
is still acceptable (compared to the cost of CVD production) if its performance can truly 
fulfil industry requirements.
13.4.3  Work‐up and Purification
At the end of the oxidation process, a number of impurities will be present in the reaction 
vessel, including an array of ions (i.e. K+, H+, Mn2+ and SO4
2−) and any unoxidized graphite. 
Purification is important to ensure stability and safety of the final product. In fact, many 
downstream applications will not tolerate even small levels of impurities. For instance, 
while GO is normally chemically inert, the presence of potassium ions can increase the 
flammability of the product. During a reduction reaction, for example, GO can violently 
combust in the presence of air and potassium [57]. In some cases, removing sulfur contami-
nation will be crucial. For example, for some catalytic applications, sulfur can contaminate 
catalytic sites [52].
Conventionally, the oxidation reaction has been quenched and the product washed with 
water, and water is the main work‐up medium discussed here. However, it should be noted 
that Dimiev et al. [58] demonstrated that using other solvents for purification can have a 
significant effect on the structure and chemical make‐up of GO. Using an organic medium 
such as methanol or trifluoroacetic acid led to a significantly different GO product (termed 
“pristine graphite oxide”) than that produced using water purification. Pristine graphite 
oxide had a higher sulfate content, more vacancy defects and a more abundant presence of 
epoxide groups. The authors propose that water may mediate the rearrangement of func-
tional groups on the graphene surface. Given that the work‐up solvent will affect the nature 
of the product itself, research on the chemistry and engineering of GO produced using 
organic solvents is warranted.
Because of the very large volumes of solution to process after the oxidation reaction, the 
requirements for high purity and the unique chemical properties of GO, purification is 
often seen as the major challenge for industrial production. There are several parts of the 
work‐up/purification process that could pose challenges for the large‐scale production of 
GO: delamination, ion removal, the removal of unoxidized graphite and drying.
13.4.3.1  Exfoliation and Delamination
A potential challenge to large‐scale production is determining the optimal conditions for the 
exfoliation of graphite oxide to GO. After the oxidation reaction, the raw product will typi-
cally be graphite oxide (i.e. multiple, stacked layers of GO). To delaminate the graphite oxide 
to single‐ or few‐layered GO, laboratory procedures typically involve stirring [59], centrifu-
gation [40] or sonication steps [28, 60]. These steps generally are carried out for very long 
times, often overnight. It does not appear, however, that harsh mechanical treatment is neces-
sary to delaminate graphite oxide. Zhou and Liu [59] demonstrated that, with gentle shaking 
overnight, very large GO sheets (up to 200 µm) could be exfoliated after a modified Hummers 
reaction. They suggest that harsher ultrasonication treatment may in fact break up GO sheets.
Thus, before embarking on large‐scale production of GO, it will be necessary to fully 
understand the effect of the delamination method on product quality. Very long exfoliation 
treatments could be costly and rate‐limiting for the process, and so the exfoliation step 
should be optimized.

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
423
13.4.3.2  Ion Removal
In order to remove the large amounts of ions present in the reaction solution, GO is typi-
cally either washed using filtration or centrifugation or is subjected to dialysis. Dialysis, 
can take several weeks, requires frequent exchange of the dialysis medium and will likely 
represent a bottleneck in an industrial‐scale GO process [52].
Filtration, however, can be accomplished in less time. There are multiple protocols for 
GO filtration and washing. However, typically, the metal ions are first washed out using 
HCl, followed by thorough rinsing with water. Both dead‐end filtration and crossflow fil-
tration may be used in GO purification to this end. In dead‐end filtration, the fluid flows 
directly against a filter; whereas in crossflow filtration, the solution flows in a direction 
parallel to a filter. In both filtration arrangements, higher pressure on the filter cake side 
forces solution/filtrate through the filter.
The filter press is a common piece of equipment used to accomplish dead‐end filtration 
and which has been used for GO purification [53, 54]. In this set‐up, the GO slurry is first 
pumped into chambers within the filter press. HCl or water is then pumped into the cham-
ber, and this liquid is extruded through cloth/membrane filter walls as the walls of the 
chamber are pressed together.
A challenge for GO filtration is that GO tends to gelate in aqueous media. This can 
greatly complicate certain types of filtration (e.g. gravity and vacuum‐assisted filtration), 
as the filter cake can block the flow of solvent. One method of overcoming this is to use 
acetone instead of water after washing with HCl, as graphite oxide does not gelate in ace-
tone [12, 57].
A second solution proposed by Tölle et al. [52] involves the use of crossflow filtration. 
In this arrangement, a graphite oxide slurry is first washed with HCl using dead‐end fil-
tration. In subsequent water washes, crossflow filtration is used. Graphite oxide is 
pumped continuously through a cylindrical membrane unit (see Figure 13.6). Wastewater 
is pushed outwards from the center of the filtration unit by a pressure gradient. The flow 
of the GO stream through the filtration unit serves to constantly move graphite oxide 
away from filter pores, reducing pore blockage and minimizing fouling in general. Fresh 
wash water is added to the system to make up for the lost wastewater. The solution is 
pumped through the crossflow filter until impurities in the wastewater reach an accepta-
bly low level.
13.4.3.3  Removing Unoxidized Graphite
Depending on the graphite inputs and reaction conditions, some of the starting graphite 
may remain unoxidized after the reaction. This presents a further separation challenge. 
This problem can be precluded by choosing the process parameters such that all the starting 
materials are oxidized [49, 54]. If this is not possible, a variety of separation techniques are 
available to remove the unoxidized graphite. On a laboratory scale, centrifugation is often 
used to separate GO from unoxidized graphite based on density. While a vast array of dif-
ferent industrial batch and continuous centrifuge designs are available [61], high‐speed 
centrifuges tend to have limited capacities and can be costly.
An alternative strategy may involve a settling tank where the denser unoxidized graphite 
flakes will eventually settle down to the bottom of the tank. The rate of settling will largely 
depend on the viscosity of the GO slurry/solution and the size of the unoxidized graphite 

424
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
flakes. It is noteworthy that the product, GO, will precipitate out and settle if the pH of the 
solution is too low or the salt concentration is too high. Hence, the ideal stage for removing 
unoxidized graphite might be after the ion/salt purification stage.
13.4.3.4  Drying
With the bulk of the liquid removed from the GO, the product needs to be dried if it is to 
be stored in solid form. Typically, GO is freeze‐dried in order to create a dry powder. 
Vacuum freeze‐drying, however, is expensive on an industrial scale [61]. Moreover, 
Peng et al. [44] report that commercially available freeze‐dried GO is very difficult to 
disperse, which limits its downstream applications. The freeze‐drying process may lead 
to partial restacking of the GO sheets, creating aggregates that are difficult to disrupt 
during re‐dispersion. Spray drying appears to avoid this problem [44]. Industrial‐scale 
spray dryers are available and can be cost‐effective. For this application, however, spe-
cial pumping equipment will be required to feed the spray dryer’s atomizer with the GO 
filter cake [61].
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 13.6  A GO purification pilot plant, enabling GO purification by automated crossflow 
filtration: (1) wash water reservoir, (2) pump for wash water feed, (3) control of filling level 
and controller for water feed pump, (4) blade stirrer with mixing holes, (5) vessel containing 
GO dispersion, (6) hollow‐fiber crossflow filtration membrane cartridge, (7) peristaltic pump 
for GO circulation, (8) on‐line ion conductivity measurement for monitoring the ion content of 
the wastewater, (9) wastewater stream, and (10) containment. Reproduced from [52] with 
permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2015

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
425
13.4.3.5  Wastewater Treatment
At the conclusion of the purification process, the wastewater will contain K+, H+, Mn2+ and 
SO4
2− ions, and, if NaNO3 was used during the oxidation, also Na+ and NO3
− ions. High salt 
concentrations and acidity mean that the wastewater cannot be released to the environment 
or recycled without treatment.
Typically, ionic wastewater streams are treated using chemical precipitation [62]. In this 
strategy, counter‐ions that form insoluble compounds with existing ions in the solution are 
added. The insoluble precipitate is then filtered or otherwise separated off. For example, to 
remove sulfate ions (SO4
2−), slaked lime, Ca(OH)2, can be added to the solution. Calcium 
combines with the sulfate ions, leading to the formation of insoluble calcium sulfate, CaSO4. 
Similarly, under neutral pH conditions, sodium carbonate can be added to precipitate man-
ganese to manganese carbonate, MnCO3. In this case, a precipitation strategy would need to 
be carefully designed in order to minimize unit operations and added chemicals.
Care should also be taken in increasing the pH excessively. Mn2+ can be precipitated by 
adding excess base (e.g. OH− ions from KOH) [48] at a pH of 10, resulting in the formation 
of insoluble manganese tetroxide, Mn3O4. However, manganese tetroxide dust is highly 
neurotoxic and carcinogenic. It is generally recommended that processes are designed to 
avoid the compound unless a suitable downstream use can be found [63, 64].
Process designers should explore different opportunities for recycling and reusing spent 
materials, consistent with general waste management principles [65]. For example, 
reclaiming and reselling precipitated compounds could reduce landfill costs and provide a 
small profit.
Given the challenges of separating a multi‐component mixture of salts, an alternative 
strategy is neutralization of the solution followed by evaporation. Evaporation of the waste-
water will lead to the crystallization of MnSO4, KOH and other salts, which can then be 
recycled or disposed of. Given the fact that a very large amount of water is required for 
purification of GO and fresh water is limited in many countries, having the right wastewa-
ter recycling system installed is decidedly one of the major considerations for the construc-
tion of a GO production plant.
13.4.4  Storage, Handling and Quality Control
There may be distinct challenges associated with the storage, handling and quality control 
of GO. Graphene oxide may be hazardous in some cases, and the product can be unstable 
at ambient conditions, increasing the need for good quality control.
13.4.4.1  Storage and Handling Challenges
While purified GO is not flammable, it becomes highly combustible in the presence of salt 
contaminants (notably potassium) [12]. Even without contamination, GO can be thermally 
reduced, which under certain conditions can cause explosion. When slowly heated under 
inert gas to approximately 140 °C, GO will explode [66]. In air, GO will explode when 
heated to around 300 °C [12]. Given this explosion risk, GO needs to be treated as a poten-
tially hazardous material.
There are also challenges related to GO’s chemical stability. While it was initially 
thought that GO was stable after the reaction and work‐up, it has recently been found 

426
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
that dried GO is only metastable at ambient conditions and will in fact chemically 
change during storage. Kim et  al. [67] showed that multi‐layer GO spontaneously 
reduces at room temperature, reaching a quasi‐equilibrium state after approximately 35 
days. Over time, the number of epoxide groups decreases, the number of hydroxyl 
groups increases, and the overall oxygen‐to‐carbon ratio (O/C) falls (see Figure 13.7). 
Further, Chua and Pumera [68] found that multi‐layered and single‐layered GO degra-
dation could be observed over a period of 30 weeks. The degradation of single‐layered 
GO was a function of exposure to air, while that of multi‐layered GO was a function of 
light exposure. For example, GO exposed to air saw the O/C ratio fall from 0.46 to 0.40 
at 30 weeks, again with a concomitant reduction in the number of epoxide groups. This 
degradation was not observed when the single‐layer GO samples were kept under 
nitrogen.
In solution, GO appears to be stable over short time frames even when heated to 40 °C 
(but not in the presence of NaOH) [69]. However, no long‐term assessments of the stability 
of GO in solution have been reported. Graphene oxide’s post‐oxidation chemical rear-
rangement is thought to be water‐mediated [7, 58]. It therefore might be expected that 
storage in water would have an effect on the product’s stability.
Lack of stability has clear implications for industrial production. Changes in the chem-
ical composition of GO will affect its properties in downstream applications. Therefore, 
future work is required to fully understand the mechanism and time course of degrada-
tion. This will allow GO producers to develop strategies to ensure product consistency. 
Suitable quality control measures, such as routine product testing, will need to form part 
of this strategy.
0
Poxygen
20
40
60
80
100
0.8
1.2
1.6
2.0
0.34
(a)
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
Δt (days)
(b)
Phydroxyl
Pepoxide
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.24
0.30
0.06
0.12
0.18
0.24
0.30
0
20
40
60
80
100
Δt (days)
PGO/PG
Figure 13.7  Chemical change of GO films over 100 days deduced from X‐ray photoelectron 
spectroscopy (XPS) data. Symbols show experimental values and statistical error bars. (a) PGO 
represents the hydroxyl/epoxide bonded carbon as a proportion of all carbon in the sample, 
while PG represents the proportion of C–C bonded carbon. PGO/PG (black circles) is therefore 
a measure of the oxygen‐bound carbon in the sample. Poxygen (red triangles) is the oxygen‐to‐
carbon ratio, estimated from the O 1s/C 1s intensity ratio, corrected by a Scofield relative 
sensitivity factor of 2.93. (b) Fraction of epoxide (Pepoxide; purple circles) and hydroxyl (Phydroxyl; 
blue circles) species relative to the amount of C in GO. Reproduced from [67] with permission 
from Nature Publishing Group, Copyright 2012

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
427
13.4.4.2  Quality Control Measures
As with any chemical process, it will be important to ensure that the process is operating 
smoothly and that the finished product is of an acceptable quality. Ideally, on‐line monitor-
ing would be available to allow plant operators to quickly identify and troubleshoot prob-
lems as they evolve, thereby minimizing product loss [61, 70]. Simple on‐line analysis 
might include measurements of the pH in the various reactors or measurement of the waste-
water stream conductivity (abnormally low conductivity may indicate low ion content in 
the wastewater stream, which would suggest that there may be problems with the purifica-
tion). Further, portholes can be installed in reactors to allow for visual inspection of the 
process stream. When the oxidation reaction is quenched with hydrogen peroxide, the reac-
tion mixture becomes yellow, indicating that the material has been oxidized; operators may 
periodically check for this color change.
The final product will also need to be checked at on‐site or independent analytical labo-
ratories before distribution. There are a variety of analytical techniques for characterizing 
GO, which could be used to assess product quality [7, 71] (see Chapter 3 for a detailed 
discussion of these methods). Fourier‐transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is a rapid 
measure, which can be used to detect the functional groups in the GO molecules, thus con-
firming the quality of the sample. X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) can indicate the 
degree of oxygenation, as can ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy. Raman spectroscopy can 
further confirm the identity and indicate the degree of defects. Tapping mode atomic force 
microscopy (AFM) can be used to determine the thickness of the sample, and therefore the 
number of stacked layers. AFM, along with other forms of microscopy, such as tunneling 
electron microscopy (TEM) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), can be used to 
assess the overall morphology and lateral dimensions of the GO sheets. Some combination 
of these analytical techniques may be chosen based on quality requirements and cost/
economic factors.
13.5  Concluding Remarks and Future Directions
In the field of polymer science, a single type of polymer (e.g. polyethylene) can be pro-
duced at various molecular weights and regiospecificity with different side/end groups to 
suit a variety of applications. This is aided by the extensive polymer chemistry available to 
precisely polymerize and tailor speciality monomers into the desired polymeric material in 
a bottom‐up fashion. Unfortunately, a polymerizable “graphene monomer” via wet chem-
istry is difficult to achieve, and the size of such synthetic graphene is expected to be lim-
ited, as seen in the case of solvothermal growth [72]. The beauty of GO is that it is essentially 
a functional two‐dimensional macromolecule with good dispersibility in water and many 
other solvents, thereby a highly processable intermediate to reduced GO, graphene nano-
hybrids and graphene nanocomposites. The utility of the oxidation route is that it can 
­produce an array of single‐layer GO types, from sheets with a nanoscale lateral size and 
porous sheets to the more elusive large diameter sheets with low irreparable hole defects 
and controlled oxygen functional groups.
Given the promising outlook for graphite supply, the top‐down approach of graphite 
oxidation and exfoliation is undeniably one of the most promising methods for producing 

428
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
graphene‐based products. It is the only scalable wet‐chemical method capable of producing 
single‐layer GO, and reduced GO, in high yield. This is in contrast to other methods, which 
typically produce a mixture of few‐layered graphene or graphene nanoplatelets. The chal-
lenges of industrial‐scale GO production are traditionally associated with the hazards 
involving strong corrosive acids and explosive oxidants, but these hazards can be overcome 
with modern industrial chemical processes. The control of oxidation degree and other criti-
cal properties of GO are currently being addressed, with promising results. The less recog-
nized issues associated with purification and waste management are not obvious when 
operating at laboratory scale, but escalate to become the major challenges at the industrial 
scale. Moreover, seemingly minor details such as the shelf‐life, packaging and delivery 
method have to be optimized to suit the needs of targeted industries.
Indeed, given that the market for GO is nascent, producers will need to play an active 
role in defining the format in which GO is produced and supplied. Among the many poten-
tial product types, GO may be supplied in dry form as powders or as films, in aqueous or 
organic solution, or as intermediary products such as graphene/polymer dispersions. As 
various market niches for GO are found, the establishment of industry standards for 
GO products will further encourage uptake of this new material [3]. However, some 
graphene producers are nonetheless operating in great secrecy, without providing details 
about their products, let alone their production processes. This is unsustainable, as it will be 
difficult for end‐user industries to integrate these products reliably into existing applications 
or to make improvements to future products. Hence, there is a pressing need for full 
transparency on the materials characterization and quality control used for GO products.
There are multiple challenges for the industrial‐scale production of GO, which can also 
be viewed as avenues for innovation and growth. By waiting for the “killer application” 
to drive the production of GO, there is the risk that production will be limited to highly 
specialized markets, with producers relying on one particular grade of graphite to make a 
small range of products. On the other hand, new GO producers can seek to be versatile and 
define the market for their products. There is the possibility of treating graphite as both a 
basic raw material and a precursor to a large range of new materials – analogous to the wide 
range of products obtained from crude oil. In this case, producers are responsible for sort-
ing out the variety of low‐cost graphite feedstocks and adding the capability of producing 
a greater diversity of products catering to a wider breadth of industries. Similarly, the 
apparent challenges of wastewater management and polluting by‐products likely present 
opportunities for recycling and reuse. Minimizing cost and environmental impacts from 
waste products will be an important area of innovation for GO producers. Quite fittingly, it 
will probably not be long before the advancement in graphene technology (e.g. filtration, 
desalination, etc.) can be used to solve some of its own production challenges.
References
[1]	 Wan, X.; Huang, Y.; Chen, Y., Focusing on energy and optoelectronic applications: a journey for 
graphene and graphene oxide at large scale. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45 (4), 598–607.
[2]	 Zhong, Y.L.; Tian, Z.; Simon, G.P.; Li, D., Scalable production of graphene via wet chemistry: 
progress and challenges. Mater. Today 2015, 18 (2), 73–78.
[3]	 Zurutuza, A.; Marinelli, C., Challenges and opportunities in graphene commercialization. Nature 
Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 730–734.

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
429
[4]	 Ren, W.; Cheng, H.‐M., The global growth of graphene. Nature Nanotechnol. 2014, 9 (10), 
726–730.
[5]	 Ferrari, A.C.; Bonaccorso, F.; Fal’ko, V.; et al., Science and technology roadmap for graphene, 
related two‐dimensional crystals, and hybrid systems. Nanoscale 2015, 7 (11), 4598–4810.
[6]	 Kim, J.; Cote, L.J.; Huang, J., Two dimensional soft material: new faces of graphene oxide. Acc. 
Chem. Res. 2012, 45 (8), 1356–1364.
[7]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Todd, A.D.; Bielawski, C.W., Harnessing the chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2014, 43 (15), 5288–5301.
[8]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. Adv. 
Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[9]	 Gambhir, S.; Jalili, R.; Officer, D.L.; Wallace, G.G., Chemically converted graphene: scalable 
chemistries to enable processing and fabrication. NPG Asia Mater. 2015, 7, e186.
[10]	 Zhu, Y.; James, D.K.; Tour, J.M., New routes to graphene, graphene oxide and their related 
applications. Adv. Mater. 2012, 24 (36), 4924–4955.
[11]	 Eigler, S.; Hirsch, A., Chemistry with graphene and graphene oxide – challenges for synthetic 
chemists. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53 (30), 7720–7738.
[12]	 Krishnan, D.; Kim, F.; Luo, J.; et al., Energetic graphene oxide: challenges and opportunities. 
Nano Today 2012, 7 (2), 137–152.
[13]	 Galande, C.; Gao, W.; Mathkar, A.; et al., Science and engineering of graphene oxide. Part. 
Part. Syst. Charact. 2014, 31 (6), 619–638.
[14]	 Novoselov, K.S.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.; et al., Electric field effect in atomically thin carbon 
films. Science 2004, 306 (5696), 666–669.
[15]	 Novoselov, K.; Jiang, D.; Schedin, F.; et al., Two‐dimensional atomic crystals. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. USA 2005, 102 (30), 10451–10453.
[16]	 Novoselov, K.; Geim, A.K.; Morozov, S.; et al., Two‐dimensional gas of massless Dirac fermi-
ons in graphene. Nature 2005, 438 (7065), 197–200.
[17]	 Greil, P., Perspectives of nano‐carbon based engineering materials. Adv. Eng. Mater. 2015, 17 
(2), 124–137.
[18]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Dommett, G.H.B.; et al., Graphene‐based composite materials. 
Nature 2006, 442 (7100), 282–286.
[19]	 Huang, L.; Huang, Y.; Liang, J.; et al., Graphene‐based conducting inks for direct inkjet printing 
of flexible conductive patterns and their applications in electric circuits and chemical sensors. 
Nano Res. 2011, 4 (7), 675–684.
[20]	 Pumera, M., Graphene‐based nanomaterials for energy storage. Energy Environ. Sci. 2011, 4 
(3), 668–674.
[21]	 Acik, M.; Lee, G.; Mattevi, C.; et al., Unusual infrared‐absorption mechanism in thermally 
reduced graphene oxide. Nature Mater. 2010, 9 (10), 840–845.
[22]	 Brodie, B.C., On the atomic weight of graphite. Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 1859, 149, 249–259.
[23]	 Staudenmaier, L., Verfahren zur Darstellung der Graphitsäure. Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. 1898, 31 
(2), 1481–1487.
[24]	 Charpy, G., Sur la formation de l’oxyde graphitique et la définition du graphite. C. R. Hebd. 
Séances Acad. Sci. 1909, 148, 920–923.
[25]	 Hummers, W.S.; Offeman, R.E., Preparation of graphitic oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80 
(6), 1339.
[26]	 Dreyer, D.R.; Park, S.; Bielawski, C.W.; Ruoff, R.S., The chemistry of graphene oxide. Chem. 
Soc. Rev. 2010, 39 (1), 228–240.
[27]	 Kovtyukhova, N.I.; Ollivier, P.J.; Martin, B.R.; et al., Layer‐by‐layer assembly of ultrathin com-
posite films from micron‐sized graphite oxide sheets and polycations. Chem. Mater. 1999, 11 
(3), 771–778.
[28]	 Wu, Z.‐S.; Ren, W.; Gao, L.; et al., Synthesis of high‐quality graphene with a pre‐determined 
number of layers. Carbon 2009, 47 (2), 493–499.
[29]	 Wissler, M., Graphite and carbon powders for electrochemical applications. J. Power Sources 
2006, 156 (2), 142–150.
[30]	 Industrial Minerals, Graphite: Market brief. See http://www.indmin.com/Graphite.html#/
MarketBrief (accessed 13 May 2016).

430
Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications
[31]	 Technology Metals Research, TMR Advanced Graphite Projects index. See http://www.techmetals 
research.com/metrics‐indices/tmr‐advanced‐graphite‐projects‐index/ (accessed 13 May 2016).
[32]	 Moores, S., Flake graphite: Supply, demand, prices  –  GMP securities. GMP Securities 
Workshop, London, 10 June 2014. See http://www.slideshare.net/sdmoores/flake‐graphite‐supply‐
demand‐prices‐gmp‐securities (accessed 13 May 2016).
[33]	 Industrial Minerals, Pricing database, graphite. See http://www.indmin.com/PricingDatabase.
html (accessed 24 June 2015).
[34]	 Moores, S., Has China reached peak graphite? Mining.com. See http://www.mining.com/web/
has‐china‐reached‐peak‐graphite/ (accessed 13 May 2016).
[35]	 Hu, X.; Yu, Y.; Zhou, J.; Song, L., Effect of graphite precursor on oxidation degree, hydrophilicity 
and microstructure of graphene oxide. Nano 2014, 9 (3), 1450037.
[36]	 Asbury Carbons, Amorphous graphite. See http://asbury.com/technical‐presentations‐papers/
materials‐in‐depth/amorphous‐graphite/ (accessed 13 May 2016).
[37]	 Sun, L.; Fugetsu, B., Mass production of graphene oxide from expanded graphite. Mater. Lett. 
2013, 109, 207–210.
[38]	 Hantel, M.M.; Kaspar, T.; Nesper, R.; et al., Partially reduced graphite oxide for supercapacitor 
electrodes: effect of graphene layer spacing and huge specific capacitance. Electrochem. 
Commun. 2011, 13 (1), 90–92.
[39]	 Burress, J.W.; Gadipelli, S.; Ford, J.; et al., Graphene oxide framework materials: theoretical 
predictions and experimental results. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2010, 49 (47), 8902–8904.
[40]	 Marcano, D.C.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Berlin, J.M.; et al., Improved synthesis of graphene oxide. 
ACS Nano 2010, 4 (8), 4806–4814.
[41]	 Muller, T.L., Sulfuric acid and sulfur trioxide. In Kirk–Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical 
Technology. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000.
[42]	 Tonyan, D., US sulphuric acid import prices up. ICIS Chemical Business 2015, 13 April 
(3534), 32.
[43]	 U.S. International Trade Commission, Potassium permanganate from China. Investigation no. 
731‐TA‐125 (Third Review), Publ. 4183. U.S. International Trade Commission, Washington, 
DC, 2010.
[44]	 Peng, L.; Xu, Z.; Liu, Z.; et al., An iron‐based green approach to 1‐h production of single‐layer 
graphene oxide. Nature Commun. 2015, 6, 5716.
[45]	 International Trade Administration, Potassium permanganate from the People’s Republic of 
China: Preliminary results of antidumping duty administrative review; 2013. Department of 
Commerce, US Government, Washington, DC, 2015.
[46]	 Wojtoniszak, M.; Mijowska, E., Controlled oxidation of graphite to graphene oxide with novel 
oxidants in a bulk scale. J. Nanopart. Res. 2012, 14 (11), 1248.
[47]	 Coons, R., New production process slashes potassium ferrate price. Chem. Week 2010, 172 
(8), 33.
[48]	 Chen, J.; Yao, B.; Li, C.; Shi, G., An improved Hummers method for eco‐friendly synthesis of 
graphene oxide. Carbon 2013, 64, 225–229.
[49]	 Chen, J.; Li, Y.; Huang, L.; et al., High‐yield preparation of graphene oxide from small graphite 
flakes via an improved Hummers method with a simple purification process. Carbon 2015, 81, 
826–834.
[50]	 Pisarczyk, K., Manganese compounds. In Kirk–Othmer Encyclopedia of Chemical Technology. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 2000.
[51]	 Simon, A.; Dronskowski, R.; Krebs, B.; Hettich, B., The crystal structure of Mn2O7. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 1987, 26 (2), 139–140.
[52]	 Tölle, F.J.; Gamp, K.; Mülhaupt, R., Scale‐up and purification of graphite oxide as intermediate 
for functionalized graphene. Carbon 2014, 75, 432–442.
[53]	 Lee, S.; Eom, S.H.; Chung, J.S.; Hur, S.H., Large‐scale production of high‐quality reduced 
graphene oxide. Chem. Eng. J. 2013, 233, 297–304.
[54]	 Park, W.K.; Kim, H.; Kim, T.; et al., Facile synthesis of graphene oxide in a Couette–Taylor 
flow reactor. Carbon 2015, 83, 217–223.
[55]	 Zhang, L.; Li, X.; Huang, Y.; et al., Controlled synthesis of few‐layered graphene sheets on a 
large scale using chemical exfoliation. Carbon 2010, 48 (8), 2367–2371.

Challenges of Industrial‐Scale Graphene Oxide Production
431
[56]	 Eigler, S.; Enzelberger‐Heim, M.; Grimm, S.; et  al., Wet chemical synthesis of graphene. 
Adv. Mater. 2013, 25 (26), 3583–3587.
[57]	 Kim, F.; Luo, J.; Cruz‐Silva, R.; et  al., Self‐propagating domino‐like reactions in oxidized 
graphite. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2010, 20 (17), 2867–2873.
[58]	 Dimiev, A.; Kosynkin, D.V.; Alemany, L.B.; et al., Pristine graphite oxide. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134 (5), 2815–2822.
[59]	 Zhou, X.; Liu, Z., A scalable, solution‐phase processing route to graphene oxide and graphene 
ultralarge sheets. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46 (15), 2611–2613.
[60]	 Stankovich, S.; Dikin, D.A.; Piner, R.D.; et al., Synthesis of graphene‐based nanosheets via 
chemical reduction of exfoliated graphite oxide. Carbon 2007, 45 (7), 1558–1565.
[61]	 Green, D.W.; Perry, R.H., Perry’s Chemical Engineers’ Handbook, 8th edn. McGraw‐Hill, 
New York, 2007.
[62]	 Guyer, H.H., Industrial Processes and Waste Stream Management. John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 
New York, 1998.
[63]	 Hathaway, G.J., Proctor, N.H., Proctor and Hughes’ Chemical Hazards of the Workplace, 
5th edn. Wiley‐Interscience, Hoboken, NJ, 2004.
[64]	 Vincoli, J.W., Risk Management for Hazardous Chemicals. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 1996.
[65]	 European Commission, Directive 2008/98/EC on waste (Waste Framework Directive). See 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/framework/ (accessed 13 May 2016).
[66]	 Qiu, Y.; Guo, F.; Hurt, R.; Külaots, I., Explosive thermal reduction of graphene oxide‐based 
materials: mechanism and safety implications. Carbon 2014, 72, 215–223.
[67]	 Kim, S.; Zhou, S.; Hu, Y.; et al., Room‐temperature metastability of multilayer graphene oxide 
films. Nature Mater. 2012, 11 (6), 544–549.
[68]	 Chua, C.K.; Pumera, M., Light and atmosphere affect the quasi‐equilibrium states of graphite 
oxide and graphene oxide powders. Small 2015, 11 (11), 1266–1272.
[69]	 Eigler, S.; Grimm, S.; Hof, F.; Hirsch, A., Graphene oxide: a stable carbon framework for 
­functionalization. J. Mater. Chem. A 2013, 1 (38), 11559–11562.
[70]	 Sinnott, R.K., Coulson & Richardson’s Chemical Engineering, vol. 6, Chemical Engineering 
Design, 2nd edn. Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1993.
[71]	 Soldano, C.; Mahmood, A.; Dujardin, E., Production, properties and potential of graphene. 
Carbon 2010, 48 (8), 2127–2150.
[72]	 Qu, D.; Zheng, M.; Zhang, L. G.; et al., Formation mechanism and optimization of highly 
­luminescent n‐doped graphene quantum dots. Sci. Rep. 2014, 4, 5294.

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
graphene oxide (GO)
epoxide
tertiary alcohol
ketone
carboxylic group
lactol
carbonyl
phenol
quinone
gem‐diol
geminal diol
vic‐diol
vicinal diol
formation mechanism
reaction mechanism
production
Brodie method
Staudenmaier method
Hummers method
Charpy–Hummers approach
Kovtyukhova modification
Marcano modification
chemical properties
nucleophilic attack
intercalation compounds of graphite
stage‐1 GIC
chemical structure
Thiele model
Hofmann model
Nakajima model
Ruess model
Clauss model
Scholz–Boehm model
Lerf–Klinowski model
Szabó–Dékány model
Dimiev–Tour model
structural model
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
infrared spectroscopy (IR)
Fourier‐transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR)
X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
Raman spectroscopy
microscopy
scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
atomic force microscopy (AFM)
transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
high‐resolution transmission electron 
microscopy (HRTEM)
inflection point
acidity
cation exchange capacity
titration
reverse titration
intercalation compound of graphite oxide
deflagration
colloid
diazomethane
functionalization
electrophilic reactions
nucleophilic addition reactions
graphene
X‐ray diffraction (XRD)
transition form
domain
Onsager theory
anisotropic
isotropic
lyotropic
nematic phase
Vocabulary

Vocabulary
433
birefringence
polarized light
dynamic shear
steady shear
storage moduli
loss moduli
Boltzmann’s constant
Brownian diffusion coefficient
Bingham model
Herschel–Bulkley model
Ostwald–de Waele model
linear viscoelastic region
dynamic frequency sweep
viscosity
Kerr coefficient
Kerr effect
shear thinning
dynamic structural model
thermal decomposition
thermogravimetric analysis
decarboxylation
oxo‐functionalized graphene
density of defects
poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride)
ethyl disulfide
N‐isopropylacrylamide
sigmatrope rearrangement
“click” reaction
esterification
nascent hydrogen
edge functional groups
covalent functionalization
amide
deconvolution
physisorption
pyrazole
reduction
point defects
reducing agent
electrochemical reduction
hydrazine
hydrazone
sodium borohydride
hydrogen iodide
electrical conductivity
elemental analysis
contact resistance
lithography
sheet resistance
graphene oxide nanoribbons
deoxygenation
thermal reduction
decomposition
redox reaction
degradation
disproportionation
carbon dioxide
carbon monoxide
oxidation state
annealing
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations
thermally processed graphene oxide (tpGO)
Langmuir–Blodgett technique
diazonium chemistry
diazonium salts
aryl cation
azido‐hydroxyl graphene
density functional theory (DFT)
semiconductor
bandgap
transistor device
Schottky contact model
cathode
anode
electrolyte
separator
solid–electrolyte interface (SEI)
irreversible capacity loss (ICL)
gravimetric capacity
volumetric capacity
specific capacity
surface area
cycling rate
energy density
power density
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy 
(EIS)
polymer–graphite composites
interfacial interaction
exfoliation
carbon nanotubes
N‐methylpyrrolidone

434
Vocabulary
dimethyl sulfoxide
GO–polymer composite
mechanical properties
mixture law
efficiency coefficient
volume fraction
filler
matrix
continuum model
Young’s modulus
modulus
reinforcement
confinement
stress transfer
misalignment
agglomeration
interface
thermoplastic polymers
thermoset polymers
nacre
percolation
scaling law
percolation threshold
aspect ratio
anisotropy
segregated network
immiscible polymers
polymer blend
thermal conductivity
Kapitza resistance (RK)
interfacial resistance
graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs)
barrier properties
diffusion coefficient
self‐assembling
catalysis
benzyl alcohol
benzaldehyde
benzoic acid
unsaturated hydrocarbons
Wacker–Tsuji oxidation
oxidative dehydrogenation
Claisen–Schmidt condensation
condensation reaction
oxidative coupling
superoxide radicals
fuel cell
oxygen reduction reaction
Friedel–Crafts reaction
photolysis
photo‐oxidation
GO hybrid materials
palladium nanoparticles
nucleotides
detector
antibody
biocatalyst
commercialization

Graphene Oxide: Fundamentals and Applications, First Edition. Edited by Ayrat M. Dimiev and Siegfried Eigler. 
© 2017 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. Published 2017 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
ab initio calculations, 91
absorption, 149, 151, 158
acetylation, 25
acidity, 23
acidity, GO solutions, 57
agglomeration, 268, 281, 286, 329, 384
alcohols, tertiary, acidity, 62, 74
all‐carbon electrodes, 235
all‐graphene‐battery, 275
amide, 199
amine reactions, 24
amorphous phase, formation mechanism, 46
anisotropic, 122
anisotropy, polymer composite, 340
annealing, 179, 182, 203, 234, 247
anode, 258
electrodes, 275
materials, 263
antibiotics, 371
antibody, 403
anticancer drugs, 372
antitumor effect, 370
aptamers, 375
aryl cation, 212
aspect ratio, 333
atomic force microscopy (AFM), 114, 210, 221
attenuated total reflection (ATR), 94
Auger electron spectroscopy, 64
azido‐hydroxyl graphene, 219
bandgap, 102, 147, 158, 233
barrier
applications, 299
properties, 341
bending mode of water molecules, 96
benzaldehyde, 385
benzoic acid, 385
benzyl alcohol, 385, 391, 395
binding energy, 98
Bingham model, 130
biocatalyst, 404
biochemical applications, 370
biological effects, 365
biological imaging, 169
biosensors, 169, 240
birefringence, 123
Boltzmann’s constant, 129
Brillouin zone, 102
Brodie method, 3, 5, 40, 41
Brownian diffusion coefficient, 129
cancer, 370
treatment, 370
capacitors, 278
capacity, 260, 264, 274, 276, 289
gravimetric, 266
volumetric, 260, 261, 266
carbon dioxide, 65, 204
carbon monoxide, 204
carbon nanotubes, 314, 323
carbonyl, 14, 56, 61, 181, 195
carboxylate ion, 74
carboxylic group, 24, 60, 165, 187, 188
carrier mobility, 234
catalysis, 382
cathode, 258
electrodes, 259
materials, 260
cation exchange capacity (CEC), 25, 57
cell imaging, 242
cell viability, 366
cervical cancer cells, 367
charge carrier density, 66
charge storage, 278
Charpy method, 39
chemical properties, 175
chemotherapy, 366, 370, 371
Chua’s equations, 246
Claisen–Schmidt condensation, 391
Clauss structural model, 14
click reaction, 189
CO2 permeance, 303
colloid, 22, 121
colorimetric immunoassay, 403
Index

436
Index
commercialization, 410
composite electrodes, 271
composite materials, 248, 266, 272, 289, 314
condensation reaction, 390
conductivity, 234, 261
electrical, 261, 279, 337
thermal, 339
confinement, 330
conjugate base, 60, 75
contact resistance, 202
continuum model, 327
covalent functionalization, 186
critical concentration, 122
cross‐polarization NMR, 86
crumpled carbon material, 282
cycling rate, 263
cytotoxicity, 349, 365
D band, 153
decarboxylation, 179, 207
decomposition, 18, 204, 347
deconvolution, 100, 197
defect regimes, 155
defects, 103, 115, 180, 203, 209, 263, 299, 421
deflagration, 18
degradation, 204
dehydrative polymerization, 395
density functional theory, 41
density of defects, 182
deoxygenation, 203
detection of nucleic acids, 376
detector, 402
deuterated water, 95
diazomethane, 28
diazonium chemistry, 212
diffusion coefficient, 129, 342
diffusion of oxidizing agent, 45
Dimiev–Tour structural model, 63
Dirac cone, 102
disorder, 153, 162, 167, 262, 350
disproportionation, 200, 207, 349
DNA, 242, 368, 371, 375
domain GO structure, 53
doping, 103, 153, 245, 288, 397
double‐layer capacitor mechanism, 279
drug carrier, 371
dynamic frequency sweep, 126
dynamic shear, 125
dynamic structural model, 57, 74, 177
edge functional groups, 186
edge‐to‐center reaction propagation, 69
efficiency coefficient, 327
electrical conductivity, 207, 384. see also 
conductivity
electrical double layer, 60, 279
electrocatalysis, 397
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), 
265, 403
electrochemical reduction, 201
electrolyte, 258, 279, 281
electronic structure, 166
electronic transitions, 148
electrophilic reaction, 29
elemental analysis, 202, 219
emission, 156, 161, 165
endoperoxides, 369
energy
density, 272
harvesting, 257
storage, 257, 260, 289
transfer, 160
enol, 60
enzyme, 402
enzyme–GO hybrid, 404
epoxide, 49, 60, 93, 152
esterification, 189
ethylbenzene, 389
ethyl disulfide, 186
excitation wavelength, 156
exciton, 159
exfoliation, 317, 412
field‐effect transistor, 233
filler, polymer composite, 319
fingerprint region, 95
first‐principle calculations, 389
flexible device, 236
flexible RGO paper, 262, 267, 275
fluorescence, 166, 403
imaging, 375
lifetimes, 158, 167
microscopy, 375
quantum yield, 157
folic acid, 375, 394
formation mechanism, 41. see also mechanism
Förster resonance energy transfer, 240
Fourier‐transform infrared spectroscopy 
(FTIR), 48, 152
freestanding, 262
electrodes, 263
Friedel–Crafts reaction, 399
fuel cells, 309, 396
functionalization, 28, 175, 184, 187, 212, 
215, 319, 396
G band, 153
gas barrier, 298
gas sensor, 238
gas separation, 296

Index
437
gas transport mechanism, 299
gem-diols, 56, 61
glucose sensors, 243, 402
GO hybrid materials, 397
GO–polymer composite, 329
graphene, 37, 67, 209
electrodes, 234
market, 411
nanodisks, 159
nanoribbons, 234, 367
oxide nanoribbons, 208
quantum dots, 367
graphite, 301, 400
graphite nanoplatelets (GNPs), 340
graphite oxide, 76
graphite sulfate, 69
graphitic acid, 4
Hall effect, 65
Halpin–Tsai model, 328
hazards. see also production
hemin, 394
Herschel–Bulkley model, 131
high‐resolution TEM, 52, 117. see also 
microscopy
Hofmann structural model, 12
hole defects, 263
H2 sensor, 239
human fibroblast cells, 366
human lung carcinoma cells, 366
humidity, 300
sensor, 240
Hummers method, 6, 39, 415
hydrazine, 161, 188, 200
hydrazone, 202
hydrogen iodide, 201, 211
hydrolysis organic sulfates, 49
hydronium cation, 57
hydrothermal treatment, 64, 168
hydroxyl, 87, 95, 149
ID/IG ratio, 104, 153
immiscible polymers, 338
indium tin oxide, 243
indole addition, 399
industrial applications, 412
inflection point titration, 58
infrared absorption. see also Fourier‐transform 
infrared spectroscopy (FTIR)
infrared spectroscopy, 93
inkjet printing, 135, 235, 243
intercalation, 42, 78
alcohols into graphite oxide, 78
alkylamines into graphite oxide, 78
compounds of graphite, 42
interface polymer composite, 332
interfacial interaction, 316, 331
interfacial resistance, 340
interlayer distance GIC, 45
interlayer space, 28, 297
ion‐selective membrane, 311
irreversible capacity loss (ICL), 260
isotropic, 123
jagged flake edges, 74
Kapitza resistance (RK), 340
Kerr coefficient, 136
Kerr effect, 136
keto–enol tautomerism, 15, 58, 87
ketone, 55, 190
Kovtyukhova modification, 40
lactols, 56
Langmuir–Blodgett technique, 65
Lerf–Klinowski model, 51, 176. see also 
structural model
LiC6, 260
LiCoO2, 259, 260
LiFePO4, 270
lifetimes, 158
linear viscoelastic region, 125
LiPF6, 259
liquid crystalls, 121
lithium‐ion batteries, 205, 258, 261, 263, 
270, 275
lithium–sulfur battery, 272, 311
lithography, 202, 236
loss moduli, 125
lyotropic, 122
magic angle spinning NMR, 86
magnetoresistance, 65
Marcano modification, 40
mass transfer, 301, 420
matrix, polymer composite, 138, 300,  
319, 327
MCF-7 cells, 367
mechanical properties polymer composites, 325
membrane damage, 366
membranes, 23, 76, 296, 299, 305, 310, 365
memristor, 245, 248
metal/insulator/metal, 246
metal/insulator/semiconductor, 247
metal oxides, 246, 289, 
methylation, 24
Michael addition reaction, 383
microscopy, 111
miRNAs, 369
misalignment polymer composite, 329

438
Index
mixing law, 339
mixing rule, 340
modulus, 326
molecular dynamics simulations, 205
monosulfate, 49
nacre, 332
Nakajima structural model, 11
nanoparticles, 115, 122, 138, 191, 267
palladium, 401
nanopores, 285, 303
nanowires, 243, 336
nascent hydrogen, 190
near‐infrared, 159, 168, 370
nematic phase, 122, 342
N‐isopropylacrylamide, 186
N‐methylpyrrolidone, 216, 320, 347
non‐covalent functionalization, 184, 221, 
242, 321, 372
nonlinear optical properties, 151
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), 15, 21, 
55, 85
nucleophilic addition reaction, 28
nucleophilic attack, 58, 74, 206. see also 
chemical properties
nucleotides, 242, 402
oligonucleotides, 376
on/off ratios, 233, 236
Onsager’s theory, 121
optical applications of GO, 147
optical bandgap, 155, 161
optical properties, 147, 156
optoelectronics, 169
Ostwald–de Waele model, 131
oxidation, 24, 39, 43, 65, 72, 150, 163, 201. 
see also catalysis
degree, 24, 40, 54, 63, 201
state, 65, 189
of sulfur compounds, 391
oxidative coupling, 391
oxidative debris, 72, 123, 167
oxidative dehydrogenation. see also catalysis
oxidative stress, 368
oxidizing agent, 10, 40
oxo‐functionalized graphene, 64, 69, 107, 
182, 209
oxygen‐containing functionalities, 149
oxygen ion drift mechanism, 250
oxygen reduction reaction. see also catalysis
ozone‐induced oxidation, 150
pathogenic DNA, 403
PEGylated GO, 199, 375
Peng method, 40
percolation, 140, 162, 334, 
threshold, 336
permeability, 76, 276, 296
peroxidase, 393, 403
pervaporation, 311
pH, 57, 150
phenol, 20, 28, 58
phonon, 94, 101, 157
photodetectors, 169
photodynamic therapy, 370, 373
photoluminescence, 72, 148, 155
photolysis, 400
photo‐oxidation, 400
photothermal therapy, 370
photovoltaic, 169
physisorption, 214
pKa, 25, 57
plasma‐oxidized graphene, 164
plasma treatment, 155
point defects, 201
polarized light, 123
polyaniline, 279, 287
poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride), 
185, 397
polymer blends, 338
polymer composite, 138, 298, 317
polymer–graphite composite, 316
polymerization, 394
polypyrrole, 279, 287
porous carbons, 279, 282
potassium ferrate, 40, 418
potassium permanganate, 39, 43
power density, 265
pristine graphite oxide, 43, 45, 47, 97
production, 410
method, 37
propane, 389
propene, 389
proton conduction, 310
pseudocapacitive storage mechanisms, 278
pseudocapacity, 279
pump–probe spectroscopy, 150, 152
purification, 415, 422
pyrazole, 200
quality control, 425
quantum dots, 168, 401
quantum yield, 157
quenching, 157
quinone, 17, 51, 389
radicals in cells, 368
Raman spectroscopy, 43, 66, 100, 107, 153
reactive oxygen species, 28, 366
reducing agent, 19, 188, 196, 201

Index
439
reduction, 19, 188, 200, 201, 207, 209. see also 
chemical properties
control, 224
reinforcement, 328, 331
resistive switching, 248
reverse titration, 58, 59
rheology, 121
ring opening polymerization, 395
Ruess structural model, 14
scaling law, 334
scanning electron microscopy (SEM), 113
scanning Raman microscopy, 101, 182
Scholz–Boehm structural model. see also 
structural model
Schottky contact model, 234
second harmonic generation, 151
segregated network, 325
self‐assembling, 344
semiconductor, 221, 235
sensors, 237
separation mechanism, 301
separator material, 275
serum albumins, 367
shear‐thinning, 129
sheet resistance, 202, 244
Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations, 67
sigmatrope rearrangement, 188
silicon anode, 266
siRNA, 366, 374
sodium borohydride, 185, 201
solar cells, 257
solid–electrolyte interface (SEI), 260
specific capacity, 260, 278
spectroscopy, 84, 93
stage-1 GIC, 43, 45
statistical Raman microscopy, 109
Staudenmaier method, 6, 11, 40, 47
steady shear, 124
stomach cancer, 371
storage, 425
storage moduli, 134
stress transfer, 329
structural model, 4, 11, 51, 57, 61
styrene, 191, 221, 389, 395
sulfate, mono-, 48
sulfate organic, 48, 63, 97, 216, 218
sulfone, 48, 97
sulfur, 272
supercapacitor electrodes, 280, 285
supercapacitors, 278, 280, 285, 291, 384
superoxide radicals, 391
surface area, 260, 266, 281, 384, 401
surfactant, 243, 272, 320
Suzuki–Miyaura cross‐coupling reaction, 401
switching, 246
Szabó–Dékány model, 51, 52
TERS, 101
tertiary alcohols, 49, 99, 201, 206
theoretical studies, 41
thermal conductivity, 262, 339
thermal decomposition, 178, 204, 206
thermally processed GO, 163, 205, 238, 262, 
289, 320
thermal “reduction”, 204
thermogravimetric analysis, 70, 178, 347
thermoplastic polymers, 329
thermoset polymers, 331
Thiele structural model, 12
3D networks, 275, 277, 281, 285
titration, 25, 58
toxicity, 323, 349, 365
mechanism, 366
transfection reagents, 374
transient absorption, 151
transistor device, 234
transition form, GIC‐to‐PGO conversion, 45
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), 
53, 115
transparency, 147, 170, 203, 234, 243
transparent conductive films, 243
transparent device, 234
two‐component GO structural model, 72
unsaturated hydrocarbons, 385
vicinal diol, 26, 59
vinylogous acid, 61, 63
viscosity, 129
volume fraction, 327, 334
Wacker–Tsuji oxidation, 385
wastewater treatment, 415
water flux, 306
water purification, 305, 422
X‐ray diffraction, 45, 80
X‐ray photoelectron spectroscopy, 56, 97, 
197, 426
Young’s modulus, 326, 328

