
 
Gratitude is the
Only Attitude
Being Thankful
Will Take You the
Distance
 
By Katie Lenhart
Copyright © 2013

Table of Contents
Introduction
A Little Deeper into Gratitude - What is
it really?
4 Routes to Express Gratitude
Benefits of Expressing Gratitude
The Psychology Behind Gratitude
Gratitude Myths Debunked
Better Health with Gratitude?
Do's and Don'ts of Thank-You and
Gratitude
The Power of Gratitude in Times of
Trouble
Gratitude Quotes/Expressions
September 21st - World Gratitude Day

Understanding the New Science of
Gratitude
Just use your Manners! Adolescents
Lack Gratitude!
Practice Makes Perfect
Final Thoughts
 


Introduction
It really isn't that hard to show someone
you appreciate them right? Maybe they
helped you with your groceries, allowed
you to cut in front of them on the
freeway, or perhaps they actually
stopped to help you when your car broke
down in the middle of rush hour.
Is it really so hard to say thank-you? To
take a millisecond to acknowledge and
show appreciation for others? Well it's
not, but showing gratitude is so much

more than that.
Let me ask you something? How do you
feel when you show gratitude for
something? When you volunteer your
time to read stories to children that are
sick and stuck in bed at the hospital,
don't you feel good afterward? When
you put a smile on someone's face
because you thanked them for something
they did for you, doesn't the smile get
returned? It makes you feel good from
the inside out, doesn't it?
Showing gratitude isn't just a matter of
manners, showing that you really weren't
raised on a farm, and that you do know
"right" from "wrong." It's a matter of

respect. By not showing gratitude in
everyday life, you are showing the
world that you don't respect it or anyone
in it. Definitely not a nice feeling or
"place to be," for you anyway.
Negativity manifests if gratitude isn't
shown. Society looks down on people
that are disrespectful of it and don't
practice it, and rightly so I would think.
Gratitude means a whole lot more than
just showing someone you have manners
and respect. The meaning goes way
deeper, right into your psychological
health and well being.
You see, positivity creates productivity,
advancement, satiation, fulfillment,

determination, and the desire to "do the
right thing." It's a positive mindset that
sets you up for success. It helps you
make it through the tough times and
appreciate the great ones that much
more.
With positivity comes hope and
happiness, a desire to be bigger and
better than you ever imagined on all
levels; mentally, physically, emotionally
and spiritually. One constant and simple
method of tapping into this positive
optimism is to be gracious, to make a
habit of showing gratitude, and believing
it does make a difference. It’s a
gynormous difference for both you and
the recipient.

Let's start with the basics, the definition
and gratitude.
Gratitude is believed to have derived
from European roots, and is simply a
state of thankfulness and being grateful. 
Pretty simple right?
Let's dig a little deeper and uncover
more of what this word truly means.
Let’s open our minds just a little bit
more, and better ourselves in the
process.


A Little Deeper
into Gratitude -
What is it really?
 

You do understand this is an incredibly
subjective question right? Not far from
asking me who is God, or what is spirit?
It looks like a straight forward question,
but this couldn't be further from the truth.
Maybe it’s better to approach this
question from another angle. Perhaps it's
best to say what gratitude isn't?
Gratitude isn't, "I am so thankful for
my Porsche!"
It's important you understand that
gratitude is far too important to be used
to for materialistic purposes. This
should help yourself feel better or

perhaps to give yourself permission to
not feel guilty for having a material
possession that may be a little extreme,
particularly when there are dying
children in the world that don't have a
clean and safe place to live, fresh
drinking water, or enough food for their
belly.
Now this isn’t trying to make you feel
guilty or bad for what you do have in
life. It’s just pointing out the fact that
gratitude is not about material
possessions.
And gratitude isn't automatically
associated with the big man upstairs.

Gratitude has no boundaries, it doesn't
judge people on any level. Gratitude can
be practiced regardless of your
domination, your beliefs, customs and
traditions. Now this doesn't mean you
shouldn't show gratitude for your beliefs,
religious or not, but these two things are
mutually exclusive, not collectively
exhaustive.
Gratitude isn't extreme positivity.
This doesn't mean that gratitude isn't
positive and can't be used to support
positive thought. But is is more about
looking at the "big picture." Life is full
of positives and negatives and
everything in between. By

acknowledging your sadness, heartache,
worries and fears with gratitude, you can
flip on your positive switch and
appreciate the good that you have.
Now this may be a little bit backwards
to what you might be thinking, but give it
a thought for a minute or two and you'll
see that it really does make sense.
Gratitude isn't final.
We set our goals in life and work hard to
hit them. Then what? Well, we celebrate
our victory; the hard work, perseverance
and dedication we had paid off and now
it's time to give thanks.

Gratitude is so much more than being
thankful or giving thanks, it's about
stepping outside of this "one-track"
thought process and looking at how you
reached your goal. Opening your mind to
who helped you. Because for certain you
couldn't have done it alone right?
Maybe it's best you think of gratitude as
simply a state. Something that comes and
goes but you know you can always reach
it. By taking a minute to look at things
from the outside looking in, just how you
might look in through a window, you're
getting a little bit closer to understanding
all that gratitude is.
And on that note, with life experience,

love, understanding, appreciation and
selflessness, you will continue to
understand and embrace all that gratitude
is.
My Thoughts . . .
Gratitude is just one of those words
that's only intimidating if you look
beneath the surface, digging deeper to
find the true or maybe "expanded"
meaning. With this basic
understanding, let's move on with our
exploration.


4 Routes to
Express Gratitude


Now, there are universal routes to
expressing gratitude. If you clock
someone for helping you carry your
groceries to the car, that's just not an
acceptable token of gratitude. However,
if you gave them a thank-you and a
smile, tipped them a few dollars, or
perhaps even pushed your luck with a
nice big hug, that would be showing
gratitude.
That said, here are a few routes in which
you can learn to express gratitude.
Basic List
Anything that has to do with change takes

time, I think you'll agree here. In fact, if
you want to create a new habit, you need
to repeat the particular action regularly
for at least 3 months in order to have it
stick, at least that's what the behavioral
experts seem to think.
In other words, if you want to improve
your gracious nature, you're going to
need to practice.
If you want to kick-start your gratitude
attitude, why not start with making a list,
a list of gratitude? This is a tool to train
your mind to recognize the things in life
you are grateful for, things you might not
acknowledge so much in your everyday.
And your best bet is to dive right in and

write down a hundred things you are
grateful for. Don't think about what
you're writing, just do it. Whatever pops
into your head with the thought, focal
point "grateful," write it down before it
slips away.
The purpose of this is to help you to
appreciate and be grateful for the things
you do have in life, and not just
materialistic items either. This is a
whole lot more than that. Things like
your sister’s caring nature, even though
she does drive you bonkers from time to
time. Or how about your boss, because if
you didn't have him/her, you wouldn't
have the job you love right now. The
point here, is that with an open mind and

appreciation for "everything" you have,
by actually writing a list to remind
yourself of these things, your world is
only going to get richer, and that’s not
talking lottery-wise!
Personal Journal
This is a great habit to get into, writing a
journal for gratification. Just write
thoughts each day that you are
appreciative of, things you want to
recognize and not take for granted. Too
many things in life seem to just pass us
by where we don't take or rather make
the time to show gratification.
All you need is a notebook and a pen or

pencil. Make a habit of writing in it
before you go to bed each night, or
maybe you want to throw it in your
briefcase and write down a few thoughts
here and there throughout your day. Just
having your book with you will
subliminally remind you to be gracious.
It will put the thought in the back of your
mind and make you a better, more
loving, and giving person because of it.
Believe it.
Volunteer or Give Back
We all have so much to be grateful for. It
doesn't matter who you are, no matter
what, there are always those less
fortunate than ourselves. In a strange

way, this can help you to show gratitude
for what you do have. Giving back to a
special cause near and dear to your
heart, is a fantastic way to show you are
grateful for what you have.
Maybe you are grateful for having a dry
and warm place to live, so you can
volunteer a few hours to help out at the
local homeless shelter. Or perhaps you
are thankful you have warm clothing, and
this can inspire you to clean your closets
out and take all the clothing you don't
need down to the local Salvation Army,
so those less fortunate will have warm
clothing too.
Giving back just feels "right." That’s not

to mention the fact that it's another good
deed that will remind you of all that you
have to show gratitude for.
Through Prayer
You don't have to be religious to pray,
anyone can do it. But many who do
believe in some sort of "God," or eternal
power or being of sorts, find that
showing gratitude through prayer warms
your insides.
There is no right or wrong way to go
about this. All you've got to do is close
your eyes, or not, and start listing the
"things" you are grateful for in life.
Maybe you are grateful for the sunshine,

getting a good mark on a school paper,
or not getting into trouble when you took
the last piece of homemade apple pie.
These are your thoughts, the things that
are important to you, that you're grateful
for. Showing your gratitude through
prayer is just one more route for you to
bring recognition and appreciation of
your thoughts to the table.
My Thoughts . . .
There are all sorts of different routes
you can show gratification. These four
are a great place to start. Practice
them and then practice them some
more, make them a habit and you will

see there's a whole lot more gratitude
in your future.


Benefits of
Expressing
Gratitude

A simple thank-you, I appreciate it, or a
nice big hug, goes a long way in showing
gratitude. They take very little time and

effort and are extremely powerful. 
These are a few gestures that leave little
room for miscommunication, direct and
straight to the point of showing someone
that you care, that you are grateful. And
for bonus points, you feel great too.
This example however is just the tip of
the iceberg, as there's so much more
where that came from and we are going
to investigate further, into the benefits of
showing gratitude.
To simplify things I'm going to
categorize these benefits:
* Social
* Work

* Health and Wellness
* Character
* Emotional
All of which are collectively united to
equate to your overall happiness and
well being, appreciation for life and all
that it has to offer.
Social
Friendship Bonds are Deepened with a
Dash of Gratitude
By making others feel appreciated and
valued you are going to have a win-win
scenario. They are going to feel great
that you are showing gratitude towards

them, and you are going to be smiling
because of it.
You'll Look Great Because of Gratitude
If you choose to not show gratitude, you
will be pre-judged in a negative light.
Whereas showing gratitude is
considered a positive, albeit a specialty
virtue in various cultures and religions.
Being gracious does not mean you are
weak. It represents strength and
recognition of the goodness of others and
all things.
It's a self-less act to recognize and show
gratitude, to admit others had a hand in
getting you where you are right now, in

accomplishing your goals, whatever they
may be.
I don't know about you, but someone that
shows gratitude naturally is downright
awesome!
Your Marriage Benefits of Gratitude
When the honeymoon phase wears off,
you're going to need four legs to stand
on. Experts agree that showing gratitude
towards your partner regularly, showing
appreciation for who they are and
everything they bring to your life, is
something that will help strengthen your
bond in marriage, minimize conflict, and
increase overall satisfaction.

Wow, pretty powerful don't you think?
You're More Approachable With
Gratitude
Maybe it's just me, but I believe there is
a different aura with people that display
gratitude. And when you see someone in
action who is gratuitous in nature, it's
sort of like an open door for opportunity.
A strong suggestion this person is
respectful, happy, courteous and helpful.
And interestingly, scientific studies tend
to agree with this. It seems that various
behavioral studies have been conducted
and concluded that individuals showing

a gratuitous nature are granted "pro-
social" behavior, meaning they are more
approachable and have an increased
likelihood of establishing and
maintaining new relationships. 
Gratitude Helps Make Friends
The "easier" way to make friends is to
say your "thank-you's," and to make sure
you appreciate people and verbalize
this. Things like making a habit of paying
people a nice compliment just because,
is a fantastic way to show your gratitude
and to make more friends. And you just
never know when genuinely thoughtful
comment can flip someones frown
upside-down, setting them up for a

fabulous day.
Work
Output Increases with gratitude
Studies show that if you lack self-
confidence, your work effectiveness
decreases. On the other hand, if you
radiate confidence and belief in yourself
and your abilities, you are going to be
more productive on the job.
So what has this got to do with
gratitude? Well gratitude helps to boost
your confidence levels and get rid of
insecurities. This means you are going to
benefit by performing "better" at work,

and in life in general.
Goals are Hit More Often with
Gratitude
If you practice your gratitude more often
than not, you're more likely to reach your
goals.  This does make sense if you stop
and think about it, because productive
people are more likely to be positive,
and positive people have an increased
likelihood to use their manners, and go
out of their way to make another person
"feel special."
Gratitude Improves Social Stability
People that are gracious in nature tend to

draw people to them, which improves
networking effectiveness tremendously.
People naturally associate happy,
confident, "thankful" people, with money
and success. Hence it goes without
saying that gratitude will increase your
networking parameters considerably.
Management Skills Soar with Gratuity
A successful manager gains the respect
of others by giving respect, being
viewed as fair but firm, and having no
issues handing out the compliments and
supportive thoughts and actions
regularly.
In a work environment, praise triggers

heightened productivity. And who
wouldn't want to work hard for someone
that shows appreciation and isn't afraid
to go out of their way to make you feel
special?
And a manager that practices gratuity
will also be able to work through
conflict more easily, because people
will be more likely to bend to find
compromise.It makes sense, give a little,
get a lot.
Health and Wellness
Did you know that gratitude helps you
get healthier mentally and physically?
Understanding your psychosomatic is

more important than you probably think
in your overall health and well being.
Perception in a positive light will deter
disease and illness from settling in, and
help you to improve your quality of life
as a whole. Think of it as waking up and
seeing the world through sunshine every
day, versus clouds of gray and rain
showers.
Attitude is everything and gratitude helps
you see the upside in living and life.
And as for the physical side of the fence,
practicing gratitude has been shown to
transfer into "physical" self-betterment. 
Studies have shown that acts of
thankfulness and appreciation:

* Trigger more time exercising
* Lower blood pressure
* Decrease the perception of pain
* Increase sleep
* Encourage relaxation
* Decrease stress
* Lower depression symptoms
* Increase overall energy
In other words, by taking the time to
show gratitude on a routine basis, you
are going to improve your health both
mentally and physically, thus bettering
your quality of life as a whole. I don't
know about you, but I think that's worth
its weight in gold!

Your health is your most important asset
- believe it.
Character
Confidence is Boosted with Gratitude
Gratitude is the platform for improved
self-confidence and success. Just think
of how depressing it would be if nobody
helped anybody else, every man/woman
would fend for themselves, and that was
all you had to look forward to in life?
As humans we are intrinsically
programmed to crave human connection,
approval, validity and association.
Nobody wants to be left out and nobody

wants to be unappreciated. Gratitude
helps to ensure confidence levels are
riding high, no "cocky" confidence,
rather "proud" confidence. This is only
going to make your day and life that
much brighter.
Gratitude and Optimism go Hand in
Hand
It goes without saying that showing
respect, thanks and appreciation is
directly proportional with optimism. In
plain English? Optimism skyrockets
when gratitude is practiced.
It is so unbelievable what an optimistic
take on life does for your mind, body

and soul, even if you just write down a
few things every day that you are
grateful for, this will do wonders for
your mood and life perspective. It's
worth five minutes of your time don't you
think?
Your Spiritual Beliefs are Driven by
Gratitude
Experts agree the more spirituality you
practice, the more gratitude you are
likely to exhibit. The reason being, most
religions "give thanks' and perceive
graciousness as a virtue. Spirit and
gratitude work hand in hand because
practicing spirituality expectedly
equates to giving thanks.

Some believe spirituality and gratuity
are one with each other, both dependent
upon each other, intertwined, a package
if you will.
Keep in mind also that you don't have to
be religious to have spirituality.
"Beliefs" come in all different shapes,
forms and denominations. Spirituality is
a thought or belief without boundaries
and if you want to deepen your spiritual
connection, open the doors of gratitude.
Gratitude Tones Down your Ego
It's your ego that makes it "all about
you." It is directing you to focus on

yourself and ignore any other factors
around you, and this all happens on a
conscious level. By making a conscious
effort to be more helpful and
appreciative towards others, even those
which you may not fancy, you are going
to stop thinking about you, greed, and
material possessions so much, opening
your mind, arms, and heart to others.
The base of gratitude is to focus on
others, their well-being, how they think
and feel, to better or contribute to it in
any way you can. It’s time for you to get
gracious.
Emotional

Gratitude Increases Resilience
If you're gracious, it's going to be easier
for you to get back up on the horse when
you're knocked off. Maybe you've got
more padding, or perhaps you've
generated a more positive outlook on
life as a whole by recognizing and
appreciating more than many others. You
are also more likely to ask for help when
you are in need, thus increasing the
chances of getting your life back on track
faster.
Gratitude is just like an Endorphin
Release

If you want to feel "high" legally, just
exercise. By getting your heart rate up
you're going to trigger the release of
endorphins, or feel-good chemicals, that
are going to boost energy, mask pain,
and leave you feeling on top of the
world.
Expressing gratitude on a regular basis
is going to give you the same sort of
effect. By making others feel good,
you're going to feel the love too.
Gratitude is going to make you feel
better, stronger, healthier, happier and
sexier! Your environment matters, make
it positive and support it with gratitude
and it will return the favor.

Gratitude Helps to Balance You
When you choose to practice gratitude,
you are balancing your mental stability
as a whole. This means in essence that
you are more emotionally "happy," if
that makes sense to you. People that are
emotionally sound, seem to make better
life decisions, and don't panic so much
when life throws them a curve ball.
My Thoughts . . .
I think it's safe to say there are a good
many personal advantages for choosing
to practice gratitude. These advantages
aren't isolated, as they extend to those
around you as well. My question to you

is, "Why wouldn't you want to do
everything you can in your power to
better yourself, mentally, emotionally,
physically and spiritually, and put a
smile on the faces of others?"


The Psychology
Behind Gratitude

Gratitude is a form or example of
positive psychology. In basic terms,
positive psychology is a psychological

science that simply studies what makes
your life worth living. Of course that is
in the broadest sense of the term.
It encompasses and focuses only on the
positive, not the weakness or negative
light. This concept is tuned in directly on
how to make the lives of "normal"
people better as a whole, inclusive of
natural healing pathology. Now, this
doesn't mean you have the green light to
ignore life's issues and problems, that's
not going to help anyone. The idea is to
acknowledge the problem and deal with
it, but still choose to see the light at the
end of the tunnel and rise above your
troubles.

This ties in with gratitude because
gratitude brings forth positivity. You can
be having a totally lousy day, wishing
you had slept through your alarm and not
even bothered to get  out of bed. And
when you are moping painfully through
your day, having someone show their
appreciation out of the blue, for
something you have done for them, or
maybe someone else, that immediately
boosts your spirits, flips you negative
switch to positive and you feel worthy,
needed, respected, and understood.
This helps to put a skip in your step and
transform your negative, self-pitying
thought process to the positive, so that
you can look forward to the rest of your

day, rather than worry about what's
going to go wrong next. That's a fairly
simple example anyway.
Getting a call from your significant other
for no reason than to tell you that you are
special and they miss you, or perhaps a
surprise arrives in the mail for you from
a friend, just because they took the time
to think about you. It's those sort of
random acts of kindness that make
gratitude a reality. A simple thought or
gesture can literally make your day.
Have you ever heard of  "ingratitude
habit?"
What it is, the simple version anyway, is

that as humans, we are programmed to
always want what we don't have. You
can have all the money in the world, a
loving relationship, and every "toy" on
the face of the earth, and you are still
going to want that one thing you don't
have. Growing up seems to teach us to
lose sight of what we do have, to be
ungrateful for it and search desperately
for justification, in which we can set our
sights on something we want, but don't
have. It's a never-ending cycle with no
beginning and no end. Not recognizing
the more we focus on the negative, the
larger it becomes in our lives.
What you think is what will be

Your mind is a powerful thing and if you
are emitting negative energy, you will
attract it. This is something researchers
have found to be true. And when you
take a minute to bring this thought into
perspective, it does make sense. The
people you know that are always
worrying about what tragedy is going to
strike next, always focusing on the
negatives in life, seem to actually have
their fair share of turmoil arrive on their
doorstep regularly.  Call it a
coincidence if you will, but I know
better, and I think you do too.
If you choose to see life in a positive
light, then good things will happen. And
by having gratitude and making sure that

is one of your daily focuses, you are
only going to manifest more positive
power here.
But if you continue to see, think, feel,
perceive, and practice negativity, you
are going to keep digging your hole
deep, dark and depressing, making your
life that much harder to find value and
satisfaction in.
You shouldn’t blame anyone else or any
circumstance. It's your choice and your
life.
"Your thoughts dictate your path in
life. Positivity will keep you headed in
the right direction, and negativity is

only going to make you walk
backwards."
 
Let's look at this from a prayer
perspective. In the Islamic religion, the
pillar of Islam is not complete without
"Surah Fatihah." This is all about
expressing gratitude for your Lord for all
the blessings he has given you.
Most religious beliefs encompass the
idea of giving praise and thanks for what
you have been given and what you have.
And I for one am not going to argue these
subjective thought concepts from
thousands of years ago, that just serves
no purpose.

Heading in the "Right" Direction
Gratitude is a simple route to get your
life back on track, to gain back our
positive focus and manifest in the energy
of it. Most problems in life exist because
we chose to focus on them. And it's not
just the idea of focusing on the problem,
but rather focusing on the "negative" part
of it. Getting stuck or obsessed with it
and closing the door to seeing the "big
picture," or the bright side of the
equation. If we were able to do this on a
regular basis, then we would have far
fewer problems and we would resolve
them much faster.
Gratitude will help you to alleviate

stress in your every day, to gain
confidence in you and battle your
problems with positivity and a goal of
accomplishment. Where you are going to
look to battle your issues with a smile,
and irregardless of the outcome, you are
going to be better for it. Your
psychosomatic will find balance and this
is going to give you the fuel to drive you
forward in life to bigger and better.
But this isn't something that just happens.
You need to work at it and consciously
remind yourself to look for the light at
the end of the tunnel. To acknowledge
stresses and problems and choose to
look forward to opportunity, to learn and
grow and rise much higher than the

"issue" you are facing.
Tools to Support Gratitude in Your Life
* Lists - Take a few minutes every week
and write down twenty or thirty things
you are truly grateful for. Then you need
to expand a little and write down why.
Don't forget to include how you are
feeling and any other reflections you may
have. This is going to help you train
yourself to look for the sunshine in your
every day. It is so very powerful indeed.
* Sharing - At least twice a day make a
point of sharing your gratitude with
someone else. You can send them a text,
call them, stop in or even email them.

The tool to deliver the message isn't
what's important here. What's important
is that you do it. How does it make you
feel inside?
* Begin recognizing - Call it a game if
you like, but actually start looking for
things you can express gratitude for.
Maybe you've found ten dollars in the
laundry, or you found a missing earring
under your bed. Be happy with this and
express gratitude in any way you see fit.
Perhaps you'd like to do a "gratitude
dance," or maybe just jump up and down
and clap your hands? It really doesn't
matter as long as you DO IT!
* Recognize the negative, but don't let it

eat you up - So often in life when we are
knocked down with a negative, we focus
on it and let it consume us. Ask yourself,
"Is that helping anything?"
Choose to look for the positive in even
the most negative circumstances. If your
child is  sick you can choose to kill your
brain with negative thoughts of why this
happened and who's to blame. Or you
can choose to accept what "is," and look
for solutions to help make the best of
things. This doesn't mean you have to
understand the  circumstances, but it
does mean that you can't dwell on them
because that is only setting you back
further in life.

Don't forget, you are in charge of your
brain and can choose what you're going
to focus on and what you are going to
ignore or skip past. My advice, run
towards the light and never look back,
psychologically speaking.
"Negativity will eat you up if you don't
choose to run right past it and straight
toward the brilliant light just around
the corner."
My Thoughts . . .
Your mind is a powerful thing and yes,
sometimes it gets the best of you. But
ultimately you are in control of your
thoughts, feelings and actions. If you've

got turmoil beneath the surface, which
all of us do, you can choose to face and
release it, or let it hinder all the
greatness you can be. Choosing to
express gratitude in everything you do,
negative or positive, is only going to
raise you up higher in love, in wants,
needs, dreams,and in life.

Gratitude Myths
Debunked

I don't think there is a concept out there
that hasn't gathered misconception

somewhere along the road of time, and
gratitude is one of them. Here are a few
myths to clear up to help you understand
gratitude just a little deeper.
Myth 1
If you continually express gratitude it
won't mean anything.
Now that's a load of malarkey. Gratitude
has no boundaries and your first sign of
gratitude is as effective as the next. As
long as you are being genuine with your
gratuitous nature, the more the better.
Myth 2

Showing gratitude means you are weak.
Another myth that just isn’t true. There is
no correlation between showing thanks
and being weak. In fact the opposite is
true. If you choose to express gratitude,
then you are gaining internal strength and
so much more.
Myth 3
Gratitude only means things are good
in life.
This is simply not true, although I can
see why some people may be led astray
here. Gratitude is that much more
powerful when it arises from negative

circumstance. You are so much stronger
if you're able to see the positive when
your circumstance is anything but.
Myth 4
You will only show gratitude when you
might get more.
Maybe if you have the mindset of a
child. It's quite normal for children to
butter you up with gratitude if they think
that's going to get them a later bedtime,
or perhaps lessens the wrath for a bad
report card. But it's naive to think that
people only show or give thanks when
there is something on the table for them.
Again, gratitude becomes so much more

when you are able to show it when the
exact opposite is true. The reward in
doing this is so much better.
Myth 5
Gratitude should only show face on
certain special occasions.
Okay, this is partly true because
gratitude will appear on special
occasions, which just seems to bring it
out in everyone. But gratitude is
something that can always be, if that's
what you choose. Many people make it
habit to be gracious regularly throughout
their day, and this is when the act of
gratitude becomes very positive and

powerful.
Myth 6
You're dumb to have gratitude when
something "bad" happens to you.
That may seem logical to you and most
people tend to have this thought first. But
if you look a little deeper into this, just
because something negative has
happened, doesn't necessarily mean
there isn't anything positive about it.
I bet you were upset when you boyfriend
dumped you, but if he didn't you might
not have met the love of your life!

You see, even though you may not
recognize it at the time, it's the negatives
or unfortunate situations in your life that
may actually be some of the most
positive times in your life. Often in
retrospect, but that doesn't negate the fact
you should still choose to look for the
good in any and all situations, it doesn't
hurt now, does it?
Myth 7
Gratitude is something you should
display only when someone saves you
from serious consequence.
This is just not true. If you choose to
show appreciation only when triggered

by someone else being thoughtful and
considerate, you're selling yourself
short. Be pro-active here and challenge
yourself to show gratitude just for the
sake of it, you don't have to have a
reason. I think it's more powerful that
way.
My Thoughts . . .
It's important to always try and keep a
level perspective, particularly when
you hear something that triggers
questions. Although normally harmless,
myths can cause confusing and
misleading information that triggers
harm. The message here is, get to the
bottom of any "uncertainty" you may

have with something you hear or
thoughts you are having. With accurate
information you are arming yourself
with exactly what you need to keep
progressing positively in life.


Better Health with
Gratitude?

"A positive mind of gratitude will only
improve your health circumstance, but
only if you utilize the power of your

mind and believe in this."
 
Studies show that people who practice
gratitude have better physical health,
exercise more, and have better sleep
quality than those who choose not to.
This makes perfect sense simply because
your mind, physical and emotional
realms are  interconnected. They work
together as a unit and positivity greatly
influences all. It's your perception of all
aspects of life that determine the degree
to which they occur and "how much" so.
Just because you show gratitude doesn't
mean you aren't going to break your leg.
But those with a gratuitous nature tend to

see the light in this. They, of course,
aren't happy that they broke their leg. But
they are more likely to recover faster,
feel less pain, and adjust to the
circumstance smoother than someone
that isn't grateful with nature.
In other words, if you have a negative
and defeated perception here, you will
get whacked with more negatives. If you
choose to see the positive and show
gratitude as much as you can, then you
will make light of the situation and make
it through easier as a whole.
Another neat fact various studies have
found is that people who look to give
thanks and show appreciation for others

are more likely to want to exercise and
take care of their health. This makes
perfect sense because exercise is a
positive in life for you
psychosomatically and physically, and if
you choose to be positive, you will act it
and attract it.
Doing this is only going to make your
life better because exercise itself has so
much power in removing or at least
controlling sickness and disease, and
boosting your life optimism in general.
This helps you to sail through the curve
balls life throws at you and look
forward to smacking the ball right out of
the park.

My Thoughts . . .
As I've already mentioned several
times, the mind is so incredibly
powerful. And by making a habit of
showing gratitude, you are going to
keep your "aura" in the positive, and
this is going to trigger positive health
benefits. This is mainly because you
will "want" to better your health and
improve all aspects of your life that
you have control of. Your health is one
of them!

Do's and Don'ts of
Thank-You and
Gratitude

One universal route to show gratitude is
to say thank-you, I think that's a given.

Here are a few do's and don't that may
serve you well.
Do: Make certain that when you are
thanking someone that you mean it. There
is nothing positive about extending a
courtesy when it just isn't true, or
perhaps just not felt.
Don't: Say thanks just because you think
you should. If you believe there is
nothing to say thank-you for, find
something else to show gratitude for, just
don't be insincere.
Do: Make sure you practice, practice,
and practice some more. It's important
that you train yourself to look for

reasons to give thanks and do it. Whether
you write down the things you are
grateful for or just pick a time to
challenge yourself to show thanks and
appreciation, both are only going to
manifest the positive in your life.
Don't: Allow yourself to only focus on
gratitude when the calendar dictates, like
for Thanksgiving, Christmas, Hanukah,
and the like. This is handcuffing yourself
out of the starting gates. Remember,
genuine gratuity can never be overdone.
My thoughts . . .
It goes without saying there aren't a
whole lot of "don'ts" when it comes to

gratitude, and rightly so. Genuine
gratitude is ever powerful and has the
ability to single-handedly turn
someone’s day around with a simple
gesture, a few words, or an act of
kindness. I challenge you to do the
right thing here and get to showing
your gratitude.

The Power of
Gratitude in
Times of Trouble

 
Gratitude is powerful. The word itself
has presence and looks strong. The
meaning is powerful and has no

boundaries in its positivity. Gratitude
has the ability to overpower the negative
that seems to accompany times of
trouble, and this in itself is positive.
If someone has experienced an
unfortunate event in their life, we can
naturally use this to trigger our positive
thoughts. Allowing us to see and
appreciate, to show gratitude for all that
we have and are. And for a moment or
two it may even seem mean or selfish,
but it's not.
Now, this doesn't mean you are happy
they are having life troubles, or that you
wish it would happen more often so you
can be forced to acknowledge and

appreciate what you have and your
circumstance.
What it means is that what has happened
has happened, and there's nothing you
can do about it. So now you have a
choice. You can choose to let the
negative of the situation grab hold of you
and pull you down into the depths of
despair, triggering worry, regret,
sadness and remove any signs of hope.
But is this helping you or the person
suffering the tragedy?
No, it's not.
So, by choosing to show gratitude and
look for the positive, you are naturally

looking to work past these feelings. And
your appreciations and "bright light"
actions will rub off on the individual in
turmoil, helping them to see the good in
things and pull through that much faster.
Take the negative, acknowledge it and
use its power positively to be rid of the
unfortunate situation or circumstance.
You have the power to do this and when
you do, the results are inspiring for you
and anyone else involved. This act of
gratitude can trigger others to do the
same, or in the least remind them there is
hope and they can choose to walk past
the "bad," and run to the "good." It really
is all in your hands for you to do with as
you please.

Now this isn't going to be easy, far from
it. It's a whole lot easier to stay stuck in
the mud of negativity, rather than find a
way to climb out, get washed off and
continue on with a smile. You should
choose to be striving every day for a
more positive place. This isn't a reality
you will ever actually reach, and that's a
good thing here. The gratitude you are
showing is pushing you towards a place
of positivity that's just out of reach, but
rewarding at the same.
Think of it as you would a bone being
dangled in front of a dog. They are
excited, they are behaving, they are
looking forward to never-ending

opportunity, to bigger and better and are
elated at the fact that one day they want
to bite into that delicious juicy bone.
It's the same with your mindset,
practicing gratitude in your everyday to
propel you continuously forward
towards the positive light, never losing
sight of the fact that it's always within
reach.
My Thoughts . . .
You are shaped by your thoughts,
feelings, perceptions, actions,
experiences and ability to adapt to
unfortunate circumstances. Some
things in life you have control of and

others you don't, that's just the way the
cards are dealt. Instead of allowing
yourself to drown in a negative
situation, choose to use your gratuitous
nature to rise above and bring others
with you. Make a point of
acknowledging the good, no matter how
difficult that may be, because this is
going to make you stronger as a whole,
a better person in life, someone whom
others gravitate towards to gain
strength to battle their demons and
win.
It's all in your perspective.
"Your beliefs and life views control
your destiny, you choose whether the

glass is half full or half empty."

Gratitude
Quotes/Expressions


Sometimes all you need to turn your day
around is an expression of gratitude, or
just a positive thought. Nothing earth
shattering, just a few words to remind
you of all that you do have and how
important it is to practice you gratuitous
nature.
"Gratitude unlocks the fullness of life. It
turns what we have into enough, and
more. It turns denial into acceptance,
chaos to order, confusion to clarity. It
can turn a meal into a feast, a house into
a home, a stranger into a friend.
Gratitude makes sense of our past,
brings peace for today, and creates a
vision for tomorrow."

- Melody Beattie
"Gratitude is the gift that never stops
giving, not ever."
- C.A.W.
"Nothing is more honorable than a
grateful heart."
- Seneca
Symbols of gratitude can be as simple as
some fresh flowers, a thank-you note, a
box of chocolates, a hug or helping hand.
It truly is the thought that is the most
powerful.

"I would maintain that thanks are the
highest form of thought, and that
gratitude is happiness doubled by
wonder."
- Gilbert K. Chesterton
"Gratitude is the fairest blossom which
springs from the soul."
- Henry Ward Beecher
"Gratitude makes sense of our past,
brings peace for today, and creates a
vision for tomorrow."
- Melody Beattie

"You wouldn't be who you are without
the help of others, acknowledge this and
give thanks."
- C. Wilson
Your tough life memories are not going
to be undone. But if you take these
difficult thoughts and search for the
good, you are going to make sense of the
bad, restore your faith in all the great the
life is, and move forward with a smile.
It's your choice.
If you don't open your mind to change,
look to alter your actions for different
results, how can you possibly expect

"better" to be?
Showing gratitude opens your heart and
releases positive emotion. And by
practicing it regularly you can actually
engrain it into your being. With your
optimism and positivity you will ease
yourself through troubled times, soothe
stress and open your mind to focus in on
the big picture of life, which is what you
choose to make it. Gratitude manifests
energy and by training your thought
patterns to appreciate and acknowledge,
you will strengthen your spirit and
ability to soar, high above the clouds
you once perceived to be your ceiling.
"At times our own light goes out and is

rekindled by a spark from another
person. Each of us has cause to think
with deep gratitude of those who have
lighted the flame within us."
- Albert Schweitzer
"Be thankful for what you have; you'll
end up having more. If you concentrate
on what you don't have, you will never,
ever have enough."
- Oprah Winfrey
My Thoughts . . .
I don't know about you, but a spirit
boosting quote always makes my day

that much better. Often I will write
them on a note and stick them to my
fridge or my bathroom mirror. It’s a
great way to ensure that I start the day
on the right foot, something I show
gratitude for.

September 21st -
World Gratitude
Day

 
I don't know about you, but I didn't learn

until recently that there was a special
day celebrating gratuity!
September 21 is dubbed "World
Gratitude Day." It’s a day manifested to
remind people of all they are thankful
for. And it goes deeper than that. I think
of "thank-you" as a surface sign of
gratuity, all in good thought though. I
challenge you to make an effort to show
different forms of gratitude. How about
mowing a neighbor's grass for them, or
picking up the mail and leaving it on the
porch for them?
You could cook a dinner to take to an
elderly person that doesn't get out very
much, or how about just taking the time

to go sit with someone that is lonely and
in need of company. The idea here is to
make the special day more meaningful
than it already is.
When you stop for a minute and think
about all the things you are grateful for,
it really is quite overwhelming, in a
positive light of course.
I challenge you to make this day the first
day where you begin focusing on
showing gratitude in everything you do.
Start off by completing 10 acts of
kindness, making another feel special,
loved and appreciated, and work your
way up. This is only going to help you
become more than you ever thought you

could be. That is simply amazing.
My Thoughts . . .
You've got to start somewhere right?
Having a "World Gratitude Day" is a
fantastic route to bring recognition to
just how important it is to acknowledge
others for their positives, and to
recognize and reflect in thanks on just
how fortunate you are in life. Sure, we
all face our challenges and not
everything goes a smoothly as we might
like. There will be some potholes that
you hit and maybe even sections where
the whole road has been wiped out,
some of which is inevitable, but it's
how you choose to handle these

challenges that creates your character
and dictates whether you are going left,
right, going straight, or pulling a risky
u-turn.
Regardless, showing gratitude is a sign
of who you are and all that you can be.

Understanding the
New Science of
Gratitude

 
Many people seem to take gratitude for
granted. An unfortunate indicator of this
is when someone just doesn't bother to
say "thank-you" where it's warranted.

They just "assume" the other person
knows the kind act is appreciated,
instead of taking the initiative to convey
this clearly. Is it really such an effort to
say "thank-you?" For some I guess that
maybe it is.
In an attempt to understand the concept
of gratuity further, researchers are
looking to see if people practice it more
or less as time passes. And one factor of
discovery is that people who are
practicing tactics of gracious nature
benefit tremendously, some ways are:
* Having more positive emotion traits
* More likely to lend a helping hand
with a smile

* More content with themselves and life
in general
* Better health overall
* Less likely to suffer from depression
Experts have concluded that gratitude is
a very measurable factor that has the
ability to change people's lives, and for
the better, something as simple as
keeping a daily journal where you
record positive thoughts and feelings of
gratitude.
Gratitude is something that needs to be
conscious in the act and practiced
regularly to become habit. It is mentally,
emotionally, morally, and intellectually
challenging. In order to be gratuitous in

nature you need to practice reflection,
consideration, and discipline, which can
be stressful and tough work.
In order to be more grateful, you need to
commit to recording what you have
gratitude for in your life. But you also
need to recognize and reflect on times of
sadness, heartbreak, or turmoil. It’s not
to focus and dwell on these times, but to
acknowledge them so that you can
appreciate all the good in your life. And
you can allow this feeling of worthiness
and acknowledgement to inspire you
forward positively, lifting others with
you.
Here a few conscious practices to help

you gain the most from gratitude.
* Allow yourself time each day to
appreciate your senses, particularly
breathing, by breathing in and out
deeply, feeling your body relax.
* Verbally commit to practicing random
acts of kindness, gestures representing of
a
  gratuitous nature daily.
* Place reminders where you can see
them, to remind you of the importance of
stepping
  outside of yourself to show gratuity to
others. Maybe you have a quote you love
and

  you stick it on your fridge, so you
make certain to read it every day.
* Sometimes your emotions are a ways
behind your actions. So practice gratuity
and
soon you will get comfortable and feel
connected with the actions. Think of it as
you        would warming up before the
big game. You may have to get
uncomfortable to get
  comfortable.
* Be careful what you say. The words
that come out of your mouth, direct how
you see
  and perceive the world. By thinking
and talking positive you will believe in

positive
  and act it.
* Let down your walls and open your
mind to newness and creativity. Change
your
  habits and create new positive ones
where you can find things you are
grateful for,
  and new situations and ways that will
help you make others feel great too.
Experts believe gratitude is indeed one
of the chief virtues.
My Thoughts . . .
When there is scientific research

behind a concept, this seems to add
validity to the general population, even
the conventional black and white
thinkers! The bottom line is there is a
science behind gratitude and the
positive effects it has on your life
mentally, physically, emotionally and
spiritually. I see only great in that.

Just use your
Manners!
Adolescents Lack
Gratitude!

 

I know that growing up isn't easy. Sure
it's easy for us to say that kids should be
doing this and that, but don't forget we
are sitting on the other side of the fence.
Young children grow up learning to say
"please, thank-you, excuse me, and
sorry," to start anyway. At this point they
are still young enough to still get excited
to learn, to copy, and to please. A pat on
the head is enough reinforcement and
gratitude to encourage young children to
want to do it again and again.
Then they seem to grow up and often
seem to forget all about respect,
acknowledgement and gratitude in
general. Where's the disconnection here?

Is it just hormones and defiance keeping
adolescents from showing gratitude?
You know how it is, if you tell them to
do something, they do the exact opposite
regardless of whether it's logical or not.
Think of it as a phase, but I guess some
just don't ever grow out of it.
Do adolescents seem to lack a "helping
nature" these days simply because family
values have seemed to fall by the
wayside nowadays? Gone are the days
of a hard working dad, a mom that cares
for the children, church every Sunday,
strong family traditions, and lots of
bonding time taking care of each other
and spending time together.

Yes, that was the way of the world in
years past. But today this concept is far
less evident. People spend more time
working their fingers out with their
electronic devices, fast-food
convenience in front of the television is
quite acceptable, and more often than
not, both parents are working full time to
make ends meet, meaning there is
selective "family bonding" time as it is.
Which, of course, is where important
values like gratitude are taught and
practiced.
And don't forget that many are single
parent households, making it even more
difficult to stay on top of enforcing the
"important" things in life, which comes

through spending lots of quality time
together.
This doesn't mean there aren't children
out there with manners and that practice
positivity, going out of their way to help
others and have a naturally gracious
nature. That's not necessarily the case.
But notice that teens these days seem to
be a little more lax in their efforts to
show their gratitude skills. They assume
they have the right of way when crossing
the road, without so much as a friendly
wave. Some tend to saunter slowly
across the road instead of showing some
hustle, as we would do habitually.
Swearing and rude gestures seem to

come to a quick boil. Mouthiness seems
"stronger" than in the past. I don't recall
ever swearing at my mother or father,
nor hearing any of my friends doing it.
Now, while in the grocery store
checkout line, I hear kids cursing their
parents and getting away with it!
I understand I am yammering on a touch
here, but this is something that seems to
be gaining momentum, rather than
diminishing. Perhaps the school system
needs to start up gratitude classes at a
young age. Reminding the children that
by taking the time to step outside of their
ego-driven thought, to consider the rest
of the world, they might actually enjoy
giving a little more, showing more

courtesy and respect, and that going out
of their way to make someone feel
special just may be extremely
rewarding.
You never know, right?
My Thoughts . . .
Times change and progress waits for
no one. It is important to take the time
to talk with your children about the
importance of gratitude. Simply by
helping them to practice it and make a
habit of doing it daily, you are going to
set your children up to live a healthier,
happier, longer and more productive
life, not to mention one that will be

more fulfilling than they ever imagined.
Lead by example and encourage your
followers. It's worth a shot don't you
think?

Practice Makes
Perfect

 
This thought ties in nicely with the last
one regarding adolescents and their lack
of displaying gratitude more often than

not. One thing for certain is that gratitude
isn't just going to magically appear. This
is something you need to work on and
commit to, along with your family.
Although when push comes to shove,
only you control you.
Here are a few strategies you can try to
improve your recognition of others and
all that is great in your life, not just in
positive situations, but in all your life
experiences. Sometimes the greatest
lessons learned are in times of turmoil
and dismay. And by looking hard within
yourself to see and pull out the "good" in
a "bad" situation, you are showing
yourself and others that where there's a
will there's a way. If you decide to gain

power and strength through positivity,
you will pull it out, and you will find it.
If you truly believe it, you will see it. If
you choose to focus on doubt, then it
will be lost to you.
A Letter of Gratitude
Here is something you can set up to do
each week that will make a huge impact
on your life. Take the time to think of
someone that has made a difference in
your life. Someone who helped you
reach a goal, or perhaps get you through
a tough time. Maybe it's a teacher or
friend, family member or an
acquaintance. Write them a letter and tell
them how important they are to you and

why. Mail this letter the old-fashioned
way for full effect, or you can actually
take it to them and read it.
This is a hugely powerful practice of
gratitude that is going to empower both
of you.
Morning Ritual
Make a habit of reminding yourself
every morning that you are going to
practice more gracious acts. Perhaps you
will literally tell yourself to say "thank-
you" more often. And by telling yourself
this, you are just triggering yourself to
follow through more often than you have
in the past, it's all positive progress to

me.
There aren't too many people that don't
like to be thanked, and it makes you feel
great too!
Notes Here and There
Placing random quotes or thoughts of
gratitude around your house is going to
increase your use of gratitude. Out of
sight, out of mind. In sight, in your mind.
That's how I look at it anyway. Put
gratitude in your conscious thoughts and
you are going to practice it, that only
makes sense.
Reading these positive words are going

to put a bounce in your step and a smile
upon your face. Just imagine what the
people close to you are going to receive,
as there most definitely will be
aftershocks.
Text Messages of Thanks
You've got the device, now use it, p-o-s-
i-t-i-v-e-l-y. Every time you send a text
to someone, make a point of texting a
thank-you or note of appreciation to
someone. It doesn't have to be elaborate
or fancy. Something as simple as
thanking someone for making you smile,
or maybe for picking you up to drop you
off at work. It’s a great way to boost
your spirits and make another person

feel special too.
Observe and Erase
This is a great way to make yourself
aware of any negative energy that may
be lingering in your system, tossing it
out, and replacing it with a good thought.
Each day think of at least one thing you
are ungrateful for. Get rid of it, and then
think of something you are grateful for.
This is proving to yourself that you do
have control of your choices and thought
process, when you're paying attention
anyway.
Take control of your gratitude and
choose to practice it always. Before you

know it your negative or ungrateful
thoughts will disappear, and you'll be
left with a mind full of goodness.
Before Lights Out
Before you go to bed each night make, a
point of focusing on 5 "great" things in
your day. It could be that you got a big
work project done, bought lunch for a
friend, or helped an elderly lady with
her groceries. It doesn't matter how big
or small your moments of gratitude
were, what matters is that you bring them
up to a conscious level so you can use
this powerful positive energy to fuel and
drive to want more.

The more you do this the more you are
going feed your desire to practice
gratitude. And that is fantastic.
My Thoughts . . .
You need to find your groove, what
works for you when looking to improve
your gestures of gratitude. It's
sensational how addictive another's
smile can be. It feels good to help
another, boost their spirits, to enable
them to see the positive in a situation
when they seem only to focus on the
negative.
Life is all about connection, which is a
need of all healthy, balanced, and

productive people. And by learning to
give, to step outside of your immediate
wants and needs and think of others,
you are going to benefit daily.
The positive energy you are going to
generate by practicing gratitude is
going to help you be more productive
in life, advance further faster, sustain
and improve good health, and you will
do the same for those lives you touch.
Figure out what strategies work best
for you and get to making them healthy
habits for life. You've no reason not to.

Final Thoughts
Gratitude is so much more than just a
word. Sure it refers to an emotional
expression of gratitude. But that
definition really doesn't do it justice.
Gratitude is more like a way of thought,
a direction toward a positive light that
will touch all aspects of your life and
those around you.
It's a thought process that takes time to
fine-tune. You need to practice gratitude
and set yourself up for success by

implementing strategies that are going to
keep you on track. Things like keeping a
gratitude journal, posting notes around
your house, and recognizing that although
you fall sometimes, there is "good" in all
negative situations if you look hard
enough for it. You may not want to at the
time, but it truly is the best strategy to
empower you to get by the negative
moments in your life, and more
importantly to appreciate all the great
you have, you are, and will be.
Now I'd like to "thank-you" for reading
and hope that I've made you smile.

Disclaimer
 
All Rights Reserved  Copyright © 2013
Katie Lenhart
No part of this book can be reproduced,
stored, or transmitted by any means
including recording, scanning,
photocopying, electronic or print without
written permission from the author.
While utmost care has been taken to
ensure accuracy of the written content,
the readers are advised to follow the
guidelines and ideas mentioned herein at
their own risk. The author in no case
shall be responsible for any personal or

commercial damage that results due to
misinterpretation of information.
This book does not take personal
situations into consideration, and
therefore may not be fit for every
purpose. All readers are encouraged to
seek professional advice for a specific
situation.

