Scanned by Shopping Monster.
Proofed more or less by Highroller.
Made prettier by use of EBook Design Group Stylesheet.
Ok the proofing was hell on this one. This book ocred very
badly and had a LOT of place and character names in it. If
anyone has deadtree edition feel free to check the names and up
the version number and upload result. It took me many hours
just to get it this good.
A Dragon's
Ascension by Ed
Greenwood
The Foe of the Serpent
Is the Dragon.
No true Crawling viper
But a Black-Robed mage
Heart darker than garb of night
Hands adrip with blood
His spells so deep
Crawl and creep
Beyond death and passing years
Kings falling, towers crumbling
Always watching,

Lurking in shadows
Slithering in dark dreams
The Serpent Who Shall Rise Again.
Whispers he to princes
Steals he into minds by night
Men of malice chant his name
Gasping Fools Fill his Fane
Crowns tumble before his fangs
Men mutter of him, and cower
True Crawling viper, after all
Yer stand against him not in vain
Keep sword sharp to be his bane
Stray not to peaks snow-cloaked deep
Ruins Forgot, nor echoing grot
Hunt no wyrms, gold aseeking
For the Foe of the Serpent
Is the Dragon.
from The Way of Valor
by the Bard Haelithe of Ranshree Penned in the days of King
Gaur (too long ago)
From the Chronicles of Aglirta: A
History
Now in the Time of Many Wizards, when all Darsar sought

the Dwaerindim and realms rose and fell with each passing
season, there arose in Aglirta four heroes, who were destined to
give the Kingless Land a king once more—though to many it
seemed not the salvation and peace for all Asmarand that had
been foretold.
This Band of Four arose in desperation, in the time after
Baron Blackgult sought to gain an edge in his long feud with the
rival house of Silvertree, and made war upon the rich Isles of
Ieirembor, seeking to make their tall timber and trade-metals
his own, but was vanquished, and hurled back with great loss of
armsmen and armaragors, Blackgult himself being thought lost
in the fray.
Then did the cruel Faerod Silvertree, the fell magic of his
Dark Three wizards his main weapon, seize the barony of
Blackgult, and he made war on the other baronies nigh his own
holdings, and flourished. So great was the rise of his power that
it seemed that he would soon be King in Aglirta, whose king had
slept for years beyond the memories of living men.
Then did two desperate warriors of Aglirta—the great
armaragor Hawkril Anharu, most trusted of Blackgult's blades,
though he refused all rank; and his closest friend, the
barb-tongued and nimble procurer Craer Delnbone—return as
outlaws to Aglirta, and made so bold as to try to steal gowns
from the Lady of Jewels—Faerod Silvertree's own
daughter—from her very palace bedchamber. She being skilled
in sorcery, her father's Dark Three had trained but also enslaved
her, making Silvertree Castle her prison, and planning someday
that she'd be bound into its very stones, to serve them as a living
fortress. Thus Embra Silvertree, who could have slain the two
thieves, instead made pact with them to carry her away.
Pursued by her father's forces, the three fled to the Silent
House, the cursed and long-abandoned mansion of House
Silvertree, and there did meet with an aging healer, Sarasper
Codelmer, who could take the shape of a longfangs—called by
some a "wolf-spider"—among other forms. Sarasper was friend
unto Craer from long before, but was in hiding from all men to
escape being enslaved, as barons chained all healers for their

usefulness.
So the Band of Four were born, as merry a band of rogues as
ever enlivened bards' ballads, and in their strivings Faerod
Silvertree and his Dark Three were thrown down, and the
Sleeping King awakened, to rule from Flowfoam once more.
King Kelgrael Snowsar rewarded them for their deeds with
the titles of Overdukes of Aglirta, in the same wise as he made
the returned Baron Blackgult Regent of Aglirta, ere returning to
his spellbound Slumber-for only when Kelgrael slept could his
age-old foe, the fell and most mighty archwizard remembered by
men only as the Serpent, be held also asleep, and away from the
world he so desired to rule.
Yet in all this strife of ambitious barons and wizards, of folk
everywhere seeking the four powerful Dwaer-Stones, the folk of
Aglirta were grown tired indeed of misrule. And they turned to
the worship of the Serpent, whose scaled priests-who were not
priests at all, but wizards who as they grew in power took on
more and more of the shapes of snakes—led them into intrigues
that sought the Crown of Aglirta. They turned also to various
barons, who hungered after the same thing, hoping each one
would become the great king that Aglirta had lacked for so long,
who would restore peace and justice to the Kingless Land, so folk
could rest easy and the land flourish at last.
And all the while outlander mages eyed the rich Vale of
Aglirta and thrust their own hands into the fray, and the fabled
Faceless lurked behind all, and the Band of Four rushed hither
and other, seeking to set wrongs aright…
Yet the slaughters and Dwaer-seekings continued apace, and
none of all those hard-riding folk foresaw the Great Doom
rushing to meet them.
Or rather, the apocalypse that their own deeds were bringing
down swift and hard upon their beloved Aglirta—and all Darsar
around it.
Prologue

Lamplight flickered back from the bright-polished rims of a
dozen Delcamper shields. A young man in a magnificent silk
shirt stared past rich blue tapestries into that dazzle, and
murmured, "For if all the world my love forsake… her life like a
flame the wind doth take… doth take…"
He sighed heavily, tossed his parchment down, and speared
an innocent quace-fruit with his quill. "Oh, to be the bard they
dunk I am!" he quoted darkly, glowering out his open window at
the stars.
Flaeros Delcamper brought his boots up onto the gleaming
top of his best bedchamber table with a crash, and leaned back
in his chair.
Fighting dragons was easy-now, composing ballads, that was
hard.
The shore breeze rose, bringing the familiar tang of the sea to
him. Restlessly, Flaeros swung his feet back down and sprang
upright, striding across the room in an idle parody of a gliding,
courtly dance. Slapping his palms down on the sill, he stared out
over Ragalar Bay, its waters shimmering under the light of the
rising moon and the familiar vault of stars.
He'd stood here on early evenings for years, looking out at a
little slice of Darsar—a slice that rolled or blew past uncaring
how haughty or coin-bright the Delcampers might be, or noisy
and bustling the gray city of Ragalar might become. His
great-great-grandsire had stood in this room when as young as
he was now, and undoubtedly stared out at these same stars.
This castle, Varandaur, seat of the Delcampers, had stood here
like a grim, weary fang of stone for five centuries at least,
looming over this corner of Ragalar Bay—the tower he was
standing in, all nine floors of it, actually overhung the waters,
jutting up and out above the spray like the prow of a great stone
ship, and—
A chime sounded musically behind him. Flaeros whirled
around. What could befall at this time of night?
It sounded again, like a discreet servant's cough. The Bard of

the Delcampers smiled thinly, and called, "Enter!" Then he
raised an eyebrow. 'Janthlin?"
"Of course, Lord Flaeros," came the dignified reply.
The bard turned back to the window, so that only the stars
saw his smile flash into a broad grin. Janthlin always sounded
so world-weary, so pained to humor the nobles he served. Face
composed, Flaeros turned his head. "What brings you up here
after moonrise?" he asked the row of shields. "Is someone in
need of a song?"
"Nay, m'Lord. We are well supplied with music, down-hall. A
minstrel of the road is harping in return for candlefeast and a
bed. He's come from Aglirta, he says, an—"
Flaeros whirled around and strode past the servant like a
rising storm. "Yes, Janthlin, you've done well. My thanks! Aye,
my thanks!"
The last words echoed back up the stair in his wake. The old
servant turned, tottering slightly, to watch the young lord's
shadow race down the wall, and grew a slow smile of his own.
So like his father, this one. Flits like a bird, leaps like a
flame… Janthlin's smile died as his thought came inevitably to
the next line of that old ballad.
Dies cry unheard, naught left but his name.
That was the thing about ballads. All too often, they went
where you didn't want them to. Like love. Like life. Hmmph.
Janthlin reached into the breast of his tunic, drew forth the flask
of liquid fire he kept ready to wash away such morose,
increasingly frequent thoughts—and used it.
The high, lacy harping died away into a few last, aching tones
as Flaeros bounded down the Urdragon Stair and paused on the
landing overlooking the High Hall. "Under the lamps below, a
great crowd of servants jostled with Delcamper uncles in their
crimson and gold, goblets dangling empty in many hands. And
no wonder, with nary a maid hastening to refill them. Everyone

was speaking at once, hurling questions at the sad-eyed man in
worn leather, who sat on a stool perched atop the long feast table
nearest the great open sea window, his harp still thrumming in
his hands.
News from Aglirta was always worth hearing-and here was a
taleteller who could be asked things, not the usual few paltry,
suspect whispers heard seventh hand…
The minstrel looked up at Flaeros and seemed to nod slightly,
though his drooping moustache made the gesture hard to read.
"I came to this happy house," he said abruptly, his words hewing
a sudden stillness out of the clamor of voices, "because amid all
the latest tidings of barons' boasts and lost lasses and trade
shortages, there's real news for one here: the Regent of Aglirta
has put out an urgent call to parley with one Flaeros
Delcamper!"
Heads turned, brows lifted, and murmurs rose. "Flaeros?"
more than one uncle asked, in astonishment that might have
pained the young bard had he not been hastening down the last
flight of stairs so eagerly, spilling out the words, "I am he!"
The minstrel- Three bless him!--waved his free hand out from
his harp in the flourish with which folk of music salute bards.
"Lord Flaeros, I am Taercever Redcloak, harp of the road, and
honored to meet you. Before you ask: I know nothing more than
the bald proclamation I've just imparted. The regent hopes to
see you at Flowfoam soon, for parley."
Flaeros drew himself up, feeling all eyes in Varandaur on him,
and made his voice as deep and mellifluous as he knew how. "I
thank you, Master of the Harp. Your music honors our house,
and I'll ask no more, save what all here would know: what news
rides high in Aglirta?"
The bard Taercever smiled, something akin to mockery in the
twist of his lips. "The usual chaos of barons clawing for power.
The waiting hands of hireswords are filling with coin in plenty
again, as brigandry is so sharply on the rise."
"And is it?" the nearest uncle of Flaeros growled, waving a

gleaming goblet as large as two servants' heads like a
disapproving finger.
The minstrel shrugged.
"When armed men at loose ends wander so rich a realm,
Lord," he told the glossy curves of his harp, "trouble always
awakens, and with a sharp edge. Yet so much swift and
unforeseen trouble that only dozens of lancers and scores of
bowmen can quell it?"
"Aye," another uncle rumbled, "I take thy point. Tis a tune
we've all heard a time or two too often before. So it's war again,
sooner or later. Anything else?"
"A talking cow shown at market in Ibryn," the minstrel said
lightly, pausing for the expected—and enthusiastically
given—snorts and dismissive growls. "Oh, and something more:
word hisses over all Aglirta like shaken bedsilks that the regent
is looking for—this!"
From the folds of the weathercloak bundled beside him the
minstrel plucked up something bright, that caught and flashed
back hearthfire like a hand mirror. It was a scepter of massy
gold swept into the likeness of a dragon's head, jaws slightly
agape, atop the proud curve of a many-scaled neck.
The minstrel moved his arm slowly, so that all gathered
around him could see its magnificence. The eyes—amber-hued
gems?—seemed to glitter, as if the wyrm could truly see them.
There were gasps, and some drew back. "The foe of the
Serpent," someone in the crowd muttered, before Flaeros could.
And then from among the servants crowded to the fore a
figure darted. A handsome steward, who thrust aside the
plucking arm of a Delcamper uncle with a hand whose fingers
were suddenly hissing, snapping snake-heads.
Amid the gasps and shrieks the steward never slowed, racing
forward to spring up onto the feast table where the minstrel had
bent to wrap his cloak around his harp.

Taercever glanced up, saw his peril, and flung the scepter in
his hand-not at the rushing steward, but towards Flaeros at the
foot of the stair.
The bard grabbed for it, but tried to keep his gaze on the
steward's charge; the heavy scepter dealt his arm a numbing
blow and clattered on the steps beside him.
A knife flashed…
Serving maids shrieked.
The minstrel sprang back.
An uncle vainly hurled a goblet and another bellowed for
guards as Taercever caught his heel on his stool. It tumbled
under the diving steward as his gleaming blade stabbed down,
rose again—and Snake-worshipper and minstrel plunged out the
window together.
There was a thunderous splash below—and everyone started
running.
"Fetch the snake-head!" Uncle Hulgor shouted, his hoarse
bellow cleaving the uproar like a trumpet. "I'll deal with him!"
"Three look down," Uncle Sarth snarled to Hulgor, giving his
young kinsman a glare as the bard snatched up the scepter and
stared at it in wonder, "but young Flaeros seems to wear drawn
swords and danger like an always-flapping cloak!"
"Aye," Hulgor said with some satisfaction, as they both drew
their slender, ornamented swords and watched guards trotting
into the room with halberds in their hands. "The lad's become
someone of importance-in Aglirta, at least."
"Aye, Aglirta," Sarth said sourly. "Where all the troubles
always are."
Yet even as Hulgor waved his blade at the window and
snapped orders about boats, lanterns, nets, and hooks, Sarth
stood guard over the wonder-struck bard, who was still hefting

the scepter in his hand, turning it round and around as he felt
something stirring within it, some magic that made his arm
thrum and tingle.
"The regent must have this, and my presence, too," Flaeros
murmured. "At once."
The bard sprang up the stair in a sudden charge of his own,
heading back up to his chambers to prepare.
Sarth shook his head and ran after him, gasping and growling
after a few flights of steps, his sword gleaming in his hand as
Varandaur erupted into shouting tumult around him. He was
getting too old for this…
"As we all do," he grunted, slashing a particularly ugly display
of crownflowers out of its urn as he passed. They fell before his
blade without a fight, scattering petals in a golden rain, and
Sarth raced on, his legs feeling heavier and heavier. Aye, too old
by half.
Something rose dripping out of the night-dark sea, glistening
wet in the moonlight as a fin grew fingers, and then a human
arm. That arm took firm hold of a wet rock, and a faceless snout
rose to join it.
The snout rose, thickened, and became a head that watched a
second creature rise from the waters, sinuous tail curling, and
grew arms of its own, its faceless head split in a great vertical
mouth to spit forth onto the rock a damp cloak, wrapped around
a harp.
The other shapechanger's head grew a similar gash. It spat
the steward's knife onto the stone beside the cloak, and then
twisted into a jagged smile.
"Nice harping."
"I try, Indie. I try."
The Koglaur who usually went by the name of Oblarma
heaved herself out onto the rocks, fins and tail melting away in

the moonlight to reveal the curves of a shapely human woman.
Beside her, the Koglaur often called Indie rode the gently lapping
waves a little longer, tarrying to gaze back across Ragalar Bay.
Many lanterns were bobbing back and forth along the shores
nigh the dark mountain of Varandaur's turrets, and torches
flared and sputtered on boats cleaving the waters like an aroused
swarm of fireflies.
A real firefly darted past Indie's head. A tentacle flashed out,
curled, and swung over Oblarma's head. When it withdrew to
become one of Indie's new fingers again, the firefly winked amid
Oblarma's newly formed lustrous tresses.
"Hmm," Indie said, regarding it critically as he held out the
bundle of clothing they'd hidden here earlier. "Why didn't I dunk
of that before?"
One of Oblarma's eyes bulged from her face, thrusting forth
on a finger of flesh—a stalk that curled up and back until she
could gaze at the top of her own head, and see the firefly's silent
blue-green flashes.
"Like a little jewel," she murmured approvingly, settling a vest
around a pair of magnificent-and quite dry—breasts that hadn't
been there a few moments earlier. "I rather—"
Indie hissed sharply, chopping with his hand for silence…
Oblarma gave it.
In the stillness, they heard the splash of oars, voices
grumbling to each other on the boats, the thud of someone's
boot against old and sodden planks—and the thunder of hooves.
It sounded very like Flaeros Delcamper, riding hard with two
house armaragors right behind him, and took but a few
moments to die away into distant darkness. They were in a
hurry.
"Adventure comes late to some," Indie said in satisfied tones,
heaving himself onto the rocks in a flurry of spray that made
Oblarma roll hastily aside to keep her clothes more or less dry.

"It seems our little deception worked as well as—"
"A typical day at Flowfoam," the other Koglaur replied in dry
tones. "And just like, a courtier caught at treachery unawares,
the real steward will be strolling home from his little
Serpent-worshipping moot right about now-straight into the
arms of all those hard-eyed Delcamper armaragors, and
roaring-rage Delcamper uncles."
Indie gave her a little bow. "And I even managed not to stab
you."
Oblarma chuckled. "Just as well. I like being Taercever."
"As long as you don't come boot to boot with his creditors,
hmm?" Indie said, plucking up his clothes from the tall grass
above the rocks.
"He died alone in the backlands six summers ago, now,"
Oblarma replied. "As successful as minstrels of the road ever get
to be. You think he owed much coin to anyone?"
Indie shrugged. "All it takes is one debt to see a man dead—if
it's the wrong one."
Oblarma's answering smile was thin. "A lesson too many folk
of Aglirta seem never to learn. Who shall pay the final price next,
I wonder?"
Chapter One
Gracious Hosts of Aglirta
The breeze was all too steady.
The leaves of the trees around the four riders rustled
ceaselessly.
Craer frowned and hunched a little lower in his high-cantled
saddle.

Hundreds of archers could be crouching within easy
bowshot in this sun-dappled forest—Three take us, every
second bowman could be felling trees for firewood, with the
rest shouting encouragement!—and in all this hissing and
roaring of foliage, riders on the road wouldn't know of the
danger until 'twas too late, and they were all wearing rather
too many arrows to ignore.
These four riders in particular: the Band of Four, Aglirta's
only Over-dukes. Four folk Craer suspected the barons of the
realm—loyal, good, and otherwise-were already heartily sick of.
He glanced back, collected Hawkril's calm nod, and muttered to
the placid gray beneath him, "Horns of the Lady! I've lost track
of where we're headed! Why can't we call on the nearest baron
and then the next, in some sane sequence, instead of riding forth
and back and up and down the whole blessed Vale?"
Embra's chuckle sang in the air beside him, making his
horse's ears twitch.
Craer sighed; he'd forgotten her chatter spell. The Four could
whisper and murmur and yet be heard by each other as clearly
as if sitting in a quiet chamber with heads bent together, not
riding through this windy forest spread out to deny archers an
easy, massed target.
"This way," the Lady Silvertree explained with infuriating
sweetness, "my fellow barons will find it just that trifle harder to
play gracious hosts by thoughtfully preparing 'accidents' for us…
or stealing away the prize we seek."
Ah, yes, the prize: the fourth magical Dwaer-Stone. Present
whereabouts unknown, but held—at least on the day when they'd
been made Overdukes and Embra's father Blackgult named
Regent—in secret by one of Aglirta's barons.
Finding it was why the overdukes had spent far too many
days riding the roads that flanked the Silverflow, crisscrossing
Aglirta to visit baron after baron.
Not that Craer Delnbone had the worst task of the Four
during visits. Here in the forest, as front-riding target, now…

" Thank you, Embra," he said in the most silky tones he could
manage. "Now if you knew a spell to repel lurking archers
instead of eavesdropping…"
"Gently," Sarasper's rasping voice reproved him, as if Craer
were a disobedient but indulged dog. "Gently!" Treated like an
unwelcome wyrm? Be then an unwelcome wyrm.
Craer growled like one of the yipping perfumed and
beribboned lap-dogs the Baroness Rildra so doted on, of
ankle-shredding acquaintance three baronial castles back. At
least he'd had the satisfaction of shaking one persistent
boot-gnawing creature out a window into the moat below, under
the carefully unseeing gazes of two smirking guards. What
attraction even silly baronesses saw in such—
"Anything amiss, Swiftfingers?" Hawkril murmured.
Craer snorted. "An army could be tramping along beside us,
hewing down trees to clear a road for their passage, and I'd hear
them not." He peered ahead all the harder, as if his eyes were
torches that could sear through ever-dancing leaves.
"Pray silence for the eminent Overduke Delnbone," Sarasper
intoned. "Trees, attend! Winds, bow down!"
A wordless but decidedly rude sound was Craer's only reply.
They were at least another day's ride away from the next
baron—where once again Embra would work
Dwaerindim-seeking magic from the privacy of whatever
chambers they were given, whilst Hawkril stood watchful guard
over her, Craer made oh-so-clever talk with stewards and
guardcaptains and seneschals, and Sarasper used his spells to
ward away the harm of all poisons and venoms offered to the
Four in their food and flagons.
So far, they'd failed to find the missing Dwaer—and survived
two poisonings, choosing to smilingly ignore the attempts to slay
rather than confront their hosts.
"We're not managing much more than to make ourselves
more widely disliked and offer ourselves as ready targets, are

we?" Sarasper's voice came suddenly out of the breeze nigh
Craer's left ear.
"Now, don't forget the chance to see Aglirta's beautiful
countryside," Hawkril rumbled. "I've been a target in worse
places."
"Far too much of Aglirta's beautiful countryside, I'd say,"
Craer grunted.
"So we spent an extra day riding the back lanes, lost and
testy-tempered. A wandering that befell when one Craer
Delnbone was scouting our way, if you must remind us," Embra
told the backs of her fingernails idly.
Sarasper chuckled. "Aye, some blundering heroes we are."
"Nay, my good fellow Lord of Flowfoam, we were blundering
heroes— now we're pushy Overdukes," Craer told the old healer
triumphantly. "Try to remember that, and the necessary
pomposity will Row Jar more smoothly."
Something hummed past his cheek then, so closely that it
burned. Craer's horse reared with a startled sound that was
almost a shriek, and the smallest of the Overdukes kicked clear
of his stirrups with an alacrity that seemed suddenly far more
necessary than any pomposity.
The long-anticipated arrows came leaping out of the trees in
a hissing storm, flaring with enchanted fire and slowing
noticeably as they reached Embra's waiting shielding spell.
"Brigands again!" Craer snarled, clawing at reins as he
snatched out a dagger and tried to see exactly where the shafts
were coming from and how many bows must be sending them
forth. "Clear the rats from one forest, and they scurry to
another!"
Embra's shielding flared into a visible glow around them as
she called on her Dwaer for more strength. The arrows seeking
them now hung in her spell glow by the dozens, sliding very
slowly on through the air. Craer struck one aside with the edge

of his dagger, freeing it from the magic—it shot away to crack
and shiver among roadside stones in an instant-and ducked
around the wicked point of another…
"A dozen?" he called, peering into the trees as he wrestled his
snorting gray under control.
"More this side," Hawkril replied calmly. "A score, at least."
"Brigands whelm in armies these days, it seems," Sarasper
grunted. "Do we try to outride them?"
As if their unseen attackers had been listening, grim-faced
men in leathers sprang from the trees, leaping out from between
dark trunks and twisted shrubs to block the road before the
Four… and behind.
"Twoscore, and more," Hawkril corrected himself grimly.
"Fast-breeding brigands!"
The armaragor bent low over his saddle to better reach the
hilt of the great warsword slung across his shoulders—and then
found himself wrestling the reins of his mount as the horse
danced sideways in alarm. More men burst out of the trees close
at hand, and a fresh volley of arrows sped out of those rustling
leaves.
Embra gasped in pain, and her Dwaer flared into sharp
brilliance. Hawkril cursed and wheeled his horse, furiously
slashing aside arrows with his warsword as he went. If his lady
was hurt-
The Lady Silvertree was reeling in her saddle, her face
twisted, though the charging armaragor could see no arrow that
had bitten to cause her that pain. Sarasper, too, was clutching
his head and groaning. Unseen spell-arrows, then, that struck at
those who could work magic? So-wizards in the trees, too?
No matter; the Four had to get out of this, or they would be
slain. The real arrows were gliding ever closer, a tightening net
of glowing points drawing in around Sarasper and Embra.
Hawkril growled out his rising anger and plucked at the shield

bouncing behind him. It was too small to cover them all, but if
he could win a few moments for Embra to hurl some mighty fire,
or to snatch them out of the closing jaws of this trap, it just
might befall that th-
Craer abandoned his own saddle an instant before no fewer
than six shafts lanced home in the flanks of his doomed gray,
sweeping aside a seventh arrow as he threw himself into the
road dust and rolled enthusiastically out of the gods-blessed way.
In another instant his horse would come crashing down right
here, rolling and screaming and kicking, and Craer did not want
to be observing its painful death from right underneath it.
The procurer didn't want to be observing its painful death 
anywhere, but the Three seemed to demand that a certain
foursome of overdukes provide them with frequent and violent
entertainment, and…
"The day does draw on," Craer told the dagger in his hand, as
he sent it spinning into the face of a shouting archer who'd
drawn a wickedly curved sword of his own, "and we seem to have
fallen behind on our bloodletting. All of this peaceful riding
about and feasting and polite over-goblets chatter must be to
blame! Die, horseslaying dog!"
The archer gurgled, tried to reach for the dagger that
sprouted in his eye, and then toppled forward without offering
further reply.
Arrows were striking the ground and each other, now. Thus
freed from Embra's slow-shield, they shivered along the stones
underfoot or thrummed away with new vigor. Craer vaulted over
one shaft, snatched another dagger from a handy sheath, and
then flung himself flat to avoid another arrow as he raced back
towards the hooves of Hawk's charger. Choked-off cries and
oaths around him told him that some of their attackers lacked
his agility.
"Ah, I suppose they're just not fit stock to be overdukes," he
muttered, racing on.
"Craer," Embra snarled, something that sounded horribly like

a sob in her voice, "will you be silent?"
Her next word might have been a scream, if she'd still had
breath enough for screaming. It came out as a sort of horrid dry
gasping, instead—that was promptly drowned out by Hawkril's
roar: "Embra! Embra! Lass, speak!—"
It was his turn to groan and gurgle, and Craer risked a look
up from his own deadly game of rolling and sprinting and
nicking arrow-sighting glances right and left.
He was in time to see his oldest friend topple from the high
dragon saddle, one armored shoulder bristling with arrows—as
the huge horse under Hawkril twisted and lashed out its hooves
at empty air in agony, its right flank a forest of quivering shafts.
Embra's shielding was melting away. They were going to die
here on this sun-dappled road amid the beautiful and
be-damned-rustling trees, beset by this army out of nowhere,
and with noth-
Sudden purple lightings snarled and spat across the road,
half-blinding him. Craer flung himself flat in a place he hoped no
arrows would find, and wondered what magic was seeking their
lives now. Gods, but Aglirta seemed to hold an overabundance
of folk eager to deal death. Couldn't they cleave to baronial
style and provide a good feast laced with a little poison ? Did
their murdering attempts always have to involve road dust and
searing spells and Three-be-damned arrows?
"I can only conclude," the strained tones of Sarasper rasped
next to his ear, "that you wish to proclaim to the listening land
once more your usual complaint, procurer? Too much magic,
wallowing in the dust, and arrows—have I captured the list
rightly?"
"Fancy yourself a herald?" Craer murmured back. "So I
started shouting, eh? Pray pardon… Embra must be still aware
for the farhearing to work. I'm flat on my face, still seeing
purple-and-white fire whenever I try to stare at anything—care
to enlighten me as to what happened?"

"Later," the healer told him grimly. "For now, be silent, and
lie still." 
"Eh?"
"Silence, procurer!"
Something in the steely fury of Sarasper's tone made Craer
obey, for once. Through slitted eyes he stared at the curling
dust—just visible as lazy shadows beyond the white-and-purple
fire that still danced before his mazed eyes—and waited until his
sight returned enough to show him something more of what had
so scared Sarasper.
Whatever it was must have slain or stunned the archers with
those lightnings; the only sound was the muffled thudding of a
downed horse twisting in its last throes. Craer waited tensely,
dagger in hand, hoping he'd be able to see a foe before a sword
or spear was driven through him.
A boot crunched on road stones very close to his head, and he
heard Embra gasp. Should he fling himself wildly away, or—?
Not all that far from the roiling dust and many sprawled
bodies in the road, a cautious hand closed around a knob where
once a branch had sprouted, so its owner could lean around the
curve of a dark, old tree trunk and peer through the rustling
leaves at the few figures still moving, where battle had raged
moments before.
Not an arrow sang, nor did any bowman stand ready to shoot
more-yet the Overdukes of Aglirta had, it seemed, fallen far short
of victorious. The thief among them lay in the road, motionless.
But for a betraying ripple of tense, quivering shoulders, he might
have been dead.
Wincing in a half crouch on the road not far away, his arm
dark and wet with blood and transfixed by many arrows,
Overduke Hawkril Anharu grimaced at a lone figure walking
slowly up the road towards him. Twice the hulking armaragor
tried to pick up his warsword in the trembling, blood-dripping
fingers of his stricken arm… and twice he failed.

Beyond the armored warrior, against the ferny bank that
bounded the far side of the road, the healer and the sorceress lay
huddled, the old man trying to shield the slumped, white-faced
body of the woman with his own. He, too, glared his defiance at
the lone approaching figure.
The watcher in the trees drew back, crouching low and
pressing close against the concealing trunk, yet watching still.
Red mists of pain curled at the corners of Hawkril's vision.
Spitting blood, he fought to hold them at bay, to keep clear sight
of the man now walking towards him. Tall, slender, dark, and
young. Handsome, too… a small tattoo like a vertical drawn
dagger on his left cheek, and sharp—nay, smouldering—dark
eyes above. A few rings on long, slender fingers, those hands not
marked by work. A dagger at belt, black hose, high boots, and a
dark tunic above, richly made but bearing no device nor noble
colors. Someone, Hawk knew, he'd never laid eyes on before.
The newcomer stopped just out of reach of any desperate
lunge a man of the armaragor's size might make, and stared
down at the pain-wracked warrior. His hands hung empty at his
sides, but cupped slightly. Wisps of purple smoke studded with
winking white sparks still rose from his palms—sparks that
crackled menacingly as he raised his hands to point at Hawkril
and Sarasper.
"Should I slay you all, Overdukes of Aglirta?" this unfamiliar
wizard asked, his voice barely more than a whisper. "Or can you
give me good reason why I should let you live?"…
"Lord Baron," the old seneschal said nervously, "there's a man
come to see you. In full armor, with sword ready and a dozen
war-ready fighting men at his back. He gives as name only 'Little
Flower.' "
Baron Nesmor Glarond smiled thinly and lifted one hand in a
signal that stirred his guards into a brief flurry of drawing
swords and stiffening into new positions, here and there about
the throne room of Glarondar.
Their master cast a glance up at the gilded balcony and made

another sign. His pages saw, turned, and snapped low-voiced but
coldly firm orders. Many faces of courtiers who spent hours
every day along that opulently carved rail, peering down at
Baron Glarond, awaiting his smallest slip-or slightest sign of
favor—abruptly vanished, amid unfriendly murmur.
Glarond lost his smile. Let them wonder at why they'd been
swept away. Ambitious rabble, all, best kept distant from the
bargaining ahead. Only those who mattered need, or would be
allowed to, stay. His "Little Flower" was a dangerous man, and
would undoubtedly drive a hard bargain; if things went poorly
for the Pride of Glarond, the fewer folk who were watching, the
better. Baron Glarond was well aware he was not a deeply loved
man.
In a matter of moments the seneschal stood forth, near the
doors, and bowed to his lord; the populace of the hall was now as
the Pride of Glarond had desired it. The man on the throne
nodded back, lifting his hand almost idly to indicate the doors.
The seneschal turned, flung them wide, and stood back without
announcing who was entering.
A near shout would have been necessary to do that heralding
above the sudden, rhythmic clanking that arose then: the sound
of men in full coat of plate marching swiftly in step. Into the
throne room of Glarondar they came, bareheaded and
empty-handed, but striding as if they were masters in this hall.
They ascended the dais before the throne, and there stopped as
smoothly as any formal guard on parade.
The baron's guards stiffened, eyeing the new arrivals
nervously. It did not take a veteran eye to judge that they were
outnumbered-and probably overmatched. Most of them failed to
notice brief scuffles on the balcony stairs and along the back of
the hall, as procurers in leather harness, hand crossbows held
ready but pointed at the ceiling, wormed their way past
courtiers and pages alike, to certain vantage points. Unfamiliar
men, who stared about the hall with hard, eager eyes, seeking
targets.
"Be welcome, Lord Bloodblade," Glarond said calmly, rising
from his throne. "Your fame precedes you."

The man at the head of the armored throng acquired a
ghostly flicker of a smile that stopped far short of his eyes, and
said, "No lord am I yet, Glarond, though some have called me
'warlord.' Sendridi Duthjack, at your service—if we can come to
agreement."
Baron Glarond inclined his head. "I am not an unreasonable
man."
Some who stood listening in that hall might have disagreed
with that statement, but no one in all that tensely frozen
assembly chose to do so audibly just then. The baron was also
not held to be a swiftly forgiving man.
"And I," Duthjack said clearly, "honor the pacts I make. I
believe you know that."
Glarond inclined his head. "I do. I am also in the habit of
honoring pacts, as it happens. Shall we begin by my stating what
I desire to hire you and the swords you command for?"
"Do so. No task is unacceptable to me, if we can agree on
price—and mine shall be my first answer," Duthjack replied. His
men turned in perfect unison, though no order or sign had been
given, to face the courtiers on both sides—and their gauntleted
hands clapped firmly to the hilts of their weapons.
The silence, when it came, sang as tightly as a drawn
bowstring. More than one man in that hall swallowed—and
found his throat dry in doing so.
"I desire," Baron Glarond said calmly, "to be King of Aglirta.
Before first snowfall, I would sit upon the River Throne,
undisputed master of all the Vale, all barons sworn to me or
dead. Plain enough?" >
Duthjack nodded. "Have you wizards to fight for you?"
The baron shook his head. "None," he said, in a tone that
suggested he was about to say more. Instead, he fell silent. A
sheen of sweat had appeared from somewhere to gleam on his
brow, but he lifted his chin and stared at his armored visitors as

if he already was king.
Duthjack said flatly, "Others will. Our losses will be heavy.
Two thousand gold coins-sundars of Ragalar or Garraglan
zostarrs, not Aglirtan minting—for every swordsman I bring to
the fray. A written roster of my command, copies held by us
both. Half paid out before blades are drawn; survivors only to
collect the balance, by midwinter at the latest."
Glarond nodded slowly. "And your share?"
"One hundred Ragalan sundars, and a downriver barony.
Brightpennant, I think."
"Loushoond," the baron countered firmly.
Silence fell, softly at first but then, as it stretched, rising in
tension. The courtiers who remained in the hall glanced at each
other, then swiftly looked away. No one dared gaze for long upon
the two men facing each other at the heart of the hall…-,
Slowly, Duthjack nodded, his face thoughtful and withdrawn.
Scarcely believing it could be this easy, the baron leaned
forward on his throne. Sweat was streaming down his face as he
asked eagerly, "So— have we a deal?"
The man often called Bloodblade smiled. Drawing off his
gauntlets and handing them to one of his men behind him,
whom he did not look at, he stepped forward and held out his
hand.
The baron rose from his throne, descended the single step to
the dais where the mercenaries stood, and reached out to clasp
Duthjack's offered grasp.
Their hands met, gripped, and a look of pain crossed
Glarond's face. Before he could utter even a gasp of protest, the
warlord's other hand took the baron by the throat.
Fingers of iron tightened, and the Pride of Glarond made a
thin, startled, throaty sound.

Duthjack’s smile was as cold as his voice. "No, my Lord of
Glarond, we do not. I've taken counsel with others in the Vale
besides barons, and heard other views as to the best future for
the realm. Why should I settle for being a baron—among so
many fat, decadent, arrogant fools of barons—when I can sit on
the throne of Aglirta? You need me, dear Glarond… but I don't
need you."
He drew his fingers together with sudden, quivering strength,
a throat crumpled into bonelessness, and the strangled noises
coming from the baron ceased. Deftly Duthjack plucked the
golden coronet from the brows of the sagging Pride of
Glarond-and then his shoulders tightened, muscles rippled, and
the mercenary infamous as Bloodblade in a hundred bloody
tales threw the corpse away from him. Limply it tumbled down
the steps of the dais.
The baron's guards surged forward, hands on sword-hilts,
snarls rising in their throats… and then paused uncertainly as
those little crossbows rose to menace their throats and faces, all
over the hall—and the Pride of Glarond came to a stop, his
lolling head staring glassily and purple-faced at the ceiling in
frozen, eternal startlement.
From out of the shocked group of courtiers nearest the throne
a grandly dressed man stood forth in ruby silks. Clearing his
throat, he gestured with one heavily ring-adorned hand, essayed
a brittle smile, and called, "All hail Baron Duthjack!"…
The warlord smiled, strode forward to meet the man, and said
coldly, "No. I think not."
With smooth, unhurried grace he drew his sword-and ran the
courtier through. As bloody steel burst out of the man's
trembling back, slicing through ruby silk with the briefest of
whispers, crossbows twanged all over the hall, and courtiers
groaned, screamed, gasped, or gurgled—and started to fall,
dying.
"Barons have been Aglirta's curse for too long," Duthjack told
an old guard who stood stiffly at attention a sword's reach away,
gray-white moustache trembling in fear. "It's high time, and

past time, that someone should have gone baron-hunting. Not
quite as good sport as chasing stags, but hopefully more
profitable. Your name, old blade?"
"Th-tharim, Lord Bloodblade," the guardsman stammered,
going to his knees and presenting his sword-hilt to Duthjack.
"You're wise, Tharim," the warlord said with a cold smile,
"and prudent. You may live, if you serve me diligently in one
small service: tell the armaragors of Glarond I'm their lord now.
Baron of Glarond, if you must. Oh, and tell them one more thing:
their warlord bids them arm, make ready for war, and report
here two nightfalls hence, ready to ride."
"Aye, Lord Bloodblade. Ready to ride." The old warrior rose,
then hesitated, waiting.
Duthjack's wintry smile widened. "No, I'm not going to tell
you where. Just say: we ride to war."
The guardsman nodded. "Hunting barons along the way," he
murmured, trying an unsteady smile of his own.
Bloodblade smiled even more coldly. "Prudence is always
overrated, find you not so?"
As Tharim muttered a hasty, "Yes, Lord," and turned away,
his tremblings visibly returned.
Chapter Two
Saddle Deep in Adventure
The figure behind the tree leaned closer, trying not to miss a
single murmur or indrawn breath of the doings in the road
below. Flies were already buzzing above the heaped, ragdoll
bodies of the bowmen-and the lightning that had slain them still
curled around the hands of the wizard who stood in the road.
""You should let us live if you care for Aglirta," Sarasper
rasped, no trace of fear in his face as he squinted at the wizard.

"Too long has this land been not only kingless, but lawless, unless
one holds as 'law' the ever-changing whims of unscrupulous
barons and tersepts. We strive for an Aglirta where all may walk
unafraid, laws are strong, and peace unbroken allows folk to
harvest and craft and make coin without living always in fear of
cruel barons and their…"
"Wizards?" the handsome young man sneered. "I think we all
want peace and good rulership, healer. And bows were always
better bent to take deer for the table, not men's lives." Nudging
the nearest dead archer with his foot, he added, "Yet mayhap
these would also claim, if they lived, that they stood to keep the
peace, under the orders of a wise and just ruler-and what is
there to choose between you? You are but four who swagger like
brigands, while they are many, someone's command belike… and
in these days of overdukes and regents, I cannot believe that
rebel armies tramp Aglirta!"
"Who are you," Sarasper asked quietly, "to mock us?"
Hawkril snarled in urgent pain, then, and both wizard and
healer turned their heads and watched the armaragor wrench an
arrow forth. A gush of dark blood followed, and Hawk slumped
over onto his side in the road, rocking back and forth and
groaning.
Sarasper settled Embra gently back amid the ferns, rose, and
went to Hawkril.
"Stay where you are!" the wizard snapped, raising a
spark-spitting hand.
Sarasper knelt by his stricken friend, and said calmly,
"Healing is what I do, Sir Mage. The many folk I've aided down
the years, and the many more I may live to heal in years ahead,
can all only hope that blasting all who don't obey you isn't the
only thing you do."
With fingers drenched in Hawkril's blood, he fumbled for the
straps and buckles of the armaragor's shoulder-plate.
"Attend me, healer!" The wizard's voice was sharp with anger.

"I am Jhavarr Bowdragon, and—"
Sarasper lifted his head to look into the mage's eyes, and
nodded. "You've come to Aglirta to avenge the murder of your
sister," he said softly. "At the hands of a wizard, I might add."
Bright lightnings raged briefly around two clenched fists, and
faded. The mage drew in a deep, shuddering breath, then said
calmly, as if discussing the unremarkable weather of some days
back, "You see things rightly, healer. Cathaleira Bowdragon was
the most able living mage of all our family, and we two
were—close. We farspoke often, and I know well that she came to
love her master here in Aglirta. Yet so far as my magic can learn,
she was butchered by his hands, and her sentience made part of
a monster of his making. This I can scarce believe, and yet…"
Jhavarr's voice gathered strength again as he snapped, "Yet
I've also learned that you Four helped slay that beast, sending
my sister into the cold, endless sleep that none return from!"
Sarasper sighed.
"Someone has told you false: we did not," the healer
explained. "Those who hacked it down also sought our deaths
that night. Tharlorn of the Thunders betrayed your sister,
yes—growing jealous and over-wary of her growing skill at
sorcery, I doubt not. Forgive the blunt saying of this, but he cut
open her body like a Sirl fishmonger gutting the biggest fish in
his catch. One of his lesser apprentices, who was there and saw,
confided in a friend, hoping to work a measure of revenge on
Tharlorn if his master served him the same fate."
"And the famous and much-feared Tharlorn is dead," Jhavarr
said grimly. "I wish I could be sure of that."
Trembling as he worked healing on Hawkril, and the
armaragor shuddered beneath his hands, Sarasper looked up
sharply. "You've cause to doubt it?"
Jhavarr Bowdragon drew himself up, and said slowly and
coldly, "I doubt nothing because as yet I know too little. I can
trust in nothing for the same reason. Yet hear this: I shall slay

anyone who had any hand in Cathaleira's death. No matter
where they hide or how they defend themselves. This I swear"
The mage paced forward between sprawled bowmen, sighed
as his gaze fell upon flies crawling on skyward-staring eyeballs,
and added in gentler tones, "I know something of the ways of
wizards, Sarasper. I seek the Thunder's apprentices, to make
sure Tharlorn is truly dead and didn't send someone else into
battle in his guise… and to learn if anyone else helped craft the
mage-slayer."
Whirling around, he added in a whisper that was almost a
sob, "All shall pay—and they'll die in pain and knowing why I
take their lives. Darsar is the poorer for the loss of her-but I shall
beggar it deep and proper before I'm finished!"
Hawkril winced, wrenched out another bloody arrow, and
shook anew.
Sarasper nodded wearily at the wizard as the healing
continued. "Usually a vain undertaking," he murmured, "and all
too often one that comes to ride the avenger like a
slavemaster—but none of that makes your cause less noble. I
hope you find what you seek, young Bowdragon… and peace,
besides."
They stared into each other's eyes for a long time before
Jhavarr replied, in a voice that was calm again, "Thanks for
those words, healer, but hear fair warning: if I learn that any of
you overdukes, or Regent Blackgult, or anyone else yet living in
Aglirta had anything to do with my sister's death, I'll destroy the
guilty-as cruelly and painfully as I know how."
Embra swayed into a sitting position, murmuring, "H-hawk?
Srass-?"
Bowdragon stared at her, then smiled suddenly, lifted ready
hands, and gave them lightning.
It was not a nice smile.
Blinding-bright bolts of purple and white snarled across the

road and back, washing over the folk huddled there. Sarasper
reeled, Embra fell back among the ferns… and then Bowdragon
beckoned, and his lightnings flowed back to him.
Borne within crackling coils of his magic, something came
with them, snatched from Embra's breast: a mottled
brown-and-gray stone.
Bowdragon took the Dwaer into his hands, trailing the last
sparks of his spell, and hefted it. It was lighter than it should be
for its size, but it was a Worldstone right enough. Power surged
up his arm, and his smile became wide and real.
"This will be useful to me—and less of a danger to Aglirta
than it is in your lax keeping, oh-so-mighty overdukes. No
Dwaerindim are toys suitable for anyone but a wizard… and a
responsible, calm mage at that."
Hawkril struggled to rise, face twisted in pain, using his
warsword as a crutch to help him totter to his feet and reach for
the wizard standing so near…
Bowdragon smiled and made the Dwaer call up lightnings
this time. 'Twould be fun to hurl a man as far as the eye could
see while roasting him, now that it cost nothing to call on such
power! Over yon hilltop, there…
It took some few moments to feel how to make the Stone do
his bidding, and in the process, Jhavarr inadvertently lofted it
into the air above his palm, where it spun, spitting eager sparks.
Bowdragon raised his other hand casually to slay the staggering
armaragor—and something silvery-bright and as cold as ice
flashed through his fingers, leaving him gasping in pain as he
shook them… and saw blood. Wincing, he glanced hastily
whence the silver thing had come.
A slender figure had sprung up from amid the corpses on the
road. Another hurled dagger was whirling right at Jhavarr, and
a third dagger was already in Craer's hand. Bowdragon ducked
hastily away from the thrown blade, snatched the Dwaer out of
the air-and took himself elsewhere, leaving only a few sparks
whirling around in the air where he'd been. Craer's third dagger

flashed through that space just an instant too late.
It was suddenly very silent in the road.
Craer sprinted after his daggers, in case the mage had
fartraveled just a few trees away and decided to hurl lightning at
where the procurer had been standing. Scooping them both up,
Craer whirled, crouched, and froze to listen… hearing nothing
but the rustling leaves.
Cautiously, the overduke peered here and there into the trees,
seeking anyone-bowmen, as well as murderous young wizards.
The leaves rustled as cheerfully as ever, sun dapple danced in the
tree gloom, and—he could see no menacing figure amid all the
large, dark tree trunks around him.
Cursing silently but fervently, Craer ran back to the road.
Hawkril had fallen on his face with the sort of sob that he only
made when his wounds were very bad, and wasn't moving.
Neither were Sass or Embra, and with the Dwaer gone, there
wasn't much a procurer dared try, if they were dying… nothing
much beyond prayer…
"Forefather Oak and Lady of Grace," Craer began unsteadily,
clambering hastily over dead bowmen and through whizzing flies
to where Hawk lay fallen, "hear now my—" ?;
"Tanth the road! Overdukes, I come in peace!"
Craer's head jerked up. The voice was male and sounded
young, uncertain, and different from Jhavarr Bowdragon, and
"tanth" in back-lands speech meant "I'm hailing you but in
peace, and don't want an arrow in reply"—but anyone who
wanted to get close enough to strike true could cry such a thing!
With a single angry bound, Craer crashed through ferns and
into the trees whence the call had come, daggers gleaming ready
in each hand.
"Why," Aglirta's newest baron asked the armaragors gently,
"do you want to ride with me? Tell me truth, now."

The younger knight flushed and cast a quick glance at the
older armaragor beside him, who frowned, fixed Bloodblade
with a level gray gaze, and said, "I've heard of you,
Duthjack—good an' bad, but more victories than not. No turning
away from your men, either. That's good—an' that's what I want
in a king. So, to tell you true, that's why we're here: to find a new
road to glory for Aglirta. We want to grow old in a strong realm,
an' a just one, not this kingless land of barons stabbing endlessly
at each other an' hiring wizards to try out their newest and
crudest spells on Vale folk."
Bloodblade nodded thoughtfully. "A new road to glory for
Aglirta." He looked up and grinned fiercely. "Handy,
that-because that's what I want, too." He bounded up from his
seat and held out his hand.
"Let's build that road together."
The Regent of Aglirta strode to the map on the wall, gazed at
it for perhaps the thirdscore time that day, and sighed. Neither
the Sleeping King nor any of his crowned predecessors had
thought a map of Aglirta was necessary—and now he wished he
had three of them, to mark out with stones and wood tokens all
the whelmings and journeyings of his ambitious barons and
their forces. Aye, they and the Sirl wizards had grown so
arrogant as to regard Aglirta as a vineyard ripe for their private
plucking— to say nothing of Aglirta's homebred mages, and the
mysterious Koglaur, and the fell priests of the Serpent. Aye, the
Snake-lovers were active in every hamlet and trailmoot, from
one end of the Kingless Land to the other.
Ezendor Blackgult sighed. When he'd been the Golden
Griffon, a warrior baron, chief rival to the fell Faerod Silvertree,
the "Noble Baron" many hated and others hailed but all
respected, he could ride and swing sword and dispense justice as
he liked, with the occasional oath hurled at the absent king and
many more snarled at his rivals. Now, striding the echoing
vaulted chambers and gleaming marble of Flowfoam, ever
watched by the ambitious eyes of a hundred glib-tongued
courtiers, his hands itched to swing a sword in battle.
Yet he dared not leave the seat of power, lest another seize it

or urgent messages fail to reach him, leaving him ignorant of
what this map showed and loose tongues told. Three Above, had
not men in Aglirta anything better to do than scheme and
sharpen daggers and use them by night?
"We could be so great & land!" he roared suddenly, startling
the nearest dutiful page, standing by the door beside an
impassive guard. "Peace, and a few good harvests, and we'd be
awash in coins and folk eager to better their lot…"
His voice trailed off as he strode angrily over to the map
again. And I could go hunting, he added silently, his eyes
wandering over the painted likenesses of the Windfangs and
thinking on how poorly the map showed all the little hidden dells
and back trails, and that he'd have to do something about that
soon… if peace permitted. Hunting traitors and outlaws and
rogue mages, who are all become an overnumerous curse on
this fair land.
Blackgult's lips curled as he turned away from the map. As if 
that was anything new.
"I understand," the warlord in full, gleaming armor said from
the towering height of his high-cantled saddle, "that a veteran
warrior by the name of Belth Ardurgan dwells here. Do I
understand correctly?"
The slack-jawed boy stared up at him, eyes dark and wide,
then stammered something inarticulate but affirmative.
Bloodblade smiled encouragingly, and said, "Will you take me
to him, please?"
Vigorous nods were added to the incoherency. Bloodblade
smiled again and swung himself down from the saddle, landing
with a clank. He looked even taller when standing on the ground,
somehow. His guide, now mute with excitement, beckoned him
in through a dark doorway.
He ducked his head, peered within—and found himself
looking into the calm eyes of a scarred man who held a bent bow
in his hands, the arrow pointing straight at Bloodblade's throat.

"Fair day," the warlord told the bowman without pause. "I
come in peace, desiring to do business with Belth Ardurgan.
Have I found him?"
"You have," was the calm reply. "Your business, Goodman
Nameless?"
The tall man in armor smiled.
"My name is Sendrith Duthjack; men call me Bloodblade. I
have for years been a hiresword of some success."
Belth Ardurgan nodded. "I, too, once rode to war for coins.
Once. When I was younger."
Bloodblade nodded. "I also grow old—and I find myself
increasingly hungry for peace. Peace for all Aglirta."
The bowman snorted. "Those are words I've heard before." He
lowered his bow and turned the arrow aside, just a trifle. "And
so?"
"And so I need swordcaptains, and I'm told you're one of the
best. I need swordcaptains because I find myself now Baron of
Glarond—and have no desire to be one more baron among the
endlessly squabbling barons of Aglirta, with their raids and their
wizards and their knifings in Sirl alleys. I want peace. I want a 
new king for this Kingless Land—a real king, who'll keep order
and justice throughout the land… for all Aglirtans, not just those
with coins and castles."
"A new king," Ardurgan said slowly, as if tasting the words.
"And this 'real king' would be you, I take it?"
Bloodblade bowed his head. "If the Three Above grant so."
The old warrior lifted his bow again. "I'm tired of swords and
blood and hard riding. Very tired. I could end all your dreams
right now, you know—just by letting go of this bowstring."
Duthjack nodded. "So you could." He spread his hands,
showing that his fingers were nowhere near his own weapons,

and asked quietly, "Is that what you want for Aglirta?"
"No," Belth Ardurgan said slowly. "No, it's not." He lowered
his bow and cleared his throat. "Hiring swordcaptains, you
said?"
"At twice the usual coin," Bloodblade said flatly. "I want good
officers everywhere in the realm after I'm on the throne—not just
men to the valiantly getting me there."
"Just." Ardurgan said, shook his head-and then grinned
suddenly, stepped forward, and held out his hand. "I believe,
Lord Baron and king soon to be, we have a deal. For Aglirta!"
"For Aglirta," Bloodblade replied, clasping forearms with the
old bowman, as warriors do. "For a True King at last!"
"A True King at last!" several voices echoed, from behind
Duthjack. He whirled around, and found himself facing several
carters, a farmhand, and the miller, all crowded together at the
door. Gods, but they'd come quietly. Some of them had knives in
their hands—but they were raising them, under his gaze, in
hasty salute.
"Aye?" Bloodblade asked mildly.
The miller licked his lips. "Well… Lord… we're not much in a
fight, but… you'll be needing armsmen, won't ye?"
"And carters, to haul food and ale," one of the carters said.
"Coins are few, these days?" the warlord asked lightly.
The miller spat to one side. "Coins I have in plenty," he said
bluntly.
"It's kings, and good law, and feeling safe, that I'm in short
supply of. If you'll be a good king for Aglirta, we're for you."
Bloodblade smiled. "Then I'm for you. All who desire to ride
with me-and get honest pay for it—come to my camp at
Blackhelm Ford this evening." He looked back at Ardurgan, and

added, "Come ready to ride, armor and all, Swordcaptain."
Ardurgan grinned and nodded. "By your order, Lord."
"Awww," said the small boy, from down below Bloodblade's
belt. "Does this mean you're not gonna fight him? No one's
gonna die?"
"I'm afraid not," Bloodblade said solemnly, bending over.
"Not here, gods willing."
The boy looked disgusted. "What good's being king, then, if
you can't kill people?"
There were embarrassed chuckles from the men standing
around, but Bloodblade drew himself up, and asked quietly,
"How can the lad know any better, if that's all he's ever seen and
heard done? This is why it's time, and past time, for a new King
for Aglirta!"
"A new King for Aglirta!" someone cried, and they all joined
in. Bloodblade waved to Ardurgan, turned, and strode back to
his horse, amid much excited chatter. Many woman stood
watching, and they did not look happy.
"Taking our men off to be killed?" one of them cried.
Bloodblade swung himself up, and turned in his saddle. "No. I
ride to make peace-and a new King for Aglirta!"
"Huh," one of the women said bitterly. "That's what they've all
said."
But as Bloodblade smiled, shrugged, and turned his horse
away, cries arose behind him of "A new king!" and "A True
King!" and "Bloodblade! For Bloodblade, and victory!"
He grinned, and spurred his mount into a gallop. For
Bloodblade and victory… that had a ring to it. He'd use that.
He urged the horse still faster; he needed a lot of warriors yet
and had to see a lot of Ardurgans. "What good's being king,

then, if you can't kill people?" he murmured aloud. "How right
you are, lad. How terribly right you are."
Meanwhile
Over Shaunsel Rise a lone horseman came riding.
His cloak flapped behind him, the road was clear, sun-bright,
and nigh deserted, and he'd left his escorting
armaragors—full-armored and riding two horses that had been
weary when they'd begun, a night ago—far behind.
Flaeros Delcamper laughed aloud at the blue skies above for
sheer pleasure. He was saddle deep in adventure once more, the
Regent wanted to see him, and minstrels saluted him like one of
the great grand bards of old!
"Aha!" he roared aloud. "Delcamper High!"
He'd never dared bellow that battle cry before-not in all his
years of being too slender, too weak, and too clumsy with a blade
to so much as draw a dagger in defense of the family honor…
and strictly speaking, he wasn't in battle now, only galloping
hard along the coast road far too fast to ensure his own safety.
But there was no one to hear him, and—look, all watching
Darsar—he was someone important, by the Three!
This ride to Teln would hasten his journey a good dozen days,
or more. He could board one of Malavar Obalar's swift
spice-and-silks traders, and sail right up the Silverflow to
Flowfoam! Yes! "Delcamper High!" he cried again, and laughed
wildly.
"Three Above, what a racket!" a roadside mound of hay
snarled, rising suddenly man high and hauling hard on the
waxed cord bent around an old fence post at its feet.
"Aye! 'Twill be a pleasure, taking this fine young idiot down!"
another pile of hay agreed from the far side of the road, pulling
on the cord's other end-as the racing Delcamper horse struck it,
tripped, and crashed to earth with a scream and a heavy tumult
of thudding hooves, dust, and dazedly rolling rider.

Trailing hay, Suskar laughed and lumbered forward, long
knife in hand. The horse had broken its neck, and lay still but for
one feebly kicking back leg. There were no saddlebags—but the
rider, now, all silken finery… and was that the gleam of gold?
"In at him, Baerm-don't let him flee!" he roared, as the lad on
the ground ceased spitting and retching to scramble wild-eyed
to his feet, and whirl away.
Whirl and limp, badly, stumping comically through the
hayfield, arms windmilling for balance, with Baerm leaping after
him.
One long and dirty arm caught the stumbling lad by a
shoulder, spun him around into a kicking fall—and Baerm drove
both his fists into the lad's gut, with the expected result.
"Beef and carrots," Suskar said disgustedly, as he stopped
above the twisting, spewing silk-clad tangle that a grinning
Baerm was standing guard over. "Why is it always beef and
carrots? Does all Aglirta dine on nothing else?"
"Well," someone growled from just behind him, "you could try
a meal of-cold steel!"
Suskar stiffened as something cold and sharp slid into his
back, bringing a numbness that burned, and then burst out of
his belly, dark and wet and pointed.
Baerm gaped at it, aghast, for what seemed a very long time
before his gaze rose, almost reluctantly, to look up over Suskar's
shoulder. And then he screamed.
"Ah," that gruff voice greeted him, "you are pleased to see me.
I like that."
Baerm hadn't taken more than two running strides after
whirling to flee when a heavy, hard-thrown mace struck the base
of his skull and brought him red oblivion.
Suskar's groaning body struck the ground close by, and
bounced. Flaeros winced, shaking his head to try to rid himself

of the agony raging in it, and gasped, "W-who-?"
"My parents, whose tongues must have been nimble, named
me Glarsimber Belklarravus," the gruff voice said from above
him, as strong fingers caught up a fistful of fine silk, and hauled.
Flaeros blinked, suddenly upright and staring into a face he
knew… from that magnificent whelming in Flowfoam, where the
Smiling Wolf of Sart had been named-"B-Baron Brightpennant!"
he gasped.
"Aye, that would be my newer name," the jowly,
fierce-sideburned face agreed, as its owner sheathed his sword
and strode a few steps to pluck up a mace. "So bright-born that
I'm not used to it, yet. You, of course, are the bard Flaeros
Delcamper."
"Y-yes! By the Three, my thanks, Lord! I'd've—you—you saved
my life!"
The baron shrugged, smiled, and clapped an arm around the
bard's shoulders that almost sent him wobbling groundward
again.
"Come, lad, back to the road," Glarsimber said briskly. "You
were in some haste, as I recall."
"Yes," Haeros agreed, stumbling. His head was still
ringing—it had all been so sudden, and—
He frowned. "My Lord Baron," he said, "the Three must surely
be smiling upon me, to have brought you so far from Aglirta to
rescue me!"
At his elbow, the baron chuckled, and muttered something
that sounded like, "No fool here."
They walked on together a few hay-trampling paces before
Haeros dared to look up at his rescuer and prompt, "Baron?"
Glarsimber grinned crookedly—and then looked away towards
the sea. "Well, lad," he told the air in front of him, "I was sent

here, to—do a thing."
Flaeros gasped. "You must be on a mission commanded by
Blackgult!"
The baron shrugged, grinned even more lopsidedly, and said
only, "Perhaps."
The deep blue smoke writhed a little higher, and the wizard
standing beneath it held up the Dwaer in his hand and chuckled.
"Think of it, think how to do it, and—'tis done. No dozens of
spells and days of hunting up rare powders and words of
binding. No wonder the Lady of Jewels defeated the Spellmaster,
and strolled so languidly through a dozen spell-duels since."
Jhavarr Bowdragon's smile widened. "And Blackgult has
another two of these, doesn't he? I'm almost forced to conclude
he had something to do with Cath's death. Oh, yes."
The smoke spun more swiftly, and out of its coils something
came undulating, something long and dark and smooth-scaled: a
Vale viper!
Yet no Vale viper had ever boasted small, fluttering wings
behind its head, and more down its length, gently beating amid
the smoke.
"Little flying serpent," the wizard muttered, "bound as I
decree-fly forth now, and spy for me!"
He brought his hand forward as if hurling a stone into a
pool—and the blue smoke roared around in a spiral, racing away
in howling fury to an otherwhere lost in the shadows beyond his
study door—and taking his flying snake with it.
, "A clumsy incantation," he told his reflection in the oval
glass by the door, "but it's spellbound to me nonetheless."
He turned back to the last whirling wisp of blue smoke, as it
spun, sinking and fading, above the clutter of his casting. "Lurk,
and trail after the Band of Four," he murmured. "Spy on every

last overducal deed, so that I may see, and know. For guilty or
not, they are like prowling hunting cats in Aglirta. Trouble
follows them, and they bring it to others in their blundering…
and somewhere out there is the fourth of the Dwaerindim. Yes."
He went to a certain gem that lay on a tabletop, its lower side
smooth and flat, its uppermost surface curved and glossy, oval,
and as long as his hand. He polished it with his fingers, and blue
smokes rose from where he touched it.
Staring into them, he beheld a road strewn with bodies. A
familiar road. He shrugged and turned away, letting the smoke
trail away again.
His lurker would spy tirelessly, and would remember for him
whatever he saw not through its eyes. And if these four buffoons
of overdukes should notice it and lash out with blade or spell, the
snake would grow when struck. Blow by blow it would grow, to
do battle as a turret-tall flying behemoth, if need be. Jhavarr
Bowdragon smiled; that would be worth watching.
Idle entertainment, aye-but then, what were "heroes" for?
Chapter Three
Dropping Out Of the Trees
The wide-eyed, white face was one Craer knew.
He'd not expected to find it here in this Three-cursed forest of
rustling leaves and deadly arrows, but here it was nonetheless,
above a nervously swallowing throat his dagger was a whisker
away from slitting open.
"Raulin Castlecloaks," Craer snapped, in a voice soft but
hardly gentle, "what by all the holy dancing gods are you doing 
here?"
"I—1-" A slender hand rose to push Craer's blade aside. Raulin
looked a little surprised when the procurer let him move the

steel instead of working swift surgery on fingers or throat with
it. He cleared his throat, fixed Craer with very steady eyes, and
said, "I've been watching and following you Four."
"Why? D'you want your clothes back?"
Raulin flushed. "Lord Delnbone, please. I-I've been watching
you in hopes of another chance. I want to be like you, and ride
with you to make Aglirta strong, and—and help you when you've
need of—"
There was a thunderous snort from behind Craer.
Hawkril Anharu was on his feet, pale, bloodstained, and
trembling-but clear-eyed and holding his warsword in firm
hands.
"You've found your chance, lad, and welcome. Aglirta has few
enough friends, and every hand that helps her has a place beside
ours. Craer, put that fang away and come down here. Em looks
bad."
With something akin to disgust, Overduke Delnbone whirled
away from the boy who'd fought alongside them through an inn
and—despite a certain procurer striking him senseless and
borrowing most of his clothes-a great battle in the Silent House,
and led the way down through the ferns to the corpse-strewn
road.
Raulin gazed around at all the spilled blood and bodies
sprawled amid the flies and dust, went pale, and swallowed
several times. Craer gave him a glare and then a wave across the
fallen bowmen to the far roadside bank, where Sarasper and
Embra lay slumped side by side, mute, white, and motionless.
Their garments were scorched, and a strong burnt smell hung in
the air around them.
"So, lad," Craer asked bitterly, "know you any healing magic?"
Raulin opened his mouth to make a reply that was not going
to be a "yes," but left it hanging open without uttering a word as
the air several corpse-strewn paces away suddenly shimmered,

danced with brief silver shadows-and was as suddenly filled with
four women.
They stood together, dark-gowned, slender, and tall-taller still
because their booted feet stood on air a handspan or so off the
ground. They looked like sisters, sharing the same beautiful
features, large gray-green eyes, and in their hands were wands
crowned with glossy gems that crackled with magic. They
regarded the folk standing in—and lying on— the road, and their
faces looked neither impressed nor friendly.
Craer's manner matched their cold, wordless sneers. "What is
this? A magemoot? Or have we blundered into the trail that
every last wizard and sorceress of Darsar trots down, to draw
spells from the same well every morning?"
A wand lifted almost lazily to point at the procurer's
chest—and then a sneer widened, and it was turned to menace
Hawkril instead.
"We follow Jhavarr Bowdragon," the sorceress who held that
wand said coldly, stepping to the fore on empty air, "and know
he's been here. Who are you, and what's your business with
him?"
Craer glowered at her, but Hawkril rumbled their names and
titles, identifying Raulin as "the Bard Castlecloaks, son of a
famous father," which left the lad red-faced but beaming. Then
the armaragor added, "None of us had ever seen this Bowdragon
before. His business with us, it seems, was to attack us."
"Your turn," Craer said bluntly to the four women. " We are
the ranking nobles here; unburden your names to us."
"Ariathe, Dacele, Olone, and Tshamarra," was Olone's
prompt, proud reply, indicating who was who with one
finger-while her leveled wand never wavered from Hawkril's
armored breast. "Sisters all, and not so less noble than some.
Talasorn is our name."
Craer stiffened. "Any relation to Raevur Talasorn, of
Sirlptar?"

"We are his daughters," Olone told him coldly, "and we seek
revenge for his death. The Risen King and his Regent must die,
among others."
"Talasorn fell in battle against the Baron Cardassa," Hawkril
rumbled thoughtfully. "Many died that day, the Old
Cro—Cardassa standing for the king, and the rest seeking the
Throne o'erthrown." His brows drew together in a frown. "Which
makes those who attacked Cardassa in his own castle enemies of
Aglirta."
"Our father was courteous, and diplomatic; he stood among
the foremost wizards of Sirlptar," Ariadie said, sounding nettled.
"He allied with the Baron Adeln against the Risen King not in
some crown-seeking conspiracy, but because he sought a strong,
united Aglirta wherein increased trade and wealth would mean
more patrons seeking to hire wizards—by which our father
sought to provide lives of wealth and importance for us."
Craer's brow wrinkled. "Pray pardon?" he asked, incredulity
warring with bafflement. "Wealth and importance as—?"
Raulin Castlecloaks put a hand on Craer's arm and cleared his
throat. Then, holding up a ringer for silence, he strode forward
until he was almost touching the four sisters. As many wands
shifted to point right into his face.
Ignoring them, Raulin looked up at the sky and started to
chant, as if recalling something learned long ago and not
thought on again until this moment: "The spellcraft of Raevur
Talasorn's four daughters outstripped his. His wife Iyrinda long
dead, he doted on Olone, the eldest; Ariadie of the mighty spells;
Dacele; and Tshamarra, deeming them too clever and beautiful
to be wedded off—and, thus 'brutalized by some warrior-baron,'
denied any chance to use their magic or follow their own wills."
Craer's eyebrows lifted, but the four sorceresses smiled. "They
teach bards well these days," Dacele remarked. "Not a word of
untruth."
"Enough of this," Ariadie snapped. "These overdukes serve the
Risen King-blast them and let's begone!"

"Nay" Tshamarra said flatly. "Hurling spells too quickly got
Father into trouble time and again; we'd do better to follow
Bowdragon and learn who is who first."
"Well said," Olone agreed. "There'll be time enough and
chances aplenty to blast castles to dust later."
"Let it be soon," Ariathe snapped, glaring balefully at Craer.
The procurer stuck out his tongue at her in reply—an instant
before Olone's upswept hand took the four sisters away into
shimmering nothingness again.
No bolt from a wand crashed into the thief, and nothing
remained to show that the sudden apparitions had been there;
flies buzzed through otherwise empty air.
Craer looked at Hawk, and Hawk looked at Craer. Their sighs
came more or less in unison.
The procurer took a dancing step forward, then wheeled to
face Raulin and Hawkril. Spreading his hands, Craer said in
sudden exasperation, "What is it about Aglirta? We ride along
on a nice bright day dealing with one nice, tidy little
mystery—and suddenly wizards are dropping out of the trees and
the sky and the Three know where else, and lads want to join us,
and doom bids fair to fall on us all in moments—"
Raulin held up a hand again for silence. Glowering, Craer
granted it with a "pray proceed" gesture.
The lad held out a small, ornate metal flask to the procurer.
"One of them—Tshamarra-put this into my hand," he explained,
"and then pointed at Sarasper. She didn't want the other ladies
to see."
Craer held the flask up and stared at it, his face a battlefield
between bewilderment and suspicion.
Hawkril smiled and echoed: "What is it about Aglirta?"
Silently, the procurer looked at Sarasper and Embra, turned

his gaze back to Hawkril, and gave a helpless shrug.
Hawkril shrugged back. "What choice have we?"
Craer nodded, unstoppered the flask, sniffed its contents
suspiciously, stoppered its mouth with a finger, and tipped it
just enough so as to leave that finger wet, sniffed and licked the
residue-and men, as they'd all known he'd have to, slid the
mouth of the flask between Sarasper's jaws, and imparted a
small dose.
The old healer coughed, gave a great shiver as an expression
of bitter distaste flashed across his face, embarked on another
deep, racking cough, and started sputtering like an indignant
drunkard. His eyes remained firmly closed throughout. Craer
frowned down at him, then sighed and turned to Embra.
A clawlike hand tugged at the procurer's elbow from behind
before he could apply the flask to her mouth, accompanied by a
raw, rattling shout of: "Wait!"
Craer turned. "Save it," Sarasper croaked. "Any of us can
drink it. Let me heal her."
Waving one hand in a florid gesture to indicate that the
healer should proceed to work on Embra, the procurer
restoppered the flask, hooked it onto his belt, and shook his
head. "I wish—just for once—I knew what was going on," he told
the trees above him. "Back when we were warriors of Blackgult,
or even starving outlaws, things were much simpler. One knew
where one stood—"
"Aye, a running stride ahead of the hangman's noose,
usually," Hawkril growled, "thanks to your urge to steal things
large, florid, and useless."
Craer spread eloquent hands. "Large you are, aye, I'll grant,
and useless, too—but florid, now—"
"Right," Sarasper agreed, a twinkle kindling deep in his weary
eyes. "'I'd not go around saying a man was 'florid,' by the Three."

"We're mad, boy," Hawkril explained to Raulin. "Run fast and
far, while you still can."
The young bard grinned at him. "In truth, Lord Anharu, I've
been missing this. There's a shortage of good buffoons elsewhere
in Aglirta."
Craer stiffened.
Sarasper looked up, then slowly drew the dagger at his belt,
squinting hard at Raulin. Like the side of a ponderous, armored
mountain, Hawkril slowly turned to face the young bard
squarely.
Large-eyed and beginning to tremble, Raulin met the
armaragor's gaze steadily. Eyes as sharp and fearless as a
swordblade stared into—and through—Raulin. Castlecloaks…
And then Hawkril's face split into a gigantic grin. Roaring out
sudden laughter, he swept the bard into a bruising, dust- and
blood-spattered embrace.
Grinning in wild relief, Raulin laughed right back, and they
waltzed briefly past a smirking Craer, to where Sarasper was
shaking his head.
The old healer did not, however, lower the fine dagger. It had
been a gift from Regent Blackgult, Raulin recalled, watching
Sarasper's lips tighten.
The bard gasped as a blue glow began along the edge of its
gleaming blade, kindling swiftly to blue-white fire. Sarasper
turned it slowly, murmuring, "So may all slaying magic pass."
The old healer's hands trembled… as the blue-white glow
crept slowly down from the blade to his wrinkled hands, his arm,
across his chest to his other arm… and then down the spread
fingers of his other hand, to Embra's throat.
As Raulin watched, entranced, he saw that beautiful flesh rise
in a deep breath. Sarasper held his hand steady, the raised blade
now dark and lifeless, and Embra swallowed under the healer's

touch. Slowly, those wrinkled fingers trailed up to her chin and
touched her lips.
Her eyelids fluttered immediately, she moaned softly-and
opened her eyes and blinked at him. "Again, Sass?" she asked
quietly. "How many times have you put me back together again,
now?"
"Less man I have these two gown-stealing dolts of yours," the
old man growled loudly. "They've even arranged a replacement
for you."
He jerked his head towards Raulin, who smiled nervously at
Embra, bowed, and said formally, "My day is brightened by our
meeting, fair Lady Overduke-uh, Lady Baron Silvertree."
As his formal words stumbled in confusion over what Embra
was now properly called, the Lady of Jewels grinned remarkably
like Hawkril, and replied, "I am honored by your regard, Bard
Castlecloaks. Call me Embra—only please, not 'Em.' " She cast
glances at the rest of the Four, and added, "Listening, gentlesirs?
A little courtesy never comes amiss."
Craer launched himself into a fluted parody of a deep,
elaborate court bow, and lisped in affected tones, "Good my
rathant Lady, I deeply regret my past and utterly misguided
attempt to lighten thy wardrobe, but am forever grateful that
the Watching Gods above saw to it that this my dastardly failing
brought us two into close harmony and the courteous bindings
of friendship!" Straightening, he added in his normal voice, "To
which I can't help but add that in my professional opinion, it will
be brilliant policy if we move on from this place before any more
wizards—or archers—make an appearance."
"Aye," Hawkril agreed quickly. "We should move, if only to
give the wolves and wild dogs more sport in trailing us."
"Sport? They'll have to drag themselves along our trail on
their bellies if they devour all of these bowmen first," Sarasper
commented.
Craer and Hawkril shook their heads in unison. "Nay," the

armaragor explained grimly, "to the fanged foragers of the Vale,
battle dead are sure meals, and lures to bring curious creatures
hence, to be slain and made yet more fare. Our tracks, away
from this place, will be followed first."
"Always expand the larder," Craer added. "We must get
moving!"
"Where?" Embra asked, rising from the crushed ferns to
stretch—and promptly wince, sway, and let Sarasper steady her.
Pale, she sat gracefully down again, waved away Hawkril's
anxious hand, and added, "Men in Aglirta seem to set great
stock in rushing places, waving swords and yelling as they
go—but I, being a lazy, pampered noble thing, always like to
know where I'm bound, and for what reason such haste is
necessary, before I commence shouting and hastening."
"A destination stands ready in your mind, I can see," Hawkril
said quietly, staring at her. "Where and why?"
Embra shrugged. "My Dwaer is gone. I'm sure you'll tell me
how and who took it, but leave that for later. The echoes of
recently spun spells are so strong around us here that it's like
having men shouting different battle cries into my ears whilst
standing shoulder-to-shoulder in some small robing room. Let's
get ourselves to Flowfoam. There, bolstered by Bla—by my
father's two Dwaer, and by more of my precious family dancing
inkwells and singing jewel boxes, I can try some elaborate
magics to trace my Dwaer-Stone."
She rose again, took two careful paces along the road, turned,
stepped delicately over a sprawled body, and blurted, "I
feel—naked without it. As if it's a part of me, something I was
meant to have. Any wizard aches to have a Dwaer, yes, but… it's
mine, now, as if the Three intended it for my hand."
Sarasper glared at her, then sheathed the dagger he'd drained
all magic from to heal her with an angry flourish.
"It's not that simple, Embra," he snapped. " 'The gods meant
me to do this, so I will.' D'you know how dangerous such words
are? How crazed those who spout them become, and the damage

they do? The gods don't announce neat little destinies for us,
lass. It's never that simple."
"Easy, Sass, easy," Craer murmured. "Yet your point is a good
one. Bard, let the telling stand that Embra lives, she needs her
Dwaer back—and the rest of us are ice-cold certain that we'll all
be dead in short order without it… at about the time we
encounter our next unfriendly wizard."
Ere Raulin could reply, the procurer turned to look at him
directly, and added, "Well, here's where we'd best part w—"
"Nay," Hawkril said firmly. "Even if it was not truly throwing
the lad to the wolves, to leave him go his own way from here, I
say he bides with us. I said before: every hand that strikes for
Aglirta must be made welcome—or how shall the land ever be
more than self-interested, warring families and cabals and
handfuls of swordbrothers? What if there were a hand-count 
more foursomes of angry sorceresses flitting about the realm
seeking to work avenging murder on real—or imagined—foes?"
Sarasper sighed. "Raulin Castlecloaks. Valiant, willing, of
good character—and one more body for me to try to heal," he
told his hands, looking down at the dried blood all over them.
Most of it was Hawkril's, but a little was Embra's and some his
own. "One more life for us to throw away in our little
adventures."
The healer looked up sharply, and added, "Lad, if you come
with us, you're a fool. Swift death is your most likely fate, and
the gods will probably bestow it sooner rather than later—with
our blundering help."
"I say Raulin has proved his usefulness to us and to Aglirta
before, and has every right to stand in danger with us—or be
more prudent, and go elsewhere—if he chooses," Embra said.
"We're not speaking of someone who hasn't ridden with us
before, and doesn't know the danger, or hasn't already shown he
can handle it. The choice should be his."
Craer looked at Sarasper, and they exchanged shrugs.

"Lady," the procurer said, turning back to the sorceress, "we
abide by your counsel—if only to spare our ears all the things
you're sure to say, and say again, many times over in the days
ahead, if we do not."
Embra smiled sweetly. "Ah, we understand each other clearly
at last." She glanced at Raulin. "Still want to journey with us?
We play tongues-as-daggers all the time."
"I do," the young bard said firmly.
"Well enough," Craer told Raulin briskly. Pointing at the
bodies all around, he added, "Daggers. Fetch me a score—bundle
'em in a cloak someone doesn't need anymore. Use another cloak
to carry any decent boots you see; they're worth good coin.
Then-"
"Craer!" Embra snorted. "We've gained an ally, not a
pack-mule!"
The procurer turned to her with wide eyes and spread hands.
"What, Lady Baron Overduke? Is this collecting not exactly what
I'd be doing, were Raulin not with us? Hmm?"
Despite the high sun beating upon the road where an
increasingly white-faced youth gingerly plucked daggers from
sheaths-and then collected those sheaths, and the belts that went
with them, too, under the harsh tongue and helping hands of
Overduke Delnbone—two bats clung, awake and aware, to the
same tree limb.
Intently they watched and listened to the humans below.
When at last those five set off along the road, still trading jests
and barbed comments, the bats looked at each other and rose
into flight. One swooped after the departing humans, and the
other flapped purposefully in another direction, flitting low amid
the trees.
Craer was wont to suddenly turn and look back when out
walking-several times—but the bat following the
Four-plus-Raulin took care to duck behind leaves and follow
unseen.

Nor did the alert and suspicious procurer notice a whorl of
silent sparks and strange colors suddenly boiling in midair
between two thaerul trees a little way behind the bat. Out of that
whirling, in a puff of blue smoke, spun a viper with many tiny
wings beating along its length. It reared up for a moment and
glided forward, following the five humans trudging along the
road. It, too, took care to keep hidden—both from the procurer
whirling from time to time to look back and from the fluttering
bat ahead of it.
If the bat saw what was behind it, it gave no sign—but then,
bats seldom do.
The lonely figure in the dark, warm cavern stiffened above the
drift spell, and then bent to peer closely at it. "Strong," he said,
in a surprised voice. "'Very strong—but slumberous. Not a
Dwaer, but what?"
Then he shrugged, and told the empty darkness, "No matter.
Whatever it may be, I shall have it! With warlords whelming
iron-heads to march on the throne and Snake-lovers everywhere,
no magic is too much."
The darkness answered not, but that had long since ceased to
bother the lonely wizard. He talked to the darkness a lot.
Right now, he was smiling rather unpleasantly. Moving a safe
distance away from the glowing fog of the drift spell, he cast
another magic. "Go forth, my Melted. Go and snatch this thing
of magic for me."
Then he sighed, and added, "Even if your fellows haven't yet
managed to slay four bumbling overdukes for me. Corloun, your
creations leave something to be desired."
Corloun, of course, was far too dead to answer.
"Desired," the wizard murmured to the darkness—and, as
always, thought of Embra Silvertree. Bare and beautiful, as she'd
been so often when he'd spied on her, that first summer while
binding her to the castle. Furious… and helpless…

He sighed again, and told the darkness, "Embra, you'd have
made a lovely slave."
Then he smiled again. "And you still might."
If one believed the faded signboard out front, the Glory of
Aglirta was some sort of gold two-headed dragon with an
impossibly long, looped, and knotted tail. But then again,
perhaps too many tankards of dark ale do the same dark work
on the vision of artists as to more common folk, and the real
dragon had but one head and a more modest tail. Or then again,
perhaps the artist had been blessed by the gods with the
opportunity to see a nightwyrm and live to remember the
experience… and had merely gotten the color wrong.
Dragons, nightwyrms, and glory of any sort were all sights so
rare as to be legendary in this upland corner of the Vale, hard by
the foothills that became the Windfangs, north and west of
Tselgara.
Off-color converse was the norm in the dim, dirty interior of
the Glory, where rats scuttled among the rushes, the dirt floor
was none too even, and weary men in worn smocks and
many-patch cloaks nursed more drink than stew. Grumblings
about gold-drenched merchants in distant, thieving Sirlptar and
the fool heads of Flowfoam were even more common than
mutterings about the wolves, the weather, outlaws, and strange
beasts of the mountains. Folk everywhere snarl about their kings
and the doings of kings, from taxes to heavy-handed soldiery to
threatened war.
Yet there was a grimness in the Glory this afternoon, a
darkness of heart and hope that had lurked at the bottoms of its
large tankards for nigh a season, growing steadily stronger and
heavier.
"Chaos grips Aglirta like a strangler's hand on throats, he
said," Old Adbert said, propping the stump of his left leg on the
bench beside him with a grunt of pain. "I heard him—and him a
bard, too, up and down the Vale like sea wind, seeing all and
hearing Three near all, too!"

"Chaos has been choking Aglirta since I was born, and
before," Thaeker Blackcloak responded, spitting onto a passing
rat. "Aglirta takes a long time dying, y'must admit."
"Admit nothing," one of the Luroan brothers called, from his
corner table. "Always safer that way!"
"Ye've found it so, hey, Guruld?" Thaeker flung back, swirling
his tankard. "Look at it as entertainment, sent to us by the gods!
This baron defies the regent here, and that one defies him there,
in this small way or this larger way—so the Sleeping King awoke
and named one baron his regent, what then? Blackgult's the
same rogue we've always known, wizards spell-slay as much as
they ever did, our precious king took himself off into dreams
again, and-what? This is still the Kingless Land, that's what!"
"Aye, that's truth," another man said. "Barons have been
snatching at power and making war on other barons since my
grandsire's day, and probably before that, too. Nothing
changes."
"And what of these precious overdukes?" Guruld Luroan
snarled. "What good are they? Just more barons, I say!"
He spat on the rushes and banged his tankard down, but Old
Adbert turned around in his chair so swiftly he almost toppled
over. "Now you heed!" he barked angrily, startling men all over
the dim taproom of the Glory. "I saw the Band of Four on the
last wagon run I ever did, and took my measure of them—which
is more than any of the rest of you've ever done!" He waved his
tankard so wildly that ale slopped out and down it— and that
shocked the others in the room more than any words could have
done. Old Adbert, spilling a drop of ale?
"I heard about their big battle at Flowfoam with Silvertree's
wizards, too," the one-legged man added. "Oh, you all did, I
know, but I talked with men who were there, swords out and
fearing to die, any moment-and let me tell you something: we
should all thank the Three every night on our knees for the Band
of Four. They're all that's holding back the barons, right now!"
"Well said!" a traveling peddler spoke up. "I, too, have seen

and heard, up and down the Vale. They at least keep barons
from swording or hanging everyone whose face they don't like, or
lands and daughters they do like! If the Band of Four falls, who'll
stop the barons?"
"Aye," Thaeker Blackcloak added gloomily, "and the
Serpent-priests?"
The oldest man in the room, Saurn Belrastor, raised his own
tankard and rapped on it to show the tavernmaster that it
needed refilling. It was so rare for Saurn to do this that men's
heads turned at the sound. Saurn looked at them all, and said
sourly, "If the fate of Aglirta rests on the shoulders of four
wandering adventurers, we are doomed indeed. Four to save us,
against armies?"
"We are doomed indeed," Old Adbert agreed quietly, staring
into the depths of his tankard. He didn't seem to fancy whatever
he saw there.
"I'm taking my kin all the way around the Windfangs, into
Dalondblas, brigands or no," Tarsam Faurolk told the taproom
grimly, causing many jaws to drop. Leave four hills and all the
sheep on them, and run away to—nothing?
As if in answer to their amazement, he added darkly, "There's
nothing but death and doom riding Aglirta's roads, these days.
Better coinless and alive than a wealthy corpse when war sears
up and down the Vale again. All the barons are arming. Get out
while you can, if you've any sense."
Old Adbert's laugh was a short, bitter bark. "Any sense? Lad,
I'm Aglirtan—of course I've got no sense!"
Scattered chuckles agreed with Adbert, but none of them held
much mirth. Even the tavernmaster, refilling more tankards
than he'd been called on to do for many a month, found it hard
to smile.
He couldn't stop seeing dead men lying in the upland fields,
awaiting the wolves… There'd be time for smiling men.

Skulls grin easily.
Chapter Four
Riding to War
The guard at the bridge tilted his helm back against the heat
of the bright morning sun, ran a disgusted hand through his
sweat-soaked hair, and looked longingly at the shade of the old
shieldwood tree. When these next few folk are past…yes, b'yr
Lady! A little shade, a little cool water followed by a
swalhwfirm my boot flask to take the foul taste of river mud
away, and… yes…
Sammarthe's herb cart creaked by, and he gave the straining
woman and her two daughters a nod and smile. The youngest
child, skipping along barefoot with a spray of tansel in her hand,
was the only one who smiled back.
Kuldin shrugged, and thought again of the waiting coolness
yonder. Ah, to be out of this sun!
He didn't bother to lower his spear or helm when the next
arrivals into Sart came onto the bridge. The foremost man was
dirty and wild-eyed, his clothes torn and his mouth ababble with
strange phrases, nonsense words, and half-sung snatches of
rhyme. Leather straps encircled his forehead, each arm in three
places, his thighs and ankles, and were also clipped to a stout
belt. The other ends of those straps were held by two guards who
looked as weary as Kuldin felt. They trudged along behind their
captive—and each of them held a loaded hand crossbow—what
was called a dart gun in Carraglas—ready in his free hand.
"Madman," the nearest guard explained, nodding at the
drooling, gabbling man in his care. "Going to the trade fair, for
the right soothing potions."
"Rich madman," the other guard commented, "or you'd not
catch me out walking a man like a dog in this heat."

"Aye to that! Kuldin agreed, his feelings heartfelt. He waved
them on into Sart-and so it was that his arm was still raised and
his mind abrim with friendly thoughts as the guards turned in
unison and fired their crossbows.
One dart found a home deep in Kuldin's nose, but the other
went right through one of his eyes. The madman had already
whirled to spring at the guard, a dagger flashing in his hand.
Kuldin toppled back against the bridge rail, sagged, and half
rolled along it. The dagger rose and fell, and then an enthusiastic
hand went under the guard's knee and heaved. The bridge guard
pitched up and over the rail, finding coolness at last, with a
splash.
The madman turned to the two warriors who'd been
shepherding him and held up Kuldin's signal horn with a grin.
"Got it!" he announced, and then turned and ran back down the
road whence they'd come.
The two guards exchanged glances as they sought cover on
either side of the road, on the Sart bank of the bridge.
"Enjoys this just a bit much, doesn't he?" one of them
muttered, readying another dart for his bow. "I sometimes think
he is a little mad."
"Ah, actors are all like that," the other replied, ducking
behind a wyvernthorn. "He's just crazed at the thought of
earning some coin for a change."
"We're not supposed to kill him until everyone's across the
bridge, right?" The words came from behind a suddenly
trembling sroanberry bush. "You don't suppose we could hasten
the process just a trifle?"
"Bend a direct order from Bloodblade? Not dragon-dung
likely! Looking for an early grave yourself, perhaps?"
"All right, all right!" the sroanberry bush said sourly. " 'Twas
just an idle thought."

"It's best if loyal warriors refrain from having 'idle thoughts,' "
a new voice said flatly, from very close at hand.
There was a moment of frozen silence, and then one of the
bushes asked hesitantly, "L-Lord Bloodblade?"
"Of course. Point those bows at the ground or die."
"Yes, Lord!" two voices agreed hastily, as the thud of hooves
and the creak of saddle leather grew steadily louder along the
road. Around the bend whence the herb cart and the escorted
madman had come, out of the trees of Sirl Forest (no one used
the name on the new maps; "Bright Forest" just seemed wrong
for a place so dark, thorny, and tangled, somehow), came a knot
of mounted armaragors… followed by several dozen
crossbowmen, a long column of spearmen, and more mounted
knights. At the head of this host rode a tall man in magnificent
fluted armor, astride a taller horse in full barding.
"But-who-" the sroanberry bush said in confusion.
"A false-me, of course, in case any of Sart's defenders are
seized by bravery or desperation, and decide that a headless
army is a beaten one," Bloodblade said coldly. "I didn't order you
not to think, Lornelth, I suggested that my most loyal warriors
refrain from idle thoughts when in battle."
"Y-you know my name?" The bowman, until recently the
youngest and least-regarded of Glarond's house guard, was
dumbfounded.
"Of course. A baron who knows not his sworn men? That man
would be an idiot."
Across the road, the wyvernthorn chuckled uneasily-and then
the tramping and hoof falls and dust passed between the two
bushes, ending all easy converse, as the forces of Sendrith
Duthjack, Baron of Glarond and better known as Bloodblade the
warlord, entered Sart.
"Calm yourself, Craer," Sarasper said mockingly. "There are
only three hundred or so miles of back roads betwixt here and

the Silverflow alone— to say nothing of what lies in the next
barony, or yet the next. And the royal writ of safe passage can be
shredded on each and every one of them, scores of times each
day."
Puffing and sweating as he trotted past, the procurer flung
Sarasper a furious, wordless glare as he hastened towards the
next blind corner, where the road dipped into deep forest and
made a sharp turn around a jagged shoulder of wet,
vine-and-creeper-cloaked rock as tall as six men. Craer peered
into that deep shade for a long time before he made the hand
signal for them to join him.
"I heard something, I tell you," he scowled, as Raulin and his
fellow overdukes sauntered up to him, Sarasper and Embra
wearing bright smiles for his benefit. "We're being followed, or
watched as we move into a waiting trap-of-swords, ahead. I can
feel it."
"Oh? Do you have such feelings often?" the old healer asked
innocently, as they stood together in the tree gloom. "Before or
after you empty flagons?"
Craer gave him a dark look, and murmured, "Be still. Please.
I—there 'tis again!"
They all froze obediently, straining to hear what had alarmed
Craer.
Silence… silence… a distant birdcall, and the whir of wings as
an alarmed forest-fall took wing, much closer by.
"There," Craer breathed. "No birdcalls close, but a
bird-probably a pinecock, by the sound, and they fly up at the
last moment, right when your boot's about to come down on
them—disturbed right close by. In against the rock, quick and
quiet, and then everyone be still again!"
Everyone obeyed, and when they had shoulders to stone,
watched Craer's upraised hand. It urged silence, and silence they
gave.

It seemed a long time before they heard the deep, faint sound
of a stone turned over by a heavy tread. It seemed to be coming
from everywhere, from back behind, from—
Craer pointed straight up, at the top of the rock face above.
Then he put his finger to his lips and made the downward,
clawlike motion that meant "freeze, keep still."
Raulin and the four overdukes pressed themselves against the
rough stone for what seemed a very long time before small
stones started to shower down; something was climbing down
the rock face.
At about me same time, a warrior strode suddenly out of the
ferns and underbrush, into the road ahead… followed by
another.
Raulin peered at them, and then gasped.
The warriors stared sightlessly as they came, and their flesh
was sagged and twisted, like old candle wax frozen in middrip.
They strode steadily but clumsily, as if not quite alive, and-
"Melted," Embra whispered to him. "Beware! If you touch
them, they can burst into flames!"
As she spoke, Hawkril unslung his great warsword and
stepped away from the wall to face the oncoming warriors. There
were seven or eight Melted on the road now, and probably more
in the trees. "Behind?" the armaragor asked calmly.
Craer ducked his head out from the stones. "None, but"— he
twisted himself around to peer—"four coming down the rocks,
and more above."
Embra looked up and took a step away from the rock face, but
Sarasper caught at the arm she was raising, and said, "Save your
spells—for now, at least. We may need them to get clear of this."
"W-what should I do?" Raulin asked uncertainly.
"Watch out back the way we came, lad," Craer snapped,

pointing, "and yell out if you see anyone or any beast
coming—what, how many, and how close."
With a sudden rush Hawkril slashed the ankles out from
under a Melted. It fell heavily on its side in uncanny,
unbreathing silence, and the Melted behind it fell over it. The
warsword beheaded that second Melted even before the first
warrior rolled to its hands and knees and started crawling
towards Hawkril.
He hacked at it once, and then ducked back as the next three
Melted came striding swiftly forward, in a group.
"Which mage, d'you think?" Sarasper asked Embra.
The Lady of Jewels shrugged. "It could be anyone; who knows
how many wizards may have seen Gorloun's notes? They must be
meant for us, mind, and that explains Craer's watched
feeling—someone is farscrying us right now." She crossed the
road swiftly, knelt beside a dead sapling, and murmured forth
fingerflames. Holding her hand like an axe blade, she seared
through the base of the sapling, caught it as it started to topple,
and handed it to Craer.
With a wordless nod the procurer turned, summoning
Sarasper with a jerk of his head, and thrust the wooden pole up
the rock face, at the lowest of the Melted.
It was just out of reach, and Craer swung the pole hastily
down and around to catch the shoulder of one of the Melted in
the road and smash him sideways into his two fellows, as they
stood slashing at Hawkril's parrying warsword.
In a flash Hawkril bent and chopped low at the other side of
the stumbling trio—and they went over together like a collapsing
haystack. Craer leaped into the pile with his dagger in one hand
and the pole in the other, hacking like a madman.
There was a sudden great roar of flame from the writhing
heap of bodies, and the procurer tumbled hastily back out of the
sudden inferno by vaulting with his pole—scorched and smiling
fiercely.

"So a watching mage wants us cooked, hey?" He thrust the
blackened, flaming end of the pole up the cliff again, and this
time managed to deal the legs of the lowest Melted a solid blow.
It slipped, clawing vines and rock, and fell—and the procurer
and Sarasper pounced on it, caught hold of a boot and an elbow,
and threw as hard as they could.
In the same dead silence the Melted whirled past Hawkril like
a rag doll, and crashed into the blazing heap of its fellows. Two
more Melted were trying to push past this small conflagration,
but were being held back by great swings of Hawkril's warsword,
which threatened to sweep them into the flames even if they
parried it to avoid losing limbs.
Craer glanced back up at the rock face and the Melted still
standing above it, and then at those stiffly striding around the
blazing heap in the road, seeking to outflank Hawkril, and called,
"Raulin-still clear?"
"Yes!" the young bard shouted. Craer nodded and cried, "Fall
back, everyone! Hawk, draw back beyond the rock face!"
The armaragor growled his dislike of butchering walking
dead men, but stepped back a reluctant pace—and as he did, the
Melted poured forward, coming out of the trees in numbers,
now.
Craer was still looking up, smoldering pole in hand, as he
waved the others back along the road. What he'd been awaiting
befell almost immediately: a Melted sprang from the rocks,
seeking to land atop Sarasper.
With a brittle smile the procurer darted to just the right
place, planted himself-and held firm as the plunging warrior
impaled himself on the sapling. It shivered, splintered, and then
collapsed in the process, and Craer sprang back just before the
Melted burst into flame.
Another Melted jumped or fell from the rock face, and the
panting procurer sprinted to Hawkril's side to guard the
retreating armaragor's flank, and then to turn suddenly, and

call, "Embra! Now!"
The Lady Overduke raised both hands over her head, snarled
something intricate and hissing, and then flung her arms
forward as if she was hurling a flour sack down to someone
waiting below. Craer and Hawkril threw themselves off the road
into the trees as Embra's shapely hands came down.
Flames roiled forth from the empty air in front of the
sorceress, a great snarling flood of fire that plucked Melted from
the rock face, caused two more to fall from the trees above the
rocks, and swept over everything on the road.
There were sudden bursts of fire here and there as whoever
was controlling the staggering dead men caused them to burst
apart in flame, hoping to catch one of the Four.
Embra smiled grimly, and tugged at her fire as if she was
clawing at an invisible quilt or fishnet in the air, seeking to drag
it back and—
Sweep the last Melted from atop the rocks, scorching the
leaves there with a loud crackling, to plunge in that same dead
silence down into the flames below.
Raulin and the Four watched the conflagration and the forest
on either side closely, but saw no foe beyond a lone, blazing
Melted that lurched forward at least ten paces out of the flames,
trying to reach them even as it crumbled to ash.
"Feast, anyone?" Craer asked, waving a hand at the dying
flames.
"I fear the meat is a bit crisped," Hawkril replied, "but my
thanks for your kind invitation." He squinted at the crumbling
bones in the thick of the angry red flames, then pointed.
"That one, yonder, is less scorched than most. Is there any
way to tell what mage sent it, love lass?"
Embra smiled and shrugged. "I doubt it, but it won't hurt to
have a look."

Gingerly, she picked her way between the heaps of ash and
guttering flames, heading for a Melted that had escaped the
flames from its thighs upward—or rather outward, for thanks to
Hawkril's warsword, it lay in a sprawl of severed limbs to one
side of the road.
Embra cast wary glances all around, then bent to peer at it,
frowning. After a long moment she sighed, shook her head, and
rose again—only to tread on a hot ember and leap swiftly aside,
to an ungraceful landing on her knees nearby.
In midleap, something whipped past her—flashing by her
shoulder to bury itself in a tree.
"Sargh!" Craer snarled, and launched himself into the trees in
a furious, crashing sprint, leaping deadfalls and racing through
tangles at breakneck speed, not even taking the time to snatch
out a dagger—wherefore it took him an instant to do so, and
throw, when he came out into a little clearing and saw a robed
man, running ahead of him, plunge into an inky, upright whorl
in the air.
The man vanished into the rotating oval of darkness and it
promptly spun faster, spiraling into nothingness at his heels. It
swallowed Craer's flashing blade just before it grew too small to
see-but if his steel struck something, it left no sign behind.
Snarling, Craer rushed forward to slash through where the
whorl had been with another dagger, cutting the empty air
repeatedly. He'd known it was futile when he started, but… 'twas
always best to be sure.
Panting, Craer retraced his steps through the deep forest and
found his companions staring grimly at the arrow that had
sought Embra's life.
It was no arrow at all, but a snake stretched out straight and
rigid, fangs agape and buried deep in the tree bark. Its slitted
eyes swiveled to better see the procurer as he bent to scowl at it.
The scaled body must be held rigid by a spell…
"It'll stay that way until its fangs touch flesh," Embra

murmured. Craer quirked an eyebrow, and slowly reached out to
take hold of the serpent.
"No," the Lady Overduke snapped. "It can be used as a focus
for magic, against us. Leave it be."
Craer hesitated, moved his hand a little closer to the
snake—which turned its eye still more, to look at him—and then,
reluctantly, drew his hand back. He grimaced a little; it never
sits well with a procurer, to be able to reach something
interesting, but know he shouldn't.
"Well," Sarasper grunted from behind him, "at least we've
achieved something this day. Craer Delnbone learned a touch of
prudence. His first, I believe."
Craer turned his head very slowly to give the old healer an
unloving look. In the process, his gaze swung across Raulin-who
kept himself carefully expressionless—and both Embra and
Hawkril, who both suppressed smiles rather poorly.
The face of the swordlord who sat on a splendid chestnut war
steed at the head of the hastily assembled garrison was rather
pale. As white as Wind-fangs snow, in fact.
The big man in the fluted armor smiled as he raised his open
hand in greeting. "Hail, Swordlord of Sard Where's the Baron
Brightpennant? I've business with him!"
The swordlord licked his lips. "N-not here," he said
reluctantly. "Gone on a mission for the Crown, we know not
where." He eyed the ready-armed host behind the big armored
man, and asked, "Who are you, sir— and what business have you
in Brightpennant that needs an army to accomplish it?"
"Your eyes behold the new Baron of Glarond," the man at the
head of the host replied, "but men more often call
me—Bloodblade."
A swift murmur arose amid the guards of Sart Gasde, and
someone among the line of them that barred the way through its
gate gasped aloud.

"My fame precedes me, it seems," Bloodblade said pleasantly,
"which should make our business together much easier."
"Ah—our business?"
"Well, since Baron Brightpennant is so careless of the safety
and rule of his barony that he leaves it open and undefended to
invading armies-such as this one, that whelmed in the very
streets of Gildi without a blade raised to stop us, and has come
hither with similar lack of challenge or scrutiny—I deem
Glarsimber Belklarravus unfit to hold such office, and declare
these lands forfeit to me. In short, I am now Baron
Brightpennant, and-"
"You dare?" the swordlord shouted, snatching out his sword
and hurling it, in one snake-swift motion. "Men-resist this
outlaw rabble!"
The swordlord's throw was as sure as it was unexpected, and
the huge man in fluted armor toppled silently from his saddle,
his open-faced helm sprouting a sword-hilt and spraying blood
in all directions.
With a roar the men of Brightpennant surged forward—only
to come to a confused halt before a line of suddenly leveled
spearpoints.
Another, deeper voice snapped, "Bowmen!" and the spearmen
suddenly flung themselves to the ground, to reveal a line of
stone-faced cross-bowmen. The crash of their volley of bolts was
deafening in the castle foreyard-and before its echoes had died
away into the mad whirring of half a hundred windlasses as the
bowmen readied their bows again, the swordlord and his steed
had both crashed to the cobbles, so transfixed by arrows that
they resembled many-branched trees. Very dead trees.
The order had come from a second, slightly smaller man in
nondescript, much scarred armor, seated on a horse behind the
now-riderless mount of the giant in fluted armor. As the men of
Brightpennant watched—and the spearmen rose to menace them
once more—this man could be seen to smile, in the few moments
before he swung the visor of his helm firmly down.

"As it happens, I am Bloodblade," his voice came hollowly to
them, sounding almost lazily casual, as he raised one gauntleted
hand in greeting, "and I offer you a choice: surrender or death.
Gildi is mine, and Sart shall be mine by nightfall, one way or
another. I am your new baron; will you serve me, or not? Choose,
men of Brightpennant, for neither patience nor mercy runs
strong in me."
A few moments of tumult followed under the castle arch, as
Brightpennant armsmen traded glances, jostled, and cursed.
Some flung down their arms, and stepped back. Others stood
their ground defiantly, one of them swinging his blade at a fellow
who'd surrendered his steel. No one moved to stop the brief,
brutal thrusts that followed.
Bloodblade's spearmen watched impassively… and ere long,
silence fell like a tense cloak over the scene, and it could be seen
that perhaps a score of the armsmen of Brightpennant stood
defiantly in the arch, swords and shields raised ready for the
fray. Almost as many stood uncertainly aside, openhanded and
looking rather foolish.
"Those who've surrendered," Bloodblade said flatly, "get you
down on the stones, flat—facedown, and move not until I say so."
After a moment of uncertain hesitation, the unarmed men
clattered their ways onto their bellies, leaving the few defiant
armsmen alone in the arch. "Such loyalty should be rewarded,"
Bloodblade declaimed grandly, looking up and around at
frightened faces peering out of house windows and castle
balconies. And his open hand swept down.
The line of spears was flung, and Bloodblade's spearmen
hurled themselves to the cobbles in the same movement. The
Brightpennant armsmen were still staggering and reeling when
half a hundred crossbows fired again, the crash and thrumming
as loud as ever.
When that hail of heavy quarrels was done, only three men
still stood in the arch. Bloodblade's horse danced restlessly,
snorting at the smell of blood, but he sat in his saddle as easily
as if it was a solid, immobile throne, and asked gently, "You

three brave men-do you reconsider? Will you fight for me, or still
stand against me? I pay well, but coin is brighter payment than
the waiting grave."
One armsman threw down his sword and shield—but the
Brightpennant guard beside him turned and drove his blade
through the side lacings of the man's armor, and he fell.
Grim-faced, the two surviving armsmen looked at each other,
then straightened their shoulders and stood ready against
Bloodblade's army.
"Halduth," the warlord said calmly, and the ranks of his host
parted before a man even larger than the false Bloodblade in the
fluted armor—a man who drew back his arm and hurled a war
spear as large as a tree without salute or delay.
It struck one of the two remaining defenders in the chest,
plucking the man off his feet and bearing him some twenty
paces into the castle courtyard. When the spear slid to a stop,
the bleeding, broken thing wrapped around it no longer looked
like a man, let alone clung to life.
The last man wept, flung down his shield-and then with a
wild roar, raced forward into the ranks of Bloodblade's men,
hacking frantically. For an amazingly long time he slashed,
thrust, kicked, and spat, loudly crying, "Brightpennant!" thrice…
but in the end he was overwhelmed, and men turned from him
to raise bloody blades in salute to Sendrith Dudijack.
Bloodblade gestured wordlessly to the castle, and with a roar
they surged inside, waving blades and bellowing triumph. Their
orders were clear: no breakage or burning, no harrying of
horseflesh, no savaging of any clergy, cook, or kitchen maid-but
all armsmen, swordcaptains, courtiers, and other women were
theirs to sport with.
As the screaming began, Bloodblade turned in his saddle to
look down into certain waiting faces, and said, "Lordikul, stand
guard around me with all your command. Darag, go and secure
what I've ordered."
Darag saluted him impassively and led his men off at a trot.

Bloodblade watched men hooting and running this way and
that across the castle yard for a time, and was seen to smile.
Then he turned again, and said to Lorthkul, "Find me the trade
fair. We'll buy herbs there and enjoy fair Sart town, until Darag
sends word that the feast is ready. Castles are such noisy, bloody
places."
Chapter Five
A Storm of Serpents
Te faces of the commoners were white with terror; clearly
they expected to die here this night, as they shuffled into the
feasting hall of Sart Castle under the gentle but firm hands of
Bloodblade's armsmen.
When the seats were filled—fourscore full-armed warriors,
still in their reeking and blood-smirched armor, seated across
from as many frightened commoners—and swordcaptains at
each table had rapped for silence and received it, the tapestries
behind the baronial high seat parted, and a large man in a plain
tunic came into view, bearing the baron's great goblet in his
hand.
"Welcome!" he said pleasantly. "I am your baron—Lord of
Brightpennant and Glarond both. I'm sure you're all well aware
of the unpleasantness that befell earlier this day, and my men
have shown you several chambers full of carrion we scoured out
of these halls: courtiers who should have been dead years ago, or
doing honest work as you do, rather than simpering over feasts
here while you sweated."
He smiled around at them. "No, friends, there are no tricks.
Unless one of you is so foolish as to draw blade and try to harm
any warrior here, none of you will die this night. Eat and drink
heartily! Be merry, for this is a bright new beginning for Sart
and for Brightpennant!"
He raised his goblet in salute. "This is your feast now, and
your castle. In Bloodblade's Aglirta—yes, the rumors are true,

may we always meet in pleasant peace—there'll be no more such
bejewelled parasites bleeding you white with taxes. You will find
my hand light and merciful, and my rule fair—so long as you but
spare some food and drink for my army, as I march on
Flowfoam, to take the River Throne and become your rightful
king."
The faint echoes of distant, drunken singing came to him. The
man who called himself Bloodblade smiled faintly, and went to
find the errant open window.
When he found it, amid all the fine paneling, tapestries, and
gleaming statuettes, he drew it firmly down to shut out the
sounds of revelry, murmured, "The feast is well advanced,
indeed," and retrieved his goblet of wine.
Three Above, but these barons treated themselves well! This
rich, cherry-red Best Aluith from the Sheiryn uplands was like
nuts and fire, warming the belly as much as it pleased the
tongue.
Bloodblade swirled the goblet to watch it flash back
reflections of the candlelight as he padded barefoot across what
had been until recently Glarsimber the Wolf's study. His men
had installed two terrified but still attractive chambermaids in
the bed he'd sleep in this night, but the warlord was in no hurry
to seek that particular door. Darag had gagged the wenches to
keep them silent, and bound them to the bedposts to keep them
unharmed and where they should be; they would keep until it
suited him to go visiting.
He wandered about the study. Books, many books, some of
them too old and dusty to have known Glarsimber's touch. Idly
he drew one form, flipped it open to a random page, and read
aloud, "The blessed text begins, aye, so it doth, calling forth
trumpet-clear o'er hills and turrets, battlements and spires, to
smite the ears of foolish men and their hearts besides, and leave
no life untouched, no soul unguided…"
Smirking, Bloodblade slammed the book, rearing his head
back from the inevitable cloud of dust, and slid it back into
place, shaking his head. Why did otherwise clear-witted men

waste their time with such airy fripperies—such utter dross?
There was a restlessness in him, this night. Sart had fallen too
easily; the task seemed unfinished, somehow. The Baron of
Glarond and Brightpennant lingered by Glarsimber's map of
Aglirta, staring thoughtfully at the twists and turns of the
Silverflow. "Where to conquer next?" he asked the empty air
lightly. "Ah, decisions, decisions…"
The voice from the darkness behind him was as unexpected
as it was soft, "Nay, Bloodblade, don't alter what we've agreed to.
We can't shield you with magic if you turn willful tyrant on us
and ride where we don't expect."
Sendrith Duthjack's face was suddenly as hard as stone, his
eyes two glittering gems as his hand closed like a claw around
the baronial goblet— but he took care to relax his features into a
calm mask ere he turned to face the speaker. He did not,
however, smile.
Red-gold it was, bright against the darkness of his dreams,
looming up bright and fierce to stare right at him.
He stared back into the dragon's golden, knowing gaze,
caught and held by its regard as if he was transfixed on a
sword. He could not move, could not speak, too terrified to even
weep as the great wyrm turned lazily, so smooth on its vast
wings.
As large as a castle it dived at him, racing down, its great
jaws and claws opening…
And then, as always, he woke up.
Meanwhile
Flaeros paused for breath, wiping sweat from his brow with
his sleeve. "Baron," he gasped, "could we rest, perhaps?"
The Baron of Brightpennant turned and gave him a quizzical
glare. "Why, lad? It's been but half a day, at none so brisk a
walk! Have you stepped on something? D'you nurse some hidden

wound or other?"
The Bard of the Delcampers drew himself up, breathing
heavily, and then gave Glarsimber the Wolf a miserable smile.
"No," he panted, "I'm just not used-to this-"
The baron snorted. "How can you be a bard, and sing of long
pursuits and hunts, if you've never even walked in the woods for
a day? Wet with sweat, and not even wearing armor! What do
Delcampers have for backbones, anyway? Broken straws?"
Flaeros winced, but Glarsimber put a heavy hand on his
shoulder and practically forced him down into a sitting position
on a wayside stone. "Sit, lad, and rest," he growled. "It's not like
Aglirta hasn't needed saving for several centuries or so! What
boots another day or two?"
And he lowered his own substantial backside onto an
adjacent stone.
They'd been sitting thus, breathing in heavy unison, for quite
some time when the baron stiffened, turned his head a little, and
listened intently, holding up a hand for silence.
Flaeros bent his head and leaned in that direction, too. It
wasn't long before he heard what had caught the baron's
attention—and that even now made Glarsimber put a finger to
lips for silence and gesture that they should both rise. The old
warrior promptly drew his blade with exaggerated care and
slowness, so that it made not a sound, and put a hand on the
bard's wrist before Flaeros could attempt the same thing.
Transferring his grip up to a handy Delcamper forearm, he
led Flaeros back away from the rocks, to where there was a little
open space around the road where a tree had fallen long ago.
Then the baron turned again to face the direction from which
those soft sounds—of footfalls, boots planted heavily and
clumsily on soft ground—had come, and crouched with his
sword hilt low before him, its tip up and foremost like the prow
of a ship.
And then the shambling Melted came.

Dead they were, or looked it, and yet moved. Stiff and clumsy,
striding ahead with unseeing eyes and blades in their hands,
their flesh melted and sagging hideously away from skulls and
lesser bones.
"Oak and Lady both be with me," the baron swore, eyes
narrowing. Melted! Hadn't they all fallen with Corloun?
Or—gods, yes!—didn't every damned wizard write everything
down so he could boast about it? And those scrolls fell into the
hands of other mages, and so on… but of course: every wizard in
all the Vale probably knew how to make these shamblers now!
"Run, lad," he said shortly. "You can't stand up to these-try,
and let them get a grip on you, and they'll explode into flames
and take you with 'em!"
"But-I can't leave you!" Flaeros protested, dancing in fearful
indecision, torn between fleeing and not daring to leave the
reassuring safety of the Smiling Wolfs blade.
"Ah, got to stay and see the heroic baronial fall, and write the
ballad about it, hey?" Glarsimber said, eyes never leaving the
advancing cadavers. "Can't you see it from a distance, lad? Or
perhaps work some useful magic with that scepter you've been
so clumsy at trying to keep hidden from me?"
"I-uh-"
The silver-tongued bard Flaeros was still struggling for words
when the first Melted reached Glarsimber-and swung its blade
with a vicious speed that was astonishing for something that
tottered along with such faltering, stumbling strides.
But the Smiling Wolf wasn't there. A quick sidestep, a lunge
around and to the right-and the slashing blade missed an
armored thigh by inches, while Glarsimber brought his own
stout blade around in a chop that half severed the Melted's head.
It flopped loosely atop the bloodless neck, but seemed not to slow
or confuse the shuffling cadaver at all. The Melted turned with a
lurch and struck out vigorously again, striking sparks from the
baron's parrying blade—and this time Glarsimber backed hastily
away from it, as three other Melted came within reach and

chopped at him in unison, heedless of each other's blades or the
intervening arm of the first Melted.
That arm dangled from a few strips of flesh when they were
done, and one Melted had been knocked over by the backswing
of a fellow, but none of the lurching corpses seemed to feel pain
or even to notice what wounds they took or what happened to
their fellows. They stumbled forward, and Glarsimber cast a
quick look back over his other shoulder, swore, and lunged with
his blade right under a Delcamper armpit. "Gods, lad, don't you
ever look behind you?"
Flaeros gulped, ran a few steps and turned in time to see the
Baron of Brightpennant slash open the face of a Melted with a
flurry of swordblows, duck forward to trip the corpse over
backwards, then spin away to rush back to where he'd first been
fighting, and parry the thrusting blade of another Melted before
it ran Flaeros through.
"Would this be the hearty exercise you were saving your
strength for earlier, lad?" Glarsimber panted, as he pounded
past. "I'd appreciate it if you jumped about a bit, even if you
don't want to swing a blade—just to give these corpses a little
sport, that's all!"
Flaeros shot him a shocked look, then realized the baron was
jesting and ducked frantically away from the blade of a
Melted—only to feel the icy sting of another blade, its tip just
slicing flesh after cutting through a stout cloak and fine
Delcamper clothing. Glarsimber shouted and hacked that
Melted furiously away, sending it staggering back on its heels
with its forearms cut off, and then it seemed to the panting,
stumbling bard that they were ringed all around by dark blades,
closing in slowly as the Melted holding them advanced
impassively, and that despite the baron's raging, they were
doomed…
Suddenly there was a coldness in the air around them that
shouldn't have been there, and a blue mist or smoke, and then
strange shadowy trees that didn't match the trees around
them—and the blue rathance shaped a ring or arch around
them, through which the thrusting blades of the Melted were

forcing them, as Glarsimber cursed and stamped and slashed…
… And then, suddenly, they were somewhere else, in a forest
that looked Aglirtan: Flaeros, Baron Belklarravus, and a dozen or
more Melted.
"We were herded, lad! Watch sharp!" Glarsimber roared,
hacking and parrying like a madman. Flaeros ducked away from
one Melted, rolled away from the thrusting blade of
another—and suddenly found himself with no foe standing in his
way, amid long-dead branches in the undergrowth of a deep
forest. Sun reached down to light up small pools of the forest
floor in the distance-glades choked with green leaves blazing
bright in the sunlight—and in the far, rolling distance, the green
gloom brightened where mere must be an edge to the trees, with
open land beyond.
The bard found his feet and ran like he'd never run before,
crashing through brittle dead branches and plunging down
slippery slopes choked in deep leaves and moss, whooping for
breath and just running, running, all thoughts of brave barons
and dragon scepters and regent's summons forgotten in his
frantic flight to be away from silent, lurching corpses that
reached for him with drooping, dripping flesh.
"For Brightpennant! For Sart! Ah, Lady take you-for me,
damn it!"
Baron Glarsimber hacked through what must have been his
fortieth severed Melted arm. None of these had caught flame,
thank the watching gods-why, I wonder?
That had been a spell-gate, and they'd been herded through
it, he and the lad—why? And where by the Claws of the Dark
One was Flaeros, anyway?
The Smiling Wolf chopped aside a Melted blade and then an
elbow, beyond, spinning the cadaver around. Then he hacked
viciously at its knees from behind, pitching it over on its back,
forever.
That was the last. He was done.

Wearily, Glarsimber leaned on his sword, panted for breath,
and bellowed the lad's name. No reply.
He peered about, under the trees, fearing the worst, and
shouted for the bard again. Nothing but Melted and their pieces,
lying where they'd fallen. Not even a trail of blood.
The Baron of Brightpennant panted out a fervent curse on all
bards, hacked aside a sapling that was in his way, and grimly
started searching.
"Along the towpaths, Lord, all day and night," the man
gasped, before he fell on his face on the polished marble of
Flowfoam.
Blackgult knelt beside him, ignoring courtiers' shocked looks,
and said to that battered, exhausted face, "Bloodblade claimed
to be Baron of Glarond, ere his men carried Sart Castle?"
"Aye, Lord Regent," the man said in a dull, fading voice.
"Glarond and Brightpennant both, he said—and our army to join
his." His next word trailed off into an unintelligible moan, and
his eyes closed.
"My thanks, loyal sir," the regent said, clasping the man's
shoulder.
He rose and snapped at the nearest courtier, "Temple healers!
Here, at once, to see to this brave man!"
"L-lord?"
Blackgult caught the disbelieving courtier by the shoulder,
pointed at the unconscious and travel-stained body sprawled on
the marble before the River Throne, and snarled, "'This is what a
courtier should be! Remember well true loyalty, and its
reward-and by the Horns of the Lady, get those healers! Run!"
This last bellow nearly deafened the courtier, and made him
stumble backwards down the steps to a hard and painful landing
on his behind-but he scrambled up and promptly trotted away,
painfully but at a respectable speed.

Blackgult whirled around to point at another courtier. "You!
To the barracks, forthwith! Tell the swordcaptains full
provisions—ready for war!" He pointed at another courtier.
"You! To the South Tower; tell Halvan to be ready. Then drop all
else and submit to Garzhar's orders. He'll be in charge here."
The courtier gaped at him. "Old Garzhar of the Guards? In
charge? But—but Lord, where will you-?"
"I'll be riding to war," the regent told him with a savage smile,
"at least one last time. For Aglirta, and a future for us all!"
His smile twisted wryly. "As the bards say."
The attack was a complete surprise. Thinking themselves safe
with the hastily whelmed forces of Brostos massed between them
and the brigand army of Bloodblade, the red-cloaked knights of
Maerlin were still fetching out their best blades and brightest
armor when barges grated against their docks and the warriors
of Bloodblade stormed ashore, spitting everything that moved on
their spears—and greeting the indignantly charging knights with
volleys of heavy crossbow quarrels, whistling storms of death
that slew hundreds in the space of a few breaths.
Then it was just a matter of seizing riderless horses and
riding through the barony, swording half-armored,
magnificently moustached men as they tried to hide or gather
their best treasures before fleeing.
Brostos would keep, an all-too-sparse line of armaragors and
farmhands hastily made armsmen waiting in grim fear along the
borders of the barony. They'd not move a stride onto lands not
their own—so why break blades against them, when they'd
surrender like the grateful cowards they were, once summoned
to Flowfoam by the new king?
Castle Maerlin was scoured out by nightfall, its dungeons
crowded with terrified baronial heirs, wives, consorts, and
courtiers who had—or claimed to have-hidden wealth with
which to buy their freedom, if taken under escort to reclaim it.
Bloodblade was already hard at work on the list of those his

men were to make sure "accidents" befell after their treasure
was safely in hand and of those who were harmless enough to be
let go.
There were three fair lasses waiting in chains in his
bedchamber this night, but they would have to wait until
another feast was done, whereat another dumbfounded, fearful
crowd of commoners would be told that there'd be no more
"bejewelled parasites" of courtiers overtaxing them in
Bloodblade's Aglirta—if they but spared some food and drink for
his armies, as he marched on Flowfoam to take the Throne. It
was so close now that Bloodblade could taste it.
"I've a bad feeling about this," Craer grunted, as they trudged
along the road together.
"What, walking? Try to remember all the years before you
became an overduke, and your feet should recall their familiar
aches," Sarasper told him with mock tenderness and sympathy.
"No, you old dolt, not my feet-the road. 'Tis too quiet," Craer
snapped. "Where're all the peddlers? The carters? By the Three,
not even a wagon, let alone a caravan! Just locals, like those
woodcutters—no one who's traveled far!"
"That's true enough," Hawkril rumbled, looking thoughtful.
"Aye, these roads'd have to be busier than this."
Raulin and Embra both looked at Craer with wide, fearful
eyes.
The procurer nodded slowly, and voiced the fear rising in all
of their minds. "So what has been happening in Aglirta while we
trudge along the backlands of nowhere? What wow?"
"Ready, Halvan?" Blackgult called, reining in his huge black
warhorse and ignoring its dragonlike snorts of outrage.
"Ho, Regent!" the fat armored man on the bay mount almost
as large roared back. "My Sirl Swords can o'ermatch anything
Bloodblade can send against us!"

Blackgult grinned. "For the coin you cost, that's the least I'd
expect! What, no dancing girls, too?"
Halvan threw back his head and roared with laughter.
They understood each other, the Regent of Aglirta and the
Sirl mercenary captain. Blackgult had whelmed a few hundred
men from the fragments of his own old baronial forces—but if
the news that Bloodblade had taken Maerlin was true, that
meant the Regent of Aglirta commanded just enough men to
guard the stables of Castle Maerlin, and keep safe the horses of
the would-be usurper.
Halvan's troops numbered nigh a thousand, but a fifth of
those were untrained younglings eager to bloody their blades for
the first time-and apt to be reckless wildheads in the field, a
danger to friend and foe alike.
Yet Halvan could be trusted, his loyalty guaranteed by the
spells of three Sirl wizards, who could dash his head to bloody
gobbets from afar if he betrayed Blackgult. That was the best
thing about hiring Sirl mercenaries, and made them worth three
times any muster of other hireswords.
And if they were all fated to die at the hands of
Bloodblade—well, at least he'd have to be a strong warcaptain to
take them down, perhaps strong enough to hold the Throne
against fell wizards and sneaking Serpent-priests, and make
Aglirta strong again.
The Golden Griffon had enjoyed a long run and a good one,
and the gods gather us all in the end.
Not that it wasn't more fun to send others into the everlasting
embrace of the Three first, cheating the Sirl oddsmakers one
more time…
The breeze gathered force, setting the leaves of the trees
ahead to rustling—and Blackgult grinned again, like a carefree
lad let out to play. He was riding to war in his old armor once
more, free of chattering courtiers, scuttling scribes, and endless
papers, papers, and more papers to read and sign.

There was a brief confusion of jostling horses and
good-naturedly cursing riders as the Royal Host of Aglirta
narrowed to a point, like a gigantic spear, to pour down the
dark, narrow road ahead.
When things were sorted out, the riders gathered speed.
"Lances down," Blackgult and Halvan ordered the armaragors
ahead, in unplanned unison, and then traded grins again as the
thunder of hooves grew loud in the dim-shaded corridor around
them. From the farms nigh the docks, the main road through
southbank Silvertree ran through these tangled woods to the
open meadows of Sarth Fields.
There, with the sleepy hamlet of Sardi hard by, they'd meet
Blood-blade's army, with room enough to swing swords. If the
day went against them, they could always fall back into this
wood and fight in the shade, sword to sword—but if that befell, it
was likely Bloodblade would send barges past them, seize
Flowfoam, and proclaim himself king.
Similar forests—and bogs to the south, so treacherous and
stinging with insects that no man dwelt there—trammeled
Duthjack's way east from Maerlin. Unless he made all his
armsmen swim, or built a hundred new barges overnight, the
usurper would have to come to Sarth.
If Blackgult could only get there first, he could use the old
ditches and cart bridges and hedgerows as his shields, and make
Bloodblade pay dearly for daring the snatch at the Crown. If
only…
There was a shout of triumph from his foremost riders as they
spurred out of the trees and found the rolling fields empty of
banners and waiting, glittering steel. They were in time! They
were—
Pitching from their saddles in startled silence, to be trampled
under-hoof and lost, man after man of Blackgult's best. What, by
all the gods?— there!
"Lances to the side-strike at will! Visors down!" Blackgult
roared, standing in his stirrups to make his voice carry back.

Serpent-priests were standing among the last few trees,
hurling tiny javelins overhand at the riders pounding past.
Javelins that trailed fleeting glows of magic, and found
targets with unerring aim: the unprotected faces and throats of
men who hadn't laced gorgets up and clasped visors down. No,
not javelins, but arrows… arrows with strange heads, like the
gaping fangs of—
"Serpents!" Halvan swore. "They're throwing snakes at us!"
The priests threw snake after snake, little rigid darts that
struck down all too many warriors, tumbling them dying out of
their saddles. Those that missed hissed and slithered underfoot,
though many were crushed by the plunging hooves. Blackgult
saw one priest throw his last snake and then race forward with
knife in hand, screaming with rage, eyes fearless, to slash at
stirrups and girth straps and the flanks of warhorses. He was
kicked aside by several horsemen, but always rose again.
Fearless-they were all fearless. Drunk on some potion or
perhaps a spell of their wizard god.
Blackgult leaned down from his saddle to slash one
dagger-wielding priest across the face, met the glare of
glittering, hate-filled eyes for a moment, then swept on. That
man had not bled! His sword had laid open flesh to grate along
bone beneath, right across jaw and nose and forehead—yet no
blood!
"More magic!" he cursed, and felt for the Dwaer in their
pouch slung under his left armpit. Well, if sorcery was the
favored sword this day…
That thought took him as far as the first cart bridge in Sardi
Fields, where the road crossed winding Crommor's Creek— and
the realization, as armaragors cursed and wrestled with their
reins ahead of him, that the bridge was missing. To avoid a
breakneck plunge into the narrow, deep creek bed, riders were
turning right and left along the banks—and there were shouts
and the clang of weapons making war.

Blackgult turned one way, and Halvan the other—and both
found themselves staring at an army now scrambling on foot up
the slopes of the creek to attack them with an uneven line of
dark, dung-smeared pikes and bills and man-forks.
Mercenaries! A ragtag, motley host of tattooed and
strange-armored hireswords from seemingly every port and
town in Darsar—thousands of them!
Blackgult gaped in utter disbelief. He could see red-sashed
pirates out of Jarrada, running shoulder-to-shoulder with grim,
spire-helmed knights of Pelaerth! Even as the Royal Host
crashed to a halt in a welter of shouting, hacking men, there
came a sudden thunder of hooves from beyond the barns of
Sardi—and into view around an orchard came a long line of
horsemen, riding hard. Pennants of bright silk—oranges, golds,
and vivid lime greens, colors never seen in Aglirta-streamed
from the tips of their long lances.
"Flame Riders!" Halvan shouted, sounding every bit as
disbelieving as Blackgult. The fearsome warriors of the hot
South, not seen on a Vale battlefield before… dusky-skinned and
straw-haired men of far Sarinda beyond Carraglas, who fought
in silks with streamers of silk whirling from bracers at their
wrists, with no armor but glassy plates down their arms, and
wielded swords of hardened glass!
The coffers of the Scaly Ones must be deep indeed to reach so
far, and bring so many here unseen! There was no sign of
Bloodblade-this must be the Snake-lovers' own doom for Aglirta!
A hurled spear clanged harmlessly off his shoulder-plates, and
fell away. Blackgult snarled a curse and snatched at the horn
that hung at his belt, to blow the call to form a lance ring. Barely
onto the field, and the Royal Host would be making its last
stand!
Halvan was watching for the horn already. Blackgult held it
up so the Sirl warcaptain could see it clearly, but turned his
head south again as he blew it, to look towards the river. Was
the disaster complete, and Blood-blade sliding past this fray on
barges?

No—the Three had granted him that small mercy, at least.
Well, 'twas time to die gloriously, for Aglirta and the Rightful
King!
He roared that battle cry as he wheeled his mount, heading
for the highest nearby hill, and heard the men around him-his
own loyal men of Blackgult—take it up, raggedly and then
proudly, as the hooves of their war mounts trampled barley, and
the hilltop seemed to leap towards them.
Behind them the galloping Flame Riders gathered speed,
lances lowered, seeking to overrun the Royal Host before the
lance ring could be formed.
Serpent-priests were running fearlessly alongside the Aglirtan
armaragors, hurling daggers. Blackgult glared at more who rose
out of the barley to meet them, with more serpent-arrows-no,
they'd been whisked here by spells.
No matter. He looked into their eyes, and they looked
back—looks that promised death.
The Serpent-priests, smiling coldly, had also come to play at
Throne-snatching.
Chapter Six
A King Shall Arise
The road ahead wound through overgrown, abandoned farm
fields—Craer growled; the tall grasses were the best sort of cover
for lurking brigands—and plunged into a shady hollow, crossing
a small stream and vanishing into trees. Peering along it, they
could just see a few bright patches of sun dapple in the distance.
"Raulin?" Craer asked quietly, from the head of the weary
procession of walkers.
"Nothing but stray flies and fluttercloaks," the bard replied,
from his post at the back, looking ever behind him.

Craer looked at Hawkril. "This is eerie. Unless there's a plague
we've not heard about, or a dozen hungry dragons came foraging
last night, the countryside shouldn't be nearly this empty."
The hulking armaragor spread his gauntlets in a helpless
shrug. "Mayhap they saw you coming, and decided to hide what
they hold most valuable."
Craer snorted. "In backcountry farms, that'd be a cow."
Sarasper shook his head. "Nay, Lord Overduke-when times
are hard, the only valuable possession left to the farmer is
himself."
The procurer made a rude, derisive sound. "So they all
dragged trunks out of hidey-holes, leaped inside, locked the lids
down, bumped themselves back into the holes, and caused the
ready-heaped earth and turf to fall neatly back into place atop
them, is that it?"
"Gently," Sarasper said soothingly, "and eyes front: I thought
I saw something moving in the trees, yonder."
"I'll give you something moving in the trees yonder," Craer
snarled, "in a breath or…"
His sour promise trailed away as they all saw it: a heavyset
man in armor, stalking along through the forest with a drawn
sword in hand. Lurching along, the warrior seemed to be alone…
and that jowly, long-sideburned face looked familiar, somehow…
"Brightpennant!" Craer called. "Smiling Wolf!"
The man's head jerked up, and he peered through the trees at
them. He'd obviously been following the line of the road without
getting too close to it, or paying it overmuch attention. Now he
came crashing down through the ferns and manythorn canes
towards them, wearing a frown.
"Fair day, Overdukes," he greeted them. "Have you seen a
young fool of a bard running this way?"

Four heads turned to look at Raulin, who stared at
Glarsimber of Sart in puzzlement.
The baron lifted an eyebrow and spoke directly to the lad.
"Well, have you?"
"This one's a bard," Sarasper explained, jerking a thumb in
Raulin's direction.
Glarsimber's brows drew together. "Nay, nay—'tis Flaeros
Delcamper I'm looking for! This lad's a bard, too?"
"Well—my father was," Raulin said quietly. "What befalls,
Lord Baron?"
Glarsimber looked quickly from the young lad to the
overdukes; Embra smiled and murmured, "Pray speak freely.
We've no secrets between us-or betwixt us and the regent, for
that matter. What befalls?"
The Baron of Brightpennant frowned. "A lot of things, but one
over all: the hires word men call Bloodblade has whelmed an
army, and marches on Flowfoam as we speak, to crown himself
King of Aglirta—over the bodies of all who stand against him."
Several jaws dropped. "Pardon, Glarsimber," Craer said
sharply, "but-you've seen the warlord with your own eyes?"
The baron shook his head. "No, and I can scarce believe it
myself. Yet I trust the one I heard it from."
"Who was?" Sarasper asked promptly.
Glarsimber of Sart looked uncomfortable. "King Kelgrael
himself," he replied, leaning close to them and lowering his
voice. "Like a ghost, mind-flickering like, a candle-flame, and I
could see through him all the while."
"That would be the king, aye," Hawkril said slowly, shaking
his head in disbelief-and dismay. How could so much have gone
wrong in the Vale so swiftly? What was so amiss about this
realm he loved, and called home, and now served? An

usurper—seen by the Risen King and yet not by us? How could
this be?
He and the rest of the overdukes traded frowns, and there
were several other headshakings.
"Pardon, Lords," Raulin ventured, "but why look you so
puzzled? You believe the Lord Baron, and yet believe not his
news?"
Craer's answering grin was entirely empty of humor. "Right,
lad— exactly."
Sarasper added, "You see, mercenaries don't act this way.
Why stick your head into the noose of rulership, when you can
collect endless coins by fostering small skirmishes and avoid all
the work and danger of actually sitting on a throne. So what in
truth is going on?"
"A king shall arise…" Sarasper quoted an old ballad—and it
was Raulin's turn to frown, as he found he couldn't remember
the words to the rest of it.
And that was not a good sign.
"A king shall arise," a soft voice purred in a room suddenly a
little less dark—as the glow rising from a large, tilted mirror
shaped itself into vivid, moving hues, and then spun suddenly
into clarity: a scene of the towering walls of Flowfoam Isle, and a
surging in the river water that became scores of slow-moving,
purposeful warriors climbing up the stones. "And about time,
too…"
The man in the splendid tunic looped with glittering chains of
gold wore a thoroughly bored expression as he strolled down the
hall. Whistling more tunelessly than he thought he was, he idly
regarded the gilding of his fingernails—yes, chipped, just as he'd
feared-and stopped to gaze at his reflection in one of the oval
mirrors flanking the statue of King Olaurim, who'd ruled Aglirta
so long ago that there'd been no baronies then.
"In the days when the Three walked the land and trees were

all rooted in the air, floating freely and blowing hither and
thither with the storms," the courtier quoted grandly, waving his
hands like a great orator, "then was Aglirta born, king and all,
and great was the war and wrack of its founding. Beasts were
hurled back and roads laid down, and deeds actually mattered…
instead of this endless, yawning boredom…"
"If it's not too much trouble, Saraedrin," the impassive guard
standing the doors at the end of the hall said suddenly, "could
you stir your bored legs a trifle and get yourself to the throne
room? Ranking Sword Garzhar's waiting for your report."
Thelmert Saraedrin's head snapped up. "And if he is? I'm not
in the habit of taking orders from old fools in ill-fitting
armor—or doorguards, for that matter!"
"We can all learn good habits before we die, Saraedrin," the
guard said ominously. "Even if our death's not all that far off…"
He put a hand to his sword-hilt and drew forth his sword a
meaningful three fingers' worth.
"Threats, threats," the courtier sneered. "That's all you steel
heads know, isn't it? All dozen of you broken-down old men,
swaggering around the palace like strutting roosters now, with
the regent gone to war!"
"Aye," the guard agreed, "to war. Which is why your oath of
loyalty to the Throne binds you to obey Garzhar as you would the
regent—and him as you would the king himself! Now jump, or
war will come to Flowfoam even swifter than Bloodblade can
ride!"
Saraedrin snapped his fingers insolently. "I tremble, I
tremble," he taunted the guard, as he reached the doors. "See?"
The doors swung wide under a practiced hand, the courtier
drew him- ; self up with a last sneer in the guard's direction-and
a boot connected solidly with Saraedrin's backside, sending him
sprawling forward onto the gleaming marble of the throne
chamber.
"Why, you—" the courtier sputtered, voice rising into

inarticulate rage.
Before he could think of a suitable string of oaths or even get
to his feet, an old and dry voice above him commented, "your
haste is commendable, Saraedrin. Have you those figures for me
at last? They won't wait forever; I'm not a young man, you
know."
The courtier picked himself up, face dark with anger, and
snapped, "Who cares how many barrels of salted fish and wheels
of cheese we have, anyway? The regent rides to war and all we
fuss over is—"
"Preparations to withstand a siege, if need be," Ranking
Sword Garzhar said in a voice of cold iron. "On the morrow,
Thelmert Saraedrin, you'll be fitted for armor and taught to hold
a sword. By the day after that, I'll expect you to swing it without
falling over."
"What?" the courtier almost howled. He met Garzhar's cold
stare, choked back what he'd been going to say, and instead
asked sarcastically, "And what will you expect me to do on the
day after that?"
"I don't expect there will be a day after that," Garzhar said
quietly, "for any of us."
The courtier stared at him in disbelief. The bent old man in
armor ran an unsteady, callused hand through his few
remaining strands of white hair, and said grimly, "There's no
way I can hold this island against any attack, with twelve old
men in arms, three dozen fat, lazy, and utterly untrained
courtiers, twenty chambermaids, and as many cooks. Even if
we're attacked at only one spot, and we all happen by the great
blessing of the Three to be standing right there, ready to
fight—instead of having to run across the Isle from somewhere
ere-we're doomed. A few moments of sport for a handful of good
armsmen, and we'll be feeding the flies forever."
"What?" Saraedrin cried again, getting good volume this
time, so that his voice echoed across the throne chamber and
made other courtiers look up and start to drift over from the

various pillars they'd been leaning against. "Then-then-why do
we stay here?"
"I and the guardsmen under my command stay here because
we were ordered to," Garzhar said slowly and coldly, "and that's
what loyalty and a Crown Oath mean" He turned away. "As for
you pretty-boy dandies who don't understand the oaths you
swear or intend to keep them, I've never understood why you
stay here, loudly lamenting your boredom. The free food, I
suppose."
"I resent that," another courtier said in his customary grand,
deep voice. "Why, in all the years I—"
"Sword Garzhar!" the guard from the doors shouted. "Melted!
Scores of them! They came over the wall by Northlook Tower,
and are at the Garden Gate already! Daeruth's calling for aid!"
"My thanks, Ilibar! You guard the throne!" Ranking Sword
Garzhar was already limping across the polished marble,
drawing his sword as he went. "Tarth!"
"Here, Lord!" The young page was already at Garzhar's side.
He put the old man's helm into his hands—then handed him a
flask of wine.
The old man's eyes widened, and he clapped the boy on the
arm, and said, "My thanks for this. Get the cooks and maids
away, now" He strode on.
"What?" the deep-voiced courtier snapped. "You still have
boats? I thought the regent took them all! Where are they?"
"Get to your post, Nilvarr!" Garzhar roared in disgust, not
slowing in his march to the far doors.
The courtier ignored him. "Boy— boy! I demand that you—"
"Tarth!" The ranking sword called back. "Follow the order I
gave you last night!"
"With pleasure, Lord!" the page cried, darting for another

door. _ Saraedrin and Nilvarr raced after him, shouting at him
to stop.
Saraedrin was swifter, but Nilvarr was much closer. His heavy
hand fell upon the page's shoulder when they were a little more
than halfway across the nigh-deserted throne chamber. "Stop,
you disobedient little dog! Nilvarr snarled, spinning Tarth
around. "I'm a lord of the court, and I gave you a direct order!
You're in a lot of trouble, and you'll be in a lot more if—"
"—I do this! Tarth shouted suddenly, clawing aside Nilvarr's
ornamental silver filigree codpiece with one swipe of his
hand—and lifting his leg in a full-strength kick that met Nilvarr's
best hose at precisely the spot where the courtier's legs joined
his torso.
The tall, florid Nilvarr made a high-pitched, birdlike chirping
sound as he rose a few inches into the air, attempted some futile
clutching, clawing motions-and fell on his face, senseless, right
at Saraedrin's rushing feet.
Helplessly, Thelmert Saraedrin tripped and went
sprawling-and by the time he'd scrambled to his feet again and
joined a few other courtiers at that door, the guard, Ilibar
Quelver, was standing in their path with his back to the door
Tarth had vanished through, his sword in his hand, and a cold
grin on his face.
"I will have no choice," he said in a voice soft with eager
promise, "but to regard any man who tries to get past me as a
traitor to the Crown and an agent of the would-be usurper
Bloodblade—and be warned: I'll treat such a man fittingly." The
tip of his sword lifted a little, meaningfully.
The courtiers hesitated, not wanting to turn away or to look
at each other-and in that uncertain moment, they heard a
wrenching cry of agony from somewhere distant in the palace,
followed by the faint clash of arms.
There was a sudden, scrambling rush, and Ilibar Quelver was
alone again, shaking his head at the retreating backs of men
busily scampering up staircases and along balconies, each

heading for his favorite bower or back closet.
"They'll all be lonely in their various hiding places," he
murmured, as he swung his sword at empty air a few times and
prepared himself to die, "lacking their usual chambermaid
companionship. I hope they won't all be bared!"
The skirl and clang of swords grew louder. Ilibar swallowed. 
By the "three, but we're giving ground fast!
Only the eldest and most infirm guards had stayed on
Flowfoam, he well knew-and this handful of fussing courtiers
who truly had no welcome elsewhere. Everyone else had taken
horse to ride with Blackgult, and hurl back Bloodblade… if they
could. Even with the Sirl hireswords, it probably wouldn't be
enough. Not if the warlord truly was rolling over baronies like a
boy tumbling down a riverbank, and all their surviving soldiery
was now marching under his banners.
Well, at least he'd die somewhere important, doing something
that mattered. Hurriedly, Ilibar took up a stance in front of the
empty throne, bared blade in hand, and said aloud to the empty,
echoing chamber, "Horned Lady, bring us victory from beyond
hope; Forefather Oak, keep me standing; Dark One, guide my
biting blade. Be with me, you Three, if you love Aglirta half as
much as I do!"
His last words had been almost a whisper, but they rang clear
in the empty room—and as their last echoes died, he heard a
desperate shout from outside the room, followed by a crash,
some cursing, and then a louder boom as the doors he was wont
to guard burst open.
Ranking Sword Garzhar—his helm gone and one
shoulder-plate dangling uselessly-and two other guards reeled
back into the room, grunting and gasping with every weary
swing of their swords. Slow, weak, and reeling with weariness,
they'd have been dead long ago, Ilibar saw, if they'd faced young,
fresh foes.
"Yet in some ways, the Melted were worse. Unseeing,
inexorable, staggering forward heedless of pain, they kept

coming—
Ilibar winced as two blades slashed from different directions.
Old Garzhar flung up his sword in a desperate parry, tilting his
head away, and sparks flew from the fury of that meeting of war
steel.
Unscathed by any swordblade, the old man in armor
staggered back and almost fell-and Ilibar could take no more.
"Garzhar!" he cried. "To me! To the throne! Rest you, and let
me sport a while!"
The old, weathered face turned towards him, in surprise, and
then grew a slow grin. The ranking sword waved his blade in a
weary gesture as the two Melted pressed forward. "Be my—guest,
good Ilibar," he gasped, his words almost drowned out in the
scream of one of the other guards dying with two swords
through him. "I'm-about done—"
Ilibar launched himself forward in a rush, almost losing his
footing on the slick marble. As it was, he came sliding into the
fray faster than he'd intended, lost his balance ducking back
from the slashing sword of a Melted—they were blind, yet they
always knew where living foes stood!— and sat down hard on his
behind, crashing into the dead legs of one of the cadavers.
It crashed over past him, and he hacked at its head and arm
and leg as he rose—dancing back as the next Melted came at
him. He stepped aside so that two couldn't catch him between
them-and then looked down the hall at a legion of stiffly
marching Melted, coming towards him, and knew just how soon
his doom would come.
"Three be with me!" he snarled, and lashed out recklessly at
the nearest Melted. By luck his blade caught its throat, spinning
it around with its head lolling at a horrible angle—but it swung
back at him as if he'd done nothing to it.
"Fall back!" Garzhar shouted, his voice cracked and
breathless. "Back f to the throne, lads!"

The other guard—Keldert, perhaps, though Ilibar never had
time to look properly and be sure of who it was—groaned as he
took a blade in his stomach, and never even had time to try to
obey. Ilibar saw the Melted hack him down with brutal efficiency
as he ran back across the slick marble, to where Old Garzhar
stood facing the foremost Melted.
"We're the last," the ranking sword panted, as Ilibar joined
him. They backed around behind the throne, so that it guarded
one flank, and stood back to back. "I hope you're at peace with
the Three." Ilibar nodded. "That I am. You?"
Garzhar grinned. "There's this girl I always meant to marry,
but never did," he panted, between thrusts and hackings, "but it
doesn't seem to matter now… so I suppose I am." He beheaded a
Melted with a wild whirl of his blade, and shouted, "For Aglirta!"
"For Aglirta!" Ilibar took up the cry, and they hacked and
chopped like angry butchers for a long time before Old Garzhar
went down silently. Then Ilibar did something he'd never dared
try before—he leaped up onto the throne itself, and fought from
its height, shouting his defiance at the seemingly endless waves
of walking dead.
Above a glowing mirror, there was a soft hiss of disgust, and
then a few muttered words. The mirror flashed blinding bright. :
The Melted around him suddenly burst into flames, and Ilibar
screamed at the pain—screamed and sprang forward, howling,
hacking blindly in the inferno as dead men crumbled all around
him. More of the cadavers were tottering in by the doors he was
charged to guard, he knew—unburned dead men, coming to
hack him. down.
Unseeing, he swung his blade, lurching towards where he
knew the doors must be, the stink of his own burning hair and
sizzling flesh overwhelming him, choking him—
Something hard and heavy took him in the ribs, and he
reeled, losing his sword somewhere in the raging flames before
another blow ended it all, and drove Ilibar Quelver down, down,
into the waiting, cool darkness…

Soft laughter rose above the flickering mirror. It displayed
dying flames in the Throne Chamber of Flowfoam, then dozens
of Melted converging on the Throne of Aglirta, and then empty
halls and feast chambers, followed by deserted kitchens, and
more scenes of marching corpses, lurching into every room of
Flowfoam Palace while even the bats flapped hastily away above
their heads.
"I wonder," that soft voice said then. "The Master of Bats?
Lives he yet?"
And then it snorted dismissively and passed a hand over the
mirror-which went dark in an instant.
Robes whirred as their owner hurried out, to stride along a
corridor-and through a whorl of sorcery spinning lazily at its
end.
That same soft laughter rose again, echoing around the
Throne Chamber of Flowfoam. An almost casual hand gestured,
and in silent obedience the Melted shuffled back to leave clear a
path to the high seat.
Shadows cloaked the robed man who stood facing the throne
down that open way-the shadows of protective spells, writhing in
a ready man-de. Their owner raised his hands and carefully cast
a new magic. From the shadows cloaking him a new, brighter
rathance stole forth, drifting along the marble to ascend the
throne dais, and slowly encircle the seat. It was bare of crown or
scepter, and the radiance seemed to prowl around it, searching
for something, before slowly dying away.
Silence followed, and the man cloaked in shadows cast the
spell a second time. Another wave of seeking rathance toured the
dais, the ceiling above, and the throne itself—but no lurking
magics could he find. Magic was bound about the seat, deep and
many-layered, yes, but no triggers were to be found, and nothing
that was awake in its power.
With a chuckle of relief the robed figure strode forward—and
sat on the throne.

His mantle of shadows billowed away into nothingness in an
instant, and Ingryl Ambelter, Spellmaster of Flowfoam, threw
back his head and laughed aloud. The crown itself might yet be
adorning the head of that fool Blackgult, but the River Throne
held even stronger enchantments, and could be used to power
mighty spells indeed. King or not, know it or not, Aglirta now
had a new ruler.
He bent his will, and nigh a hundred corpses went to their
knees in unison around him.
With a soft, eager smile Ingryl looked around at his Melted,
curled his hands around the armrests of the throne, and drew on
its power to weave a spell he'd been waiting a long time to
unleash.
In but a few moments and a whirl of sparks, it was done. The
Spell-master crowed in triumph—and far away, in the thick of
battle, the Regent of Aglirta reeled in his saddle and clutched at
his head in sudden agony as a spell that seared like fire took hold
in his brain.
Chapter Seven
Scepters, Bats, and Playing
Vultures
It was cool in the shady hollow, and the stream slid past dark
and wet and inviting. Raulin looked at the peaceful forest all
around and could scarcely believe armies were thundering into
battle in Aglirta right now, screaming and shouting and dying.
He shook his head, a movement unnoticed by the five grim folk
standing around him.
Craer was speaking, as usual. "For the nonce, at least, we
must leave off Dwaer-hunting! Bloodblade must be dealt with
first—after all, if he goes on killing barons, it won't matter which
of them was hiding it; it'll either be lost, or the warlord'll have it
in his fist when he comes calling, with his army at his back!"

"And how do you propose to 'deal with' Bloodblade?" Embra
asked quietly. "Overdukes, a baron, and a bard we may be, but
that's just six against his army—or armies by now, for all we
know."
The procurer smiled and bowed, indicating her with a
flourish. "Why, Lady Silvertree, I propose to deal with
Bloodblade by assiduously following whatever brilliant
stratagem you unfold to us now!"
"I thought so," Embra said sourly, amid a few chuckles. All
four men— Raulin and Glarsimber included—leaned forward
eagerly to hear the next words from her lips.
She sighed. Three Above, why me?
And then Embra heard herself speaking, swift and sure, for all
Darsar as if she knew what she was talking about. Perhaps the
gods had heard her, after all!
"We must get to Flowfoam as swiftly as we can. If I can call on
the power of Bla-of my father's Dwaer, perhaps we can find
Bloodblade. Then we use the Dwaer to give Hawk the warlord's
likeness, spelljump to him, slay him—and Hawkril pretends to be
him. With the right commands, Hawk can turn Bloodblade's
troops to fighting among themselves, and so blunt this
sword-thrust at the Throne."
There was a roar of approval, and even Sarasper grinned and
shook his head. "Impossible," he said. "So crazily impossible that
it just might work."
"Right, we do it!" Craer snapped eagerly. "Enough of this
wandering back roads—there's a realm to save, barons to twit,
and fell wizards to knock on their backsides!"
"An engaging philosophy of life," the Baron of Brightpennant
agreed. "If you are going to take me with you, aren't you?"
A little silence fell, in which the overdukes traded swift, grim
glances. "We have a problem," Embra said carefully. "Right now
I can't even take myself to Flowfoam, let alone anyone else. Too

little magic."
Glarsimber's eyes narrowed. "What sort of magic is needed?"
The Lady Silvertree sighed. "Anything that bears an
enchantment of sufficient power that can be sacrificed—for my
spells will drain it to crumbling dust."
The Smiling Wolf grinned at her and tugged aside his gorget.
Fishing out a neckchain, he triumphantly produced something
small and gleaming, and held it out to her on his palm.
"My little keepsake from the battle in the Silent House, where
Ornentar grew into the Serpent-thing, and Bla—the Lord Regent
revealed himself to be Stormharp."
The overdukes bumped heads trying to get a good look at
what the baron held. Even Raulin peered at it: a small
pendant-charm such as highborn ladies wore ere they took
husbands or lovers, and adopted lockets with hair and limned
likenesses of their beloved. It was delicately sculpted, and looked
almost new: a bright-burnished copper hand.
Brightpennant did off his chain and held it out to Embra.
"One of the barons was wearing it—the one who turned out to be
a Serpent-priest. Touch it to metal, and it sings; the tone tells if
the metal's true."
"Serpent magic—and you carried it?" Craer snapped
suspiciously, but Sarasper shook his head.
"Older, lad, and better work. This is old."
Embra nodded and sighed, holding the copper hand up high
in front of her to begin weaving a jump spell. "It does more than
taste if gold's gold," she murmured, studying it critically. "Yes,
something I'd love to study and keep safe… but"-she grimaced,
and closed her hand around it—" 'twill do, burnt-out in an
instant, to answer our need."
Raulin gaped in astonishment at what Craer did next. As
Embra muttered an incantation and raised her free hand to cut

certain exacting gestures out of the empty air, the procurer
calmly plucked the tail of her tunic up out of her breeches to lay
bare her midriff, planted a firm hand as high on her back as he
could reach, to hold it the garment aloft—and all of the men
leaned in to put their hands on her skin.
Glarsimber grinned, shook his head, and added his hairy
hand to the crowded group, whereupon Raulin gingerly and
"hesitantly did so, too. Her skin was velvet-soft, gently warm,
and smooth.
Blue rathance curled at the edges of their vision; Raulin
turned his head to get a better look at it, but could see only the
trees. He could feel something stirring, under the Lady
Silvertree's skin, tingling in his own fingers…
The enchantment ended with a clearly enunciated couplet
wherein Embra repeated her earlier comment: "By this magic
spilled to work our deed, burnt-out in an instant, to answer our
need."
"As Aglirta burns so many things, lass," Sarasper grunted.
"Precious magics, dreams, illusions, trusts… and people."
Raulin found himself suddenly on the verge of tears. He
blinked at the homely old healer.
"Stop cheering me up," Glarsimber growled, close by his
shoulder. "It's time to go kill someone."
"Isn't it always?" Embra murmured, as she closed her eyes
and brought both of her hands together high over her head,
feeling the magic roiling up around them. "Isn't it always?"
Meanwhile
The scepter felt reassuringly smooth and heavy in his hand.
Flaeros Delcamper hadn't the faintest idea how to awaken or
wield the magic that must slumber inside it—else why would the
regent need it, dragon scepter or not?-but holding it made him
feel better, even with the Melted far, far behind.

He was clutching it now, as he knelt amid the damp, rotting
leaves and fallen branches and fungus of the deep forest, peering
out through ferns at mounted warriors galloping along the road.
"A king shall arise," he murmured, seeing the banners of
barons flashing past in gauntleted hands. Loushoond, Ornentar,
and Tarlagar, bright-fluttering from lancetips, as rider after
rider spurred past, the ground shaking with the thunder of their
hooves.
War was come to Aglirta, without a doubt, for these
armaragors of three baronies were galloping in haste along the
road that led to the Silvertree docks-and ready passage to
Flowfoam Isle.
Abruptly there was a flash of light, shouting, and the tumult
of rearing horses and hooves thudding to halts, swift gaits
broken. Flaeros blinked, and dared to lean forward and hold
aside a fern, straining to see with eyes still mazed with
brightness.
A man had appeared, standing on empty air several feet off
the ground. A wizard, it must be-tall and slender and
angry-looking, with blue-green flames swirling around his arms.
"Jhavarr Bowdragon am I!" he shouted. "Let none be so
foolish as to bend bow against me! I seek but one man!"
A veteran armaragor, who was still wrestling with the reins of
his wild-eyed mount, snapped, "Who, then?"
"Is Blackgult the Regent among you? I found him not on
Flowfoam."
"He is not," another knight replied. "We hear he's taken the
field against the warlord Bloodblade, in southbank Silvertree."
The wizard snarled in anger, threw up his hands, and
vanished in a swirl of his flames.
"And kings shall fall," Flaeros murmured, letting the fern
dance back into place, his eyes better.

Peering under it, he beheld warriors pointing this way and
that, and shouting-save for an old armaragor, closest to the edge
of the road, who merely growled, "Wizards!" in a tone of deep
disgust.
A man in bright-gleaming armor with the arms of Tarlagar
resplendent on a never-worn-before overtunic rode into view,
flanked by two bodyguards in matched harness. "Ornentar!" he
called, in a deep, self-important voice, "the foreguard must be
almost at the docks by now. Shall we ride?"
"Aye," an almost-as-grand shout came back. "We must press
on, crazed wizards or no! We'll never have a better chance to-nor
Aglirta a greater need for us to—seize the Throne!" An unseen
hand must have given a signal, for in the next instant they were
all agallop again, sundering on amid the rising dust.
"And which of you will rule it, when you do?" Flaeros
muttered, as he sprang to his feet in the wake of the last riders
and trotted along after them, just inside the concealing edge of
the forest.
"The old, old problem, my Lords," he told the empty air
reprovingly, as sticks snapped under his boots, "and not settling
such things beforehand is the old, old disaster that goes with it."
And with that wise judgment Flaeros Delcamper stumbled
over a tree root and toppled, crashing right onto his face in the
dead leaves.
Something hissed over his head, and struck a tree trunk a few
paces head. Flaeros gaped at it—an arrow? No, gods, a rigid
snake, its spread fangs sunk into the bark, and its eyes turning
to look at him!
Flaeros whirled around to see whence the deadly thing had
come—and found himself gaping past half a dozen trees, to
where a single man in robes stood sneering at him. A
Serpent-priest!
That sneer broadened, and from his sleeve the priest drew
another snake, straight as a stick, and hefted it, overhand, to

throw.
Flaeros gulped and snatched out the only thing he had that
might serve to bat aside the serpent-dart-the dragon scepter.
At the sight of it the sneer fell away into a look of terror, and
the priest whirled around and fled headlong through the trees,
sprinting as swiftly and as desperately as Flaeros had ever run in
his most terrified flights.
The Bard of the Delcampers stared in bewilderment at the
place where the Serpent-priest disappeared from view, and then
looked down at the scepter, shrugged, and whirled around to
resume his pursuit of the baronial force. This time, he missed
the first few tree roots.
In a tower remote indeed from the Silverflow, hard-galloping
knights, and armies crashing together in fields, a man stood by
an open, arched window.
Bats by the pairs, trios, and dozens were flapping out of the
sky to swoop into that window, but the man never glanced at
them—even when they settled on his shoulders like perching
birds, in a silent but increasingly heavy living black cloak.
The Master of Bats had eyes only for a gently drifting array of
upright, glowing ovals of rathance that almost filled the room
around him.
One showed a chuckling man sitting on a throne, surrounded
by silent, dead-looking warriors whose flesh sagged and drooped
like the wax of old candles. Another showed hard-riding knights
bearing the banners of three baronies, and another a furious
battle raging between hundreds of screaming, thrusting, hacking
men—who struggled to find footing on ground cloaked with
hundreds more men, and horses, too, dead and fallen.
There were other scenes, also, of tense audience chambers
and women brooding alone and young magelings crowding
around scrying glasses.
The Master of Bats shook his head grimly as his gaze roved

from scene to scene.
"Too many players in the game," he murmured, rubbing his
cheek against a bat that was cluttering softly by his ear.
No, he was not going to enter the coming fray between Ingryl
Ambelter, Blackgult and his pet heroes, Bloodblade who sought
to be king, and the Serpent-folk. It was just too dangerous.
Far better to bide his time and wait. Two years ago, he could
not have held back—he would have rushed in and been burned.
He'd done just that.
Yet sometimes-slowly and reluctantly-even mighty wizards
can learn lessons. He would lie low here in his tower, and just
watch.
Of course, any magic let fall by someone slain in this
fight—and anyone sufficiently wounded in the fray who could be
caught alone by a properly prepared wizard—would be fair
game! But for now, it was time to just play vulture.
* * *
Ezendor Blackgult was dimly aware of his mount rearing
under him, and men who'd served him for years hacking aside
blades that sought his life, raising shields to protect him and
leaving their own throats and joints endangered.
He cared not, nor could muster wits enough to do anything
except wrestle against this gnawing worm in his head, this red,
clawing thing of agony that savaged him and raged through his
brain and clawed ever farther.
He was weeping, he knew, and roaring nonsense—when he
wasn't spewing vomit, shuddering, and railing against the
wizard's spell-lash.
He knew who it was. Oh, yes, he knew Ingryl Ambelter was
gloating at the other end of the spell clawing at him… he could 
feel the Spellmaster grinning and enjoying his wails and
retchings, peering at whatever memories he could see as they

fought across his mind—the regent ever retreating, and the
wizard striking at will.
Three Above, what did it take to kill a wizard? This one
should have been dead several times over—and deserved to die a
hundred times over-yet here he was, grinning and plunging
mindworm spells into anyone he pleased to torment, using the—
Horns of the Lady! He was sitting on the throne and
drawing on its power for his damned spell!
With a roar of sheer rage Blackgult called upon the throne
himself, by the linking enchantment Kelgrael had laid upon him.
It was a feeble thread, doomed to fail against any strong-willed
creature sitting on the throne, let alone an archmage—but his
furious effort shook the Spellmaster's gnawing, just for a
moment.
And that was long enough.
He snatched the Dwaer forth and flung them into the air
above him, calling on their power as he did so-and power roared
into him, like a white-hot flame, storm lightning come calling to
crackle right through him, shocking him with its pain and
cleansing him of mindworm and Ingryl's gloating both.
With a grin that clenched his jaw white, Blackgult rode that
roiling power right back along Ambelter's spell, leaping across
the miles between Sardi Fields and the Throne Chamber of
Flowfoam in an instant. Ruthlessly, he smashed into the
Spellmaster's mind, searing and scouring in a mind-blast as
brutal as the spell Ingryl had used on him.
"Die, bebolten wizard!" he roared. "Graul you—graul you!"
Ambelter would survive even this, somehow; he knew it even
as he bellowed his heartfelt desire. Wizards always did. Grimly
he lashed about in the cringing, shuddering mind, not knowing
quite what he was doing but trying to work harm nonetheless.
All too soon-perhaps only moments after his first triumphant
lance into that dark and gloating mind; he knew he could never

tell-he felt the raging power of the Dwaer turned aside, deflected
like a swordblade parried in the fray.
Dimly aware of screaming around him and the Dwaer
whirling above his head, in a sky where lances thrust and
quarrels hummed, Blackgult snatched back his power, and was
abruptly back on a hilltop overlooking Sarth, with Flame Riders
washing over the last of his men around him, pressing forward
with fierce grins to slay.
The Regent of Aglirta gave them a fierce grin of his own, and
his eyes flashed dark and terrible. Someone moaned in sudden
fear—even before Ezendor Blackgult rose in his stirrups and gave
them all good cause to fear.
"For Blackgult!" he roared, in a voice that rolled and echoed
across all that battlefield. "Far Aglirtaaaaaaa!"
And a white flame arose on that hilltop so bright that it
outshone the sun. Men cried out, blinded—even before the flame
leaped forth among them, two Dwaer almost singing as they
spun hungrily around each other in the air, and they died in
their thousands.
Sarindan silk sighed into nothingness in an instant—and
Sarindan flesh boiled and was gone an instant later. Blackgult
roared out his rage in a voice of thunder, and men died wherever
he looked, as a trembling built within him that told him he must
stop soon, or be torn apart by the very Dwaer he was
harnessing…
Only his scrying shield saved him. A trifling defense, thrown
up out of habit to cloak himself from the prying eyes of distant
wizards—and thrown up poorly, he saw now, with two great
holes in its working that meant it concealed him from no one.
Yet it saved his life. In the moments before his awareness
would have boiled away forever, Ingryl managed to bow before
the regent's mind-bolt, let it roll over him—hugging the throne
as a spell-anchor, in all the raging— and deflect it into the
scrying shield.

Like a fireball caught in a net, he could hope to hold it there
only a fleeting time—but as it blazed up brightly, spilling
energies in all directions, Ingryl used that energy to transform
his faulty scrying web into a better warding.
For the space of a few breaths, Flowfoam was girded about
with a shield that blocked all magic—forcing the regent's strike
back whence it came and preventing any lurking foe or
opportunistic hedge-wizard from striking at him in his
spasming weakness.
Not for nothing was he called the Spellmaster.
Smiling grimly-for he knew just how close to death he'd come,
this time, and how fortunate he'd been to cheat it—Ingryl
Ambelter reached behind his ear and broke the dragonfang he
wore hidden in his hair there, on a dainty coif net wrenched long
ago from some cringing noble lass or other.
It was the only one he'd ever seen, and the enchantment he'd
sourced in its power had taken a long time to oh-so-carefully
cast. He'd known that if he ever had to use it, the time would be
desperate.
The fang broke, sighing away into nothingness as legend
insisted they always did—and his spell awakened immediately.
Until he slept or worked magic again, he was "not there" to all
magic, hidden and unreachable.
A guard's blade could still slay him, but no spell could see or
touch him-no matter what it was. Or so the enchantment
claimed.
Gasping in relief and pain, Ingryl Ambelter slid bonelessly
forward off the throne and ended up on one hip on the cold,
smooth marble. The Melted stood like silent statues all around
him, and he gathered himself against the shuddering pain and
started crawling slowly through them, on his hands and knees,
seeking the back passage and the stair to the north that would
take him down, down into the dark ways of Flowfoam, where
Gadaster awaited.

Freed from his control, the Melted started to wander,
stumbling aimlessly about, truly staggering at random.
Wincing-if one fell on him now, he might be pinned helplessly, or
even slain outright—the Spellmaster crawled on, weeping softly
from the pain of shattered fingers. Other things were broken
within him, too, not least his mind, which persisted in
presenting him with sudden, blinding-bright images of events
long ago, and folk long dead… most of them slain by him.
Groaning, he clawed his way out of the throne chamber. He'd
slain Gadaster, for one—Gadaster Mulkyn, his master and
perhaps the most coldly cruel archwizard Ingryl had ever met.
Now he had to reach Gadaster's bones, and embrace them,
drinking in the vitality he'd spelltrapped there, and bound for
his use in dark moments like this. He'd done it before… in
similar times of dark defeat.
He didn't like to think about those times, now or ever, but
they had taught him one timely lesson: Aglirta would keep until
he had strength to contemplate ruling it again. Oh, yes…
He lay slumped against the door to the stair for a long time,
shivering, too weak to go on. Thankfully, there were no prying
courtiers or watchful guards still alive to find him. He had
Flowfoam all to himself-just as he'd wanted, for so many years.
All his, the Great Isle, every tomb and crypt and turret of it,
every forgotten spellbook and enchanted bauble, all the magics
grasping Silvertrees had crafted, stolen, or stored since they'd
fled the curse of the Silent House. All his, now—except for the
wench, Embra, who'd slipped through his fingers. She should be
his bound lover, his Living Castle, part of Flowfoam Palace,
another Gadaster to drink from at will… but she'd escaped him.
Never again. When he was whole again, he must hunt for her.
The Lady of Jewels first—not her Worldstones, nor the Throne of
Aglirta. They could keep, clawed at by barons and the
Snake-priests alike, and would be his in due time.
Embra Silvertree must come first, and surrender to him
utterly.

Yes…
Blue rathance swirled, flashed, and was gone, washing away
behind their eyes-and suddenly six figures were standing a little
dazedly on the Silvertree docks.
"Embra," Craer complained, his voice as sharp as any tutor's,
"flow-foam is over there. Why did you bring us here?"
Embra held her forehead, and said softly, "Ingryl Ambelter.
He touched my mind just now. He wanted me. Oh, how he
wanted me."
She swayed, there on the silver-weathered wood amid the
bobbing moored barges, and Hawkril's long arms snapped out to
cradle her, hold her close, and soothe her. She settled into them
with a sigh, and said to Craer, "Some sort of barrier-magic of
more force than I've ever felt before-blocks magic into and out of
Flowfoam. This is where it threw us, when my jump spell struck
it."
"What she's saying, Clevertongue," Sarasper observed wearily,
"is be thankful you aren't dead."
"So what does a spell-barrier mean to our ah, grand scheme?"
the Baron Brightpennant asked, squinting at Embra. "Is your
father in there, with his Dwaer, or somewhere else? And what do
we do now?"
Embra spread helpless hands, feeling Hawkril's ire growing
around her. She patted his hand soothingly, and asked brightly,
"Raulin, what do bards generally do, when everything goes
utterly wrong?"
Raulin Castlecloaks looked back from gazing wonderingly at
Flowfoam Isle to give her a sudden grin. "Why, Lady, we
generally stroll along, whistling nonchalantly, and pretending
that everything is unfolding just as we planned it. Whereby we
fool surprising numbers of folk."
"Just so long as it's the right ones, lad," Glarsimber of Sart
grunted at him. 'Just so long as it's the right ones."

Chapter Eight
Magic Hath Two Sharp Edges
The Lady of Jewels closed her eyes, and her companions saw
the color drain out of her face in an instant. She started to
tremble in Hawkril's arms, sagging like an empty cloak.
"Lady Embra!" the Baron Brightpennant snapped. "What ails
you?"
"The Spellmaster," she replied with a wince, looking down at
her empty hands a little wonderingly, as if she'd never seen them
before.
"I'm right sick of him, too," Craer said meaningfully, "but 
how does that wizard 'ail you,' just now?"
"He set a trap for me," Embra replied, lifting her head to gaze
out across the sparkling Silverflow to the battlements of
Flowfoam Isle.
Raulin peered at her a little warily; she wore a strange
expression that was part anger, part sadness, part weary
wisdom-and part hunger.
"A weird to bind me to him," she added, after staring across
the river in silence for a breath or two more. "Part of the Living
Castle spells he spun to enslave me." She shook her head. "So
much power, surging…"
There was a thudding of fast-fleeing boots and a clatter of
boat boards. The Four and their two companions whirled
around on the docks—in time to see a few frightened boys in
ill-fitting leather harness running for the nearest trees. One bore
a fluttering crown-and-river banner of Aglirta in his hand.
Evidently talk of magic was enough to frighten away the few
boys Blackgult had been able to spare to garrison the Silvertree
docks and its small muster of boats and barges.

Craer, Glarsimber, and Sarasper exchanged swift glances, but
then shrugged and watched the youths go. Raulin frowned and
shook his head as he saw them plunge into the trees. Craven
weakreeds…
Then he remembered what had seemed so all-important a few
moments before, and whirled around to look again at the Lady
Silvertree.
Her gaze was on Flowfoam no longer; now she was regarding
Baron Brightpennant. "Your magic saved me, Glarsimber," she
said slowly. "My thanks."
"My magic? I have no sorcery, nor… oh: the copper hand?"
Embra nodded. "Some of its other enchantments. I think."
She curled her lip in a mirthless smile. "Whatever the reason,
Ambelter got almost as nasty a surprise as I did." Then she
looked again across the river to Flow-foam, and her mouth
tightened into a thin line.
Shaking her way free of Hawkril's arms, she strode to the edge
of the dock beneath her boots, and peered again at something
unseen that seemed to shimmer above the water between the
shore and the royal island. Then she whirled around to face them
all, flung up a slender arm to point at Flowfoam, and burst out,
"We have to get there!"
As if in reply, before Hawkril could even bend to the moorings
of a single boat, angry shouts rang out from the shore road. With
them came the drumming of hooves—and suddenly mounted
armaragors were racing towards the docks, lances lowered and
pennants fluttering.
"What treachery is this?" Raulin gasped, staring at the
onrushing knights and the rising dust fast-curling in their wake.
"Do they not recognize you? Overdukes of Aglirta?"
Sarasper gave him a wry, weary grin. "Oh, they know who we
are, lad. Yon's the livery of Loushoond, and Tarlagar… and
Ornentar. We've seen two of their masters quite recently. Aye,
they know quite well who we are."

With a sudden grunt and heave Hawkril swung the smallest
moored boat up out of the water, whirling it dripping over his
head, and roared, "Glarsimber! Craer! A hand, here!"
They sprang to catch hold of the craft as the hulking
armaragor staggered under it and almost fell into the water—but
with their aid, he caught his balance in time. Together, as oars
and rudders clattered and tumbled in all directions, they ran the
boat forward to where they could wedge its transom against two
pilings and perch its crossbraces atop a third, so it jutted up
from the weathered boards of the docks like a gigantic lancetip,
pointing at the onrushing riders.
"Can't we just take a boat and get out on the river?" Raulin
shouted, waving at the many bobbing craft around them.
"Can't!" Craer snapped. "They always have bows!"
"Or worse," Sarasper said gloomily, clambering past the
stoutly wedged boat onto a bare finger of dock beyond.
"Lass!" Hawkril roared, panting from his effort. "Raulin! Get
back here, behind! Hurry!"
He waved his hand to beckon them after the scrambling
Sarasper, out onto the longest dock in the lee of his improvised
shelter.
Raulin hastened to obey, but before anyone could do more
than launch themselves into a run, a dark figure among the
fast-approaching horsemen stood up in his stirrups, waved one
hand in a gesture Embra knew all too well-and the world
exploded.
Bright fire…
… blazing…
Jagged shards and splinters of wood burst everywhere,
stabbing and tumbling in the blinding, dancing inferno. Craer
shouted something excited and probably clever as he
cartwheeled helplessly through the air, blade in hand, heading

for the waiting water.
Hawkril flung up a warding hand in front of his face—in time
to save his eyes, but not before a handlike spray of joined
splinters sliced open his cheek and ear. As the pinwheel of slivers
sliced past, the planks beneath the armaragor's great boots
erupted, and he was plucked into the air, up and back, into a sky
filled with a hail of splintered wood. Shattered and torn boats
and docks were tumbling everywhere…
Raulin's fingers found a piling, and he clawed at it frantically,
his rush to reach Hawkril turned into a crazy spin around the
old wooden posts. The young bard could hear nothing, though he
knew the groans of rending wood must be louder than any
human scream. The boat Hawkril had wedged to blunt the
charging knights leaped through the air and flew like a war
hammer, smashing three knights from their saddles with a
brutal force that shattered horses, men, and armor with equal
disdain. Raulin, watching with his mouth open in awe, knew
there must be screaming going on. Lots of screaming.
Then the young bard's hearing came back with a ringing,
echoing rush. There were sharp tearings and snappings of wood
striking earth far behind him and tumbling away through brush
and shrubs; the thunderous crashes of many, many things
striking water, and the wet thuds of spears of broken wood
impaling armaragors.
There were evil bubbling sounds from behind him, too—either
the fabled lurking monsters of the river come foraging, or more
likely boats sinking in the mucky shallows; Raulin dared not
spare a moment to glance back and learn which-and then the
tumbling timbers of a dock fell away from the air in front of him,
and he could see the bloody chaos that moments before had been
the eager foremost ranks of the foreguard of three baronies.
Fountaining blood, huge lumps of meat studded with horse
heads, hooves, and protruding bones sagged and fell aside—and
through their ruin galloped snarling men in armor, lances
lowered. Raulin saw one of them swing viciously with his mace
at another mounted man he was passing— and the wizard who'd
wrought such ruin spewed blood and brains as he pitched

forward out of his saddle, the back of his head missing.
"Bastard idiot!" the armaragor screamed at the falling mage.
It wasn't the sort of battle cry Raulin had heard before-but then,
he'd never been in a battle like this before!
Boats were drifting away from the shattered docks now,
plucked by the river—some of them overturned or full of water
already, soon to sink or fetch up on the rocks a little way
downstream—and then Raulin had no more time to snatch
glances at anything, as a glittering forest of lancetips reached for
him.
A stocky figure in torn and jangling armor sprang past him,
smiling wolfishly. " Well now," Glarsimber Belklarravus cried
jovially, sword flashing in his hand. "Well now!"
The baron ran along the heaved and shattered dock to meet
the lances, even as his would-be slayers reined in sharply, horses
reared-and one overeager armaragor and his mount slid
helplessly along the muddy, board-strewn bank and plunged into
the water.
"Stand and hold, men of Aglirta! Hold!" Glarsimber roared, in
a voice that must have carried clearly to the far-off north bank of
the Aglirta. "As a Baron of Aglirta, I command you! Get you 
back!
His answer was a chorus of sneering laughter—and two
viciously thrusting lances. He chopped one aside and ran a few
paces along the other ere grasping it and tugging, hard.
Its wielder pitched from his saddle to crash heavily down onto
a broken tangle of timbers. Bloody points of wood jutted up
through twisted armor—and that armaragor flopped and arched
twice or thrice, like a fish landed on the bank, then fell limp and
still.
More lances thrust at the baron, but he danced back onto the
ruined dock with that same wolfish smile on his lips, and said,
"Treason, is it? Men of Loushoond, and Tarlagar, and Ornentar,
I charge thee with treason against the River Throne! For that,

the penalty is death!
"Hah! As to that, we'll feed you death soon enough!" one of
the knights snarled, urging his mount forward. Its hooves
slipped on wet planks, and he drew it hastily to a halt, lance
wavering, as he saw Over-duke Delnbone advancing along a lone
dock timber to his left with a cluster of knives protruding from
between the fingers of one hand, Brightpennant smiling bleakly
at him to his right-and straight ahead of him, beyond a twisted
ruin of splintered spars and oars, the old man of the overdukes
slowly changing shape into something large, and hairy, and
spider-legged…
There was a sudden growl from the water beyond, and a large,
gauntleted hand came into view. It closed over the end of a
piling, fingers tightening like talons, trailing a grunt—almost a
growl—of effort in its wake, and then the familiar hulking
shoulder-plates of Hawkril Anharu rose into view, trailing river
water, and through a wet and tousled forest of hair Raulin saw
the armaragor's eyes blazing like two coals. The cause of his rage
hung like a rag in the fold of one of Hawkril's mighty arms-a
slender and shapely rag. Embra Silvertree's eyes were closed and
her mouth hung open, limp and slack.
"I believe," Hawkril said, with terrible care and gentleness,
"that it's time-and past time-I did some killing. Of men who
richly deserve it."
He took two swift, ponderous strides forward and thrust
Embra's body at Raulin. "Here, lad," he said curtly. "Don't let her
fall, see that she breathes, and keep her shielded from arrows
behind this! He waved a hand at the tangles of smashed and
heaved dock boards all around, watched Raulin stagger back
under his heavy burden—and then strode past, his warsword
appearing as if by magic in his hand.
A glittering array of lances awaited him, wavering in the air a
little way onto the dock where the overdukes stood. Hawkril
strode determinedly forward to meet them.
One of the armaragors who'd dismounted well back behind
the line of lancers readied a crossbow—and Craer threw a

dagger. It flashed through the air, catching sunlight for an
instant like a silver fish leaping from the river… and sprouted in
one of the archer's eyes. He stiffened and toppled over without a
sound, as the procurer called casually, "Anyone else foolish
enough to try to use a bow?" and waved his cluster of daggers
meaningfully.
There were murmurs of wariness and fear from the
armaragors of the three baronies as they saw the wolf-spider
that Sarasper had become creeping forward in Hawkril's wake,
plucking up a shattered cross of timbers as a crude shield as it
came. Raulin stared at it and found himself shivering. Embra
moved slightly in his arms, and hastily he bent his head to peer
at her, sitting down hard and swiftly in the lee of a tangle of
timbers.
"Hawk?… Who?" the Lady Silvertree murmured, and Raulin
held her as gingerly as if he was cradling precious crystal.
"Uh, Raulin, great Lady," he blurted, "and—uh—are you well?"
Lips twisted into a wry grin even before her eyes focused on
him. "As eloquent as an overduke, I see, Master Bard," she said
almost fondly. "My pendant, here-pluck it off, will you? I'm loath
to lose it, but I fear we're going to need some magic soon, or…"
She did not finish the sentence, but Raulin knew very well
what she meant. Cautiously, he reached to her throat and closed
his fingers around the little thing. A glossy-smooth black stone,
enwrapt in fine chain. "This?" he asked.
"Aye. Tug it off. Swift and hard, but don't lose hold of it. My
arms are still… untrustworthy."
Raulin winced—and tugged.
"You'll never lure them," Craer murmured, dose by his head.
Putting the stone carefully into Embra's hands and helping her
close her fingers around it, Raulin glanced up. The procurer was
speaking to Glarsimber. "Fools they may be, but even they can
see these docks'll never hold their mounts."

The baron snorted. "They wasted more than enough good
horses learning that," he replied—and then launched himself
into a sudden, sword-waving charge.
"For the regent and the Risen King!" he cried, hacking aside
lances. "For Aglirta!"
Long, cruel lancetips stabbed at him, but Hawkril stepped in
to chop them aside—and then two armored men were trotting in
under the lance shafts, staggering as the alarmed knights tried
to strike them down or aside. There was a brief, crowded
confusion of snorting horses and men cursing as they kicked
with their spurs and wrenched at their reins—and then Hawkril
reached the nearest of the horsemen, and the clang of steel
arose.
A man pitched helplessly from his saddle with a shout, to
disappear under the dancing hooves—and then there was a
groan and a splintering crash as a piling gave way and dock
boards collapsed under a dapple gray; its yelling rider went over
its head in an unintended dive into the Silverflow.
"Waste of good horses!" Glarsimber snarled, hacking with his
sword as hard and as fast as he knew how. "Call yourself
armaragors?"
The rest of the knights had crowded forward to try to join the
fray, but officers among them were roaring curses and orders at
them to pull back as the dock boards groaned warningly and
horses stumbled and reared.
"Lances!" one of the officers cried. "Take up lances and force
them back! Then get those horses away fr—"
Hawkril's warsword slid through his throat then, and the rest
of the swordcaptain's rage was lost forever in a gurgling of blood.
Lances were being snatched down from the horsemen,
however, and another horse sprang from the dock into a
shrieking fall against the bank, onto the ribs of a smashed boat.
For a moment there was a clear path ashore, and both Hawkril
and the longfangs that was Sarasper sprang for it.

Bright blue-edged flame kindled before their faces, hurling
armaragors and their mounts aside like toys. Tall and terrible, it
loomed like a wagon where there'd been nothing moments
before. The force of its presence struck Hawkril to his knees, and
the baronial foreguard shouted in alarm and scrambled back,
abandoned lances bouncing and clattering, as the flames grew
vivid blue, with a white, searing heart.
Searing, yet cold. Icy cold. Hawkril scrambled back, shaking
numbed hands, as two horses fled, on the bank beyond, in a wild
thudding of hooves. Out of that whiteness stepped four tall,
slender dark-gowned figures he'd seen before. The Talasorn
sister-sorceresses. His heart sank as he saw hostility on their
faces.
"We know, now, just who serves our father's killers," Olone
Talasorn said coldly, "and who seems to always be eager to hack
down wizards, wherever you ride in Aglirta. Die, meddling
fools!"
Four wands aimed—and spat dazzling fire along the dock at
the over-dukes and the two who stood with them.
His arms felt like battered clubs, too heavy to lift-and his
head seemed like the scorched aftermath of a cookfire, black and
ravaged and smoldering. Weak, numbed emptiness rode in him
as he sat in his saddle atop a hilltop in Sarth Fields strewn deep
with the dead, and amid the flies, high-wheeling vultures, and
men too weary to smile in victory, the Regent of Aglirta
struggled to keep from swaying and falling right out of his
saddle.
He wanted to lie down and rest. Three Above, speak truth: no,
he wanted to lie down and die.
The Dwaer spun silently above him, and with a cold
ruthlessness he jerked his hand in a beckoning gesture. Two
burly but pale-faced armsmen of the Royal Host of Aglirta
brought forward the next struggling Serpent-priest, turning
their heads aside for fear that his spittings were poisonous.
More than one had been, and men kicked their heels and arched
in shuddering agony right now as they died, not far off, with

their swordbrothers powerless to help them.
He'd let the Dwaer ravage him, using them too long-but being
Regent of Aglirta meant doing such things. If the Vale needed
him to be a taloned monster, the Golden Griffon in truth, men a
taloned monster he would be.
But he was damned if he was going to let his frightened but
still-loyal warriors think he was enjoying the murders he was
doing now.
Blackgult stared into the hate-filled eyes of the Snake-priest
and said grimly, raising his hand like priests did in benediction,
"I do this for Aglirta. For justice and for the need of our fair
land. Die, traitor, that Aglirta may live!"
And then he bent his gaze on the man's eyes, and called on the
Dwaer for their darkest fire.
Not to sear and melt flesh, as he'd done earlier, but to drink
life, stealing it into him as the man gasped. Glittering eyes slowly
went dark above whispered prayers and curses as the priest
sagged in the fearful grasp of the armaragors, and died.
Ezendor Blackgult drew in a deep breath as the stolen life
force surged through him, soothing and strengthening all at
once. Ignoring the grim gaze of the warcaptain Halvan, he said
quietly, "Bring the next one."
He didn't want to meet Halvan's eyes, and see the carefully
shielded disgust lurking there, amid the fear—and more: the
growing resolve that, personal death sentence or not, it might be
best for all Darsar if the Sirl Swords were commanded to hew
down the Regent of Aglirta before he stole more lives with the
fell Dwaerindim.
Deliberately, he dismounted and turned his back to the stout
Sirl war-captain, standing within easy reach. Best to let Halvan
see his chance, and decide for himself not to take it. Even a
Blackgult gone magic-mad and deadly with power was
preferable to bullying barons snatching at the Throne, and
Serpent-priests smirking at the resulting ruination and slyly

provoking fray after fray, until all the Vale was an emptied,
death-choked battlefield…
There were stirrings, all around the hilltop. Blackgult ignored
them, too: the sounds of good men of Aglirta remembering old
tales, as they saw for themselves why some legends cursed the
Dwaer, and called them the Warstones.
Aglirta had won a victory this day, and there were still a grim
handful of armaragors of Aglirta alive to know it. Halvan's Sirl
Swords had taken the brunt of the losses, as desperate Jarradar
pirates and a few tall knights of Pelaerth had tried to hew their
way free of the slaughter. Of the proud and haughty Flame
Riders, not a man still lived; Blackgult and the Dwaer had seen
to that.
The Dwaer had won the battle for him. Without them, the
fray would have ended with the Sirl Swords dying one by one,
hacking defiantly at wave after wave of gutter scrapings from
across Darsar, five or six for each man of the Royal Host of
Aglirta. Instead, this unforeseen viper had been crushed into the
grass.
Aye, the Serpent-worshippers were Aglirta's real foes. Their
honeyed tongues and merciless murders and ready coins had
wrought all of this. He hoped none of them had escaped. Halvan
and his men had ruthlessly ridden down all seen trying to flee
the field, but the right magic can snatch a man far in an instant,
and in all the shouting and swordwork…
Blackgult allowed himself neither a sigh nor a grimace. Six
Snake-robes had been captured, and only one was left, now. Not
as fearless as the rest, this last priest screamed and struggled as
they dragged him forward, and Blackgult fought to keep a
sudden, fierce satisfaction off his face as he strode to meet the
man.
The Dwaer above him were already aflame, he knew, and the
priest stared at his doom in horror, sobbing out curses that one
of the soldiers ended with a backhanded slap of his gauntlet. As
swift as a real snake, the priest sank his teeth into—unyielding
metal plates. More of the same knuckle-plates smashed his face

red and left his ears ringing as the other guard dealt him a
brutal blow that left the priest reeling on his heels.
By then Blackgult had hold of his shoulders and was staring
into the depths of that fear-filled gaze, deeper… and deeper…
The life flooded out of the man in a rush, making the regent
shudder, and he turned away abruptly as the now-familiar warm
surge spread through him, making him feel strong, alert-and
hungry for more. Damn Ambelter for inadvertently showing him
how to use the Dwaer thus… and yet thanks to him, too, by the
Three, or there'd be no grim victory for Aglirta this day.
Blackgult shook his head. All this, and Bloodblade still to come.
"Post sentinels on this hilltop, and yonder one, too," he
ordered. "Hal-van, set some of your men to fetching every last
snake-arrow, and snake, too-scales, pieces, fangs, and all. We'll
make a fire here and burn it, all of it! The rest of you, back to the
trees whence we came; this open land is deadly."
He lifted his head to gaze across the Sardi Fields once more;
was that a plume of dust, away west? Was the usurper's army
that close?
A faint, familiar thunder arose from the earth beneath him,
and Hal-van cursed. They all knew what it was: the sound of
hooves, many hooves. An army, riding against them.
A Sirl man cried out, pointing south. Aye, riders, and in
plenty. Blackgult strode a few paces in that direction, to get a
better look. Halvan cursed and wheeled around. "They're coming
from the west, too," he snapped. "More than a thousand, for
sure."
"And the north!" another man cried, pointing.
Men peered. "Many," one of them said grimly. "I can't tell
their number, but… many."
Blackgult shook his head and smiled. Well, now, this was
more what he was used to. Perhaps the Three were truly sick of
Aglirta, and wanted to see it all swept away…

"No sentinels nor snake-hunts, then," he shouted, "but
everyone to the trees! East, back towards the docks—and once in
among them, there we turn, stand, and fight! Let the forest be
our shield. Take up all bows and shafts you find, but tarry not in
searching!"
"No fear of my doing that," a hiresword growled, as everyone
started to hasten. "Look yon!"
Few warriors bothered to turn and peer west, where the man
was pointing, but on the way to their weary horses, Halvan and
Blackgult did look. A forest of moving glitterings and gleams met
their eyes; two thousand armsmen at least, hastening forward on
horseback.
"Trying to catch us right here, before we can reach shelter,"
Halvan grunted, swinging up onto the saddle of his big bay. It
snorted and stamped in complaint, sore and weary.
Blackgult looked at the scarred and bleeding flank of his own
warhorse, then turned and lifted his voice in a merry shout:
"Farewell, loyal men of Aglirta! I'm proud to have fought at your
side! If Sarth be our doom, let it be one the bards sing of with
awe, a hundred summers hence! This night, I'll see you again
around the deadfires, where the Three wait for us all!"
He raised his sword, but few of the armsmen of Aglirta
looking back at him saluted him in return, or even managed a
bitter or weary smile. It's hard to find mirth when you know
you're doomed.
Chapter Nine
Skulls Grin Easily
Magic flashed as bright as lightning, snarling along the
shattered wharf.
Sarasper hunched as low as he could in wolf-spider form,
Craer hurled himself behind a tangle of boat timbers and

splayed boards—and, on her knees beside Raulin, Embra
murmured, "Let it be enough. Oh, Lady Above, let it be enough!"
As delicately as a mother's caress, a bolt of searing sorcery
stabbed out at the Lady of Jewels as it passed. Raulin yelled in
fear as his hair tingled and he felt the flesh on his face creep,
cringing back before the slaying force surging so close—surging
into Embra's cupped hands, and the tiny pendant there.
That jewel had been too paltry to bring them all hence in her
spelljump, or she'd never have sacrificed the baron's copper
hand… and Raulin thought he knew the sort of enchantment it
held: a little glow, such as many high ladies could call forth from
their gems, to light them in soft evening-gloom as if with soft
candles, and make their jewels sparkle. That was all—just a spell
glow, to be turned on and off by the wearer's will. What help
could it possibly be against this?
In the next roaring instant, Raulin's despairing question
found an answer. Though the Lady Embra bit her lip and threw
her head back in obvious, trembling pain, the magic shocking
into her didn't hurl her dying out over the waters, or melt away
her hands to bony stumps in a flash.
Instead, it plunged into her cupped hands, trailing fire, and
roiled there, impossibly held and caught—only to spill out from
between her fingers as a bright, leaping net of spell-strands.
Two of those strands arced out, almost as if by accident, to
snare a bolt that had scorched a line of upthrust timbers into
flame and driven a groaning Baron Brightpennant reeling out
from behind one of them, clutching his shoulder in staggering
agony.
The strands whirled around that bright lance of slaying
sorcery—and then plucked it and hurled it out across the
Silverflow, straight and true, towards Flowfoam. "Lady!" Raulin
gasped, as Embra shuddered again, her face wet with tears.
"What befalls? How can I—?"
"Help me?" Embra panted. "Touch me not! Just… leave me
be… an instant longer…"

Something snapped back from Flowfoam with a bright flash
that made the armaragors on the bank shout in pain and
dismay, and clutch at their blinded eyes.
Raulin's own gaze swam, but through his tears he saw Embra
smile in grim satisfaction—as a flood of ravening magical fire
twice as great as the bolt she'd snared came howling back from
the distant island, to crash into the blue Talasorn fire with a
crash that sounded as if every bell in all Darsar had been
shattered with one brutal blow.
Raulin spun around, in time to see a fallen, tumbling wand
blaze into ash in the wake of four sorceresses, as they were
hurled end over end over the dead horses and sprawled
armaragors into the trees, trailing screams.
Four blue flames blossomed there-and vanished abruptly, one
after another, as the Talasorn sisters snatched themselves
elsewhere.
Embra gave Raulin a weary smile. "A spell net-one of the few
useful enchantments of all the Living Castle restraints and lashes
laid on me. Given power by their magic, it sent their bolts to
smite the barrier that kept us from Flowfoam—and the barrier
struck them the same blow it would have used on me, if I'd had
foolishness and spells enough to try to smite it down."
Her gaze shifted wearily to the trees. "It does every young
sorceress good to be astonished by magic a time or two." Her
smile twisted. "I should know."
And still wearing that wry smile, she toppled sideways,
crashing into Raulin's startled arms like a dead thing. .-…
She felt just as heavy and still as she'd been earlier, when a
furious Hawkril had put her in Raulin's care. The young bard
looked wildly up and down the blazing dock. "Hawkril?" he
called. "Lord Hawkril?"
"Here, lad!" came a low growl, from somewhere on the other
side of a plume of smoke. "What befalls?"

A scorched and bedraggled Craer was suddenly bending over
Raulin, peering at Embra.
Sarasper lurched towards them, too, two or more of his
spiderlike legs curled uselessly under him. Somewhere on the
shore, armaragors were groaning and cursing. At least one was
weeping.
"Don't you just love magic?" the procurer murmured, putting
his hand gently against Embra's chin. "Hash, boom, and another
dozen lives made dust! If Em here wasn't so beautiful—and so
gods-cursed useful in keeping us all alive, grant you—I'd start
strangling all wizards right here and now!"
"And if you do that," Glarsimber said in a raw, wheezing,
pain-filled voice from somewhere nearby, "it'll be back to
brute-force barons and their armies swording each other up and
down all the Vale again! A vast improvement, don't you agree?"
Craer crooked an eyebrow. "What an odd thing for a baron to
say," he commented, patting Embra's shoulder gently. "Well,
she's alive, but probably kitten-weak again. I think I need to
steal us one of Blackgult's Dwaer, if we're going to go on battling
here-in-a-flash sorceresses…"
"No," Hawkril said grimly, as something that sounded like
ragged but approaching thunder came to them, from along the
shore road, "I think we're in for an unhealthily large dose of
brute-force barons and their armies, about now. Swords out,
all!"
As Raulin stared, Craer cursed softly, and Glarsimber
lumbered past them drenched in blood, the thunder from the
road grew.
The young bard hadn't known that wolf-spiders could sigh,
but the beast that was Sarasper did so quite loudly as it limped
past, joining Hawkril and Glarsimber on the shore.
More armaragors were galloping down to the docks, lances
and pennants fluttering above them in a bright forest. Raulin
stared—if those standards told truth, all three

barons-Loushoond, Ornentar, and Tarlagar-Were among the
sinister-helmed, hard-riding men.
"My, but Aglirta spawns an overabundance of greedy, greedy
men."
Craer observed in a mocking voice. "A pity we haven't enough
crowns to go around."
He cast glances in all directions as swiftly and as sharply as if
he was hurling spears, and then snapped, "Raulin! Those boats,
there—cut them clear, so none can follow you! Then get down
into this one, and get Embra clear!"
The procurer slapped a gleaming dagger into Raulin's hand,
and set off down the dock to join Hawkril without a backward
glance.
The young bard stared after him. "Uh, ah—what'll you be…
doing?"
"Bards usually refer to it as a 'doomed, defiant last stand,' I
believe," Craer called back. "It's what nobles of Aglirta do best."
The Baron of Brightpennant turned and waved at Raulin
almost jauntily, as the foremost armaragors lowered their lances
and someone snapped, "Stand aside, or die!"
"As an Overduke of Aglirta," Hawkril rumbled calmly, "I
believe I give the orders here. Where among you are the barons
whose banners you bear?"
There was a little silence, ere someone in the press of men in
armor said in bored, dismissive tones, "Kill them."
Armaragors surged forward—and with a roar, Hawkril and
Glarsimber rushed to meet them, hacking aside lancetips,
seeking only to bear the weapons down. The wolf-spider sprang
over the struggling men, to land on the riders wielding those
lances. In an instant, the first rank of horsemen became a chaos
of cursing men, flashing daggers, and death—even before a
slender man in leather sprang into its midst.

Craer launched himself into one armaragor and sent the man
sprawling from his saddle. Alighting on its cantle doubled up
like a frog, he leaped to the next horse, catching its rider by the
neck. They struggled for a moment ere Craer's dagger found a
way under a helm and into the throat beneath—and then the
procurer was scrambling to his feet for another leap.
Lances stabbed at him from horsemen beyond, so he spun
around and jumped at the back of the first rank of battling
armaragors-specifically, onto the back of a shouting knight who
was trying to carve up the longfangs perched on the head of his
screaming, bucking horse.
The last Raulin saw of the procurer was two daggers rising
and falling in a vicious whirlwind, and Craer's face appearing
momentarily above them to snarl, "Are you deaf, Castlecloaks? 
Get Embra clear!"
"They certainly enjoy their butchery," the man with no face
commented, as he rose smoothly from in front of the glowing
whorl of magic.
The man still crouched over the whorl looked up sharply. "An
Aglirtan failing, but not one exclusive to the folk of the Vale.
You're off to—?"
"Find and follow Flaeros Delcamper, and see that the dragon
scepter is kept safe. It's worth a thousand dead Aglirtans."
"Or more," the Koglaur who'd cast the scrying whorl agreed,
looking back at the bright scene at its heart, wherein battle was
raging at the burning Silvertree docks. "Fare you well."
A fierce, beaklike nose and a high forehead grew smoothly on
the smooth, blank flesh of the departing Koglaur's face. "Fare
you better," he replied, still eyeless. He did something with one
of his hands to a ring he wore on his other hand—and vanished.
The Koglaur above the whorl curved his lips in a smile that
held no mirth and bent his will upon his scrying magic.
Obediently the spinning wheel of flickering light grew larger, and
the scene within it swam closer-reaching out to dwell upon one

shouting, sweating man.
Glarsimber Belklarravus, the Baron of Brightpennant, wore
an expression of fierce joy as he staggered and hacked, limping
badly and covered with blood that was mostly his own. Lances
stabbed and tore at him, clenched jaw and corded neck betrayed
his pain, and he reeled in weariness—but he laughed betimes,
amid the clang of arms, and his eyes danced with excitement,
like a young boy at play.
"He's going to die," a new voice murmured, from above the
whorl-caster's shoulder, "and yet he seems to… enjoy it."
"Aglirtans are like that," the scrying Koglaur replied. "I would
find some of the customs of Sarinda strange, I'm sure. This,
you'll get used to. It's one of the reasons I love this land."
The Koglaur from Sarinda leaned closer to the whorl. "Might I
know some of the others?"
The whorl-caster's smile was real, this time. "So much old
magic, waiting to be snatched up and used. Endlessly scheming
barons, all of the doings of the Serpent-priests as they grow
restless to get their hands on both magic and the Throne… and
the folk of the Vale dream so fiercely, too. Right now, they've
hunger for a strong king, and turn to this Blood-blade in hopes
he'll become such."
"And will he?"
"Too early to say, yet. Warlords are seldom good
kings—brutal, efficient kings, yes, but farsighted and caring for
their realm, except as a prize to clutch tight and defend against
the thieves, no." The whorl-caster shrugged. "Perhaps he'll be
different."
The Koglaur from Sarinda gestured at the bright scene of
battle, where Baron Glarsimber was still staggering and hacking
happily, shouting defiance at the armaragors he was hacking
down. "Yet for Bloodblade to crown himself, this man we watch
must soon die."

The whorl-caster looked up. "We love this land, and admire
some of its folk-but in our meddlings, we dare not favor a few."
He waved a hand at the battling baron. "We needed him to do a
thing, and he did it. His time is done; Thuulor goes now to guard
the scepter."
"Ah, this one was your tool to blunt the claws of the
Spellmaster? Yet he knows not of us, or why he was sent to guard
the young Delcamper fool?"
The whorl-caster nodded. "This man, long called the Smiling
Wolf-rough, yet swift-witted, an able fighting man capable of
staunch loyalty when he found lords he could believe in—was
told privately-and separately—by both those lords, to guard the
bard and his scepter."
"Those lords being?"
"Regent Blackgult and the King of Aglirta—or rather, the
flickering phantom of King Kelgrael, who warned this
Glarsimber that keeping the scepter safe was his true task.
Kelgrael led him to a spell-gate that took him to the coastal road
nigh Ragalar without the need for a long ship voyage. Of course,
those lords—or at least, the Blackgult and the Kelgrael who
appeared to this baron—were two of us."
He smiled again. "I particularly enjoy being Blackgult. All
dark, grim swagger, hints of great intrigues and high missions,
and enemies everywhere; richly earned, too."
The Koglaur from Sarinda nodded. "So while this naive dolt of
a Del-camper remains necessary, we guard him closely, of
course. Given that we're counting on the Band of Four to do so
much actual work against various evil wizards and would-be
Kings of Aglirta, why aren't we guarding them with the same
diligence?"
The whorl-caster smiled. "We watch the Four, but guard
them only lightly, because we want them—and Aglirta needs
them-to be tempered like fine weapons, in battles large and
small, to be good defenders of Aglirta in the years ahead."

The Koglaur from Sarinda smiled wryly. "I see." He waved at
the scrying whorl. "I also see that the forge fires are raging. The
Band of Four can't be enjoying themselves, about now."
"Ho, Tall Post! How fare you?"
"Passably well," Hawkril grunted, swinging his warsword in a
great roundhouse blow that struck sparks off the swords raised
against it, and sent two armaragors staggering back with
numbed hands. "I don't seem to be hewing my way any closer to
any real barons, mind you."
"That's because," Craer panted, "these craven upstarts believe
in cowering behind heavy guard, ordering their swordsworn to
die for them-a task, I might add, that in the main they
accomplish remarkably well."
"Your tally?" Hawkril shouted back, hewing an armaragor to
the ground and springing back before the man could trip
him-and other blades reach in to stab him from several sides.
"Four and ten, I make it!"
"Five and ten," Glarsimber corrected, shoving a dying knight
away and reeling back against an upthrust dock piling. "That
one you kicked off his horse spitted himself on someone else's
lance."
"Well, well," Craer called, snatching up a dagger from the belt
of a dead armaragor and hurling it into the face of a rushing
armsman, "we may soon leave them with no one to hide behind!"
"And then, no doubt," Hawkril rumbled, parrying two
swordcuts and leaning over on his backswing to slice through
the back of a knight's knee, "we'll be treated to the sight of three
belted barons of the realm running away!"
"Ah, but will it be fast enough?" Baron Brightpennant cried,
lurching forward to hew down the swordarm of an armaragor
who was trying to stab Sarasper before the longfangs bit out his
throat. "I've a hunger to cut the heels off the slowest one!"

Sarasper bit down, blood spurted, and the knight fell with a
wet, wordless sound. Glarsimber snatched a dagger from the
corpse and tossed it to Craer's feet. "You seem to be collecting
these, so…"
"Kill them!" Baron Tarlagar howled at his men, brandishing a
bright, unused sword from some distance back behind the fray.
"What does it take to kill three men and a spider?"
"More armaragors than you remembered to bring, evidently,"
Craer called back. "Why don't you show them, Tarlagar? Or
should I call you 'Baron Coward'?"
"Now, now," Glarsimber gasped, as he parried a knight's
blade a handwidth in front of his face, "if you do that, I'll grow
confused, and I might start hitting things! After all, there are
three of them! Which Baron Coward do you mean, exactly?"
"Slay them!" Baron Loushoond snarled, as Craer threw
another dagger, an armaragor spun around and fell on his
face—and Glarsimber charged forward through the gap, to
swing his notched blade at a "real baron" at last. "Slay them
now!"
Loushoond's next words were lost in a yelp as the staggering,
bleeding Baron Brightpennant smashed through his guard and
sent a gem-adorned baronial sword spinning away. Loushoond
stumbled back, moaning in fear. "Slay them!" he shrieked
wildly.
"Best ask Ornentar to do that," Craer called, leaping over a
blade to roll and spring up under a man's guard and drive a
dagger into a throat from inches away. "Tarlagar doesn't know
what it takes, remember?"
Three knights leaped forward, blades flashing. Steel clashed
and rang-and Glarsimber Belklarravus groaned, reeled back with
a blade in his side, and fell.
The wolf-spider sprang forward over him, but six or seven
armaragors surged to meet it, shouting eagerly to each other,
and Sarasper was forced to dart away again.

"Hawk!" Craer snapped. "Brightpennant's down!"
"On my way," Hawkril growled, parrying with such force that
his foe staggered away, cursing. "On my way!"
With a roar the hulking armaragor hewed down a man,
kicked another in the codpiece hard enough to lift the man right
off the ground, and ducked past a third knight.
"Aid!" the man he'd kicked gasped, writhing on the
corpse-strewn ground. "Aid!"
"Now, Hawk!" Craer called reprovingly, as his swordbrother
reached Glarsimber and took up a stance over the fallen,
groaning baron. "You kicked Tarlagar himself, and forgot to use
the boot with the toe-blade! Again! That must make a dozen
barons you've forgotten to slay this year alone!"
"Fall back!" Baron Ornentar snapped, striding forward to
stand by Tarlagar and gesturing to his men to help the
stumbling Loushoond to his side. "Shield ring, around us
three-now!"
Hawkril roared again and slashed so hard at a knight that the
man reeled back, slipped—and then fell, his neck broken by
Sarasper's pounce. The wolf-spider scuttled away again before
any other armaragor could reach him with a blade-through
renewed roars from Ornentar for his men to form a shield ring.
Craer shot a glance over his shoulder, shook his head, and
called, "Hawk! Embra!"
His friend was large and heavy-armored, but not stupid.
"Carry to the boat?"
"Precisely," the procurer agreed, snatching up belt-daggers
from dead knights like a madman. "Glarsimber first, hey?"
"And who'll entertain our ambitious barons?"
"Sarasper and the most handsome overduke, of course."

"Ah, that would be Embra," Hawkril growled, snatching up
Bright-pennant and lumbering over bodies at what might, given
good footing and distance enough, become a run. "I suppose you
meant to say the most clever-tongued overduke."
"Ah, yes," Craer agreed, as the armaragors rushed forward
and he was forced to hurl half a dozen daggers with snake-swift
speed. "I suppose I did."
Sarasper pounced on one knight, rolled, and sprang away
again, leaving the man bleeding from a huge bite on his neck.
The other armaragors lost their sudden enthusiasm, and—under
the lash of a steady stream of curses from Ornentar-returned to
their defensive ring.
Hawkril skidded to a halt at the splintered edge of the dock,
and almost fell. "That's the best boat left, lad?"
"Y-yes," Raulin panted, paddling clumsily in the water with
an oar. "It has the Lady Embra in it, see, and—"
"That would make it the best craft, yes," Hawkril agreed
gravely, shooting a glance back down the dock to see if anyone
was charging towards him, as he knelt to lower Glarsimber's
heavy body into Raulin's anxious grasp.
No one was coming, and Craer's stream of brightly mocking
comments hadn't abated, so Hawkril tucked the blood-dripping
baron under one arm and swung himself down into the water,
wrestling Brightpennant aboard the boat and heaving himself
towards another, larger boat in a desperate, wallowing splash.
The new boat tipped alarmingly as he forced its rail down and
rolled over it into the bottom, seeing the sky for a few alarming
moments ere the craft righted itself, and Hawkril found himself
bobbing not far away from Raulin's leaking boat.
Someone had left behind a shield with broken straps in the
vessel; Hawk dug into the water with it as if he was stirring
gruel, and drove his boat up against Raulin in a few furious
strokes.

"Roll them in, lad," he growled, clamping the boats together
with his huge hands. "Gently."
Raulin grunted and banged and even muttered a curse before
it was done, but Hawkril hadn't had time to do more than look
around, see that there were only three other boats still afloat—all
of them adrift, and well downriver already—ere the bard said,
"Uh, Overduke Hawk… Hawkril! Uh, sir!"
Hawkril turned his head, saw that Brightpennant, Embra,
and Raulin were all now in his boat, and roared, "Craer!
Sarasper! To me!"
Swords clashed, beyond the smoke, and there came no
answer. For a moment Hawkril wondered if his friends had
fallen—and then the wolf-spider came scrambling into view,
someone threw a lance far too feebly after it, and Craer vaulted
into sight over the heaved and splintered wreckage of a boat that
had been driven partway through the dock, and came sprinting
past the still-quivering lance. "About time!" he called. "I was
almost out of daggers!"
"Behind you!" Hawkril roared. "Right behindyou!"
Craer dodged abruptly sideways, leaping into the water-and
the armaragor racing after him hacked desperately at empty air,
overbalanced, and pitched into a tangle of timbers, face-first,
with a grunt and a very meaty thud.
The second armaragor tried to slow and turn, skidded, and
finally managed to lurch to a stop—in time to see the
wolf-spider, on the very end of the dock, dwindle into a bony old
man who lowered himself clumsily over the edge, and was gone.
"After them!" Baron Ornentar bellowed, waving his sword in
reckless flourishes. "After them!"
"Up and in, old Longfangs," Craer said, coming up beside
Sarasper in the water and boosting him towards the boat.
"We're bound for Flow-foam."
"Ah, yes," Sarasper agreed sourly, "where we'll be sure to find

restful peace in plenty. Thankee."
With a splash and tumble, he was aboard, Hawkril's iron
strength holding him until he could catch hold of the nearest
thwart. Craer surged after him, up and in, as smoothly as a river
otter-and Hawkril leaned out with his warsword in his hand, and
drove it solidly into the bottom of Raulin's leaking boat. Water
welled up in a rush, and Hawkril snatched back his sword and
shoved down, enthusiastically.
The boat was half-full as it slid astern, and they watched
pursuing armaragors run out of dock and discover there were no
usable boats handy, at about the same moment. Ornentar
pointed downriver at the few fast-dwindling boats in the
distance and shouted something, and as Hawkril tugged oars out
from under Embra's slumped body and handed his shield down
the boat to Craer, they saw the armaragors begin to run the
other way, back along the ruined dock towards shore.
"Well, at least there're no bowmen left!" Raulin said brightly.
"Still your tongue, lad," Sarasper snapped. "We're not out of
bowshot yet-give them no ideas!"
The old healer was already clambering awkwardly along the
boat towards Brightpennant, who still wore someone else's
sword in his side. "Have any of them started swimming yet?"
"In that armor?" Craer looked back. "No, they're idiots, but
not complete fools. I think."
"No," Sarasper agreed, "we're the complete fools—on our way
to we-know-not-what, in yonder castle, with our Dwaer gone and
our sorceress stricken." He glanced up at Craer, and added
gravely, "We fight well, though."
"A score and seven," Craer replied promptly. "One more if the
one who was chasing me just now broke his neck."
Sarasper shook his head. "Life isn't all a matter of keeping
score, look you," he growled, gently turning Glarsimber over.

"Oh? What else does it hold?" Craer asked innocently.
"Well, there's food," Hawkril replied, rowing hard. "And-" He
glanced at Embra's shapely form, and then at Raulin. "Yes," he
growled. "As I said, there's food."
Craer snorted—and then fell silent, his eyes narrowing in
suspicion. A bat had come flying out from the shore near the
docks, despite the full light of day. It circled them slowly,
flapping low over the water, then flew away, turning once in a
brief whirl, for all the world as if it was looking back.
Steel clanged, and then was gone, trailing a scream. Blackgult
sent a snarl after it. Another Aglirtan he'd had to slay—another
good man who should have drawn sword in the name of the
Rightful King for years yet.
Men were dying and screaming all around him, and his
warhorse had crashed to the ground seemingly hours ago,
almost taking him with it into death. Now he stood hip deep in
dead warriors, sending forth fire from the two Dwaer whirling
serenely above his head—blasting down this band of warriors,
and then that one.
They hadn't made it to the trees. Halvan was dead and the
loyalty of his Swords with him, there seemed no end to the
armsmen-and hedge-wizards, too-who'd rallied to Bloodblade,
and the Royal Host of Aglirta was now no more than a handful of
wounded or exhausted men.
He would not abandon them, these loyal few. They'd fought
for him, standing when they knew it meant their doom, and he'd
fight the Three alone and unaided before he'd call on the Dwaer
to flee, and leave good men to be slaughtered behind him. To die
knowing they'd been abandoned by the regent who'd led them
into this.
And yet there were wizards here in the fray, however feeble
their magics— could he escape? If he fought on to the bitter end,
no magic could snatch him away if he was struck senseless, or
overwhelmed by pain or an arrow in the eye or throat… and
what of the Dwaer then?

How could Embra escape—or Aglirta withstand the lurking
Serpent-clergy-with the Dwaer-Stones in the wrong hands?
Embra! Yes! That was it!
Through the Dwaer he called to her, shouting with his mind: 
Embra, daughter mine! Farewell! Blackgult must Jail, that
Aglirta live—but lass, use your Dwaer to call mine to you, or
they'll be lost with me! Embra, swiftly! Call my Dwaer, and
take them from here!
His cry echoed away into nothingness. No familiar mind
brushed his, no warmth of regard or even fury… nothing.
Three Above, was his Embra dead?
"Gods," he whispered despairingly, swinging his sword almost
out of habit to turn aside the blade of a snarling armaragor, and
sidestep the lunge of another. Almost absentmindedly he spun to
slice the throat of one man, and called on the Dwaer to blind the
other, hacking the man down ruthlessly an instant later.
Waves of knights were advancing towards him, now—stalking
menacingly forward, and then drawing aside. Through the gap
they were creating, the Regent of Aglirta saw more armaragors
striding proudly forward—and, glaring at him over their drawn
swords, Sendrith Duthjack. Bloodblade was coming for him.
Embra, hear me!
Bloodblade was pressing forward now, and the knights
crossing swords with Blackgult were falling back, bringing up
their blades to ring him with glittering steel, where he stood
alone among the fallen.
Alone with—his heart leaped—a sudden burst of magical
rathance, in the air before him. Armaragors shouted, some
snatched out daggers to throw—and out of the spell-glow
stepped a tall, slender, darkly handsome man, in dark garb. A
small vertical dagger was emblazoned on his left cheek.
He reached up for Blackgult's Dwaer, orbiting out of reach,

and the regent saw that his long, slender fingers bore
rings—rings that flashed and made Blackgult's blade sear his
hands ere he could swing it, and bring this stranger-wizard
down.
"I am Jhavarr Bowdragon!" the man snapped, as if that name
would make men tremble, or bow down.
Blackgult glared at him, reaching for his dagger. "Aye. So?"
"Give me those," the wizard snarled, stabbing a pointing
hand up at the two Dwaerindim, his eyes alight with excitement.
"Such power! I must have them! Yield them to me, Blackgult, or
die!"
Chapter Ten
Confounded Wizards
Everywhere
The scrying whorl turned serenely-but the Koglaur from
Sarinda suddenly extended an impossibly long finger down at its
brightness, to point at the scene therein, and more specifically at
a bat flapping low across the Silverflow in broad daylight. "I've
seen that before! That's a wizard, or a spy of his!"
"The latter," the whorl-caster agreed calmly. "The Master of
Bats, scrying in his way as I do in mine."
The taller Koglaur sighed. "Wizards," he muttered. "They
seem to be everywhere in Aglirta!"
"You're not the first of us to make such an observation," the
whorl-caster said wryly. "Magic lures them—and baronial gold.
Steady employment, that is, as walking weapons for one baron to
threaten another with… and barons of Aglirta, it seems, are
always threatening other barons of Aglirta."
"This much war is usual?" The Koglaur from Sarinda spread
his hands. "I must confess a certain bewilderment: given such

bloodshed, how is it that any crops get harvested, and the land
survives, king or no king, down the centuries? It should all have
become beast-roamed waste by now!"
The whorl-caster smiled. "Tension and intrigue are constant,
yes, but such open battle-no. The people whelm behind
Bloodblade, their new hope, all of the barons seek the
Throne—and behind it all are the Serpent-clergy. They've finally
risen in earnest, to make a concerted bid for the Throne."
"And if they succeed?"
"If they take Aglirta, Sirlptar will in turn fall. Then, city by
city—unless some as-yet-unknown foe arises from nowhere to foil
them-they'll take all Darsar. A bard sang of it, once: 'a cloak of
death and tyranny flung across the land.' Fear will then drive
some to flight before them, and freeze others into helplessness,
to be mastered where they cower."
"You soothe me," the taller Koglaur said bitterly. "So why
have we wasted our time down the years meddling with lesser
foes and matters, when alongside us, the Snake-lovers have
grown into something much greater?"
The Koglaur bent over the whorl did something with his
hand, and the whorl sank, slowed, and began to go dark and fade
away. "We've struck at the clergy of the Great Serpent again and
again," he said grimly, "but have often been slain or foiled… as if
our foe knew just how, when, and in what shape we'd be acting."
The Sarindan Koglaur made a restless movement. "Well, it
can't have been the Serpent, asleep. Is it these confounded
wizards again?"
The whorl-caster looked even grimmer. "No."
"Who, then?"
"Who better to fight us than one of our own?"
The tall, spar-headed creature raced through dry, dead
underbranches in a loud chorus of snappings, fragments

tumbling in its wake. As it ran, leaping fallen and rotten tree
trunks and vine tangles, it murmured, "Swifter, Thuulor, swifter!
This Flaeros will be halfway to the ends of Darsar before you
catch him, at this rate!"
There came a place in the green and shaded gloom where the
forest fell away in tumbled rocks beneath its pounding feet, and
the hurrying figure plunged into space. There was a twisting and
blurring, and then a frantic flapping of huge wings, ere the crash
of crushed bushes came. A leathery, winged thing sprang up
from that hard landing and flew on-and with each wingbeat its
wings grew smaller, and its body longer and more slender, until
a gigantic many-winged eel or snake was darting between the
trees…
* * *
Every breath burned like fire, his legs felt weak and wobbly,
and Flaeros Delcamper had no idea where he was running to-or
where he was. In this confounded forest, yes, utterly lost and
blundering along where bears and worse dwell, yes, but he must
go on running—or die.
Something was crashing along after him, something that
could change its shape, something large and fast that was
hunting him.
Twice he'd deliberately made a sharp turn and headed in a
new direction—and twice it had followed, sometimes running,
sometimes flying… and always drawing a little closer.
Flaeros gasped for breath, stumbling and almost falling for
the hundredth time, staggering on he knew not where, through
dark, old, moss-covered trees and wet leaves underfoot, roots like
gnarled boulders wandering under his boots like rope strewn
across a barge deck, and oh, Three Above save me, when would
this end?
There—again! The human fool was holding the scepter openly
in his hand, now, as he ran on, shirt torn away from one
shoulder by branches, panting in deep, exhausted groans,
stumbling like a drunken man in his weariness. Perhaps it'd be

better to draw back a bit, and lurk unseen, before this Flaeros
broke something in his fleeing. Let the lad catch his breath, rest,
and then-
The winged serpent swooped around a tree that was as large
around as a small cottage, over one gigantic bough, and then
under the nex-
The two boughs clapped together like slashing blades, and
then drew apart a little. The snake writhed in shuddering agony,
half-crushed and transfixed between them on many thorny
spikes that hadn't been there moments before. Branches that
had sharp cutting edges like swordblades whipped out and back,
and severed sections of snake plopped down onto a moss-cloaked
stone. A humanlike hand was protruding from the tree
there-and from a ring on one of its fingers fire erupted. The
sections of snake sizzled in that cone of snarling flames, seared,
and then crumbled into ash—as the two branches slowly bent
down to thrust the rest of the winged serpent into the stream of
fire.
In a matter of moments the snake was all blackened,
shapeless ash.
Abruptly the flames were gone, and the branches silently
melted back into something slate-gray and headless that boasted
two stumpy legs. Those legs stamped on the ashes, and then took
a stride-and half the tree quietly walked away.
Flaeros Delcamper was several tree-cloaked hills away by
then, blundering into trees in his terror and exhaustion, and so
missed seeing these makings of a very fine terror ballad. He
would have been fervently thankful to know that the walking
thing wasn't headed in his direction at all. Yet he might well
have been almost as alarmed if apprised of other lurking beasts
of the forest, that he was now much closer to. For bards as for
others, life remains a process of stumbling blindly between
perils.
"Yes, there are windows behind all of those shutters,"
Tonthan "Gold-cloak" said solemnly. "Rest assured: mere are no
other rooms here save the taproom and jakes below us. No

passages, secret or otherwise. We've chosen a good place for our
shared purposes. You may speak freely."
He waved a hand that glittered and gleamed with fat gold
rings crowned by thumb-sized gems at the empty chairs drawn
up around the table. "By all means examine the underside of the
table, the floor, and the ceiling; we'll not be offended. Sit where
you like, and on the chairs of your choosing."
The representatives from the Isles of Ieirembor regarded him
expressionlessly, and then did all of those things, lingering for
some time at their examination of the seats and backs of all the
chairs. Tonthan and the other wealthy Sirl merchants waited
patiently, goblets in hand—and when the Ieiremborans were
seated, brought decanters and empty glasses to the table, silently
offering them.
Just as silently the Ieiremborans refused that offering. Their
heads then turned to regard one of their number, a large,
dark-haired man with fierce and full eyebrows, who put the
knuckles of one of his hands under his chin, stared at all of the
Sirl merchants across from him, one at a time, and with a total
lack of expression on his face said, "We are met this day because
we of the Isles seek revenge on Ezendor Blackgult, who dared to
try to conquer us, and did much harm in failing at that. We seek
your sponsorship in working that revenge."
Tonthan nodded over the rim of his glass. "And the intended
form of this revenge?"
"The death of Blackgult-dealt openly, by red war, not by
poison or a night-hurled dagger. All Aglirta must know why he
falls—and know also that we can at will strike to the very heart of
their land."
Tonthan steepled his fingers wordlessly and looked at one of
his fellow merchants-a man in yellow silks with large, dark eyes
and a curving, short-spike beard on the end of his chin.
"Sathbrar?"
Sathbrar leaned forward. "It was our assumption that your
revenge would not end with Blackgult's death, but extend to

something of lasting benefit to us all: the ascension to the River
Throne of a man all of us here in this room could have some
measure of control over."
The Ieiremborans sat like stone statues for the space of a very
long breath before their spokesman said in carefully neutral
tones, "You are in favor of installing a figurehead king?" j_
"Indeed," Sathbrar replied.
"You might even say our financial support depends on it,"
Tonthan added, leaning forward. "A man we approve of,
moreover."
The eyes across the table from him narrowed. "A king of your
choosing?"
"I did not say that. Say rather: a king of your choosing, whom
we find agreeable."
The spokesman for the Isles sat back and exchanged glances
with his fellow Ieiremborans. It took but a few moments of looks
traded with that same careful lack of expression before they
reached some sort of consensus, and the spokesman leaned
forward again. "We find this acceptable," he said, "so long as all
magic used upon this king, and counsel given him, is also a
matter of mutual agreement—beforehand, and with full
knowledge of what is being attempted, on both sides. That is, all
of us here at this table are informed fully, equally, and-as much
as is possible-at the same time."
He lifted his brows in query, and Tonthan and Sathbrar both
nodded without bothering to confer with each other.
"Have we agreement?" the spokesman for the Isles asked.
"We do," the Sirl merchants said in unison, before Sathbrar
held up one finger, and said, "There is one caution we must
place before you at this time—before we speak of how many
hireswords, under whose command, and where and when
whelmed. Although we appreciate both the patience you've
shown thus far and the fire of your cause, we are loath to

proceed in haste just now. Aglirta is erupting into wizards' wars
again."
Ieiremboran faces acquired slight frowns. "Explain. We heard
talk here in the streets of 'confounded wizards everywhere'
upvale, but were given to understand that this is by no means an
unusual occurrence in Aglirta. Yet Blackgult brought no strong
force of mages against us."
"Wizards are numerous in Aglirta, yes-though none remain
who could seriously challenge the greatest mages of this city, we
believe. But as to the warfare we spoke of: the Serpent-followers
have been tossing coins to hungry warriors all over Darsar for
some time now, and bringing their hireswords to Aglirta. Many
of the barons of the realm are riding to war as we speak.
Moreover, one mercenary captain by the name of Duthjack—
probably better known to you as 'Bloodblade'—marches on
Flowfoam Isle itself, with the stated aim of becoming King of All
Aglirta. Many Vale folk flock to his banner, seeking an end to
strife among barons, lax justice, no peace—and no king they can
look to, to set such things right."
"Blackgult remains regent?"
"If he yet lives. He whelmed a paltry force in arms to meet
Blood-blade, but we've heard nothing yet of how either fared."
"It matters not," an Ieiremboran who'd been silent all this
time said suddenly. "Both of them drew sword on our Isles and
shed the blood of our people. Both must die. Yet it would feel
better were we to wield the blade that slew Blackgult
ourselves—so we can be certain he is dead, and so that he dies by
our hands and knowing it."
"Better but less prudent," the Isles spokesman put in. "I've no
taste for wading into a realm at war, with unfamiliar foes riding
at us from all sides—and even less eagerness for making enemies
of the Serpent-priests until a time and occasion of our
choosing."
Tonthan nodded. "We of Sirl share your tastes in this matter.
We would prefer to bide our time in this matter of your revenge

until a victor emerges in Aglirta. That one will have to be the
puppet of the Snake-priests, or acceptable to them—or they'll
move against him soon enough. We wait, then, until irking is on
the Throne—and then we strike, slaying king and priests, and so
win all."
The spokesman traded looks up and down his side of the table
again, then said heavily, "We agree with and accept your counsel
in this matter. We wait, then, with but one query more: is there
some wizards' way of keeping watch over Blackgult, so that we 
know if he dies?"
"I will try to arrange what you desire," Tonthan replied
carefully. "It is not a matter of cost, or of any shortfall in skills of
the more discreet and, ah, biddable mages available to us here in
Sirlptar, but rather that Blackgult bears some magic of his
own—granted to him as regent, we believe-that often foils the
spells of others."
He leaned forward until his nose was almost among the
decanters. "We, too, see a value in what you propose. If all the
tales of the regent being able to summon the Sleeping King are
true—and many respected men of Sirl were present when
Snowsar named your foe regent, and swear this is so—and
further, that Snowsar's awakening will also unbind the Serpent,
as the king insisted upon that occasion, then we of Sirl feel we
must all know what happens to the regent, and when."
The spokesman for the Isles nodded slowly. "Thus far
agreement has been both surprisingly plentiful and easily
reached between us. If I may propose one additional matter for
us to agree upon, admittedly more trivial: let this tavern be our
meeting place henceforth, upon signals between us being
exchanged as before. Have we-?"
Tonthan smiled. "We do. Is our mutual business concluded at
this time, then?"
"It is." They rose in a scraping of chairs and extended their
hands towards each other across the table, empty palms up but
not quite touching each other, in the usual parting of merchants.

To Tonthan's astonishment, the Ieiremboran suddenly smiled.
So they could smile, after all.
All who'd met departed at intervals, and took various routes
away from the tavern through the Sirl alleys. So it was that
Sathbrar took his leave of Tonthan moments after descending
into the taproom, and was quite alone when he turned onto
Sandraea Street, and paused at a spot where many folk do,
where the street looks out over the trees of gardens below.
There he gazed out and down whilst pulling his cloak over his
yellow silks. "A last glass of thraevin," he murmured, voice
slurring as the length of his jaw changed and the nose above it
also shifted shape, "and then it's high time I went to whisper in a
certain regent's ear."
Without wasting breath on a reply, the Regent of Aglirta
hurled the full power of the Dwaer at the young wizard. The very
air around him shuddered with the force of his strike-but
Jhavarr's howl was louder.
Blackgult watched as his foe was hurled away across the
battlefield, lightnings spitting from fingertips as the rings
thereon exploded, and shook his head. 'Jhavarr Bowdragon?" he
asked the dead warriors all around him heatedly. "Graul and
bebolt, who is Jhavarr Bowdragon? Just one more young fool of
an overambitious wizard? And why must he challenge me now?"
His sword was cool enough to take up into his hand again,
but as he hefted it, he saw armored men hastening towards him.
Blackgult sighed and took up a stance ere he recognized a face or
two—these were not Bloodblade's men coming to slay, but
battered men of Aglirta who greeted him with smiles and his
battle cry: "For the Risen King!"
Blackgult gave them a grim but smiling greeting. "Well, at
least I'll fall in the company of friends—and these fields are as
good a place to die as any!"
"What?" one bristle-bearded armaragor growled in mock
horror. "Not lying in a pool of wine with a dozen lovely lasses? I
thought the Three and I had a solemn agreement on that!"

There was a chorus of rueful laughter-but it ended abruptly
when the bearded armaragor pointed across the strewn bodies,
and said warningly, "Lord Blackgult, 'ware!"
Jhavarr Bowdragon was flying low over the field towards
them. His hands were blackened claws, his eyes were two flames
of fury, and a Dwaer-Stone was circling in the air above his
head.
Blackgult's face tightened. "Get back!" he said warningly to
the men around him. "Well away, and lie low among the
fallen-there'll be wizard-fire all over this hill in a moment! Go!"
Jhavarr's first bolt turned the bearded knight into a
screaming torch, and the others needed no further prompting.
The regent stood alone when the young wizard came to a halt,
standing on air not far off, and snarled,
"Regent of Aglirta, for what you allowed to happen to my
sister, you shall die! For what you just tried to do to me, know
this: your passing shall be slow and painful!"
"I know your sister not," Blackgult replied quietly, "though I
recall hearing of a Bowdragon among the archwizard Tharlorn's
apprentices— but I fear I know the Stone you bear all too well.
How came you by it?"
"I took it from one who deserved it not, nor had power
enough to keep it from me," the young wizard sneered, "and now
I'll—"
Blackgult was not in a mood to waste time or breath this day.
He called on his two Dwaer to slash with blades of unseen air at
the man facing him, seeking to break limbs and the man's neck
and jaw, too, ere this Jhavarr finished spouting doom.
Flashes of light heralded his attacks—or rather, their strivings
against an unseen shielding spell. Somewhere behind those
raging rathances the young mage shouted derisive laughter at
him, and struck back.
Ezendor Blackgult was no accomplished wizard who might

make Dwaerindim dance, empowering webs of intricate and
many-layered enchantments and conjurations—but he'd dabbled
in sorcery for years as best a cunning warrior could, and knew a
few magics very well.
Wherefore the dark bolt that hurled him into the air, flinging
many dead men aloft to whirl limply around him, slew him not.
Blackgult used the Dwaer to twist it, so the fire that should
have ravaged his innards gave him scales instead, and from the
midst of his tumbling smashed back at Bowdragon—two fists of
force, one behind the other.
The first shattered the wizard's shielding spell, and the second
drove him to the ground with brutal force. Blackgult heard the
dull snapping of ribs ere Jhavarr's Dwaer flamed bright and
forced his onslaught away.
"Graul you, old bastard!" Bowdragon shouted, a thread of
pain in his furious voice, "I'll kill you!" Wincing, he clambered to
his feet, not waiting to snatch his balance ere he hurled bursts of
flame at Blackgult.
"You already have," the regent told him grimly, striding
forward with the fires of his own Dwaer whirling around him,
sucking in Bowdragon's flames to make themselves stronger.
Jhavarr found his footing, strode forward to face the
regent—and then met the eyes of the grim warrior stalking
forward in blood-spattered armor, and involuntarily took a step
back. Then another.
Blackgult raised his sword as he came. "If you've slain my
daughter in seizing her Stone," he explained almost gently, "and
keep me now from fighting alongside my men as Bloodblade
reaches for the Throne, you slay me as surely as if your blade
pierces my heart."
Jhavarr sneered and threw up a shield, calling on the Dwaer
to make it strong and abristle with many whirling swordblades.
Blackgult strode towards it, never slowing, and the young
wizard's face grew pale as the regent's two whirling Dwaer

winked and flared, forcing the shield of many blades back, step
by step, towards its caster.
"So you storm through Aglirta striking folk down in the name
of your sister," Blackgult continued, eyes dark and angry, "and
slay or do harm to folk who never knew her. I think you're just
one more greedy young mage who wants a cloak of righteousness
to cover your butcherings and thefts. Tell me: how many farms
have you burned? How many commoners have you casually
struck down?"
The sword was reaching for him. Jhavarr cast a swift and
desperate spell to make it burn again, but this time his flames
spiraled off it in wisps as they formed, plucked away to join the
tunnel of racing fire around Blackgult.
Jhavarr's shield was almost touching him now—and in
sudden alarm he saw that its blades were receding into it—no—
reversing through it, so that their glittering points menaced him
now, and not his foe! They reached for him, growing longer,
sliding out at him with Blackgult's own sword at their heart…
the regent was bending his own magic back on him, bearing him
back, breaking his—
With a snarl of rage that was almost a shriek of fear the
wizard sprang into the air, his Dwaer-Stone spiraling around
him, and let his shield fall away into nothingness. Let the regent
try to reach him now! He'd bide his time, and return to—
Another figure was in the sky with him, rising from the field
of armored men and shouts of "For the Risen King!" and "Down
the regent! Bloodblade for king!"
Blackgult, trailing flames of red and black, his Stones whirling
around him!
Jhavarr snarled again, fear overmounting his fury. The Dwaer
were just too strong! He needed two Stones, too, for his spells to
have any good chance of reaching Blackgult, to slay…
And for the first time that day, the young wizard began to
wonder if the man with no escape from this battle might

be—Jhavarr Bowdragon.
"That's the last of them?" Bloodblade snapped, his eyes on the
sky above.
"Yes, Lord," the swordcaptain panted, reining in. "We don't
think any reached the woods. Those who took their stand yonder
are all dead—I've set men to walking among the fallen to slay the
wounded and any who feign death."
"Good. Scour me this field," Bloodblade said slowly, all his
drought on what befell overhead. He waved a vague and
bloody-gauntleted hand at a hilltop. "Keep back from those
shimmerings, there—that's some evil Blackgult worked, some
slaying magic that can do nothing if we go not near. Search
everywhere else."
He frowned, and waved his hand again, back and form. "All
others: scatter, that no great whelming of men be in any one
place—at least until that is done."
The swordcaptain knew very well what "that" was. Two tiny
figures stood on empty air above, flashes of magic streaking
betimes between them—and one of the two had begun to blaze
with light, like unto a star in the night sky. He turned his horse
towards the nearest armsmen, to relay the Lord's command to
spread out, glanced up at the blazing star overhead, and
swallowed. Against whatever might stab down out of the sky, a
soldier had no good shield.
Hmmph. No wonder so many priests insisted their god was
up in the sky, always watching.
You'd think some of them might stir themselves to help, from
time to time.
Or wait; would that be the worst doom of all?
"What are you doing?" Jhavarr screamed, as his Dwaer
slowed around him and he started to fall-so had Blackgult's; he
was falling, too!

Frantically Jhavarr clawed at his Stone with his mind,
abandoning the spell he'd been going to cast. Move, bebolt you!
Move, and give of your power again, unto me…
There! Hah! Torn from Blackgult's clutches, whatever his
crazed plan!
"Were you trying to kill us both?" he shouted. "Tired of life at
long last, Regent of Aglirta?"
"It will be some years," Blackgult said, his voice sounding
calmly right beside Jhavarr's ear despite the goodly span of
empty air between them "before you gain wits enough to battle
me with words, Bowdragon. Didn't your sister ever get tired of
your endless shouting?"
Fury flamed in Jhavarr once more, white-hot and so bright
that for a moment—just a moment—the air around him blazed
like fire, too. It had been some time since he'd been able to see
Blackgult, but the starry rathance cloaking him could only be
another Dwaer-trick, after all…
When his throat loosened enough that he could form words
again, he spat, "You dare to mention Cathaleira? To taunt me
with what was done to her?"
"Young mage," Blackgult reminded him coolly, "you've dared
rather a lot of things, since arriving unheralded in fair Aglirta.
As regent, I'm sworn to defend this land—and if I have to dare
things and taunt you to best do that, be assured that I will."
Jhavarr's Dwaer slowed again, his rathance winked out, and
he fell again-not so far, this time, but enough to choke him once
more. "W-what are you doing?" he screamed in bewildered rage,
when he could speak.
"Taking control of your Dwaer, if I can," Ezendor Blackgult
said in a voice of iron. "I've no more time to spare for yapping
young puppies who think sorcery is all lording over others and
blasting whatever's handy without dunking or seeing what flows
from their deeds—even if their name is Jhavarr Bowdragon."

And then the young wizard found himself swept around in a
helpless spiral in the air, high above the warrior-roamed
battlefield, his maimed hands clawing at the whistling wind and
finding no aid or hold to cling to. A singing sound was erupting
from his Dwaer, rising, rising…
Bright blue flame suddenly burst into being in front of him, a
huge sphere of fire that completely hid the glimmering star that
was his foe-along with that half of the sky. The roaring of wind
in Jhavarr's ears died, and his Dwaer's song fell into a confused,
discordant chiming.
"Blackgult!" a woman's voice cried from out of those flames,
high with rage and exultation. "At last!"
"Strike, sisters!" another female called. "Strike now!"
Fire and lightning and bright and deadly spell-arrows of a
sort Jhavarr had never seen before leaped up from the flames,
arcing high over Blackgult's suddenly bright Dwaer, then
stabbing down like claws coming in at the regent from all sides.
"Die, Blackgult!" A third woman shrieked, rage and grief
making her voice tremble on the edge of tears. "In the name of
Raevur Talasorn, die!" Jhavarr Bowdragon opened his mouth to
shout in delight and triumph, raising a fist to beat at the air-and
then the air before him shattered in blinding brightness, and
bolts were lancing every-
Horses screamed and bolted, tumbling more than a few men
from their saddles. Men shouted and ran in like fear, wildly,
running to nowhere, fleeing the great smiting in the sky. A few
fell, or cowered under their shields, awaiting the next great
blow-as their ears rang and the echoes of that great blast rolled
around the woods and across the fields, from Sarth to the
mountains and back.
No other blast followed—nothing but a hissing in the
darkened sky, and here and there wet thuds. They heard those
same thuddings in Sarth and in Helm Hollow beyond-and even
along the backlands road, where men came out of their
steadings to stare at what was raining down into their hog

troughs and orchards alike, all around: small pieces of
Bow-dragon and torn-armored Aglirtan warrior.
Chapter Eleven
Going to Flowfoam to Die
The way ahead was dark. Yet he knew it all too well, every
painful stone step that he was crawling down, headfirst, resting
his chin on cold and dusty stone as his crushed and broken
fingers shrieked protests. His gaspings echoed loudly around
him, in the chill, deserted underways of Flowfoam. None came
here but the rats—and Ingryl Ambelter.
He smiled into the darkness. Aye. None came here but the
rats, indeed.
The stair ended-good, 'twas the last one. Now across this little
unseen room-to the right, here, where there was a tilted
flagstone… the doorway waited, somewhere beyond…
His probing hand struck the edge of the frame a little too
hard, and the pain-wracked Spellmaster sobbed and curled up to
shudder away the pain, until he could master himself enough to
crawl on again. Not for the first time he wished he'd left
Gadaster a little closer to the ways above, just a few bebolten
rooms nearer-Surge, all afire *gasp* such *power* gone, rolling
away… What was THAT?
"Something mighty has happened," Ingryl gasped, to the
empty air around. His own hoarse whisper echoed… and then
faded. No other sounds followed. Nothing had been awakened,
nothing scurried or crumbled and fell, and that was good.
He let his forehead sink down onto the cold stone, and lay
still. His mind was still atingle, but he knew very well what he'd
felt—a great surge of sorcery, racing up from the south and west,
invisible but as alive as a hundred shouting men. Farmers and
armsmen might not even feel it, but it would serve every wizard
as it had him: crashing into their heads, roaring—and then,

having washed over them in its flood, race on, leaving them
dazed.
Some great act or shattering cataclysm of sorcery had just
befallen, somewhere nearby in Darsar, possibly in Aglirta itself…
and here he was, crawling like a sick child across a cold stone
floor, on his way to embrace a dead wizard's skeleton.
Gadaster Mulkyn no doubt lay waiting just as grinningly
patient as always, his tutor and tormentor no more. Ingryl had
laid him low and made him the Spellmaster's best little secret:
Ambelter's own personal bones of healing. Bones that said
Ambelter sorely needed once more. Until he'd undone what
Blackgult had done to him, he was little better than a crawling
worm.
Perhaps Blackgult had died in that spasm of sorcery, doing
something to Bloodblade-or trying to. Dabblers in magic seldom
succeeded in what they tried, after all…
Or succeeded all too well, to richly rue their deed.
That meant, Ingryl supposed, that the gods had very cruel
senses of humor. But enough of wizardry wit and hazarding; he
was growing cold and stiff, and no hint of what the cause of the
great wave of spell-force might have been came to him-or would
come. His dazed mind was as dark as the Silvertree cellars
around him.
"Something mighty has happened," Ingryl Ambelter repeated
to himself, a little angrily, "and I've missed it." Feebly and
painfully he wormed his way through the doorway, and dragged
himself onward into the cold and waiting darkness.
Light flashed like the lashing lightnings of a wild storm,
racing across the splendid high ceiling of a certain chamber in
Arlund, where a sphere of spell-rathance floated. Thrice it burst
from the sphere to snarl around the room. The five robed
Bowdragons in the chamber trembled uncontrollably as it
clawed through them.
Even when smoke curled up from their robes, pain lashed

their eyes to tears, and blood filled their mouths and streamed
from their noses, they ignored the stabbing lances of
wizard-fire—to stare intently into the sphere.
Abruptly one of them made a halfhearted grab at the glowing
orb, choking back what might have been a sob.
The other four recoiled from the sphere in horror. "No!" one
of them shouted. "Not again! Not Jhavarr!"
"That's it! Another snarled, drawing himself up to his full
height and shaking a fist in the air—a fist that suddenly crackled
with tiny fires and lightnings of its own, spitting from between
clenched fingers. "Aglirta and all of its cruel, grasping mages
must be destroyed!"
Bloodblade seemed not to notice the gentle sighings of his
own shielding spells dying away around him. He peered through
the fine rain of blood at smoke and ruin, seeking a particular
hilltop-where—yes!-shimmerings he'd warned the swordcaptain
against were winking out.
"And so passes Blackgult!" he chuckled, watching the last one
flicker and die. "The swaggering Shield of the Risen King is
shattered!"
Snatching the rally horn from his belt, he blew it and spurred
his snorting, fearful mount to the nearest hilltop, beckoning his
warcaptains with great sweeps of his arm.
Soon enough he was ringed by eager faces, staring at him
hungrily out of helms adew with blood. Everything had that iron
tang-and everything was covered in a dripping wash of red.
Gods, but sorcery bought impressive deaths, if naught else!
"Get you to Flowfoam as fast as you can," he told his men
grimly. "Seize me the Throne! Once Kelgrael is good and dead
and I'm king, the rest of the barons will come to me—on their
knees, or waving vain swords, or as corpses. Barons always come
to Flowfoam, as surely as water flows downward. There I'll be
victorious!"

They still stared at him in eager, expectant silence.
He looked around at them all, struck the flat of his sword
against his thigh with a ringing clang, and shouted, "What're
you waiting for? Ride!"
"For Bloodblade!" one of them roared. "Ride!"
"Ride!" they took up the cry, and were off, galloping like
madmen, blowing their own rallying horns wildly as they went.
Bloodblade waved his sword on high to his troops, and allowed
himself a grim smile. With a sound like reluctant thunder, his
whole army started to move. East, to the docks—and thence to
Flowfoam!
"Embra," Sarasper muttered, as their boat grated against the
Flowfoam dock. "Embra, awaken! I need your wits, quickly!"
"You're not the only one," Lady Silvertree murmured drowsily.
"In fact, if I gave a piece of mind to all in Aglirta who needed
it…"
"Not now!" the old healer hissed, as both Craer and Hawkril,
busily mooring the boat, snorted their mirth. "Leave the feeble
jokes to Craer, and tell me this: where on Flowfoam is some
magic I can get my hands on, quickly! You're hurt, and
Brightpennant's worse-he'll die on us if I don't get magic I can
drain, quickly!"
Embra opened swimming eyes, and tried to stare at him.
"Top of the dock stair-little door in the topmost torch lantern: a
glowstone, for when there's wind or rain or overmuch snow…"
"Raulin!" Sarasper snapped, and the young bard launched
himself up the steps like an arrow shot from a bow.
"Uh, Raulin—?" Craer asked, on the stair, as the young bard
stormed past. "Hadn't you better wait for us, in case whichever
wizard raised that barrier is lording it up there? And might be
struck by the urge to turn you into a rotten gourd? Or, say, a
pillar of ale, with no flask or handy tankard to hold you
together?"

The hurrying youth paid him no heed, slowing not a step in
his rush.
"Our 'whichever wizard' is going to be Ambelter, I'll be
bound," Hawkril growled darkly, striding up the stairs three at a
time with war-sword in hand.
Raulin came back down the stairs even more quickly. He bore
the glowstone in his hand, but looked sick.
"What ails, lad?" Hawk snapped.
"B-bodies," the young bard called back. "Blood, and flies
crawling on their eyes—"
He was suddenly, noisily sick just to one side of the stone
steps, and ran on, almost sobbing, to where Sarasper waited in
the boat, with Embra and Glarsimber slumped on either side of
him.
"Spew some more right now if you can, lad," the old man told
him with a sour smile. "I'm going to need your help pulling the
sword out of our bold baron, here!"
Raulin stared at him, face white—and then, abruptly, did as
Sarasper suggested. The healer threw a hand under the nearest
Castlecloaks elbow and spun him around just in time to avoid
being drenched.
"Such obedience is rare in the young," he commented, as
Raulin's shoulders stopped shaking.
The bard hissed a bad word at him, then threw back his head,
breathed deeply, and followed it with an apology. "There's been a
battle up mere," he told the healer. "Bodies everywhere."
"Flowfoam court guards? Courtiers? Strangers?"
The bard shrugged. "I don't—all of them, I guess. Just blood,
blood-"
Sarasper clapped a hand on Raulin's shoulder, and said, "The

glow-stone? Thankee. Now into the boat-we've got a lady
sorceress to get on her feet."
"But isn't Glarsimber-?"
"Yes, and I'd be seeing to him first save that we all might
need Em's spells in a hurry; us for healing Brightpennant, here,
or Hawkril and Craer if they run into the Spellmaster or some 
other crazed wizard, Aglirta's got plenty to spare—a step or two
inside the palace! Now get down here! I need you to hold her
still, in case she thrashes if there's pain and loses us this
glowstone into the water, see?"
Raulin saw, and got down mere in as much haste as he could.
He was only sick once more, and that was safely into the water.
"The lad was right," Hawkril muttered. "Looks like a
hog-slaughtering!"
Craer nodded, but put a finger to his lips for quiet as he
glided forward into the next chamber. Bodies were slumped
everywhere, and all was dark and silent, as if not a man yet
lived— There! Something had moved over there!
In a crouch, the procurer crept forward, darting along beside
a grandly gilded lounge that half a dozen armaragors could hide
behind. At its far end he halted, low to the floor, and peered
around the corner, head swaying out like a snake's.
The man at the far end of the chamber was stumbling along
blindly, blundering into walls and doorframes, and-yes, his face
drooped sickeningly, eyes great pits and flesh hanging like
melted wax. Another lurched into view, shuffling mindlessly
through another doorway, a sword dangling from its hand. It did
not even seem to see the first stumbling man-or the procurer
peering at it.
Craer ducked back the way he'd come. "Melted! The place is
full of Melted!" he hissed.
"So which wizard commands them now?" Hawkril growled.
"The one we're going to find and slay, yes?"

Craer gave him a wry grin. "You have a knack for reducing
things to simple, clear tasks, Tall Post!"
"It's a better life than some lead," Hawkril replied
meaningfully, watching a Melted shamble along a passage
towards them. It did not appear to see them, even when Hawkril
waved his warsword in front of it, and stumbled past as they
exchanged wary glances.
"Perhaps someone already took care of the wizard for us,"
Craer murmured.
"I don't like this," Hawkril growled. "Back to the boat-Em will
know best."
"Doesn't she always?"
Hawkril gave his friend a dark look, but made no reply.
Raulin turned his head away, wincing, his hand so tight
around the hilt of the blade in the baron's guts that it was going
numb already.
"Just pull it straight out, lad," Sarasper said. "Whatever you
do, don't twist—just pluck it straight out, hmm?"
Raulin clenched his teeth. "I'm going to… be… sick again…"
"Here, let me," said a crisp voice at his shoulder. Raulin
blinked at the Lady Embra, and she gave him a small, quick
smile, ran a finger along the line of his jaw that did anything but
soothe him as she'd intended, and firmly removed his fingers
from the hilt of the sword.
"Now, Em," Sarasper said, looking up from the glow of magic
between his hands. The Lady Silvertree leaned over Raulin,
bosom brushing against him so that he blushed and swallowed
again—and tugged the blade forth, straight and swift.
Her hand stabbed in at where it had been almost as swiftly.
Blood was spurting everywhere, and Raulin cringed away until
he saw with shame that lines of gore had splashed across

Embra's face and breast, and left Sarasper's intent face a
dripping mask of blood, and neither of them had so much as
flinched.
"A bad one," Sarasper murmured, the glow flickering between
his fingers. "Yes… a bad one."
Embra reached out her other hand and laid it on one of the
old healer's hairy forearms. For an instant, something flashed
between them, something Raulin almost saw… and the air
tingled. Magic, strong magic…
Glarsimber jerked, under them, snarling and clawing blindly
at the air… and then fell limp again, and groaned.
"Oh, gods," he cursed. "Three Above, that was almost my
dooms-word… or was it? Am I—?"
"Alive, I'm afraid," Sarasper chuckled. "With flagons still to
drain, and ladies still to… ah…"
"Still to kiss," Embra said gleefully, bending to Glarsimber's
astonished lips.
The baron's eyes flashed, under her—and he gave Raulin a
wink, an instant later, ere the Lady of Jewels released him to
gasp for breath delightedly.
"My," he purred, "that was almost worth carrying a cold
sword through my guts for most of an eternity…"
"Almost," Sarasper agreed dryly. "Almost."
"Either he's dead or he's delighted," Craer said, as they
pounded back down the steps to the dock. "She's kissing him."
"Stop your teasing? Hawkril snarled. "It's like the little lasses
giggling and teasing, when I was a brat-except that your tongue
never stops, but them at least I could make howl!"
"Oh, you could probably make me howl if you handed me
gems enough," Craer replied.

"Aye, a heap of sparkling stones higher than a wagon," the
armaragor snorted. "Forgive me if better uses for such a
hoard—assuming I could ever find so many gems in all
Darsar—spring to mind."
"Making Embra howl? I think if we burned all her gowns,
we'd find she has that many stones already."
"That many and more," Embra replied, looking up from the
boat. "I'd trade them all, right now, for my Dwaer back!"
"So would I," Hawkril growled. "There's got to be a wizard up
there-the place is crawling with Melted, stumbling around
unseeing."
Embra's eyes narrowed. "As if something has happened to
whoever was commanding them." She sighed, tried to wipe
blood off her face and rearranged it into a big smear instead,
and said grimly, "Let's to work, then. Glar, can you stand?"
"I'd rather go right on lying here with you on top of me,
actually," the baron told her in tones of mock innocence.
" Up, Baron of the Realm," she told him crisply. "We'll be
needing you to die far more spectacularly than in the situation
you describe."
Craer raised his eyebrows. "There are more spectacular
situations?"
"You can belt up and go forth to die, too," the Lady Overduke
told him fondly. "All of you-get!"
They got. Craer took the lead, the rest of the Band of Four
followed, and Raulin found himself assisting the baron—who by
the top of the steps knew just how weak and easily winded he
still was.
Flowfoam was dark and empty, save for the flies, the dead,
and the eerie, silently wandering Melted. "Hurry," Embra hissed,
looking around. "I don't like this at all."

"Hurry where?" Craer asked. "I know you grew up here and
might remember this on your own, but this castle does cover the
entire perimeter of the island, you know."
"The throne chamber, you dolt," the Lady Overduke told him
witheringly. "I can call on the Living Castle linkages anywhere,
but if I do so when someone else is sitting on the throne, he can
see right where we are— and strike at will. Once I'm on the
throne, I can search all Flowfoam with-out shifting my shapely
behind an inch."
Hawkril raised his eyes to the ceiling. "I'm glad you said that,
my Lady," he growled. "I'll be even more thankful if Craer resists
the urge to comment cleverly, about now." —
Craer smiled, winked, and said nothing at all.
"Should I shift shape?" Sarasper asked reluctantly, as they
headed for the throne chamber, and the messily sprawled bodies
of guards and courtiers grew more numerous.
"Not unless you'd be much happier as a beast," Embra told
him. "Personally, I find it hard to converse with a longfangs."
"That fails to surprise me," the old healer told her wryly,
stepping smoothly to one side to let a Melted blunder past
without touching him.
"Quiet now," Craer warned. "One more passage, and we'll be
looking into the throne chamber."
The doors stood open where the procurer was pointing,
huddled bodies in plenty to keep them that way. Embra sniffed
at the air, frowning, and shook her head. "I don't like this," she
whispered again, and led the way onward. Craer and Hawkril
quickly moved to flank her, while Sarasper looked behind
them—and found Glarsimber already grimly doing the same
thing.
Embra paused at the last door and crouched slightly to peer
ever-so-cautiously ahead. Without a word Craer put a hand on
her arm to make her stop, and slid past her into the gloom like a

fast-drifting shadow. The first place he looked was up at the
ceiling, the others saw, ere he glided from view.
Hawkril took a quick step forward to keep his friend in view,
war-sword raised at the ready. Craer was peering behind the
throne, and then at the doors to either side of it. Embra joined
Hawk, and they both saw the procurer shake his head and turn
and beckon them to join him.
The throne chamber was crowded with Melted, wandering
everywhere. The Lady Overduke was relieved to see that when
they collided, they didn't start hacking at each other, but merely
staggered back and turned to wander elsewhere. Still, she
twisted and darted like a procurer to avoid even brushing into
any of them, as she made her way across the wide expanse of
marble.
Guards and courtiers lay dead everywhere; she tried not to
look at them. When she was standing before the River Throne at
last, Embra gazed down at its emptiness, drew in a deep,
shuddering breath, and said to Hawk, "Stand guard before me.
Please."
He nodded, swung around, and drew his dagger, spreading
his arms so that edged steel barred all ways to the front of the
throne. Craer raised an eyebrow in a question, and she
murmured, "See if you can guide one of those-things—out of a
doorway, without getting attacked. If it works, get rid of a few
more. Then bar all of these doors."
Craer nodded and glided away, heading for Sarasper,
Brightpennant, and Raulin to relay her orders.
"Hawk," Embra whispered, as she turned around to sit down
on the High Seat of the Kings of Aglirta, "if my voice seems… not
my own, or I speak harshly to you or say things I wouldn't, strike
me senseless and get me off here as fast as you can—but throw
down your steel before you do it!"
The armaragor merely nodded, over his shoulder. Embra bit
her lip, put out her hands to grasp, the arms of the throne—and
sat down.

The seat was cold and hard under her, and there was the
strange tingling she always felt, as the familiar, waiting Living
Castle enchantments stirred, recognizing her. Yet the Melted did
not turn to charge at her, no crawling magic clutched or stabbed
at her, and… nothing untoward happened. Yet.
Swiftly, she let her awareness flow out, and then reached 
down into webs of laced and intertwined magic—spells laid by
Ingryl and Gadaster before him and half a hundred other mages,
all mighty… and all treacherous and sly, laying traps and secret
linkages of their own.
Yet this felt like home. She had always known these powers,
these bindings. Here, present herself thus, endure the flood of
fearsome images laid to scare away the timid, and call upon this
thread of power. Follow it, deeper now, until—yes! There!
She came to a place deep within the palace and deeper within
herself where she could call on the old, deep-seated
enchantments of Flowfoam. In a trice she sourced them to scry
the state chambers.
Nothing. No magic, strewn or fallen or even hidden, and
nothing alive but a few rats scurrying in the walls. 'Twould take
hours to search all of the interlinked keeps and underways across
the Isle, and somehow she already knew the regent was either
dead or not on Flowfoam.
She could not feel him.
Not near, not anywhere. Even with Flowfoam's magic. She
had no Dwaer now, to call to his—and she had precious little
time to search for anyone or anything.
Something had happened here on Flowfoam. No regent, no
court—no one left alive. Who had done this?
The enchantments had not been tampered with, or damaged.
If there'd been a spell-battle, it had been elsewhere-or all of the
combatants had either refrained from using the ancient magics
of the Isle, or been so familiar with them that they could wield
them so skillfully that no trace was left, and no damage done.

Where was her father?
Her father, the man she'd been reared to hate, the hereditary
enemy of all Silvertrees, the nemesis of the cruel tyrant who'd
called himself her father.
Baron Blackgult, the darkly handsome, laughing Golden
Griffon. Scourge of the high ladies of the Vale, striding confident
in his black and gold from bedchamber to bedchamber. She still
could not quite believe what she knew to be true: he had sired
her-and he was far less the monster many Vale folk thought him
to be than any Silvertree. Perhaps including herself.
The Lady of Jewels, folk still called her, fear and envy in their
voices more often now than the pity or veiled hatred she'd heard
when she was younger. All Aglirta had trembled when Faerod
Silvertree had looked their way, then, and some saw her as his
pawn, and others as one talon of his claws.
So much had happened since then. The tyrant was dead, his
outlawed enemy had returned to Aglirta and been named regent
by the king she and her swordbrothers had awakened—and now
he was nowhere to be found, and the throne stood unguarded,
and she needed answers.
King Kelgrael named us overdukes, we Band of Four, we
lawbreaking adventurers. He bade us protect his realm. Oh, how
we've failed in that…
Ezendor Blackgult-Father—where are you?
Silence. Emptiness. Far-questing thought, feeling for that
dark, rich mind, that humor, that fierceness… like unto his
griffon namesake, something of the gold-eyed hawk in the man…
Flash of blue mind-flame… awareness… four watchers, magic
fierce in all, regarding me… not friendl—
* * *
Embra screamed.
Hawkril whirled around.

Her head was thrown back, blue-white lightnings were arcing
from her eyes-and more bolts were crackling across her, from
arm to arm of the throne, holding her down like chains as she
writhed and arched, struggling under their fury.
Stone smoked where those bolts spat sparks, but Hawk flung
away sword and dagger and snatched at his lady without
hesitation. Em was hurting! He had to-
Roar out his pain, helpless in the grip of magics that howled
through him, stabbing, searing spells he had no defense against.
He was dimly aware of his hair standing on end, his armor
creaking and giving off smoke, his body trembling in the flow of
fell magic like a spiderweb in a gale…
And then Embra did something that hurt her very much, and
hurled him away, freeing him from that slaying storm of fire.
Hawkril crashed to the floor through many mindless Melted,
gasping, too weak to even make his arms obey him as he flopped
and panted.
Embra sobbed, and he struggled to rise. He couldn't even lift
his head—and above him, around him, the entire room—vaulted
ceiling, great broad battlefield of polished marble floor, and
all—was shuddering! Craer skittered towards him, waving his
arms crazily in a wild scramble to keep his balance and not fall
headlong into the crackling spell-lightnings.
He couldn't even see Embra, somewhere beyond his feet
where he couldn't look! "Three aid me!" he roared. "Any of you! 
Help!"
Four of them—kin to each other, and all "shes"… sisters?
Embra winced as they hurled fresh bolts into her. She didn't
even know them, had never seen them in her life before! They
couldn't be of Aglirta, they couldn't be someone she'd angered
even unwittingly…
The pain! Ok, Three, the PAIN!
Yet she was alive, thanks to the old magics of Flowfoam

running through her, and the River Throne to empower her own
castings.
Oh, Hawk, what you must be feeling now, with none of those
things!
Embra bit her lip again, not caring if she had any face left at
all. If she could but raise a shield…
Thrice she tried—and thrice they smote her, just as it was
about to form. They knew quite well what she was attempting,
they must do, and so she could only fail: each time the shield
started to form, they could overwhelm it with a fresh attack,
and…
The palace had seen so many spell-battles, down the years,
wild storms of magics, spitting and thrusting and exploding…
and yet it endured. And she was linked to it—it could be her
shield. Sink down through those Living Castle linkages, take on
the cloak of stone, settle deep and dark and cool…
Yes… battered she was still, her body torn and wracked by
their spells, but now the pain was but a dull, roaring ache, and
she could think again. Weave spells again. Scry and probe and
perceive again…
Fierce they were, these four. Young, and yes, sisters…
strangers to her, yes, though there was a proud name woven into
some of their incantations.
Embra frowned, and bent her will to listen. It was hard to sit
still while bolts were spun that would be hurled to hurt her, to do
nothing but wait for the twisting, sickening instant when the
magic struck deep into her, clawed, and then receded amid
spell-echoes…
Tala… Talasorn! That was it: Talasorn. There'd been a
Talasorn in Sirlptar, a private man, of good reputation among
mages. Where these his daughters?
And if so, or if not so, why were they savaging her?

Or did they slay everyone whose minds they met, while riding
their sorcery?
"Lady forfend, what's that?" Baron Tarlagar gasped, as a man
whose flesh was gray and hung from his face in grotesque
wattles and flaps, for all the world as if it was wax frozen in
middrip from a candle, lurched out of an archway and walked
stiffly down the terrace steps, almost falling twice. The Melted
strode unseeing right past the armaragors of the three barons,
who watched it with open mouths and pale faces, and vanished
into the trees of the southern-side Flowfoam gardens.
"Three Above," Loushoond said. "The Melted walk again!"
Ornentar nodded grimly. "That means a wizard awaits us. Let
us go slowly, and skulk about this palace. A charge to the throne
chamber may be a race to our deaths."
Tarlagar nodded grimly. "Better alive and barons, than dead
with crowns on our heads."
Loushoond winced. "No grand bardic phrases, please! Say
rather: the most attractive tactic is to carefully search this
palace, avoiding the rooms of state until last-in hopes that only
one surviving foe will face us there, when at last we do venture
therein. A weakened foe."
"Not another wizard like Silvertree's Spellmaster," Tarlagar
said fervently.
"Agreed," Ornentar said tersely, and pointed with his sword
down a garden path he knew. "That way-and keep together."
"That way" led to Griffonguard Door, a side way much
mutilated by Faerod Silvertree because of its resemblance to the
badge of his hated foe Blackgult, and hence little used.
Loushoond and Tarlagar nodded. For once in this armed rush to
seize the Throne, prudence was advisable.
When blue flame burst into being in the sky above the docks,
the armaragors did not wait for orders to duck down and begin
running through the gardens-and the three barons did not tarry

to discuss tactics further.
"Embra!" Sarasper called, hurrying through the maze of
moving Melted with a grim Glarsimber and a frightened Raulin
in his wake. "Are you well? Need you healing?"
Craer turned a pale, trembling face towards them—and
Sarasper saw the procurer's eyes suddenly blaze with blue fire.
Then that same rathance came into the faces of the Melted,
too, and they ceased their stumblings and turned in smooth
unison to face the south wall of the throne chamber. Sarasper
cast a quick look in that direction, but could see nothing but the
wall that had always been there, unchanged.
He could hear something, though. Something hissing or
roaring, distant but drawing swiftly nearer… more than one
something, of the same sort. Three or four identical snarling,
crackling noises, like wind-driven fire racing through dry trees…
And then blue fire was flaming behind the doors on the south
side of the throne chamber, and those doors burst open,
booming back against the walls in an instant where usually three
men had to strain to slowly shift them.
Blue fires raced along the passages beyond those doors,
drawing nearer. Spells, leaping blue lightnings of magic, and
riding them—as if those crackling bolts of magical fire were
steeds—four women.
Dark-gowned, furious, and similar in looks. Sorceresses all,
sweeping the room with their frowns and dismissing all as
unimportant except the throne-where their blue lightnings
clawed and snarled around one weeping, writhing woman.
One Talasorn sorceress smiled unpleasantly-and all four of
them roared towards the River Throne on plumes of angry blue
fire, raising their hands like claws to slay.
Chapter Twelve

To Spit upon a King
A pale fire flowed in the darkness. The Spellmaster gasped in
relief as the pain started to ebb, flowing away from him into the
glow. Ahhh…
Lying in the open casket, sprawled awkwardly atop Gadaster
Mulkyn's grinning skeleton, Ingryl Ambelter growled softly as the
tension that had governed him, keeping his limbs obeying him
through stabbing agony, faded at last.
He'd been a fool to try spells against someone with two
Dwaerindim. Gods, but the Worldstones were strong! Blackgult,
too, had been a surprise. Oh, the smiling cunning any could see,
and all of those intrigues and back-bedchamber doings take
swift wits and boldness as well as low guile—but the man could
work magic, too. His mind was as sharp as a sword, even before
he seized on the power of the Dwaer. It would be wise not to
strive spell to spell with him again…
The glow around Ambelter was growing dim, and his pain
was almost gone. Old Gadaster was losing strength even faster
than he was; 'twould be best to rise now, before the bones of his
onetime mentor crumbled away entirely.
Abruptly the glow brightened, and the solid stone walls 
rippled. Three Above, what sort of magic could do that'?
The palace around him seemed to gasp, too, and he could feel
magics surging through it, storming through ancient bindings.
Somewhere stones fell with a clatter, and ages-old dust swirled
in the air around him.
Gods forfend, this had happened the last time he'd had to
crawl here, too, and-
In gasping haste Ingryl clambered down off the casket,
staggering as he found his own feet and his weakened legs
groaned their own complaint. Great magics were surging
overhead, now, contesting and grappling in the palace above.
He had to get gone from this place! At any moment the

ceiling might smash down, or bolts of ravaging magic flood
through this forgotten chamber and sear him in their passing.
Grossing the chamber was like walking against a gale, slow and
struggling work in air that seemed as thick as river water, while
the tinglings that betokened titanic magics came and went as
swiftly as flames leap from a campfire.
"Serpent and Dragon!" the Spellmaster swore, as frightened
now as he'd ever been-before his fingers found the shelves of
scrolls and small coffers of rings and talismans and spell-gems,
and began to snatch and gather in feverish haste.
Something fell from his grasp as he snarled the spell that
would take him away, but he cared not. Flight was more
important now. Ingryl Ambelter finished the spell, drew in a
deep, shuddering breath of the swirling dust as more stones
crashed down, somewhere closer—and vanished from Flowfoam.
Four plumes of flame crackled to a halt, hanging like
balconies in the lofty vaults of the throne chamber—and on each
of them a sorceress stood, more blue flames raging around their
hands.
Sarasper started to curse softly, knowing how powerless he
was. On the River Throne Embra gasped and twisted under
stabbing lightnings, still trapped in torment. The sorceresses
looked down at her coldly.
"Slay her?" Ariathe spat, looking to Olone. Craer's daggers
were spinning through the air towards the Talasorn sisters, but
they paid no heed— and one by one, those spinning blades
melted into blue flame ere striking, and fell away into nothing
but brief sparks.
Olone shrugged. "If she dies, she dies-but the throne, sisters,
strike at the throne! If we shatter it, surely the Sleeping King will
be destroyed—and the royal line of Aglirta swept away forever!
In the name of our father, striker
"Raevur Talasorn!" three voices shrieked in answer, as balls of
blue fire were hurled-

Hawkril struggled to his feet, empty-handed, and stood
swaying. Aglirta endangered—but how could he charge someone
standing high above, on air? .,
His blade… he needed his blade. He—gods!
Slender Talasorn arms weren't much practiced at throwing
things, it seemed—or the four were too enraged to spell-guide
their hurled infernos. A whirling sphere of flame spun right at
Hawkril; desperately he flung himself to one side, bowling over
two Melted, and crashed to the marble floor, skidding a long
way-and thankful for it, as blue fire burst on the marble and
sprayed hissing streamers in all directions. Melted caught fire
and staggered, here and there around the room, and as Hawkril
rolled over, new bruises shrieking, he saw Craer snatch up a
fallen dagger, and fling it hard at the closest sorceress.
Her head turned, blue fire flashed in her eyes-and the
procurer grunted as unseen magic plucked him off his feet and
smashed him against the back wall, limbs bouncing wildly.
"Craer!" Hawkril roared, but there was no reply. Aglirta
beset… what to do now? He needed sorcery to fight sor—Embra!
He had to get Embra off that throne…
"The armaragor struggled up again, ignoring the raging blue
fires— Tfvherever Talasorn flame had struck, the marble seemed
to be burning like dry fire-tinder—and launched himself towards
the throne. It seemed to be the only thing these she-wizards
feared, but it was massive; there was no way he'd be able to lift it
as a shield against them, or hurl it, or…
Hawkril stopped trying to think about what he'd do when he
reached the throne, and just ran. Off to one side, Sarasper,
Glarsimber, and the lad were also trotting through the Melted
and the fires, heading for the high seat where Embra writhed.
The Talasorn sorceresses were spinning other spells now,
launching thin beams of silver and ruby-red rathance that
stabbed at the dais and then clawed at the throne itself. These
magics seemed to vanish into old, much-enchanted stone
without effect-but when one of them strayed across Embra, her

shriek smote Hawkril's eardrums like daggers driven into his
ears, and she sat bolt upright, clawing at the air as if it was a
wall she could climb, raking nothingness with her eyes wide and
staring.
"Lady preserve her!" Hawkril swore, terror overmastering his
rage. "Embra, I'm coming! I'm coming! Empty-handed in his
armor, the armaragor burst right through searing blue
flames—an instant so hot that it seemed like the touch of ice,
and a momentary smell like spices as they licked, seeming to do
more harm to his armor than to him-and sprang onward.
Someone else was swearing, not far overhead. "Such power!
Dacele Talasorn cried, her hands trembling. "Sisters, are you
sure-?"
"Strike at it with Sarandor's Seekings!" Olone shouted.
"Waver not! This is the way!"
"The Sleeping King must die," Ariathe snarled, lips drawn
back from clenched teeth, spell-sparks swirling from her eyes,
"and Aglirta with him! Strike, sisters-strike!"
Hawkril was still a few stumbling strides short of the River
Throne and Embra's pleading eyes when the murmured
chantings ceased, and the air above his right shoulder suddenly
shone with a strange shifting light-first coppery and bright, and
then green, deepening to dark emerald.
"Back!" Sarasper shouted from somewhere. "Hawkril, get
back!"
The armaragor could not have stopped if he'd wanted to—and
with the lady he loved struggling in pain right in front of him,
Hawkril Anharu didn't want to. Gods, for a Vale free of all
sorcery! If the Three were in no mood to grant that, what he
wanted was somehow to have magic enough in his hands that he
could turn and rend these Thrice-cursed sorceresses, and all
others of their ilk, too, smashing them up into the sky and out of
Aglirta forever!
What Hawkril did was lumber dizzily on as copper and

emerald lances of light stabbed down around him, seeking the
throne—and then, as the armaragor stretched out his hands to
try to snatch Embra from the faltering, spitting lightnings once
more—finding it.
The River Throne flashed as the beams of magic touched it,
and suddenly blazed up as bright and orange as glossy-polished
copper, with Embra frozen at its heart a handspan above the
stone seat, fingers and every tress of her hair outflung in all
directions like a bristling of straight, rigid arrows. Emerald
lightnings snarled warningly at Hawkril's fingertips as he flung
himself nearer, and then there was a sound like the shriek of a
great bell riven in twain, and—
There was nothing in front of his eyes but white emptiness.
He was falling, flung off his feet by a great upleap of the
unseen marble beneath him, and there was a strange, discordant
singing in his ears. Other things were falling, too, and whirling
past, felt more than seen, and-something hard and heavy struck
him across the face and chest, and he was tumbling through the
air, clutching at nothing… nothing…
Raulin Castlecloaks sobbed, clutching Baron Brightpennant's
arm so tightly that Glarsimber roared in startled pain—a roar
unheard amidst the ear-shattering cacophony of the River
Throne exploding.
Magic erupted in sprays and bolts and struggling helices of
light so bright that it hurt the eyes, and Embra Silvertree was
hurled screaming across the room, carrying Hawkril with her.
They cartwheeled through Melted who'd all suddenly ignited into
a walking forest of greasy flames, and in their wake—as Craer
Delnbone was flung along the back wall like a torn corner of
parchment caught in a gale-the ceiling began to fall.
Sarasper Codelmer stared up at spreading cracks and
tumbling slabs of stone, and found the only possible shield: he
got himself right under one of those floating whorls of blue flame
where sorceresses stood shrieking their triumph.
As tons of stone began to fall, shattering marble in a

deafening, never-slowing thunder, he only hoped that Raulin and
Glarsimber would have time to do the same.
The ground trembled under racing hooves, and more than
one man fell from his saddle. Lord Bloodblade of Aglirta clutched
at his reins as the armaragors around him, riding hard, shouted
their alarm and amazement.
The rumbling went on, the leaves of the swaying trees hissing
loudly, and-they all knew where it was coming from, even when
it spread to the mountains and echoed back, until it seemed all
Aglirta was atremble.
The thunder was coming from Flowfoam Isle.
Men cried out in fear. "The Risen King!" an armsman
shouted, not far away. "The king returns!"
Others took up that cry. With a snarl of rage Sendrith
Duthjack stood up in his stirrups, snatched up his rally horn,
and blew a blast that cut across the shouts, overriding even the
rumbles of the land shuddering around them.
"Ride on! Bloodblade bellowed. The cowled man riding on his
right made a tiny gesture, and the warlord's words rang out like
a trumpet into every man's ear, across his entire army. "If
perchance the king does dare to stand against us, he will fall
before our blades, and Aglirta shall be cleansed at last! Ride on!
To Flowfoam, and victory!"
"To Flowfoam, and victory!" a thousand throats echoed, and
the thunder of hooves began again, drowning out the last echoes
from the mountains.
Curved slabs of stone crashed down, shattered—spraying
shards of marble in all directions as they broke what they landed
on, too—bounced or rolled over ponderously, and came to a halt,
trailing dust.
Crushed and mangled Melted lay half-buried everywhere, and
Sarasper scrambled through the choking dust to get out from
under descending blue flames. The coughing and retching

sounds from overhead told him that the four sorceresses weren't
going to be smiting anyone or anything for the next few breaths,
at least.
Time enough to find Raulin and the baron, if they yet lived. In
the next moment he was twisting desperately aside from a
sword, and then hearing Glarsimber's muttered apology. Time
enough, indeed!
"Where're Embra? And Hawk?" Raulin hissed, at the baron's
elbow.
Sarasper gave them a shrug in the dust gloom, and pointed in
the general direction of where he'd seen them rumbling through
the air—into the far reaches of the room, thankfully beyond
where the ceiling had collapsed.
He glanced up, into the darkness of what had been the gallery
above the throne chamber, and was now an even higher ceiling
for it. Nothing but swirling dust. The blue flames were dying
away now, at floor level, flickering feebly around the booted
ankles of the four tall, dark-gowned women.
They looked slender, agile, discomfited by all the dust—and
furious. If they hadn't been so angry and so dangerous, they
might have seemed beautiful.
Gods, even cloaked in dust, they were beautiful. Like so many
of the perils the Three sent to torment other mortals: alluring
but deadly. Sarasper waved at Raulin and the baron to crouch
low behind a heap of broken stone slabs, and took, himself to his
knees, a hand over his nose against the dust.
One of the Talasorn sorceresses glanced right at him, but
seemed uninterested. Her gaze, like those of her sisters, strayed
again and again-when they weren't looking at each other,
glances that were clearly silent converse—at the riven throne.
A glow was growing there, an eerie blue darker than the
flames of the Talasorn. Darker, yet growing slowly brighter and
lighter in hue. Three broken shards, like reaching fingers, were
all that was left of the River Throne, mere fragments of its back…

and this rathance was growing brighter and stronger in front of
them.
Ariathe Talasorn lifted a hand to hurl magic at it, but Olone
said sharply, "No! Not yet! See what befalls, first!"
"I am so sick of waiting to see what befalls…" Ariathe said in
a voice of low, angry warning—but although she kept her hand
raised and ready, no blue fire kindled in it.
The light before the throne was white now, and the
sorceresses gazed at nothing else; Sarasper rose and went softly
to join Raulin and the baron, pointing again to where Embra
and Hawkril had been thrown. Slowly they proceeded in that
direction, carefully threading their ways around the
smouldering, half-buried bodies of the fallen Melted and much
broken stone, pausing often to glance back at the throne.
The rathance in front of the throne seemed shot through with
whirling stars, now. Olone Talasorn took a cautious step closer
to it, and then another, and her sisters did the same. As they
watched, that light grew brighter, more slender, and taller.
Abruptly the whirling motes within it rushed together, into a
shape-and Kelgrael Snowsar stood looking at them, drawn sword
in hand. The King of All Aglirta was wearing a sad smile as he
gazed upon the ruin of his throne room and the four furious
women standing in it.
The white light was fading around him, now-and a sudden,
angry sob or snarl erupted from Ariathe Talasom, a moment
before she hissed an incantation—and a ruby-red beam of fell
magic stabbed out from her fingers to smite the king.
Kelgrael turned a little to face her, but did no more. Her spell
raced at him, seemed to be sucked aside into his sword—which
glowed briefly, as if white starlight had raced down it, from tip
to pommel and back—and then sent her own ruby rathance back
at her.
"The, murderer!" she shrieked, her cry echoing strangely in
the ragged vault overhead. Its echoes were still shouting back at

the room below when the red fire reached her, washed over her
with horrible speed, and left only crumbling ashes in its wake.
In so fleering an instant, Ariathe Talasom was no more.
"No!" Dacele cried, and swung her head around to glare at
Olone. "Sister, aid me! Together—thornarrows!"
"Yes" Olone snarled, her hands already shaping intricate
gestures. The last sister—it was the one who'd slipped him the
healing potion, Raulin saw—stood silent, her hands raised but
unmoving, as she watched her sisters. She took a step back and
shook her head slightly, looking uncertain.
Sarasper and Brightpennant exchanged grim glances. There
was nothing they could do against spells—even if they hurled
something right now and by some miracle struck down a
sorceress, it would be too late.
Olone was a skilled spellweaver; she brought her magic to
readiness and held it there, risen force keening in the air around
her, until Dacele's thornarrow spell was ready. They nodded to
each other, took a few strides farther apart—and hurled their
spells in unison at the king, striking at him from both flanks at
once.
Kelgrael lifted his sword and held it out before him, shaking
his head slightly. Long, slender dark needles of force—maroon
thorns two feet or more long—raced at it, swirled somehow into
and then out and around that sword, despite their length-and
sped back at the sorceresses who'd cast them.
The deaths were bloodier this time. Raulin choked after one
glimpse of Olone swaying and spitting blood, transfixed by a
dozen dark needles, one sprouting from an eye—but before the
young bard could look away, the thornarrows erupted in angry
maroon fire. In an instant of raging flame the sagging,
arrow-bristling women became forms of ash amid dying purple
flickerings… dark things that sank, crumbled, and were gone.
The only light left in the throne chamber now came from the
king's sword. He held it up like a lantern so that Sarasper,
Raulin, and the baron could dearly see him raise his other hand

in salute to them, and then wave at them to stay back and keep
clear of what he was about to do now. Thrice he gravely waved
them away, ere turning with sudden speed to stride across the
broken, littered marble to where the last Talasorn sorceress knelt
by the ashes that had been her sisters, sobbing.
She looked up when the glowing blade came down, eyes
streaming— and the king put the sharp point of his sword to her
trembling throat.
Despite the king's gestures, Sarasper took a step or two
nearer, to see clearly what befell. The Talasorn sorceress was
staring fearlessly up at Kelgrael, fury shining bright through her
tears.
"Who are you," the king asked quietly, "and why did you four
do"— his free hand waved at the wreckage around, but his eyes
never left her face-"all this?"
"Tshamarra Talasorn am I," she spat, "and we came here, we
sisters, to shy you, King of Aglirta! Our father's dead because of
you, and—and if you gave me a blade right now, I'd use it on you!
So kill me now, King Snowsar! I've sworn to be your bane, and by
the blood of my sisters and of my father, I will be your death. I'll
never rest until one of us is dead!"
The swordtip moved ever so slightly at her throat, like an icy
finger stroking her skin. "I've grown so very tired of slaying," the
man above it said wearily, and his eyes looked as old and tired as
the seaswept mountains of the Isles. "And the death Aglirta's
seen thus far is nothing to the slaughter that's soon to come."
Tshamarra's eyes blazed up the king's steel. "How can that
be?" she snarled at him. "Or have you forgotten the fallen, these
past few years? Armaragors and armsmen and farm folk beyond
number! Raevur Talasorn, my father! The Baron Esculph Adeln,
whom he served! Baron Cardassa, and Eldagh Ornentar, who
was baron before the sly fool who holds that castle now! The
former Baron Loushoond, too! The wizards Corloun and Oen
Darlassitur! Faerod Silvertree and his Dark Three! Ilisker
Baerund, Tersept of Tarlagar, and half a dozen tersepts more!
The arch-wizards Tharlorn of the Thunders and Bodemmon Sar,

gods spit on you! Are you blind, King of Aglirta? Or are so many
lives nothing to you?"
"They are everything to me, daughter of Raevur," he said
grimly, "but they are a list that a trained bard could remember,
and recite entire during, say, a single meal. You have doomed
countless more, you and your sisters."
She laughed incredulously. " We! How have we doomed
anyone?"
King Kelgrael shook his head slightly, those old, old eyes on
hers, and under that sad gaze she fell silent. "You awakened me,
you four, and destroyed the only swift means of my returning to
Slumber, all in the same stroke."
He waved at the ruined throne behind him, and asked gently,
as if patiently schooling a child, "Now, Tshamarra, you are the
sorceress of us two, so you tell me: what does that mean?"
The woman on her knees looked up at him with something
strange kindling in her dark eyes and moved her lips twice
without saying any-thing, ere she murmured, "I-I, Lord, I know
not. Tell me, please."
The king nodded, as if satisfied, and said in the same gentle
voice, "It means that, at long last, the Serpent is stirring.
Awakening as I have done, with no way-short of almost every
wizard in all Darsar whelming to work together, or all the
Dwaer-Stones being found and properly used-to drive Aglirta's
ancient foe back down, in time."
"And so?" Tshamarra whispered, foreboding in her eyes.
"And so it has come down to this," the king said slowly, and
threw back his head to draw in a deep breath. "All I can do
now," he added, more briskly, "is use the binding 'twixt the
Serpent and myself to buy Aglirta a little more time."
He turned his head, then, and raised his voice. "Overdukes,
hear my royal command: get to the Serpent swiftly, with force
enough to slay—and do what must be done. This is imperative, if

Aglirta is to survive."
A frown crossed the king's brow, and he asked, "Lady
Embra—any of you-where is my regent? I can't feel either
Blackgult or the Dwaer—why?"
Glarsimber and Sarasper traded long glances, and said
nothing. Then they both turned to the young bard standing with
them.
So it was left to Raulin to spread helpless hands and gulp,
"Gone… all of them."
"Aglirta has always been thus," Kelgrael growled, swinging his
sword aloft and glaring at it. "What must I do, to win peace at
last?"
He shook his head sadly—then looked down, as keen as a
striking hawk, at Tshamarra Talasorn. Her hands were moving
in stealthy spell-casting, and her eyes, fixed on him, held open
hatred once more.
With a speed she'd never seen in any man before he bent and
caught both her wrists in his free hand, snatching them together
with astonishing strength. He shook the sorceress slightly, as the
ruined spell curled away in little twinkling motes and sparks
from her fingers, and bent the rest of his body to stare into her
eyes from only inches away.
"Do you truly want me dead, Lady of the Talasorn?" he
murmured.
Her eyes blazed up into full fire again. "Ifes!" she snarled, and
spat in his face.
King Kelgrael smiled slightly, then lifted his head, and called,
"Over-dukes, keep back!"
Sarasper took another stealthy step to one side, bending to
peer and hear every word.
The king put his face back nose to nose with Tshamarra

again, her spittle dripping unregarded from his chin, and
muttered, "There is one way-and only one way—you can make
sure of that. Turn from me, and use your spells to hold off my
overdukes, and the others with them, without doing them
harm."
Her eyes narrowed. "While you do what?"
"Slay myself with this sword whilst railing up a certain
magic—and so drive the Serpent down for a time."
She gaped at him in disbelief.
"Choose, daughter of the Talasorn," Kelgrael Snowsar told her
gently. "Or I'll sharpen this sword in your innards before I use it
on myself."
Trembling, she stared into his eyes for a long time ere she
whispered, "I-I'll do it, Lord of Aglirta."
The king smiled at her and released his grip on her wrists.
She stared at him in mute astonishment for another long
moment before slowly stretching out one hand and carefully,
delicately wiping his chin. Then she rose, stepped around the
king, raised her hands—and cast a shielding spell.
It rose in a whirling of sparks, to wall off that end of the
chamber.
She cast a quick glance back over her shoulder at King
Snowsar, and he smiled at her, nodded approvingly, and then
lifted his eyes to stare straight at Sarasper.
Hear me, faithful Overdukes.
Aglirta is yours now. Watch it well, as I know you have
done. Have my thanks— and in time, I hope, all Aglirtans of
good wits will join me in that gratitude. Watch over our land,
no matter who sits the River Throne. My hope is that one of
you will take the Crown-My only sadness is that it can't be this
crown I wear. It dies with me, unless my

hand places it on the brow of my direct descendant. I had
my own hopes in this regard, and regret your choice, Lady
Embra, while at the same time praising it. We must all do as
our hearts bid. So I have lived for Aglirta-and so I will die for
Aglirta.
Raulin, Glarsimber, and Sarasper all stared at the king, too
dumbfounded to speak or move or even glance at each other.
Kelgrael was murmuring something that sounded like an
incantation. Tshamarra Talasorn whirled around to watch and
listen with her own astonishment plain on her face. She knew a
few of those phrases, and what it cost to guide one's will through
them; the Risen King was mightier in magic than any
archwizard!
Kelgrael gave her a little smile as he went on, raising his
sword upright, point high, at arm's length. A glow was gathering
around it, rose-red and white, slowly growing brighter. A thin
mist seemed to curl up and down the blade, and a singing sound
stole softly out of the blade to chase that mist, growing higher
and louder-not a keening or a high horncall, but a wordless
singing, as if from the throat of a maiden.
Kelgrael let go of the blade, and gestured to the Talasorn
sorceress that she touch it. Gently, with one fingertip and fresh
foreboding in her eyes, she stretched forth a finger-and then
drew back, shaking her head.
Sarasper took another step nearer the shielding, and so was
close enough to hear Kelgrael murmur, " 'Tis no trap. Touch the
blade, and take what magic it pours into you, that it not be
forgotten. Expect no usable spell, mind, but words of power and
snatches of incantations and instruction that may find their uses
in years to come."
Tshamarra looked at him doubtfully, and he smiled, and said,
"Please, daughter of Raevur. Your father sought spell-lore all his
life; will not you?"
The Talasorn sorceress drew in a deep breath—and touched
the sword.

Sarasper saw her shudder, and snatch her hand back. Her
other hand lifted, as if she wanted to take the blade from where
it hung in the air and wield it herself, but Kelgrael smiled, and
said, "Nay. For this to work, the hand must be my own."
And as Tshamarra watched with a strange look in her eyes, he
took hold of his sword in both hands and murmured something
even she did not catch.
His arms trembled, then, and slowly grew longer… impossibly
longer—until it was a simple matter for him to turn the glowing,
singing blade around—and drive it, hard, into his own breast.
The sword flashed, Tshamarra's barrier fell away into
bouncing sparks, and the Risen King threw back his head and
cried out in pain. Magical fires flooded from his mouth—and the
Throne Chamber of Agfirta went dark.
Light flashed and flared in that darkness: the royal sword,
shattering into many shining, flaming shards. By their fading,
descending light, they saw Kelgrael Snowsar melt away into
dust. Dust that fell away into drifting nothing—as the world
rocked.
Chapter Thirteen
Godly Favor and Handy Graves
There was a sudden rumbling in the distance.
The snake-headed man looked up sharply, shrugged off his
cloak of scales, and strode naked to the nearest rocks. There
were scales on his back and thighs, and a stump at the base of
his spine that looked like the stubby beginnings of a snake's tail.
The Serpent-priest embraced a sloping rock taller than he
was, flattening himself against it to feel what was causing that
rock thunder. Here in these rocky, barren uplands, few tumults
disturbed the endless sighing of the wind-and no eruption of a
smoking mountain, such as sprouted in Sarinda and

Harthlathan beyond, must be allowed to disturb the Sacred One!
The Serpent-priest threw back his head and tasted the air
with a long, darting tongue-but it seemed almost needless, now,
as the rumbling grew to an echoing roar, the ground started to
shake under him, and the rock he was embracing thrummed
under the goad of—something deep and titanic beneath Aglirta
that was racing towards this place!
The priest sprang away from the rock, whirling to rouse the
other holy guardians of the Great Serpent—but they were
already darting out of the caves and watch posts and running
aimlessly about, looking and shouting.
The rumbling grew even louder, and small stones came rolling
down the rock slopes from above. The shaking was now strong
enough to numb the feet and make teeth chatter, and the
Serpent-priest saw with alarm that cracks were forming in the
dirt and rocks beneath him-spreading with wild speed there,
and there, and everywhere!
Then there were shouts—almost screams—of joy, and the
Serpent-priest's head snapped around to see the cause. A
moment later he was on his knees, throwing up his hands and
shouting, too-using all his ready magic to make his voice
trumpet-loud.
His words crashed across the dell, to roll back their own
echoes to him, as he cried, "Rejoice, Blessed Brethren of the
Serpent! The time we have waited so long for, striven so hard
for, is at last at hand! The cursed Risen King must be dead at
last, his bindings broken! It is the moment of the Awakening of
the Serpent! All Aglirta, all Asmarand, all Darsar shall soon
tremble before the holy might of the Serpent, his Awful Wrath
that only we faithful shall be spared! Aglirtans cower before
wizards and regents and an iron-headed brute called Bloodblade,
but soon they shall know what it is like to truly cower!"
Breath failed him at last, but the Serpent-priest seared his
way on, empty lungs carried by magic into one final shout. "The
Awesome One is freed at last! On your knees to make reverence!
On your knees, and cry him forth fittingly! The Awakening

comes—NOW!"
As the thunder of his voice died away, exultant shouts filled
the dell, cries that soon settled into a ragged chant, "Arise
Eroeha! Arise Eroeha! Jw EROEHA!"
Though the shaking of the ground had lessened—racing on, it
seemed, to the mountains, leaving the cracks in its wake just as
they were—the grassy earth in the center of the rocky dell, in the
midst of the kneeling priests, was bulging upward. It was already
higher than a man, and surging towards the sky more and more
swiftly, shedding great clods of earth to tumble and roll aside
from gigantic black coils beneath… coils that slithered but
slowly, yet…
Yes! At long last! 'Twas true!
"The Serpent Awakens!" the naked Serpent-priest roared,
springing to his feet as his fangs grew longer and his scales
brighter. "The time has come at last! Eroeha, command us!"
As the scaled men and women danced in heartfelt exultation,
a single red-gold eye opened amid those inky coils. A slitted
pupil as tall as the roaring priest regarded the world with savage
fury and glee, more earth fell away as the black coils bunched
and heaved—
And then a mist of shadows stole across that blazing eye. The
Rising Serpent came to a halt, frozen in midrise—as the scaled
priests all stared in dismay, and silence fell.
Silence that was broken only by weeping, here and there,
across the Place of the Serpent.
Of all the birds that wing the Vale, the waterswift is perhaps
the most beautiful. Deep blue of back and wing, gray of head and
tail, with rainbow iridescence of breast and glossy black eyes set
in a black eye-mask stripe, it darts here, there, and everywhere.
It may chitter softly, or make deep liquid bubblings, or mew
loudly if angry or alarmed. Ever-curious, cocking its head to look
at things, it often befriends fisherfolk, drovers watering their
beasts, and bargemasters, and will flit in to visit, day after day,

ere swooping away in pursuit of the insects that dance above the
Silverflow. It has a sense of humor, but none of the thieving ways
of the stormjack or the drale, and is also known to sit still as a
statue on strange perches for hours-human heads among
them-just watching its surroundings.
The waterswift now whirling above the river was older than
most, and no stranger to Flowfoam. It swooped and darted
above the Silverflow, dining on shimmerwings and stinging
mierye, and did no more than peer curiously, once or twice, at
the cloud of shadow that seemed to cling to the Royal Isle.
When the shimmerwings were all gone, it turned to cross
Flowfoam, and dine on whatever droneflies might be found
above the rushing waters on its far side. Chittering to itself, it
darted into the dimness-and froze.
Had another waterswift happened by and turned a curious
eye on the gloom upon seeing the motionless tail of a fellow
swift, it would have observed a bird hanging motionless in the
air, stopped in midwingbeat, beak parted to chitter, eyes staring
ahead, and claws drawn back in its haste.
Alive and unaware-frozen by magic. On Flowfoam, in the
wake of Kelgrael's sacrifice, all that moved was air and dust.
* * *
Frozen in grief, frozen in darkness with great magic roaring
through and past him, Sarasper Codelmer had the dream again.
It had haunted him before this, in his sleeping hours, at first
rarely but in recent days almost every night. Always it left him
wide-awake and as cold as winter ice drenched with sweat.
Always, 'twas the same vivid thing: a dragon, red-gold and
large and terrible--no beast of bardic legend, but very much
alive!
Alive and staring right at him, gaze golden and knowing as
it challenged him. He hung frozen, every time, as it turned with
lazy, ponderous grace and began its dive towards him, jaws and
claws opening…

Which is when he always came awake—silent but bolt upright
and trembling in terror. To gasp for a long time and stare
wide-eyed into the darkness, before sinking back down into
dreams that never held the dragon again, the same night.
Why Sarasper so feared it he did not know. Perhaps every
man fears what comes plunging towards him unbidden out of
the night, long-taloned claws outstretched to clutch…
Empty air shimmered above the grave of Maeraunden
Silvertree, dead some eight hundred years—and its cracked and
crumbling slab suddenly grew a dark-eyed, rather slender man
in robes whose face was far less forgotten in the Barony of
Silvertree than Lord Maeraunden's. The Spell-master cast a
quick glance around at the overgrown graveyard, smiled in
satisfaction—free of watchful eyes, and wildly surging magic,
too—and strode around several cracked and leaning memorial
columns, up through the tall grass and creeping vines towards
the Silent House.
Whatever mighty magic had rocked Flowfoam—right behind
him, out in midriver—did not seem to have reached here. Ingryl
Ambelter smiled again as he peered around at familiar
overgrown Silvertree crypts and tombstones and found no
lurking children at play or farm folk tending snares.
Let the game begin again, then.
He headed for one of the doors of the Silent House that he'd
spell-sealed on the orders of Faerod Silvertree years before.
There were safe chambers within, and one hideaway is as good
as another—this one, with its view of Flowfoam, would be the
best hide-hold of all in Aglirta just now, for watching various
armored brutes arrive to slay one another. When scrying showed
the situation best suitable, he could return to the Royal Isle to
parley with—or simply destroy—the last survivor.
"Barons, barons everywhere," the Spellmaster purred, "and
not a one of them worth a tankard of his favorite ale."
Idiot sword-swingers, the lot of them. Betimes more biddable
and less dangerous than wizards, and useful for fetching and

carrying-but to think that such as these warmed thrones all over
Darsar, while many mages were hunted and hated!
Why, if ever wizards got together and founded a realm of
their own, then th-
There came a sudden crashing in grass and snapping of
branches from the far end of the graveyard, and Ingryl whirled
around, gliding two swift steps into the shadows of a particularly
tasteless, two-wizards-tall Silvertree grave marker.
Someone or something large had entered the shunned
Silvertree graveyard and was hurrying onward heedless of the
sounds they made, the track they left-or their own comfort, as
they burst through thorn-bushes and pounded through
whipping tree branches.
Whatever or whoever it was turned towards the Silent House
and started crashing uphill, breathing hard—nay, panting.
In a few moments they'd round that row of crypts and be but
a few running paces away from a particular tall grave marker.
Ingryl Ambelter's mouth tightened in irritation, and he
muttered something brief, made a stabbing gesture with one
hand—and was gone.
Meanwhile
Flaeros Delcamper could run no more.
Every breath was shuddering fire in his chest, the world swam
crazily around him, and he was stumbling and tripping almost
constantly, now, his feet heavy and yet numb. He knew no other
place to hide from whatever was after him, the thing that could
change shape at will. The Silent House was a deadly labyrinth of
traps, yes, but perhaps he could find a crypt outside that he
could scramble to the top of, and there lie hidden…
It was hide or fall on his face and be taken if he tried to go on.
The gruff words of one disapproving uncle came into his head
suddenly: "Phaugh! We're not breeding Delcampers like we used
to!"

Well, that was certainly true. And if the gods weren't with
him now, this particular Delcamper wouldn't live long enough to
breed at all. Smiling grimly, Flaeros clutched the dragon scepter
in a hand that was slippery with sweat and wobbled up to an
archway that he could cling to, and look back, and if the Three
were smiling, choose his crypt-or, if they were not, perhaps see
just how close on his heels the thing pursuing him was, and what
horrible shape of many fangs and claws it now wore. Something
unfriendly was watching him right now—he could feel its cold,
malevolent regard heavy on his shoulders as he struggled on,
trying not to think that he might just be choosing the particular
span of Aglirtan turf that would soon be his grave.
Useful enchantments, jump spells. Ingryl Ambelter now stood
on a high balcony of the Silent House, from which he'd once
watched Silvertree serving wenches chasing his more
disobedient apprentices with barbed whips. Ah, those had been
the days. Long, sinister talks with Faerod Silvertree as they
plotted Aglirta's future and Blackgult's doom together, no mage
yet risen to challenge him in Faerod's service… yes, it had been
fun, seeing the clumsy dolts who'd never master sorcery cringing
as their blood flowed, just down there…
Ah, here was the blunderer in the graveyard! Panting and
staggering, his finery sweat-soaked and torn—of course!
Everyone's favorite naive buffoon, soon to be hailed the Bard of
Bards, Flaeros Delcamper!
He'd wasted a jump spell on that. Well, then, 'twas only fitting
that he waste another, more appropriate magic…
Gleefully Ingryl Ambelter threw back his sleeves with a
flourish, made a lazy gesture to begin the casting, and opened
his mouth to begin the short, familiar incantation. Halaezer's
Scourge-a whip to flog the backside of a foolish bard with, to be
sure, and—
The Spellmaster made a strange whuffing sound, and without
uttering another word pitched forward over the ancient
battlement, plunging headlong into an even older Silvertree
tomb that-fortuitously both for his personal future and for the
heart of the already fearful Flaeros Delcamper, who was too

blinded with sweat to see the wizard's fall—had long since
collapsed into a pit.
Someone on the battlements murmured a soft curse, and
lowered what he'd used as a club. The Spellmaster still had a
back side to his skull purely because too much haste had been
necessary to deliver a proper, killing blow-a mistake that would
be addressed next time.
The problem was that wizards not thoroughly dealt with
always charged Darsar such a high price to arrange a "next
time."
Something was happening, up ahead. Men were falling-no,
their horses were falling, spilling riders in all directions, of
course-and his hurrying host was riding over them. There were
screams, and men cursing, and fights breaking out, as
everything slowed into tight-packed confusion.
Furiously Bloodblade snatched out his horn again-but already
sword-captains were blowing theirs, calling a halt.
"Three Above!" the warlord snarled, standing in his stirrups
in a vain attempt to see what was going on. Everyone was
crammed together along the road, with the trees standing like
dark walls close by—walls that could sprout arrows at any
moment, or even a few enraged boars, for that matter!
He wanted to get to Flowfoam now, before anyone could steal
away with the crown or the Throne, or whelm a force there
against him!
"What befalls?" he shouted. "Why're we stopping?" The
nearest swordcaptain relayed his shout, and others took it up,
over the heads of the cursing, clanging, packed-together
armsmen.
With Blackgult gone, if he could but outrace word of the
regent's passing to the Isle, he might just be able to take the
Throne without bloodshed—and without any courtier having the
chance to sneak off with royal riches or treaties… or, graul it,
with their own heads still on their shoulders!

The shouts were bringing word back, now. "The horses, Lord
Blood-blade!" a swordcaptain called. "That blast in the
sky—many of them now bleed from the head, and cannot keep
balance, and so fall! And all are exhausted!"
Duthjack was too good a warlord not to see, now that
everyone was halted, that many of the horses near him—and the
men riding them, too— were weary. He saw no mounts
staggering or streaming blood, but for some under his eye, the
choices were rest or collapse. He was not so desperate, yet, that
he need gain the cloak of cruelty in the eyes of Aglirtans, before
he even took the Throne over them.
Raging inwardly, he called to the nearest swordcaptain,
"Spread the word: we halt, and camp. The foreguard are to walk
their horses far enough ahead for us to have room to dismount,
tether, and lie down for sleep. All others, dismount and be easy."
The robed figure on the horse beside Bloodblade turned his
head, and a single soft word came out of his shadowed cowl:
"No."
Bloodblade scowled. " 'Tis true: men and mounts are spent.
The best deed for us now is to make camp, right here."
"And what if you all stood at the Flowfoam docks right now?"
the robed man murmured. "How weary would you all be then?"
Bloodblade stared at his questioner, his face flaming and his
temper rising to match it. He saw a cold smile in the depths of
the cowl ere the robed man turned in his saddle to snake out a
hand and close it on the neck of an armsman who rode nearby,
helm in hand and his hair a tousled, sweat-stiff tangle.
The armsman stiffened, turned his head to see who'd touched
him-and froze in that twisted position, his angry eyes acquiring
a staring, wide-eyed gaze.
The cowled figure raised his other hand and cast a spell.
Bloodblade watched, fury falling away to a faint feeling of
sickness, as here and there throughout the host, he saw other
robed, cowled figures grasping other warriors. Their other hands

rose more or less in unison, to cast the same spell that had just
been worked beside Bloodblade.
As Bloodblade watched numbly, he saw that there was
nothing left in the eyes of the armsman he'd seen touched—no,
nothing left of the eyes: they were empty, dark pits!
The armsman toppled from his saddle onto the saddle horn of
his cowled slayer, and Bloodblade could see that all that was left
of him was a bloodless husk, crumbling and weighing but little.
Other such corpses toppled or were let sag to the ground as the
cowled men withdrew their hands—and Bloodblade saw fangs
protruding from the fingertips of some of those hands. They
shrank back into flesh almost immediately, and were gone—but
the warlord knew very well what he'd seen, and his hand was
clenched white on his sword-hilt.
And then the world around him changed, trees and armored
men and horses all sliding into liquid distortion as a great
hissing arose, like a hundred snakes all crying menace at once.
The hissing echoed all around Bloodblade as everything swam
and swirled before his eyes, leaving him to stare only at vivid,
racing colors… that suddenly whirled back to normal.
Sendrith Duthjack blinked, but he neither swore nor shivered.
The narrow road through the trees was gone; his host now stood,
boots and hooves, on the south Silvertree shore, with shattered
docks and splintered boats before them—and Flowfoam,
crowned by its palace, standing oh-so-close across the water
before them.
Bloodblade stood up in his saddle, and cried, "Behold the
favor of the Three upon us, to bring us down upon our foes! Let
us crush them and end this, now! Find us boats in yon wrack, or
upriver yonder, at Treehal-low—to Flowfoam, and victory!
The cowled figure smiled again, and Bloodblade sat down
hearing his words echo back from the walls of Treehallow itself;
once again, a spell-trumpet had carried them to the ears of every
man there.
There was a momentary silence as those echoes died—and

then, with a roar, Bloodblade's warriors rushed down into the
shallows, seizing drowned boats and oars, clawing aside ropes
and shattered dock planks, and dragging vessels up out of the
water to pour their small shares of the river out of them.
In the space of a few breams seven were found that would
float-and eager armaragors were setting out across the
swift-flowing Silverflow under the shouted commands of
swordcaptains, to bring death to the River Throne.
"Jhavarr was our brightest," the gray-bearded man said
curtly. "Of course all our younglings are afire for Aglirtan
blood-and half of you who should know better; oh, yes, I heard
your shouted boasts and vows of vengeance. As for our offspring,
so close that they call each other brother and sister and not
cousin—how could they not be afire? They are Bowdragons."
He turned from the gem-adorned circular garden window to
face them, and added with no little asperity, "Yet answer me
this, Muldias and Araunder and Ithim: how swiftly do you want
to lose your striding sons and raven-eyed daughters? Pride and
grand words and fury are poor weapons against wizards the like
of whom we see walking Aglirta or hiring themselves out to
Aglirtans in Sirlptar-and if they chance on even a hedge-wizard
who has hold of a Dwaer-Stone, well…"
Multhas Bowdragon ran his ringers along his long, thin
moustache and nodded slowly. "Your every word awakens rage
in me, Dolmur— because, by the Three, as always—you are
right."
"I do not think I can stop one of my sons, at least," Araunder
Bow-dragon said slowly, rubbing at his balding head as he
started to slowly shake it.
"Then bid him your last farewell and consider him dead," the
eldest Bowdragon said bluntly, "for he soon will be. Go you back
to your hotheads and tell them again the tale of the Sword of
Vengeance."
Three brothers frowned at him in puzzlement. "The Sword
of-?" Multhas said slowly. "I do not know that tale."

Dolmur gave him a mirthless smile, and said, "Of course not.
You haven't made it up yet. Yet it's a grand yarn, of the
five-summers-old daughter of a swordsmith slain by a cruel
baron. She grew to be a woman taking no husband, knowing no
lover but the forge, teaching herself to make and temper
mattocks and scythes and then swords, until at last long years of
work gave her the skills to craft a magnificent blade. This she
presented to the baron as a gift—right up his vitals, telling him
its name was Vengeance, ere he gurgled his last. I'm sure you
can embroider it enough to-forgive me-drive the point home."
"Dolmur," Ithim snarled, "your humor has always… grated."
"Better that you glower at me," his older brother said gently,
"than weep over more fresh-carved tombstones. You doted on
Jhavarr rightly, as your bright heir—but I loved him for the
greatness in him, and had already decided to give unto him my
staff of magics when he learned a shade more prudence."
All three brothers looked at him sharply again. There were
sudden tears in Ithim's eyes, but Araunder looked troubled, and
Muhhas looked angry.
"Dolmur," Muldias said carefully, "what of Eridi? He is your
son."
The eldest Bowdragon waved his hand dismissively. "And only
surviving offspring, yes. A dreamer, not a mage yet, if ever.
When I lost my Cathaleira, I knew where my staff should go, one
day."
He turned back to the window. "Now, my Lords Bowdragon, I
know not where to bestow it. And if we fail to rein in our heirs, I
doubt me that anyone, no matter how dunderheaded or craven,
shall still walk Darsar bearing the name Bowdragon when the
staff falls from my failing hand."
"I could take me a new wife, and make more Bowdragons,"
Multhas growled.
"And school them to prudence and cool temper as well as you
did your first brood?" Dolmur asked calmly. "Multhas, how?

How does fire craft ice?"
Multhas clenched and unclenched his hands, face dark in
anger, and said nothing.
"My Lords," Dolmur added, "for all our sakes, and a few
seasons, at least: keep our heirs out of Aglirta—and so keep them
alive."
Meanwhile .;?:
Sobbing for breath, utterly winded, Flaeros Delcamper
staggered another few paces through the graveyard and turned
to see if the next crypt along looked climbable.
Exhausted, he overbalanced in turning, lurched back on his
bootheels with arms waving wildly—and slammed down, to
bounce on his back amid the long grass.
The world spun crazily, he groaned out a curse on all
unhelpful gods and buried Silvertrees, and struggled over onto
his side and thence to a sitting position, feeling weak and sick.
The door of the crypt he'd wanted to look at was ajar—and it
took Flaeros a stunned moment or two to realize that it had
suddenly swung completely open, swinging inward to show him
darkness—and then, stepping out of the tomb with a strange,
shuffling motion, a man in long robes, his face hidden beneath a
lowered cowl.
A hand rose to throw back that cowl, and show him the
smiling face of a man he'd never seen before. It was not a nice
smile.
Flaeros struggled to rise, panting, slipped and fell, bruising
and winding himself on the dragon scepter. The man undid a
clasp at the throat of the rope, and then another, lower down.
The bard got himself up on one elbow again, tried to use the
scepter as a prop to push himself up by-and slipped again,
reeling in his weariness.

The robe fell away-revealing not a torso and legs, but the
undulating coils of a snake. Flaeros stared down at it, and then
back up at that terrible smile.
The man's eyes were fixed on him-and they were now vertical
slits of gold in black, staring pupils. Scales sprouted along the
man's arms, racing up towards his shoulders, as he threw back
his head and hissed.
As Flaeros stared at what could only be a Serpent-priest, that
hiss went on and on. The man's mouth was widening, his face
flattening and growing broader along with it, and that maw
gaped wide to display rows of fangs.
The bard whimpered, or tried to, and backed away—clumsily,
scrambling on one hip. Almost lazily the snake-man slithered
forward to loom over him, upright and swaying, now all snake
except its human arms-arms that spread wide to grab hold of
Flaeros no matter what dodge he might try.
Weakly the bard tried to rise again, but the snake was already
above him, forked tongue flicking in that hideously wide smile.
Its coils curled, its tail nicked—and like a cracking whip, lashed
around to strike the bard's limbs out from under him, tumbling
Flaeros once more onto his back.
Delicately the snake laid another coil over his chest, pinning
him, and in breathless, helpless horror he watched it rear up
against the sky, throwing back its head. Those white fangs grew
visibly longer as he watched, and so did its neck, if that's what
one called the part of a snake just behind its head…
That longer neck arched, those black-and-gold eyes looked
down, the jaws widened into a horrible maw, and—there was a
sudden green-and-gold flash of light, a wild burst of gore and
scales and tumbling fangs, and a beam of golden rathance was
sizzling through empty air, above the headless trunk of a
serpent.
A wild spasm seized that trunk, whipping it so wildly that
Flaeros was flung into the air and rolled over there, thrice, while
coils raced crazily through the air all around him, buffeting him

even as the golden ray melted them away into little tendrils of
smoke—and then the tiny bit of snake tail that was left struck
the bard like a cruel drover's whip, and hurled him through the
air to crash into tall grass and creepers, bouncing and rolling
painfully and helplessly until he fetched up against something
cold, and hard, and old.
That bright beam of magic had come lancing out of the Silent
House, his mind told him brightly, and Flaeros considered that
thought dazedly for a time, his face pressed against crumbling
stone.
A Silvertree tomb, of course—what else could it be?
My, but his mind was full of useful observations this day…
And then Flaeros heard something that brought his thoughts
to a quivering, chilled halt. Slow, shuffling footfalls were
approaching him, thudding heavy and deliberate on the grass,
from the Silent House.
Closer, and closer…
Chapter Fourteen
Serpents and Stormharp
Darkness hung like a heavy cloak over the stillness. Gently
drifting dust was all that moved in the ruined Throne Chamber
of Flowfoam. Amid the tumbled stones with no courtiers
crowding forward to see them and the dead strewn all around
them, a few folk stood like statues, unseeing and unhearing…
Tshamarra Talasorn stared at a spot near her where there
was nothing now, not even dust. Her lips were parted slightly,
her eyes wide, astonishment and wariness and triumph all
warring on her face, with just a hint of sorrow in her eyes. Her
hands were half-raised, to ward off what could never be
warded—and the fingers of that hand were the first thing that
moved.

Ever so slowly, drifting like the dust, her fingers rose and
straightened.
Raulin Castlecloaks, face frozen in midshout, was the next to
move, his jaw starting to close around a word that no one would
ever hear. Let it be writ that this word was "No!" and that it was
delivered with all the despair of a bard who sees what he holds
dear shattered and swept away before him, taking some of the
brightness of his childhood dreams with it.
Glarsimber Belklarravus, Baron of Brightpennant, was also
shouting-as his head turned the other way, seeking the one
whose name he was crying: "Embra!" His cry, too, would go
unheard, as his wounded, pained whirl around resumed, slow
inch by inch.
Sarasper Codelmer stood facing the king who was no longer
there, a dragon fading before his eyes. The old healer's arms
were still rising to sweep apart in the first surge of
shapechanging that would give him wings, and diminish him
into a bird that might, just might—though he knew it could not,
even as he strove to do it-reach Kelgrael Snowsar in time to
pluck that sword away, to snatch it and fly on with it, over river
and farms and forest, to where it might be plunged into the head
of a Rising Serpent and end Aglirta's doom forever. The stuff of
fireside dreams—but a day's work for an overduke, it seemed, in
all this tumult and treachery and time of great need.
All across the throne room, the living were moving, now,
while yet the uncanny silence reigned-moving ever so slowly, as if
their limbs were drifting in thick molasses… as the darkness
seemed to lessen, ever so slightly.
Away above the endless foam of the river rushing past the
rocks at the base of Flowfoam's southern battlements, a
waterswift hung frozen, utterly unmoving. Even rough change
takes time to touch all things.
The armaragors and armsmen peered warily ahead as the
boats neared Flowfoam's docks. A cloud of shadow cloaked the
entire island, a still and silent gloom that they feared. "Magic,"
one man spat, clutching the hilt of his sheathed sword more

firmly. "Always, 'tis Three-cursed magic!"
The robed and cowled Serpent-priest sitting beside him
laughed coldly, and the warrior shrank back from him. Other
Snake-clergy joined in that exulting laughter-and stood up, one
by one, to throw off their cloaks. Scales glinted in the sun, legs
lost already in serpent coils, and as Bloodblade's warriors stared
in horror, scales raced up shoulders and down forearms, those
arms shrank away to spindly, child-sized limbs, hair gave way to
scales on dozens of laughing heads—and they were sharing their
boats with huge serpents, swaying upright taller than a man.
As the boats swung around and bumped the docks, warriors
leaped ashore with even more alacrity than usual-as the serpents
struck again, and again, gleefully biting everyone within reach.
Armaragors who could not flee in time slumped down in heaps
around the serpents, who were now hissing incantations that
stabbed at the lifting darkness.
The foremost armsmen never knew they'd paused in midstep
as they rushed up the stone steps to seize the palace. They never
saw the serpents wriggling eagerly onto the island, or a lone
waterswift flying on at last, or the swordcaptains plunging into
the water to cling grimly to dock rings, hoping the snakes would
slither past and leave them alive to clamber aboard the boats
again and return for the next ferrying of warriors.
Then, priests standing mere or no priests, those
swordcaptains intended to tell Lord Bloodblade a thing or two
about serpents and their fangs. At about that time it dawned on
most of them, as the hissing continued above their heads and
darkness receded, that all, or almost all, of the robed and cowled
figures riding with them had crowded aboard for the first
crossing. So eager to die? But then, Serpent-priests did not fear
what fighting men might…
About then, as the first clang of arms rang out from above
and the first shouts joined them, most of the silently raging
swordcaptains returned to a dark thought every one of them had
visited and often revisited already: why did the Hope of Aglirta
welcome Snake-lovers at his side, and ride with them to war?

Serpent-priests who now surged up the steps towards the
River Throne as fast as their undulating coils could take them?
"Whatever spell it may have been," an aging armaragor
growled to a swordbrother, as together they fought to catch
breath after sprinting up the steps to Flowfoam's southern
gardens, " 'tis gone now, or seems almost so… making me a
wagonload or two happier about rushing into yon palace with
my steel drawn, let me tell you!"
The other armaragor nodded, head down and fighting for air.
"Let me… rest just a… moment more…"
"Of course, Landron! I could use a breath or two more
mysel-Aonw!"
Frenzied hands seized Landron by the arms and more or less
threw him across the terrace where they'd been standing.
"What?" Landron snarled, snatching for his sword. "Telez,
what're you-?"
"Run, Lan! Run, graul you!"
"What?" Landron Stonetower cried, in a last, futile protest,
ere Telezgrar Rethtarn burst past him, plucking at Landron's
swordarm as he passed.
Spun around and staggering, Landron found himself looking
at the reason for Telezgrar's sudden renewed enthusiasm for a
breathless assault on Flowfoam.
Rearing up above the topmost step with black-and-gold
gleaming eyes fixed on him and many-fanged jaws widening
eagerly was a snake twice as tall as a man already-and its coils
ran down out of a sight a good way, with another serpent-head
just coming into view lower on the stair.
Landron choked in midcurse and spun himself around this
time, sprinting to catch and then pass Telezgrar on an
impromptu tour of the Flowfoam gardens. That stand of tall
ultharnwoods at the far end of the Isle looked particularly

attractive, all of a sudden…
"Look!" an armaragor snapped, pointing with his sword. Two
knights were running frantically through the gardens, whooping
for breath as they came.
"None of ours," the Baron Loushoond said shortly. "Nor, it
seems to me, are they guards of Flowfoam."
Omentar made his own frowning inspection—as the two
running men slowed, looked fearfully back over their shoulders,
and then slowed once more, panting wildly. "No," he said.
"Smite them down?"
The baron's smile was as brief as it was sour. "Best have them
tell us what they're running from, first."
"That darkness," Tarlagar said slowly. "Magic, I swear it
must have been—and lasting some time, too: look at the sun!"
"Will you still your tongue about your precious darkness?"
Loushoond snarled. "So 'twas magic—so your eyes are green!
What boots it? I-"
"My eyes," Tarlagar said stiffly, "happen to be gray."
"Cease this, both of you!" Ornentar snapped, loudly enough
for the two fleeing armaragors to hear, even from a good
distance past the watching men. They traded glances—and then
started to flee again, with renewed vigor.
"Well," a swordcaptain by Loushoond's shoulder said heavily,
""I'm not chasing them!"
, "And why not?" that baron asked silkily, turning his head to
give the man a cold and meaningful glare. "If I order you-"
"You need not," the man barked, pointing with the mace he
bore in his hand. "Look there: that's what they were fleeing
from!"
Serpents as long as two good-sized horses were gliding along

through the gardens, heads raised to look about as they came.
"The regent was in league with the Snake-lovers?" Tarlagar
swore. "Three Above, we should have slain him right there when
Snowsar named him, Risen King and scores of guards or no!"
"Who's to say they're not just guardians of the Isle,"
Loushoond asked peevishly, "conjured by whatever pet mages
Blackgult still has?"
"He has no 'pet mages,' to use your well-aimed words,"
Ornentar told him.
"Except for the Silvertree bitch," Tarlagar reminded them.
"Lady Embra of the Many Jewels, foe of her father. She might
obey Blackgult just because of that, whatever fancy tide Kelgrael
invented for her."
"Overdukes!" Loushoond snorted. "The king's lover and her
three pack-dogs, more like!"
"I've heard that Blackgult is her father," Baron Ornentar said
quietly.
"Ho-ho!" Tarlagar cried. "No wonder Silvertree hated him so!
Why, the sly fox! I've been hearing for years how he tumbled
every baroness and terseptress in the Vale, but you know how
such tales grow in the tel—"
"We're all well shut of Faerod Silvertree," Loushoond said
heavily. "His schemings and daggers in the dark make the regent
look like a loving mistress to us all!"
"Ware!" the swordcaptain who'd spoken before said suddenly.
" What, man? You presume overmuch, to be giving us ord-"
The swordcaptain gave him a dark look, and barked, "I'll
serve you no longer, Lord High Fool of Loushoond! You three
idiots can stand here bickering the day long, for all I care—but
mind you carve up yon serpents yourselves—ere they dine on
you! And with a defiant wave of his mace, he burst through the

branches behind them, and was gone.
"What? By the Three, man, I-"
"After that bebolten whoreson, you 1—"
" Graul! Swords out, all of you!" Ornentar cried, in sudden
fear—as a great sleek scaled head slid into view around the tree
in front of him, smiling a very wide smile.
"Ssssso," it hissed, eyeing all the men snatching at their
swords and trembling, "we're all gathering to sssssee a new day
for Aglirta together. That'sss good!"
And its jaws took off an armaragor's head, helm and all, with
one lightning-swift bite.
Another serpent-head swung into view—and with a common
cry of terror, three barons and their warriors whirled and ran, to
crash headlong through the trees with hissing laughter loud at
their heels.
"In!" Tarlagar cried frantically, beating at the rump of the
armaragor in front of him with the flat of his sword. "Get in,
graul you!"
"There's a man lying here burned to death," an armsman
called back gloomily. "Not long ago, by the smell of him."
"Phaugh! He was rotten before he burned!" another warrior
complained.
"Out of my way!" Baron Tarlagar shrieked, as serpents glided
swiftly across a lawn and onto the terrace that led right to where
he stood. He hammered and beat on the armored back of the
man in the doorway until that armaragor cursed and shoved
someone else hard enough to let the shouting, weeping baron
claw his way into the palace.
"Close the door!" he shouted, the moment he was through. "
Close that door!"

Three armaragors sprang to do just that, snarling in fear at
the cold smiles of the snakes rising to eye them, just outside. The
door boomed shut, and chains raided as the door-bar was
slammed down into place and its pins thrown to keep its stay
chains in place.
"What now, Lord?" one of the knights asked as he turned
away from the door, just a shade wearily.
"They're going along to that low window!" an armsman
shouted fearfully, watching dark shadows surge past the
windows of the gloomy hall they stood in. "They'll get in!"
"Then we'll outrun them," a grizzled armaragor grunted. "At
least they're slower than boar!"
"Where's Loushoond?" someone shouted. "And Ornentar?"
"They got in by another door," someone said curtly.
"Loushoond lost most of his bodyguard doing it."
"Any orders, Lord Tarlagar?" the armaragor by the door
asked again.
"I-I don't know," the baron replied in a quavering voice.
When the knights turned to look at him sharply, he pointed
ahead into the darkness.
Three passages led into the hall they were standing in—and
down the right-hand way armaragors were advancing, with
swords out and determined looks on their faces.
When Tarlagar's armsmen moved to get a good look at the
oncoming warriors, those knights broke into a run. "For
Bloodblade!" they shouted. "For Aglirta!"
The baron sobbed and ran wildly down one of the other
passages. His knights and armsmen looked at each other,
shrugged-and burst into their own clanking runs, after him.
Bloodblade's charging warriors howled and ran faster, seeking
to catch up to Tarlagar's men before they vanished from sight in

the cluttered, darkened palace.
From somewhere not far off in the many dark chambers,
there came a sudden roar of shouts and screams and the clash of
swords as another band of Bloodblade's swords met with the
forces of the Barons Loushoond and Ornentar—and began to
hack them down.
Meanwhile
"Up, Flower of the Delcampers. Aglirta has immediate need of
your watchfulness and keen bardic memory-to say nothing of
that scepter you're clutching, too."
He knew that deep voice.
Flaeros rolled over to stare up at the man who must have just
saved his life.
The Regent of Aglirta stood as tall and darkly handsome as
ever, though his clothes were torn and full of holes, locks of white
now ran through his raven-hued hair, and deep lines of pain
marked his face and had left dark hollows around his eyes. He
wore a wan smile, and a lone Dwaer-Stone circled in the air just
above his brow.
"L-Lord Blackgult!" Flaeros stammered. "What happened to
you?"
"I rode into one battle too many, as we all do," the regent told
him, unclipping a rather battered flagon of chased silver from
his belt and handing it down to the bard.
Flaeros took it eagerly, unstoppered and sniffed, decided it
was fiery amberglelt of the very finest sort, and took a cautious
swallow.
Ahhhh. The finest, indeed. He shuddered, sighed, and
reluctantly handed it back-or tried to; Blackgult waved at him to
have another swig.
Flaeros smiled. "And at that battle?"

Blackgult's smile was broader. "I won, then lost, then got
caught in magic."
Flaeros let his second sampling of amberglelt trickle slow fire
down his throat ere he dared say, "Lord Blackgult-Great
Regent-you know that answer was a clever tease no bard can let
pass. You defeated whom? Then lost to whom? Were caught in
magic how? What magic was it, and who cast it?"
Blackgult held up a hand in a "stay thy words" gesture. "The
priests of the Serpent whelmed their own host of
mercenaries—from every far corner of Darsar I know of-and
them I defeated, with my mercenaries, whilst riding to fight the
army of Bloodblade Duthjack, who fancies himself King of
Aglirta. The Snake-swords were a complete surprise to me-and
they cost my Royal Host dearly. I had barely enough blades left
to give Bloodblade something to charge at."
"Which he did," Flaeros added with a rueful smile, handing
back the flagon. He didn't have to have been on Sarth Fields to
know what the gods had unfolded for the regent. This tale was
something that had happened a time or eighty before.
The regent nodded. "There is no Royal Host any longer.
Unfortunately, I was visited by a wizard just then-Jhavarr
Bowdragon, seeking to avenge the death of his sister, who was
one of the archwizard Tharlorn's best apprentices."
Flaeros nodded. "His lover, I heard."
"And victim, when he tired of her," Blackgult agreed.
"Unfortunately, as her death possibly befell somewhere in
Aglirta, and Tharlorn also seems to be dead, this Jhavarr blamed
me-and King Kelgrael-and anyone else holding palace
authority—for it. The overdukes, for instance; he had Embra's
Dwaer with him. He tried to slay me."
Flaeros had got his breath back, but still felt like a weak and
aching sack of bruises. "The Lady Embra? Dead?" he asked
quietly, knowing that he was speaking of Blackgult's
daughter—and that one Dwaer was orbiting uncomfortably close
by.

The regent spread helpless hands. "I know not her
fate-Jhavarr said only that he'd seized it, and his fate, too, is a
mystery to me. I suspect he, at least, is dead."
"Ah… suspect?"
"With my two Dwaer, I struck at him," Blackgult said grimly.
"There was an explosion. I snatched myself away from it, calling
on my Dwaer, and… escaped, after a fashion."
"After a fashion?" Flaeros asked gravely, his eyes on the
regent's face. Ezendor Blackgult's expression seemed to change
often, as if different emotions were flowing across it and laying
bare different flesh, each time. Flaeros had an uncle like that,
whose moods showed bright and clear upon his face, but the
Golden Griffon had always been so cool, so—utterly in control.
"The blast did not tear at my body," the regent said in a low
voice, "but through the Dwaer it touched my wits." He tapped
his head, managed a flickering smile, and added, "You might say
it 'mind-blasted' me. My memory comes and goes, and for some
time-I think a long time, but you can count the passing days
better than I, now—I was little better than a numb, shuffling
shell. I lack the skill properly to call on a Dwaer for healing, but
it seems to me that I am better man I was."
"You seem as formidable as ever to me, Lord," Flaeros said
hastily, feeling the cold stone of the tomb against his arm and
wondering if he dared move. He didn't want to stir the regent
out of this mood of openness, nor goad Blackgult to slaying rage
if he was truly so… unstable. Yet would he have hurled a spell to
save a young bard, and revealed much to that same Flaeros
Delcamper-speaking of Aglirta's need for him, too—if he
intended to men harm said songster? Surely not… and yet, every
man has but one life to lose, and it was all too true that the Bard
of the Del-campers had already hazarded much with his…
Blackgult smiled dimly. "It's good to know that bards, at least,
I can still fool."
That sounded not so good. Flaeros decided there was no
better way ahead than to continue doing what a good bard does.

"What happened to your other Dwaer?" he asked. "And the one
this Jhavarr was using, for that matter?"
The regent smiled and nodded approvingly, as if Flaeros had
passed some sort of test. "Vanished in the blast, both of them,"
he said, spreading his hands in a gesture of helplessness. "Gone I
know not where. I would have felt it—I would probably be
mindless now—if they'd been destroyed. They were flung… well,
elsewhere. Somehow it seems to me that they each went to a
different place, but I've no way of knowing I am right in that."
Flaeros nodded, and their eyes met. "And what, Lord," he
dared to ask, "will you do now?"
The regent shrugged and spread his empty hands. "I find it all
matters less and less, friend Flaeros," he said sadly, "with my
daughter dead. But I'll be blasted and broken by the Three
before I'll let the damned Snake-kissers—and mincing wizards
who lord it over everyone and never once in their lives chop
wood or draw water—have Aglirta!"
He took two restless strides away, then spun around and
snapped, "I'll take as many of them with me as I can, if I have to
fill up all Silverflow Vale with blood doing it!"
As if in answer, the ground rocked, sending up birds from
trees and bushes all over the graveyard in a squawking cloud of
alarm.
A deep rumbling made the earth shudder beneath them, and
Flaeros could have sworn that one of the tall old stone tomb
markers, at least, swayed. That shuddering raced under the two
men from the direction of the river, rippling under the Silent
House-which groaned its own brief stony protest—and beyond.
They both looked towards the Silverflow. A dark cloud was
curling up and away from Flowfoam Isle, high into the sky over
the Vale.
It was a greasy brown-and-purple plume unlike anything
Flaeros had ever seen before. As they watched, it seemed to be
shaping itself with a life and sentience of its own, darkening

swiftly into jet-black, but with none of the billowing that races
up from a wood fire or the ruin of torched barns or castles. No,
this smoke was smooth, as if—spell-shaped.
The two men saw the smoke become the dark image of a huge
snake, rearing up to regard all Aglirta with its great dark eyes. A
forked tongue licked out and vanished again, and then huge
fanged jaws gaped, as if to swallow the Kingless Land entirely,
splitting the sky with a vast maw of darkness.
And then, ere its jaws closed, the Serpent started to fade
away—not scattering with the winds, but thinning out just
where it hung.
The bard and the regent both looked at the Isle whence the
apparition had come—and then Blackgult reached down a long
and muscular arm to pluck Haeros bodily onto his feet.
"Come and bear witness, Bard of the Delcampers," he
growled, "and try to think of a really striking tune for your next
ballad, The Last Stand of Stormharp, will you?"
?
Chapter Fifteen
Standing Too Close to a Throne
Darkness fell away as suddenly as a shroud snatched off a
corpse, and the wisewoman sat back with a hiss of surprise and
dismay. Had the impatient merchant known her better, he
would have recognized dread in her face as she stared down at
the tanthor cards, back up at him without seeing him, and then
down at the cards again.
Them she saw, all right. Peering, and shaking her head as if
she could not believe what she saw, and peering again, staring
slowly at every last card, as though she'd never laid tanthor
before!

Now, the blood she'd let drip from her fingers into the
customary chalice had caught fire somehow in the dark and
burned away in a trice, leaving behind only a thread of smoke,
and he'd never seen that before, but there was nothing wrong
with the array that he could see, nothing out of , place and no
fault in the tanthor magic.
Aye, the cards were good!
Kirlstar could see that as well as anyone; their vivid blue
spell-glows ; were bright and strong on her black cloth now that
the customary Shadow of the Gods she'd cast had passed. The
heart of the array was crowded with gold—there, the Laden Ship,
then a cluster of the Goldsack, the Fall of Gems, and the Crown
and Rubies. Over there, the Wagonwheel, the Bright Castle, and
the Fortuitous Bridge. No Map of Fools, no Brigand.
Snatch—how could this be a cause for dismay? He was going
to be rich! He was-yes. Three Above, but he'd never had cards
this good before!
The Hill of Skulls was the only bad card in view, below the
cluster— battle, that meant, and the death of someone in it.
Well, Kirlstar of the Splendid Silks certainly wasn't going to be
joining in any battles soon! Leave that to the fools in Aglirta,
now busily tearing their land asunder one more time, when they
could be making coins hand over fist!
But what was this? The wisewoman was pushing his coins
back across the table at him, her face as white as beached bone.
"Go," she whispered, in a voice as raw and hopeless as if she saw
the Doom of All Darsar and no way to avoid it. "Keep your coins,
Goodman Kirlstar. I cannot tell your fortune today."
"What?" Kirlstar roared, as dumbfounded as he was angry.
"Cannot-? Woman, what foolery is this? Look at those
cards—Goldsack, Fall of Gems, Crown and Rubies all, look you,
and all gathered at the heart!" He was almost pleading, he knew,
and rushed on nonetheless. "I've never had cards so good! What
d'you mean, you can't tell my fortune? Why can't all those riches
be mine?" His pointing finger stabbed angrily down at the
cards-until a fat blue spark snapped back from one of them to

sear and numb him, and leave him staggering back in fresh
astonishment.
"Please," she whispered up at him, and the cards began to
spark and smoke beneath her. She was crying, he saw, tears
falling onto the tanthor array.
Suddenly afraid himself, but not knowing why, Kirlstar
snatched up his coins, stared at her again with mounting alarm
and the plaintive need to know why rising together in his
gaze—and whirled out of the tiny shop on Graemere Street
without another word, the heavy curtains swirling in his wake.
Orathlee the Wise stared down at the cards again and then
reached for the bell that would summon her daughters. Her
hand trembled. They would have to pack and be gone this very
night, if she read this right. The Dragon At Dawn here, and
Morning Over Towers here—it was impossible to say if the
Lady's clear warning meant that the danger was going to fall like
lightning from the sky in a very short time, somewhere nearby
but not actually in Sirlptar—or fall in the morning right here in
the city. "Dragonfire," she whispered, as the bell rang and she
heard her daughters start up in alarm and come running. She
stared down in disbelief at the cards again, shaking her head.
Dragonfire.
The cards did not lie.
It could be nothing else.
Centuries it had been since such a reading, the Seers of the
Tanthor had been very clear about that—and on that last
occasion, two dragons had torn each other apart above the fair
realm of Loroncel, and laid waste to it in their death throes, so
that it was but a wasteland to this day.
The time before that-oh, she remembered those lessons
vividly, because the stories had been so good; they always were,
weren't they, when it had all happened to someone else,
somewhere far away and long ago—it hadn't been a real dragon
at all, but a storm of spells that got out of hand. Fed by many

angry hurled magics until it took on a crawling, wizard-seeking
life of its own, a cloak of "dragonfire" that had drowned
tall-towered Chalsymbryl, City of Enchanters, beneath the waves,
battling mages and all—leaving behind the reefs and whirlpools
that sailors called Lost Chaise, a region shunned for its hunger to
devour ships.
Ships! They'd have to catch the next ship leaving the docks,
no matter what it was or where it was bound. Even if its captain
took slaves, they'd at least be alive. It would be hard for her
daughters, but Orathlee had been a slave before.
She shook her head again as Meleira and Talace came
thundering down the stairs, daggers in their hands and alarm in
their wide eyes. "Dragonfire," she whispered again, helplessly.
What had someone done, to anger the gods thus?
Darkness fell away as suddenly as a shroud snatched off a
corpse, and the dim light of day coming in the windows of the
galleries above lit the Throne Chamber of Aglirta again, casting
faint shadows amid its dust and riven throne and tumbled
stones.
Raulin blinked at the empty place beside Tshamarra Talasorn
that had held a king. Sarasper stared at the same spot with
despair growing in him, and froze in midsurge. Briefly the
shapeshifting healer grew feathers and then lost them again,
sinking back into man-shape: an old man who was shaking his
head sadly.
Glarsimber whirled to a stop and took two quick paces
forward, peering. There, behind those stones! Hardly daring to
take the next few steps the baron growled at himself-what price
a barony, if the holder not do what is needful for Aglirta?—and
scrambled forward, to where he could stare down.
Embra Silvertree and Hawkril Anharu were sprawled
awkwardly together. The Lady Overduke's arms were flung wide
and her hair made a great swirl on the stones around her. The
armaragor was lying on his back, partly beneath her. His dazed
face blinked up at the riven ceiling from beneath Embra's boots.

Hawkril's mouth twitched, several expressions raced rapidly
across his face as the baron bent over him, and he made a faint
sound that might have been a moan. Embra was utterly silent as
she suddenly rose on hands and knees and crawled a little way
forward, staring at the far wall of the room with her back to
them all.
"Lady Embra?" Glarsimber asked roughly, taking a cautious
step after her.
"I saw… a dragon," Embra murmured, and then turned her
head sharply to look at him. "Here, in this room, towering up
just there-but that cannot be!"
"Embra," the Baron of Brightpennant asked gravely, "are
you… all right?"
The Lady of Jewels looked at him expressionlessly for a
moment before her lips twisted into a thin little smile. "If I were
Craer, I'd tell you I was considered much better than 'all right,' "
she murmured, "but in truth-I think so, Glarsimber. I… hope
so."
With more weariness than grace, she found her feet, turned
away again, and took a few exploratory steps. "Nothing broken,
at least," she announced, shaking her head so that her hair fell
back around her.
Then she sighed, spun around with her hands on her hips,
and asked, "Hawk? Are you-?"
"Alive, or I'd not be hearing you," the armaragor groaned
from beneath the hands he'd flung up to his face, to rub at eyes
and brow. "For more than that about my present hurts, best ask
the gods!"
For some reason Embra found this very funny. She clapped a
hand to her mouth and giggled as she went to her knees by
Hawkril's head and added her gentle hands to his. He peered at
her from between two fingers, and her mirth deepened into a
chuckle—ere she bent to kiss him.

His hands reached up to her shoulders, and their embrace
tightened, Embra's hair cascaded down to conceal their faces,
and she made a delighted, wordless sound. Hawkril growled just
as wordless a reply, almost as if he was purring.
"They're safe, I see," a familiar voice said in mocking tones,
from close beside Glarsimber. "I couldn't help but fail to notice,
mind you, that no one came running and calling after me?
The baron grinned.
"That, my Lord Overduke Craer," he said, turning to regard
the longtime thief, "is because we all had every confidence that
you were fine-moreover, that your recent journey along yonder
wall was no harmful and involuntary matter, but a skillful tactic
of some sort on your part!"
"Three Above," Craer replied, rolling his eyes, "make them
barons and they soon learn to talk like barons, do they not?"
"I learned," Brightpennant told him, drawing himself up in
mock dignity, "from the best. I listened to thieves-ah, pray
pardon: procurers?
"No doubt," Craer agreed, showing his teeth in a mirthless
grin. "No doubt. Too many barons have listened to procurers
these last score of years, and brought Aglirta to"-he gestured
around the ruined throne chamber-"this."
"The king," Raulin said abruptly from behind them both, the
rich Castlecloaks voice trembling on the edge of tears, "is dead. I
saw him—kill himself."
"Aye," Sarasper called grimly from a goodly distance down
the room. "So did l-we?
Glarsimber and Craer turned to see the reason for that last
word. Sarasper and Tshamarra Talasorn stood mute, eyes
locked. They'd suddenly found themselves staring at each other,
both in awe of what they'd seen.
"That was," the Talasorn sorceress started to say, a quaver in

her voice. She stopped, swallowed, and started again. "That was
the greatest-"
"The Serpent-priests have struck down Kelgrael's bindings!"
Embra said sharply, her voice snapping across the room like the
crack of a drover's lash as she scrambled up from Hawkril, her
hands rising in alarm. "They'll be here soon-I'll need all the
magic I can get, to have any hopes of standing against them!"
Six faces stared at her-Hawkril's from right beneath her—and
the Lady Overduke said crisply, "If the king has fallen, Aglirta
has not, and he left us all—save you, Lady-with sworn duties. I
need your service, my lords!"
Embra's tone made it clear that she was a little puzzled as to
why none of the others were battling the last Talasorn
sorceress-and why she in turn wasn't trying to spellslay
them—but there was not time for explanations now, however
grand the tale, and the Lady Overduke accepted things as they
were, without comment.
"When Baron Faerod Silvertree ruled this house, and I was
being bound to it by fell enchantments by the wizards who
served him," she added, "I learned where certain items of magic
were stored. Those that were hidden may still be found by us
now, if the Three smile down—and you hasten!"
"Command us!" Craer snapped. "We look where?"
"On the back of yon door, behind the throne," she replied
without hesitation, pointing across the ruined chamber.
"Filigreework there holds a wand—bring it."
She spun, and pointed again. "Down that passage, the third
shield on the wall bears an enchantment. A bracelet hangs from
the same hook, hidden behind the shield-'twill seem like but a
loop of hempen rope, but that's part of its magic. Bring both."
She turned again.
"Craer, know you the gallery that overlooks the ferns, along
that passage? The arch window: its sill can be made to lift out by

pressing on the two darkest stones of the running border,
beneath. Bring everything you find in the storage hollow mere."
She paused, her mouth open to say more, and then sighed
and made a dismissive wave of her hand. "The rest are probably
too far off to fetch in time."
Craer limped away on his errand, plucking at Raulin's sleeve
and pointing at the door that led to the shield and bracelet.
Glarsimber set off for the door behind the throne, seeing at once
why Embra hadn't sent Raulin on that shortest of fetchings: the
way was blocked by fallen stones almost certainly too heavy for
the young bard to lift.
"Hurt, Longfingers?" Hawkril rumbled, seeing the pain on
Craer's face.
"I'll live until I die," the procurer flung back, without slowing.
Craer had heard that crisp tone of voice from Embra only a few
times before— when she was desperate, and danger was close.
When he flung open the door, Craer saw just how close.
Perhaps forty paces down the passage, armored men were
backing slowly towards him. They were fencing with other men,
beyond, and being forced back, blade to blade. As he watched, a
man gurgled, clawed vainly at the sword that had slid into his
throat and back out again, and fell, to be trampled underfoot.
The man's bright blood ran across the stone floor—to join more
man one ribbon of gore already lacing their ways across the
flagstones.
Craer peered, eyes narrowing. He could see shoulder badges
of Loushoond, Tarlagar, and—Ornentar, was it? Aye.
"Trouble come already," the procurer reported to his
companions, unnecessarily. They could all hear the clash and
skirl of arms before he slammed the door, shrugged at its lack of
a bar or surviving lock, and added, "Three barons come
calling—or their blades, at least. Someone else is out there, too,
fighting with them." Craer waggled his eyebrows, and added in
mock consternation, "How unusual for Flowfoam, these days."
Then he sighed, and murmured so softly and bitterly that none

of his companions heard, "How unusual indeed. Some great
overdukes we've turned out to be. Everyone snarls about what
they'd do if they could command armies and set realms in
order… but when the chance comes, things never work out as
one intends…"
"Shield and bracelet!" Raulin called, holding them up
triumphantly as he came trotting towards Embra.
"Hawkril," Glarsimber grunted, from the door behind the
throne. "I need a hand here-"
"Done," the armaragor growled, staggering across the room
in obvious discomfort. Sarasper frowned at Hawkril's obvious
pain, sighed—and then shuddered and flowed, becoming a
longfangs.
As spidery legs lengthened and the wolflike head arose, the
Talasorn sorceress gasped and flung up her hands to cast a spell
at him—only to freeze at Embra's warning look and sharply
raised hand.
Swallowing, Tshamarra watched the wolf-spider climb the
nearest wall and proceed onto the ceiling, swarming swiftly
along its cracked and crumbling edges until it—no, he; she had
to remember that this monster was Sarasper—hung above the
door Craer had slammed, awaiting the arrival of the warriors.
For his part, Overduke Craer Delnbone had taken a step or
two back, and was feeling in his boots and along his forearms, to
be sure daggers were loose and ready in their sheaths. Seeing a
Melted lying nearby half-crushed under a fall of stone, he
plucked up the dead man's sword and hefted it calmly.
Tshamarra Talasorn had stood very still since Embra's glare,
only her eyes moving to watch all the preparations for battle. "Is
there anything I can get, Lady, to help?" she asked now,
hesitantly.
Embra's eyes narrowed, but she paused for only a moment
before pointing at a door in the far corner of the throne
chamber-where, down the years, Hibar Quelver had stood guard,

deciding who would be allowed passage to the River Throne, and
who would not—and said, "The forehall beyond that door opens
into three rooms. The one on your right has three suits of armor
posed along the wall like guards, holding banners. Bring back
the helm of the farthest one from us here."
Tshamarra bowed her head. "Lady, I will," she replied, and
hastened across the littered floor.
Embra watched her go, thoughtfully, and then asked,
"Raulin?"
"Yes, Lady Silvertree?" the bard answered eagerly, from
beside her.
Embra took the bracelet from him and slid it up her arm to
the shoulder, and then took hold of the shield in both hands,
standing it protectively in front of her legs ere leaning on it. "Tell
me-briefly, mind-what happened to the king. Who did what,
and-"
She saw the Talasorn sorceress cautiously open Quelver's
door, peer out, then slip through it, out of sight.
"-what part the lady sorceress who just left us played in it all."
"Uh, well, Lady," Raulin began, with as much smooth
eloquence as most flustered young bards can muster when battle
is about to break over them and they know it, "the four Talasorn
ladies—uh, that one and her three sisters, who are all dead
now—they—uh-" isf The bard's next stumbling words were lost
in the crash of the door guarded by Craer and Sarasper booming
open, and the clank and clangor of armed armaragors reeling
into the room.
"Craer! Sarasper!" Embra cried quickly. "Not yet! Hold back
for now!"
Craer nodded, giving way to stand back among the piles of
fallen stone with borrowed sword in hand. "'you've been right
thus far, Em," he called, as cursing, panting armored men killed
each other by the door. 'Just let's not change that now, hmm?"

"Lady Embra!" the Baron Brightpennant called from behind
the ruined throne. The Lady of Jewels turned her head—and
Glarsimber tossed the wand smooth and straight towards her,
underhanded, as Hawkril struggled to get the door closed again.
"My thanks!" she said, snatching the wand out of the air. Just
as she remembered: a coppery dapple-sheen metal tube, capped
at one end with a stylized flower. The rest of the matching
filigree had been even more hideous. "Hawk, leave it! We may
need a way to flee!"
"Or at least a narrow place to stand in, and defend,"
Glarsimber agreed, as beside him the armaragor straightened
up with a nod, letting a huge chunk of stone thud back onto the
shattered floor again.
Other doors were banging open now, all over the throne
chamber, as armsmen and armaragors in the livery of
Loushoond, Ornentar, and Tarlagar backed into the room,
hacking desperately at ever-advancing warriors who were
shouting, "Bloodblade! Bloodblade! Victory!"
With a purring growl the longfangs sprang down from the
wall, slamming a handful of warriors to the floor and breaking
the necks of others by the slaps and curling clingings of his long
legs as he swept down. Ere blades could find him, he sprang up
to promptly smash down another harvest of armsmen, biting
throats and necks savagely before springing again.
Bloodblade's warriors were shouting in alarm now. "A
longfangs! Wolf-spider!" and "With evil magic they summon
monsters to fight for them! Slay them! Slay the longfangs! Flee
Aglirta!"
Blades were hewing the wolf-spider's limbs, now, and men
were hurling themselves on those legs, seeking to drag it down
and hold it to be butchered. The legs of a longfangs, however, are
stronger than many a charging warhorse. Sarasper pulled them
back in, dragging each clinging man within reach of his
powerful jaws—and many warriors' heads were soon lolling,
throatless, leaving those long legs free to lash out and break
bones beneath armor or necks-ere the wolf-spider sprang again,

and more men died.
Where Sarasper was fighting, the rushing ranks of
Bloodblade's armaragors looked more like a battlefield of the
fallen—yet still the warriors flooded in through the throne
chamber doors, more and more of them, bright-armored and
eager.
"Bloodblade! Bloodblade! Victory!" the shouts rang out.
Hawkril's warsword flashed as he drew it and shot glances in all
directions, deciding whom to charge at first. His mouth
tightened as he saw figures in splendid, fluted armor stumbling
along in the midst of ragged rings of baronial warriors. The
three barons themselves were here-no doubt strolling hence on
an idle day, to see if perchance any fallen crown might be lying
around for them to pluck up.
Well, there were worse ways to enliven a dull afternoon… but
most of them involved floods, forest fires, earthquakes,
mountains erupting in fires from below, or several reckless
archwizards hungry for battle.
Sarasper growled and sprang away from a forest of reaching
blades to the wall once more, out of reach—for just an instant.
His blood-slick legs could not hold, he slipped, and a roar of
hope arose in the warriors below him.
A roar that lasted until the wolf-spider kicked out against
that wall as he slid, to twist in the air and pounce, slamming two
tall armaragors broken to the marble beneath with screams and
a horrible bouncing splintering of shattered bones. Sarasper
came up biting and tearing, slashing faces and throats with his
teeth and slapping out with his legs with such swift savagery
that men were thrown into their fellows, falling outward from
the raging wolf-spider by the dozens.
Still Bloodblade's warriors came swarming into the room,
slaying men of the three barons with eager, vigorous speed, and
Craer had to scramble to avoid being cornered and hewn down.
"They're coming up every passage, converging on us," he puffed,
coming to a halt beside Embra. "This bids fair to be
entertaining."

"As the gravediggers say," Glarsimber agreed in a dry voice,
as he and Hawk joined them.
Then swords were ringing all around them as Bloodblade's
foremost knights came seeking the blood of overdukes, and there
was no time for converse in the brief, frantic skirling of steel.
Sarasper sprang up to the wall again as warriors with spears
came striding over the dead, to slay this deadly longfangs—and
his limbs caught and clung this time.
There he hung, just out of reach of their seeking pole steel,
with two legs raised to bat aside any hurled spears, and panted
visibly. Longfangs or not, Sarasper Codelmer was old—and, as
the bards said solemnly, growing older by the day.
The last man of Bloodblade gurgled to the floor, and the
Baron Brightpennant tugged back his bloody blade, peered at
the longfangs clinging to the wall above the door, and asked,
"That is Sarasper, isn't it?" Upon Craer's nod, he added, "What's
he doing there, just hanging from the wall and watching?"
"Oh," Craer replied airily, "it's his way. Healers like to watch
damage done, you know; the thought of all that business to come
excites them."
Embra sighed and shook her head. "Craer," she murmured,
"don't ever change. I'd miss all the inane comments."
Whatever biting riposte the procurer might have intended
was lost in the sudden crash of Quelver's door, as it was flung
open to boom against the wall and rebound, shuddering. The
screaming figure racing through it was safely past it by then,
and well across the throne chamber towards them, as Craer
raised an approving eyebrow at her speed.
Tshamarra Talasorn was sprinting in wild-eyed terror,
sobbing between shrieks as she slapped busily at things that
kept curling towards her face, out of her own hair. The helm
Embra had sent her for danced from the crook of her elbow as
she came.

"Snakes!" Hawkril swore. "Horns of the Lady, her hair is full
of snakes!"
Embra frowned, held up the wand, and murmured
something. The wand seemed to glow for a moment, and then
darken a little. Its tip crumbled away as she pointed her other
hand at the fast-approaching sorceress.
There were suddenly plumes of sizzling flame in the air
behind Tshamarra, curling and writhing things that crackled,
smoked, and fell to the floor to twist and burn. Embra kept her
hand leveled and will intent until every last snake had been
purged from Talasorn tresses.
As the sobbing sorceress plunged into their midst, and Craer
flung soothing arms around her to wrestle her to a swaying stop,
Embra bent her gaze on the doorway Tshamarra had returned
through, and murmured another phrase that made the wand in
her hand darken from end to end, and lose a lot of its length in
crumblings.
The Talasorn sorceress wept uncontrollably into Craer's
shoulder, and the procurer rocked her and muttered soothing
words with a strange expression on his face. When Glarsimber
grinned at him, Craer calmly raised one hand in the
corkscrewlike twisting gesture whose rude meaning is known
from one end of Aglirta to the other.
A moment later, an expected sight met Embra's watchful
eyes: three Serpent-priests appeared in that doorway, smiling
coldly as they surveyed the room. Embra sent their- flaming
serpents back at them in a fiery hail that made them draw back
in alarm and embark on hasty spellweavings.
Tshamarra fell silent, and then moved in Craer's arms,
seeking freedom. When he gave it to her she patted his shoulder
in silent thanks, gave him a red-eyed smile, sniffed loudly, and
turned to face her tormentors—in time to see one of them gasp
and reel back out of sight, as Embra turned the flames he was
battling into something else. The Lady Overduke smiled tightly
as the wand she was holding crumbled entirely to ash and
trickled away between her fingers.

The stricken Snake-cleric was still falling when a second
Serpent-priest received the crowning surprise of his life-literally.
The longfangs none of the priests had noticed scuttling across
the ceiling and down the wall above their doorway chose that
moment to swing down into view with a jagged piece of rock as
large as a man's head held delicately between two of its legs. The
speed of its swing gave the released stone more than enough
force to crush the top of the priest's skull.
Spitting blood from several places, the man crumpled,
knocking over the third priest—and that was when it became
apparent that there were other Serpent-clergy behind, who were
growing impatient at not being a part of all this reeling and
dying. They pushed forward into the room, hurling gouts of
magical fire from their palms-and the longfangs came scurrying
back across the ceiling, skirting the great gap, to hang upside
down about Hawkril, who gave him a grim smile, and said,
"Swords out, all. 'Tis time to take a stand—'twon't be long before
Bloodblade himself gets here, all blood and thunder, and we'll be
fighting for all Aglirta. Again."
He glanced up, and added, "No swords for you, old man. Stay
a beast for now—'tis safer."
"Old man?" Sarasper growled, the maw of the wolf head
blurring briefly into a human mouth. " Who's an old man?"
Hawkril snorted, but said with a grin, "My apologies. I
mistook you for some other lurking longfangs."
"Gods, but this throne room's seen more than its share of
blood spilled," Craer said wryly. "Now, unless I'm mistaken, it's
our turn to wash the tiles red."
"Raulin, to me," Embra said quietly. "I need someone to ward
off hurled things coming my way, and to hand me all this
gathered magic as I need it."
Tshamarra held out the helm to her, and then to Raulin, and
then back at Embra with a grin, and the Lady Overduke
wrinkled her nose at the Talasorn sorceress and jerked her head
at the young bard to indicate where the armor should be

bestowed.
"If you ladies are finished with pleasantries," the Baron
Brightpennant said grimly from beside them, "we'd best be
backing towards that door we left open, I'm thinking. There
might even be a chance that what's left of the throne might have
some magic left in it that you could use, Embra."
"Well said," Hawkril agreed, but they'd barely begun to move,
staying carefully together in a ring as fighting armaragors
whirled closer, when the last of the closed throne chamber doors
burst open—and a wedge of Blood-blade's knights charged into
the throne room with a roar. There were baronial banners in
their midst—and one man strode along under them in plate
armor that gleamed as bright as a new-burnished blade.
"Bloodblade! Victory! Bloodblade! Victory!" the armaragors
chanted, as they hacked down all who stood in their way, and
strode across the ruined chamber towards the ruined throne.
"Death to all barons!" Bloodblade cried. "Let Aglirta have a
new king and a new way!" He waved the sword he held-and with
a wordless howl, his warriors put down their heads and charged.
Chapter Sixteen
Baron's Battle, and Bloodblade
The fading but ornately lettered sign above the foul-smelling,
slippery steps read:
Dolstan Drearihead
Scribe For Hire
-but that inscription had been improved upon by the starkly
scrawled amendment:
Found Dead.
Burned All

Still Many Rats.
An inspiring text, to be sure—and coupled with the complete
darkness the steps curved down into, and the litter of bones to
be found on those steps, few wanderers in this poor
neighborhood of Sirlptar felt welcomed enough to proceed down
into the deep, water-dripping cellar, slosh through the
ankle-deep, filthy water to the door at its far, unlit end, and give
the correct knock. Those who failed to do so, but tarried in the
cellar, often heard slight grating sounds, coming at once from
either side of them.
One was made by a sliding shutter that revealed a window in
the wall, into a room where a bright lantern hung, flooding that
side of the cellar with light—but the other shutter, across from
it, opened in the locked door just enough that a crossbow could
poke out—and give swift death to whoever was outlined against
the light.
The bodies of such overly inquisitive visitors, huddled in the
water at the corners of the room, added to the welcoming reek of
the cellar. One addition was too recent to have been cleared
aside yet: a drunken carter who'd mistaken the cellar for the
entrance to his own damp hold, and attacked the door with
ever-increasing rage. Now stiffened in death, he lay with one
reaching hand rising like a claw into the cellar darkness.
Its unfeeling fingers tugged at the cloak of someone else,
arriving in some haste. With a growl of revulsion the owner of
the cloak tugged free, strode straight to the door with long,
sloshing steps, and knocked in a careful rhythm.
There came the muffled sound of two heavy bolts being
thrown back, and then the door opened inward, without a
sound.
The man strode through it in matching silence, not slowing
for pleasantries or to help dose the door, but straight on towards
a distant arch, and even more distant lanternlight, glimmering
beyond it. Not for the first time, the man in the cloak wondered
sourly why, in all of intrigue-ridden Sirl town, it was necessary
for this particular cabal to meet in such a filmy place. Deep

cellars were fine for hiding contraband and bodies best
forgotten, but a warm fire and some good wine would not come
amiss, just once…
He came out into the light, ignoring the sullen stares of the
grim guards lounging against the wall with weapons at the
ready, and made for the only empty seat at the table.
"Ah, my Lord of Haeltree," Baron Cardassa said with a
joviality that fooled no one, "you're late!"
"I was followed," the Tersept of Haeltree said shortly, doffing
his cloak with a contemptuous disregard for the sudden,
threatening movements his action provoked in several of the
guards, and seating himself with a sigh. "Wizards again, seeking
to pry. Every titled Aglirtan is a marked man in Sirl town right
now, I tell you."
"I'm not surprised," Maevur of Cardassa said with a smile.
"Even Sirl mages and merchants are eager to find friends at
Flowfoam—or should I say, eager to greet the coins that might
flow their ways if they help someone new to be seated on the
River Throne."
There were sour mutters of agreement from the others
around the table—tersepts all, and most of them as new in their
offices as this smoothtongued new Baron of Cardassa. Haeltree
knew for a fact that some of them didn't even know the
difference between an armaragor and an arms-man. Not that
knowing who was a knight sworn personally to you and who was
a warrior of the barony would matter much if you were a tersept
ignorant even of your own obligations of office, and never
intended to keep the peace or draw sword in battle against
anyone.
This moon-faced, oiled-haired Maevur, for one, wouldn't soil
his hands in battle if he could possibly avoid it. A distant cousin
of the Old Crow, this new Baron Cardassa had spent all his
wastrel, formative days in Elmerna—which city, popular
Cardassan belief held, was far enough downwind of Aglirta for
the Old Crow not to gag at the stench of his perfumed,
always-idle relation.

Maevur gave Haeltree a condescending smile and said, "If I
may continue-?"
Haeltree became aware that the baron was actually expecting
a response. From him. "But of course," he said, leaning forward
to better feign apologetic, hearty eagerness.
Maevur beamed like the brightest sun of a hot day, reached
behind him to receive the bundle a guard stepped forward to
place in his open palm, and swept this mystery around in front
of him with a nourish, unrolling the tube of bright new
parchment grandly.
Ah, yes, of course. The map. Fledgling conspirators were
nothing without a map. Every man here knew each bend and
twist of the Silver-flow, and every way inn and horse pond on the
overland roads, too—but they all crowded forward to look, as if
the map held new revelations. A barony they'd never noticed,
perhaps, or town or two someone had flung up overnight, or
when they last took time to bathe—whatever decade ago that
might have been. Some even reached out to put their ringers on
their home castles, as if reassuring themselves that all of this
was real, and they really did hold tides.
Well, they'd lose both tides and their heads if any slips were
made on the road ahead—and possibly even if not, when this
Maevur decided to be rid of the most capable of his fellow
conspirators and replace them with underlings just as falsely
loyal but incompetent enough ever to rise as rivals. He'd be on
that "have accidents happen soonest" list, Haeltree knew.
Maevur knew he was too clever to be left alone—and had already
clearly judged him disobedient, to boot.
Ah, but obedience was always the problem, wasn't it?
Whether you ruled a sty full of hogs or a barony full of people…
"Behold Aglirta," Maevur announced, as proudly as if he'd
created the whole realm himself, this very morning. "A realm
that can be ours, once this upstart Bloodblade and the justly
feared and hated regent have slaughtered each other. They
butcher each other even as we speak, and even if one is left
standing at the end of their bloodbath, he'll be too weak to do

more than sneeze without the permission of a wizard."
The Baron of Cardassa turned away from the map he'd been
so grandly waving at and commenced to strut across the cellar,
hands clasped behind his back. Gods, but you could see how his
belly had grown since their last moot! The man must be a
veritable boar at the trough…
"Now, wizards" Maevur of Cardassa said with supercilious
authority, "have been the bane of Aglirta all my life—and these
last three centuries at least, if half the tales I've heard and read
can be credited with truth. Hired in by this baron and that
tersept, they worm their ways to the best wine, the most
gold-and true power, using spells and fear to rule in fact even if
someone else holds the local tide. Many of them hail from
Sirlptar or even farther afield from Aglirta, and none of them
love the land as we honest men do, or care for it, except as a
source of food to gorge on, wine to guzzle, servants to fawn over
them or fear them, oddments to use in their conjurations—and
women for them to mistreat."
Growing growls of agreement up and down the table gave
answer to this rising peroration, and the satisfied baron wheeled
around and headed back towards the map.
"So any wizards we welcome into the new Aglirta, our Aglirta,
will be men we can control by some leash or other, or"—his
bubbling, gloating chuckle was pure, slithering evil—"or women 
we can mistreat."
There were answering roars of approval, up and down the
table. Haeltree moved his shoulders and murmured in time with
the rest, knowing that the cold eyes of the guards were marking
who betrayed what, all the time.
As it happened, time was the theme of Gardassa's next
weighty speech. "And so, my friends, our long-awaited moment
has come at last. Ifes, now is our best time!"
He paused, waiting for the roar of approval that was
supposed to erupt, but he was moving too fast for the dullards
he'd chosen to ride with him, and they gave him only silence. It

was left to Haeltree and one of the guards to begin the expected
cry of eagerness; the tersept only hoped no one detected the
lacing of mockery he'd been unable to keep entirely out of his cry
of, "Brilliant!"
Maevur smiled like a great cat as the hubbub of approval
erupted at last, and let it run its course. Then he leaned forward
over the map with a soft smile, and said, "My reasons for asking
us all to meet armed and ready for travel at our every moot
should now be clear. We leave forthwith, straight from this
place, all together-down tunnels that link this cellar to others
that have barge docks leading right out to the river. My men
have already roused yours, and taken them by other ways to
those same docks. We load our warriors aboard the trade barges
I've purchased these past few months, and start upriver slowly,
with no show of arms. Let the wizards rage and storm, and wear
themselves out. We shall dock at Flow-foam, bring our archers
ashore, and go mage-hunting. I think all of us here know which
wizards will look better with their eyes growing arrows. Almost
every last one of them, yes?"
There was laughter-nervous laughter, in some cases; Haeltree
wondered what plans some of these tersepts would be leaving in
tangles behind them, outfoxed in any schemes to inform others
or tarry by Maevur's boldness—and sounds of agreement, or the
show of same.
And then the map was rolled up, Maevur drew on black
gauntlets—his men promptly slipping glittering rings onto his
armored fingers, leaving him looking like some actor playing the
Buffoon King rather than the formidable leader of a rebel
conspiracy-and the new Baron of Gardassa started snapping
orders.
Chairs scraped back, cloaks swirled, and men hurried to
where guards with lit torches were now beckoning. Haeltree
hurried with them. Well, that was one thing, out of all this
foolishness: naive idiots these other tersepts might be, but they
wouldn't all end up as fat and lazy as Cardassa obviously hoped
to be. None of them were men who liked waiting, when there
was swordwork to be done.

Bared bodies writhed as the two tall, attractive women
danced together once more, the piping and chiming music rising
to a frenzied crescendo.
The one who wore only much blood, and a red silk cord that
made her long, raven-hued hair into a mare's tail, thrust her
breasts forward as if offering them to the wench whose hair was
bound in blue.
That taller, darker dancer responded by thrusting her last
flaming skewer crosswise through both of the Red Dream's
breasts. Sizzling flesh and spurting blood doused the flames
along the needlelike blade as it slid in and through.
Red Dream gasped and writhed, the music falling silent so
every sob of pain could be heard. She was still trembling when
Blue Passion bent forward to kiss her, and they embraced
hungrily—despite the gentle clashing, as they pressed together,
of the skewers that transfixed them both striking against each
other. Men all over the room sat like gargoyles, frozen leaning
forward over their tankards and goblets to see and hear
everything. No one called for more drink or even stirred in his
seat as the chiming continued and two entwined dancers slowly
twirled around, displaying slender, shapely backs and behinds to
everyone. It had been a long dance, and a good one.
Then one of the minstrels of the House ran his hands down
the strings of his maraun in a plunging, liquid fall of notes—and
everyone moved again.
Tray wenches strode out of the pantries, folk started talking,
and men around the tables sat back and murmured their
wincing approval as the bleeding women broke apart and knelt
hand in hand to receive applause, tears of pain streaming down
their faces.
Amid a chorus of lewdly encouraging comments, a man who'd
paid a tableful of gold for the privilege was brought forward to
pull the skewers slowly out—while ringed with the swordpoints
of other wenches in scanty armor, who were there to prevent
him excitedly driving home a skewer or two himself.

Red Dream and Blue Passion pressed themselves against him
for more kisses, but could not stifle their screams when the
traditional dousing of wine was done to wash their blood off the
pleased-and visibly aroused-guest. As the stinging lessened and
they could control their spasms once more, they caressed him
skillfully but regretfully, for he'd not paid the proprietor of
Dragonrose House that extra small fortune that would entitle
him to kiss away their hurts in private for a night.
He, too, looked forlorn as the two dancers took the waiting
handfuls of skewers from the armored wenches who'd just
collected them from his eager hands. Red Dream and Blue
Passion looked at each other, and then swiftly undid the cords
that held their hair and laid them in his trembling grasp.
There was a fresh roar of approval, and they smiled back at
the tables of watching men, spun around once so their unbound
hair swirled about their shoulders—tresses long enough to brush
the upper swell of their behinds-and left the stage, to a small
fanfare that sounded somehow mocking, and a last smattering of
applause.
The armored wenches quickly barred the way behind them.
With weary smiles the two dancers proceeded along a dim
passage to where a portcullis slammed down behind them,
leaving them facing a row of nine identical heavy ironbound
doors. They went to the unmarked one that was theirs, slipped
through it and shot the bolts, and mounted a short flight of steps
to where they could relax at last.
Shuddering amid the warmth of many candles, they padded
barefoot to the full and waiting bath and slipped into it with
grateful sighs, letting the warm, petal-scented waters carry away
ribbons of blood as they let their voluptuous forms slide into
quite different shapes, and shared a chilled decanter of waiting
saransor.
"Dragonrose dancers certainly lead luxurious lives," the
younger Koglaur commented, holding his goblet up to gaze
through its amber-hued depths.
"Short ones, mind, even with ready healing magic-if they

don't happen to be of our kind," the older Koglaur replied.
"Humans did this, before—?"
"Of course. Who do you think I learned the dance of the
skewers from, all those years ago?"
"You've done this before now? I thought no one stayed at this
long, except as punishment or when they had long-running Sirl
business!"
"Raegrel," the older Koglaur said feelingly, "only gravediggers
and poisoners have long-running Sirl business. When you're sent
to make me wiser, you'll often find yourself here. Now let's have
your report."
Raegrel put his glass down with a sigh. "So my punishment
begins, eh?"
"This won't hurt as much as the skewers did. Just answer my
questions, sit through my occasional boring musings, drink as
much saransor as you like, and we'll be done. Then you, too, can
pay overmuch gold to plunge into the fleshpots of Sirlptar."
The younger Koglaur made a face. "And how will I know any
lusty wench I take to bed won't be you or one of the other elders,
keeping watch over me?"
"We'll wink, to warn you," was the dry response. "Now: the
Serpent actually rose?"
"As high as a well-built cottage," Raegrel said without
hesitation, "though earth still crowned it and was thrown up
around its coils like the walls of an oven. It was aware, too,
looking about with at least one eye, before everything
simply"—he shrugged—"stopped."
"The binding held, though those who believed that the slaying
of Kelgrael would also bring death to the Serpent were proven
wrong."
"I believe so. The Great Snake's eye filmed over, and it

became as a statue-but it lives. I'd swear to that, Thaebred."
"As Serpent-priests all over Darsar are their usual bold, cruel
selves and not foaming, shrieking madfolk running through the
streets, I'd say you're right. So the Serpent again sleeps—which
is a good thing for Bloodblade and all the other ambitious
barons, wizards, brigands, and the Three alone know who else
now hurrying to snatch at the Throne of Aglirta. They'd soon
learn what real tyranny is if the Serpent ever sat the Throne of
Flowfoam."
"What, the epitome of tyrants isn't the sly, cruel, duplicitous
old regent? You disappoint me!" Raegrel replied, rolling his eyes.
"To hear these Aglirtans squawk and scheme, you'd think he was
emptying their coffers and barns, seizing their wives and beasts,
and flogging their backsides to boot, every morning!"
"When he grows tired of such onerous ruling duties, I
sometimes step in for him," Thaebred replied wryly. "Now tell
me of Bloodblade, and the Bold Barons Three, in whichever
order best describes what's befallen."
"Loushoond, Ornentar, and Tarlagar are as foolish a trio of
ambitious, ungrateful dolts as I've ever seen. Barely mantled long
enough to know where their own castles are, they reward
Kelgrael's trust by seeking to seize his throne, figuring he'll never
awaken to smite them because he's so dedicated to keeping the
Serpent out of Darsar. They scheme with enthusiasm but no
secrecy whatsoever, and gallop back and forth along the shore
roads—with ever-larger groups of bodyguards who practice for
battle by casually swording a handy peddler or herder or two,
per trip—visiting each other. They wear bright new armor day
and night and wave drawn swords at table and in bedchamber,
ordering their maids to fetch that goblet or to strip. The
moment they hear the regent has taken horse against
Bloodblade, they storm the docks to seize Flowfoam, not sparing
a single thought for what will happen to them the moment
whoever wins the great battle between regent and Bloodblade
comes looking for the throne. It's almost as if they believe the
Three Above reach down to bestow prizes upon anyone who sits
on the throne for a moment!"

"And so, Master of Vitriol? What's befallen said trio of fools
thus far?"
"A wizard riding with them did his best to destroy the
Silvertree docks, and in the resulting wreckage they fought the
four overdukes, apparently for possession of a few surviving
boats. In this manner they lost much of their battle strength ere
the Band of Four embarked for Flowfoam, but followed shortly
thereafter—not all that far ahead of Bloodblade, who evidently
prevailed at Sarth Fields. Did the regent die?"
"We think not. Dwaer were used in the air above the battle,
and there's some confusion as to Blackgult's fate and… other
things. Continue."
"We rapidly approach the limits of my knowledge," Raegrel
replied. "All three forces in turn voyaged to Flowfoam,
Bloodblade's requiring many ferryings, and none have departed
that isle yet-nor hare we seen bodies floating downriver."
"That'll come," the older Koglaur said with a grim smile.
"Believe me."
"Oh, I do. They must be hacking at each other already—and
there was some sort of Serpent-shaped apparition raised by
magic above Flowfoam Palace, not long ago. I've no idea as to
what it meant to the real Serpent, because I was hastening
here."
"So as to shed blood so prettily in the early show," Thaebied
agreed, his smile broader this time. "Well, there are worse
destinies."
"For me, or for Aglirta?"
The older Koglaur only smiled, and refilled both their goblets.
"Noisy, aren't they?" Craer commented, raising his borrowed
sword in a swift parry-and then driving home the dagger in his
other hand, and ducking his face away from the spray of blood
that followed.

"They'll learn," Hawkril grunted, shaking a gurgling, dying
armsman off his sword. "Those few who live to heed the lesson,
that is."
"You're going to leave some alive?" the procurer gasped, in
mock horror, springing aside from an armaragor's snarling
lunge.
"Some always flee," the tall, burly armaragor said regretfully,
leaning over to chop the lunging knight's swordwrist into bloody
ruin.
And then they were too busy to try to do anything but keep
themselves alive.
The room was aswarm with enthusiastically hacking men,
crowded together until their armored shoulders clashed, and still
they poured in through the doors, in a flood of bright blued steel
that swept past the tumbled stones and sprawled Melted and
frightened men of the three barons, to thrust and hack and stab'
at the small band of overdukes and their allies gathered by the
throne.
Glarsimber and even Hawkril grunted and staggered back
under the sheer force of that charge, jostling Raulin up against
something soft that he realized with a shock was the Lady
Embra's bosom. "Ss-sorry, Lady!" he shouted desperately,
struggling for balance.
"For what? 'Tis a battle!" she shouted teasingly into his ear.
"Now make up for it by slipping between Lady Talasorn and me,
here, and holding this helm above your head. Straight up, but
not so high we can't both touch it!"
Tshamarra was already weaving a swift spell of thornarrows,
but she eyed the young bard with interest rather than hostility
as he carefully ducked between them. The clanging and singing
of steel was almost deafening as men hacked and hacked with
frenzied fury, as if they could thresh their ways through armor to
reach the blood and bone beneath.
Cringing as one long blade burst in over Craer's shoulder and

almost touched his nose, Raulin feared that maybe, just maybe,
the threshers might prevail.
"Hah!" Tshamarra cried then, in satisfaction, as her thorns
sprayed into the faces of armsmen several ranks back-men who
were busily shoving at their fellow warriors in their eagerness to
get at the overdukes. Some of them screamed as they were
blinded, some gurgled as they choked on their own blood and
died—and more than a few just threw back their heads and
perished in shuddering silence, to sag limply and bleed as they
were held up in the press of bodies.
"Now, Lady Talasorn," Embra called, tiny white arcs of
lightning coursing between her fingertips and the helmet as she
raised her hand towards it. "Touch the helm!"
Two slender-fingered hands put fingers to the curving metal
in unison, one from either side. Embra knew what to expect, and
had braced herself, but the surge of magical power rushing down
Tshamarra's arm almost made the last Talasorn sorceress reel
and fall.
Raulin caught awkwardly at her hip to keep her upright-and
then shouted in fear as the tingling he'd been feeling in his hand
grasping the helm became a full-fledged hammering of power
through him, leaping through crackling air to his fingers from
Tshamarra's flank even as he snatched his hand away.
"Don't let go!" Embra shouted. "Stand, Raulin!"
Stand he did, teeth chattering in fear and from the sheer
force of the mighty flow of magic racing through him, but Raulin
Castlecloaks could not hold back a gasp of awe when bolts of
lightning burst out of the helm, died in a spitting of sparks
about an arm's length in front of him— and then burst forth
again from the outstretched hands of the two sorceresses.
Armsmen and armaragors roared in pain and reeled, too
tightly packed together in their armor to fall, even when the
stink of their cooked flesh grew strong, and their armored heads
lolled loosely in the shouting, convulsing press of bodies.

Again and again the women lashed out with those bolts of
leaping death, slaying at will and reaping many lives, until it
seemed like half the throne room was full of swaying,
head-lolling dead men, but there seemed to be no end to
Bloodblade's warriors—and the helm over Raulin's head was
growing blacker and smaller, dwindling as swiftly as parchment
curling in a crackling fire.
As the humming and crackling of the bolts died away into
occasional snappings, Raulin heard both Craer and Glarsimber
sobbing with the effort of swinging blades in battle—the baron
because of his wounds, and Craer because he was used to
springing about and hurling daggers from afar, not standing
blade to blade against armored brutes twice his size and playing
"batter thy foe down" with swung steel.
Embra's lips tightened in determination, and she spent her
last few feeble bolts carefully striking down men close to the
Four and their three friends, to win them some respite. When
Tshamarra saw what the Lady Overduke was doing, she did the
same, raking the nearest foes with spitting lightnings that where
they didn't slay, clawed at visors or ran up under gorgets, to
leave men blinded or gasping to breathe through seared face.
Suddenly the helm, shrunk to scarcely the size of Raulin's
gathered fingertips, fell away into ash, and the spell ended.
Raulin looked rather dazedly at the two tall, grinning sorceresses
as they leaned across him, brushing his face in a very distracting
manner, and said, on Embra's part, " 'Tis always nice to welcome
a new friend! Lady, have my hand!" and on Tshamarra's part,
"Lady Embra, we've not been properly introduced. I am
Tshamarra Talasorn-and I am honored to fight at your side!"
The two women kissed—quick pecks on cheeks that
nonetheless forced Raulin to lean back sharply or be
smothered—then broke apart, Embra smoothly plucking the
shield from Raulin's grasp as she did so.
"I don't want to use this yet," she murmured, as Craer and
Glarsimber shuddered, stamped, and blew great gulps of air like
winded horses right in front of them, and Hawkril clapped
steadying arms around both men, "but if I have to…"

"Onward! In at them, you fools!" Bloodblade roared, from the
rear of the throne chamber. "Their magic must be near spent!
Can you not sword down three men, a boy, and two maids?
Strike now! Strike for Aglirta!"
A few armaragors struggled to obey, but found themselves
shoving against the dead, their ways forward choked with
bodies. With a grin Hawkril turned his warsword crosswise like
a staff, and fended off corpses that might otherwise have
toppled, holding the slain upright and packed together. The men
around Bloodblade put down their shoulders and heaved, and
here and there about the room bodies clattered and clanged as
they fell between stones or over their fellows into heaps—but for
the nonce the jam held, and the three weary nobles of Aglirta
could lean on their swords or each other, and snatch more
breadth.
Embra kept the shield up to just below her eyes and peered
over it, keeping careful watch. Any moment now one of these
iron-heads would remember that maces, daggers, and even
swords can be hurled, and they'd be facing a hail of spinning
steel.
Wordlessly Raulin reached out and took hold of the shield for
her, holding it up as he had the helm, and with grateful glances
the two women pressed in against him to shelter behind it.
"Move, Three curse you!" Bloodblade shouted across the room
at warriors he didn't know were all dead, and then turned to the
swordcaptain at his side. "Where are the Serpent-priests?"
The man spread helpless hands. "There were some here when
we came in, Lord, but—"
Bloodblade threw back his head and roared with anger.
"Right!" he bellowed as he brought his chin back down. "Where
are those wizards?"
"A-all dead, Lord, save one left witless by that blast in the sky.
I saw one in the boats, but he was dead on the stairs up from the
dock, later. I… think he'd been stabbed in the back."

Bloodblade growled again, and then blew out his nostrils like
an angry stallion, and snapped, "Right, then. Well enough. Our
swords have brought us this far, and our swords will take us this
last, little way to that throne yonder! Forward—throw aside
bodies when you find them! Clear a way to the regent's last few
sycophants, and sword them down!
His bellow was answered by a sudden flash of light and a
deafening crackle of spell-lightnings that sent even Dudijack
staggering, heralding a surge of force that tumbled warriors
away like armored dolls. Others ducked down against the
momentary gale and shouted in alarm, raising their blades to
somehow ward off-Two men who'd appeared in midair, standing
on emptiness with their boots a little above the helms of the
tallest warriors, above the center of the throne chamber. One
was the Regent of Aglirta, Baron Blackgult, with a lone
Dwaer-Stone orbiting his head—and in one hand he held the
shoulder of a frightened-looking, much younger man: the Bard
Flaeros Delcamper.
The regent hurled sharp glances in all directions, taking in
the scene— and his eyes widened.
"My daughter lives! he shouted exultantly, his Dwaer flaring
overhead like a star. "Embra, lass! I'm here!"
"The regent!" Bloodblade howled, flailing at the armored
backs of the armaragors before him with the flat of his blade. "
Shy Azvre! Kill him before he can use his dark magic on us all!"
That danger goaded them as no other words could have, and
Blood-blade's warriors charged forward into the ranks of the
dead, plying their blades with frantic fear, wrenching aside
corpses and forcing their ways on.
They threw daggers at the men standing on air-and then axes,
and swords, too, whirling end over end to-clang aside from
nothingness that suddenly glowed to match Blackgult's Dwaer,
as the regent muttered hasty incantations and crouched,
dragging Flaeros around almost behind him.
That barrier shone brighter as a quickening hail of weapons

were flung against it, falling away amid flashes of tortured
magic. Then Blood-blade's armaragors reached the floor beneath
the two men and stabbed upward, springing up with grunts of
effort to hack and thrust—and fall back with startled cries of
pain, as blue fire surged down their blades to wash over them,
leaving them staggering or falling.
"'There they are," Embra murmured. "Farewell to our shield."
Raulin and Tshamarra followed her gaze, to where men with
scaled heads and forked tongues had appeared around the edges
of the riven ceiling, to gaze down on the battle from the galleries
above.
"Raulin," the Lady Overduke added with some urgency, "take
this back." She boosted him under one elbow to raise the shield
as swiftly as possible as he fumbled it aloft, over their heads.
A moment later, green fire crashed down on them, and
Tshamarra snarled between clenched teeth as she stumbled
bruisingly back into the bard, fighting off the Serpent-spell with
a hasty magic of her own.
"Uhh," she groaned, panting for breath as the green fire
faded, "I-haven't much magic left, Lady… if you can source more
lightnings for us both… that might be a… good idea about
now…"
"But of course," Embra said with a grin. "Let there be
lightnings once more!"
"Are you always," Raulin said in disbelief, "so crazily cheerful
in battle?"
Embra winked at him without halting her fast-muttered
incantation, but Tshamarra said with a smile, "I begin to believe
it's expected of heroes, friend Raulin. Gods, what a slaughter!"
A moment later, three faces tightened in unison as Embra's
magic tugged at the enchantment on the shield, started to drain
it-and power surged through them, snarling forth as lightnings.
The Lady Overduke spread her fingers and sent her bolts up at
the Serpent-priests—more than a dozen of them now, their own

hands moving in spellcastings as they stood glaring down at her.
Tshamarra lashed them with lightnings, too, as Raulin stood
holding the swiftly shrinking shield. Bolt after bolt flashed out, to
crack and hum and sear its way across scaled flesh, and more
than one snake-man stiffened or convulsed ere falling with
smoke rising from their scales.
The clang of swords meeting in anger off to the right heralded
the breaching of Blackgult's barrier, perhaps simply
overwhelmed by so much vigorously plied steel, but neither
sorceress dared spare time to look. They could hear Hawkril
growling as he swung his warsword in great slashing strokes,
and that was reassurance enough that nothing had gone horribly
wrong-yet.
The Serpent-priests were fending off the shield-spawned
lightnings now, warding spells of their own glowing as each bolt
bit into those unseen barriers, flared out in a spreading flood,
and faded. Embra's eyes narrowed-yes, the snake-men's
shieldings must be drinking the power of the bolts, growing
stronger with each lightning that struck!
Frowning, the Lady Silvertree sent her next bolt lower,
striking not at grinning Serpent-priests, but at the broken edges
of the throne chamber ceiling beneath their boots. For a breath
or two nothing happened but lightning clawing and snarling its
way along jagged stone—but then a large chunk of vaulted
ceiling broke free, and fell.
That huge stone plunged through the throne room, spilling
dust and rubble-and then the floor tiles of the gallery above-all
down onto the heads of shouting warriors below. They were men
of the three barons, and what few shields they raised did no good
against stones as large as men, that simply smashed everything
standing against them down to the floor.
Screaming Serpent-priests joined that cascade, and
Tshamarra Tala-sorn grinned and fed them bolts as they fell,
suspecting that some of the shieldings would hang in the air
where they'd been cast, in the gallery above, and not cling to
their creators. She was right—and more than one scaled man

burned on the way down, or landed gouting smoke from various
places, and lay still.
Embra kept her gaze on that upper gallery, expecting spell
attacks from the snake-men who'd been wise enough to hastily
back away from the edge, but their attention—and their hurled
magics—were aimed elsewhere.
Even as Tshamarra merrily raked the broken edges of rock
again with her lightnings and sent fresh showers of stone down
onto the trapped armsmen below, varicolored fires snarled down
from scaled hands at Ezendor Blackgult's barrier.
At the heart of their fiery onslaught, as tongues of flame
splashed and raged outward, the air around the regent began to
flicker with dark, flame-like shadows interspersed with
lightninglike flashes. In its midst, Blackgult and the bard sank
towards the floor, the Dwaer winking and sputtering fitfully
above them—and eager blades were waiting for them, thrusting
in ruthless unison.
Ezendor Blackgult had been a giant among warriors long
before he'd ever seen a Dwaer-Stone, and he swung his sword in
one hand and his dagger in the other in great roundhouse
sweeps, striking aside enemy blade after enemy blade in a
shower of sparks. All the while he was muttering something that
made his Dwaer flash and pulse with redoubled vigor—and when
he let go of his dagger it did not fall to the floor, but whirled up
into the air around him and became a dozen shining fangs of
metal, racing back and forth in a bright barrier of steel that rose
around the regent and the bard, keeping Bloodblade's warriors
at bay.
Blackgult gave them a savage grin, and then reached up and
plucked the Dwaer out of midair with his freed hand. Looking
over at Embra, he cried, "Lass-catch!" and threw it.
End over end the mottled tan stone flew, as Serpent-priests
hissed in eager unison and spun snake-swift magics,
Bloodblade's warriors stared in horror-and a Lady Overduke's
long, slender arm reached up to just the right place.

And caught hold of the Stone.
The shield in Raulin's hands burst into tiny shards with a
scream of tortured metal, Blackgult's barrier of whirling daggers
flashed into silver flames and was gone, and Embra clutched the
Dwaer to her breast with a moan of what could only be
described as—rapture.
White flames suddenly wreathed her about in a soaring white
column, and she was snatched up in them, spiraling upright off
the floor. Raulin and Tshamarra cried out and shrank away in
pain from that whirling, blinding fire, a few last lightning bolts
stabbed out across the throne chamber at random, and an
overeager Serpent-priest overbalanced on the edge of the riven
ceiling and fell, wailing, onto the head of the Baron Tarlagar
below. This time the baron's warriors were ready-and four
blades met in the scaly form ere it reached the floor, but not
before it smashed the baron into a moaning heap beneath it.
Craer and Hawkril sprang forward to try to reach Blackgult's
side, but they were met by a dozen men or more, and held back
in a ringing contest of blades. Another dozen armaragors
stepped warily forward to slay the regent and the pale-faced,
trembling bard.
Ezendor Blackgult drew himself up, his blade ready in his
hand, and • gave them a soft smile and a question: "Who wants
to die first?"
The usurper's men came to an uneasy halt, and he asked them
another. "How much of your blood is the price of a Regent of
Aglirta?"
"Hah!" Bloodblade snarled, as his men faltered. "One man,
alone?" he shouted. "And with his magic gone?"
"Not alone," the Baron Brightpennant growled, as the
armaragor he'd been fighting sank to the floor with a dying
groan, and he strode to Blackgult's side. "For Aglirta!"
"Oh, so it's two old men, is it? Now we're trembling! Die,
fools!" Blood-blade sneered, and blew his rally horn. With a

startled roar, his armaragors and armsmen charged forward.
Hawkril roared right back, and by main strength heaved the
warriors he and Craer were battling back on their heels, into
their charging fellows in a tangle of shouts and curses and
skirling weapons, so the two over-dukes could burst past and
reach the regent, too.
Tshamarra plucked at Raulin and dragged him firmly away
from the door that might take them to safety, around the
whirling column of flame that held Embra, to stand between it
and Craer. "Pick up a sword and hold it out in front of you," she
growled, "and I'll do the rest!"
Raulin blinked at her.
Not far away—unless you had to hew your way there at this
moment, through so many roused and full-armored
men-another bard was also striving for battle valor. "Uh,"
Flaeros stammered, plucking at Blackgult's arm, "perhaps this
isn't the best time, but-" He thrust the dragon scepter under the
regent's nose.
"What's this?" Blackgult snapped, taking hold of the scepter
above the bard's grip on it, and dragging it-and Flaeros-a foot or
two closer. He peered at the dragon head in snatched glances,
whilst parrying the blade of a howling armaragor.
"W-what you were looking for, Lord Regent."
Blackgult stared down at the scepter, as power suddenly
flooded out of it to thrum through him, causing his sword to
glow brightly. The armaragor he was battling drew back with a
gasp.
"I never… wait. Yes!" The scepter flashed in Blackgult's
grasp—and he and Flaeros suddenly vanished.
The scepter clattered to the blood-smeared floor where they'd
stood-an instant before the swords of four armaragors ran Baron
Brightpennant through.

Chapter Seventeen
Serpent Rising
Glarsimber Belklarravus had never felt such pain in his life
before. Four ice-cold and yet afire lengths of steel were deep in
him, sliding-nay, twisting as the armaragors wielding them
grinned savagely into his face, and turned their blades in their
hands.
The Baron Brightpennant slashed at them with his own
sword, reaching out despite the sickening agony, and they all
drew out their blades hastily to avoid being cut across their
throats or faces.
That left him free, as wet, awful fire bubbled up inside him, to
defiantly spit out the blood already coursing into his mouth, and
gasp, "For Aglirta!" at them.
Staggering a step sideways, he plucked up the dragon scepter,
and then threw it as hard as he could, back and to his left, where
the Four were fighting. He did not have time to turn his head to
see it go, or say the things he wanted to say, because everything
was going dark, and the bloody tide behind his eyes and choking
up through his throat could be fought back no longer…
He fell, or thought he did, but the Smiling Wolf could
suddenly hear nothing. Everything was going dim, and a
mail-shod boot swung past close by his head, the marble
suddenly looming up very near…
* * *
Out of fire, back into bloodbath. Embra Silvertree blinked
away the last white haze of the roaring exultation that had
whirled her up, and now set her back down, so gently that her
boots struck cracked marble with nary ajar.
A moment later, something struck her ankle gently and
skirled away-to where a longfangs dropped from the ceiling and
stood guard over it causing two hurrying armaragors to shrink

back in horror. They were the first two knights Embra killed, ere
she turned and saw that Glarsimber was dead.
He'd been an unexpected friend—and now the baron was
sprawled in his blood, with another pair of armaragors making
sure of his passing by driving their swords between the sagging
plates of his hacked and battered armor, right through him.
They were the next knights she slew.
Behind her, the longfangs dwindled into Sarasper, a man who
seemed truly old now. The hand that reached for the dragon
scepter trembled, and its skin was mottled and wrinkled. The
healer grasped the scepter slowly, almost reluctantly, and there
was a strange look in his eyes. Sarasper glanced over at
Brightpennant's body, shook his head, and stared at the scepter
again.
Embra Silvertree saw none of this. She was aloft again,
whirling up into the air with a wordless snarl of fury bubbling
from her lips, the Dwaer a bright star in front of her brow and
her eyes blazing tears of white fire.
"You rogues! she shouted. "You slaying bastards! Die, all of
you! Die.!
And she stretched forth her hands and called on the Dwaer in
earnest. Deadly lances of white light stabbed out from her hands,
stabbing through dozens of Bloodblade's warriors as if they were
made of parchment.
Raulin whimpered in fear as he saw scores of men die in a
heartbeat, heads seared off or bodies burned through. He shrank
back, and turned to run—only to be grabbed and spun around by
Craer, whose own face was wet with tears. "Prefer her when she's
cheerful," he hissed into the bard's terrified face. "Prefer all of us
that way. Always."
And then the procurer spun around with a wild cry and
hurled himself at the nearest armaragors, springing so high that
his codpiece slammed into a helm. Craer promptly wrapped his
legs around the head of that knight-a foe who was dead before
crashing to the ground, as Overduke Delnbone rode the enemy

armaragor down to the marble, sinking daggers into throat and
back of neck and eyeslits in a snarling fury.
"Halduth!" Bloodblade roared. "Strike down that sorceress!"
Hawkril Anharu looked wildly for whoever Halduth might
be—and behind the press of armaragors in front of his blade he
saw an armored arm rise up, holding a spear as large as a
horse-lance. With a roar he gave ground, planted himself on the
shifting bodies of the dead before the men he'd been fighting
could rush forward, and sprang into the air, chopping-and the
spear shrieked as the overduke's blade struck it aside, hurling
Hawkril back to crash down on more of the dead—crash and roll
and find his feet, in time to sword a rushing man and sidestep
another, slashing backhanded at the man's neck.
Hawkril's blade caught in armor plate as that man died with
a splintering of bone and a frantic choking sound, and he
tugged, kicked, and staggered free of his foe-in time to face the
next charge.
Embra struck again, more deadly lances of searing magic
striking down dozens of armsmen. Men were shouting in fear,
now, and trying to flee, everywhere—everywhere, that is, save
above, through the hole in the ceiling, where angry-eyed scaled
priests were murmuring incantations, their eyes on Embra.
Armaragors melted away in terror before Hawkril, leaving
him standing face-to-face with the spearman-an armored giant
who was dragging a huge mace out of a baldric-sling and hefting
it in his hands. Hawkril charged forward, found his blade
parried by the mace about where he'd expected, found the arm
behind that mace was every bit as strong as he'd feared—and
also found that his free hand had a clear path to the man's eyes.
He punched and rode with his blow, scraping the sharp knuckles
of his gauntlet back and forth across the man's brow, trying to
blind the giant with his own blood.
They fell together, and rolled, the giant underneath—and
grunting in pain as they went over the points of dead men's
weapons. Hawkril let go his sword, plucked his belt-dagger, and
made sure the giant had no throat left ere their rolling was done.

Then he snatched up his sword and glared around, seeking foes.
Everywhere, now, men were running…
After her first awed, hard-swallowing glance at what a Dwaer
could do when its wielder was lost in slaying fury, Tshamarra
Talasorn had been glancing swiftly around the room, seeking
perils directed at Embra, and ways to thwart them before they
could do the Lady Overduke harm or interrupt her in cooking
Bloodblade's army. Upward was the first place Tshamarra
looked, and the moment she was sure that none of Blood-blade's
warriors had brought bows to this battle, she glanced up at the
Serpent-priests again, and murmured a spell of her own. It was
almost her last-but then, if a sorceress worried about such
things and allowed such prudence to guide her, every spell she
cast might prove to be her very last, forever.
With careful swiftness Tshamarra worked her casting, her
eyes never leaving the hissing Serpent-priests—and none of them
had finished their spellweavings when her green fire struck and
raged among them, swift and painful. It was nothing beside the
searing oblivion that Embra was dealing, but it was enough to
leave the scaled men reeling or on their knees, their spells
ruined. One of them obligingly fell into the throne room-and
Baron Ornentar raised his blade in desperate haste and spitted
the Snake-priest while the scaled man still lay twisting on the
floor, winded and shuddering.
The surviving Serpent-priests retreated from the edge of the
hole in the ceiling, weaving hasty shielding spells, and
Tshamarra raised her hands, feigning the casting of another
spell, but did nothing. She had too little fire left in her to waste
anything.
Armed with her Dwaer, Embra had no such cares. As the
Worldstone flamed above her, the Lady Overduke slaughtered
on—and, in moments, an army was slain.
The three barons saw their handful of armsmen ducking
behind stones and among corpses, and hastily did the same.
Here and mere around the room armaragors of the usurper did
the same—particularly after Embra took special care to burn
down anyone who tried to flee out a door.

Crouching behind one of the largest piles of fallen stone,
Bloodblade watched in disbelief as these last few of his men died.
The room before him was a charnel house, and only a bare
handful of his swordcaptains remained, clustered grimly around
him. Wondering what door he dared try to flee to, the warlord
glanced up at the riven ceiling—and saw the Serpent-priests
looking down at him coldly, from within the spark-shot
flickerings of many overlapping shielding spells. Thus protected,
they had returned to the very edge of the hole, and now stood
watching—doing nothing.
Something in dusty leather burst over the heap of stones, and
an armaragor who had sword up and ready died with a dagger
in one eye before he could even cry an alarm. A second gurgled,
throat cut, ere the other three got their blades up to force back
the procurer.
Delnbone, the little rat of the overdukes! Well, his
swordcaptains could deal with—
An armored form loomed up over the stones and smashed
aside Bloodblade's swift thrust with one swing of a long,
well-used warsword. The Lord of All Aglirta sprang back,
stumbling on rubble, and Hawkril Anharu stalked after him.
Bloodblade looked up at the snake-men. As before, they stared
dispassionately down, arms folded and shields strong.
"Aid!" Bloodblade called to them desperately, as Hawkril
hewed through Duthjack’s parry and drove the warlord back.
Bloodblade caught the overduke's next titanic swordcut on his
blade, but the blow left his arm burning and without strength.
He couldn't feel his fingers—fingers that his sword was already
slipping from! Frantically, Bloodblade snatched it in his other
hand and backed desperately away from Hawkril's slow, grim
advance. His swordarm, the warlord knew, was broken.
"Aid!" Bloodblade cried, looking up at the Serpent-priests.
"You promised!"
At the far end of the room, a woman was weeping bitterly.

Scaled faces smiled coldly down at Sendridi Dudijack. "As a
certain bold mercenary said before another throne, not so long
ago," one of them sneered, " 'No, I think not.' You need us—but 
we don't need you. You've served your purpose, Bloodblade. The
Serpent thanks you; die comforted by his approval. Die now.
The priest smiled coldly, and added, "There are so many fat,
decadent, arrogant fools of barons, aren't there? Better to be rid
of them all, and their king with them—whichever idiot of a
sword-swinger that may happen to be. The Serpent should rule
from the River Throne, bringing true glory to all Aglirta."
"No!" Bloodblade cried despairingly, trying to parry that
great warsword and failing. "No!
"Serpent-priests, behind all! I might have known," Hawkril
said grimly-and drove his blade home, stabbing right at
Sendrith Duthjack's chest. His warsword struck sparks off the
thick breastplate of Blood-blade's grand armor and ran up that
shaped steel, shrieking along in a shower of sparks, to catch the
edge of the would-be usurper's gorget, and go up—and in.
The man called Bloodblade staggered back, eyes wide with
pain, gargling on his own blood, and stared despairingly into
Hawkril's flinty stare. The armaragor took a step to the side, to
where the side seam of Duthjack's armor could be reached-and
then Hawkril Anharu lunged with all his strength, piercing the
lighter plate and running the dying Bloodblade through.
"I should have known!" Craer added darkly, hurling a dagger.
"Who else so hates Aglirta as to unhesitatingly ruin it in their
strivings to conquer it?" The Serpent-priest who'd told
Bloodblade his doom waved a hand, and its fingers were
suddenly a writhing forest of hissing snakes. The procurer's
razor-sharp blade sliced off more than a few of their heads as it
flashed towards its target—but it was snared and brought down
before it could find the holy scaled throat, beyond…
Embra Silvertree knelt in all the blood and cradled
Glarsimber's head in her hands. Sightless eyes stared past her,
and more blood drooled from the baron's slack mouth.

Blackgult and now Brightpennant… Two brave barons dead,
in the space of a few breaths. Her father was gone, and Flaeros
with him, blasted by some magic because he'd given her his
Dwaer, and left himself defenseless… oh, Lady Above, there was
no laughing deliverance from this sorrow…
Hawkril shook Bloodblade half off his warsword, and then
twisted it and drove it home again. Dripping blood, the
would-be usurper staggered and threw up feeble hands in a
beseeching gesture.
" 'Tis just a little late for mercy," Hawkril told him softly, in a
voice that trembled on the edge of tears, "when Aglirta lies
scarred by your hand, all law broken and the king gone forever
and so many dead because of your deeds. I would slay you once
for each death you've caused, if I somehow had the magic to
bring you back to feel each and every slaying!"
Bloodblade reeled off the dark, slick end of Hawkril's blade,
eyes glazing over—and the hulking overduke sprang forward
with the roar of an angry lion and swung one gauntleted fist as
hard as he could. Duthjack's neck broke with a horrible
splintering sound, as the warlord's feet left the floor for one last
time.
"For Aglirta!" Hawkril Anharu shouted. "And for us all!"
Overhead, another Serpent-priest finished hissing a long and
intricate spell, and lifted one scaled hand.
In answer, something black—like smoke that somehow 
glistened— boiled up from the floor of the throne chamber,
sprouting wherever no bodies lay or blood was smeared, and
roaring up into… serpents! In moments there was a black, rising
wall of snakes, hissing and biting the air and curling out to snap
their jaws hungrily at anyone nearby.
"Embra!" Tshamarra Talasorn screamed, shaking with
revulsion. "Embra, help!" Snakes were hanging down from the
ceiling and boiling up from the floor, between her very legs
within her gown! Shrieking, she sprang away, kicking and
slapping, and landed hard on tumbled stone, scrambling up in

horror as she saw the black, hissing wall of snakes drifting
closer, upright but moving, closing in…
Tshamarra stared around wildly. On all sides, in a tightening
ring. "Embra!"
Hawkril slashed furiously at the nearest snakes, slicing
hissing heads in all directions—but wherever they landed, they
sprang up like leaping trees—and the severed stumps grew new
heads with just as frightening speed.
Craer was hurling dagger after dagger up through the hole in
the ceiling, but the snake-men were laughing at him and
transforming them into wriggling snakes in midair.
The Lady of Jewels looked up through tangled hair at that
cold laughter—and stared around in sudden fury, her Dwaer
flaming into fresh brilliance. White fire slashed out from her
hands as she rose, melting away black snakes at a touch—but the
ring of snakes gave way only sullenly, and regrew a pace behind
her ravening fire.
"And so the famous Band of Four feels the fangs of our little
trap at last," a mocking voice floated down to them from the
gallery above. It was the Serpent-priest who'd taunted
Bloodblade.
He smiled into Embra's fierce glare, crooked a green-scaled
little finger—and the Crown of Aglirta was suddenly gleaming
upon his brow. The Serpent-priest promptly sketched an elegant
court bow, smiled even more widely as Embra's Dwaer blazed
brighter in her fury, and mockingly held out his hand to her, as
if inviting her onto a dance floor.
There was a Dwaer-Stone glowing in his open palm.
"Lady Silvertree," the priest commanded in a voice suddenly
deep and powerful, as Dwaer-fire rose around him like white
lightning and his eyes glowed with sudden fire, "give me your
Dwaer."
"No," Embra spat at him, "I think not." And power rushed out

of her with a roar that echoed back from every corner of
Flowfoam Palace like an agonized shout.
In a deep and dusty room, a glowing skeleton sat up in its
casket, just for a moment, and two tiny flames kindled in its
empty eyesockets. Its jaw swung open, stiffly, and worked,
struggling to say something with lips, throat, and lungs that
were no longer there—and then, with one arm half-raised, it fell
back into the casket, to lie in silent stillness once more.
Her Dwaer-Stone danced in the air like a small star afire, so
bright that it hurt the eyes—and where Embra's cone of ravening
white fire struck the smiling Serpent-priest, it parted, touching
him not—and snuffed out the lives and bodies of half a dozen
other scaled clergy, leaving nothing behind but wisps of lazily
curling smoke.
Other Snake-priests went to their knees dazedly, holding their
heads, and many reeled briefly in pain.
The Serpent-priest who had a Dwaer of his own gave the Lady
of Jewels a brittle smile, men began to chant a simple
incantation-a few words in the hissing, fluid tongue of the
Believers of the Great Serpent, repeated over and over again…
His Dwaer flamed red, then black, and men red again, raging
above him—and as the priest's chant went on, and the other
surviving Snake-clergy began to join in, his Worldstone grew
slowly brighter.
Embra knew what that chant was-and it did not take long for
Tshamarra or Craer to correctly guess what was befalling.
It was Raulin who asked, raw-voiced, "What is he—it—doing,
Lady?"
"He's summoning the Serpent," Embra told him grimly, her
face as white as bone, "and there's nothing I can do to stop him."
Her white fires wrestled with the black wall of snakes, and
beat it back a pace or two, but could gain no further ground.

The invocation went on, louder and louder, its insistent
rhythm quickening. Other voices joined in, from far down the
passages that led to the throne chamber, and snakes larger man
men came gliding in through some of the doors.
"Give me your Dwaer, Embra Silvertree," the Serpent-priest
hissed triumphantly, as the chant rose to an echoing crescendo
in the palace around them. "Give it to me on your knees—or I'll
come down mere and take it, adrip with your blood!"
As his last word hissed out, a deep, thrumming roar of
triumph arose all around—and the roof of the gallery above burst
off in a thousand flying fragments that were whirled away over
the gardens and into the river.
The six heroes blinked up at the bright open sky, with ribbons
of white cloud scudding past serenely high above-and then lost
sight of those clouds as the Serpent surged up into the sky, huge
and dark and terrible, towering higher than the mountains.
Eyes glittering like black flame, it roared its exultation to all
Darsar— and then turned its great head and looked right down
at them.
No, down at the ruined throne, seat of the king who'd bound
it for so long. With a thunderous hiss of rage that seemed almost
a sob, it spread huge jaws—and its vast head came hurtling
down, fangs agleam.
Hawkril Anharu swallowed twice as he took a stance, his face
white-and stood ready to meet the Great Serpent, warsword
upraised. "For Aglirta," he whispered. "I have only one life to
give, creature… take it, if you can." He bared his teeth and added
in a snarl, "If…you… can."
Fangs descended, long and deadly, maw so large and dark
between…
* * *
"So you see," Tonthan "Goldcloak" said smoothly, raising his
goblet to the Elmernan as the wizard accepted a goblet of his

own from a servant's tray, "this could be a great opportunity for
us all. The richest realm of all—if restored to peace, of course,
and held free of burnt and trampled crops and barns, slaughter,
and spending on hireswords and battle-steel for, say, three
growing seasons—and a whole barony of it to be yours, to rule as
you see fit."
A ring flashed momentarily on Mranrax Arandor's hand. Ah,
seeking for spell-taints on the wine, no doubt, though Sirl
poisoners preferred more subtle—and inexpensive-herbal ways,
as the wizard raised his glass and his bushy white eyebrows
together.
His dark eyes were suddenly very direct and penetrating.
"And how would the good folk of Aglirta view a wizard as baron?
Would I have to worry about every bed-servant coming in to
greet me with my late-night wine in one hand and a dagger
ready in the other?"
Tonthan shrugged. "Mages have not been well regarded in the
past, for two reasons: they have 'experimented' on unwilling,
captive folk-pretty local lasses in particular, if you take my
meaning—and most of them have come to Aglirta as the hired
scourges of this or that baron, and have served in such
capacities all too well. If you show promise of gentle character
rather than cruel arrogance, and show no signs of the warlike
whims of recent barons, you'll escape such opinion."
Arandor of Elmerna smiled so blandly that his expression
betrayed nothing of his mood or thoughts, and asked, "And what
of the Ieiremborans? How will they feel if a fell and mighty
archwizard suddenly joins their conspiracy?"
Tonthan shrugged again. He was getting quite good at it.
"They want Kelgrael and Blackgult dead, and a king of their
choosing on the throne. They need our coins to fund armies
enough for the bid, and are in no position to dictate who holds
every last barony and terseptry. If they think to do so, or come
ashore to occupy such positions themselves, you will serve as a
salutary surprise."
Arandor raised his eyebrows again. "What? A tight rein on

ambition? What a strange role for a wizard."
The Elmernan's voice was wry, but Tonthan had not made
more coins in Sirlptar than many wealthy trading families
amass in three generations by being a fool or less than keenly
perceptive. "A capable wizard might well come to dominate two
or even three baronies," he said carefully, "or, even better, rise to
advise a figurehead king—but a wizard who conquered barony
after barony, even through others, or who sought to warm the
River Throne personally, would remind Aglirtans of the
tyrant-mages of their past, and…"
"Steps would be taken?"
"Indeed-steps involving the Lady of Jewels and Dwaerindim, I
fear."
Mranrax Arandor could not keep his features as
expressionless as stone after all. "Ah, yes, the Dwaer. I must
adm—"
Deafening sound smote their ears, and the room rocked.
Darkness flashed outside the windows, tinkling glass fell, and
someone screamed.
A thunderclap greater than any storm Sirl had ever tasted, in
Tonthan's recall, and this was no storm.
He and the wizard spun around together, to gaze out through
the frame where glass had been, moments ago. From this
highest ridge in Sirlptar, they could look right up the
Vale—miles upon miles of green trees, glimmering curves of
river, and verdant shoulders of farm, as far as the eye could see.
The keen-eyed claimed to be able to see Flowfoam Isle, amid the
trees cloaking the horizon, but Tonthan-whose eyes were quite
keen enough—doubted such claims. He'd never been quite able
to decide if that smudge of trees was the Royal Isle of Aglirta, or
that one, a little way to the right.
Now he thought he knew. What was towering up into the sky
almost had to be on Flowfoam. As high as a cloud it loomed,
black and terrible, coiling up clearly: a serpent-no, The Serpent,

no fancy-beast of bards' tales after all—whose every movement
was gloating. It spread jaws that must be wider than the length
of most of the ships down at Siri's sea docks, right now—and
plunged its head down, striking at something below.
"Well, now," Mranrax Arandor said softly, in a voice that was
not quite steady. "Well, now."
Tonthan glanced over at him. The room was still frozen in
gasps of awe, with the cursing, screaming, and fleeing still to
erupt, but the arch-wizard was trembling.
"And then, of course," he added smoothly, "any wizard sitting
on the Throne of Aglirta right now would have to deal with that.
Before it bit him into small, bloody gobbets."
His calmness was both surprising and pleasing. Tonthan
waited for ppf the wizard's response, but someone else answered,
and that was another surprise.
"Very calm, very swift-witted, Tonthan Runthalan. We'll
remember that." The voice spoke from very close behind him,
and it was one he'd never heard before. And no one—no one
—knew Tonthan's true surname. Or so he'd thought.
By then, Tonthan had whirled around. No one was there, of
course. Sathbrar blinked at him in mild surprise from half a
dozen paces away, from over a plate heaped with grapes and
splundroons. The glass the silk-clad merchant was holding was
as rock-steady as Tonthan's own.
Or as steady as Tonthan's had been. He whirled around again,
and saw fear stark and clear on Mranrax Arandor's face, his eyes
still fixed on the distant, titanic bulk of the Serpent.
Thirst for baronies had melted away before a sudden longing
to be home in Elmerna, it seemed. Perhaps some small part of
Aglirta could be conquered another day… at another time, say,
than Serpent season…
The screaming and running had begun now. "It turns this
way!" someone shouted. "The Serpent comes!"

Sathbrar joined him. "Splundroon?"
"Thank you," Tonthan said. "I believe I will." Selecting one, he
gestured gently in the direction of Flowfoam with his glass.
"How can we make some coins off that, do you think?"
Sathbrar shrugged, chewing. There was a sudden movement
on Tonthan's other side, a whirling of robes. He turned.
The wizard Arandor was backing away from him, his face
pale. "How can you-just—don't you know what that is, out
there?"
Tonthan shrugged. Yes, he was getting the hang of these
shoulder shiftings; one can convey a surprising amount of
information with just the right…
"Of course," he said, mild reproof in his tone. "The Serpent,
awake at last. Greatest mage ever; one of the crafters of the
Dwaerindim; completely mad; cruel and ruthless beyond peer;
driven by the need to rule everyone, everywhere, and everything;
able to force men forever into beast-shape with a glance-have I
missed anything?"
Mranrax Arandor made a wordless quailing sound, eyes
wide—then whirled away from the two Sirl merchants and ran,
robes streaming out behind him. His screams followed many
others, down the stairs.
Tonthan and Sathbrar turned back to the ruined window,
drinks and fruit in hand, to watch the show.
Tonthan shook his head. A good revel, but all wasted. No
spells from Arandor to save on hiring-and burying-hireswords,
after all. Aglirta was going to have to fall the old, tried, and
expensive way.
Ah, well. They don't make archwizards like they used to.
Mulgor was used to restless sheep, here in the uplands with so
many wolves and foxes and stalking bears.

That was why he liked Ul's Hollow so much: a grassy bowl
with nary a tree or thornshrub for a hunting beast to hide
behind, two bare hills on either side of it that a shepherd could
keep watch from, plenty of bustard and dunfeather to fill his
cookpot with and keep his bowwork sharp… and he could get
clear shots at predators, too.
He could still see that wolf, two summers back, tumbling over
with his bolt in its eye. Right down yonder, it had been. Yes, this
was a good place, and almost his own, these days, with so many
gone to wars and not come back. It'd be a hard winter for some,
and he'd get better coin for his mutton.
Then he could buy old Throrkan's fields, at last. Overgrown
and neglected, these five years, now—but his sheep would make
short work of that. The hills, behind, too—Throrkan took just
enough grapes for his own use, to slump about in drunken
grumbling day after day, but there was enough there for proper
vinting, and wine to sell downriver. Esdevan Mulgor, Fine Wines
and Fleece. Three smile down, but that had a fine ring to it!
Why, h—
What the bebolten sty was that?
All of his sheep were on the move, flooding forward in the
same direction-not stampeded, but trotting purposefully
towards the lip of the dell. He sprang to his feet, bow in hand,
and launched himself down the slope as fast as he could,
heedless of a possible fall. Gods, they could all be over the edge in
a moment, and—
The world rocked under him, hurling his thudding feet
skyward, and the sky seemed to explode with a dark roar.
The ground slapped Esdevan Mulgor, hard. He was lying on
the side of his face, dazed, his bow gone. The sheep! This storm
would send them scattering, for sure! He scrambled up, gulping.
From wine merchant to nothing, in a single thunderclap!
He'd best—Mulgor stopped, jaw dropping, and just stared.
The sheep had all crowded to the front of the dell in a long line,
their heads turned to watch one thing—and there they stood

frozen, as still as so many dirty white statues. There was no
storm in the sky above them, only high white clouds like finger
ribbons.
They were staring downriver, at Flowfoam Isle. Or at what
was rising in the sky above it. As high as a mountain it loomed,
huge and black and coiled-a snake! Taller than the Old Claw,
taller than the Mombeacon— taller than all the Windfangs!
It must be the Serpent bards spoke of, that was bound into
Slumber by the king. And that meant… that meant King Kelgrael
must be-
"No," Esdevan Mulgor whispered. "Oh, no." If the Serpent was
loose in the world, there'd soon be no Aglirta, but a dead waste…
or a dark realm of hissing, wriggling Serpent-priests and slaves.
He stared at it, towering above the distant palace. It reared
up-he could see one black, gold-rimmed eye clearly, and for one
heart-freezing moment thought it had noticed him, and was
glaring right at him-and shook its coils out, gloating in its
power. Throwing back its head, it opened jaws that must be
wider than two Ul's Hollows-and with its fangs bared, struck,
plunging its head down into the palace.
Kelgrael must be dead already-and someone else down mere
must be dying, right now. A snake that size would take a lot of
feeding…
And there he was, with his sheep a white, welcoming beacon
on the green hillside. Mulgor started to shake, and then looked
around wildly. His bow… if it came hunting this way, he'd need
his bow…
Stones fell like rain amid snarling dust, and cracks raced
across the floor and wall and ceiling. Up and down the dark,
forgotten halls and rooms of these Flowfoam cellars, the stones
groaned loudly, threatening collapse… and then it all died away,
and the glowing bones of Gadaster Mulkyn settled back into
their proper places, reassembling themselves into a skeleton-or
what was left of a skeleton, after Ingryl Ambelter's ravagings.

Careless and reckless Gadaster's onetime apprentice had
certainly been. Not content to steal his master's life and tide,
this new Spellmaster had contrived to get himself hurt unto
death time and time again, struggling down here to clamber into
the casket and embrace all that was left of Gadaster often. All
too often.
Not for Gadaster—what use are whole and handsome bones to
a man who has passed beyond death and sanity, into the
enduring dark madness beyond?-but for Ingryl Ambelter
himself. With every healing he partook of, a little of Gadaster's
will seeped into him, stealing within silently to join a whelming
of what was already there.
He seemed oblivious, too, smilingly confident as he went
blithely on calling himself Spellmaster… and could not even see
or feel Gadaster's regard when he lay drinking Gadaster's power.
There would come a day, if this went on, when Ingryl would
taste the other edge of the sword of spells he'd used on
Gadaster-and his sentience would be torn apart in torment for a
suitable time… a year or three, perhaps… ere Gadaster quenched
it forever and took Ingryl’s body for his own, repaying his
apprentice in kind for his treachery.
Yes, there was no greater danger for a mage than dabbling in
magics he did not really know. All must be understood, every last
detail and consequence, not just the flash and the fire-or what
difference would truly stretch, between a wizard and a small boy
playing with a burning brand from the hearthfire, carelessly
setting this tapestry and that chair alight, and so dooming
himself and a grand house together?
Yet this magic that had so disturbed his bones was one
Gadaster did not know. It had shaken the oldest enchantments
of the palace, underlying spells that had been old and forgotten
and many-layered when Gadaster had cast his first timid magics
here, in the service of Silvertree.
Did he dare to send his awareness stealing forth, when he
might be noticed by someone truly mighty? He must.

Curiosity is the bane of wizards, and the goad that drives
them on. He had to know.
Something was gone, something missing. Destroyed, not
taken… the throne! The River Throne stood shattered, amid
much lesser destruction, and that meant all the binding
enchantm… but what was this? A singing of shattered spells, a
tangle of incantations about emptiness… Kelgrael was dead! The
Sleeping King had awakened—and been slain!
So what of the Serpent? Th-Horns of the Lady! Gadaster
became aware of a deep, dark, and fell sentience very close by
above him, pervading all of the palace above, and now seeking
down, down into these cellars…
He must sleep as Kelgrael had, must spin himself away from
this place, or be discovered!
Gadaster did something hasty in his mind, drawing a glyph
with mental fire in the gloom with frenzied haste, racing along it
in mounting fear…
Just in time. The glow faded from old bones lying in a casket,
and darkness reclaimed the room Ingryl had so carefully
prepared.
A bare breath later, minor magics on its shelves-and one
small, fallen thing, on the floor-flashed briefly blue as the mind
that had been called Irtle Eroeha, and other names besides,
became aware of them… and drank their power, leaving
crumbling dust behind.
The bones lay still and silent as the dust of Flowfoam Palace
started to settle once more.
And when the next great crash came from above, a few
moments later, nothing in the casket was aware of anything.
At the top of a tower far from Aglirta was a round,
high-ceilinged room dominated by a tall arched window that
was always open.

Bats flew in and out of that window almost ceaselessly,
whatever the hour, and the rafters above, as they reached up to
meet in a central down-spire of carved and turned wood that
was far grander—if shorter—than the matching spire above it,
outside the tower, were encrusted with thick clusters of hanging
bats.
A dark-robed man sat at a desk in that room, reading. He
seemed scarcely to notice the dozens of bats that perched and
then flapped away from his shoulders and head, or clung there
with the passing hours. He was reading a spellbook that many a
mage would have cheerfully given many lives for but their own,
and his name was Arkle Huldaerus.
Though that seemed a suitably grand and arcane name for a
wizard, he'd acquired a better one-a calling that had so eclipsed
the name he'd been born with that few now remembered it. To
all Darsar, when they thought about him at all, he was the
Master of Bats.
He turned a page, his eyes seeming to glow for a moment, and
nodded thoughtfully. This was how he spent much of his time,
not being the sort of mage who loved bubbling and burning
experiments, and crafting new magics that
might-rarely—delight or do just what was desired, but that more
often destroyed days of work or cottages or unfortunate
apprentices—or all three. This was how most wizards spent their
time: reading, and so learning new spells or magics to replace
what they'd cast, and slowly losing their eyesight in the doing.
Huldaerus rubbed at his eyes now, as he set down the book,
looking thoughtful. Hadn't Orstal done the same spell as this
Waereuvin, but with a better incantation? Saving live frogs was
always a good thing, considering the time one spent getting wet
gathering them…
All around him, without any fuss, fluttering bats froze in
midair.
The glow he'd conjured to read by sank away to nothing, and
the Master of Bats stiffened in alarm, peering about, his eyes
glistening palely in the darkness.

He'd felt no disturbance of his ward spells, no presence of any
intruder… so what?
The bats were simply motionless. Not dead, not even
enspelled that he could see, but—
The world rocked, and there came a thunderclap out of the
north like a leaping fist, darkness flashing across the sky. From
down below there came the sounds of glass breaking and falling
from all his windows.
Aglirta. Oh, there were other places north of here, almost half
Asmarand-but somehow Huldaerus knew that whatever had
befallen to so shake the world, it had come from Aglirta.
Well, things always did, didn't they?
He smiled thinly at that, and murmured the word that
summoned up out of the floor his scrying eyes. Gleaming spheres
of nothingness melted up out of the solid stones, rising silently to
become upright, glowing ovals of rathance, gently drifting as
they arranged themselves in response to his will, almost filling
the room.
Gently, slowly, the bats started to move again.
The Master of Bats peered into the nearest seeing sphere,
bending his will to look upon… the Throne Chamber in
Flowfoam. Always a good place to start.
His bats were fluttering around him as usual by the time the
sphere showed him shaking stones-no, stones being flung
everywhere-and something large and dark. Very large, by the
gods! Huldaerus frowned at it for a moment, and then
commanded his sphere to show him the outside of Flowfoam.
He was in time to see the head of the Great Serpent rise into
view, men's bodies trailing from its jaws, turn to coldly regard
something below-and then, as muscles rippled beneath its
blue-black scales, plunge back down into… yes, by the Dark One,
into a great gaping hole in the roof of Flowfoam Palace.

Well, well. The Great Serpent, free at last. That meant the
bindings were broken, Snowsar was dead, and soon all
Asmarand—all Darsar— would have a large, dark, and hissing
problem to deal with. If they could.
If we can, rather. Archwizards and court mages and
hedge-wizards all working together—hah, the Three alone knew
when that would happen!-just might have power enough…
Was there anything here he truly dared not lose? If so, where
to hide it?
The Master of Bats looked around at his tower, smiling
slightly, and shook his head. He went back to his desk, put his
feet up, and sent some bats to fetch a bottle of iyrilith from his
cellars. The seeing sphere obediently drifted to hang right in
front of him, and grew as he merged other spheres into it—until
he could see every last glance and glare and shifting scale
moving in the throne chamber.
The iyrilidi was cold and black and wonderful, with an
aftertaste of cherries. Huldaerus sipped and watched other
people dying.
Yes, it was still a good time to play vulture.
Chapter Eighteen
Scepter, Dragon, and Serpent
Luckily, not all of his spells had failed him. One had brought
him here, out of the dark rubble and scurrying spiders of a
Silvertree tomb. His head still ached abominably, and from time
to time red fire surged behind his eyes, leaving him dizzy and
half-blinded, but Ingryl Ambelter knew he was fortunate to be
alive.
He wished no such good fortune on whoever had smitten him
with magic on the Silent House battlements. He did not even
know who it was—might never know.

He didn't even know how long he'd lain there, crumpled on
the stones—and, thankfully, on a thick web of vines that had
grown over them. There'd been no sign that anyone had tried to
rob him or do him more harm as he'd lain senseless in the tomb.
He'd stumbled around that pit, after coming to. Some
long-lost Silvertree had been foolish enough, or perhaps had an
heir miserly enough, to build a room-sized crypt out of wood.
Inevitably it had rotted away and collapsed. If there'd been any
magic or anything else useful entombed there, it had been
carried off long ago, or buried so well that he'd not been able to
find it.
Perhaps it was best if his unknown foe thought him dead, as
Blackgult probably did after their mind-wrestling. Gods, but he 
had to get a Dwaer!
Hah. Easily said.
Well, get one somehow, and keep hidden until then. Ingryl
shook his head and shuffled across the little dell to Tharlorn's old
refuge-his little hide-hold, now.
He could have the spells of lost Tharlorn and Bodemmon Sarr
both, and fabled Eroeha, too—and still not prevail against a
Worldstone, wielded by someone who knew how to use it.
Ingryl looked around the familiar bowl of shrubs and
stormgrass, to make sure no shepherd or woodcutter was
watching, and then stepped around the first trap, to begin
worming his way into his refuge. Yes, he was done with Aglirta
for a while; best go to ground and wait to see who survived-and
where the Dwaerindim ended up.
"Farewell for a time, idiots of the Vale," he murmured,
looking out over the Silverflow. "I'm sure the realm will be glad
to be rid of me-but will yet fail to find peace. Forget me, fools…
but I'll be back when you least expect me. It's fitting that I rule
Aglirta, someday—for I love this land so much that I want to
hold every last inch of it in my hands, and let no one else have it.
When a Dwaer is mine, I can bind taproots and deep streams
and land spirits to me like I bound the wench Embra to her

father's castle, and make Aglirta mine."
He grinned. "Until then, let us be absent and fond friends," he
added lightly, and waved a jaunty farewell to the Vale.
Aglirta nearly threw him into the trap anyway.
The sky went dark for a moment, with a clap of thunder so
loud it made him cry out in pain and clutch at his ringing
ears—and then the ground threw him off his feet, so that he
sprawled painfully on rocks on the very lip of Tharlorn's nasty pit
trap, and had to cling there through the rumbling that followed,
to keep himself from being hurled in.
As the Spellmaster snarled curses into the weeds now tangled
in his mouth and nose, there was a flickering of movement, off to
his left.
He looked that way swiftly, out over the Vale, to be sure no
doom was headed this way—and froze, gaping in astonishment,
at what he saw.
The great stone heart of Flowfoam Palace was shattered, the
southern rooms gone and a great gaping hole in the roof of—the
throne chamber, or at least the gallery above it. Where those
rooms to the south should have been were the great black coils
of-the Great Serpent Eroeha! It had to be!
It was real, no spell-spun illusion. As he watched, stones fell
from a broken wall, dislodged by the great black-scaled bulk as
the Serpent straightened, towering up into the sky. So high it
went that Ingryl found himself rolling over to look at—no! Oh, no
! He clawed at the stones until his ringers bled to keep out of
Tharlorn's damned pit, dragged himself back from that danger,
then looked again at the Great Serpent and shook his head in
awe. It had to be higher than the tallest of the Windfangs behind
him, almost brushing the clouds!
The gigantic snake looked around the Vale with a gloating,
knowing eye. That orb was black ringed with gold, and seemed
to see everything. Ingryl cowered down as its gaze swept past,
hoping for the first time in his life that he looked small and

insignificant. Then it spread fanged jaws far wider than his
dell—far wider than four such dells, by the looks of them— and
plunged that great head down, into the rent in the palace roof,
striking at someone below. Someone in the throne chamber,
judging by how far the head went in.
Ingryl shivered, and scrambled hurriedly into the little cave
that led to the second trap. So Kelgrael Snowsar was dead, the
Serpent was loose, and Aglirta was doomed.
Worse than that: he'd have to get to the Dwaerindim fast, and
find all of them, before the Serpent did. For if Eroeha-who'd
helped to enchant the Worldstones—ever got hold of them all, it
wouldn't just be Aglirta facing doom.
It would be all of Darsar.
"But you were Red Dream last time," the spectacularly
beautiful woman said poutingly, one long-nailed hand posed on
a bare hip, and the other holding a red cord still swaying from
just being caught.
The taller, darker woman on the far side of the room
shrugged and threw her the blue cord, holding out her hand to
receive the red one back. "Suit yourself, Raegrel, but mind you
match my looks exactly. Darker, see? Longer legs, just here."
The procurer hanging head downward outside the window
swallowed. He couldn't quite hear what they were saying, but the
one farther away from him seemed to be critical of the nearer
one's breasts, and-yes, she'd grasped her own nipples now and
was tugging on them, laughing! Gods above, you do know how to
torment a man!
He'd never seen any women so beautiful, and-
The world exploded in a clap of thunder, there was a flash of
dark-ness, and suddenly shards of glass were tinkling all around
him and he was in the room, by the Three, and falling helplessly
towards that bath-pool! He was going to—
Raegrel snaked out one feminine arm until it was over twenty

feet long. Quite long enough, in other words, to slap the ragged
little man's back in midair, driving him down headfirst under
the water. "Shall I drown him?"
"Stop playing and look out the window!" Thaebred snapped,
extending his neck in a grotesque, rubbery thrust of flesh that
took his head clear across the room. Frowning, the younger
Koglaur did the same, and together they peered out.
And stared at distant, dark coils, the frantic bubbling sounds
behind them forgotten.
"W-what is it?" Raegrel asked. "Illusion magic?"
"No," Thaebred whispered. "No, it's not. It's the Great
Serpent, come at last."
Silence stretched for a long time before the younger Koglaur
asked, in a small and frightened voice, "So what do we do now?"
"Run, hide, and pray."
"What?
To the Three Who Heed Not?"
"To every god you've ever heard of," the older Koglaur replied,
and did something with a jerk of muscles that freed the procurer
from Raegrel's drowning grasp and sent him sailing out through
the window.
A moment later, as the far-off snake opened its fangs and
struck at something beneath it that they could not see, there
came a wet splat from the cobbled street far below.
"He would have been just as dead in here," Raegrel said, a
little reproachfully.
"He's still alive," Thaebred said slowly, his eyes on the distant
Serpent. "I dropped him onto jarambur's latest delivery of full
wineskins."
Raegrel stared at him. "You mean the street's full of wine?"

"For now. It'll be full of blood when yon Serpent gets here."
Raegrel frowned at the older Koglaur, went a little pale, and
swallowed. "You're serious, aren't you?"
Thaebred nodded. "I'm one of the few beings yet alive," he
said softly, "who can remember what it was like the last time the
Serpent was loose."
Raegrel looked at the older Koglaur. Thaebred was trembling
slightly.
He'd never seen Thaebred frightened before. After a moment,
he whispered, "So what do we do?"
"I don't know," the older Koglaur replied simply, and turned
his head away from the window.
Raegrel watched him retract that long neck, and then, quite
suddenly, started to cry.
Thaebred's head turned to look at him. "Come on, Red
Dream," he growled. "Pull yourself together-hmmph, literally.
We've got a show to do."
"Dolmur! What was that?" Multhas called, from outside the
locked door. He sounded more bewildered than angry, for once.
The oldest surviving Bowdragon smiled thinly and called
back, "Muldias, bring everyone. Every living Bowdragon. Here,
at once."
"What? Dolmur, what're you playing at? Just tell me! Did one
of your spells get away from you?"
"No," Dolmur said. "Get the others, and you shall have your
answer."
"Dolmur, you're… you're…"
" 'Eccentric but to be indulged' is the appropriate phrase,
Muldias. Go-this is important!"

Carefully he cast the necessary spells. He was barely done, and
the door unlocked, before Muldias was striding into the
chamber, with Araunder and Ithim-and, by gods, all of the
children, even his own Erith, who was looking as bewildered as
usual.
"What you're about to see—" Dolmur said to the younglings,
making sure he met the gaze of each and every one of them.
Three Above, but his brothers had sired beautiful daughters! As
sullen and preening just now as any their age would be, yes, but
still…
"-is the reason why none of you must go storming off to
Aglirta to avenge Jhavarr, or Cathaleira, or the honor of the
Bowdragons, or anything else."
Without waiting for any queries or replies he turned his back
on them and released the chain of spells he'd just finished
crafting.
A window appeared in the midair, well off the floor of his
spellcasting chamber. It was a window all of them knew: the
gem-adorned, circular garden window in his study, or rather, a
spell-spun duplicate—and it grew swiftly until it was a huge disc
twice as tall as a man, glimmering bright before them.
Through it, then, he showed them what he'd seen. Every
detail, just as he'd remembered it, from the flash of darkness
accompanying the thunderclap to the serpent lifting its head
with bodies dripping from its jaws, only to plunge it down again.
Some of the lasses gasped, and Erith went white and trembled
visibly. Dolmur's three brothers, too, grew pale.
"That's the Great Serpent, isn't it?" Araunder asked quietly.
Dolmur nodded. "It is. No illusion, no trickery—and it's not
just a huge beast. It's the most powerful archwizard Darsar has
ever known, and he may well still be able to use all of his spells.
All of us Bowdragons-yes, even if we embraced the Kledilars and
the Yarltowers as friends, and cast spells side by side with
them—"

He waited for the younglings to make their sounds of anger
and disgust at the mere thought of cooperating with their worst
rivals, and then continued, "-lack the collective sorcery to harm
him more than enough to, say, get his attention. He can destroy
us in the space of a few breaths."
"So just like that, Aglirta is off-limits to us? Sirlptar, too, I
suppose?" Ithim's oldest daughter-Maelra, yes, that was her
name—asked angrily, her dark eyes snapping. "Honored Uncle,
are you going to use this-this beast-to keep us imprisoned, safely
locked up here where all of you elders can keep watch over us?
And tell us a hundred more times the tales of what happened to
our mothers because they disobeyed, and strayed?"
"No, Maelra," the oldest living Bowdragon told her sadly,
banishing the image of his window with one wave of his hand.
"No, I'm not."
"Maelra," Ithim murmured soothingly, "this is not a time
for—"
"No, Father, I'm not going to be silent! As Uncle Muldias said
when he came in to snatch us away from a very nice spell-show,
this is important? She whirled back to Dolmur, long hair flying
about her shoulders, and asked, "Then, Honored Uncle"—her
tone did not quite make that title a mocking insult, but she
came close—"what exactly are you asking us to do?"
"I'm asking all of you younglings not to be fools, not to throw
your lives away—and when you must die, to do so to some
purpose and with dignity," Dolmur said, his eyes locked on hers.
"Die with dignity?" she asked, bewildered. "You speak as if
we'll all be slain on the morrow!"
Dolmur shrugged. "It may be months farther away than that."
"When, then?"
"Whenever the Serpent decides to come here."
The Master of the Fair Wind gave her another frowning,

questioning look. In a moment, Orathlee knew, he'd ask her
again why she'd been so eager to pay the deliberately high price
he'd charged, and be away from Sirlptar in such haste.
Yes, here he came, along the rail. This time Orathlee did not
turn away. There were only so many places one could go on a sea
rel like the Fair Wind— particularly when you needed the master
of such a ship to keep the more hot-eyed men of his crew away
from you and two far-too-beautiful daughters.
The winds were strong and the sea under them a rhythmic
series of large but gentle swells. Perfect sailing weather, even to
the high cloud and complete lack of storm smell. They were
making good time, south to Teln, and had already left Coelortar
astern and sighted the long green coast of Elgarth, ahead.
"Goodwoman Orathlee," Master Telgaert said carefully, " 'tis
good to see you on deck. Most of the few passengers I get huddle
below, with buckets to hand, if you know what I mean."
Oradilee gave him a pleasant smile. "Master, I do. Yet this is
fair passage thus far"—she let him see the warding gesture that
all make when saying such things at sea, to keep fortune from
turning—"and I and my daughters are very grateful to you for
taking us aboard in such haste, and with no warning."
Telgaert looked out to sea and shrugged. "The cabin was
empty." Carefully not looking at her, he observed, "You seemed
to be in some need—and in great hurry."
The words hung between them, and Orathlee smiled ruefully
to herself, sighed as soundlessly as she could, and squared her
shoulders. This seemed the right time, and it had to be said
sooner or later.
"Master Telgaert," she said firmly, putting a hand on his arm
so that he turned to look at her, and then stepping smoothly
back, "you seem in some need of reassurance. Let me speak
plainly: I and my daughters are not running from a brutal
husband, I am not guilty of or suspected of a murder, a theft, or
an abduction-and you can probably tell, if you look into their
faces and mine, that Meleira and Talace are my daughters. I am

not fleeing a feud or debts, no one in Sirlptar knows or cares that
I am gone, and I am not secretly a princess, a shapeshifting
monster, or a sorceress. I am not even a young, bored
noblewoman out to see the world on a lark. I'm looking for no
husband nor lost treasure, and lack all intention of piracy. I'm
not even going to rape you."
His embarrassed chuckles had begun way back in her list; her
last sentence made his eyes widen, left him in surprised silence
for a moment-and then plunged him into a guffaw. A guffaw
that built into a full-throated roar of delight.
Telgaert slapped his thigh as crewmen here and there turned
their heads to see what was afoot-and knowing they'd be looking,
he took a careful pace away from Orathlee, recovered himself,
and said, "Well, that's a relief. By the Three, but I like you,
Goodwoman!" His grin flashed. "Take that not the wrong way,
mind."
"Master, I will not," she said with a smile, "and assure you of
one thing more: every word I have told you is true. Plain,
on-any-altar truth. You have nothing to fear from me."
Telgaert bowed his head as if they were two master
merchants sealing a bargain, and said, "That is always good to
hear. Please understand that I'm not trying to pry, but only
curious, and perhaps desirous of offering aid if it's something
within my power. Oradilee, forgive me, but 'twas clear to me
then, as it is now: you left Sirl town in haste, unwillingly, and
upset, fleeing something. Is the 'something' a matter you wish to
share?"
"Master Telgaert, it is not. Please understand me: not
becau—"
Out of a clear sky, a clap of thunder that smote the ears like a
fist broke over the ship, and darkness flashed across the blue
vault—flashed and was gone again, as sailors shouted their
alarm and Telgaert gaped up at the sky.
"What by all the Claws of the Dar-"

"There, Master—look there!" Orathlee snapped, pointing
north and east across the decks, at the horizon.
Telgaert stared at her, and then along her pointing arm, and
saw. Tiny, it was, and yet clear, through the Coelortar Gap: the
head of a serpent, rising to brush the clouds, spreading fearsome
fangs, and men plunging down out of sight, striking as he'd seen
many a fang-viper take a rat in sagging warehouses in the
southern ports. As he peered, the ship riding up a swell, it rose
into view again; its jaws clamped on prey—and plunged down to
strike again.
And then the sea carried them on past the Gap and
mountains hid the snake from view. Telgaert turned to regard
his passenger with a face that had gone very pale.
"Suppose," he said, in a voice that was not quite steady, "you
tell me what that was."
"The Great Serpent," Orathlee told him bluntly. "Not a bardic
whimsy or scare-tale for the fireside, after all. It is what I'm
fleeing-and no, I'm neither a priestess nor a worshipper of the
Serpent."
"For the Serpent to be free, the Risen King of Aglirta must be
dead," Telgaert murmured, and then his eyes narrowed. "How
did you know-?"
"Master," Orathlee said, pulling open her bodice to show him
the brands put there on both of her breasts by priests of the
Three when she was but a girl, "I am of the Wise. I was doing a
tanthor reading for a client, and foresaw this without knowing
which great peril of Darsar would befall. I just knew that I did
not want to greet that danger, whatever it was, in Sirlptar, city
of grasping merchants and cruel wizards."
The Master of the Fair Wind was staring at her brands not
with horror or lust, but in pity, shaking his head a little. She did
not reach to pluck her bodice closed again and tighten the laces,
but held her chest calmly out to his gaze, until he dragged his
eyes back up to meet hers. "You were but a lass when they did
that?" he asked roughly, waving one hand gently to indicate that

she should cover herself.
When she nodded, he said, "Lady, my granddam was of the
Wise. They flogged her to the bone when she was young, so her
shoulders were a ruin and she walked bent over all the rest of her
days. All because she could foresee, as you do, and the priests
found out." His hand closed into a fist—a fist that shook. "You
and your daughters shall have every coin back that you paid me
for your passage."
He took a step closer. "Say nothing if you'd rather not,
but—where will you go from Teln?"
Orathlee took a step towards him, until they were almost
touching, and replied, "Master, I know not. From the Serpent,
there is no escape."
"But on the wave," he murmured.
"Telgaert, I can cook," she said brightly, and when he looked
down at her sharply, she added, "and heal with herbs, and sew.
I've been a slave and often sewn sails and spliced cables and
scrubbed decks and worse. Oh, yes, I have other brands—and
probably more impressive scars than any of your crew.
Moreover, I'm quite willing to sleep with every man on this ship,
often—so long as my Meleira and Talace are left alone until they
choose to take one of you to bed."
The Master of the Fair Wind swallowed and gripped the rail
so tightly that his hands went white. "Are—do you know how
sailors dream of… women?"
"Of course," Orathlee said. "I am of the Wise; dreams are my
business."
Telgaert smiled, and held out his hand to her. "Then, Lady, it
is my pleasure to accept your offer. I trust our business together
will be long and happy."
"Serpent willing," Orathlee murmured, making a warding
sign of the Wise. Telgaert matched it with his own fingers,
precisely.

When her eyes widened, he smiled, and said, "I am of the
Wise, too-but I know little. My granddam died before she could
teach me properly, you see." He hesitated. "If you'll join me after
evening fry in my cabin, I'd like to tell you of her. I'll show you
my best wine."
Orathlee winked again. "And I'll show you my other scars."
She giggled then, at his shocked look, and took his hand. Arm
and arm they went to the way down to her cabin, "You will want
to tell your daughters of… your decision," Telgaert said, handing
her down the ladder.
"And of the Serpent," she added, "if they don't know already."
The Master raised an incredulous eyebrow, and she said, "Oh,
yes, they're of the Wise, too—and carry knives. Your men had
best be careful."
She left him grinning and shaking his head at the waves, and
went down to where Meleira and Talace would no doubt be
rolling their eyes and waiting for her, if they'd been mindriding
her—or sitting frozen in terror, if they'd been practicing tanthor
at the Rising of the Serpent.
She would let them do whatever they wanted, from this
moment forth. Their lives might be all too short, now that the
Serpent was loose.
* * *
Fangs shrieked on stone as the Serpent bit down—striking not
at Hawkril or anyone living, but at the throne itself, biting it
right up out of the floor with a violence that hurled the
armaragor headlong and shook several Serpent-priests off the
gallery.
Their screams went unheeded as that great dark head rose,
trailing stones and bodies of the Melted, and lofted once more
into the sky.
Craer looked at Embra, and whispered, "Lady of Jewels, what

shall we do now?"
She gazed at him incredulously through her tears. "You think
I have the barest idea?"
The procurer smiled, as severed arms and legs of Melted
tumbled down out of the sky, shrugged, and said, "You're the
true nobility among us. Weren't you trained to act just as if
everything was unfolding as it should, and you always knew what
to do? Well?"
"Craer," she murmured at him, "you are such a mocking little
weasel— and I love you so much."
"Well," the procurer said brightly, as the great dark head of
the Serpent swept down again, jaws agape, "that's a comfort. I'll
have need of such comforts in my old age."
The next cellar stank of the river—or rather, of the filth Sirl
folk sluiced into the river. They must be at the barge docks at
last.
Just ahead of him, someone ran into someone else, stumbled,
and cursed. The swift reply was a more vicious curse.
The Tersept of Haeltree smiled to himself. Hail, bright
conspiracy!
"Lord Baron?" a voice came out of the darkness ahead.
"Report, Suldun," Maevur Cardassa snapped, by way of a
reply. This manner was intended to impress his fellow
conspirators, it failed.
"All is ready, Lord," Suldun murmured. "The wizard says one
of the men with you has a shielding spell around him."
"What? Torches, at once! The Baron Cardassa sounded
alarmed, and many of the men halted and fired questions; there
was some shoving in the gloom.
Torches were brought, and a hired Sirl wizard with them; the

baron looked less than happy, after his tirade against wizards,
that his staffing secrets had been so soon revealed. "That one,"
the wizard said, pointing to the Tersept of Shaeltor. The other
tersepts hastily drew back from Shaeltor, as if fearing the Sirl
mage would hurl a lightning bolt—or Shaeltor would do
something just as deadly.
"Why, Shaeltor, you astonish me," Maevur Cardassa said
airily— though the sweat beading his face in the torchlight was
so copious that his manner fooled no one. "To reach such heights
of sorcerous accomplishment, and not tell us? I confess myself
wounded!"
Not yet, Haeltree thought to himself, keeping his face a
careful mask. Not quite yet.
Moving slowly and carefully and keeping his hands in the
torchlight, the stout and sweating Tersept of Shaeltor removed a
ring from his finger, put it down on the stones underfoot, and
stepped back from it. "There's your shielding, I believe," he said.
"Please touch it not. My grandsire gave it to me. 'Twas his lucky
ring, but now 'tis all I have left of him."
"Not lucky enough, hum?" Maevur said with a little laugh.
The wizard bent over the ring and straightened, walked
towards Shaeltor and waved at him to keep moving away, and
then stopped and nodded. "He speaks truth."
"I'm no wizard," the Tersept of Shaeltor said hastily. "I
couldn't cast a spell if my life depended upon it."
Haeltree winced. Oh, don't say such things around this
Maevur. You'll but give him ideas.
"Well, then," the baron said jovially, "it seems our little
misunderst-"
A rolling boom that was almost a roar rang through the
cellar, like a thunderclap—and the very stones beneath their feet
trembled. For just a moment, all the torches went dim, though
there was no rush of air-and they blazed brightly again.

Men shouted in alarm, even some of the guards, and the
unseen water ahead was suddenly very loud; waves crashed
against stone as if an angry sea was clawing at tall cliffs. A
moment later, boats began to boom against rock, plunging and
rocking wildly, as waves slapped back and forth savagely.
"I'm glad I can't see any of this properly," Haeltree muttered,
and one of the guards gave him a heartfelt "aye" before he
remembered that Cardassa had given him orders to be
menacing to all of these useless tersepts.
"What was that?" Maevur Cardassa snapped, his voice more
than a little wild.
"Careless and mighty magic," the Tersept of Shaeltor replied
darkly, slipping his ring back onto his finger. "What else?"
"Aye, welcome to Aglirta," Tersept Haeltree added in a dry
voice, reaching for his belt-flask.
The time for partings had come.
"Remember me," Sarasper Godelmer whispered, white to the
lips. "Oh, friends, remember me!"
Craer was bounding out of the way of those gigantic jaws, and
Embra had just hurled a beam of ravening Dwaer-fire into the
gullet beyond, which made the Serpent roar and hesitate, even
draw back for a moment.
Everyone turned to stare at him save the shuddering Serpent
above them all, and the old healer managed a crooked smile for
them as he held up the scepter… and shifted shape.
He let the scepter's magic guide him—a sudden surging of
power that warmed him within, even made him uncomfortably
hot for a moment, ere he soared, growing larger, stronger, and
more sinuous, scales coming as he loomed still larger, until the
roof scraped his shoulders and back, and the scepter tumbled
from his talons—talons?—to the ground, crumbling into
fragments that trailed smoke. He was billowing up just like
smoke, he was… a dragon at last!

"Tshamarra!" Embra cried, as she saw the scepter in
Sarasper's hands. "Now! At the Serpent, no matter what it is!
Hurl all you have!"
The Talasorn sorceress nodded through the wild tangle of her
hair, murmured something, and a feeble flare of flame spat from
her fingertips.
Gods, I am spent. Embra closed her eyes for a moment in
despair, but kept the Dwaer-fire going. They had to give
Sarasper the few moments he needed… or he'd be throwing his
life away for nothing—and Aglirta's last hope would the with
him.
It befell with awesome swiftness. Suddenly he was surging
upward, the scepter tumbling into smoking ruin, and then
Sarasper billowed up into massive, wide-winged solidity above
them, red and gold and mighty: a dragon, such as had not been
seen in Aglirta in living memory!
Vast and terrible it loomed, opening its jaws with a terrible
roar. Flame spurted from them—a tiny, feeble flame, as paltry as
Tshamarra's spell.
The Serpent swallowed Embra's fire, spasmed in pain, and
then arched itself, drawing its head back. Tshamarra's flames
fell away harmlessly from shimmering black scales as the
Serpent reared-and then struck with the speed of leaping
lightning, sinking its fangs deep into the dragon's throat.
Embra choked back tears, white-faced and trembling. There
was nothing she dared do now, with those two gigantic bodies
locked together. This was their battle now, these titans… and one
of them had once been the grumbling old man who'd healed her
so often and so tenderly. The one with the Serpent's fangs locked
on his throat…
Sarasper struggled, spasming and clawing at the air, his
lashing tail bringing down more of the palace. He tried to twist
away from the Serpent-but that great black serpentine body
stretched and stayed with him, its fangs sunk deep.

Foaming at the mouth, the Dragon roared, or tried to—but
what came out was a strangled croak. Clawing the air, Sarasper
tried to straighten, but the Serpent was coiling around him now,
its great weight bearing the dragon to the ground.
Sarasper fell on his back with a crash that hurled everyone in
the throne chamber into the air—which was a good thing, given
the thrashing fury of the Serpent's tail as it busily coiled itself
around its foe.
Tshamarra Talasorn sobbed in fear and amazement. How
long could the old shapeshifter survive? He was doomed, and all
Darsar doomed with him…
The two wrestled like mongoose and snake.
Sarasper raked at the Serpent with his taloned feet, shredding
its scales and leaving deep, smoking furrows in the scarlet flesh
beneath. Smoking gore spilled from those wounds as the Serpent
and the Dragon rolled over together, tearing the western rooms
of the palace asunder. Shrieking in pain, the Serpent reared
back to strike again.
Those great fangs came down, inescapable… and Sarasper
darted his snout right into its gullet, wedging those jaws apart.
Cruel fangs bit at him, and bit again, trying to close and savage
and crush, but failing.
Then the Serpent tried to draw back, but it was coiled around
Sarasper, much of its bulk pinned under him, and his neck was
long enough to keep his head wedged into the Serpent's maw.
Angrily, desperately, he breathed fire.
Again it was feeble, a ragged spitting of flame that flared
white for but a moment-but it went in deep, and there were
squallings and rumblings somewhere in that vast body. Around
his head, the Serpent's jaws opened as it shuddered
uncontrollably.
With a growl that shook all Flowfoam, Sarasper Codelmer
breathed fire once more-and the world exploded into purple,
white, and red-gold flame, forever…

The Serpent exploded, and Sarasper with him, in a wet and
roaring maelstrom of spattering flesh and searing gore-and as it
rained down on everything and Raulin sobbed in terror, the air
was riven by the hoarse, raw scream of every last Serpent-priest.
Staggering to his feet and blinking through gobbets of
Serpent-flesh, Hawkril saw priests capering up in the shattered,
roofless gallery. Some were barking and drooling aimlessly, and
others were running in circles. Some stood as still as statues,
except for their tremblings and whimperings-and others leaped
down into the throne chamber, howling, to their deaths—or ran
at jagged spars of broken rock in the galleries, trying to impale
themselves. The rest clawed and bit at each other in a bloody,
reckless frenzy, literally tearing each other apart as he stared.
The Dwaer-wielding high priest reeled among them, but those
watching numbly from below saw his Stone flash-and a shielding
sparkle into life around him.
Another priest's body flowed and shifted as they watched,
taking on the likeness of an armsman—and just for a moment,
but dearly, Embra saw the glimmer of an awakened Dwaer
cradled in one of his hands. Feverishly she called on her own
Stone to weave a swift tracer, hoping the shapeshifter-a
Koglaur?—hadn't laid a trap for anyone trying such a thing…
Craer ran up the tallest heap of stone, a sloping slab left
behind by Sarasper's struggles, and sprang into the gallery. A
dagger flashed from his hands at the shapeshifter as he landed,
and he sprinted in its wake, bounding forward to pounce—
—as a Dwaer flashed, and the false armsman vanished. Craer
struck empty floor, hard, and skidded along on his elbows until
he met with a wall.
Then Embra shrieked as the counterspell she'd feared flared
up from her Dwaer and slashed at her with whirling flames.
Reeling, she moaned in pain as her garments began to
smolder-and desperately hurled the counterspell on, at the only
other Dwaer nearby. Her tracer was broken, and oh, the pain…
As she crumpled to the shattered, bloody marble, trailing

smoke, it was the Serpent-priest's turn to shriek. His Dwaer
erupted into flames with such force that he was plucked off his
feet and hurled against the nearest wall, the Crown of Aglirta
clanging to the tiles.
His Dwaer spun in midair, the shreds of his shattered
shielding spinning from it, tantalizingly close. In the shattered
throne chamber below, Tshamarra reached up a hand—and then
drew it back, shaking her head in disgust. She had not a wisp of
magic left to snare anything or harm anyone.
Craer struggled to his feet, wincing, and had not yet seen the
unattended Dwaer. Much closer to it, the Serpent-priest
stretched forth his hand, fear and determination mingled on a
face that scales were fading away from. His snout and wide jaws
slowly became more human as he frowned at his Dwaer, willing
it to him…
… and the tendrils of shattered magic faded from the Stone as
it drifted to his hand.
Craer was still two desperate running steps away when the
priest's hand closed around the Stone—and he vanished, leaving
the procurer pouncing on nothing and sliding along the floor
again.
Cursing, he glanced down into the throne chamber—and
sprang to his feet with a snarl and leaped into space, aiming
himself for the largest heap of bodies below…
His landing was a bruising crash that left him limping, but
Hawkril was already charging towards the same danger.
Tshamarra had snatched up Embra's Dwaer with a smile. She
held it up as they ran towards her, and it began to sing, softly.
Holding it, she knelt over Embra, and did something.
"Back, Lady!" Hawkril roared, "or-!"
Without waiting for a reply, he hurled his war sword.

It struck home, deep and true, and Tshamarra Talasorn
reeled on her knees, threw back her head and sobbed, and then
moaned, "Pluck it out! Pluck it out! I can't use this to heal us
both!"
"Oh, gods!" Hawkril gasped. "What've I done?"
He reached her a stumbling moment before Craer. "Hold me
up," she gasped at them both. "If we break apart, we'll both die,
she and I…"
With as much tenderness as they could muster, Hawkril and
Craer held the sorceress just as she was.
For a long, trembling time the Dwaer-glow pulsed from
sorceress to sorceress, ere Tshamarra sat back with a sigh, and
said, "She's well. Now, please, take your sword out of me. Three,
but it hurts!"
"Lady," Hawkril said, his face agonized, "I'm so sorry…"
"You couldn't know," she said softly, and then gasped and bit
her lip as the warsword came out. "Hold me, as before!" she
snapped, almost crumpling in the armaragor's arms.
Hawkril and Craer held her, as Raulin danced anxiously
around them and the Dwaer pulsed, until Tshamarra drew in a
deep breath, smiled, and said. "Done. I, too, am whole."
She looked up. "Whither now? Run and hide, to heal and
whelm and then fight again as every ambitious fool comes
Throne-seeking, or shall we go gathering barons and force them
to accept a new king?"
"Why do you care for Aglirta's kings, Lady?" Craer asked
softly.
She met his eyes and shrugged. "I'm of Aglirta, too."
"You're Sirl," Hawkril growled slowly.
She whirled around in his arms, to face him. "I was born in

Glarond and grew up in the woods and hills there, not in Sirl
town." Her tone was fierce, but her words barely louder than a
whisper as she stared into his eyes, and added, "I am Aglirtan,
and—and I stand with you. For the first time in my life, I'm
doing something of worth, something that matters?
"Be welcome," Embra said faintly, from beneath her. "And…
thanks."
"Hey!" Raulin cried suddenly. "Help!"
They looked over at him. He stood pointing down at
something amid the tumbled stones, something blackened and
smouldering.
"I-it was the tip of the Serpent's tail," the bard said, his face
white. "And then it turned into this"
By then Hawkril was beside him, warsword in hand. Amid the
stones lay the tattered, blackened body of a man, its face little
more than a sheet of bubbled flesh with two eyesockets and a
mouth. That mouth moved, trembling, trying to speak, and one
stump of an arm—the only arm it had, the overduke
realized-reached up towards him.
With a snarl of rage and revulsion Hawkril hacked at it,
shearing through that arm and then cleaving the head, again
and again, until-
His warsword exploded in ringing, riven shards that spun
past his face and sent him staggering back.
"Hawk! Craer shouted. "Here!"
Hawkril turned, blinking—and a dagger spun towards him,
turning lazily, tossed by the procurer. Hawkril plucked it out of
the air and raised it to stab down-but the body of the mage
who'd become the Serpent so long ago was burning as he stood
over it… dwindling, as he watched, to nothing. Dead and gone.
Just like Sarasper and Brightpennant.

Chapter Nineteen
Entertaining the Gods
The light of the scrying spell faded, and the man staring into
it snarled in irritation. It flared back brightly once, showing him
an enraged armaragor hacking at the charred, feebly moving
remnants of a man, but then died completely, falling away into a
scattering of sparks that winked out, one by one.
"By the Three," Ingryl Ambelter said thoughtfully to the warm
darkness of his refuge, "but I did the right thing for once. If I'd
stood against them-"
"Spellmaster?" a voice called, from behind him. Gods, it must
be coming from near the entrance to his refuge-but on the
inside.
Ingryl whirled around, snatched up two wands, and took two
swift steps to fire them down the entrance tunnel. Streams of
fire roared, and he let them rage for a long time before he called
back sweetly, "Yes? Which fool is it?"
"This one," the Baron Phelinndar replied crisply, stepping
through the doorway with Ingryl's flames still curling vainly
around his strong shielding. He held what had spun that shield
in his hand: a glowing Dwaer-Stone.
"I'm enough of a fool," he announced calmly, "to know that I
don't know how to use thiss properly-but I've bound myself to it,
so any treachery you do to me will also be visited on you" He
strode forward. "I need you to conquer Aglirta, and you need me.
Have we the beginnings of a deal here?"
Ingryl swallowed, set down his wands, and waved the baron
towards a vacant chair. "I suppose we do," he said faintly. "Claws
of the Dark One, but I used to think I knew who was whom in
Aglirta, and what spell would defeat which. Now…"
"It's never too late to learn new tactics, I believe," the baron
observed calmly. "Have you any wine to share that isn't
poisoned?"

After a moment of startled silence, Ingryl threw back his head
and laughed.
Meanwhile
Somewhere, in darkness, Ezendor Blackgult and Flaeros
Delcamper fell forever.
There were no stars, no sounds, and—nothing. Nothing but
endless tumbling. They were falling slowly through nothingness
to the accompaniment of the regent's ceaseless flood of oaths.
Blackgult cursed softly, on and on, spewing forth a great
splendor of words that left the young bard marveling.
When at last the regent grew tired, or ran out of fearsome
phrases, and fell silent, Flaeros asked timidly, "Did I do
something wrong, Lord?"
"No," Blackgult said shortly, "I did. The scepter has a 'take
refuge' power of some sort, and I aroused it when I meant to do
something else. That's what comes of snatching up in battle
something one has only read about, and trying to use it."
He glanced about, all around them, and spread his hands in a
flourish to better indicate-nothing. "We're in a place that only
magic can reach—an endless void, if the books tell true… and
they seem to." Fixing Flaeros with a sour gaze, he asked, "So,
young Delcamper, do you have any other little surprises for me?"
"I… no… well, what d'you mean?"
"Magic, and suchlike—are you carrying any?"
"N-no… well, wait. Just this," the bard said slowly, extending
the hand where he always wore the Vodal.
Blackgult seized hold of his fingers, peered at the ring with a
frown, and nodded slowly. "I believe this'll do. It'll cost us both
blood and the ring-but it will return us to Aglirta. The
alternative is to be trapped here forever, I believe-though we'll
probably lose interest in 'forever' when we starve." He glanced
up. "Shall I?"

Flaeros stared at the Vodal. Familiar, comforting, the family
treasure he'd always worn… he ran his fingers over its familiar
curves one last time, then looked at the regent. "Yes. Serpent and
all, we must go back."
Blackgult nodded grimly, and drew his dagger.
Flaeros looked at him warily, but the regent grinned. 'Just a
little blood, lad—I'm not looking to cut your throat."
"Everyone else in Aglirta seems to be trying to," Flaeros
complained, and the regent laughed as he nicked the back of the
young bard's arm and murmured something. Then he cut
himself, made the same murmur, and held out his hand for the
Vodal.
Reluctantly Flaeros gave it to him. Baron Blackgult touched it
to his own blood and then to the bard's, said the last incantation
of his spell, looked up with a grin, and said, 'Just wait until
you're a baron, lad. Then ask your throat how hunted it feels."
A moment later, with a sudden whirl of blinding lights and a
roar of sound, Aglirta came back to them.
"Quick-run! Serpent-priests!" Narneth hissed, shoving his
sister's shoulder. She shrieked and plunged away through the
rindolberry vines, leaving generous amounts of hair and her
dress behind on various thorns as she crashed along-and
Narneth pounded after her, just as uncaring of his hide.
Berries spilled out of the basket on Briona's arm, but she
cared not. To be caught here nigh the altar would be their
deaths.
Not for the first time, Narneth wondered angrily why, in all
the Vale, the Snake-lovers had to choose the very best
rindolberry patch for their altar. Not that he minded watching
ladies bare themselves and dance about it, mind—but seeing
them grow scales and snake-heads and fang each other brought
on the shivers.
Worse than mat—they'd stopped using the drum. Its slow

beat chilled the heart, to be sure, but gave clear warning the
Snake-lovers were coming. Now they were just suddenly—there,
some of them slithering along like gigantic snakes with human
arms. Most of them were still people-people with slit eyes and a
few scales and fangs and forked tongues, yes, but people. There
were a few, though… well, more than a few, who had
snake-heads all the time, or tails, or both. They gave Narneth
nightmares-and just seeing them from afar set Briona to
screaming.
"Quiet "he hissed, catching up to her. "Y'want them to come
after us?"
Together he and Briona crawled on to where they could
crouch under a tangle of thorny vines, where the rindol lay
looped and draped thickly over dead trees. Narneth chose the
best gap to peer out of, and Briona just laid herself down,
panting like a forge bellows.
They were coming. Snake-heads suddenly slid into view,
regarding the world expressionlessly with forked tongues
flicking. Six—no, seven full serpents, with half serpents walking
behind. A dozen, or more.
Two of the lightly scaled ones carried a terrified village
lass-one of the Alhand girls, the one who worked at the mill—tied
to a pole slung between them. They'd torn away most of her
clothes, and her wrists and ankles were bound over the pole
with—curling, angry snakes! Other snakes lashed her throat to
the pole, and another was jammed into her mouth, tail first, so
she couldn't do more than moan. Her eyes were wide with
terror-and Narneth shivered and sank down as low as he could
as the Snake-lovers carried her past.
They were going to make her into one of them—or more likely,
sacrifice her!
Yes. The ones to be made priestesses did their own walking,
while priests whipped them with living snakes; this one must be
a sacrifice.
She'd be laid on the altar while they hissed prayers and set

one poisonous snake after another on her. She'd be bitten until
she went mad and died, foaming at the mouth and with her skin
gone purple-and then they'd roast her over their spit, and feast.
Narneth had watched such deaths before, though he never
stayed long. Afterward, the Serpent-priests always spread out
through the forest, to hunt.
"What's happening?" Briona whispered, trembling. Narneth
put a stern finger to his lips and crawled a little way along under
the vines, to where he could see the altar.
Serpent-priests were busy around the fire, lighting kindling
above the cold coals of their last feast. Narneth watched them
with fear and hatred coiling together in his belly, feeling
increasingly sick, and then it happened.
One moment the priests were strutting or slithering about
with their usual cold arrogance-and the next moment they went
mad. The two carrying the girl dropped her and went for each
other, biting and clawing at each other bare-handed, while one
of the almost-snakes ahead of them drew itself up and started
hammering itself against the ground, its head thudding down
repeatedly before another snarling priest slammed into it,
dashing its brains out against the stone altar. He was promptly
bent over the altar himself by another priest armed with a knife
made of snakes' fangs and stabbed repeatedly until his kickings
and screams grew feeble. Other serpents bit at each other in a
frenzy, or threw their coils around everything in sight, trying to
crush and throttle. One tried to devour its own tail, biting
repeatedly, up and up the thickening scales, until it choked.
Narneth shivered and backed away. He was almost back to
Briona before he remembered the Alhand girl, hesitated, and
slowly crawled back again.
By then, though some coils and tails still twitched and
thrashed, the Serpent-lovers were all dead. When Narneth took
his belt-knife to the snakes that bound the mill lass-Jalebra, he
remembered her name, now— and freed her, there was no sound
for a long time but her weeping as she clung to him, and the
occasional snap and crackle from the neglected fire.

The hissings he hated so much were silenced forever.
The meal had been splendid, and so was the wine, though
Oradilee had been somewhat startled to receive it in a
tankard—a tankard that comfortably held the contents of an
entire bottle, at that.
"No needless glass aboard ship that might break with the
seas," Telgaert explained, "and I got tired of goblets toppling,
too. Was the fare-?"
"Wonderful," Oradilee told him, as she stretched contentedly
and lay back on his bed in the narrow cabin—and meant it. "I
don't know that I can match it."
"You don't have to. Three of us can cook: gruel, fishhead stew,
fried fish with sauces, and-after we've stopped in at a good port,
a roast fowl fry-up like this. That's the entire span of our fare."
"Oh," Orathlee replied, nodding as she sipped from her
tankard. "I can see how that would be… less than ideal, as the
months pass."
"Salt fish by the barrel in winter, and sometimes eels snagged
over the rail, too," Telgaert added brightly. "I almost forgot."
She giggled, and he left off caressing her bare feet to take a
generous swig from his tankard (even larger than hers, and
adorned with an ornate coiling-dragon handle) and reached
higher.
"If I may be so bold—?" he asked softly, his eyes suddenly
serious, as his hand went to the lacings of her bodice.
"You may," she purred, reaching for his codpiece, "if I may be
allowed to unfasten this!"
Telgaert's eyes widened, and a wide grin flashed across his
face. Shaking his head in mirth, he said grandly, "But of course,
my Lady. How can I refuse?"
"Well, cursing and rolling away is the usual way," she replied,

as gentle fingers peeled back fabric and her breasts were bared
to the gentle breeze blowing in through the porthole. "But if
you'd rather…" She gestured down at herself.
"I would," he murmured, and bent forward to lightly kiss her
skin. Again, and again, like the brush of a moth.
"I'm not ticklish," she murmured. "You needn't be… tender."
His response was the lick of his tongue, slowly and teasingly
over the twisted flesh of a brand to her left nipple. Orathlee
sighed and arched to meet him, murmuring something wordless
as she reached her tankard over onto the bedside shelf, to free
both her hands to get to work properly on the laces of his
codpiece.
He took hold of her nipple in his teeth and bit down, very
gently.
"Yes," she encouraged him. "Harder."
He obeyed, tugging gently, and she twisted under him,
moaning slightly—and then she shuddered, jerked back from
him until her nipple tore free of his teeth, trailing blood, and
shoved him away, sitting up frantically, and drumming one
frustrated fist on the bed linens.
"Lady?" Telgaert asked, in hurt astonishment. "What befalls?
Have I—done something amiss? I—ah—"
"No," she gasped, wide-eyed, seizing one of his hands in both
of her own and pulling it to her breast. "Something just
happened. The Serpent is—gone"
As if her words had been a signal, there was a sudden, heavy
pounding on the cabin door. Telgaert spun around to stare at it,
and then back at her. Then he choked back a curse, pulled his
hand away, and bounded to his feet.
"Yes?" he snapped, bending his ear close to the door, between
the heavy bolts he'd thrown into place earlier. "What befalls?"

There was no reply—but after a moment, the pounding
resumed, mixed with sharp knuckle rappings. From several
small hands, it sounded like.
Telgaert threw a sharp glance at Orathlee. She hastily laced
herself up and swung herself from the bed to his desk chair,
reclaiming her tankard on the way.
The moment she was settled, Telgaert threw the bolts and
pulled the door open.
Meleira was standing in the dark passage outside, with Talace
peering over her shoulder.
"Well, they didn't get very far," Talace said, sounding
disappointed. "Perhaps they were just talking about his
grandda-"
Meleira elbowed her Hush!" she snapped. "This is serious."
Shooting a glance at Telgaert, she added crisply, "My apologies,
Master. We've no intention of making a habit of disturbing you
two-but this once, there's something my mother must know."
She looked straight at Orathlee without waiting for his reply.
"Yes?" Oradilee asked softly, setting aside her tankard
again—and already suspecting what was to come.
"I laid out tanthor," Meleira said, her eyes very large and
dark, "and Doomdeath came up, over the Great Serpent. Twice I
cast the cards— and twice, the same. One thing more, both
times: Dragonfire."
"The Dragon has slain the Serpent," Orathlee whispered, and
her face was suddenly awash with tears.
A silent flood of streaming tears, out of nowhere. "The last
thing my mother ever said to me…" Orathlee managed to choke
out through them, before real weeping took her. Her daughters
stared-and then ran to her.
Telgaert awkwardly reached out an arm to comfort her, and
then drew it back to let Meleira and Talace embrace her instead.

"Mother, what is it?" Meleira asked anxiously, holding her
tightly. If I thought it was a curse, or a way of telling me 'never,'
" Oradilee struggled to tell her, and then threw back her head to
draw in a shuddering breath. Her daughters saw that hers were
happy tears, and some of the fierceness went out of their
embrace—enough to let their mother reach out over Talace's
shoulder for Telgaert.
"Mother told me I'd find my true man, my soul mate," she
told him with a watery smile, "when the Dragon slew the
Serpent."
Blackgult and Flaeros stared around the Throne Chamber of
Flowfoam, at ruin everywhere.
It was now entirely open to the sky above them—and from
what could be seen through the doors to the south, most of the
palace in that direction was now rubble. Hawkril was grimly
swording the last few Serpent-priests, and many more scaled
men with forked tongues drooping from slack mouths were
already draped dead over tumbled rocks in every direction. Flies
were swarming thickly above the rest of the shattered room,
where armsmen and armaragors lay heaped head high, and the
stink of cooked flesh was strong. Raulin was wandering rather
dazedly among the dead, silently mouthing names of those he
recognized, trying to see and remember who had fallen here-as a
good bard should.
Nearer at hand, Craer stood watchfully, with a dagger ready
to throw, and beside him the Talasorn sorceress was kneeling
over Embra Silvertree, one of her hands on the Dwaer glowing
on Embra's breast—and the other pointing right at the new
arrivals, in case it would prove swiftly necessary to blast them
with magic.
A smile quirked the edge of Blackgult's mouth. "You didn't
take very good care of the place," he commented, waving a hand
at all the devastation.
"Father!" Embra cried, rolling over hastily. "Father,
Sarasper's dead, and Brightpennant, too! I know not how to use
the Dwaer to bring them back! Help us!"

She held out the Dwaer towards him, a tendril of glowing
mist swirling up from it, but Blackgult shook his head sadly as
he went to her and knelt to caress her cheek, and then gently
wipe away the tears that started to trickle down it.
"From this sort of death," he said gently, lifting a hand to
indicate the ruined room around them, "with magic surging
through everything, there's no coming back."
Someone sobbed above him, and the Regent of Aglirta
glanced up. Tshamarra Talasorn stood with her fists clenched at
her sides, trembling. There were tears streaming down her face,
too-but her glare down at Blackgult was like a lance of fire.
There was a needle-bladed black dagger in one of her fists, but
Craer had hold of that wrist, and his own dagger now menaced
her.
Weeping in earnest, now, she turned her head away, and let
go of her dagger, kicking it away before Craer could. "I—I…"
She whirled back to glare at him again, jerking Craer with her
as if he was a child's puppet, and snarled, "I've sworn to slay you.
And now, I— damn you!"
She bent over, lost in sobs and shaking. Blackgult put a hand
on Craer's shoulder and jerked his head in a silent "get hence"
command. The procurer nodded, let go of the sorceress, and
quietly stepped back.
Blackgult reached down, heaved-and suddenly a startled
Tshamarra Talasorn was being carried in his arms like a little
girl, cradled against his torn and dusty black as the Regent of
Aglirta strode carefully along through broken marble and fallen
rubble, heading for the most empty corner of the room.
She stared up at him, face contorting as she fought to control
her tears and her rage. Ezendor Blackgult set her down on a slab
of fallen stone so large that it could serve as a seat, reached to
his belt, and then put a worn and heavy dagger in her hand.
She stared at it, and up at him in bewilderment, sniveling.

Blackgult stooped until he was facing her, with their heads
level-and his face and throat were within easy reach of the
dagger. "Lady Talasorn," he asked gravely, "how much blood is
an oath worth?"
She set her teeth, jaw trembling, and said, "I don't know." It
was more a sob than a firm utterance.
"Nor do I," he told her, "and I've shed a lot of blood and
broken a lot of oaths. I've kept more, but I don't know if the
Three look down on me any more kindly for that."
He looked over her shoulder and years into the past, sighed,
and said, "I've made two bad mistakes—two very evil deeds.
Seducing Embra's mother without slaying her husband first, and
invading the Isles. Both of those, I deserve to the for."
He looked straight into her eyes, and added firmly, "As for the
rest of my deeds or misdeeds, I ask no forgiveness nor feel any
need for it. I did what I had to do. I am sorry your family has
paid so much, in lives and grief. I've felt such pain, too, but I
suppose such words seem empty comfort to you."
Tshamarra looked back at him, and then down at the dagger
in her palm. She'd still not closed her fingers around it. "Why,"
she whispered, "have you given me this?"
Blackgult shrugged. "If you slay me, it will be… a release. I've
nothing to hide from the Three; they know me all too well." He
smiled faintly. "Yet they never seem to want to see me."
"It's a failing we share, I think," Hawkril said softly, from
behind him. For all his size, the armaragor had come up to them
out of all the drifting smoke and death in uncanny quiet, a
borrowed blade ready in his hand.
"Or perhaps," Craer said slowly from behind Tshamarra, over
the keen edge of yet another ready dagger, "they judge us to be a
source of peerless entertainment."
White waves curled up from the bows of four barges as they
raced up the Silverflow, thrust knifelike against the current by

magic.
The tersepts on the second boat glanced often at the two
hired Sirl wizards in their midst. Those mages were white-faced
and sweating already from the strain of holding their spells
together, but the barges were racing along, faster than the
Tersept of Haeltree had once sailed down-river-and that had
been in a small boat whose sails were filled with a strong wind.
Baron Cardassa smiled and drew his sword. It gleamed
mirror-bright, and when he flourished it, the blade gave off a
faint green glow. "While we were in Sirlptar," he announced, "I
bought this blade. It's enchanted—to cleave armor like a kitchen
maid guts an eel, I'm told!-and I don't think I'll tell you just how
much I had to pay for it!"
"Either he stole it, or he can't count without servants holding
out their fingers," Haeltree murmured to Shaeltor—who snorted
in agreement.
"With this goodly steel," Maevur Cardassa boasted, waving it
above his head as if to hack invisible river gulls into diced fowl
and drifting feathers, "we cannot fail! The River Throne shall be
ours forthwith!"
They were moving very fast, but Ibryn had just fallen astern
and the towers of Ool were in sight; it was still a long way to
Flowfoam. One tersept glanced at the sky, as farmers do when
judging how much day is left to them, and the baron saw it.
Scowling, he swung around—almost gutting a guard in the
process. "Faster," he snapped at the two sweating wizards,
waving his magic blade. Emboldened by the flash it made then,
he thrust it aloft, his belly wobbling in the wake of that grand
movement, and laughed aloud. "Aye, we cannot fail!"
"I want to see—just once, and from a safe distance—the shop
where he bought yon tunic… or anything else that size!" the
Tersept of Shaeltor muttered.
"The shop where he stole it, more like," Haeltree muttered
back.

Maevur looked down from being entranced by his blade and
grinned around the boat-a grin that slid off his face into sickly,
crestfallen quivering when he saw that no one was looking.
Sweeping his sword down to point straight at the Sirl mages,
he snarled, "Faster, or whoever was hurling those spells earlier
will be fathering heirs and feasting ere we get to the throne he's
sitting on!"
One of the wizards reeled, and then fell over sideways in his
seat, his eyes going dark. The boats slowed suddenly, wash dying
away around their bows, and tersepts sprang to their feet, looked
at the stricken mage and the terrified one who hadn't yet
collapsed—and started to swear, horribly.
"Lord Regent," Tshamarra Talasorn said faintly, "please take
your dagger back. I'm going to break the first oath of my life."
She turned her head to peer at the procurer standing ready to
slay behind her, and added wryly, "Even if it does leave Overduke
Delnbone deeply disappointed."
Craer spread his hands in an exaggerated feint of utter
innocence that fooled not a single watching eye.
Blackgult smiled down at the sorceress-who managed a shaky
smile back at him-collected his dagger, and raised her to her feet
like a courtier.
"And now, I suppose, the hard and slow work begins," he said
to her with a sigh. "Rebuilding. These overdukes of mine always
seem to have the fun of destroying things in wild battle, and
never—"
"Father," Embra said softly. "Please. Sarasper died for us all,
and… and…"
Blackgult whirled to take her in his arms, "Three Above, but
I'm sorry, lass," he said quickly. "I-forgive a fool."
"Aye," Embra told him shakily, "of course." A crooked smile
touched her lips then, and she added meaningfully, "I've been
doing a lot of that."

A loud, triumphant hiss from above overrode her last
word-and everyone tensed and looked up.
In the roofless gallery above, on the very crumbling edge of
the riven throne chamber ceiling, stood a Serpent-priest, and the
Crown of Aglirta shone in his scaled hand.
With a flourish he crowned himself, hissing, "Sssso! Aglirta
hasss a fitting ruler at lassst!"
Then he flung himself aside with snake-swift speed, and
Craer's hurled dagger flashed over his shoulder to tinkle and
clang harmlessly down a wall.
With a high, wordlessly gibbering cackle of laughter, the
Serpent-priest pranced across the gallery, avoiding another
dagger by apparent luck, and clambered up a sagging
uldiarnwood great-arch wardrobe to the onetime ceiling of the
gallery, heading for the roof.
Hawkril growled, hefted the sword he'd salvaged from
Bloodblade-and threw it, hard.
End over end it whipped, large and heavy enough to howl a
little as it sliced air.
"Pulls to the left," Craer commented.
"Aye, Cleverfingers," Hawkril agreed, "but 'tis to the left he'll
have to go, to climb around that jutting bit of vaulting, and-yes?
To the armaragor's satisfaction, the drooling, gibbering
Snake-priest stopped capering long enough to swing himself up
towards the sky-and straight into the path of the hurled sword.
He stiffened as it took him through one shoulder, overbalanced
backwards, and they saw its bloodred tip standing out of his
chest as he began a swift and tumbling return to the gallery that
ended with a wet, bouncing crash.
The Crown of Aglirta rang once on floor tiles, above, and
arced down into the throne chamber. Hawkril did not even have
to take a stride to put out his hand and catch it.

"Hawkril!" someone cried, from a ruined doorway. It was a
bedraggled, smudge-faced Flowfoam gardener, with his fellows
behind him—and, by the looks of once-grand finery, one or two
courtiers who'd been hiding wherever the gardeners had taken
refuge, too. "King Hawkril! Long live King Hawkril, and Aglirta
with him!"
A few servants peered hesitantly into the ruined throne
chamber through other doors, now—and took up the cry.
Hawkril shook his head and turned to Blackgult, holding out
the crown.
The regent shook his head, too. "None of the barons will agree
to me ruling them longer—or, unless I read them but poorly,
accept any from among their ranks, either. Someone new is
needed." He looked right back at the huge armaragor. "A man
such as Hawkril Anharu."
The warrior overduke shook his head again—and then,
suddenly, turned to Embra. "Lady," he said gently, holding out
the crown to her. "This is more your calling man mine."
The Crown of Aglirta glittered in his hand, before her.
Embra looked down at it, and then back up at him. "The
people have named you," she said softly. "Take up your throne,
Hawkril. Let the good folk of Aglirta be heard and heeded, for
once. Rule well, Hawk."
Hawkril backed away from her, his eyes almost pleading.
"What, sit on a throne and grow old, waiting for the day when
someone decides to ride in and hew me down? Nay, let us have
something different for Aglirta! The Serpent's dead, and the
Risen King, too. Blackgult sired you, of Silvertree—Embra, take
the Crown and rule as Queen of Aglirta!"
Embra shook her head, and there were tears in her eyes
again. "It's not that simple," she said in a rough voice, and then
cleared her throat and said steadily, "As Sarasper said to me: it's
never that simple."

The points of drawn swords ringed the last wizard, who was
gasping and shuddering, his face growing more lined and
cavernous by the minute. The barges seemed almost to fly along,
though, and the tersepts raised a cheer as they rounded one last
bend and caught sight of Flowfoam in the distance.
"Can't… go on," the mage gasped then, his face a dripping
mask of sweat. Ribbons of blood were running from his nose and
mouth now.
A hard-faced tersept put his sword to the wizard's throat. "Do
it," he snapped, "or die. In the new Aglirta, wizards will know
their place at last, and do our bidding—or pay with their lives."
"Knowing wizards," the old man gasped, "I cannot help but
conclude that you'll soon have an acute shortage of persons who
can work magic." And with those words, his eyes rolled up in his
head, and he toppled forward to the deck planks, landing with a
heavy crash.
The barges slowed to a stop very swiftly, turned a little in the
water… and then started to drift backwards in the tug of the
Silverflow.
"We're almost there! Start rowing!" Baron Cardassa shouted,
dancing with rage-then, with a little scream of fury, he swung
his magic blade, slashing at the tersept who'd threatened the
wizard. As promised, it sliced armor like eel flesh on a cutting
board—and blood sprayed from the tersept's opened throat.
Gurgling, the man reeled and fell out of the barge, the
Silverflow swallowing him with the smallest of splashes.
"Any other fools?" the baron roared, looking murderously
around the boat. No one met his eyes or replied—but when he
strode to the prow, growling, his back prickled under the weight
of all the murderous glances that were directed back at him.
"Whoever reigns," the Regent of Aglirta growled, "his—or
her—rule must begin with the fealty of the barons. Let's have
them here." He stretched out his hand to the Dwaer Embra held,
and it flashed.

Flashed, and flashed again. With each burst of light, someone
new stood in the room, blinking around in bewilderment—and
then, with awe, at the devastation. Baron Maevur Cardassa was
one of the first. The Tersept of Bladelock appeared beside him,
and they exchanged sharp looks—what of the barges? And all
their armsmen? What now?—ere. the Tersepts of Ironstone,
Varaedur, and Starntree appeared, in swift succession.
"Hmm," Blackgult murmured, after some dozen tersepts
stood facing him, " 'twould appear that Phelinndar has a Dwaer.
Or someone with him, who knows how to ward with it as swift
as—sorry—a snake."
Craer sighed and turned towards the door. "Right," he said, "I
haven't forgotten our mission. Where's his castle, again?"
Tshamarra Talasorn surprised herself, then, by bursting out
laughing.
Cardassa's armsmen exchanged startled looks with his
bodyguards as the fat baron was suddenly no longer on the barge
with them—and then, before their eyes, one tersept after another
vanished, too, leaving their oars unmanned and dragging.
"What, by the Dark One—?" Suldun snarled, half drawing his
sword, but seeing no foe to bury it in.
"The wizards!" one of the armsmen snapped, pointing at the
men of Sirlptar sprawled senseless on the deck boards. His
sword flashed out of its sheath, and then stabbed—nowhere, as
Suldun's blade met it in an iron-strong parry.
"Don't be a fool" he rasped. "Do these old men look like they
can harm a mouse with spells, right now? No, there's something
worse afoot, som-"
"Enough shouting!" Maevur Cardassa snarled from behind
him. "Do you want all Flowfoam to hear us! Put those swords
away—do you see me prancing around, waving my swor—oh."
Suldun swung around, his jaw dropping. His whirling was
enough to shield the dozen or so armsmen who couldn't stifle

sputters of mirth at the fat baron's rueful expression and hasty
sheathing of his so-splendid magic sword.
The armsman he'd parried, however, was not smiling. His
eyes were narrowing, and he was shouting, "He—you-the baron!
He just appeared, out of the air! I saw him! And his face was all
twisted, looking like someone else! Magic! Foul magic!"
"Don't be a fool," said a tersept who'd just reappeared at the
baron's elbow—doing just what the armsman had described, in
full view of all the staring armsmen on the barge. "Have you
never sailed under arms to Flowfoam before? There's a
spell-barrier, that snatches each one of us away and makes sure
we're not ensorcelled, to keep the—well, to keep the Throne safe."
He smirked. "Luckily, it does nothing to peer at our thoughts."
More tersepts vanished—and reappeared—as he spoke. One of
them was the Tersept of Ruldor, an old and humorless man, and
he strode straight to the baron and muttered something in his
ear.
The baron looked devastated, and then at a loss. Then with
sudden energy he drew his sword, pointed at the nearest dock-a
ramshackle fisherfolk-shared affair of leaning pilings and rotting
boards—and said, "Turn in and make fast! We've been detected,
and twenty wizards wait at Flow-foam to slay us!"
"So we'll wait for them to come and slay us here?" one of the
arms-men snapped.
The baron looked at him in wide-eyed rage, wattles
quivering—and grew a sly look that descended rapidly into glee.
"No, that's the lovely part of it," he hissed conspiratorially. "If we
but wait, they'll very soon fall to fighting among
themselves—there's a confrontation brewing in the throne
chamber itself!—and on the morrow, we'll stroll in and take the
Crown of Aglirta after all!"
There were grumbles of discontent from various of the
armsmen, but the tersepts were all nodding vigorously.
Moreover, the current was strong, and the dock was near at
hand, whereas Flowfoam was a long, hard row against the fastest

part of the river. The barges turned towards shore.
"Isn't Thaebred going a little heavy on the overacting?" one
tersept muttered to the next, so low-voiced that no one else
could hear.
"For playing Maevur Cardassa? I don't know that it's possible
to overact, doing that," the tersept who usually answered to the
name of Raegrel-or, these last few days, to Red
Dream—answered.
The other Koglaur snorted. "I've never seen so many of us
gathered in a single whelming before," he murmured, leaning
even closer, "and I'm not sure many of these armsmen believed
my little spell-barrier tale. Nor do they look like they believe in
ghosts. They'll have us pegged as evil wizards, and will be
watching for the slightest little spellwork."
"You're probably right," Raegrel muttered back, "but why
shouldn't they believe in ghosts? There are ghosts. I've seen
them."
The other Koglaur smiled. "Of course you have. They're not as
plentiful as we need to them to be, though. I've spent a lot of
time being a ghost, to a lot of Aglirtans."
Raegrel stared at him, decided he was being truthful, and
shuddered.
Suddenly, the minor humiliations of being Red Dream in
front of a lot of lust-ridden men thrice a night didn't seem like
such a hard punishment.
The Tersepts of Haeltree and Shaeltor exchanged wary,
fearful looks. A glance down the line of newly arrived nobility in
the throne chamber told them they were among the calmest of
Blackgult's sudden summonings.
There was a smell of fear in the room. Not a man among the
nobles lacked guilty secrets-and some of them had been
positively frenzied in their race to do treason, since swearing
fealty to King Snowsar.

And Regent Blackgult, standing tall in his tattered garb amid
all this ruin, did not look like a happy man.
"Welcome," he said at last, when they'd begun to stir and
murmur among themselves, "traitors."
That brought icy, quivering silence down upon the room.
Blackgult smiled, and added, "But no more of such unpleasant
words now-it's all too late, and for Aglirta, everything's changed.
I could spin you a long and clever tale of intrigues and
treacheries and would-be usurpers, but most of you know more
of it than you'll want to admit, and it really comes down to this:
the River Throne and much of Flowfoam Palace have been
destroyed in sorcerous battle, many folk have lost their lives, and
among the dead are these individuals who should be important
to us all: King Kelgrael Snowsar, who took his own life trying to
bind or slay the Awakened Serpent; the warlord Bloodblade, who
sought to seize rule of this land by force; the dread Serpent itself;
and Overduke Sarasper Codelmer, who was a healer, and took
the shape of a dragon to the slaying the Ser-pent-that we all may
live. He joins King Snowsar among the greatest heroes of
Aglirta."
There was silence as Blackgult turned away, but a murmur
quickly arose behind him-and he whirled around to still it again
with the words, "But there'll be time to honor such great men
later. We are gathered here to rescue what they saved for us: the
realm of Aglirta. Someone must rule, and who 'tis we must
choose now—and, for once, also choose to be loyal."
He looked again at Hawkril, but the armaragor backed away.
"No, no-no thrones for me," he growled. His eyes fell on
Raulin, who was standing with Flaeros watching the proceedings
with eagerness and awe—and he strode over and plucked the boy
forward. "Here," the warrior overduke said fiercely. "Here be
your king!"
"He's just a boy!" a tersept gasped.
"Aye, so? Fewer feuds and grudges and little debts than the
rest of you," Craer Delnbone said lightly, his mocking tone

almost a challenge. "And if he does ill, we'll set him straight or
send him to his grave soon enough. We overdukes must watch
over the realm, as we were bid."
Raulin stared around at all of the gazes suddenly bent on him,
most of them openly incredulous or hostile, and went both
bone-white and wild-eyed-before he suddenly spewed up his last
meal, all over the well-trodden body of a Melted that lay
sprawled under stones in front of him.
"Aye," Blackgult agreed in a dry voice, "he just might make a
king, at that. He's wiser than most kings—and almost all lads.
No bright excitement for a crown, just horror at what it means."
Baron Cardassa drew himself up. "Kneel to that? Some
motherless boy? Do you insult us all deliberately? Do you seek to
goad us all to war, and so doom Aglirta? Do-"
"Do you shut up! the Tersept of Haeltree snapped, from not
far down the line. When Maevur Cardassa trembled in whelming
rage, the tersept added brightly, "O most masterful of
conspirators!"
And then the nobles were all sneering and spitting scorn at
once, loudly ridiculing the very idea of choosing some random
boy to be king over all Aglirta—only to be stilled by a thunderous
roar from a most unexpected source.
"You will all be still! Flaeros Delcamper shouted, his face as
red as ruby wine. In startlement they fell silent, blinking at the
young and slender buffoon who was now dancing on his toes
with anger, that same rage making him bolder than he'd ever
been in his life before. "Listen to me, Lords High and Mighty!"
he snarled. "And heed-for once! I've heard quite enough
preening and sitting in judgment from barons and tersepts in
my life to fill a library of sneering words-but in my very few years
of seeing Aglirta, I've also seen many brave folk fighting, with
barons and tersepts either the very villains they must struggle
against, or nowhere to be seen when the realm needs them!
Where were you when Bloodblade came riding up the Vale,
swording knights and armsmen alike for the crime of staying
loyal to their sworn oaths of fealty? Where were you when the

Serpent-priests made sacrifices of your own people whom you
were sworn to protect, on land you were sworn to keep safe and
peaceful? Where were you just now, when your king needed you
and the Throne stood unguarded?"
A chorus of sneering shouts began, but Flaeros cut them off
with a bitter, louder shout: "No! No, my Lords, your answers
don't matter! If you choose to mock at the regent's choice, I
choose to mock at your excuses and your intrigues and your own
mockings—and, Lords, I am a bard! When I mock, the world
hears! From Carraglas to Gloit, from the shops of Sirlptar to the
taverns in your own towns and villages, folk will hear my
mockeries of you! Yes, and they'll sing along, and whisper my
words at your backs, and tell their sons and daughters, and long
after I am dead and gone-and you are dead and gone, too, taken
by the Three just as we all are, for all your fancy tides-your sons
and daughters will hear my songs and gnash their teeth at the
truth of what their fathers were! Oh, yes, mock away at the boy
king—and I'll spread a ballad of the churls who wouldn't trust a
boy to rule, in their greed to seize the Throne, each one for
himself!"
"Not if you're dead before you leave Flowfoam, you won't," a
tersept growled. Craer gave that man a brittle smile—in the
wake of a hurled dagger that took his cap off and pinned it to the
wall behind him.
"More than one can play that game, Tersept of Fallenbridge,"
he said softly.
"Bah!" another tersept spat. "Bards! Dogs of the realm!"
"Perhaps," the Regent of Aglirta said mildly, "but this one's
also a Tersept of Aglirta."
"I am?" Flaeros gulped, all his rage spent—and as astonished
as the line of nobles were.
"Aye," Blackgult replied, "I just made you one."
He let the gathering storm of scorn gather volume, and then
crooked a little finger. The Dwaer-Stone flashed as it rose out of

Embra's grasp and flew through the air to his hand-and every
noble in the long line facing him was suddenly shocked silent,
with all their hair standing on end and the air in their lungs a
chilling, searing dung. More than a few hands also jerked away
from sword-hilts that were suddenly as hot as roaring fires, to be
left trembling.
Blackgult gave them a smile of cold promise and said, "I am
still regent, Lords of Aglirta—and I can have every last one of you
beheaded, and your families stripped of their land and titles, at
will. Or take lands and castle from any one of you, give them to
your most hated baronial rival—and give his to you. Or simply
blast you all to ashes, here among the honest dead of this day,
and appoint your own kitchen maids barons and tersepts in your
place."
He hefted the Dwaer meaningfully in his hand. "Remember
that… and tell me again if you'll pledge allegiance to King Raulin
Castlecloaks."
Chapter Twenty
Four Once More
The Basket of Eels was not a well-favored tavern. No loud
revels befell there, no high ladies nor young blades of Sirl desired
to strut or be seen there, and its name did not feature
prominently in daily discourse, social plans, or even juicy gossip.
Neither its owner nor its patrons desired it to offer
competition to, say, the Dragonrose House. It enjoyed no
endearing nickname, nor recommendations in polite Sirl society
(if, foreign protestations to the contrary, there was such a thing
as "polite Sirl society"). Yet it was not a place that neighbors
feared, or that frequently hosted fires and stabbings and
splinter-the-stools brawls—nor yet a shuttered, pinchcoin
backwater whose master, tapsters, and wenches starved, or
turned to darker work to keep them-selves in daily gruel.
Rather, the Basket of Eels did very brisk trade among a select

clientele that valued most its very anonymity. Situated a very
short walk from busy Tharaeda Street, abustle with shops
displaying many gleaming wares and fashionable "high houses"
such as the Dragonrose, it was easily reached by persons
ostensibly bound elsewhere. Persons who desired privacy and a
place to meet other persons with similar needs-but not, for once,
the needs catered to up half a hundred shuttered stairs in
Sirlptar.
So popular was the tavern in this regard, in fact, that there
were times when its most desirable meeting rooms were all in
use by a variety of cabals, and conspirators belonging to others
were forced to wait in the comparatively public taproom
downstairs, murmuring less important business to each other in
various of the discreetly separated, dimly lit groupings of chairs
and tables.
So it was that a number of Ieiremborans sat in the deepest,
darkest corner of the Basket of Eels on this day, with almost as
many wealthy and prominent merchants of Sirlptar. Tonthan
"Goldcloak" was in no particular hurry to ascend any of the
well-hidden flights of stairs anyway, because Sathbrar was late,
and he depended on the silk merchant's capable support to carry
his will over the stubborn stances of men of Sirl who considered
that their greater riches gave them the right to dictate
everything-the vintner and wine importer Anglurdiaul, for
instance, whose barrels were widely believed to carry more man
occasional slave cargoes. Anglurdiaul was seated at the other
end of the table right now, and as far as Tonthan was concerned,
that wasn't far enough away. He had no doubt that the vintner
entertained similar opinions.
None of the conspirators looked up when new arrivals stepped
into the cool dimness of the taproom; one never did.
Nonetheless, every one of them knew, by sidelong glance and use
of certain cleverly placed mirrors on the tavern walls, that the
newcomers were three in number, and that largest one-a
fighting man, by the size of his arms and shoulders and the way
he moved, with a long scabbard at his hip—was cloaked and
cowled, and had gone straight to a small, empty corner table. He
took a seat there facing the Ieiremborans, who as usual had

taken the westernmost benches across from their Sirl backers,
and would have been promptly dismissed by Tonthan but for the
behavior of the cowled man's two companions.
These were a small, little man-a procurer, by the looks of
him-and a beautiful young woman of the tallish, slender sort
who might have been described by some as "all bones" were it
not for the smooth grace of her movements. They strolled
steadily across the taproom, neither signaling for wine nor
pausing to look about, and went straight to Hardiman
Anglurdiaul, who was by far the fattest, most richly garbed
merchant mere.
The procurer stopped just out of blade reach of the vintner,
tendered a pleasant smile, and said crisply, "News for you,
Goodman: there's a new King in Aglirta. One anxious to make
peace—and trade—with the Isles and with Sirlptar. Best save
your coins and hides, and conquer in markets, not in castles."
The Ieiremborans froze, as one.
Anglurthaul looked up at him coldly. "And just who asked
you?"
The procurer displayed another airy smile, and bowed with a
flourish. "Ah, I forget myself: Craer Delnbone, Overduke of
Aglirta. You may place yourself at my service, Anglurthaul."
The vintner sneered without bothering to speak, and waved
almost lazily over one of his shoulders.
A man lounging at a table across the room stood up, cloak
falling away from leather harness, and threw a knife with deadly
speed.
Craer plucked it casually out of the air and extended it to his
female companion.
She smiled tightly, palmed it, and murmured a swift spell-and
there were sudden, hastily stilled sounds of startlement all down
the table.

In the hitherto empty air in front of every man a knife was
suddenly floating: a duplicate of the one thrown by Anglurthauls
guard. The points of all of these menacing little deaths hung
about a foot away from the throat of every conspirator.
"Consider this a warning," the sorceress announced calmly.
"We could instead simply kill you all, and be done with concern
over your plans, forever." She gave them a gracious smile, and
added as she turned to go, "I know you are sensible men, and
will conduct yourselves accordingly."
Their seated companion stood up and threw back his
cowl-and there were gasps of rage and dismay from the
Ieiremboran side of the table as they recognized Ezendor
Blackgult, smiling coldly at them from above a fist-sized glowing
stone that hovered beneath his chin. It flashed with sudden
white light, men, as his smile widened—and he, the procurer,
and the sorceress vanished.
As one, the conspirators swore and started to scramble to
their feet-only to fall suddenly silent and still again. None of the
floating knives had vanished, and one man, at least-Hardiman
Anglurdiaul-could attest to their very real solidity… and
sharpness. He dabbed at a goodly wound on one side of his
throat, and had to bend to his boot-top with a grunt of
discomfort to pluck out a brow-rag and staunch the bleeding.
Thus he discovered that, solid or not, the floating knives could
pass through tabletops to maintain their menacing positions.
For his part, Tonthan discovered the deep quality of the wine
cellars beneath the Basket of Eels, as he sat sipping and
pondering—with increasing suspicion—the whereabouts of
Sathbrar. The knives did fade away, hours later.
It would be a very long time before Flow-foam Palace was
rebuilt, and the gardens to its west and south would be a scarred
ruin for seasons to come. To the east, however, where Flowfoam
Isle came to a sharp, high, prowlike point against the onrushing
Silverflow, the tall stand of ultharnwoods stood undisturbed.
They encircled a small green lawn of moss where Embra
Silvertree had long ago buried all that she could find of her
mother—a place that the sun touched and warmed at the height

of day, above the unseen encircling fortress wall but below the
palace towers and shielded from them by the trees.
There was a fresh grave in that splash of sun now, and a few
grim folk standing around it. Three more came down from the
higher, more floral gardens to join them: Craer, Tshamarra, and,
walking a pace behind them, the Baron Ezendor Blackgult.
Embra looked up at their approach, all tears done now. Her
hands were still bloodstained from the slow, painstaking hours
she'd spent on her knees with spells and bare hands, gathering
every last smear and droplet that had been Sarasper.
"Four no more," was all she said as Craer embraced her, and
Tshamarra waited her turn to do the same. It was the procurer's
face that was wet as they parted, and Overduke Delnbone went
to the next waiting embrace-the arms of Hawkril Anharu, who
stood grimly by the foot of the mound of fresh earth that Embra
had so carefully armored in interlocked shards of marble.
The largest warsword that Flowfoam's palace walls could yield
was planted in the earth beside Hawk, with his dagger-belt hung
about its hilt. An armaragor set down his arms out of respect
when laying to rest one of his betters.
Alone on the other side of the grave stood King Raulin
Castlecloaks, unsure of what he should say or do, his own grief
writ clear on his face. His hands still bore the dirt of his first
royal act—digging this grave.
"Fare well, Lord Longfangs," Blackgult said simply, releasing
Embra at last to turn and face the grave where the others stood
with heads bowed.
"Go now and heal the Three, old healer, and make all Darsar
the happier." Then he looked to Raulin.
The king nodded, and said softly, "Tarry in a happier place,
Lord Dragon. May it be many long years before we must dig
another grave here."
There were murmurs of agreement, and then a few more

silent embraces—but no one needed to speak to reach agreement
that they would part, to walk alone for a time.
"Are they done yet?"
"Patience, Lameira. I cannot see, I tell thee." The oldest Lady
of Chambers peered again through the seeing glass that Alresse
Delcamper had gifted her with these six summers ago to mark
her fiftieth year of turning linens and dusting, sighed, and said
severely, "Faerla, I won't be pleased to have to tell thee again:
cease thy gasping and fluttering. Do you want all Flowfoam to
think we of Varandaur have never seen fine things before? Or
know how to comport ourselves before royalty?"
"Oh, Lady Orele, 'tis not this palace-though it does go on for 
miles, does it not? Nor yet these haughty courtiers that the river
seems to spew up like the silver halake run, boat after boat of
them! 'Tis that mighty magic that the Lord Flaeros commands,
to snatch us all-in a trice—thither!"
"He did not command it, Faerla; he arranged it. Our Lord
Flaeros is many things, but 'sorcerer' is thankfully not one of
them." Orele raised herself a trifle and bent a little to one side,
leaning on her silver-handled cane—another gift of the
Delcampers, but Lameira knew quite well that she'd more than
earned it, in the unwelcome embraces of at least three ardent
uncles whose trust Orele had never, by so much as a glance,
betrayed-to see the distant gardens better. "They have so allowed
their trees to grow untrammeled," she said slowly, "that
overlooking yon end garden is extremely difficult. They're
moving apart, though… yes, I do believe they are done."
She straightened, whirled about, and clapped her hands.
"Scamper, girls, scamper! The nightchambers won't prepare 
themselves, you know! I'm sure Lord Flaeros would not have
gone to the truly fearsome expense of such a great
spellweaving-and mind, Faerla, the cost is by far the most
frightening thing about that magic, not the hazy moment you
spent being brought here, so please have done about it—to
bring, as you say, all of us all this way did he not want us to show
these Aglirtans how we of Varandaur can set things to rights!
Ignore the smoke and the blood and the rubble; such things are

no concern of ours—but if I see the Lord Flaeros so much as
frown when the king and the other heroes of Aglirta come in to
feasting and to retire to bed, I shall be most displeased… and
mark you this: I've little doubt that my displeasure will be as
nothing compared to his!"
As if her words had been a warning from the gods, the doors
of the chamber burst open, and Flaeros Delcamper strode in.
"They're coming, Orele, they're coming! Is everything ready?"
Orele leaned on her cane to make her deepest courtesy. The
youngest Lord Delcamper might be a wastrel and a bard and
always messing about with foreigners and their wars -but he was
the only Delcamper man she knew who thanked servants, and
thought of their trouble, or sprang to help them when a
carrychest was too heavy or a corner too high for one's most
perilous reach with a duster. "Not as ready as I'd like it, Lord,
but 'twill not disgrace us, no… I hope."
Flaeros shot out an arm to help her to her feet, kissed her
hand as if she really was a highborn lady, and laughed. "That
tells me it's as ready as any outland place can ever be that you
haven't had years to flog into shape, Lady! I knew you could do
it!"
"B-but why?" Faerla blurted, too excited to be quelled by
Orele's furious look. The youngest chambermaid hadn't
scampered very far to do her last dusting, it seemed—certainly
not far enough. " 'Tis a pleasure to serve your will, my Lord, and
a delight to set anyplace to rights, still more so a grand
palace-but why all this trouble for folk half Asmarand away from
us? Aglirta has been here all our lives-and at war all that time
too, seemingly-why these few folk, now?"
Flaeros Delcamper turned to face her rather stiffly, but
instead of the towering fury that Orele feared—and fully
expected—to burst forth, the maids saw his eyes fill with tears.
He smiled, and said, "I'm glad you asked that, Faerla. I'm sure
many are thinking similar thoughts; always be bold enough to
speak so, and save us all discomfort and unhappiness and time
wasted."

He gestured to the windows as gracefully as any dancer, and
said, "As a bard, I came here to Aglirta because I wanted to see
and hear the greatest bard of all, Stormharp-who turned out to
be one of the men you'll serve this night: Baron Ezendor
Blackgult, the Golden Griffon. I stayed because I heard such
grand tales, and saw folk fighting so valiantly, the Band of
Four-one of whom was just buried, yonder—in particular. But we
do them reverence now-all Darsar should bow before them
now—because they have saved all our lives. The Serpent is dead,
who would have conquered us all-yes, even in far Varandaur-and
that fell beast was slain by their hands and valor. We should
praise them forever, though I know that even with grand ballads
folk all too soon forget.
"It was my honor to fight by their sides, and do what I
could—in a small and fumbling way—and I would gladly be a
slave to any one of them, for the rest of my life."
It was not just Faerla who stared back at him with wide, awed
eyes as he bowed to them, smiled, and took his modest leave.
Orele's gaze was as shocked as that of her youngest and
least-well-behaved maid.
It was Lameira who grew indignant. "A-a Delcamper bowing
to an Aglirtan? To be as a slave? To think that I should hear
that!"
Lady Orele gave her a stern look. "Mind your tongue, girl. If a
Lord Delcamper chooses to kneel before anyone, you can be sure
that they are worth kneeling before! I shall expect to see you
doing so this night, when they come up to chambers!"
Lameira looked at her. "Will you kneel?"
"Of course-and be happy to do anything else they ask of me
right smartly, Lameira—anything, mind."
Lameira looked scandalized. "If I ever thought that a…"
Orele was staring serenely at her, and under that calm gaze
she ran out of fire and things to say all at once.

"That's better, girl," the senior Lady of Chambers said quietly.
"You'll be surprised, in life, at what befalls that you've never
thought of. And your memories will be the richer for it, too,
perhaps enough to keep you warm on lonely nights."
She turned away, took a step that told the watching maids
just how much her reverence to Flaeros had cost her old bones,
and then turned around again, leaning on her cane, and added,
"If it comforts you, Lameira, I've heard from no less than three
folk—one of them this new king of theirs, and the other two
palace servants like us, and so to be trusted-that our Lord
Flaeros tongue-lashed every last baron and tersept in this
kingdom not long ago! The whole glaring line of them,
threatening them with his displeasure if they misbehaved, when
they stood battle-angry and over thirty to his one! Told them off
like children, laid down their duty and their morals for them like
old Galuster does to us, when he shows how to lay a place at
table—and they took it, too! And these folk we're serving tonight
stood with him, and did not think it so strange that a Delcamper
should tell nobles of Aglirta their business!"
The awed look was back in their eyes again, and she turned
away in slow satisfaction and took another three steps before
turning again, and adding sharply, "Mind: this does not give any
of us license to hold ourselves above these poor folk of Aglirta,
and look down prideful noses or speak slightingly. I've met
courtiers here who do all those things—just as I've met ill-taught
servants in Ragalar who do the same… and it looks no more
pretty from them as it would from you! Hold your certainty of
your own peerless worth to yourself, as I do, and smile at all the
world as you do it service!"
Her departure was real this time, and when Lameira made a
face at where her back had been and muttered, " As I do,' " with
incredulity, Faerla struck her sharply with a duster, and
snapped, "That's enough, Lameira! I won't have that woman
mocked! Where would we be-Three heed me, where would the 
Delcampers be—without her?"
Lameira shot her a burning look, but then her gaze fell, and
she said, "That's so. Flaeros-the Lord Flaeros—did say he was

taking the best of Varandaur, because Aglirta needed us… and
men he chose us, out of all the rest."
Faerla smiled. "Yes, he did—and—and, oh, Lameira, this is so 
exciting! Why, they tell me there're the bones of a wizard lying in
a casket in the cellars, and traps everywhere down there, too-so
we're not to go thither-and folk lying dead, and snakes as big as
men lurking about that they haven't found yet, and the one they
call the Lady of Jewels has chambers full of gowns all over with
gems, enough to buy all Ragalar seventy times over, and she can
walk right into the stones of this palace and then make its doors
open and close and its lamps light and douse just as she sees fit,
and-"
Lameira rolled her eyes. Ardent and demanding heroes or not,
it was going to be a long evening.
* * *
"Now, now," Maevur Cardassa snapped, "there's no need to
become restless. We'll just wait until the unpleasantness at
Flowfoam is over, and then we'll make our move."
"Hmmph," an armsman said, staring around at the tilting
tangle of half-rotten fishing huts for perhaps the hundredth
time. "Couldn't we just invade as far as the Flowfoam kitchens
tonight?"
There were chuckles and murmurs of agreement.
"No, we could not," the baron said severely. "I feel the pangs
of hunger as deeply as any of you-"
"Deeper, by the look of you," someone at the far end of the
boat commented, and there were more chuckles, which the
baron loftily chose to ignore.
"-and yet I am disciplined enough to bide here in watchful
patience until the time is right. We risk our very lives in this, I'll
have you remember!"
"How will we know the time is right?"

"I—uh-well, when we see certain folk leaving Flowfoam,"
Cardassa said. "I'll tell you, you may be sure! And then we'll—"
"We're not going to be seeing many folk leaving Flowfoam,
once it gets dark," another armsman observed loudly.
Which was about the same time as a familiar voice from high
up on the bank cried angrily, "There you are! Three above, but
we stood in the Throne Chamber in Flowfoam facing fell magic
and Blackgult and all his bravos—and where were you? Alone we
stood against them, and only through cool heads and
fearlessness and-well, valor, though I say it myself—we prevailed!
Aglirta has a new king-a motherless boy whom we can easily
steer to our desires, or slaughter if he balks, and there'll be no
need for swords right now, so—"
Maevur Cardassa had been puffing and staggering his way
around a particularly ramshackle hut and down the bank all
through these brave words, using his enchanted sword as a
walking stick—but now he'd come to a disbelieving halt, with a
straggling line of tersepts behind him.
Baron Cardassa stared at-Baron Cardassa.
Tersepts stared at their counterparts, and armsmen and
Cardassan bodyguards aboard the barge looked from one to the
other, eyes narrowing.
"Magic," an armsman growled. "I thought so!" He and Suldun
of the bodyguards drew their swords together, and advanced
on—the tersepts and the baron who were sharing this barge with
them.
"So," the armsman began, as his blade thrust out to menace
the false Maevur Gardassa, "who are you, really? Sirl wizards
trying to ruin our bid for the Throne, or-?"
"Wh-what treachery is this?" the fat man just beyond the
point of his sword gabbled. "Do your sworn duty, and attack yen
impostors! I, Maevur of Cardassa, command you!
"What?" the baron on the shore howled. "What treachery is

this? Those men aboard are the impostors! Slay them! Slay
them with your swords now, before they can use their deadly
magics on you!"
"It might be easier to slay them all," someone commented
sourly-in the moment before the armsmen and bodyguards
aboard the barge surged forward to hack at all the tersepts-some
of whom promptly leaped into the river and sank like stones.
"Hold!" someone high on the bank roared, and there came the
call of a battle horn. The baron and tersepts ashore and everyone
on the barges swung around to look up, and found themselves
gazing at a hundred or so armaragors and armsmen, some on
horseback—and many with loaded crossbows leveled in their
direction.
"Who," the Baron Cardassa ashore stammered, his fearful
voice rising almost to a scream, "are you?
"Men of Bloodblade, Rightful King of Aglirta," was the stern
reply. "Who do you swing swords for?"
"A new king for Aglirta!" the baron on the bank said hastily.
"And you others?" the swordcaptain of Bloodblade snapped,
looking at the barges.
There was a confusion of replies, as armsmen and bodyguards
named their various lords, and the swordcaptain listened, looked
disgusted, and brought his arm down in a curt signal.
Crossbows thrummed in deadly chorus, and the barges were
suddenly full of staggering, dying men, with quarrels standing
out of them. Many leaped or fell into the water, but high on the
bank windlasses were whirring away as the crossbowmen
readied their weapons to fire again-and on the barges, there was
no cover at all.
The barons and tersepts on the shore watched in horror, then
took to their heels and fled. The swordcaptain waved his hand in
another signal, and the horsemen around him spurred their
mounts down the bank, drawing blades as they went.

The screams that followed were few and short. The
crossbowmen took turns firing at the heads of the few who
sprang into the river, until the waters were stained with blood
and thick with drifting, unmoving bodies.
"Buldrim," one of the swordcaptain's men snapped, "a lot of
those on the barges simply—vanished. Gone, with magic, while
we were winching and choosing our next targets."
"How many?"
The warrior shrugged. "More than twenty."
Buldrim went pale. "That many wizards? Gods, we could be a
thousand, and they'd still fell us in a breath or two! But whom do
they serve? The regent?"
"We'd best begone, no matter what," the warrior replied, and
Buldrim nodded. "Horsemen," he snapped, "upriver to Thuss
Point, there! Seize those docks, and then put your horses in yon
sheds and hide there with them. Forage for hay, but otherwise
keep hidden. All others, seize those barges—we row to
Flowfoam!"
"Shall we slay this one? Or roll him into the river and let the
water do the killing?"
Buldrim looked down, and a pain-wracked Suldun looked
back up, bleeding profusely from the holes left by three crossbow
quarrels being wrenched out of him.
"Well?" Buldrim asked. "D'you want to lie here and watch us
conquer Flowfoam, or be free of your pain?"
"Beware," Suldun whispered hoarsely. "We were duped by
wizards…"
Buldrim nodded. "So much we know." He glanced up at
Flowfoam, rising above them now as the armsmen pulled
strongly at the oars, opened his mouth to point ahead and turn
and give the helmsman orders—then recoiled.

A man was standing on the deck facing him-where the
bloodstained boards had been empty a moment before. It was
Sendrith Duthjack, in full armor but helmless, and with a fresh
swordcut on one cheek. His gaze was fierce as he looked at the
swordcaptain with a nod of recognition—and approval.
"Lord Bloodblade!" Buldrim stammered, and went to one
knee. "Lord, command me!"
"Turn about!" Bloodblade ordered sternly. "Turn about, all of
you! Back to the docks whence you came!"
"At once," Buldrim agreed hastily, waving at the helmsman to
turn the great rudder, "but Lord, why?"
"Pull in close, all four boats together so that all may hear, and
I'll tell you," the warlord ordered.
When this was done, oars stretched and held at both ends to
keep the boats rail to rail, Bloodblade strode to the very center of
the joined decks, looked around, and said, "Loyal Aglirtans, hear
me! You have been duped—horribly tricked! Misled into
betraying your land!"
"We follow only you, Lord Bloodblade!" one of the armsmen
called, and there was a chorus of agreement.
"Think you so?" The warlord smiled at them-and then his face
changed, becoming green and scaled-a serpent's head, with
forked tongue and all!
"What if I told you sssomething clossser to the truth?" the
Serpent-priest asked them, looking around at the dumbfounded
warriors on the gently rocking barges. "What if I told you the
real Bloodblade wasss killed yearsss ago? I took hisss face and
shape, to conquer Aglirta for the Ssser-pent!"
An armsman yelled in horror and scrabbled for his
crossbow-and the snake-man's hand came up, with a slender
wand in it that spat once. A beam of flame snarled forth, and
they saw the warrior's face melt away into a skull mantled with
ashes. As the man slumped over, the Serpent-priest asked

calmly, "Anyone elssse?"
He spun around, to make sure no warrior behind him was
readying a stealthy weapon, then told them, "Now, all isss over.
You have won, becaussse the Ssserpent liesss ssslain. And you
have lossst, becaussse I ssshall not leave you alive to gloat!"
And with a horrible laugh he slashed at the barges around
him with more beams of flame, firing small snarling spheres of it
into the faces of warriors who scrambled up to hurl daggers or
their swords, until flames were licking up from the deck boards
all around him.
And then, of course, he vanished into the same thin air he'd
come from.
Men were screaming and shoving the rocking barges apart as
fire snarled up around them; only Buldrim's barge had been
spared the flames, and men tried to leap to it or to dive into the
river-only to fall to a new slayer.
The helmsman had produced a wand of his own that spat
long needles of dark force. His first took Buldrim through the
belly, sliding through armor plate as if the swordcaptain wore
none, and left the officer whimpering on his face on the deck.
Then he dealt with men thrashing in the river or trying to board.
When there were no more feebly swimming or desperately
leaping men to be seen, the helmsman coolly raked the barge
with slaying needles, putting them through heads until not a
man still stood.
The barges drifted downstream, burning merrily, and the
helmsman strolled his deck sending a thorn here and a thorn
there-wherever he saw movement.
When there was no one left to slay, he booted Buldrim's sword
into the water, bent over the stricken swordcaptain, and rolled
him over.
Buldrim lay shoulder-to-shoulder with the sorely wounded
leader of the Cardassan bodyguard, bunking up at the familiar
face above him. It was smiling.

"Wh-why did you do this, Ansyarde?" Buldrim gasped,
through the deepening mists of pain.
The man grinned. "I'm not Ansyarde." His face wavered,
flowed—and was suddenly Duthjack's, with swordcut-and then,
the flesh melting into unmarked smoothness as Buldrim stared,
without. "And I'm not Blood-blade, either."
The face changed again, becoming the scaled head of the
Serpent-priest, and hissed, "Or a Sssnake-lover, either. That
wasss all a trick, to turn you back from ssslaying another king.
Thaebred'sss a good actor, isssn't he?"
"Who are you, really?" Buldrim gasped, urgently. Everything
was going dim.
The scaled snake-head looked down at him for a moment,
then the shoulders below it lifted in a shrug. "Very well—you'll
die easssier, knowing, and we're not unmerciful."
His face changed again, becoming… utterly blank. A mouth
slit opened in the smooth mask of flesh, and smiled down.
Buldrim and Suldun beside him gasped the same horrified
name together: "Faceless!"
"Indeed. Koglaur, we call ourselves. The true guardians of
Aglirta."
"You… you…" Buldrim struggled to speak against the blood
and pain rising in him, and then blurted: "Bloodblade seeks a
new glory for Aglirta, a new road to greatness. I and the others
who ride with him can see that road… taste it… If you Faceless
are truly the guardians of Aglirta, why d'you slay us?" He
coughed, choked, and then managed to add, "As we try to hew
that new road to glory? Why?"
The Koglaur smiled grimly. "Peace to you, Buldrim. You
fought well, and made only one mistake: you chose the wrong
road."
Buldrim moaned, then, as the pain and the rising blood he'd

been wrestling with for so long rose to overwhelm him. He tried
to sob, tried to lift his hand… and failed. His head lolled to one
side, and the last things he saw were the sky and the Silverflow,
flowing endlessly…
When the last rattling breath died away, the Koglaur rolled
the sword-captain's body off the barge. Then he turned back to
Suldun—who tried to shrink away, mewing in helpless fear, but
came to a gasping halt as his wounded body failed him, and pain
caught hold of him with fingers of fire.
The faceless head above him twisted again, flowing like
porridge beneath a cook's paddle, and then suddenly spun into…
the likeness of a beautiful brown-eyed lass. The most beautiful
woman, Suldun realized dazedly, that he'd ever seen.
"There," the Koglaur asked, in a soft, husky, utterly feminine
voice, "is that easier?"
She—it—the Koglaur looked down his body, then, as Suldun
Greatsarn struggled to find words to reply, and murmured
something he did not understand. It sounded like the tongue of
another land, but not one he'd ever heard in all the markets of
Sirlptar. Now she was laying long, rubbery-fingered hands on
Suldun's wounds-right on the gaping holes left by the-gods!
Suldun convulsed with the pain, shuddering… then sank back
onto the deck, sighing, as coolness flooded through him. It was
slowly taking the pain with it, leaving him… whole. He knew it,
somehow: he'd been healed completely.
And yet he was so weak he couldn't lift his shoulders an inch
off the deck beneath him.
"Lie still," that husky voice said from above. "You've lost
much blood."
There were surging sounds and splashes, the sounds of large
bodies heaving themselves up out of the water—and so they
were: water-dripping Faceless whose faces were smooth
expanses of nothing, but who still seemed to look at him as they
found their feet and padded off down the deckboards to take oar

after oar, and end the drifting.
They were near the fishing dock they'd started from, and the
faceless men rowed only a few strokes ere the barge grated gently
against the pilings. Swift, rubbery hands moored it, tying its
ropes securely.
"Fare thee well, Suldun Greatsarn," the Koglaur said to him,
with a wink and a wave, as she—it was impossible to see that
magnificent body move and think of it as anything but
"she"-rose and stepped onto the dock.
"Wha… why did you heal me?" Suldun gasped. "What am I to
you?"
"An Aglirtan," she said softly, looking down. "We like
Aglirtans, and give our lives defending them, all too often." She
bent closer, and added, "We always like to leave a few of you
alive who've seen us, to keep the whispers alive about us, up and
down Aglirta. Fear is like a second sword in one's hand."
"And if I tell folk you defend us, and are not to be feared?"
The Koglaur laughed. "They won't believe you. They never do."
And she-he—it turned away, leaving Suldun believing until his
dying day that those last three words had held more sadness
than he'd ever heard in a human voice before.
They were human, weren't they? Well, what was "human"?
"You could have been king," Embra murmured, as they linked
hands, walking slowly to nowhere through the gardens. A few
courtiers were lighting hanging candle-lamps here and there,
but they drew aside whenever the pair of overdukes approached,
leaving them to walk alone.
"You could have been queen," Hawkril rumbled back at her.
"Aglirta needs someone strong and loving and swift of wits. Why
not a queen to rule the Vale? You'd have been better at it than
any of us."
She lifted her shoulders in a shrug. "I don't know," she said

lightly. "Craer can look pretty good in a dress, when he has to."
Hawk snorted. A few paces farther on, he said, "We jest
together all the time, we F—three. I like that. It warms me,
makes me feel wanted and… welcome at table. And yet I want to
speak plainly now, Lady."
"Lady mine," she corrected, and he came to a halt, holding
her hand tightly.
"That's what I want to talk of," the armaragor said quietly, his
eyes steady on hers. "I—I am too much lowborn Aglirtan not to
want to bed a woman and feel she's either a friend, or bought for
a night, or a warrior's wenching in passing—or someone he can
stand with, lifelong, and should wed. You are the first of those
choices, I will never let you be the second or third, and I—I very
much want you to be the fourth."
Embra looked back at him. "Did you not hear me refuse
Kelgrael before all the court, and cleave to you?"
"Aye. Aye, I did, and want the world to know. I want to shout
it from the battlements," Hawkril growled with sudden fire.
"I-I-can we be wed? I mean… you'll have me?"
Embra smiled. "Of course I will, you great dolt. All you had to
do was ask."
His eyes glimmered in the lamplight. "And—and—you don't
mind a 'great ox of an armaragor' beside you?"
"I don't even mind a great ox of an armaragor inside me," she
told him gently, "so long as it's you. Marry me, my Lord
Silvertree—please?"
"Ah-uh—that's what I was going to… ask you," Hawkril said in
some confusion, flushing crimson.
"Yes, and I want to be your lady so much I want to beg you for
it— here, on my knees."
She knelt before him, leaving the armaragor startled and

looking around to see where the courtiers were. They stood
nearer than he'd thought, but were carefully looking away.
"They'll think you—pleaded with me to-"
"I want them to," she told him, eyes bright. "As it happens, I
do have to beg you for something else—and give you a promise."
"A-what?" Hawkril floundered, knowing his tongue wasn't
forging ahead all that well, but powerless to free himself from
this sudden confusion that seemed to have… overwhelmed him.
"Hawkril, please forgive me," Embra said in a voice that was
suddenly small and on the verge of tears, "for using my magic to
force you, compelling you against your will. I promise never to
do it again. Ever."
"Force me? When did… ?"
"The night we first met, when we were fleeing my father, and
I made you carry me into the Silent House."
"I hit you," Hawkril said slowly, remembering, and started to
kneel. She thrust her hands up under his knees with unexpected
strength to prevent his descent, and then with a grunt of effort
stood, thrusting him upright again.
"Hawk," she said, looking into the armaragor's eyes as their
noses almost touched, "don't do that. I don't need you to kneel to
me like a servant. I need you to forgive me and tell me all is right
between us."
"Oh." Hawkril blinked. "Well, 'tis, of course, my Lady."
She gave him a dirty look, and he amended hastily, "Embra, I
forgive you. All is right between us."
She smiled and kissed him. "Good." She took Hawk's hand
before his arms could tighten around her and stepped away, so
they were walking together once more.
Embra promptly guided the armaragor onto another grassy

path, to where it was darker. Then she turned her head to look
into his eyes, grinned, and said, "You can hit me whenever you
like, if it makes you feel better."
"Umm," Hawkril replied, his fingers tightening in hers. "You'll
hit me back, won't you?"
"Of course."
They walked and talked a long time in the gardens, and when
at last they came in, Lady Orele was waiting for them. She led
them up into the east wing, showing the Lady Overduke first to
her rooms-but hesitated not a moment when Embra said softly
that she preferred to sleep with the Lord Hawkril, and in his
chambers. Orele merely smiled and wordlessly led them on down
the high hall to another door.
There the old lady plucked at Embra's sleeve, and when the
Lady Overduke bent close, she whispered, "Three watch over you
and keep you, Lady." Then she rapped on the door with her
silver-handled cane, and added as the maids within started to
draw it open, "May you be happy together—Darsar knows you
deserve it."
And then the Lady of Chambers turned and was gone, without
another look or word, walking very slowly and leaning on her
cane.
"Had she a lover, ever?" a guard murmured to his fellow, as
the Lady Orele stumped past, leaning more heavily on her cane.
"Vaevra will know," the other guard replied, "or be able to
mind-pry and find out. You're too softhearted, Shalace."
"I don't know that there is such a thing as too softhearted for
our kind, Mrivin," the first Koglaur said, with just a touch of
sharpness. "When we know the likeness of her man, I'll shape it
and go to her. Gods, but she's earned it."
"Careful with the hearts of the old," Mrivin cautioned. "Find
out what became of him, if she knows, and how they parted,
first. Unless you want to spend the rest of your days snapping at

chambermaids and leaning on a cane."
Shalace shrugged. "There are worse ways to serve."
"See? The flowers themselves hide before your beauty," Craer
said lightly.
"Those close up every night," the tall, slender sorceress told
him calmly. "Is your courting usually this labored, Overduke
Delnbone?"
"Lady, you wound me," the procurer protested, looking up
into her eyes. "My intentions are honorable-entirely honorable."
Tshamarra gave him a rather wry smile. "I'm sure your
lovemaking always is." She strolled on, and he had to hasten to
return to her side.
Calmly, the Lady Talasorn put a hand across his back and
clasped him against her, so they were walking hip to hip—or
rather, hip to ribs.
"Your eyes are like those lamps they're lighting," Craer began
again, smoothly.
"With little flames in them, and moths fluttering around
them? I hope not" she replied.
"Lady, you're not making this easy," he protested.
Her teeth flashed in a soundless laugh. "You amuse me, Craer.
I've never met such a master of madcap nonsense before, and—"
"Lady Talasorn, will you marry me?" Those words came out in
a rush, almost snapped forth-and she felt him tense, and falter in
his stride.
Tshamarra stopped, and his hand stole around her waist.
She reached down, took hold of that hand, and firmly slid it
down to cup her behind.
"No, Lord Craer," she replied, "not for many years—or ever. I

haven't the slightest desire to formally pair with any man—or
woman or shapeshifting serpent either, before you ask."
"Oh," Craer replied, glibly.
"Nor will I join the ranks of the Four, as I heard you
suggesting to Embra in a whisper that should have been just a
bit softer."
"I…" He sighed. "I wanted you to overhear that."
"You surprise me not, Craer. Nothing you do is likely to
surprise me in the future, either. I begin to know you too well."
"Too well?"
"As I said, it's something I'm beginning to do—and 'tis time to
take another step on that journey." Tshamarra turned off the
path, back onto the round lawn where Sarasper lay buried.
"I've never known a man's embraces before," the tall sorceress
announced calmly, "and I would like to change that-this night,
and with you, Lord Craer."
"Uh?" Craer commented, brightly.
"Remove your clothes," she said crisply, waving one hand at
the ground before them and raising the other to the clasps of her
gown. "There's no need to go inside when there's a perfectly good
soft moss-bed here."
Epilogue
The servants seemed to know just when they reached that
time of readiness for other things beyond awakening, stretching,
and greeting one's bed partner. Wonderful smells heralded the
discreet placing of the covered trays—and warm spiced cider, a
treat that made Tshamarra open her eyes wide and declare that
from this day forth, last surviving lady members of the family
Talasorn would greet opening days with no other throatslake!
"Gods, but 'twas good!" she murmured to Craer, when

servants guided them together in a high-vaulted hall. "Nothing
like the great Craer, of course…"
The procurer choked, thumped at the base of his throat, and
hissed, "D'you mind, Lady? A man has a reputation-!"
Tshamarra rolled her eyes. "Aye, and I'm still hearing bits of
yours. From the servants, the guards, some of the gardeners-you
know the grounds here quite well, I believe—several handfuls of
courtiers, and no doubt many more good folk of Aglirta, if I
perchanced to meet with them."
"Oh, gods" Craer muttered.
"Oh, yes, Lord Delnbone, I'm going to lead you a merry
dance," she whispered, taking his elbow and steering him
through the door that two sword-saluting guards had just
thrown open. "Depend on it."
"Ahem," Craer replied brightly, as his eyes met those of
Embra, which twinkled knowingly; Hawkril, who looked briefly
at the ceiling; Blackgult, who grinned openly; and King Raulin
Castlecloaks, who merely looked pleased to see him and entirely
unaware of the look Lady Talasorn had thrown the shortest,
most handsome Overduke of Aglirta as they'd parted to seek the
last two seats at the table.
"Behold the Garden Room," Embra murmured, gesturing at
the windows. The view looked east, out over descending terraces,
lawns, and woods, and Craer sighed, smiled, and said, "Gould we
perhaps stay here for once—just for a few days?"
"As it happens," King Raulin said a little hesitantly, "Lord
Blackgult and I have been conferring about that. I'd like you
to—it's my… it's our royal request that you-"
"Raulin," Craer told him, "just say: 'I'd like you to' and when I
say no, then say: 'That was a royal command, dolt,' and we'll get
along just fine."
Tshamarra snorted, clapped a swift hand over her mouth, and
shook her head ere she looked away.

Raulin flushed, licked his lips—and then laughed helplessly
and complained, "How'm I ever going to do this right,
Crae—Lord Craer—if I have to talk one way to some and another
way to others?"
"That's what being king is all about," Craer told him. "You lie
foully to some, and lie sweetly to others. You keep your true
thoughts to yourself, and—oh, Three Above, Raulin, be different
than all the others, please? Just speak plainly. Always. That will
give you the pure pleasure of interrupting any courtier who
starts in with silver-tongued tra-la and bidding him speak
plainly. Or else. It might even set a new royal fashion, and you'll
actually get some work done, and perhaps even win the respect
of the people."
There were grins all around the table, now, and Hawkril
rumbled, "I warned you. Shut him up or send him out to chase a
maid or something— or you won't get anything said or done."
"Ooh," Tshamarra chimed in, rolling her eyes. "Chase me,
Lord Delnbone, chase me!"
"Hmmph. Send her with him," Blackgult told the king. At her
sudden, anxious look, he added hastily, "Nay, Lady Talasorn, I
but jest. I'm not trying to exclude you from our councils, or our
company."
"Lord Blackgult, my name is 'Tshamarra'-hard to say and
spell, I know, but—" I
"Oh, gods" Embra said, looking at the ceiling, "we're going to
be here all morning! You recall Craer's urging to speak plainly,'
Raulin? Try it-right now. You talked with my father, and the two
of you deci—"
"The king decided," Blackgult chided her. Embra gave him a
withering look, and he spread his hands, and said, "Leave the lad
some dignity, Embra, will you? He is king, after all."
"Hoy!" Raulin shouted, bringing his hand down on the table
with a slap that made the goblets dance. As they all turned to
look at him in startled silence, he winced, shook his hand

experimentally, and announced, "That hurts!"
"Yes," Craer agreed. "That's why it's customary to grasp the
throat of a handy servant and bang his head on the table,
instead. Choose one who lacks a long nose; they bleed less."
Raulin snorted, shook his head, and laughed helplessly.
"Bla-Black—" he appealed, reaching out a hand to the baron,
who rolled his eyes and leaned forward.
"After due consideration and conferral with his trusted
advisor-"
Embra snorted, but not with mirth; Blackgult ignored her.
"-the king has reached a decision, and now wishes to make
known to you his royal command: that the surviving Overdukes
of Aglirta resume their previously assigned mission, with an
amendment. To speak plainly, you are to find the baron who
secretly has a Dwaer-Phelinndar, I believe, from his success at
blocking my attempts to summon him— as well as searching for
the other two Worldstones. Bring them all back. Now that the
Serpent is gone, whoever holds them may well think there's no
reason not to experiment with the Stones or use them to
do-anything."
"We are three, not Four," Embra said slowly, "and lack a
Dwaer to fight with. How shall we survive to do anything more,
if we do meet Phelinndar—or any others who bear
Dwaerindim?"
Blackgult reached under the table. When his hand came back
up into view, he was holding her Dwaer. He handed it to her,
then looked around the table with a crooked grin. "How do you
feel about taking a former baron and ex-regent into your ranks?
Can you lower yourselves that much?"
Craer looked at Hawkril, who blinked back at him and turned
to Embra. She looked at Craer, men at Tshamarra, who with a
forth-and-back crook of one silent finger indicated that she
would accompany Craer, and he would bide with her.

The Lady of Jewels lifted her eyes and looked at her father
across the table, then. "Well," she said with a smile, "we could
try."
DRAMATIS PERSONAE
ALHAND, JALEBRA: a buxom, not overly bright young lass of
Searith in upland Ornentar, where she works at Saerith Mill.
AMBELTER, INGRYL: Spellmaster of Silvertree and strongest
wizard of the Dark Three (the unscrupulous, evil mages who
served Baron Faerod Silvertree); ambitious, shrewd in the ways
of life and politics in the Vale, he's a creative and very powerful
spellweaver. Though slain in The Kingless Land, he seems to
have found a way to live on, beyond death. His spells have won
him control over the Melted, stumbling zombie creations of the
dead wizard Gorloun (so named because their flesh has sagged
and flowed, as if partially melted), and grandly proclaims
himself "Spellmaster of Flowfoam."
ANGLURTHAUL, HARDIMAN: a fat, sneering, coarsely
aggressive vintner and wine importer of Sirlptar who drapes
himself in riches and never goes anywhere without at least one
bodyguard—which is a wise tactic, given his great wealth of
enemies.
ANHARU, HAWKRIL: "the Boar of Blackgult," an armaragor
(unranked battle knight) in the service of the Baron Blackgult,
whom he was once personal bodyguard to; a man of unusually
large build and strength; member of the Band of Four and
longtime friend and sword-companion of Craer Delnbone, who
often calls him "Tall Post."
ARANDOR, MRANRAX: archwizard of Elmerna, growing
increasingly ambitious-and short of cash.
ARATHRO, BAERM: a rather clumsy brigand working the
coast road of Asmarand, nigh Shaunsel Rise (a farm-cloaked
ridge between Elmerna and Teln).
ARDURGAN, BELTH: a retired hiresword, now turned village
wood-carver. Much scarred and calm in a fray, still a good

hunter and battle bowman.
BAERM: see Aradiro, Baerm
Band of Four, the: our heroes, the King's Heroes, the
Awakeners of the Risen King; an independent band of four
adventurers first thrown together in The Kingless Land (see
Anharu, Hawkril; Godelmer, Sarasper; Delnbone, Craer; and
Silvertree, Embra), whose adventures yet bid fair to change the
face of Aglirta.
BELKLARRAVUS, GLARSIMBER: Baron of Brightpennant,
formerly the Tersept (non-noble ruler) of Sart but promoted by
King Kelgrael Snowsar in The Vacant Throne; a stout, brawny
warrior going to fat, but still infamous as from his days as a
mercenary war captain, "The Smiling Wolf of Sart."
BELRASTOR, SAURN: oldest and most respected uplands
farmer of the Tarlagar backcountry nigh the Windfangs foothills,
who habitually drinks at the Glory of Aglirta tavern, says little,
and owns much land and a part of many local businesses. A
former courtier and sometime warrior, more given to dignified
tolerance than dominance of the many folk who owe him coins.
BLACKCLOAK, THAEKER: wealthy uplands farmer of swift
tongue and some pride, who dwells in the Tarlagar backcountry
nigh the Windfangs foothills, and habitually drinks at the Glory
of Aglirta tavern.
BLACKGULT, EZENDOR: Regent of Aglirta and Baron (Lord)
of Blackgult, known as the Golden Griffon for his heraldic badge,
longtime rival to Faerod Silvertree for rule of Aglirta and leader
of a disastrous attack on (planned conquest of) the Isles of
Ieirembor just prior to The Kingless Land, which resulted in the
seizure of his lands by Silvertree and his warriors (including
Craer and Hawkril of the Four) all being declared outlaw. A
sophisticated, intelligent warrior and athlete, Blackgult has
dabbled in spellcraft and collected many enchanted items, using
their powers to wear another shape, wherein, as the seldom-seen
bard Inderos Stormharp, Master Bard of Darsar, he's become
famous as the greatest living bard of Asmarand, if not all Darsar.
He is the true father of Embra Silvertree.

BLADELOCK, MAURYM: this darkly handsome, taciturn
tersept has always been short of money and long on foes and
feuds—and joined Baron Cardassa's conspiracy in hopes that its
success would free him of both shortcomings, forever.
Increasingly, he hopes that it won't do so in a very final wrong
manner.
Bloodblade: see Duthjack, Sendrith "Bloodblade."
BLUE PASSION: a pleasure-dancer at the Dragonrose House
dining club in Sirlptar, recognizable by the blue cord that binds
her hair. She's also taller and darker than her partner Red
Dream.
BOWDRAGON, ARAUNDOR: the balding, stolid third
Bowdragon brother, father of three sons and four daughters, all
of whom outstrip him in sorcery-though he's no weakling with
spells, and is indeed an "arch-wizard" in the reckoning of most
realms.
BOWDRAGON, DOLMUR: the eldest Bowdragon brother,
patriarch of the family, and a mighty archwizard in his own
right. Sensitive, even-tempered, and serious, the father of
Cadialeira (now dead) and Eridi.
BOWDRAGON, ERITH: the shy, physically and magically
weak son of Dolmur.
BOWDRAGON, ITHIM: the fourth and youngest Bowdragon
brother, father of Jhavarr and five daughters, the eldest of whom
is Maerla.
BOWDRAGON, JHAVARR: powerful young sorcerer of a
family known for its magical might, who seeks to avenge the
death of his "sister" (actually cousin; all of the current
Bowdragon younglings were raised together, and regard each
other as siblings) Cathaleira Bowdragon, who was slain by her
Aglirtan master, the archwizard Tharlorn of the Thunders.
BOWDRAGON, MAERLA: the raven-haired, beautiful,
hot-tempered, and icy-tongued eldest daughter of Ithim, who
lacks but one year to have been alive for a score of seasons.

BOWDRAGON, MULTHAS: the hot-tempered second
Bowdragon brother. Bearded, darkly handsome, and the father
of no less than seven daughters!
BULDRIM: see Kavalanter, Buldrim.
CARDASSA, MAEVUR: Baron of Cardassa, a fat, lazy,
moon-faced and oiled-haired wastrel of Elmerna who inherited
the barony of Cardassa upon the death of his distant cousin, the
much older and far different Idiclammert "the Old Crow"
Cardassa (a demise which befell in The Vacant Throne). He
promptly began to nurse plans to snatch the Throne of Aglirta
for himself, gathering tersepts and hiring wizards to his cause.
CASTLECLOAKS, RAULIN TTLBAR: young would-be bard
and son of the respected bard Helgrym Castlecloaks; briefly a
companion to the Band of Four.
CODELMER, SARASPER: a healer and former courtier long
in hiding in one of three beast shapes he can take: bat, ground
snake, or (his most favored) the man-eating "wolf-spider" or
longfangs; old, gruff, and homely; member of the Band of Four
and friend to Craer when the latter first entered the service of
the Baron Blackgult.
DARK THREE, THE: a trio of evil, powerful, and treacherous
wizards who served the Baron Faerod Silvertree; they all
perished in The Kingless Land, and in descending order of rank,
power, and age, were: Spell-master Ingryl Ambelter; Klamande
Beirldoun; and Markoun Yarynd.
DELCAMPER, ALRESSE: ancient, bedridden matriarch of the
Del-camper clan, a spirited beauty in her day but now little more
than a wrinkled bag of bones clinging to life through her sharp
wits and sharper tongue. Alresse has not left the Delcamper
castle of Varandaur in thirty summers-and will probably never
leave, now; when she dies, she'll simply be taken downstairs to
its crypt.
DELCAMPER, FLAEROS: young bard, of the wealthy
Delcamper merchant family of Ragalar, equipped when traveling
with the Vodal, an enchanted ring that's an heirloom of the

Delcampers and allows (among other things) its wearer to see
through magical disguises and illusions. Still quite naive but
acclaimed for his bardic skills by no less than Inderos
Stormharp, he's known (sometimes mockingly) as "the Flower of
the Delcampers."
DELCAMPER, HULGOR: one of the uncles of Flaeros
Delcamper. A big, florid, hunt- and wine-loving man, swift with
his sword and swifter with his temper.
DELCAMPER, SARTH: one of the oldest uncles of Flaeros
Delcamper. A tall, suspicious (of everyone and everything), and
sour retired warrior, now feeling his age in earnest.
DELNBONE, CRAER: procurer (scout and thief) in the service
of the Baron Blackgult; small, agile, clever-tongued member of
the Band of Four and longtime friend and sword-companion of
Hawkril Anharu, who often calls him "Longfingers."
DOROS, JANTHLIN: Aged, well-loved Master of Chambers
(manservant) of Varandaur, family castle of the Delcamper
family nigh Ragalar. Thoughtful, kindly, attentive to detail
without being fussy, and a pillar of courtly dignity.
DUTHJACK, SENDRITH "BLOODBLADE": capable,
charismatic mercenary warrior who served the Baron Blackgult
in the disastrous attack on the Isles of Ieirembor, and later
became the leader of an outlaw fighting band ("Bloodblade's
Band"), whom he led in a foray to slay the Risen King and put
himself on the throne. That attempt failed and the Band was
slaughtered in the doing, but Sendrith retains his ambitions to
rule Aglirta-and some call him "the Hope of Aglirta."
ELVRTTH, BRIONA: a timid, curly-haired young lass of
Searith in upland Ornentar, much given to rindolberry-picking.
ELVRTTH, NARNETH: a practical, swift-witted young
half-shift shepherd of Searith in upland Ornentar; older brother
to Briona.
ELVURND, SUSKAR: a large, capable brigand working the
coast road of Asmarand, nigh Shaunsel Rise (a farm-cloaked

ridge between Elmerna and Teln).
Eroeha: see Serpent, The
ESMERSUR, ADBERT: old retired warrior, now a painter and
woodcarver, who dwells in the Tarlagar backcountry nigh the
Windfangs foothills, and spends much of every day (and most of
his coins) drinking at the Glory of Aglirta tavern. Known to one
and all as "Old Adbert," he lost most of his left leg in battle years
ago, and is a sour but fair observer of events in the Vale.
Faceless, the/Faceless Ones, the: see Koglaur.
FALLENBRIDGE, TOARSIM: an ambitious but not
law-breaking Tersept of Aglirta—a tall, pockmarked man unsure
of his future or his own confidence.
FAUROLK, TARSAM: a successful but pessimistic sheep
farmer who dwells in the Tarlagar backcountry nigh the
Windfangs foothills, and habitually drinks at the Glory of Aglirta
tavern. Well liked and usually gentle and kindly.
GARZHAR, LORN: better known as "Old Garzhar," this aging,
grizzled, limping, and much-wounded armaragor grew old in the
service of Blackgult. When Baron Blackgult was made regent, he
named Garzhar his Ranking Sword (commander, whenever the
regent was absent) of the Palace Guard of Flowfoam—because of
Old Garzhar's diligence, loyalty, and levelheadedness.
GESTEL, ANSYARDE: phlegmatic armaragor in the service of
Bloodblade, a former barge helmsman who serves so again when
his swordcaptain, Buldrim Kavalanter, seizes a Cardassan barge.
GLAROND, NESMOR: recently installed Baron of Glarond; a
onetime courtier and successful investor who—like so many
others-has ambitions that include the Throne of Aglirta.
Golden Griffon, the: see Blackgult, Ezendor
GREATSARN, SULDUN: grim, attentive veteran armaragor
of Cardassa, serving as swordcaptain to Baron Maevur Cardassa.

HAELTREE, NTTHAS: recently ascended Tersept of Haeltree,
this capable former armsman joins the conspiracy headed by
Maevur Cardassa fully intending to betray it to the regent.
HALVAN, HAELLAH: burly, jovial, and very capable
mercenary war captain, leader of the Sirl Swords' hireswords.
Halvan's band was hired by Regent Blackgult to be the backbone
of the Royal Host of Aglirta (the regent's army).
HULDAERUS, ARKLE: "the Master of Bats," sometime Lord
Wizard of Ornentar, an ambitious, cruel, grasping mage known
for using bat-related magic, commanding bats, and taking
bat-shape; the minstrel Vilcabras once said at a moot that
"Aglirta's worst nightmare would be
Huldaerus and Silvertree, working together-a terror for
Silverflow Vale one year, and all Darsar the next," and Huldaerus
soon killed him for that utterance.
INDLE: a senior Koglaur, habitually male, who usually works
in Sirlptar with the Koglaur Oblarma, but takes the shape of the
Serpent-worshipping steward Qurtil in the Delcamper castle of
Varandaur to practice a certain deception on Flaeros
Delcamper. He has also taken many other shapes, and is skilled
at casting scrying whorls.
IRONSTONE, BLASKAR: a stern, scowling Tersept of Aglirta
who looks every inch the grim armaragor he once was.
ISRINDAR, KULDIN: senior of the two Sart bridge guards; a
good-natured, experienced armsman.
JARAMBUR, MOROLD: a fat, successful importer of wines in
Sirlptar, who supplies many of the better taverns and clubs with
bulk vintages.
JORANTHAR, HALDUTH: armsman in the service of
Bloodblade; a giant of a man, slow tempered and amiable, but
ruthless when ordered to slay. An expert spearman, and
possessed of prodigious strength and courage.
KAVALANTER, BULDRIM: trusted, able swordcaptain in the

service of Bloodblade, possessed of dark hair, the remains of
good looks, and a ruthless streak.
Keeper of the Holy Place, the: a senior Serpent-priest, head of
the nine holy guardians of the Place of the Serpent (a mountain
dell where the Serpent lies buried and magically bound).
KIRLSTAR, AMADUS: bearded, flame-haired, aggressive, and
quicktempered silk merchant of Sirlptar, superstitious and
grasping; known professionally as "Kirlstar of the Splendid
Silks."
Koglaur, the: the "Faceless" or "Faceless Ones," legendary
lurking humanlike shapeshifting beings who watch over Aglirta
and meddle in its affairs for mysterious reasons of their own.
LOUSHOOND, RILDRA: Baroness of Loushoond; a lush,
passionate woman who loves entertaining, large and dangling
earrings, collecting statuary, and what Craer Delnbone describes
as "yipping, perfumed, and beribboned lapdogs." Craer
dismisses Rildra (and her procurer-chasing antics) as "silly."
LOUSHOOND, YINTER: recently installed Baron of
Loushoond; an ambitious, energetic, clever, well-spoken, and
utterly treacherous man.
LUROAN, GURULD: a loudmouthed, boisterous farmer who
dwells in the Tarlagar backcountry nigh the Windfangs foothills,
and habitually drinks at the Glory of Aglirta tavern. One of
several brothers known locally for their coarse ways, feuds, and
large, healthy herds of livestock.
MELEIRA: elder daughter of Orathlee of the Wise, and herself
gifted; dark-haired, serious, and wise beyond her ten-and-six
years.
Melted, the: men burned by a special firespell of the mage
Corloun; their flesh droops and disfigures, they become conduits
of his magic (he can cast spells from afar, through their touch,
or cause them to explode in flames).
MRTVIN: a young, sharp-tongued, habitually male Koglaur.

MULGOR, ESTLEVAN: an amiable and ambitious shepherd
of uplands Blackgult.
MULKYN, GADASTER: first and most infamous Spellmaster
of Silvertree; an aging, ruthless evil archwizard who was tutor to
Ingryl Ambelter and whom Ingryl slew by a succession of life-
and magic-stealing spells that forced Gadaster into a strange
unlife. The "Old Beast of Silvertree" retains his sentience, but
largely serves as a captive means of healing for Ambelter.
NESKER, LORNELTH: young armsman sworn to the service
of Bloodblade, but possessed of little experience.
NUINAR, LAMEIRA: sharp-tongued, opinionated Maid of
Chambers (servant) in the Delcamper castle of Varandaur.
OBALAR, MALAVER: wealthy owner of a fleet of large, swift
merchant "wavesword" ships that carry spices and silks from far
ports to Asmarand. He dwells in Teln, which is also the home
port of his fleet. All Obalar boats have white hulls and
maroon-and-gold sails.
OBLARMA: a senior Koglaur, habitually female, who often
spies in Sirlptar with the Koglaur Indie, but also takes the shape
of the dead bard Taercever Redcloak.
OLAURIM: King of Aglirta so long ago that the realm then
had neither barons nor baronies.
ORATHLEE: a beautiful young woman of the Wise (those folk
who can foresee in dreams or by divers means, or have other
inner magical gifts that they can call on without casting
spells-but are branded by priests of the Three, and outcast, as
"spirit-touched") who guides merchants of Sirlptar in their
investments—for fees. Orathlee bears disfiguring brands on both
her breasts, was once a slave in Sarinda, and is a widow and the
mother of daughters Meleira and Talace.
ORELE, NATHA: oldest Lady of Chambers in the Delcamper
castle of Varandaur; addressed as "Lady" and considered almost
noble in her own right (as a former consort of several Delcamper
uncles). Clear-witted, imperious, and walks with the aid of a

silver-handled cane.
ORNENTAR, ILVRIM: recently ascended Baron of Ornentar,
this former weapons merchant turned warrior is capable,
aggressive, quick-thinking—and possessed of grandiose schemes
(including one to personally rule all Aglirta) that outstrip his
judgment. Deemed a "sly fool" by Tshamarra Talasorn.
PHELINNDAR, ORLIN: recently ascended to the tide of
Baron of Phelinndar, this urbane, treacherous man keeps to
himself as much as possible, avoiding the intrigues and
risings-to-arms of most Barons of Aglirta. He has a good reason
to do so: since sometime before King Kelgrael Snowsar named
him to his barony, Orlin—who was then Tersept of
Downdaggers-had been the secret owner of a Dwaer-Stone.
PRESTAL, TARTH: a court page of Flowfoam; one of two
dozen such lads, but possessed of more loyalty and courage than
most of his fellows. Always hastening to obey, but terribly
curious (and becoming adroit at spying and overhearing).
QUELVER, ILIBAR: a gruff, gentle, and loyal old warrior, once
of Silvertree and later senior doorguard of the Throne Chamber
of Flowfoam Palace (palace guardsman of Flowfoam).
RAEGREL: young, rebellious, but capable Koglaur sent to
Thaebred for punishment and tutelage and to give reports of his
spyings. Part of his punishment is to play the role of Red Dream.
RED DREAM: a pleasure-dancer at the Dragonrose House
dining club in Sirlptar, recognizable by the red cord that binds
her hair. Her brown hair is lighter than that of her partner Blue
Passion, her skin a lighter shade though both tan brown in
summer), and she's slightly shorter.
REDCLOAK, TAERCEVER: a handsome, witty wandering
bard "of all Asmarand," who died alone in the wilderlands of
fever and a winter storm. His passing is unknown in Aglirta,
save to the Koglaur—who shapeshift to take on his likeness when
it suits them.
RETHTARN, TELEZGRAR: aging armaragor in the service of

Bloodblade. Friend to the less-energetic Landron Stonetower.
RULDOR, MAERIMMON: an old, humorless Tersept, who
was once clerk-of-coin to three barons in succession-hired by
each to ferret out corruption, theft, and wasteful spending. The
lawlessness of Aglirta drove him to join Baron Cardassa's
conspiracy.
RUNTHALAN, TONTHAN "GOLDCLOAK": an ambitious,
urbane merchant of Sirlptar, most successful in his dealings in
short-term investments in the affairs of other merchants. He
neither uses his surname nor wants it known (thanks to scandals
and debts of his father and grand-sire), and is very cool and
swift-witted in moments of personal peril, seeing everything in
terms of possible profits—and losses.
SARAEDRIN, THELMERT: a blustering, supercilious,
glib-tongued lord of the court (courtier) of Flowfoam-one of the
many dandies who attach themselves to the court of the Risen
King.
SARANDOR, ILTOS: a long-ago wizard of Garraglas, who of
old crafted a popular battle spell, "Sarandor's Seekings," that
generates copper-and emerald-hued beams of force at the
caster's foes. Sarandor bound his own life force into the spell, so
that he died-but perhaps lives on, his sentience being called to
wherever the spell is cast.
SATHBRAR, SULVAN: a wealthy silk merchant of Sirlptar,
who's tall, usually bearded, calm in crises, forceful and
well-spoken, and a frequent trade ally and partner of Tonthan
"Goldcloak" Runthalan. Sathbrar is also, and has always been, a
"false person" created and maintained by many Koglaur, who
take his shape in succession.
Serpent, the: "the Serpent in the Shadows."
"the Sacred Serpent."
"the Great Serpent."
"the Fanged One," a great evil being, formerly a human

wizard (name now forgotten; it's thought he worked to purge
records of it) who helped enchant the Dwaerindim, but went
mad or was mad, and murdered several rival mages to
strengthen the Dwaer enchantments; when confronted by the
other mages of the Shaping, he fled into serpent-form to fight
his way free of their spells—and was imprisoned by them in
serpent-shape; now a gigantic serpent bound into Slumber by a
mighty magic worked by the King of Aglirta (fated as sleep when
he does); worshipped by humans who revere him as divine-and
to whom he grants spells. Present-day worshippers of him (who
are wizards using his secret spell-lore, though they call
themselves priests to further the false belief that the Serpent is a
god) call him "Eroeha," but this is believed to be a corrupt form
of the Serpent's human rank or title not his name.
Serpents, the: worshippers of the Serpent (humans who often
become snakelike); they refer formally to themselves as "the
Faithful of the Serpent," but others call them "the Cowled
Priests."
"the Fanged Faithful."
"the Scaly Ones."
"the Serpent-spawn," and worse; those with snakelike heads
and forked tongues are known (not to their faces) as "Hissing
Ones."
SHAELTOR, UNDRUTH: the recently ascended Tersept of
Shaeltor, this burly, now-going-to-fat former armaragor and
armor trader joined Baron Cardassa's conspiracy—over
ever-growing personal misgivings.
SHALACE: a softhearted, experienced, habitually female
Koglaur.
SILVERTREE, EMBRA: the Lady of Jewels (so-called for her
opulent, gem-studded gowns), Lady Baron of Silvertree; a young,
beautiful sorceress and member of the Band of Four. She was
raised as the daughter of the cruel Faerod Silvertree, who
although unaware that Baron Ezendor Blackgult had fathered
her, intended to magically enslave her as his "Living Castle."

SILVERTREE, MAERAUNDEN: Baron Silvertree in his day;
one of Embra's ancestors, dead for over eight hundred years and
buried in the graveyard in front of the Silent House-but still seen
as a ghost that walks and talks when the time is right and the
deeds of the living are wrong.
SNOWSAR, KELGRAEL: the Risen King, the Lost King, the
Sleeping King, the Sleeper of Legend, the Last Snowsar; King of
Aglirta, the Lion of Aglirta, the Crown of Aglirta, Lord of All
Aglirta, Master of the River and Its Vale; rightful crowned ruler
of Aglirta, a wise and perceptive warrior and wizard who for
(centuries) too long slept in a spell-hidden
"otherwhere," while warring barons tore his realm apart.
While he sleeps, the Serpent is bound also into Slumber by his
spells; when he awakens, so, too, does the Serpent.
STARNTREE, MAERANTH: longtime Tersept of average
looks, wealth, and influence; calm and unflappable in almost
every situation— and completely unambitious. He'd prefer a
stronger, more peaceful and just Aglirta, because then he could
devote more time to raising chickens and seeing to the needs of
his folk, and less riding around chasing after brigands.
STONETOWER, LANDRON: aging armaragor in the service
of Bloodblade. Friend to Telezgrar Rethtarn.
Summoner of the Serpent, the: a magically powerful—even
before he came into possession of a Dwaer—Serpent-priest who
magically calls the Risen Serpent to Flowfoam.
TALACE: younger daughter of Orathlee of the Wise;
curly-blonde-haired, tart-tongued, curious, and stronger in her
gift at her ten-and-four years than many Wise ever get.
TA1ASORN, ARIATHE: swiftest-tempered and physically
largest of the four proud, beautiful sorceress daughters of the
accomplished wizard Reavur Talasorn (who perished in The
Vacant Throne,) and his wife Iyrinda (who died some years
previously). Ariathe is best known for her mighty battle spells
and her eagerness to use them, having inherited none of her
father's sensitivity, patience, or tact.

TALASORN, DACELE: second eldest and quietest of the four
proud, beautiful sorceress daughters of the wizard Raevur
Talasorn and his wife Iyrinda.
TALASORN, OLONE: eldest, wisest, and most magically
powerful of the four proud, beautiful sorceress daughters of the
wizard Raevur Talasorn and his wife Iyrinda—and since their
deaths, young but imperious matriarch of the family.
TALASORN, TSHAMARRA: youngest and most kindhearted
of the four proud, beautiful sorceress daughters of the wizard
Raevur Tala-sorn and his wife Iyrinda. Like her sisters,
Tshamarra wears black gowns, has seen little of the wider world,
and is sworn to avenge Raevur's death.
TARLAGAR, ORTHIL: recently ascended to the tide of Baron
of Tarlagar from a terseptry, this deep-voiced, pompous,
handsome warrior is dashing in appearance (and a hit with
many, many ladies) but a craven coward in the fray-which
makes his ambitions to rise to a grander tide than baron seem
self-deluding at best.
TELGAERT, TASLAR: owner and master of the ship Fair
Wind, of no particular home port. The Fair Wind is a sea rel: a
fast, narrow coastal-running vessel that delivers small cargoes
swiftly, up and down the Asmaranta Coast. Telgaert is a kindly,
swift-witted, handsome man—and secretly one of the Wise,
though largely untrained.
THAEBRED: one of the eldest and wisest Koglaur, who often
trains others. He dwells in Sirlptar, and often plays the role of
Blue Passion.
THARIM, ELTHAN: aging senior "throne guardsman" in the
service of Glarond. A loyal, no-nonsense warrior.
THRORKAN, URL: an aging, semiretired farmer and vintner
of uplands Blackgult.
THUULOR: a young and relatively inexperienced Koglaur, but
vigorous and fearless, with perhaps too great a love of adventure.

URNTARGH, DARAG: trusted swordcaptain in the army of
Blood-blade; a scarred, close-mouthed veteran possessed of ugly
looks and much patience-but a love of discipline.
VAELROS, SAMMARTHE: a close-mouthed, worn war widow
turned herb farmer, who sells her herbs in Sart market with her
two young daughters, pushing a cart into town from her farm.
VALATH, FAERLA: a scatterbrained, careless, but
enthusiastic and romantic Maid of Chambers (servant) in the
Delcamper castle of Varandaur. Youngest and least-well-behaved
of the Maids of Chambers; the despair of Lady Orele.
VARAEDUR, WOLVYN: a recently named tersept who's
frankly bewildered by the duties of office, the intrigues gripping
Aglirta, and his discovery that many, many folk who are fair to
look upon can lie and cheat as badly or worse as
villainous-looking persons.
WULDER, LORTHKUL: trusted swordcaptain in the army of
Blood-blade; a good-natured armaragor of easygoing manner
but tireless diligence. Possessed of shrewd judgment of folk and
an aptitude for battlefield ruses and "hard weather" tactics.
XAUVROS, KELDERT: a sharp-tongued but loyal old warrior,
once of Silvertree and later a doorguard of the Throne Chamber
of Flowfoam Palace (palace guardsman of Flowfoam).
YARONDAL, NILVARR: a tall, florid, deep-voiced, and
imperious lord of the court (courtier) of Flowfoam—one of many
such dandies who attach themselves to the court of the Risen
King.
ZAURYM, DAERUTH: a loyal warrior of Silvertree, named by
Regent Blackgult to the Palace Guard of Flowfoam. Smiling and
pleasant to pass time with, possessed of a swift sword but
terrible archery skills.

