The Man with the Golden Torc
Ebook converted by Winterborn
The Man with the Golden Torc
ALSO BY SIMON R. GREEN
THE DEATHSTALKER SERIES
Twilight of the Empire
Deathstalker
Deathstalker Rebellion
Deathstalker War
Deathstalker Honor
Deathstalker Destiny
Deathstalker Legacy
Deathstalker Return
Deathstalker Coda
THE ADVENTURES OF HAWK & FISHER
Swords of Haven
Guards of Haven
ALSO BY SIMON R. GREEN
Blue Moon Rising
Beyond the Blue Moon
Blood and Honor
Down Among the Dead Men
Shadows Fall
ACE BOOKS
THE NIGHTSIDE SERIES
Something from the Nightside
Agents of Light and Darkness
Nightingale’s Lament
Hex and the City
Paths Not Taken

Sharper Than a Serpent’s Tooth
Hell to Pay
 
 
The Man with the Golden Torc
Simon R. Green
 
A ROC BOOK
ROC Published by New American Library, a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375
Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, USA Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton
Avenue East, Suite 700, Toronto, Ontario M4P 2Y3, Canada (a division of Pearson Penguin
Canada Inc.) Penguin Books Ltd., 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England Penguin Ireland,
25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a division of Penguin Books Ltd.) Penguin Group
(Australia), 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of
Pearson Australia Group Pty. Ltd.) Penguin Books India Pvt. Ltd., 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi-110 017, India Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive,
Rosedale, North Shore, Auckland 1311, New Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand
Ltd.) Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty.) Ltd., 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank,
Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd., Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published by Roc, an imprint of New American Library,
a division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Copyright © Simon R. Green, 2007
All rights reserved
REGISTERED TRADEMARK-MARCA REGISTRADA
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS CATALOGING-IN-PUBLICATION DATA
Green, Simon R.
The man with the golden torc / Simon R. Green.
p. cm.
ISBN: 1-4295-3550-4
I. Title.
PR6107.R44M36 2007

823'914—dc22 2006038668
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form, or by
any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), without the prior
written permission of both the copyright owner and the above publisher of this book.
PUBLISHER’S NOTE
This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, places, and incidents either are the product of
the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously, and any resemblance to actual persons,
living or dead, business establishments, events, or locales is entirely coincidental.
The publisher does not have any control over and does not assume any responsibility for
author or third-party Web sites or their content.
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any other means
without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law. Please purchase
only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage electronic piracy
of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author’s rights is appreciated.
 
CONTENTS
CHAPTER ONE
Everything but a Bunch of Grapes
CHAPTER TWO
Alarms and Excursions and Getting the Hell out of Dodge
CHAPTER THREE
Chilling at the Wulfshead
CHAPTER FOUR
Home Is Where the Heart Is
CHAPTER FIVE
Remote Viewing
CHAPTER SIX
Dangerous Lab Interns
CHAPTER SEVEN
Hellhounds on My Trail
CHAPTER EIGHT
Seduction of the Not Entirely Innocent
CHAPTER NINE

Dream a Little Dream for Me
CHAPTER TEN
Cutting out the Middleman
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Good Golly Miss Molly
CHAPTER TWELVE
Down, Down, Deeper and Down
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Sleeping with the Enemy
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Happy Daze
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Chasing Eddie
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Home Alone
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Time and Time Again
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Gone Fishing, on Golden Pool
CHAPTER NINETEEN
You Can Go Home Again (Provided You Carry a Really Big Stick)
CHAPTER TWENTY
Getting to the Heart of the Matter
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
A Family at War
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Heart Breaker
Epilogue
 
 

Y ou know what? It’s all true. Everything that ever scared you, from conspiracy theories to
monsters under the bed to ghosties and ghoulies and long-leggity beasties. The only reason
they haven’t taken over the world is because my family has always been there to stand in
their way. We guard the door, keeping you safe from the big bad wolf, and you never even
know our names. Of course, there’s a price to be paid. By us, and by you. The name’s Bond.
Shaman Bond. Well, no; actually that’s just my use-name. When your job description
involves going one-on-one with creatures of the night on a regular basis, you have to find
your humour where you can. My real name is Eddie Drood. Licensed to kick supernatural
arse. My family is one of the oldest in England, perhaps the oldest, and we’ve been
protecting humanity from the forces of darkness for more centuries than even we care to
remember. There are those who say Drood is just a derivation of Druid. The job of a
shaman is to protect his tribe from outside threats, and that’s what I used to do. I loved my
job. Until it all blew up in my face.
CHAPTER ONE
Everything but a Bunch of Grapes
I t started out as just another everyday mission. A certain Very Important Politician, whose
face and name you’d recognise, had come, very secretly, to Harley Street in London. Home
to some of the most expert, and certainly some of the most expensive, specialised medical
care in the whole of the civilised world. This politician, let’s call him Mr. President, and no not
the one you’re thinking of, had himself booked into the Hospice of Saint Baphomet under an
assumed name after contracting a supernatural venereal disease during a goodwill tour of
Thailand. He was stupid enough to slip his handlers’ leash and go looking for a little fun in
the backstreet bars of Bangkok, and unlucky enough to end up getting it on with an agent of
darkness masquerading as a ladything. As a result of which, Mr. President was now very
heavily pregnant with something the very opposite of a love child. I had been ordered to
terminate this unnatural pregnancy with extreme prejudice. The offspring was not to be born,
or if born, not allowed to run loose in the material world.
I’d been supplied with a gun, and I was expected to use it.
(How did we find out about this? My family knows everything. That’s its job. And when you’ve
been fighting the good fight for as many centuries as we have, you can’t help but accumulate
an extensive network of sources and informers.)
I strolled casually down Harley Street, hiding in plain sight. No one looked twice at me; no
one ever does. I’ve been trained to blend in, to be just another face in the crowd. I was
wearing a nicely anonymous three-piece suit, expensive enough to fit in but not stylish
enough to draw attention. I strode down Harley Street like I had every right to be there, so
everyone else just assumed I did. It’s all about attitude, really. You can fit in anywhere with
the right attitude. It helps that I have the kind of face that always reminds you of someone
else: average, pleasant, nothing to jog your memory afterwards. An agent’s face.
It’s all in the training. You too could learn to look like nobody in particular, if you wanted to.
It was the lazy end of a summer afternoon in London. Pleasantly warm under a pale blue sky,
with just a hint of breeze. Traffic roared by in the background, but the street itself was
relatively calm and quiet. There were taxis, squat black London cabs, dropping people off
and picking them up, men and women of all nationalities carefully minding their own
business. And a large percentage who weren’t men or women or anything like it. You’d be
surprised how many monsters walk plainly in open sight every day, hidden from mere mortal
gaze by only the flimsiest of illusions. But I’m a Drood, and I wear the golden torc around my

throat, so I can use the Sight to see everything, for as long as I can stand it.
An elf lord was getting out of a taxi just a few feet away, looking tall and regal in his glowing
robes. He had pointed ears, all-black eyes, and a look on his face of utter contempt for all
humankind. He paid off the taxi driver with a large denomination note, waving away the
change with aristocratic disdain. The driver had better bank that note quickly, before it
touched cold iron and turned back into a leaf or something. Elves live to screw over
humanity; it’s all they’ve got left.
Up and down the street, ghosts walked in and out of walls that weren’t there when they were
alive, trapped in their repetition like insects in amber. Just echoes in time. Demons rode
unsuspected on people’s backs, their spurred heels dug deep into shoulder and back
muscles, whispering into their mount’s ears. You could always tell which mounts were
listening; their demons were fat and bloated. One man had the beginnings of a halo. He was
escorting a friend with stigmata. It’s moments like that which give you hope. An alien with
gray skin and big black eyes appeared out of nowhere, clutching a London A-Z in a
three-fingered hand. Harley Street’s reputation stretches farther than you’d think.
None of them paid me any attention. I told you; I’ve been trained.
There are times when I wonder if it might not be nice to live a normal life, with only normal
worries and responsibilities, and not have to know all the things I know. Not to have to see all
the darkness in the world. To be one of the sheep, and not the shepherd. But, on the other
hand, I get to know what’s really going on and who the real bad guys are, and I get to kick
their nasty arses on a regular basis. Which makes up for a lot.
Harley Street is still mostly a long row of Georgian terraces with expensively bland
anonymous facades. There are hardly any names on display; either you know where you’re
going, or you don’t belong there. The heavy, secretly reinforced doors only open to buzzers
when you know the right words to say, you can’t see in through any of the windows, and
many of these venerable establishments are guarded and protected in ways you don’t even
want to think about.
Those were the ones that interested me.
I studied the Hospice of Saint Baphomet from a safe distance while apparently listening to
my mobile phone. Wonderful things; the perfect excuse for just standing around with a blank
look on your face. There wasn’t any point in even approaching the hospice’s front door. I
could See layer upon layer of seriously hard-core defences set in place. The kind that don’t
even leave a body to identify. Imagine oversized magical man-traps with really big teeth and
a built-in mean streak. The sort of defences you’d expect around a hospital that specialised
in weird and awful diseases; the kind you really don’t want the rest of the world to know
about.
So I decided to break into the building next door to Saint Baphomet’s, a smaller and even
more specialised practice, Dr. Dee & Sons & Sons. They dealt strictly with exorcisms; very
strictly, by all accounts. (Their motto: We Get the Hell Out.) Their defences were just as
strong but more concerned with keeping things in, than keeping people out, on the perfectly
logical grounds that only a madman would want to get in. Most people had to be dragged in,
kicking and screaming all the way. But then, I’m not most people. I put away my mobile
phone and glanced up and down the street, but as always everyone else was far too caught
up in their own important business to spare any interest for a nobody like me. So I just
slipped into the deserted narrow alleyway beside Dr. Dee’s and activated my living armour.
Most of the time it lies dormant as a golden circlet around my throat. A torc, in the old

language. Invisible to anyone who’s not a member of the Drood family or at the very least a
seventh son of a seventh son. (There don’t seem to be many of those around anymore. I
blame family planning.) I subvocalised my activating Words, and the living metal in the torc
spread out to cover my whole body, embracing me in a moment from head to toe. It’s a
warm, refreshing feeling, like pulling on an old familiar coat. As the golden mask covered my
head and face, I could see even more clearly, including all the things that are normally
hidden from even gifted humans like me. I felt stronger, sharper, more alive, like waking from
a pleasant doze into full alertness. I felt like I could take on the whole damned world and
make it cry like a baby.
The armour is the secret weapon of the Drood family. It makes our work possible. The
armour is given to each of us right after we’re born, bonded forever to our nervous systems
and our souls, and while we wear the armour we’re untouchable, protected from every form
of attack, scientific or magical. It also makes us incredibly strong, amazingly fast, and utterly
undetectable. Most of the time.
With the armour on I look like a living statue, golden and glorious, with no joints or moving
parts and not a weak spot anywhere in its whole smooth, gleaming surface. There aren’t
even any eye or breathing holes in the golden mask that covers my face. I don’t need them.
While I wear it, the armour is me. It’s a second skin, insulating me from a dangerous world.
Looking through the mask, I could now clearly see the huge demon dog guarding the back
door to Dr. Dee’s. Night dark, big as a bus, and bulging with muscles, it sprawled across the
cobbled square, glaring suspiciously about it with a flat brutal face and flaring hellfire eyes. It
was gnawing lazily on a human thighbone that still had some meat left on it. More bones lay
scattered before the dog, broken open to get at the marrow. I had a fleeting but very real
temptation to grab one of the bones, throw it, and shout Fetch! just to see what would
happen. But I rose above it. I am, after all, a professional.
I walked right up to the demon dog, and it couldn’t see or hear or smell me. Which was just
as well, really. I wasn’t looking for a fight. Not with anything that big and infernally nasty,
anyway. I eased past the dog, careful not to touch it. The armour does have its limitations. I
studied the locked back door. Very old, very intricate, very secure. Piece of cake. I reached
through my golden side with my golden hand, easy as plunging my hand into water, and took
out the Hand of Glory I’d been sent by the family Armourer, just for this mission. The Hand of
Glory is a human hand cut off a hanged man right after he’s died, and then treated in certain
unpleasant ways so that the fingers become candles. Light these candles, in the right way
and with the right Words, and the Hand of Glory can open any lock, reveal any secret. The
family makes these awful things out of the bodies of our fallen enemies. We do other things
with the bodies too, really quite appalling things. Just another reason not to get us mad at
you.
I lit the candles and subvocalised the Words, and the demon dog raised its blunt head and
sniffed suspiciously at the still air. I froze, and the dog slowly lowered its brutal head again.
The lock had already opened itself, so I pushed the door gently inwards. The dog didn’t even
look around. I eased inside and pulled the door softly shut behind me. It locked itself again,
and I relaxed a little. I could probably take a demon dog, with my armour, but I didn’t feel like
testing that probably unless I absolutely had to. Demon dogs are trained to go for the soul.
I tucked the Hand of Glory away and studied my new surroundings. Dr. Dee’s was dark and
gloomy, and the bare stone walls of the hallway ran with damp and other fluids. There were
rusted iron grilles in the bare stone floor, to carry them away. I headed forward, and it was
like walking into a slaughterhouse of the soul. This was a place where bad things happened
on a regular basis. A place where really bad things happening was just business as usual.

I moved silently down the long stone hallway, reached the blunt corner at the end, and
emerged into a cavernous hall filled with row upon row of boxlike cages, each just big
enough to hold one man, or woman, or child. The bars of the cages were solid silver, as
were the heavy shackles that held their prisoners secure. The only light came from a great
iron brazier at the far end of the hall, glowing bloodred in the gloom around the long-handled
instruments of instruction that the brazier was heating. I moved steadily down the narrow
central aisle between the two rows of cages, carefully not looking to the left or to the right.
There were no innocents here. These were the possessed, Hell’s playthings, brought here to
be freed of their burden. One way or another.
Most of them couldn’t see me, so they didn’t bother to put on an act. But one dark hulking
figure raised its mutilated head and stared right at me with eyes that glowed as golden as
my armour. It spoke to me, and I shuddered at the sound. Its voice was like an angel with
syphilis, like a rose with a cancer, like a bride with teeth in her vagina. It promised me
things, wonderful awful things, if only I would set it free. I kept on walking. It laughed softly in
the darkness behind me, like a small child.
Following the layout I’d memorised earlier, I moved on up a floor into the residential part of
the building, where recovering patients were coaxed back to sanity. Everywhere I looked I
could see ghost images of hidden defence systems, ready to spring into action at just the
hint of an intruder. Only my armour prevented Dr. Dee’s security from setting off any number
of alarms and retributions. There were cameras everywhere, of course, including infrared,
and they were tied into the holy-water sprinkler system, but my armour redefines the word
stealth. No one sees me unless I want them to.
Soon enough I came to the wall connecting Dr. Dee’s to Saint Baphomet’s, and all I had to
do was take out the portable door the Armourer had sent me and slap it against the wall. It
spread quickly out to form a perfectly normal-looking door complete with brass handle. I
opened it, stepped through into the next building, and then peeled the door off the wall. It
shrank quickly back into a small rubbery ball of something far too complicated for me to
understand, and I put it back in my pocket. My family has the best toys. All I had to do then
was follow the layout of Saint Baphomet’s I’d memorised to take me straight to Mr.
President’s room.
(No, not the one you’re thinking of. Definitely not. You must trust me when I tell you these
things.)
The hospice was all bright lights and walls painted in cheerful colours, but the magical
protections were just as strong as Dr. Dee’s. There were cameras everywhere, whirring
officiously to themselves as they turned back and forth, and motion detectors blinked redly at
ankle height. But I was walking unseen, the ghost in the machine. No one sees us—unless
we want them to. The air smelt of disinfectant and something rotten not quite buried under
expensive flowery scent.
I made my way unchallenged up to the ward on the top floor, where they kept all the really
interesting patients, and padded silently down the starkly lit corridor, pausing now and again
to peek in through some of the windows in the doors I passed, just out of curiosity. Well,
wouldn’t you? I’d already been briefed on what everyone was in here for, and I just had to
take a quick look.
A celebrity chef with his own television show was in to have a tattoo removed the hard way.
Seems the tattooist’s hand had slipped at just the wrong moment while inking an ancient
Chinese phrase, turning a simple invocation for good luck into an open invocation for really
bad luck. As a result, the chef’s famous West End restaurant had burned down during an

outbreak of food poisoning. He’d had explosive diarrhea during his live show, all his best
recipes had turned up on the Net, and he’d been struck by lightning seventeen times. In his
own kitchen. You don’t shift a tattoo like that with just a laser, so they were flaying his back
an inch at a time to get rid of it. The famous chef was currently lying facedown on his bed,
sobbing like a baby. Next time he’d settle for Mom, or his favourite football team.
Next door to him, a woman was suffering from a severe lack of gravity. The staff had had to
strap her to the bed to keep her from floating away. Her long hair streamed upwards. The
next room held some poor unfortunate who’d made the mistake of walking into a séance
with a really open mind, and now he was possessed by a thousand and one demons. He
ricocheted around his room in his straitjacket, screaming in tongues as he bounced off the
rubber walls, while the demons fought it out for dominance. They didn’t seem to care that
they were making a right mess of their host in the process. He really should have gone to Dr.
Dee’s. You get what you pay for.
The next few rooms held a severed hand that was trying to grow itself a new body; a Time
Agent whose latest regeneration had gone terribly wrong, turning him inside out; and a
sorry-looking werewolf with mange. Takes all sorts, I suppose.
I peered cautiously around the end of the corridor, and there was Mr. President’s room. An
armed guard was sitting right outside his door, for the moment concentrating totally on his
muscle man magazine. I checked carefully, but that was it. One armed guard. They weren’t
even trying, really. I walked straight up to the man, and he didn’t even know I was there until I
squeezed a particular nerve cluster in his neck, and he went straight to sleep. I sat him back
in his chair, after moving it away from the door. I peered in through the window, and there
was Mr. President, sleeping fitfully on his back, his swollen belly pushing up the bedclothes.
Pregnancy can be very tiring, or so I’m told. Mr. President’s wife was snoozing in a chair
beside his bed. How very understanding and supportive of her.
I reached under my armour for the gun holstered on my hip. The Armourer has supplied me
with many different guns down the years, but this one really was rather special. A needle gun
with a pressurised gas cylinder that fired slivers of frozen holy water. Very quiet, very
efficient.
I didn’t bother with the Hand of Glory for the locked door, just kicked it in with one golden
foot. It crashed open, and Mr. President sat up in bed and looked right at me. The baby he
was hosting must have boosted his senses. He took one look at me in my golden armour
and started screaming that I was there to assassinate him. I aimed my gun carefully and shot
his wife while she was still half up out of her chair. The ice needle hit her square in the jugular
vein, entered her bloodstream, and melted down into holy water; and Mr. President’s wife
convulsed as the demon possessing her was forced out.
She’d been my target all along. The demon had hidden itself inside her while her husband
was out playing patty-cake with the ladything, and then waited undetected for Mr. President’
s baby to be born through a caesarean. The demon could then possess the unnatural baby
and assume a permanent physical form, safe from all attempts at exorcism. Who knows
what its plans were after that? My family hadn’t felt like waiting around to find out.
We’d all seen The Omen.
The wife went down on all fours, shuddering and convulsing, while her husband looked on,
shocked into horrified silence. Black slime burst out of her mouth and nose and ears and
even ran down her face as viscous black tears. More and more of the stuff spilled out of her,
faster and faster, forming a widening pool of black tarry stuff on the floor before her. And

from this dark ectoplasm the demon made itself a new body, its last desperate attempt to
assume a physical form in the material world.
A squat, powerful shape thrust up out of the black pool; first long, muscular arms, then a
broad chest and shoulders, and finally a horned head with coal red eyes. I shot it with
another holy-water needle, and it howled horribly but kept on growing. Determined little
fellow. It pulled itself up out of the black pool, towering above me now. It grew long claws on
its hands, and a wide smile split the dark face to show me row upon row of needle teeth. It
looked like what it was: vile and evil and terribly strong. I put away my gun and grew thick
golden spikes on my armoured fists. Some days you just have to do things the hard way.
The demon surged forward, lashing out at me with a clawed hand. Sparks flew as the claws
skittered harmlessly across my armoured chest. I punched the demon in the head, and thick
chunks of black ectoplasm flew away as my spiked knuckles ripped through its pseudoflesh.
I hit it again and again, beating it down and driving it back, while all its strongest blows
slipped harmlessly off my armoured form. I grabbed hold of one flailing black arm, braced
myself, and ripped it right off. The demon howled and its body just started falling apart,
unable to maintain itself in the face of such punishment. The dark form collapsed into thick
pools of stinking, rotting ectoplasm, and the demon fell screaming back into Hell.
I shook dripping black slime from my armoured fists and took a moment to get my breath
back. One good thing about beating the crap out of demons from Hell is that you don’t have
to feel the slightest bit guilty afterwards.
I looked around for Mr. President. He was out of his bed and cowering in the farthest corner
of the room. He saw me look at him and whimpered feebly. I took out my needle gun and
shot him too. The holy water would ensure that whatever was finally taken out of him would
be stillborn and no threat to anyone. He gasped, his eyes widening as he felt the changes
happening within him. He looked away then and cursed me feebly, but I was used to that.
"Did you really think you could hide this from us, Mr. President?" I said. "Next time, forget
your pride and come to us first. Or better yet, stay away from the ladythings."
CHAPTER TWO
Alarms and Excursions and Getting the Hell out of Dodge
T he demon’s manifesting had set off all kind of alarms. Sirens, flashing lights, the works. I
paused just long enough to check that Mr. President’s wife was okay (unconscious, covered
in black ectoplasmic gunk, but basically okay, poor cow), and then I slammed the door open
and charged out into the corridor. The sirens were deafening, and the lights flared rapidly in
time to the raucous electronic noise. Whatever happened to pleasant-sounding alarms, with
bells? Ambulances are just the same. And fire engines. I think about things like that. It
worries me sometimes. The moment I appeared in the corridor, concealed gun ports
opened up in both walls, and heavy-duty gun barrels slammed out. I started running.
All the guns opened up at once, the roar physically painful at such close quarters, and the
muzzle flare was dazzling. The heavy rate of fire chewed up the opposite walls behind me as
I raced down the corridor. My armour was still in full stealth mode, so the guns couldn’t track
me. As far as the security cameras were concerned, the corridor was empty; but the
operators knew somebody had to be there, because they’d seen the door open. So they just
opened up with everything they had and hoped for the best. The gun barrels swept back and
forth, keeping up a murderous rate of fire, but even the occasional lucky hit just ricocheted
off my armour. I didn’t even feel the impact.

I rounded the far corner just in time for a heavy steel grille to slam down from the ceiling,
blocking my way. I didn’t slow, hitting the grille with my shoulder, only to lurch to a sudden halt
as the heavy steel buckled but held. I grabbed the grille with both golden hands and tore it
apart like so much lace, the steel squealing loudly as it sheared apart. I forced my way
through the opening and raced down the next corridor. The armour makes me supernaturally
strong, when I need to be. Wonderful stuff, this living metal. I’d left the guns and the sirens
behind me, but now I could hear running footsteps and raised angry voices closing in on me
from all directions. Time to hide out in another room and let the hue and cry run past me.
I ran down the stairs to the next floor, chose a door at random, forced the lock with one push
of an armoured hand, and slipped into the darkened room, closing the door carefully behind
me. The room was pleasantly quiet, and I stood very still in the gloom, listening as a whole
group of people ran past the door, first from one direction and then the other. There was a
lot of confused shouting, and I smiled behind my golden mask. First rule of a good agent:
always keep them guessing. All I had to do now was wait for things to calm down a little, and
then I’d just ease out of here and walk past the security forces in full stealth mode, and they’d
never even know I was there. The room’s light snapped on, and I spun around, startled. The
room’s patient was sitting bolt upright in bed and staring straight at me.
Which wasn’t supposed to be possible. All right, Mr. President saw me, but that was only
because he had a demon in him. Twice in one night was unprecedented. I moved quickly
over to the bed, raising one golden fist in warning, and the patient took his hand away from
the call button. I stopped abruptly as I finally recognised the patient. Behind my golden mask,
I was gaping. No wonder he was able to see me. The man in the bed was the Karma
Catechist.
A living legend, the Karma Catechist knew all there was to know about magic systems,
rituals, and forms of power. He was the living embodiment of every mystic source, every
forbidden book, every obscure and secret treatise on how to do terrible things to other
people in seven easy steps. He’d been designed that way while still in the womb, shaped by
terrible wills, his form and function and fate decided in advance by powerful sorceries and
arcane mathematics. He knew it all, from the Kaballah to the Necronomicon, from the Book
of Judas to the Herod Canticles. Every spell, every working, every concept.
My family had been trying to get their hands on him for years, but no one had set eyes on
him for decades. He’d been passed back and forth by every group that ever dreamed of
power, stolen and abducted and traded, because no one group could hold on to him for
long. The problem was, he knew too much; and you had to know the right questions to get
the answers you needed. A living encyclopedia of appalling knowledge, but no index. And
now he was in my grasp. If I could just get him out of here with me…No. Too much trouble.
His very nature would interfere with my armour’s stealth mode. He’d get me noticed, slow
me down…No; I’d just pass on word that he was here and let the family decide what to do
next.
If it was up to me, I’d hit Harley Street with a tactical nuke, just to be sure of getting him.
There is such a thing as too much knowledge. The Karma Catechist knew a hundred ways
to end the world or disrupt reality itself. But the family would never sanction a hit on such a
valuable asset as this. They wanted the information he held within him, just like everyone
else did.
I would have killed him myself, and to hell with the consequences, but…he didn’t look so
terrible, close up. He was just a small, middle-aged man who’d already lost most of his hair.
He had a soft, kind face, vague eyes, and a diffident smile. He was wearing old-fashioned
striped pajamas, with the jacket drooping open to reveal a tuft of white chest hair. He looked

tired and sad and very vulnerable. It was easy to feel sorry for him; he hadn’t had much of a
life, and hardly any of it his own choice. It wasn’t his fault he was a living doomsday device.
"Don’t hurt me," he said, looking at me with almost childlike detachment.
"Hush," I said. "You just keep quiet, and I’ll be on my way in a minute. What are you in here
for, anyway?"
"Because I can’t keep quiet," he said sadly. "I’ve been conditioned, reprogrammed, my
working parameters altered; and it all went horribly wrong. Now if anyone asks me a
question, I have to answer them, whether they know the right passwords or not. I’ve become
a security risk." His eyes widened suddenly, alarm filling his face. "They’ll know I talked to
you! They’ll think you asked me about what’s coming! I won’t tell you! I won’t!"
He gritted his teeth, and I heard a distinct crunch. He convulsed, his back arching up from
the bed, his eyes bulging from their sockets, and then he was limp and still, his last breath a
small sad sigh. I checked for a pulse in his neck, but he was definitely gone. A poison tooth,
for God’s sake. I thought they went out in the sixties. A man had just killed himself in front of
me, and I had no idea why. I don’t know what he thought I might ask him. The guilty flee
where no man pursueth, and all that.
It occurred to me then that a whole lot of people were going to be really upset that such a
valuable resource as the Karma Catechist was dead because of me. Maybe I wouldn’t
mention this particular incident in my mission report, after all.
I listened carefully at the door; the sirens were still wailing their little electronic hearts out, but
the angry footsteps seemed to have departed. I eased the door open and slipped out into
the corridor. More guns thrust out of the walls, opening up immediately when they saw the
door move. I sprinted down the corridor, my armour giving me supernatural speed, running
laughing through the bullets like so much rain.
I reached the end of the corridor and jumped down the stairs to the next floor, sailing through
the air from top to bottom in one go. My armoured legs bent to absorb the impact as I
landed, and I couldn’t help grinning. Sometimes my job is just so damned cool. I sprinted
down the next corridor, moving so fast now the guns in the walls didn’t have time to react. I
reached the end and then skidded to a halt at the top of the next stairway. A whole company
of heavily armed and armoured security guards were already halfway up the stairs. I turned
and ran back the way I came. I could have fought my way through them. They wouldn’t have
known what hit them till it was too late. I could have killed them all without breaking a sweat,
but that’s not what I do. I’m an agent, not an assassin. Those guards weren’t the real bad
guys here. Just hired help. Probably didn’t even know what went on, up on the restricted top
floors. Probably thought Saint Baphomet’s was just another hospital for rich weirdos.
I do kill, when I have to. But mostly I don’t have to. So I don’t.
I found the elevators, forced the protesting doors open with my armoured hands, and jumped
down the empty shaft. I dropped all the way to the bottom, one golden hand tightly gripping
the steel cable to guide my descent. Fat sparks from the cable filled the shaft’s gloom like
fireworks. I hit the bottom of the shaft with one hell of a bang and didn’t feel a thing. I forced
the elevator doors open, stepped out into the lobby…and there was Saint Baphomet’s head
of security, waiting for me. I’d been hoping I wouldn’t run into him ever since I saw his name
in the mission briefing. We had history.
I allowed myself a few mental curses. Not out loud, of course. That might be taken as a sign
of weakness, and the Droods are never weak. It’s all about attitude, remember?

So I ostentatiously relaxed and nodded casually to the head of security. I knew who it was,
who it had to be, even though the face and body were new to me. This was my old adversary
Archie Leech, breaking in a new body, big and muscular and loaded down with weapons. I
only recognised him by the Kandarian amulet hanging around his throat. An ugly lump of
carved stone, relic of a race wiped out millennia ago and quite rightly too, it allowed Archie
to jump his soul from one body to another at will. Rumour had it he always kept a dozen or
so in reserve in some kind of suspended animation, just in case the one he was wearing
took too much damage to continue.
Archie was a serial possessor, a spiritual rapist, and he never gave a damn what happened
to his bodies after he abandoned them. I tried to, but it wasn’t always possible. I’d killed
Archie before, when I absolutely had to, but it had never taken. I don’t know what he looked
like originally. I suppose it’s possible even he doesn’t remember anymore, after so many
faces. He scowled at me, seeing me clearly thanks to his damned amulet. Three times in
one night…I was starting to feel just a bit conspicuous.
"This place is off-limits to everyone," Archie said flatly. "Even to the high-and-mighty
Droods."
I had to smile behind my golden mask. "Nowhere is off-limits to us, Archie. You know that."
"Why here, Drood? Aren’t even hospitals safe from you and your kind?"
"That’s rich, coming from you, Archie. When have you ever cared about putting innocents at
risk? Droods go where we have to, to do what we have to do. That’s a new look for you, isn’t
it, Archie? All big and brutal and steroid abuse. You usually like them younger…and
prettier."
He shrugged. "It’s a bit long in the arm, but it’s good for heavy lifting. And they’ve been
wearing out so quickly recently…"
I took a deliberate step forward. He didn’t budge. "Stand aside, Archie," I said. "My mission’
s completed. No need for this to get nasty."
"You worry about the bodies I wear," he said, smiling with his stolen mouth. "That’s always
been your weakness."
"Step aside," I said. "Or I’ll damage you."
"Not a chance in hell. I’ve always wanted to kill a Drood."
He opened fire with a machine pistol, spraying me with bullets. They ricocheted away from
my armoured chest and face, and I walked right into the hail of bullets and slapped the gun
out of his hand. He cut at me with a glowing dagger, but the spells enchancing its edge still
weren’t enough to do more than raise a shower of sparks as the blade skidded across my
throat. I grabbed for the amulet around Archie’s neck, but at the last moment my hand
slipped aside. The amulet had serious protections.
Archie punched me in the head with all his body’s strength behind it. I heard the knuckles
break. I didn’t even flinch. I grabbed his shoulders and threw him against the nearest wall.
He hit hard enough to crack the plaster and slam all the breath out of him. I started past him,
hoping it was over, but he surged to his feet again, drawing dangerously on his body’s
reserves, one hand full of plastique explosive. He slapped it against my armoured chest,
and it stuck fast. He laughed hoarsely as I tried to pull the sticky stuff off, but it wouldn’t
budge. Archie held up the detonator before me, brandishing it mockingly.

There was enough plastique on my chest to blow out most of this floor. My armour would
withstand it…but the blast radius would almost certainly take out half of Saint Baphomet’s
underpinnings and bring all the upper floors crashing down. Hundreds dead, maybe more,
most of them probably innocents. Archie didn’t care; he’d just jump to another body.
Hundreds could die, if it meant he could boast of killing a Drood. He didn’t care. But I did.
I grabbed Archie by the shoulders again and pulled him to me, slamming his chest against
mine with the plastique crushed between us. He struggled fiercely, but I held him easily with
one golden arm. He cried out in a pettish fury as he realised what I intended, and then my
free hand closed over his and activated the detonator.
My mask darkened briefly to protect my eyes from the glare of the explosion and my ears
from the blast, and when I could see and hear again, I was surrounded by smoke and rubble
and small bloody gobbets of what had been Archie Leech’s stolen body. My armour and his
body had absorbed most of the explosion, and the walls around me looked scarred but still
solid. The hospice would stand. Archie was gone, of course, his soul wafted away to his next
bolthole, along with the amulet. I had no doubt I’d see them both again, some day.
Once again, there was the sound of a hell of a lot of running feet, approaching fast from
above. The security guards here were nothing if not persistent. I took the portable door out of
my pocket and slapped it against the floor, where it immediately became a nice new
trapdoor. I opened it, dropped through into the basement, and then pulled the portable door
away from what was now my ceiling. Let them search the rubble for my body while I calmly
and quietly made my way up the back stairs and walked right past them to the nearest exit.
This proved to be the back door, and I slipped silently out into the back square, where Dr.
Dee’s dog from Hell was lying in wait for me. Next door’s alarms and excursions had clearly
attracted its attention. It was growling steadily, like a long rumble of thunder, up close and
threatening, and its huge jaws opened, revealing more teeth than seemed physically
possible. It glared at the door that had just opened before it, but still it couldn’t see or hear or
smell me…So I just held the door open and let the demon dog charge straight past me and
on into the hospice. Where no doubt the security guards would think of something to do to
keep it occupied. I do my best, but I’m really not a very nice person sometimes. I closed the
door quietly behind the demon dog and strolled away.
I powered down my armour, and in a moment it was just a golden collar around my throat.
And I was just a man again, with a man’s limitations. Sometimes, that’s a relief. I left the side
alley and walked unhurriedly out into Harley Street. The same people were walking up and
down, with no idea that the whole history of the world had just been changed behind their
backs. None of them paid me any attention. I was my old anonymous self again. No one
ever sees a Drood’s face, just occasionally the golden armour. It’s enough that the world is
protected; they don’t need to know by whom.
They might not approve of some of our methods.
CHAPTER THREE
Chilling at the Wulfshead
I disappeared down into the Underground, mixing in with the crowds, and took the next train
to Tottenham Court Road station. I joined the army of people bustling up and down Oxford
Street, just another face among many, and browsed shop windows until I was sure I hadn’t
been followed. Because when you work for the Drood family, the rest of the world usually is
out to get you. I headed down into Soho. The city’s gentrified the hell out of what used to be
the last truly wild part of London, but there’s still plenty of sin, sleaze, and secrets to be found

there, if you know where to look.
Just a little off the beaten track, down a side street that never gets any sunlight, lies my very
favourite Internet café. It’s a part of the Electronic Village chain, but I like it because it’s open
twenty-four hours a day, serving twilight people like me. The single window in the shopfront
is whitewashed over, and the neon sign above the door hasn’t worked in years. The people
who come here like their privacy while they do strange, illegal, and possibly unnatural things
with their computers. I entered the café and stopped just inside the doorway to let my eyes
adjust to the gloom. There were chairs and tables and computers and absolutely nothing
else. The surprisingly large area had an air of quiet reverence not unlike that of a church.
The customers sat huddled over their glowing screens, deaf and dumb to those around
them. The only sounds in the room were the swift tapping of keys and the quiet chirping of
working machines.
The café’s manager came forward to greet me. Willy Fleagal was a tall gangling sort, with
bifocals, a high forehead, and a ponytail, wearing a T-shirt saying Information Wants to Be
Free ™. He gave me a big smile and a limp handshake. He knew me as a regular
customer, with special privileges guaranteed by the chain’s owners, but that was all he
knew. I’ve dropped him the occasional hint that I might be an investigative journalist, chasing
the corporate bad guys, and he loved that.
"Wow, hello again, Mr. Bond," he said, trying hard for cheerfulness but not quite making it.
Willy was a conspiracy theory freak of long standing, and therefore tended towards
depression, misery, and gloom as natural default positions. "Always a pleasure to see you
in here, man. Are you sure you weren’t followed? Of course you are, course you are." He
produced a handheld scanner and checked my clothing for any planted bugs. All part of the
service, for Willy.
"You seem busy enough, Willy," I said. "Turned up anything juicy recently?"
He nodded quickly and lowered his voice as he filled me in on the latest conspiracy gossip.
Most of which I already knew, but I didn’t have the heart to tell him. His watery eyes glowed
behind the bifocals as he solemnly assured me that the British royal family is actually
descended from ancient lizard gods who had their awful genesis in the German Black
Forest; that the U.S. Pentagon actually has a secret sixth side invisible to all but the chosen
few, where all the really important decisions are made; and that a certain Hollywood actress
is actually a shape-changing alien, which is why she can put on and take off weight so easily
while never seeming to age. That last one was new to me, and I made a mental note to
check it out later. The family knows of four shape-changing alien species currently busy on
our world, and part of the agreement is that they’re supposed to stay out of the public eye.
Willy finally ran down and led me past his oblivious customers to the back room reserved for
my use. He unlocked the door, ushered me in with a last dismal sniff, and then left me alone.
I waited till I heard him lock the door again, and then sat down before the waiting computer. I
didn’t need to check whether Willy or anyone else had tampered with it; if anyone but me
even approached it, the whole thing would self-destruct in a quite impressively nasty
manner. Willy didn’t know that, of course. He didn’t need to know. He also didn’t need to
know that inside the standard computer shell was nothing more than a properly prepared
crystal ball. Far more powerful than any computer and a damned sight harder to hack.
I said my real name out loud, and the monitor screen turned itself on, showing me an image
of my usual contact, Penny Drood. A cool blonde in a tight white sweater, sweet and smart
and sexy enough, in a distant sort of way. I like Penny. She doesn’t take any shit from me.

"You’re late," she said. "Agents in the field are required to report in exactly on the hour."
"Yes, I did manage to avoid being killed or severely injured, thank you for asking, Penny.
May I inquire why the mission briefing didn’t inform me about the bloody big demon dog
standing guard outside Dr. Dee’s?"
Penny sniffed. "Demon dogs come as standard these days, Eddie. As you’d know if you
actually bothered to read all the updates I send you."
"If I read everything the family sends me, I’d never get anything done. And this was a really
big bastard."
Penny smiled briefly. "The day you can’t handle a demon dog, Eddie, we’ll retire you. Now
make your report, please. I do have other agents on my watch, you know."
"Ah, but they don’t worship your very existence like I do."
"Idolatry will get you nowhere. Make your report."
I launched straight into it, fluent and precise with the ease of long practice. Just the relevant
details; the family doesn’t need to know everything, as long as the mission is completed
successfully. I didn’t mention my brief, unfortunate meeting with the Karma Catechist. But
when I got to the end of my report and sat back in my chair, the very first thing Penny said
was "Tell me about the Karma Catechist." I sighed deeply, but I wasn’t really surprised. The
family knows everything, remember? That’s just the way it is. So I told Penny what
happened, being very careful to emphasise that none of it was in any way my fault, and at
the end she just nodded and broke contact. The screen went dead, and I stood up,
stretching slowly, feeling rather relieved. If I’d been in any trouble, she would have told me to
wait while she kicked it upstairs.
So, report over, mission concluded. Time to repair to a civilised hostelry and get utterly
rat-arsed.
I left the Internet café, nodding good-bye to Willy, who was busy sending anonymous hate
e-mail to Bill Gates. I shut the door firmly behind me, and then looked casually up and down
the side street to make sure no one was about. The afternoon was shading into evening
now, the shadows growing darker and deeper. The side street ended in a grimy brick wall,
covered with faded graffiti. I stood before the wall, said certain Words, and a door appeared
in the brickwork before me. A door of solid silver, deeply etched with threats and warnings in
angelic and demonic script, and with absolutely no trace of a handle. I placed my left hand
on the silver, and the door swung open before me. Try that when your name isn’t on the
approved list and the door will bite your hand right off; but one of the things I like most about
the Wulfshead Club is how jealously it guards its privacy and that of its patrons.
The club isn’t actually in London; you can enter it from any city in the world, as long as you’re
a member in good standing and know the current passWords. I’m not sure if anyone knows
exactly where (or indeed when) the Wulfshead is really located. Which makes it the best of
all possible places to go when you need to get away from the world and its demands.
I stepped through the door into dazzling light, pounding music, and the roar of people
determined to have a good time, no matter what. The Wulfshead is very up to the moment,
very high-tech. All neon strip lighting and furniture so modern half the time you can’t even tell
what it’s supposed to be. The walls are giant plasma screens showing dramatic views from
around the world, constantly changing. Every now and again they flash up the bedroom
secrets of famous and important people, covertly recorded by Peeping Toms with access to

far too much technology for their own good. The music slammed and pounded, while girls in
hardly any clothing at all stomped and strutted on the spotlit miniature stages, dancing their
hearts out till the sweat flew from their flailing bodies, and the bass lines shuddered up
through the floor.
The club was crowded, as always, full to the brim with the most interesting people you’ll find
anywhere. The Wulfshead is where all the weird people go to relax and to enjoy a drink and
a chat with their own kind. The club’s membership includes the supernatural, the
superluminal, the super-scientific, and all the rest of the superhuman crew. It’s a
cosmopolitan mixture, embracing good guys and bad guys and all the strange people in
between. Deals are made, people and others get laid, the odd murder or transformation
occurs, and a good time is had by all. Got a hell of an atmosphere.
The club is neutral ground, by long tradition, but the occasional brawl is only to be expected.
It’s just high spirits. The bartender keeps order with a steamhammer, and the bouncers are
golems, so they can’t be bribed or intimidated.
I made my way to the long bar at the back of the club: a gleaming high-tech structure that
looked more like a piece of modern art than anything functional. The club prides itself on
having anything you can name on tap; everything from absinthe to human blood to steaming
nitric acid with an LSD chaser. In fact the choice is so wide that most of us believe the club
keeps its stock in a pocket dimension attached to the bar by a hyperdimensional link. It’s
still best to avoid the house wines, unless you’re already on your third stomach.
The bar snacks are appalling, but then bar snacks always are.
I nodded and smiled at old friends and familiar faces as I eased my way through the press of
bodies. They know me only as Shaman Bond; just another face on the scene. None of them
even suspected I might be a Drood, and I was determined to keep it that way. We protect
the world, but no one ever said we were popular. I ordered a chilled bottle of Beck’s from the
bar and looked around me. To my left, Charlatan Joe was holding forth to a select group,
and I wandered over to listen. Joe was a city slicker and confidence trickster; a shark on
legs in an Armani suit. Listening more or less patiently to his boasting and preening was
another familiar face: Janissary Jane. She nodded briskly to me as I joined the group. Her
army fatigues were stiff with black blood, and up close she smelled of smoke and
brimstone.
"Just back from the battlefield?" I said, raising my voice to be heard above the din. "Where
did you end up this time?"
Jane shrugged, gulping her whiskey straight from the bottle. She wore her black hair
cropped short so no one could grab it during a fight, and if her scarred face had ever been
pretty, that was a long time ago. She was a good drinking companion, as long as you kept
her off the gin. Gin made her maudlin, and then she tended to shoot people.
"Some demon war, in another dimension," she said finally. "Some damned fool
necromancer opened up a hellgate, and the call went out for all good mercenaries to rally to
the flag. Pay was good, but I’d have gone anyway, for the fight. Hate bloody demons."
"Who doesn’t?" said the Indigo Spirit, splendid as always in his midnight blue leathers,
cape, and mask, sipping his Manhattan cocktail with his little finger carefully extended.
"Damned things are worse than cockroaches."
I raised my bottle to him briefly. "Good to see you again, Indigo. How goes the war on
crime? Killed any interesting supervillains recently?"

"Just the usual scum, dear boy. Nothing wrong with them that two bullets in the head won’t
cure. I have to say the current breed of diabolical masterminds and deadly fiends is really
very disappointing…No style, do you see; no sense of occasion. Sometimes it’s hardly
worth dressing up in the outfit. I mean, is it really too much trouble for a villain to at least wear
a domino mask in his secret lair?"
Charlatan Joe had given up on his story now, since no one was listening, and sipped sulkily
at his port and lemon. Beside him, the Blue Fairy was pissed as a fart, bemoaning the
approaches of middle age and complaining that his wand didn’t work as well as it used to.
"So," I said, loud enough to drown out the Blue Fairy, "what’s the latest gossip, people?"
There’s always someone trying to take over the world, or blow it up, or make it A Better
Place; all equally dangerous and disturbed.
"Dr. Delirium is up to something nasty again," said the Indigo Spirit.
"Swanning around in the depths of the Amazon jungle. Thinks he’s so big, just because he
has his own private army. The only reason he’s got an army is because his uncle left it to
him."
"Right," said Janissary Jane, gesturing a little too wildly with her whiskey bottle. "Never trust
private soldiers. Nice uniforms, but no real guts. No fire in their bellies. If they can’t
outnumber you ten to one, they don’t want to know. Delirium tried to get me to sign up a few
years back, but of course I said no. The pay offer was really lousy."
"Delirium," said Charlatan Joe. "Isn’t he the one who collects new plagues, and then
threatens to turn them loose on the civilised world, unless he’s paid off?"
"That’s the one," I said. "Always wants to be paid off in rare postage stamps. I guess once a
collector, always a collector."
"There’s a rumour going around that one of the Old Ones is slowly waking from its long
sleep under the Arctic Circle," said Charlatan Joe. "And that’s why the polar ice pack is
melting so much faster than it should be."
Janissary Jane sniffed loudly. "Every time there’s a blip in the weather, someone thinks the
Old Ones are coming back. Not gonna happen. They’ve been asleep so long now you
couldn’t wake one up if you stuffed a nuke up its backside and detonated it."
"I did hear that the troll problem’s getting worse in the Underground train tunnels," said the
Indigo Spirit. "Nasty things; all teeth and appetite and no manners. Word is, they could be
getting close to swarming again."
Janissary Jane brightened. "Always good money to be made during a cull. I’ll contact my
agent, see if anyone’s hiring. The city better not have tendered it out to Group Forty-two
again; those bastards always want to see the heads as proof of kill. Last time I came up out
of the Underground like Santa Claus with a sack full of goodies."
"Got some new videos in, if any of you are interested," said Charlatan Joe. "I know this guy
who knows this guy who claims his television set is receiving transmissions from the future.
He’s selling best-of compilations on VHS and DVD, and I can get my hands on some for a
really reasonable price…"
"I wouldn’t," I said. "I’ve seen that tape. Just a bunch of guys in weird clothes, showing their
bums to the camera and giggling a lot. Technology is just wasted on some people."

So we drank and talked and drank some more, and the evening passed pleasantly enough.
Charlatan Joe put it all on his tab, since he was still flush from his latest sting. Janissary
Jane tried to chat up some guy in chain mail, and then shot him in the arse when he turned
his back on her. The Indigo Spirit offered to show me his secret cave, but I politely declined.
The Blue Fairy passed out cold and lay snoring on the floor at our feet. "Don’t step on him,"
Charlatan Joe said wisely, "Or it’ll rain for forty days and forty nights."
At some point, the conversation got around to the latest sightings of the infamous Drood
family and their golden agents, and I shut up and paid attention. Never know when you might
learn something useful. There are always sightings of my family at work, most of them
apocryphal or wishful thinking. If a Drood agent’s done his job properly, no one but the
victims should even know he was there. But we’re a bit like crop circles and cattle
mutilations; we get blamed for all kind of things that are nothing at all to do with us. The
current sightings included action in Moscow, Las Vegas, and Venice. That last one was
particularly nasty; no one seemed to know precisely what happened, but the city was fishing
bodies out of the canals for hours afterwards. I made a mental note to check up on that one,
though it sounded rather sloppy for us.
My family gets a lot of credit (or blame) for things we haven’t actually done, but we never
confirm or deny anything. It’s enough that the world is protected; they don’t need to know
family business. Besides, it’s all good for the reputation.
The company is usually good at the Wulfshead, but there’s always one in every crowd. A
large figure loomed suddenly over us, brandishing a pint of lager and insisting on joining our
conversation. He had to be seven feet tall, with shoulders to match, in a battered oversized
biker’s jacket and scuffed leather trousers. This, it turned out, was Boyd, Bodyguard to the
Stars. A newcomer to the Wulfshead, young and strong and stupid enough to believe the
club’s rules didn’t apply to him. He was obviously a Hyde, using a distillation of Dr. Jekyll’s
old formula. Potent enough to keep him big and brutal while diluted enough that he was able
to maintain control.
He just talked right over us, insisting on telling us all about his new job as bodyguard to a
major Hollywood actress. Who, if Boyd was to be believed, couldn’t do a thing without him
there to supervise it. He also dropped heavy hints that he’d sampled her famous body when
he wasn’t guarding it.
"Really?" said the Indigo Spirit. "I always thought she was a Friend of Dorothy."
"Don’t know if I’d go that far," I said. "But if they were shorthanded, she’d probably help out."
Boyd glared at me. "That’s just tabloid trash. Gossip and spite. She’s all woman, and I
should know. Right?"
He glared around at all of us, but I must not have looked convinced enough, because Boyd
decided he needed to push me about a bit, just to show he wasn’t to be contradicted. He
jabbed me hard in the chest with one large finger, and I looked at him thoughtfully as he
raised his voice to me.
He was twice my size and more, most of it muscle. I could have taken him easily if I
armoured up, but I couldn’t do that. Strict family rule: the armour is only ever to be used for
family business. More important, the armour would have given away to everyone that I was a
Drood, and then I’d never be able to come back here again. I liked being just Shaman Bond,
and I wasn’t about to give it up.
The bartender was already looking meaningfully in our direction, getting ready to intervene,

and I really did consider letting him handle it. For about a second or two. But I didn’t spend
most of my life being trained to fight the good fight just so I could let a mere Hyde push me
around. Besides, if I let him get away with this, I’d never be able to drink here in peace
again. Even the weird and terminally strange have their pecking order. Still, given that Boyd
was a Hyde and more than twice my size, I sure as hell wasn’t going to fight fair.
So I held his gaze with mine, quietly retrieved the portable door from my pocket, activated it,
and flipped the door neatly under the Hyde’s feet. Boyd had just enough time to look startled
before he fell through the new opening and into the cellars underneath the club. He landed
with a satisfyingly loud crash, followed by a series of low moans. I picked up my portable
door and the floor returned, sealing Boyd in the cellars until someone could be bothered to
go down and rescue him. The bartender nodded his thanks, glad he hadn’t had to get
involved, and the watching crowd gave me a round of applause. Janissary Jane and I
shared a high five, while Charlatan Joe considered me thoughtfully.
"Where did you get your hands on a restricted device like a portable door, Shaman?"
"Found it on eBay," I said.
Time continued to pass pleasantly, and by the early hours of the morning I was drifting
through a drunken haze and chatting up a giggly sex droid who’d dropped in from the
twenty-third century to do some research for her dissertation on strange sexual hang-ups of
the rich and famous. She was tall and buxom and one hundred percent artificial, sweetly
turned out in a classic little black dress cut high enough at the back to show off the bar code
and copyright notice stamped on her magnificent left buttock. Her fizzing steel hair was full of
sparking static, her eyes were silver, and she smelled of pure musk. She ran off a nuclear
power cell located in her lower abdomen, which was just a tad worrying, but then, no one’s
perfect.
"So, what brings you to the Wulfshead?" I asked.
"Just playing tourist," she said with a smile so wide even Julia Roberts couldn’t have
matched it. "I’ve got so much more spare time since we finally got unionised. Let’s hear it for
Rossum’s Unionised Robots!"
"Down with the bosses!" I said solemnly. "Work is the curse of the drinking classes."
"Oh, I love my work," she said, batting her huge eyelashes at me. "It took more than one man
to change my name to Silicon Lily."
And that was when my mobile phone rang. I was not pleased. The only people who have that
number are my family, and I shouldn’t have been hearing from them so soon after a
completed mission. It had to be some kind of bad news, and almost certainly more mine
than theirs. People all around me scowled at the phone in my hand and gave me significant
looks; you’re supposed to turn off all communication devices before entering the Wulfshead.
I hadn’t thought to, because the family so rarely bothers me when I’m on downtime. I smiled
weakly, shrugged apologetically, blew a quick kiss to the sex droid, and retired to a more or
less private corner to take the call.
"I thought I told you never to call me here," I said coldly.
"Come home," said an unfamiliar voice. "Come home now. You are needed for a personal
briefing on an urgent mission."
And that was it. The phone went dead, and I slowly put it away, my mind racing. Another

mission, already? That was unheard of. I was guaranteed at least a week between
missions. Too much work in the field, and you burn out fast. The family knows that. And why
did I have to go home to be briefed? Ordinarily they send me my mission brief, and
whatever hardware I might need, via a blind postal drop that I rotate on a regular basis; and
then I just go off and do whatever needs to be done and do my best not to get killed in the
process. Make my report to Penny afterwards, and then go to ground till I’m needed again.
The family and I maintain a civilised distance, and that’s the way I like it.
I scowled into what remained of my drink. The phone call had shocked me sober again. I
really didn’t want to go home. Back to the Hall, ancestral home of the extended Drood
family. I hadn’t set eyes on the place in ten years. I left right after my eighteenth birthday, to
our mutual relief, and the family sent me a regular and (fairly) generous stipend guaranteed
to continue as long as I continued to work in the field. If I ever chose to give up my career as
an agent, I could either go home or be hunted down and killed as a dangerous rogue. That
was understood. They allowed me a short leash, but that was all. I was a Drood.
I left home because I found the weight of family duty and history more than a little suffocating,
and they let me go because they found my attitude a pain in the arse. I’d kept myself busy,
down the years, accepting assignment after assignment just to avoid having to go home
again and submit to family authority and discipline. I liked the illusion of being my own man.
But when the family calls, you answer, if you know what’s good for you. I was going home
again, damn it to hell.
In the morning. Tonight, there was Silicon Lily…
CHAPTER FOUR
Home Is Where the Heart Is
T he sun had only been up an hour or so when I finally left my comfortable little flat tucked
away in an enclosed square in one of the better parts of Knightsbridge. The place cost more
in rent every week than the family sent me in a year, but I once did the owner a favour, and
now he picks up the tab. And in return I keep very quiet about exactly what the succubus had
been doing in that flat before I exorcised her. (Let’s just say I had to burn the bed and scrub
down the walls with a mixture of holy water and Lysol.) The brightening sky still had streaks
of crimson in it, the birds were singing their little hearts out, the noisy bastards, and the day
felt fresh and sharp with the anticipation of things to come.
I’m not normally a morning person, but it had been a really good night, thanks to Silicon Lily.
She’d vanished from my bed in a crackle of discharging tachyons about an hour ago,
leaving me with the memory of a wink and a smile and the scent of her perfumed sweat on
my sheets. Damn, they know how to live in the twenty-third century. I took a few deep breaths
of crisp morning air, yawned abruptly, and brushed vaguely at my blue jeans, white shirt, and
battered black leather jacket. Good enough for the family. I don’t normally believe in getting
up at the same time as everyone else, people who actually have to earn a living, but I had a
long day ahead of me. I unlocked the garage under my flat with a Word and a gesture, and
then backed my car out into the cobbled courtyard. I revved the engine and it roared
cheerfully, and I had to grin as I thought of heads jerking up off pillows in flats all around the
square. I have to get up early, everyone gets up early.
I swept through the almost empty streets of London, ignoring red lights and speed limits and
marvelling at all the empty parking spaces. London just after dawn is a whole different place.
A few partygoers were still stumbling home, clutching empty champagne bottles and the
occasional traffic cone, and I waved cheerfully to them as I passed. We twilight people have

to stick together.
I was driving my Hirondel sports car, the powder blue convertible model, with the top down,
and the wind ruffled my hair affectionately as I headed out of London and aimed for the
southwest countryside, going home to meet the family. I’d had hardly any sleep and only a
rushed breakfast of milky cereal and burnt toast, but there’s nothing like a night of really
good sex to stave off a hangover. I powered down the M4 motorway, through grasslands
and open fields and cultivated countryside, enjoying the run. I sang lustily along to the
Eurythmics’ Greatest Hits in the CD player, doing harmonies when I couldn’t hit the high
notes. That Annie Lennox has got a hell of a range.
The Hirondel is a 1930s model, perfectly restored, but it also has many modern extras and
some extraordinary options, courtesy of the family Armourer. Who firmly believes in every
member of the family being prepared for enemy attack at all times. He also believes in
doing unto others before they get the chance to do it unto you. As a result of his very talented
work, speed cameras can’t see me, my license plate is Corps Diplomatique so the cops
don’t bother me, and any car that makes the mistake of getting too close can suddenly find
itself experiencing severe engine problems. For those who insist on getting too close, I have
fore and aft electronic cannons capable of firing two thousand explosive fléchettes a
second, flamethrowers, and an EMP generator. If you ask me, the Armourer’s seen too
many spy movies. I prefer to put my faith in driving like a bat out of hell and leaving my
enemies behind to eat my exhaust.
I turned off the M4 near Bristol, by now crooning along to Leonard Cohen’s I’m Your Man,
and quickly left the main roads behind me as I headed deep into the countryside. I drove
down increasingly narrow roads until I was well off the beaten track, and the roads became
lanes, without even any road markings or cat’s-eyes down the middle. The morning air was
sharp and fresh, filled with the scents of recently cut grass and the unmistakable presence of
cows. The southwest is dairy country. Small towns gave way to even smaller villages and
hamlets until finally the lane I was following just petered out into a dirt track, deeply churned
by heavy farm vehicles. I kept going, slower now, following a winding way through dark and
brooding woods, golden shafts of sunlight forcing their way through the general gloom like
spotlights full of dancing dust motes. I braked sharply to avoid hitting a badger the size of a
pig as it wandered across the road, and it actually had the nerve to give me the evil eye
before scurrying off into the undergrowth. Deer watched me silently from the sides, their
eyes gleaming in the shadows.
I rounded a sharp corner, and the track ended abruptly in a high stone wall buried under
centuries’ growth of creeping ivy. Anyone else would have slammed on their anchors and
prayed for their souls, but I just kept going. The stone wall loomed up before me, terribly
solid and unforgiving, filling my view, and then I was upon it and through it, the illusion
dissipating harmlessly around me, trailing wisps of ghostly stonework across my face like
chilly fingertips.
(To a Drood, it’s an illusion. To everyone else, it’s a solid stone wall. And if you crash into it,
don’t come crying to us. Serves you right for trying to find us.)
Bright sunlight splashed over the car as I left the illusion behind me and followed the long
gravel path between two long rows of elm trees and on into the extensive grounds of the
Hall. There were perfectly laid out lawns, expertly trimmed and long enough to land a plane
on. Sprinklers tossed their liquid bounty around, filling the summer air with a moist haze.
Beyond the lawns there were hedge mazes and flower gardens, ornamental fountains in the
grand Victorian style with water gushing tastefully from classical statues, and even our own
lake with swans drifting on it.

As I approached the Hall, peacocks paraded across the manicured lawns, announcing my
arrival with their harsh and raucous cries. An old wishing well stood to one side, its red roof
rusting and flaking away. We filled it in with concrete for getting too cocky. Winged unicorns
grazed outside the adjoining stables, tossing their noble heads at me, their coats so perfect
a white they seemed almost to glow. Watchful gryphons patrolled around the Hall, keeping
an eye on the near future, ready for any attack. The perfect guardians and watchdogs.
Unfortunately, they only eat carrion, and they like to roll in it first, so no one ever pets them
and they are never allowed inside.
My family home has always been colourful as all hell. The waterfall feature has an undine in
it, the old chapel has a ghost (though my family isn’t on speaking terms with it), and there are
occasionally faeries at the bottom of our garden. Though if you’re wise you’ll give them
plenty of space.
The Hall loomed up before me like a dentist’s appointment; it might be necessary, but you
just know it’s all going to end in tears. My feelings on seeing the old homestead again after
so long were so mixed I didn’t even know where to start. Everywhere I looked, familiar sights
leapt to my eyes, assaulting me with nostalgia for times past, when the world seemed so
much simpler. This was the place of my childhood, my formative years. I remembered
sailing across the lake in a boat made of cobwebs and sealing magics under the kind of
blue sky and brilliant sun you only get in memories of childhood summers. I remembered
being four years old, chasing the peacocks on my stubby legs and crying because I couldn’t
catch them. I remembered dancing on the roof in elfin boots, and flying on the unicorns,
and…just lying on the lawns with a good book, dozing through endless summer
afternoons…
I also remembered endless lessons in crowded schoolrooms, endless harsh discipline and
cold courtesy, and the silent sullen resistance of my teenage years as I stubbornly refused to
be led and moulded and dictated to. The never-ending arguments with increasingly senior
members of the family over the way my life should go, and the terrible feeling of being
crushed and limited by their rigid expectations of who and what a Drood should be. My need
to be my own man, in a family where that could never be permitted. In the end I didn’t so
much leave as run away, and to the Matriarch’s credit, she let me go.
I remembered the beatings, the angry raised voices, and, worse, the cutting cold words of
disappointment. The withholding of treats and privileges and affection, until I learned to do
without them, just to spite the family. I learned to be self-sufficient the hard way. You temper
a sword by beating the crap out of the steel; and I have one hell of a temper.
Now I’d been summoned back, without explanation or warning, and a cold knot of warning
and paranoia twisted in the pit of my stomach. Nothing good could come of this. Nothing
good for me, anyway. Part of me wanted to just crash the car to a halt, turn it around, and
drive back out. Just keep driving and driving, leave England, and lose myself in the darker
parts of the world, forget I ever was a Drood. But I couldn’t do that. The family wouldn’t
forget. They would declare me rogue, apostate, security risk, and they would never stop until
they had hunted me down.
And besides, even after all the arguments and disagreements, I still believed in what the
family stood for. I still believed in fighting the good fight.
I turned the car through a long, drawn-out curve, and the Hall swung into place before me,
dominating the scene. A huge sprawling old manor house, the Hall dated back to Tudor
times originally, but had been much added to down the centuries. The central building still
had the traditional black-and-white boarded frontage, with heavy leaded-glass windows and

a jutting gabled roof. Surrounding it were the four great wings, massive and solid in the old
Regency style, containing some fifteen hundred bedrooms, all of them currently occupied by
family members. Everyone here is a Drood. The roof rose and fell like a gray tiled sea,
complete with gables, gargoyles, and ornamental guttering. Not forgetting the observatory,
the aerie, the landing pad, and more aerials and antennae than you could shake a gremlin
at. There are many rooms in my family’s mansion, and there’s room for everyone. As long as
you toe the line.
The Hall is also a real swine to heat, draughty as all hell in the winter, and the family doesn’t
believe in central heating because they think it makes you soft. I grew up thinking wearing
long underwear half the year was normal.
And in the Hall’s most secret chambers, my family decides the fate of the world. Seven days
a week, no time off for good behaviour.
This isn’t my family’s first home, of course. The Droods were an old, old family even back in
Tudor times. We moved on and moved up as we grew in size and status and influence. But
the Hall has been our home and centre of operations for so long now it’s hard to think of us
anywhere else. You won’t find the Hall on any official map, nor will you find any of the routes
that lead to it. I’d felt the many layers of scientific and magical defences sliding aside to let
me pass as I drove down the long graveled drive, rising and falling before me like a series
of shifting veils, and then sealing themselves behind me again. Someone was watching me
from the moment I passed through the stone wall, and would continue to watch until I left
again. Robot guns actually rose up out of the lawns to track my car at one point before
reluctantly burying themselves again. They were new. But of course, it’s always the defences
you can’t see or sense that will really screw you over. Anyone who comes looking for us,
uninvited and unexpected, risks being killed in any number of increasingly distressing ways.
The family has always taken its privacy very seriously. When you’ve been protecting and
policing the world for as long as we have, you can’t help but accumulate serious enemies.
The Hall and its extensive grounds are surrounded and suffused with layer upon layer of
protections, including a whole bunch of scarecrows. We make them out of old enemies. If
you listen in on the right supernatural frequency, you can hear them screaming. Don’t mess
with the Droods. We take it personally. We get mad and we get even.
I brought the Hirondel to a crashing halt right before the front door, in a swirl and a spray of
churned-up gravel, and parked right there just because I knew I wasn’t supposed to. I turned
off the engine, and then sat there for a while, staring at nothing and tapping my fingertips on
the steering wheel, listening to the cries of the peacocks and the slow ticking of the cooling
engine. I didn’t want to do this. By not leaving the car I was putting off the moment when I
would have to enter my old home and walk back into the cold, distant embrace of my family.
But…sooner or later you have to walk into the dentist’s surgery and just get it over with.
I slammed the car door loudly, enjoying the echoes, and then locked it. Not because it was
necessary, or even because it would stop whomever they sent to move it. I just wanted to
make it clear to everyone that I didn’t trust anyone here. The Hall rose up before me like a
tidal wave cast in stone. It looked even bigger than I remembered, up close, and even more
forbidding. I could feel its mass, its centuries of accumulated duty and responsibility, trying
to suck me in like a black hole, but I balked at the front door. I was supposed to walk straight
in and present myself to the Matriarch, as custom and tradition demanded…but I’ve never
been big on doing what I’m supposed to do. And since I was still more than a bit resentful at
being summoned back so abruptly, I decided that the Matriarch could wait while I went for a
little walk.

I turned my back on the front door, humming aloud in an unconcerned sort of way, and
strolled past the many arched and stained-glass windows at the front of the house. I could
feel their presence, like the pressure of so many watching eyes, so I kept my own gaze
resolutely straight ahead. The gravel crunched loudly under my feet as I headed past the
east wing, rounded the corner, and smiled for the first time as I beheld the old family chapel.
Tucked away out of sight and set firmly apart, the chapel was a squat stone structure with
crucifix windows. It looked Saxon but was actually an eighteenth-century folly. The family had
its own chapel inside the Hall now, pleasant and peaceful and graciously
multidenominational, and the old building had been left to rot. It is currently occupied by the
family ghost, Jacob Drood, cantankerous old goat that he is. He’s my
great-great-great-grandfather, I think. Genealogy never was my strong point.
On the whole, my family discourages ghosts, otherwise we’d be hip deep in the things. If any
do come bleating back to the Hall after being killed in the field, they get dispatched on to the
Hereafter pretty damned sharply. The family looks strictly forward, never back, and there just
isn’t room in the Hall for anyone to be sentimental. Jacob is allowed to linger on in the
chapel through some technicality I’ve never really understood, mostly because the few
people who do know are just too embarrassed to talk about it. All families have the odd
skeleton in the closet, and ours is Jacob. The family ostentatiously hasn’t been on speaking
terms with him for years, and he couldn’t care less. Mostly he just sits around in his ghostly
underwear, watching the memories of old television shows on a set with no insides in it.
Now and again he keeps a spectral eye on what the family’s up to, just because he knows
he’s not supposed to.
Jacob and I have always got along fine.
I first found out about him when I was eight. Cousin Georgie dared me to go peek in the
window of the forbidden chapel, and I never could resist a dare. I was caught (of course) and
punished (of course) and told that the chapel and its occupant were strictly off-limits. After
that, I couldn’t wait to meet him. I just knew we’d be kindred spirits. So I sneaked out that
night and basically ambushed the old ghost in his den. He made a few halfhearted attempts
to scare me off, but his heart wasn’t in it. He’d waited a long time for the family to throw up
another black sheep like him. We quickly warmed to each other, and after that no one could
keep us apart. The family did try, but Jacob came striding out of the chapel and right into the
Matriarch’s private chambers, and whatever was said there, after that the two of us were left
strictly to ourselves.
Jacob was perhaps the only real friend I had, then. Certainly the only one I could trust. He
encouraged all my early rebellions and was the only one who was always on my side. He
was the one who told me to get out, first chance I got. He approved of me; said I reminded
him of himself as a teenager. Which was rather worrying, actually.
The chapel looked as squat and ugly as ever; rough stone buried under thick mats of ivy that
stirred and twisted threateningly as I approached the open front door. Part of Jacob’s early
warning system. I patted the ivy and spoke to it in a friendly fashion, and it relaxed again as
it remembered and recognised my voice. The door was stuck halfway open, as always, and
I put my shoulder to it. The heavy wood scraped loudly across the bare stone floor, raising a
cloud of dust. I coughed and sneezed a few times and peered into the gloom. Nothing had
changed.
The pews were still stacked up against the far wall to make room for Jacob’s giant black
leather reclining chair, and beside it sat an old-fashioned refrigerator that was somehow
always full of ethereal booze. A massive old television stood before the chair, with real
rabbits’ ears piled on top to help with the reception. Jacob didn’t look around as I

approached. He sprawled bonelessly in his great chair, a gray wispy figure who flickered in
and out as his concentration wavered. He looked older than death, his face a mass of
wrinkles, his bony skull graced with just a few long flyaway hairs. He was currently wearing
faded Bermuda shorts and a T-shirt bearing the legend Ghosts Do It from Beyond. He
chugged down the last of his beer and threw the can away. It disappeared before it hit the
floor. Jacob waved a gray hand jerkily in my direction, leaving thin trails of ectoplasm on the
air.
"Come in, Eddie, come in! And shut the door behind you. The draughts play havoc with my
old bones."
I stood my ground beside his chair, my arms folded across my chest. "And what bones
would those be, you disgusting old revenant?"
He scowled at me from under bushy white eyebrows. "You get to be as ancient as me, lad,
you’ll suffer a few aches and pains too. It’s not easy, being this old. Or everybody would be
doing it."
"How can you have aches and pains? You’re dead. You don’t have an actual body
anymore."
"That’s right! Rub it in! Just because I’m dead, it doesn’t mean I don’t have feelings. The way
the family treats me these days makes me spin in my grave."
"You were cremated, Jacob."
"All right, I’ll turn in my urn!" He shut down his ghostly television set with a snap of his fingers
and finally turned to smile at me. "Damn, it’s good to have you back, lad. None of the current
generation have the spunk to come out and talk to me. How long has it been, Eddie? I lose
track in here…"
"Ten years," I said.
He nodded slowly. "You’ve filled out nicely, lad. Good outfit, rotten attitude, and you look like
you could punch your weight. A credit to my teachings. But what the hell are you doing back
here, Eddie? You did the one thing even I couldn’t do; you escaped."
"The family called me home," I said, trying hard to keep my voice light and unconcerned. "I
was kind of hoping you might know why."
Jacob sniffed and settled back in his reclining chair. The ghost of a pipe appeared in his
hand, and he sucked thoughtfully on the stem, releasing thick puffs of ectoplasm that drifted
up to the cobwebbed ceiling. "Not much point in asking me, lad. The family’s been keeping
me even more at arm’s length than usual, of late. Of course, that doesn’t stop me from
keeping a watchful eye on them…" He grinned nastily at me. "You want all the latest gossip,
Eddie lad? You want to know who’s having who, who messed up in the field again, and who
came back stoned out of her mind and crashed the autogyro on the roof landing pad?"
"Tell me everything," I said. "I think I need to know everything."
Jacob waved his pipe away, and it disintegrated into drifting streams of ectoplasm. He sat
up straight in his chair and fixed me with a steady gaze, his ancient eyes pinning me where I
stood. "To start with, there’s a new faction in the family. Gaining a lot of support, especially
among the youngsters. Basically, it boils down to a Let’s get them before they get us
strategy. This new faction is talking very loudly about the virtues of preemptive strikes and a
zero tolerance for all identified bad guys. No more dealing with problems as they arise; stick

it to the bad guys with extreme prejudice, whether we can prove anything or not."
"If we were to declare open war," I said slowly, "our enemies would just band together for
protection against a common threat, and we’d be vastly outnumbered. We’ve survived as
long as we have only because we understand the virtues of divide and conquer."
Jacob shrugged. "Youngsters today; no patience. No taking the long view. It’s all instant
gratification now. I blame MTV and video games. So far, older and wiser heads in the family
are keeping the new faction firmly in its place, but everyone’s talking about it…Also, your
cousin William’s been stirring things, just so he can get plenty of good footage for the
documentary he’s been making about the family. Though God alone knows who he thinks is
going to see it. Could be a big hit, mind, with all those people who watched The Osbournes.
Meet the Droods: an even more dysfunctional family, only far more dangerous…
"The Matriarch’s stepped up security around the Hall. Again. You probably noticed the extra
measures on your way in. Of course, they can’t keep me out. It’s hard to keep secrets from
the dead. We’re natural voyeurs. Shall we take a look at what our beloved leader is up to at
the moment?"
He snapped his fingers at the empty television set before him, and the old episode of Dark
Shadows that had been running with the sound off was replaced by an impressively sharp
image of the family Matriarch in her study, talking with her husband, Alistair. He was pacing
up and down, looking distinctly worried, while she sat straight-backed in her chair, all icy
calm and dignity.
"He’ll be here soon," said Alistair. "What are we going to tell him?"
"We’ll tell him what he needs to know, and no more," said the Matriarch. "That’s always
been the family way."
"But if he even suspects…"
"He won’t."
"We could tell him the truth." Alistair stopped pacing and looked directly at the Matriarch.
"We could appeal to his better nature. To his duty, to his love of the family…"
The Matriarch sniffed loudly. "Don’t be a fool. He’s far too dangerous. I have determined
what needs to be done, and that’s all there is to it. I have always understood what’s best for
the family. Wait…Someone’s listening in! Is that you, Jacob?"
She turned abruptly and stared right out of the screen at us. Jacob gestured quickly and the
picture disappeared, replaced by an old episode of The Addams Family.
"Told you she’d stepped up security," said Jacob. "What do you suppose that was all
about?"
"I don’t know," I said. "But I don’t like the sound of it."
"Something’s going on," Jacob said darkly. "Something the Matriarch and her precious
inner circle don’t want the rank and file to know about. There’s something in the
air…Something Big is coming. I can feel it, gathering like stormclouds in the future. And
when it finally breaks, it’s going to be a monster…There have been several direct attacks on
the Hall just recently."
"Hold it," I said. "Attacks? No one’s told me anything about any attacks. What kind of

attacks?"
"Powerful ones." Jacob stirred uncomfortably in his chair. "Even I didn’t see them coming,
and that’s not like me. Nothing got through, of course, but just the fact that someone or
something felt confident enough to launch a direct attack on where we live speaks volumes.
In my day, no one would have dared. We’d have tracked them down, ripped their souls out,
and nailed them to our outer walls. But it’s all politics now; agreements and pacts and
truces. The family isn’t what it was…I don’t know why they’ve called you back, Eddie, but it
sure as hell isn’t to pin a medal on your chest. Watch your back, lad."
"Always," I said. "Anything I can do for you, Jacob?"
He leered at me in a frankly unsettling way. "If that headless nun is still haunting the north
wing, tell her to get her ectoplasmic arse down here, and I’ll teach her a whole new way to
manifest."
"But…she hasn’t got a head!"
"It’s not her head I’m interested in!"
And he wonders why the rest of the family won’t talk to him.
Out in the bright sunlight again, under a perfect blue sky, with gryphons prowling watchfully
on the perfect lawns, while butterflies big as my hand fluttered through the flower gardens, I
found it hard to believe that the family could be in any real danger. Or that I might be. I might
not always have been happy here, but I always felt safe in the Hall. The power of the Droods
depended on the fact that no one could touch us. I looked up at the Hall towering over me,
ancient and powerful, just like us. How could anything be wrong in such a perfect place, on
such a perfect day?
I walked in through the main entrance, and there in the vestibule was the Sarjeant-at-Arms,
waiting to meet me. Of course he was waiting; hours before the gryphons would have told
him the exact moment I’d arrive. The Sarjeant was never surprised by anything or anyone.
That was his job. He inclined his head stiffly to me, which was about as much welcome as I’d
expected. In the Drood family, the prodigal son was always going to be in for a rough ride.
The Sarjeant-at-Arms wore the stark black-and-white formal outfit of a Victorian butler, right
down to the stiff and starched high collar, even though he had the build and manner of an
army sergeant major. I knew for a fact he always carried half a dozen concealed weapons of
increasing power and viciousness somewhere about his person. If the Hall ever was
attacked and breached, he’d be the first line of defence and very likely the last thing the
attackers ever saw.
He had a face that might have been chiselled out of stone. He didn’t looked at all pleased to
see me, but then, he never looked pleased about anything. Gossip had it smiling was
against his religion.
"Hi there, Jeeves," I said just to wind him up, because we both knew he was far more than
just a butler. (There are no servants, as such, in the Hall. We all serve the family, in our own
way.) (Or at least, that’s the official line…)
"Good morning, Edwin," said the Sarjeant in his voice like grinding gravel. "The Matriarch is
expecting you."
"I know," I said. "I wish I could say I was glad to be home again."
"Indeed," said the Sarjeant. "I wish I could say I was glad to see you again, boy."

We sneered at each other for a moment, and then, honour satisfied, I allowed him to lead
the way through the shadowy vestibule and on into the great hallway. Light streamed in
through hundreds of stained-glass windows, filling the extended hallway with all the colours
of the rainbow. Old paintings and portraits showed honoured members of the family: Drood
men and women sitting and standing in fixed and formal poses, in the dress and fashions of
centuries past, staring out at their descendants with stern, unwavering eyes.
Drood service and tradition goes back a long way, and none of us are ever permitted to
forget it. By the time we got to the end of the hallway, the paintings had given way to
photographs. From the first shadowy images to sepia tones to the garish colours of modern
times, the fallen dead stared proudly out at the world they made.
I stopped to consider one photo in its silver frame, and the Sarjeant stopped reluctantly
beside me. The photo held two faces I knew like my own. A man and a woman stood
together, proudly erect as befitting Droods, but there was a clear warmth and affection in
their smiles and in their eyes. He was tall and elegant and handsome, and so was she, and
they looked every inch the roistering adventurers everyone said they were. Charles and
Emily Drood; my father and my mother. Murdered on a family mission in the Basque region,
while I was still just a small child. Looking at them, so young and full of life, I realised I was
older now than they were when they died.
The Sarjeant-at-Arms hovered silently close beside me, making me aware of his impatience
with his proximity, but I wouldn’t let myself be hurried. Hello, Dad, I thought. Hello, Mum. I’ve
come back. But I couldn’t think of anything else to say, so I just nodded to them and moved
on.
The Sarjeant-at-Arms finally ushered me into the library, to wait there until the Matriarch was
prepared to see me. He inclined his head again, very stiffly, and withdrew, shutting the door
firmly behind him. I pulled a face at the closed door and relaxed a little. Walking with the
Sarjeant always felt like you were being marched with a gun at your back. I wandered slowly
through the many towering stacks and shelves of the family library, inhaling the old familiar
smells of leather bindings, paper, and ink and dust. On these shelves, in these books, is
recorded the true history of the world. All the secret deals and treaties, the private promises
and betrayals, and all the secret wars that take place behind the scenes that normal people
never get to hear about. The subtle moves on the invisible board, in the greatest game of all.
I was born, raised, and educated here in the Hall, like every other Drood son and daughter,
but I was one of the very few who ever bothered to read any book that wasn’t part of the
official curriculum. I discovered the library when I was ten, and after that they couldn’t keep
me out. The family teaches you what it thinks you need to know and nothing more. I, on the
other hand, ploughed through books like others devoured junk food, and what the family
called education I came to see as indoctrination. I wanted to know it all, the context as well
as the bare facts. And the more I read, the more I wanted to get out into the real world and
see it as it really was.
For a long time, I couldn’t see why this was such a problem for my teachers. I was being
trained to fight evil, to know who humanity’s real enemies were and how to defeat them; so
surely the more I knew about them, the better. Whenever I challenged anything, I was always
told to just shut up and go along like everyone else, because only my elders and betters
could see The Big Picture. So I just kept reading, trying to see it too.
The problem with the Drood family library is the sheer bloody size of the thing. Miles and
miles of stacks and shelves taking up the whole lower floor of the south wing, every shelf
packed tight to bursting with the accumulated knowledge and wisdom of centuries. Books

written in every language under the sun, and some from darker places, including a few
dialects so arcane that human vocal cords can’t pronounce them out loud. So I read what I
could in the original and badgered the librarian endlessly to find translations for those I
couldn’t. A decent old stick, the librarian. Wore gaudy pullovers, even in the summer, and
went motorbike scrambling every weekend. He disappeared suddenly, years before I left.
We never did find out what happened to him.
I wandered aimlessly through the racks, trailing my fingertips lightly along the leather spines.
We believe in books. Computer files can be hacked; paper can’t. The only way to access
the information in this library is to come here in person. And the only way to do that is to be
part of the family.
"Hello, Eddie. It’s good to see you again."
I turned around, already smiling because I knew who it was, who it had to be. There was only
one living member of the family who’d actually be pleased to see me again. Uncle James
strode forward to greet me, one hand outstretched to give me a firm, manly handshake. He
looked great, as always, perfectly outfitted in the most stylish three-piece suit money could
buy, looking every inch the rakish gentleman adventurer he was. Uncle James was tall,
darkly handsome, effortlessly elegant and sardonic, and in really good shape for a man in
his late fifties. His striking face had more than its fair share of character lines, but his hair
was still jet-black. His welcoming smile was broad and genuine, but even with me, there was
still a touch of the ingrained iciness that never left his eyes.
James had always been my favourite member of the family. After my father and my mother
were killed, James became the closest thing to a parent I had. He took a sullen, silent, lost,
and introverted boy and gave him a reason to live. He found things to interest and challenge
me, encouraged my rebellions, and gave me a purpose in learning to fight all the evil people
in the world responsible for orphaning so many children. He brought me back out of myself
and made it possible for me to be happy again. If I ever had a hero, it was Uncle James. The
last of the great adventurers, he went to the good war like a starving man to a feast. He had
the most experience, and the most successful missions to his credit, of any member of the
family. His use-name was a curse on the lips of the ungodly, and you could stop
conversations with it in bars and dives all across the world. They called him the Gray Fox,
and he was everything I ever aspired to be.
He was also the first one to advise me to leave and strike out on my own before the family’s
insistence on duty and tradition crushed my spirit. I’ve always believed that the only reason I
was ever allowed to operate at such a distance was because Uncle James went to bat for
me with the Matriarch. Not that I’ve ever mentioned it, of course. It would only have
embarrassed him.
"It’s good to see you again, Uncle James," I said. "Ten years it’s been, and yet still strangely
there’s not even a hint of gray at your temples…"
"Clean living and heavy drinking," he said easily. "You’ve filled out since I last saw you. It
suits you."
"Do you know why I’ve been summoned back here?" I said bluntly.
"Haven’t a clue, Eddie. I’m only looking in, in between missions. A soft bed, a good meal,
and a wander through the wine cellars before they pack me off again. I’m just back from
giving Dr. Delirium a bloody nose in the Amazon jungle, and as soon as I’ve done a little
research here, I’m off to sort out the Shadow Boxers of Shanghai. You know how it is; one
damned thing after another."

"I am so jealous," I said, grinning despite myself. "You get all the most glamorous
assignments. I’ve never even been allowed out of the country."
He raised a single eyebrow as he lit a black Russian cigarette with his monogrammed gold
lighter. "Now, you know why that is, Eddie. But you do good work. People notice. The more
missions you complete successfully, the more trust you’ll earn, and the more leash they’ll
give you."
"But they’ll never take the leash off, will they? I’ll never be free of the family."
"Why would you want to? You’re part of the most important heritage in the world." James
looked me right in the eye, very seriously. "To be born a Drood is a privilege as well as a
responsibility. We get to know the truth about the way things really are, and we get to fight
the battles that really matter. And if in return we get the best of everything, it’s because we’ve
earned it. And all the family has ever asked for is loyalty."
"We’re born drafted into a war that never ends," I said, meeting his gaze squarely. "And
most of us die fighting that war, far from home and family. Some of us never get to know our
parents, and some parents never get to know their sons. I know: it’s an honour to serve. But I
would have liked to be asked."
And that was when the general alarm sounded, like every bell and siren in the world going
off at once. James and I turned as one and ran back through the library. We charged out into
the corridor and almost ran over the Sarjeant-at-Arms as he ran past, a gun in each hand.
James grabbed him by the shoulder and hauled him to a halt as family members came
running from every direction.
"It’s the Heart!" yelled the Sarjeant, pulling away and racing off down the corridor. "It’s an
attack on the Sanctity!"
He didn’t need to say any more. James and I were already running full pelt after him. James
had a gun in each hand too now. And all I had was my needle gun. I didn’t draw it. I was
pretty sure frozen holy water wasn’t going to be enough this time. The Heart was the source
of the family’s power. Its stored energies made all our magics and super-sciences possible,
including the living armour we all depended on. But the Sanctity, the great chamber that
holds the Heart, was the single most heavily defended and protected part of the Hall. It’s
supposed to be invulnerable, inviolate. A direct attack on the Hall was rare enough; an
attack on the Heart was unprecedented, unthinkable.
James and I ran on, plunging through corridor after corridor at breakneck speed, both of us
breathing steadily to conserve our wind, as we’d been trained. More and more members of
the family came running from everywhere to join us, men and women with shocked, strained
faces and all kinds of weapons in their hands. Young and old, fighters and researchers and
even duty staff; people who should never have been needed, given the guaranteed safety of
the Hall.
We were closing in on the Sanctity now, at the very centre of the Hall. I could feel the hair
standing up on the back of my neck. There was a pressure, a presence, on the air, like the
cold shadow of a place where bad things had happened. Something Big is coming, that’s
what old Jacob had said. Something Big…Something Bad. And it was close now. Very
close.
Uncle James and I caught up with the Sarjeant-at-Arms just as he slammed through the
great double doors into the Sanctity, and there was the Heart: a single huge diamond
shining like the sun, so big it filled the massive chamber the family had built to contain and

protect it. A diamond bigger than a bus, a million facets blazing and shimmering so brightly
none of us could bear to look at it directly. The room was full of its light, and entering the
Sanctity was like diving into ice-cold water. It took your breath away, like a shock to the soul.
The Heart blazed with an otherworldly light, holding and harnessing the power that made our
family’s job possible. A light or an energy, a science or a magic; even after all the centuries
it had been with us, we were no nearer to understanding it.
The Heart was surrounded by powerful protections. I could feel them even as I edged into
the Sanctity, hammering on the shimmering air. Some of the family couldn’t even bring
themselves to enter the room. But still the bells and sirens were shrieking, summoning the
family to defend the Heart from an attack by someone or something unbelievably powerful.
Only the most terrible of our enemies would dare launch so blatant an assault. I circled slowly
around the gigantic diamond, one arm raised before my eyes to shield me from its
overwhelming glare. The light seemed to blaze right through my fragile flesh, like an X-ray.
James was there with me, and the Sarjeant-at-Arms, and I sensed as much as saw other
members of the family moving slowly around the Heart, searching desperately for some sign
of the enemy.
I had my needle gun in my hand. I didn’t have a lot of faith in it, but just its presence made me
feel better. I hadn’t armoured up. None of us had. We were all still thinking in terms of threats
to the safety of the Heart. It never even occurred to us that we might be in danger. This was
the Hall, and we had always been safe here.
I felt something approaching from a direction I could sense but not name. It was a Presence,
something so vast and alien and utterly other that its terrible nature actually eclipsed and
overwhelmed the Heart. It drew closer and closer, straining to materialise inside the
Sanctity, trying to force its way in from some other dimension of reality. It seemed to be
closing in on us from every direction at once, and just the sense of it was like shit smeared
across my soul. Like a mountain of maggots, or the smile the razor blade leaves as it slices
through a suicide’s wrists. It was almost upon us, and it hated us, just for being human.
The wood-panelled wall to my left groaned loudly as it bulged inwards, the old wood
stretching impossibly, forced out of shape by some unnameable pressure from Outside our
three-dimensional reality. The floor rose up at its centre like some monstrous boil, and the
ceiling bulged down. All the walls were crying out now, straining inwards towards the Heart.
Something was forcing its way into the Sanctity, from some higher or lower dimension, from
some place we couldn’t even hope to comprehend. And one by one, all the many layers of
protection the family had set in place around the Heart shattered and blew apart, like so
many cheap firecrackers.
Family magicians were in the room now, crowding around the Heart, chanting spells and
brandishing ancient talismans, trying to set up new defensive parameters. Family scientists
worked right there beside them, operating esoteric constructions of weird technology, some
of which looked like they’d dragged right in from the testing labs. All kinds of energy fields
crackled on the air, but still the awful Presence surrounded us, descending on us from
everywhere at once.
And finally, it broke through. Something was just suddenly there in the room with us; or
rather, Nothing was. There was a Gap, an Absence, a horrible Void just hanging on the air
before the Heart. I couldn’t see or hear it, but I could feel it on a level that had nothing to do
with senses. It was as though some terribly old, perhaps even prehuman part of me
recognised it. A great sucking pit of the spirit; a hole in reality itself. It pulsed, like some
great malignant heart, and then it reached out and sucked the flesh right off those members
of the family nearest it.

We lost a dozen men and women in a moment, meat and blood torn from their bones, whole
organs flying through the air and into the Void to make it a body, to give it shape and form in
this world. The bloody pulp of organs and muscles slammed together, flesh slapping upon
flesh, building a body whose shape made no sense, to house and hold the awful thing that
had forced its way in from Outside. Bloody bones lay scattered across the floor, unwanted,
along with a dozen golden torcs. People were puking and retching everywhere, even as they
backed away.
"Armour up!" James yelled. "Everyone! Now!"
We all subvocalised the Words, and living armour encased us, glorious and golden, sealing
us off from the pull of the Void. For the first time I felt sane and human again, able to think
clearly, my spirit no longer soiled by the presence of the thing before us. Where the Void
had been, a huge new thing had taken shape. It looked like it was made out of cancers, like
sickness and death made solid and vicious. It was scarlet and purple with bulging dark
veins, and it glistened wetly. Uneven rows of human eyes stared unblinkingly out of a pulpy
mass that might have been meant as a face. It rose up to the bowed ceiling, big as ten men,
limbs of a sort radiating from its central mass, but its shape and dimensions and attributes
made no sense at all. I felt its attention turn away from the family, towards the Heart, and I
sensed a terrible emotion in the shape that might have been rage, or hunger, or a need to
violate. It moved towards the Heart, surging forward like a snail, and the great diamond’s
light seemed to flicker and diminish, just from the thing’s proximity.
"Stop it!" James yelled. "Don’t let it touch the Heart!"
The Sarjeant-at-Arms had already opened fire, blazing away with both guns at once. James
strode forward, pouring bullets into the bloody shape from close range, and I was right there
with him, firing my needle gun. Everyone else in the Sanctity opened fire on the mass with
whatever weapons they had, crowding forward, ignoring their own safety to protect the
Heart. Magicians unleashed curses and damnations, and scientists fired strange energies
from stranger weapons…and none of it did any good. The bloody shape absorbed our
bullets, and everything else, with equal indifference, pressing slowly but inexorably towards
the Heart. Golden armoured hands that could punch through walls or shattered steel flailed
at the pulpy mass, and it just ignored us. One armoured man stood defiantly in its path. The
scarlet shape sucked him in and spat him out the other side. He thrashed weakly on the
floor, screaming like the newly damned.
I grabbed James by the arm and made him look at me. "Call them off! They’ll listen to you. I’
ve got an idea!"
He looked at me, and then nodded curtly and ordered the family to disengage. Everyone fell
back immediately. They trusted James, where they almost certainly wouldn’t have trusted
me. James looked at me expectantly. I reached through the armour on my side, drew the
portable door from my pocket, activated it, and tossed it into the path of the bloody shape as
it surged forward, just as I had with the Hyde at the Wulfshead. The portable door slid neatly
into position, sparked and sputtered a few times, and then just lay there, inert. I’d used it too
often. The batteries were dead.
James was still looking at me. I couldn’t see his face behind the gleaming golden mask, but I
could guess his expression. He’d trusted me, and I’d let him down. I looked back at the
shape. It was almost upon the Heart. I thought hard, glaring desperately about the Sanctity in
search of inspiration, and then my gaze fell upon the dozen torcs lying discarded on the
floor, left behind when their owners were stripped of flesh to make the bloody shape. I
lurched forward, grabbed a handful of the golden collars, raised my golden fist, and punched

the torcs right through the dark-veined cancerous side of the thing. I forced them deep into
the mass, let go of the torcs, and then tried to pull my hand out again; but it was stuck.
A terrible coldness, as much of the spirit as the body, crept up my arm. I think I cried out.
And then James was there beside me, pulling at my trapped arm with all his strength. For a
terrifyingly long moment even our combined strength wasn’t enough, and then my hand
jerked out of the bloody mass, and we both staggered backwards. I yelled aloud the Words
that activated the living armour, the Words we normally only ever subvocalised, and the five
torcs within the bloody shape activated. All at once.
Inside the cancerous fleshy mass, the torcs did what they were programmed to do. They
identified their owners, or in this case what was left of them, and encased them in living
armour. Golden shards erupted out of the red and purple shape, slicing it apart. The bloody
mass fought back, struggling to maintain the integrity of the form it had taken, but the torcs’
progress was inexorable. Once started, their transformation could not be stopped by anyone
or anything. The bloody shape collapsed, and a soundless howl of fury filled all our heads for
a moment as the thing from Outside snapped out of existence, its hold on our reality broken.
Lying on the floor before the Heart, in awful unnatural attitudes, were five suits of golden
armour surrounded by pieces of bloody meat. I didn’t want to think about what those suits
contained.
The oppressive sense of the invading Presence was gone. The bells and sirens all snapped
off, and a blessed silence filled the Sanctity. One by one we all armoured down, golden
forms giving way to men and women with shocked, traumatised faces. James clapped me
on the shoulder.
"Well done, Eddie. Good thinking."
People began slowly filing out of the room. The Heart was safe. Everyone went back to their
normal, everyday duties. Some were in shock; some had to be helped. Some were openly
angry or scared, because the Hall was no longer the safe place it always been before.
Some were crying over the loss of friends or loved ones. You couldn’t blame them. Most of
the family never see fieldwork, never see any kind of action, never see the blood and
suffering and death that lies at the heart of what the Droods do and are. There’d be a lot of
sleeping pills and bad dreams in the four wings tonight.
The Sarjeant-at-Arms had already collared a few of the harder-hearted souls and set them
to work, and the clearing up had begun. He didn’t even look at me. I might have just saved
the day, and the Heart, and maybe the whole family, but he still didn’t trust me. And none of
the others congratulated me as they left. Most didn’t even look at me. None of them wanted
to be seen talking to me, didn’t even want to get too close to the man who’d turned his back
on family tradition and responsibility, in case some of my independence rubbed off on them.
James made a point of standing next to me, his hand still on my shoulder.
Everyone respected the Gray Fox.
Finally, we left the Sanctity together and went out into the corridor. Away from the stench of
spilled blood and meat and guts, the old familiar smells of wood and polish and fresh
flowers was immediately restorative. I breathed deeply, and my head cleared. The ancient,
solid walls, with their sense of long history and service, were actually reassuring for once.
"This assault is unprecedented," said James. He kept his voice low as we walked, but it still
held a cold anger that was disturbingly near the surface. "Not only did something just
hammer its way through the Hall’s defences, and the Heart’s; it actually killed Droods! Right
here in the midst of the family! That’s never happened before. We’re supposed to be safe

here, protected from all threats and dangers."
"This has never happened before?" I said. "I mean, ever?"
James looked at me for a long moment, as though deciding just how much he trusted me.
"There have been two previous attacks on the Heart," he said finally, in a voice so low I had
to strain to hear it. "No one was hurt, and neither of them got this close, but still…"
"Jesus…No wonder the Matriarch’s been busy punching up the Hall’s defences…"
James looked at me oddly. "How did you know that, Eddie?"
"I had a word with old Jacob. He doesn’t miss much."
"Oh, yes. Of course. You always were fond of that disgusting old reprobate. You must
understand, Eddie…the Hall has been inviolate ever since we first moved in here. No one’s
ever been able to crack our defences, let alone actually threaten the Heart. There can only
be one answer…an inside man. A traitor in the family, giving up the secrets of our
protections."
I was so shocked I actually stopped in my tracks and stared at him with my mouth hanging
open. Members of the family had left in the past or been declared rogue and forced out, but
no one had ever turned traitor, working from within to betray us to our enemies…It was
unthinkable.
"Is that why everyone’s been so conspicuously giving me the cold shoulder?" I said
eventually. "Is that why I’ve been called back?"
"I don’t know, Eddie. The Matriarch…hasn’t been taking me into her confidence like she
used to. So…watch your back, while you’re here. Paranoia breeds suspicion. Because if
the family can’t identify their traitor, they might just choose one…"
We walked on together, back through the many rooms and passageways of the Hall, past
magnificent works of art that we all just took for granted. Rembrandts. Goyas. Schalckens.
The Hall is stuffed with priceless paintings and sculptures and precious items, donated by
princes and powers and governments down the centuries. They’ve always been very grateful
for everything the family does for them. And then there were the displays of weapons and all
the other spoils of war we’ve accumulated. The family might not be very sentimental about
its past, but it never throws away anything useful.
"Someone is testing us," said James after a while. "Testing their traitor’s information,
seeing how far they can get before we stop them. But who? The Stalking Shrouds? The
Loathly Ones? The Cold Eidolon? The Mandrake Recorporation?" He shook his head
slowly. "There’s so many of them, and so few of us." And then he smiled at me, his old
damn-them-all-to-hell smile, and clapped me on the shoulder again. "Let them come. Let
them all come. We’re Droods, and we were born to kick supernatural arse. Right?"
"Damn right," I said.
CHAPTER FIVE
Remote Viewing
W hen the Sarjeant-at-Arms finally came looking for me, Uncle James and I were standing
before an old caricature by Boz of good old Jacob in his prime, sharing a conversation with
Gladstone and Disraeli, outside Parliament. (One of those revered prime ministers was

actually a Drood, on his mother’s side, but I can never remember which.) God alone knows
what the three of them were discussing, but given the expressions on Disraeli’s and
Gladstone’s faces, Jacob was almost certainly telling them one of his famously filthy jokes.
Jacob could shock the knickers off a nun at forty paces. Both James and I heard the
Sarjeant approaching, but we deliberately kept our attention fixed on the piece of art until the
Sarjeant was obliged to announce his presence with a somewhat undignified cough. James
and I turned unhurriedly and looked down our noses at him.
"Well?" James drawled in that infuriatingly snotty polite voice of his. He’d been known to
start bar fights with less. He even threw in a raised eyebrow. "Do you have any information
yet as to how such an appalling assault was able to get past all of our legendary security
systems to attack the Heart?"
Give the man his due; the Sarjeant just stared impassively back. "An investigation into the
security breach is ongoing, sir."
"That’ll be a No, then. Anything else?"
The Sarjeant-at-Arms gave James a meaningful look, and James nodded, knowing he’d
pushed the situation as far as he could. He turned his back on the Sarjeant and smiled
warmly at me. "It’s time I was on my way, Eddie. The ungodly await, and there shall be
beatings. Another exciting adventure lies ahead in the scurrilous backstreets and bars of
fabulous Shanghai."
"I could spit," I said feelingly. "I never get missions like that. I suppose it’s going to be all
good booze, bad women, and lots of gratuitous violence?"
"Ah, yes," said James. "The same old, same old…"
We laughed, he crushed my hand in his, and off he went, striding grandly down the gallery in
search of danger and diversion like the accomplished adventurer he was. The Gray Fox
always was the best of us. The Sarjeant-at-Arms reminded me of his presence with another
of his weighty coughs, and reluctantly I allowed him to lead me back through the Hall to meet
with the family Matriarch.
It turned out she was down in the War Room, deciding the fate of the world again, so we had
to tramp through most of the north wing to reach the heavily reinforced steel door at the back
of what used to be the old ballroom. It took us three passWords, a retina scan, and a not
entirely unfriendly frisking before the Sarjeant and I were even allowed to approach the door,
but eventually it opened and we descended a very basic stairway cut into the stone wall
itself, with no railing and a frankly intimidating open drop on the other side. The electric
lighting was almost painfully bright, and extra security measures were already in place, so
that glowing force fields and shimmering mystical screens opened before us as they
acknowledged our torcs, and then sealed firmly behind us. The usual guard goblins were in
place, sitting in their stone recesses; squat and ugly things with a face like a bulldog
chewing on a wasp. They weren’t much bigger than a football, with long spindly arms and
legs, but they could be quite spectacularly vicious when roused. I’d once seen a goblin run
down a werewolf and eat it alive, and you don’t forget things like that in a hurry.
While waiting for a chance to express their utterly vile and nasty natures, the goblins whiled
away the time by working on crossword puzzles from the Times. Goblins love word games.
One of them stopped me to ask for a seventeen-letter word for bad government beginning
with an m and got really quite upset when I came straight back with maladministration. The
poor thing didn’t realise he was doing yesterday’s crossword.

At the bottom of the stairs, we both had to place our hands on an electronic scanner before
we were allowed into the great vault that held the family War Room. The Sarjeant led me
inside and then insisted I stay put by the door while he went to inform the Matriarch that I’d
arrived. I folded my arms stiffly across my chest and sneered after him, but I didn’t push the
point. There was a gorgon squatting next to the door, head down, wrapped in leathery wings
like an enveloping cloak. She looked like she was sleeping, but I knew she wasn’t, even
though several of the snakes were making a game attempt at snoring. Entering the War
Room without following exact rules of procedure would lead to the gorgon opening her eyes
and looking at you, and then the family would have another surprised-looking statue for the
back gardens.
The War Room was a vast auditorium carved from solid stone. In here we saw everything, or
at least everything that mattered. All four walls were covered with state-of-the-art display
screens showing every country of the world, with little lights blinking to indicate cities and
other places where members of the family were at work. Green lights for a successfully
completed mission, blue for certain individuals currently on the family hit list, and the
occasional purple signifying a major cock-up and its equally large cover-up operation.
Potential trouble spots were marked with amber lights, current threats with red. There was a
hell of a lot of amber and red showing all across the world, and a lot more red than amber,
compared to ten years ago. Hell, even Lithuania had a red light.
The family sat in long rows, concentrating on their workstations despite the hustle and bustle
all around them. Dozens of farcasters caressed crystal balls or peered into scrying pools,
studying the world’s problems from afar, while softly murmuring their findings into hands-free
headsets. Technicians worked their computers, worrying out useful data, fingers darting
across keyboards with dazzling speed. Agents may operate alone in the field, but each and
every one of us is backed up by a staff of hundreds. And not just in the War Room.
Information retrieval experts are constantly at work in the newsroom (usually referred to by
those who work their eight-hour shifts in that windowless hole as the Pit), sifting through all
the world’s media and cross-referencing the official version with the mountain of information
that comes in every day from our worldwide web of spies and informers. The family relies on
these dedicated researchers to spot trouble forming before it gets out of hand, as well as
keep track of certain individuals who like to think they can pass through the world without
leaving a trace. These researchers could tell you exactly where to find a needle in a
haystack, and make a pretty good guess about which way it would be pointing. They knew
everything there was to know about the world, except what it was like to live in it. They were
far too valuable to ever be allowed to leave the Hall.
At any given moment, hundreds of Droods are operating in hot spots all across the world.
And they work alone, because agents in the field can’t be viewed from afar. Their torcs hide
them from us, as well as our enemies. That’s why only the most trusted in the family are ever
allowed to become field agents. And why I’m always kept on such a short leash. The War
Room has to wait for field agents to report in by traditional means, often on the run, and then
provide them with as much information and backup as possible. Every agent is supported
by thousands of researchers, advisors, experts in the more arcane areas of science and
magic, and an around-the-clock communications staff.
Field agents gather information, defuse pressure points, and take direct action when
necessary. (We prefer to work with a quiet word and a subtle threat, but the family’s never
been afraid to get its hands dirty.) But every one of us knows that it’s the backup people at
the Hall who make our job possible.
The family has raised remote viewing, in all its forms, to something of an art. And since we’
ve always seen both science and magic as just two sides of the same useful coin, we work

hard to stay in the forefront of all the latest advances. In fact, our research labs work every
hour there is to make damned sure we’re always one step ahead. We’ve turned out
weapons, and answers to weapons, that most of the world doesn’t even dream exist yet. We
use whatever we have to, to keep the world safe.
I was surprised, and just a little alarmed, to see how many red alerts were showing;
warnings of major threats not as yet narrowed down to any particular country or group or
individual. And when I say major threat, I mean a clear and present danger to the world. I’d
never known the War Room to seem so busy, with people crowded around every display,
every computer, every paper-strewn table. There was a general susurrus of combined
murmured voices, almost like being in a church. (Raised voices are discouraged; they
breed agitation.) Messengers were constantly hurrying in and out, bearing notes and reports
and vital updates. And fresh pots of tea. The family runs on tea. And Jaffa Cakes.
No one even glanced in my direction.
The Matriarch was sitting at the main mission table, stiff-backed and coldly attentive as
always, studying an endless series of urgent reports as they were handed to her. Some she
initialed, approving an action; others she sent back for more detail. Messengers waited in
line for a chance to push a paper in front of her, or murmur confidentially in her ear, before
hurrying off with new instructions. The Matriarch never allowed herself to seem hurried or
worried, and she never raised her voice. If some especially harried messenger did overstep
the mark, by questioning a detail or insisting on the importance of his message, one look
from the Matriarch’s cold gray eyes was all it took, and the messenger would practically
break his back bowing and scraping as he hurried away from her.
The Sarjeant-at-Arms advised the Matriarch of my arrival, and she turned immediately to
look at me. I stared calmly back, not even bothering to unfold my arms. She beckoned
imperiously, and I ambled across the War Room to join her, deliberately not hurrying. The
Matriarch gestured sharply for everyone to withdraw, and they all fell back a decent distance
so she and I could talk in private. The Sarjeant looked actually outraged at being lumped in
with everyone else, but he went. One didn’t argue with the Matriarch. She stood up to greet
me, wearing her usual cold and disapproving expression.
The family Matriarch. Martha Drood. Tall, elegant, and more royal than any queen. In her
mid-sixties now, she dressed like country aristocracy, all twinset tweeds and pearls and
understated makeup. She wore her long gray hair piled up in a sculpture on top of her head.
She’d been beautiful in her day, and her strong bone structure ensured she was striking
even now. Like the Ice Queen of fable, who drives a splinter of her ice into your heart while
you’re young and helpless, so you have no choice but to love her forever. She didn’t offer me
a hand to shake, and I didn’t offer to kiss her on the cheek. Honours even. I nodded to her.
"Hello, Grandmother."
The family has always been led by a Matriarch; it’s a holdover from our Druidic heritage.
Martha is descended from a long line of warrior queens, and it shows. Her word is law.
When I was a child, in family history class, I pointed out to the teacher that if she was our
queen, the rest of us were just her drones. I got shouted at a lot for that. Technically, the
Matriarch has absolute power over the family. In practice, she is very firmly advised by a
council of twelve drawn from the foremost members of the family. You have to achieve
something really quite remarkable for the family even to make the short list. Matriarchs who
don’t or won’t listen to their councils don’t tend to last long. In extreme cases, accidents have
been known to happen, and a new Matriarch takes over. The family can be extremely
ruthless, when it has to.

Martha’s second husband, Alistair, stood diffidently at her side, as always, ready for
whatever she might need him to do. Tall and sturdy, he dressed like a gentleman farmer; the
kind that never ever gets his expensive boots dirty. He was ten years younger than Martha
and handsome enough, I suppose, in a weak and unfinished sort of way, like the investment
broker who assures you that the deal he’s proposing is absolutely guaranteed to make you
rich. I nodded briefly to him.
"Hello, Alistair."
He was Principal Consort of the family, by long tradition, but I was damned if I’d call him
Grandfather. My real grandfather, Martha’s first husband, Arthur, died fighting the Kiev
Conspiracy in 1957. I never even knew him.
Alistair and I never did get along. Officially, his function in the family was as personal advisor
to the Matriarch, but that was just something to keep him busy, so he wouldn’t realise he was
just a glorified gopher. He’d never been on a field mission in his life, to his and everyone
else’s relief. Before he married Martha he was something in the City, but only because he
inherited it. Word was, the City was glad to be rid of him. The whole family knew he was
useless, but Grandmother loved him, so out of respect for her no one ever said anything.
While making very sure Alistair was never allowed near anything important. Or breakable.
There’s one like Alistair in every family.
Martha studied me coldly. "It’s been quite a while since you graced us with your presence,
Edwin."
I shrugged. "I like to keep busy. And it’s not as if there’s anything here I miss."
"After all this time, you still blame the family for the deaths of your mother and your father,"
said Martha. "You should be proud of their sacrifice."
"I am," I said. "But no one’s ever going to send me to my death on an operation that wasn’t
planned properly. I run my own missions."
"You serve the family," Alistair said, trying for Martha’s frosty tone and not bringing it off.
"I serve the family," I said. "In my own way."
"The people responsible for the inadequate planning of that mission were punished long
ago," said Martha. "You have to let it go, Edwin. She was my daughter too." She made a
deliberate effort to change the subject, looking me up and down. "What is that you’re
wearing, Edwin? Is this really the best you could do on your first visit to the Hall in ten
years?"
"Sorry," I said. "But I’ve been recently diagnosed as fashion intolerant. I can’t wear anything
good, in case I develop style."
She looked at me. "You know I don’t find humour funny, Edwin. And stand up straight. Do
you want to develop round shoulders? And when are you going to get married and give the
family children? Like everyone else, you have a duty to provide the family with fresh blood, to
keep us strong and vital. We have presented you with several lists of perfectly respectable
candidates from suitable families. Any one of whom would make you a good match. You’re
getting a little too old to be so choosy."
"That is something else I’ll decide for myself," I said firmly.
"What was wrong with dear Stephanie Mainwearing?" said Martha.

"Delightful creature, I thought."
"Oh, come on, Grandmother. If she was any more inbred, she’d be her own sister."
"Alice Little?"
"Lives in a world of her own and only comes out for mealtimes. Lots of mealtimes."
"Penelope Creighton?"
"You have got to be kidding! She’s slept with more women than I have! Don’t your people do
even basic research anymore?"
"Well…are you at least seeing anyone at the moment, Edwin?"
I considered telling her about Silicon Lily but rose above the temptation. "No one special,
Grandmother," I said.
"I hope you’re being…careful, Edwin," said Alistair in an even more snotty voice than usual.
"You know how the family feels about bastards."
I looked at him for a moment, and then said, "I’m always careful, Alistair."
"After all," said Alistair, "whoever you eventually settle on, she has to be acceptable to the
family."
"Like you, Alistair?" I said.
Martha decided to change the subject again. "You have been summoned back to the Hall,
Edwin, because I have a very important and very urgent mission for you."
"I had sort of gathered that," I said. "Can I just ask what could be so important that I had to
be dragged all the way back here just to discuss it? What was wrong with the usual
channels?"
"It’s a matter of security," said Martha. "It has to be you, because everyone else is busy.
Busier than ever before. You can see the boards; the whole family is stretched to its limits.
And you saw what just happened in the Sanctity. Once, such an attack would have been
unthinkable, but now the whole family is under threat. All our best efforts have to go into
defending the family and identifying our attackers. The mission I have for you now, Edwin, is
your chance to prove your worth at last and come back to the bosom of the family. Carry out
this mission successfully, and you will have earned a seat on the council." She paused,
considering her words carefully. "Some of us have come to believe that there is a traitor,
perhaps at the very heart of the family. I am no longer sure whom I can trust. Even my own
council has become…divided, and quarrelsome, of late. As an outsider, you might see
things the rest of us cannot. Prove yourself with this mission, Edwin. I would value your voice
in my council."
I just stood there and looked at her. I really hadn’t expected that. The council was where
family policy was decided. Where all the decisions that mattered were made. It had honestly
never even occurred to me that I might end up on it some day. I wasn’t even sure I wanted
such an honour, or such responsibility, but I had to admit I was tempted. If only so I could use
my new exalted position to identify and help others like myself in the family.
"What’s the mission?" I said flatly.

The Matriarch smiled briefly for the first time. "Your mission is to take the Soul of Albion
back to Stonehenge and rebury it under the main sacrificial altar, where it belongs. Once it
is back in place, the Soul will be safe again. The Stones will protect it. In the wrong hands,
the Soul could bring down England, and perhaps even the Droods."
I was nodding even as she spoke. This had to be what Jacob and I had overheard them
discussing, on his dead television.
Martha called to half a dozen armed guards, who brought forward a great oaken chest
sealed with solid silver bars and cold iron padlocks. On top of which the whole casket
practically crackled with protective spells. The guards couldn’t have handled it more
respectfully if it had been filled to the brim with nitroglycerin. They placed the casket very
carefully at Martha’s feet, and then almost tripped over each other as they backed away
from it, at speed. Martha gave them one of her best icy looks and undid the bands and
padlocks with a Word. They snapped open, one after the other, and the defence spells
immediately started warming up, until Martha shut them down with a quick gesture. The
casket lid opened by itself, and Martha reached in and drew out a small silver jewel box, no
bigger than her hand.
She turned the delicate key in its lock, and the box opened to reveal a bed of red plush
velvet and on it the Soul of Albion. A polished crystal sphere, no bigger than my thumb, it
blazed with unearthly fires. It was impossibly, heartstoppingly beautiful, almost painful to the
eyes, like the platonic ideal of every gem or jewel or precious stone that ever was. All across
the War Room people stopped what they were doing and looked around, sensing the
presence of something new and wonderful in their midst.
The Soul is supposed to have fallen to Earth from the stars some three thousand years ago,
but there are more legends about the Soul than you can shake a grimoire at. Terribly
beautiful, impossibly powerful, linked forever to the land in which it fell. Martha snapped the
lid of the jewel box shut, cutting off the brilliant light, and we all breathed a little more easily
again. While its light blazed, it was almost impossible to think of anything but the Soul.
Martha glared around her, and everyone quickly got back to work again. She locked the box
and handed it to me. I accepted it gingerly. It felt strangely light, almost insubstantial in my
hand. I slipped it into my jacket pocket, taking my hand away from the box as quickly as
possible. On the whole, I think I’d have felt safer carrying a backpack nuke with the timer
already running.
"As long as the Soul of Albion remains in that box, it is protected by powerful masking
spells," said Martha. "And the lead lining should shield you from most of the Soul’s
destructive radiation."
"Oh, good," I said. "I feel so much safer now."
Long and long ago, so far back that history becomes legend and myth, someone used the
Soul to perform a mighty magic, and now as long as the Soul of Albion rests in its appointed
place within the great circle of standing stones that is Stonehenge, England is safe from all
threats of invasion. (There is another legend, about three royal Crowns of Anglia, but that
was always just a diversion.) King Harold unearthed the Soul and took it with him to
Hastings in 1066, thinking it would help him stand off William of Normandy, the fool. After the
battle, William the Conqueror personally oversaw the returning of the Soul to Stonehenge,
and no one had moved it since.
Until now.
"I have to ask," I said. "Who the hell thought it was a good idea to bring the Soul of Albion all

the way here in the first place? And have they been given a really good slapping?"
Alistair sniffed and did his best to look down his nose at me. "That concerns policy, Edwin.
You don’t need to know. Suffice to say…there were security issues involved."
"However," Martha said quickly, "given the recent attacks on the Hall and now the Heart
itself, it has been decided that the Soul should be returned to its rightful place, and the
sooner the better. Originally, your uncle James was to have performed this mission. That’s
why we called him back from the Amazon jungles. But we all feel that under…current
circumstances, the movements of a major agent like the Gray Fox are bound to be more
clearly monitored than usual. If any of our enemies discovered he was heading for
Stonehenge, they might draw some very accurate conclusions. On the other hand, a fairly
minor, semi-rogue operative such as yourself might well slip under their radar and go
unnoticed."
"Spell out the catch for me," I said. "Just so I can be sure I’ve got it right."
"I would have thought it was obvious," said Martha, meeting my gaze unflinchingly. "If you are
noticed, and your mission deduced, the odds are that every bad thing in the world will come
for you, desperate for a chance to get their hands on the legendary Soul of Albion."
"And then my mission turns into a suicide run," I said, nodding slowly. "No wonder you felt
the need to bribe me with the offer of a place on the council. The odds are you’re sending
me to my death."
"But will you do it?" said the Matriarch. "For the family, and for England?"
"Of course," I said. "Anything for England."
CHAPTER SIX
Dangerous Lab Interns
S o I went off to pay a visit to the family Armourer. Bit of a dry old stick, but there’s nothing he
doesn’t know about weapons, devices, and things that go boom, whether scientific or
magical in nature. In the more than likely event of something going horribly wrong on my new
mission, it was clear I was going to need all the serious weaponry I could get my hands on, if
I was to protect the Soul of Albion from all comers.
I wanted a new gun. A big gun. A really, really big gun. With atomic bullets.
The family armoury is situated a decent distance beneath the west wing, set even deeper in
the bedrock than the War Room. That way when (rather than if) the whole armoury finally
blows itself to hell, it won’t take the rest of the Hall with it. The Armourer and his staff,
geniuses one and all though they may be, and enthusiastic to a fault, have always had a
tendency towards the kick it and see what happens school of scientific enquiry. They also
have unlimited access to guns, grimoires, and unstable chemicals. I’m amazed this part of
England is still here.
The present armoury is set up in what used to be the old wine cellars, behind vast and heavy
blast-proof doors. Designed to keep things in, rather than out. The cellars are basically a
long series of connected stone chambers, with bare plastered walls and curving ceilings, all
but buried under a multicoloured spaghetti of tacked-up electrical wiring. The fluorescent
lighting was a sometime thing, and the huge air-conditioning system grumbled constantly to
itself. The stone chambers were full to bursting with the Armourer’s extended staff:
researchers, expediters, mechanics, weaponeers, and human guinea pigs. (Someone had

to test each new device. This was decided by a lottery among the staff, and the loser was
the one who wasn’t smart enough to fix the outcome in advance.)
The armoury is always coming up with new weapons devised, constructed, and tested right
here in the labs. Which is why the place is always so appallingly noisy. I stood by the closed
blast-proof doors awhile, waiting for my ears to adjust to the din. Men and women with
earnest, preoccupied faces bustled back and forth, giving their whole attention to the latest
generation of deadly devices they were producing for agents to use in the field. And
hopefully getting all the bugs out in advance. I could still remember the explosive whoopee
cushion, which didn’t, and the utterly impenetrable arm-mounted force shield, which wasn’t.
No one paid me any attention at all, but I was getting used to that.
Lights flared brightly, shadows danced, and lightning crawled all over one wall like electric
ivy. Sharp chemical stinks fought it out with the gentler aromas of crushed herbs, while
molten metal flowed sluggishly into ceramic moulds, and smoke drifted gently on the air from
the latest unfortunate incident. The armoury didn’t have a first-aid box; it had its own
adjoining hospital ward. A hell of a lot of people crowded around test benches and futuristic
lab equipment, alchemical retorts and silver-bullet moulds, and of course the ubiquitous
computers and chalked pentagrams. Most of these very busy people were cursing loudly
and emphatically as they tried to persuade their latest projects to do what they were
supposed to without exploding, melting down, or turning the experimenter into something
small and fluffy. Somebody close to me reached for a handy lump hammer, and I decided to
go somewhere else.
I strolled through the labs, keeping an eye out for the Armourer. Doorways opened in midair,
giving brief glimpses of faraway places, and a test animal imploded. A desperate young
intern chased through the labs, flailing away with a butterfly net, trying to catch an oversized
eyeball with its own fluttering bat wings. I’m sure it had looked perfectly reasonable at the
drafting stage. No one paid any attention to these little disruptions, except to jump just a
little, absentmindedly, at the latest bang. Just another day, in the armoury. When you’re
working at the cutting edges of devious thinking, you have to expect and allow for the
occasional setback, along with regular stinks, spatial inversions, and the odd unexpected
transformation. Everyone who worked in the armoury was a volunteer drawn from a long list
of applications, carefully selected from those in the family who had clearly demonstrated
they had far more brains than was good for them. (Often accompanied by an unhealthy
curiosity and a complete lack of self-preservation instincts.)
(The really dangerous thinkers were either rapidly promoted to purely theoretical projects or
sent to alternate dimensions and told not to come back till they’d calmed down.)
The current crop of interns looked like science nerds everywhere, all heavy spectacles and
plastic pocket protectors, except that some of them wore pointy wizard’s hats as well. A lot
of them were wearing T-shirts under their lab coats, bearing the legend I Blow Things Up,
Therefore I Am, Even If Someone Else Suddenly Isn’t. Science nerd humour. They all looked
very earnest and very committed, and if they survived long enough would eventually be
promoted to the somewhat safer environs of the research and development labs. It did
seem to me though, as I wandered through the chaos in search of the Armourer, that the old
place held a lot more people and projects, along with a greater general sense of urgency,
than I remembered from my last visit, ten years ago.
Two of the more brawny types were sparring with electrified brass knuckles, sparks
crackling and spitting fiercely on the air as they swung and parried. One girl had her head
stuck deep in a fish tank, proving she could now breathe underwater. Impressive, but I
couldn’t help thinking the gaping rows of gills on her neck would be a bit of a giveaway in

polite society. Not far away, an unfortunate young man had stopped proving he could now
breathe fire, because it had given him hiccoughs. Unpredictable and highly inflammable
hiccoughs. Someone led him away to put an asbestos bag over his head. I didn’t see why
they couldn’t just stick his head in the fish tank, next to the girl.
And someone had blown up the firing range again. There’s always someone trying to break
the record for biggest and most powerful handgun.
I finally spotted the Armourer up ahead, striding back and forth through the caverns, keeping
a stern eye on everyone and everything. He paused here and there to dispense advice,
encouragement, and the occasional clip on the ear, where necessary. The Armourer was
strict but fair. I waited until he came back and settled at his usual testing bench, and then I
slipped in beside him. He glanced briefly at me, sniffed loudly, and went back to what he
was working on. It takes a lot to surprise the Armourer.
A tall, middle-aged man with far too much nervous energy, he wore a permanently stained
white lab coat over a T-shirt saying Guns Don’t Kill People; I Kill People. Two shocks of tufty
white hair jutted out over his ears below a bulging bald pate, and under bushy white
eyebrows his eyes were a steely gray. His expression rarely changed from an habitual
scowl, and while he had once been tall and imposing, he was now bent over by a
pronounced stoop, legacy of so many years spent leaning over workbenches and lab
projects that always needed fixing in a hurry. Or maybe just from ducking a lot. I sat beside
him for a while, waiting for him to say something, but as always it was up to me to tear his
attention away from his latest project.
"Hello, Armourer. Good to see you again. The old place seems very busy, just at the
moment. Are we preparing for a war?"
He sniffed loudly again. "Always, boy. Always."
He plugged a thick electrical cable into a socket, tripped half a dozen switches, and then
looked expectantly at a computer monitor wrapped in mistletoe and strings of garlic. Nothing
happened. The Armourer hit the computer with a hammer, and I quickly took it away from
him.
"Give that back!" he said, scowling fiercely. "That’s my lucky hammer!"
"Lucky?" I said, holding it carefully out of reach.
"I’m still here, aren’t I?"
I put the hammer down at the opposite end of the bench. "What’s the problem, Armourer?"
He sighed as he realised he was going to have to talk to me after all.
"Seems like everyone in the Hall is trying to draw power from the Heart, all at the same time.
Every damned department at once. I’m supposed to have priority, but it’s all I can do to
elbow my way into the queue. If I have to go upstairs and complain, there’ll be tear gas and
shrapnel flying through the common rooms…"
"Why is there so much demand for power?"
"Don’t ask me. Ask bloody Alistair!"
I recognised the tone. "All right; what’s Alistair done now?"

The Armourer gave me his best put-upon expression. "First the Matriarch increases my
budget, and my workload, and tells me my projects have top priority until further notice; and
then bloody Alistair comes poncing in here and announces he’s chosen the armoury as the
best place to start his latest efficiency drive. So now not only has my workload gone through
the roof, but I have to account for everything we do and use, in triplicate! If I’d wanted to
spend half my life up to my elbows in paperwork, I’d have shot myself in the head. Better yet,
I’d have shot bloody Alistair in the head, and it may yet come to that. So far I’ve taken to just
ignoring the paperwork and using his increasingly distraught memos as toilet paper. And
then sending them back to him."
I couldn’t help smiling and nodding. Typical Alistair: penny wise and pound foolish. Always
trying to be useful in the worst possible way. Someone once suggested, well out of
Grandmother’s hearing, that the best way to bring down our enemies would be to send them
Alistair as a gift. I suddenly stopped smiling. Someone in the family was a traitor…and what
better way to handicap the family than by undermining and disrupting the work in the
armoury? I shook my head reluctantly. I really liked the idea of nailing Alistair as the traitor,
but I knew for a fact he’d had to go through all kinds of security checks before the family
would allow Martha to marry him. If there’d been even a hint of anything suspicious about
him, they’d have found it. I looked around abruptly as the Armourer jabbed me warningly in
the ribs, and there was Alexandra Drood, bearing down on me like a heat-seeking missile.
"What the hell are you doing down here, Eddie?"
"Hello, Alex," I said easily. "Good to see you again too. You’re looking deliciously stern, but
then you usually do. Especially in certain dreams I’ve been having, involving you in leathers
in a dungeon…Don’t look at me like that. I’m here to pick up something in the small but
deadly line, for my next mission. What are you doing down here?"
She stood squarely before me, fists planted on her hips. "I run this place now. I’m in training
to take over from the Armourer, when he retires."
I looked at the Armourer. "Retiring? You? Really?"
He shrugged uncomfortably. "Comes to us all, Eddie. I’m not getting any younger, despite all
my experimenting in that area, and the family depends on the armoury for new ideas and
new approaches, as well as new weapons. Maybe it is time for a change. I just oversee
things, these days. Paperwork, remember? Alexandra takes care of all the day-to-day
business. And does it very well."
He actually managed a real smile for her, which she ignored, her fierce glare fixed on me. I
considered Alexandra thoughtfully. She was a cousin of mine, from the same year as me.
We’d attended a lot of classes together, and she always was teacher’s pet. A first-class
student, and the first to tell you so. Alexandra was tall and blond, with a balcony you could do
Shakespeare from. Every inch the Aryan ideal, and twice as scary. Her lab coat had been
starched to within an inch of its life and was dazzlingly white. She was pretty enough, in a
totally intimidating sort of way, but she always gave the impression that she was about to
lunge forward and bite you. And not necessarily in a good way. She glared at me with more
than her usual ferocity, and I instinctively looked around for some raw meat to throw her. She
prodded me hard in the chest with a forefinger.
"Careful, dear," I said. "In some cultures, that means we’re engaged."
"I am not your dear!"
"You have no idea how safe and secure that makes me feel, Alex."

She took a few deep breaths to steady herself, which did very interesting things to her
balcony. I had to look away for a moment. When Alexandra spoke again, her voice was icily
calm and controlled.
"I’d heard you were back, Eddie. I don’t know how you have the nerve to show your face in
the Hall. You turned your back on the family, after everything they did for you."
"Because of everything they did to me. I still serve, but in my own way."
"There can be only one way! You betrayed the family trust; the old traditions of duty and
responsibility. You ran away from the Hall. Away from me."
"I’d have died by inches if I stayed here, Alex. You know that."
"You should have stayed away. You have no place here any more. No one in the family
wants you here. No one. Now get the hell out of my armoury before I have security throw you
out."
"Ah, Alex; it’s good to see position and authority hasn’t mellowed you. How’s the work here
going? Bitten the heads off any more white mice recently?"
"That was just the once! And it was a perfectly reasonable scientific experiment!"
"Of course it was, dear. You still cried like a girly when I had to give you all those rabies
shots afterwards."
I couldn’t say I was all that surprised to discover Alexandra was the new Armourer in training.
She always was ambitious. Not to mention almost viciously focused and driven to excel.
Alexandra was hard-core family, utterly dedicated to the good fight, with no time at all for
people on the edge, like me.
"I’m here to pick up some new weapons for my mission," I said, putting on my best let’
s-all-be-calm-and-reasonable face. "I have a chitty, from the Matriarch."
Alexandra gave me a look that plainly said she didn’t believe a word of it, and stuck out a
hand for the paperwork. I handed it over, and she made a point of scrutinising it very
thoroughly, line by line, looking for some subclause she could use to turn me down. I
favoured her with my most confident and beneficent smile, which made her scowl ever
harder. She’d give herself a headache soon, if she wasn’t careful. In the end, she had no
choice but to approve my chitty. It came direct from the Matriarch, with her seal and
signature. Alexandra reluctantly put her initials in the space provided, and then thrust the
papers ungraciously back at me.
"It all seems valid enough," she growled. "But I don’t want you in my armoury one moment
longer than necessary, Eddie. You’re a troublemaker. You breed dissent, and you
undermine proper authority. You stand for everything I disapprove of in the family. We should
have eliminated you years ago. You’re a security risk, and you always will be."
I had to smile. "And to think I sent you a Valentine’s Day card, when we were both fourteen."
Her mouth twitched briefly. "So it was you. I did wonder."
At which interesting point, we were interrupted by the arrival of another field agent. It was
Matthew Drood, and Alexandra was suddenly all smiles for him. Matthew was another
cousin from my year, and everything the family had wanted me to be. He’d grown up to be
everything I’d always thought he would: very slick, very smart, very smooth. And not half as

good in the field as he liked to make out. I’d worked a few cases with him in London, and
somehow he ended up with all the credit after I’d done all the real work. He stood casually
before me in his expensively cut suit, everything a field agent shouldn’t be: tall, dark, and
handsome, and effortlessly charming when he chose to be. Good luck trying to hide him in a
crowd. (All right, Uncle James was all those things too, but James had style.)
Matthew worked mainly in business circles, keeping the City…if not actually honest, at least
a lot more cautious. He also tended towards scorched-earth solutions to most problems, in
which there was no such thing as an innocent bystander. Hard-core family, of course, which
was why he and Alexandra got on so famously together. Matthew finally broke off being
charming to her long enough to notice me.
"Ah, Eddie…Super to see you again, old thing. You’re looking very…urban. Back from exile
so soon? What happened, old boy? Run into something you couldn’t handle? You should
have called me; you know I’m always ready to sail in and save the day."
"Yeah," I said. "That’ll happen. Actually, the Matriarch summoned me back here to
personally brief me on my next mission." I don’t normally stoop to one-upmanship, but
Matthew always did bring out the worst in me. His pleasant smile started to look a bit forced,
so I pushed things a little further. "I’m surprised you didn’t hear, Matthew. I always thought
you were cleared for top-level discussions."
"Really?" he murmured. "A secret mission, you say? Do tell…I’m just dying to know what
kind of top-level mission would demand someone of your…particular talents."
"Sorry," I said. "But it would appear you don’t have high enough clearance."
He stiffened perceptibly and turned abruptly away to bestow his most charming smile on
Alexandra. "Lexxy, darling, I come to you in need. I’m afraid I just have to have another truth
field generator. I absolutely wore the last one out, following paper trails through the City on
that big Brazilian fraud case…"
"Of course, Matthew. Nothing but the best for the family’s golden boy. Come with me, and I’ll
fix you right up."
They both turned their backs on me and strolled away arm in arm, laughing easily together.
The Armourer and I looked after them.
"What that girl needs," said the Armourer, "is a right good—"
I quickly dropped my clapped-out portable door on the bench in front of him. "I need this
recharged. And as soon as possible."
"I know, I know; I’ve read the chitty. Matriarch wants you fully equipped with the best we’ve
got and out of here, on the double. Business as usual, these days." He called for one of his
interns, who came and took the portable door away, holding it at arm’s length like a dead
mouse. The Armourer lurched to his feet and fixed me with a penetrating stare. "You come
with me, Eddie. And I’ll show you a few things that might just keep you alive when everyone
else wants you dead."
He led me over to another testing bench, shooing away half a dozen interns, and picked up
a large silver handgun. He weighed it thoughtfully in his hand, and then passed it over to me.
I raised an eyebrow at how heavy it was, and he smiled proudly.
"That is a Colt Repeater. It never runs out of bullets, and it aims itself. All you have to do is
point it in the right general direction, and the gun will take care of the rest. Even you should

be able to manage that, Eddie."
"What about recoil?" I said, just to be picky.
"Since I made it with people like you in mind, none worth the mention. Try not to use it for too
long at one time, or the binding spells will overheat, and the replacement bullets might not be
able to find the gun."
"Why is it so heavy?"
He grinned nastily. "So if you do run out of bullets, you can club the buggers to death with it."
He tossed me a shoulder holster, and I struggled into it as he led me over to another bench. I
hate shoulder holsters. How women manage with brassieres, I’ll never know. I’d got it more
or less into place by the time the Armourer was ready to show me his next creation. It looked
a whole lot like an ordinary wristwatch.
"It looks a whole lot like an ordinary wristwatch," I said.
"Well, you wouldn’t want one that shouted Look at me! I belong to a field agent!, would you?
This is a reverse watch. Looks and works as normal, except for this button here. Don’t touch
it, except when you mean to use it. Push it down hard, and the watch will reverse time,
rewinding the last thirty seconds of your life. This will give you a second chance to undo your
more serious mistakes. But be warned: any attempt to meddle with time is dangerous. Don’t
use the reverse function too often; it might attract the attention of certain beings who take
time disruption very seriously."
I accepted the watch gingerly. "How does it work?"
"You wouldn’t understand if I told you, so just put it on and pay attention to this."
I put the watch on, slipped my old Rolex into my jacket pocket, and looked at the compass
the Armourer was holding. It looked a whole lot like an ordinary compass. The Armourer
looked at me, but I just smiled politely. I hate to be predictable.
"This compass will show you the best way out of any situation, no matter how turned around
you’ve got yourself. It’s preprogrammed to lock onto the nearest viable exit and take you
there. Just follow where the needle points. The Matriarch specifically asked for something
simple in this line, and this is so simple a dog could use it. Just keep it away from strong
magnetic forces, or it gets confused. If it starts sticking, grease the works up with a little
butter. Only the best butter, of course."
"Oh, of course."
"Now then, what else have I got for you? I had a really nice aboriginal pointing bone, but
someone stirred their coffee with it, and it was never the same after that. Then there was the
personality enhancer…Looked really good on the drawing board. The idea behind that one
was that you’d use it to bring to the fore whatever part of your personality was best suited to
deal with the situation you found yourself in."
"Do I gather something went wrong?"
"The enhancing part went fine. It was shutting the bloody things down afterwards that was the
problem. So far we’re dealing with six cases of multiple personality disorder, and two cases
of people refusing to talk to themselves. Further testing has been suspended. Ah! Yes; this
is what I was looking for."

He presented me with a small blue-black lacquered box, not much bigger than a matchbox,
with a big red button on top. I shook it to see if it would rattle, and the Armourer actually
winced.
"Please don’t do that. What you’re holding is a prototype we haven’t finished testing yet, but
the Matriarch said she wanted you supplied with the very best we could offer, so…That is a
random teleport generator. Press the button, and the box will instantly send you somewhere
else. And because it chooses each destination at random, no one will be able to trail you.
Use it to escape from prison cells, blind alleys, death traps, that sort of thing. It works
perfectly, except for the times when it doesn’t."
"What?"
"Which part of the word random do you need explained to you, Eddie? This box could send
you anywhere, theoretically. It’s preprogrammed not to rematerialise you inside anything
solid, but apart from that, all bets are off. You could end up at the North Pole. Or Death
Valley. Or the Mariana Trench—"
"I get the idea. Think I’ll pass on this one."
I handed the box back to him very carefully. He shrugged and put the box down very carefully
on the bench. "Suit yourself, boy."
"Maybe Matthew would like to test it."
"Now you’re just being nasty."
I grinned and nodded my thanks to the Armourer. He looked at me for a moment.
"You watch yourself out there, Eddie," he said gruffly. "It’s a lot scarier out in the world now,
than it was in my day."
The Armourer had spent twenty years as a field agent. That was what made him such a fine
Armourer. He always understood that his clever devices had to work in the real world, not
just in the labs. Alexandra, on the other hand, had never been out in the field in her life.
"Don’t worry," I said. "I’ll be careful, Uncle Jack."
But he was already hard at work on something else. Two of his interns had brought him a
large wooden case held together by half a dozen faded leather straps with heavy black iron
buckles. He undid each one carefully, opened the lid, and rooted around in the packing
material, before bringing out a large old-fashioned chest plate. He held it up to the light to
study it, and I leaned over his shoulder. The dark scarlet metal was wafer thin and deeply
scored with long lines of writing in Sanskrit. The Armourer placed the chest plate gently on
the bench before him and screwed a jeweller’s loupe into one eye to study it close up. I was
puzzled. If this piece of armour was as old as it seemed to be, it ought to be part of family
history, and I ought to recognise it. But I’d never seen anything like this before.
"What is it?" I said, trying to sound just casually curious.
He grunted, not looking up, and not fooled for a moment. "This is part of a Juggernaut
Jumpsuit. Not dissimilar to the armour we wear, except on a much higher level. This is the
kind of thing you wear when you want to push a mountain over onto its side with one hand.
And the reason you’ve never seen it before is because it’s a part of the Armageddon
Codex."

I actually just stood there and gaped at him for a moment. "But…but…those are the
forbidden weapons! The weapons too dangerous to be used, except when reality itself is
threatened!"
"I do know that, Eddie."
"Then what the hell is something like that doing outside the Codex?"
"Matriarch’s orders. She wants all the forbidden weapons removed and examined, one at a
time, and checked to make sure they’re operating at peak efficiency. Just in case they
should be needed. She hasn’t actually ordered any testing yet; I don’t think the council would
stand for that. But how bad must things be if we’re opening the Codex for the first time in
centuries?"
I leaned in close for a better look at the scarlet metal chest plate. I’d never seen anything
from the Armageddon Codex. I don’t think half a dozen people in the family have.
"No one else is supposed to know what this is," the Armourer said quietly. "It’s here under a
code name. But I wanted someone to know. Someone I trusted."
"Not Alexandra?" I said, just as quietly.
"The Matriarch specifically said not to tell her. Not tell the Armourer in training? What does
that say to you?"
"She thinks there’s a traitor in the family, Uncle Jack. And she’s not the only one…"
"A traitor? In the family? Dear God, what have we come to?" The Armourer shook his head
slowly. "There was a time I would have said such a thing was unthinkable. Now…I just don’t
know anymore."
"Do you know what my mission is?" I said. "What I’m carrying, and where I have to take it?"
"Of course. One of the few who do. You put it back, Eddie. It should never have been brought
here in the first place."
"You didn’t ask for it?"
"Hell, no! That was the Matriarch’s orders again."
"This opening of the Codex," I said slowly. "Could it have something to do with the recent
attacks on the Hall? And the Heart?"
The Armourer looked away, his shoulders sagging even farther than usual. And for the first
time, he sounded…old. "I don’t know, Eddie. No one tells me anything anymore."
CHAPTER SEVEN
Hellhounds on My Trail
T here are moments in every field agent’s life when he becomes convinced that his cover
has been blown, and the eyes of the world are suddenly upon him. Usually because
someone is shooting at him. I felt that way from the moment I left the Hall and its many
protections behind me. Having the Soul of Albion in its lead-lined container tucked away in
my dashboard compartment made me feel as though someone had painted a target on my
car, or maybe even added a flashing neon sign saying ROB THIS IDIOT NOW. I drove the
Hirondel back through the winding country lanes and onto proper roads again. Cows in

fields watched me pass, following me with their heads as though even they knew what I was
carrying. I’d never couriered anything this important in my life. It felt as though there was
someone else in the car with me. Hamlets gave way to villages, which gave way to towns,
and soon enough I was back on the M4 motorway, heading south to Stonehenge.
The afternoon was pleasantly warm as I motored along, and the breeze was refreshingly
cool as it ruffled my hair. There’s a lot to be said for a convertible. Traffic was light for a
summer afternoon, and I just cruised along, listening to a Mary Hopkin compilation on the
CD player. I hadn’t been to Stonehenge in years, and last time I went, it had been as part of
an organised school trip. Apparently these days the ancient stone circle was sealed off
behind perimeter fences and barbed wire to keep the public at a respectful distance from
such an important national monument. (Not so unreasonable; in Victorian times they’d sell
you a hammer and chisel on the way in, so you could gouge out your own personal souvenir
to take home with you.) Still, I doubted they had anything that could keep me out. And no one
sees me unless I want them to, remember?
It suddenly occurred to me that I hadn’t passed a car coming the other way in quite a while.
There wasn’t any traffic in front of me, and a quick glance in the rearview mirror confirmed
that there was nothing behind me for as far as I could see. It seemed I had this whole stretch
of the motorway all to myself. And the chances of that happening at this time of the day, on
such a busy route, were…fantastically low. I shut off the CD player and tapped my fingers
thoughtfully on the steering wheel. I was being set up for an ambush.
Question was: Were they just after a Drood agent, or did someone know what I was
carrying?
I subvocalised the Words, and the living metal swept over me in a moment, sealing me off
from all danger behind my golden armour. I checked that the Colt Repeater was comfortably
loose in its shoulder holster under the armour, and I looked around me. Still nothing ahead
and nothing behind, and only empty fields on either side of the road. An alarm blared
suddenly inside the car, making me jump, and a flashing red arrow appeared on my
dashboard, pointing straight up. I looked up, and there were half a dozen black helicopters
flying in close formation right above me in complete silence. If it hadn’t been for my car’s
detection system, I’d never have known they were there until it was too late. I hadn’t actually
known my car could do that. Score one for the Armourer, and thank you, Uncle Jack.
I braked hard, and the black helicopters shot on ahead, caught off guard. They spun around
in a wide circle, still utterly silent, and headed straight for me. They looked like nasty ungainly
insects. Two of the leading helicopters opened up with machine guns, raking the road on
either side of the Hirondel, throwing up debris, trying to frighten me into stopping. I put my
foot down again, and the Hirondel responded eagerly, surging forward. The helicopters
were behind me now as I raced along, but already they were circling around to follow me,
still holding perfect attack formation. One launched a missile, and it swept past me to
explode in the road ahead. I snapped the wheel around to avoid the crater, and the car
punched right through the smoke and flames and out the other side. The armour protected
me from the heat and from smoke inhalation, but that was all it could do, for the moment. The
armour’s strengths were mostly defensive in nature. Unless and until I got my hands on
someone.
I pressed the pedal to the metal so hard my foot ached, and the Hirondel hammered down
the motorway, the engine roaring joyously. More missiles exploded on either side of me, the
blasts rocking the car, but I refused to be bluffed. They couldn’t afford to just blow up the car,
in case they damaged the Soul. The black helicopters kept up with me easily, taking up
formation all around me. My thoughts were racing, trying to find a way out of this trap, but

mostly I couldn’t help thinking, Why are the bloody Men in Black after me? It was more than
three years since I’d burgled Area 52 on the family’s behalf. And I took only a few
things…Could it be that Mr. President was still mad over the Harley Street affair and had
called in a favour from his American counterpart? How very small-minded of him. You try to
help someone out…
Bullets raked along one side of the Hirondel, punching through the thick metal, slamming me
back and forth in the driving seat, and forcing the car right across into the other lane. I had to
fight the wheel for control, all the time screaming obscenities at the helicopter pilots. Didn’t
they realise the Hirondel was a classic car, a genuine antique and a work of art in its own
right? You don’t put bullet holes in a work of art! Bloody philistines. Right. Enough was
enough. I was angry now. Who the hell did they think they were messing with? I hit one of the
Armourer’s concealed switches, and a panel flipped open, revealing a big red button. I
pressed my thumb down firmly, and an electromagnetic pulse radiated out from the car,
swatting all six black helicopters from the sky like the hand of God.
They plummeted clumsily to the ground as all their electrical systems crashed and fried, and
it was a credit to their pilots that only two of them exploded on impact. Thick black smoke
curled up into the pale blue sky as I hammered on down the motorway, punching the air with
one golden fist. I don’t normally celebrate my kills, but they had got me seriously angry.
Killing me was one thing, stealing the Soul of Albion another; but vandalising a classic like
the Hirondel…Hell was too good for them.
(Do I really need to explain that the car was shielded from its own EMP pulse? The
Armourer’s not an idiot, you know.)
Half a dozen cars came shooting onto the motorway from a side entrance, and I actually
relaxed a little, assuming their presence meant the attack was over, and normal traffic was
resuming. I should have known better. I noticed almost immediately that each of the cars
was a sharp scarlet in colour, glistening like lipstick, and none of them were any make or
model I was familiar with. There was something odd, something off, about the six scarlet
cars as they crept up behind me. I was still driving the Hirondel flat out, but they had no
trouble catching up. They were all long limousines with old-fashioned high tail fins, and they
moved smoothly up and alongside me, pacing me effortlessly like hunting cats. For the first
time I got a good look at them, close up, and my skin crawled. The hackles stood up on the
back of my neck. I could see the driver of the car on my right, and the car was being driven
by a dead man. He’d been dead for some time, his gray face shrunken and desiccated,
almost that of a mummy. His shrivelled hands had been nailed to the steering wheel, which
moved by itself.
These weren’t cars. None of them were cars. These were CARnivores.
I’d read about them, heard about them from other agents, but I had never seen one close up
before, and had never wanted to. CARnivores are sentient, meat-eating cars with attitude.
Some say they came originally from some other dimension, where cars evolved to replace
humans, and some say they evolved right here, ancient predators who’d learned to look like
cars so they could prey on humans unnoticed. They stalk the motorways, following tired
souls who drive alone in the early hours of the morning. The CARnivores close in, cut them
off from the pack, and then choose a secluded spot and force their prey off the road. And
then they feed…
But what the hell were this many CARnivores doing travelling together in bright sunlight, in
the middle of the day? I supposed even demon cars could be tempted by a prize like the
Soul of Albion. My mission wasn’t a secret any longer; there was a traitor in the family, and

he had sold us all out.
The CARnivores pressed in on either side, bumping me hard, first from the left and then
from the right. The Hirondel absorbed the impact and just kept going. Sturdy old car. I could
see dead men swaying in their driving seats, their eyeless heads lolling back and forth.
Another CARnivore rammed the Hirondel from behind, jolting me forward in my seat. Two
more bumps, left and right, harder now. CARnivores like to play with their food. The one on
my left slowly opened its hood, the bloodred steel rising tauntingly to show me a pink
glistening maw within and rows of churning steel teeth. It was hungry, and it was laughing at
me.
Underneath the protection of my golden armour, I was sweating. I could feel it running down
my face. I was pretty sure the living metal would be a match for the CARnivores, but it couldn
’t do anything to protect the Hirondel. And I needed the car if I was to get the Soul safely to
Stonehenge, still a good hour’s hard driving away. I could see the effects of the CARnivores’
proximity already manifesting in the Hirondel. Every part of the car looked older, dimmed,
even shabby. CARnivores could leech the vitality right out of any car, aging it at an
accelerated rate until it malfunctioned or fell apart from metal fatigue. And then the
CARnivores would drive it off the road and feed on the driver and any passengers.
CARnivores exist by draining other cars dry, but even more than that, they love their human
prey.
They’re meat junkies.
The Hirondel had a lot of extra options built in, but at the end of the day it was still just a car
and as vulnerable as any other. And the CARnivores were getting awfully close. They
bumped and barged me from both sides almost constantly now, jostling me like bullies in a
playground, just for the fun of it. Time to show them who was the eight-hundred-pound gorilla
around here. I let my left hand drift over the Armourer’s special control panel. I doubted the
EMP would work on the CARnivores, even if it had recharged itself yet; they were too
different, too alien, too alive. So I used the rear-mounted flamethrowers instead. Twin
streams of raging fire blasted out of the back of the Hirondel, and a thick rush of flames
enveloped the CARnivore behind me. The demon car screamed shrilly, thrashing wildly from
side to side as it fell back. The fires had taken hold, and the CARnivore blazed brightly,
flames and smoke leaping up into the sky.
I hit my brakes hard, the Hirondel’s tyres screeching as my speed dropped by half. The two
CARnivores on either side of me shot forward, caught unawares, and I opened up on them
with the electric cannon mounted just above the front bumper. Pumped out at a thousand
rounds a second, explosive fléchettes raked both cars, chewing up the demon metal. One
CARnivore exploded, flipping end over end down the motorway before finally skidding to a
halt. The other surged back and forth across the lanes, leaking long trails of blood and oil. I
kept tracking it with both cannon until it too exploded, shooting off over the hard shoulder
and embedding itself in the grass verge beyond.
Three down, three to go.
But the other CARnivores had had enough. They slowed right down and took the next exit,
not used to prey who fought back. I swept on, checking my inventory. The flamethrowers had
exhausted most of their fuel, the cannon were almost out of ammunition, but the EMP was
fully recharged and ready to go again. I rummaged in my glove compartment for my maps.
Now that my cover was blown I needed to get off the motorway as quickly as possible. Use
the side roads and the roundabout routes that an enemy might not know. And I needed to
stop and find a landline phone so I could contact my family, let them know what was

happening. I couldn’t trust my mobile. My enemies might tap into the GPS. In an almighty
cock-up situation like this, I wasn’t too proud to beg for reinforcements. And then the car’s
alarms went off again, and I looked up to see elf lords flying towards me on their dragon
mounts.
I should have expected elves. They’d sell the souls they didn’t have to get their hands on the
Soul of Albion, so they could use it to destroy the humans who’d driven them from their
ancient ancestral holdings. Not through war or attrition, but just by outbreeding them. The
elves hate us, and they always will, because we won by cheating. I could hear their laughter
on the wind, cold and cruel and capricious.
There were twenty dragons, and none of them were the graceful, romantic beasts of myth
and legend. These were great worms, thirty to forty feet long, with wet, glistening,
segmented bodies, and vast membranous bat wings. They forced themselves through the
sky by brute effort, ugly and inglorious, their flat faces made up of a ring of dark unblinking
eyes surrounding a sucking mouth like a lamprey’s. Astride their thick necks, on ancient
saddles upholstered in tanned human skin, sat the elf lords and ladies. Beautiful and
magnificent, vicious and vile, human in shape but not in thought, they rode to the slaughter
with laughter on their colourless lips, singing ancient hunting songs on the glories of suffering
and the kill.
They came straight at me, moving so fast they were over me and then behind me before I
even had time to react. They swooped around, the hunting pack in full cry, and the lords and
ladies threw lightning bolts at me with their bare hands. The bolts exploded in the road
ahead of me, blasting out craters and cracking the surface. I put my foot down and kept
going, swerving the car back and forth to avoid the larger holes. The dragons pounded
through the air above and beside me, taking their time, enjoying the hunt. Seeing how close
they could get to the car, without actually touching it. The continuous explosions of the
lightning bolts were deafening, and the flaring lights were bright enough to dazzle me
momentarily, even through the armour’s protection. I could hear the Hirondel’s engine
straining. I tried to think what I had that could reach the elves and their dragons, safe up in
the sky. A lightning bolt hit the bonnet of the Hirondel, blasting all the paint away in a
moment, and the car slammed this way and that under the impact, swerving blindly across
the lane divider and back again. Only the armoured strength in my hands kept the steering
wheel under control, even as the wheel itself crumpled slowly out of shape.
A dragon and its rider came flying straight at me, only a few feet above the road. I wondered
at first if he was planning to ram me, but then I saw him fitting an arrow to his bow, and I
smiled. An arrow against my armour. Yeah, right. I reached for the switch to activate the
electric cannon and blow him out of my way. The elf lord loosed his arrow. And while I was
still reaching for the switch, the arrow punched right through my windshield and through my
glorious golden armour, and buried itself in my left shoulder. I slammed back in my seat,
crying out in shock and pain, and actually let go of the wheel for a moment to grab at the
arrow shaft with both hands. It wouldn’t budge. The car skidded across the lanes. I tugged at
the arrow again, crying out in agony, but I couldn’t move it. The extra pain cleared my head
like a shock of cold water in the face, and I grabbed the steering wheel and brought the
Hirondel under control again.
I was panting harshly, and sweat poured down my face under my golden mask. I could feel
blood coursing down my arm and chest, under my armour. Every movement, every breath,
brought me a new pulse of pain. I gritted my teeth until my jaws ached. I was still in shock,
and not just from the pain. My armour was invulnerable. Impregnable. Everyone knew that.
The strength of the living armour was the strength of the family. It made our work possible,
because none of our enemies could touch us while we wore the living metal. Only, the silver

shaft sticking out of my shoulder was a pretty convincing argument to the contrary. Trust the
elves to find a way to hurt us. The pain beat in my head, interfering with my thoughts, and it
took all my self-control to push it aside and concentrate. There had to be a way out of this. I
couldn’t surrender the Soul of Albion. And anyway, I was damned if I’d be beaten by a bunch
of snotty, arrogant elves.
I kept driving, foot hard down, blinking sweat out of my eyes. I’d lost all feeling in my left arm,
and it hung limply at my side. I studied the arrow shaft protruding from my armoured
shoulder. It was a strange silvery metal, glowing faintly. God alone knew from what far
dimension the elves had plundered it, desperate to find the one thing that would pierce
Drood armour. I looked up and around. The dragons were still keeping up with me, flailing
their vast wings into a blur, even though the Hirondel was pushing its top speed. I couldn’t
outrun them, couldn’t shake them off. So I stamped both feet down on brake and clutch and
brought the car to a screeching halt, leaving long smoking trails of burned rubber behind me.
The dragons and their riders swept on, caught off guard, but quickly circled around to come
back at me again. Some of them were already stringing arrows to their bows.
I forced the bullet-holed door open and stumbled out of the car, crying out despite myself as
every new jolt of movement brought me fresh pain. I strode out into the middle of the road,
facing the oncoming dragons, my left arm useless at my side. I could see the elves’ faces
now, their cold, cruel smiles. They were laughing at me. I reached through my golden armour
with my golden hand and drew the Colt Repeater from its holster. There was blood on it from
my shoulder wound, and I shook a few drops off. I aimed the Colt at the nearest dragon
rider, and the gun took care of the rest.
The cold lead bullet hit the elf lord right between the eyes and blew the back of his head off.
For good measure I shot the dragon in its ugly head too, and it crashed to the motorway in
an ungainly sprawl of flapping wings. I shot all the elves and all the dragons, all the vicious
lords and vile ladies and their ugly mounts, and they didn’t have the time to fire off a single
arrow at me. I just fired the Colt Repeater again and again and again, and the bullets just
kept coming, and the gun never missed. A triumph of the Armourer’s art. The dead dragons
piled up before me, twitching and shuddering as the last of their unnatural life leaked out of
them, and not a single elf escaped my cold anger. God bless you, Uncle Jack.
I sat down carefully on the Hirondel’s bonnet and got my breath back. The arrow in my
shoulder still hurt like hell. I had to contact the family. Get them to send a clean-up crew to
remove the dragons and elves before Joe Public turned up to see them. And then the
Matriarch would have to send a stiff and very formal complaint to the Fae Court, telling them
to keep their arrogant noses out of Drood business, or else. It slowly occurred to me that I’d
been driving for some time while fighting for my life, and I still hadn’t seen any traffic.
Someone had to have arranged for this whole section of the motorway to be sealed off. To
close all the exits and shut down all the CCTV coverage would take serious clout. How high
up was this traitor in the family, that they could arrange something like this? Yes, I had to get
to a safe phone. Tell the family. About the traitor…
My head was actually nodding, my thoughts fading in and out, when the car’s alarms went off
again. My head jerked up and I slid off the bonnet and looked around me. A thick fog
covered all the motorway behind me, a dirty gray mist that churned and boiled, with nothing
natural about it. I climbed back into the driving seat, gritting my teeth against the pain, and
then pounded my left arm with my right fist until some sensation returned, so I could slam the
car into first gear. I took off again, and out of the mists behind me came the phantom fleet.
My first thought was This isn’t fair. Not after everything I’ve already been through… But I was
too tired even to maintain a good sulk, so I just concentrated on building up some speed. My

injured arm shrieked at me as I raced through the gears, but that was better than the scary
numbness. The pain cleared my head and kept me angry. I was going to have to be sharp,
in top form, to take out the phantom fleet.
They swept down the deserted motorway after me, ghosts of crashed vehicles driven and
possessed by spirits from the vasty deep. Half-transparent cars and trucks and articulateds,
and everything else that ever came to a nasty end on a motorway. Some looked real as real
could be, while others were just misty shapes, all of them still bearing the damage and burn
marks of their previous ends. Too many to count, they came howling after me in a vicious
pack, their ghostly engines supernaturally loud. Black brimstone smoke issued from their
exhausts, and hellfire burned around their squealing tires. The phantom fleet, the wild hunt of
modern times; hungry for souls.
The lead car drew up alongside me, matching my speed effortlessly. It was a Hillman Minx
from the sixties, the front smashed in, the long bonnet concertinaed. Through the cracked
side windows, I could see the car was packed to bursting with grinning ghouls and demons
and mutant creatures. They writhed together like maggots infesting a wound, churning and
shifting and pressing their awful faces against the windows to laugh at me. None of the
Hirondel’s weapons would touch these things, because they weren’t really there. Just
memories of vehicles that once were, and the things from beyond that had repossessed
them.
Another car came forward, filling my rearview mirror. Some big boxy foreign job, driven by a
hunched-over demon with huge bulging eyes and a mouth full of needle teeth. It hit the horn
again and again, and the dead car howled like something in pain. The demon pounded on
the steering wheel with its thorny hands, caught up in the excitement of the chase. And then
the ghost car surged forward, passing through the back of the Hirondel, penetrating my
space with its dead shape. A wave of supernatural cold preceded its progress, freezing the
blood in my veins. The dead car drew level, its ghostly outline superimposed on mine, and
then the demon driver dropped a thorny hand on my shoulder, ghosted right through my
armour, and grabbed hold of my soul. I screamed, just at the touch of it. The demon pulled,
trying to haul my soul out of my body, to be prey for the pack, for the phantom fleet. Another
stolen soul, to drive the engines of the damned cars.
But my soul was linked to my armour, from the moment I was born. You couldn’t have one
without the other. And together they were stronger than any damned dead thing. The
gripping ghostly fingers slipped slowly away, unable to maintain their hold. I goosed the
accelerator, and the Hirondel jumped forward. The ghost car fell back, the demon howling in
outrage at being cheated out of its rightful prey. Pain surged up in my left arm again, and I
embraced it. It meant I was alive. I forced my left hand forward and hit the emergency default
button on the CD player. The system immediately began broadcasting a recording of the
ritual of exorcism, read by the last pope in the original Latin. The sonorous words boomed
out of the car’s speakers, and the ghost car was driven right out of the Hirondel. Around and
behind me, the phantom fleet shrieked horribly and fell back. Some were already breaking
up under the impact of the holy words, drifting away in long ghostly streamers. The thick
curling mists reappeared in my rearview mirror, and the phantom fleet vanished back into
them.
I drove on, half dead behind the wheel myself, and for a while I had the motorway all to
myself.
And then, from up ahead, came the Flying Saucerers. And I was so hurt and tired and
generally pissed off that I didn’t even slow down. Let them come. Let them all come, every
damned thing from above and below and in between. I was on a roll and mad enough to

take on the whole bloody world. The Flying Saucerers are high-level magic users who swan
around in flying saucer–shaped artefacts made up of ionised plasma energies, for reasons
best known to themselves. Personally, I think they just like to show off. They’re the vultures of
the paranormal world, darting down to pick up the spoils of other people’s battles and carry
off whatever isn’t actually nailed down. Which is actually pretty pathetic behaviour, if you ask
me, for a group who claim they’re out to rule the world.
I peered wearily through my cracked windscreen and scowled at the saucers shooting
through the sky towards me. There had to be a whole fleet of the bloody things. Twenty,
maybe thirty, their wide saucer shapes as insubstantial as soap bubbles, condensing into
weird rainbow colours around the pilots sitting cross-legged in the centre of the craft. A
whole fleet slamming towards me in broad daylight. Made bold at the prospect of a prize
like the Soul of Albion. And knowing them, they’d waited for everyone else to take a crack at
me, and weaken me, before they tried for the Soul themselves. I could feel my smile
widening into a death’s-head grin under my golden mask. I might be down, but I wasn’t out.
And I had weapons and tactics and dirty tricks I hadn’t even tried yet.
The Flying Saucerers are dangerous because, like the family, they take science and magic
equally seriously. They embrace both schools of knowledge, two very different doctrines,
and combine them in unnatural and unexpected ways to produce a whole that is far greater
than the sum of its parts. Like the plasma saucers: science devised, magic driven. They
came howling in, one after the other, targeting computers zeroing in on my car. Energy bolts
cracked and exploded in the road ahead of me, and I threw the Hirondel this way and that,
ducking and dodging as best I could. Fierce energies crackled all around me, chewing up
the road in long ragged runs. One whole grass verge was on fire, and I had to jump the
Hirondel over a wide crevice that opened up in front of me.
Anywhen else, I would probably have been scared shitless in the face of so much superior
firepower, but after everything I’d already been through, the saucers were more annoying
than anything.
The road blew up, right in front of me. I punched the Hirondel through the smoke and flames,
but the left front wheel dipped into a crack and snatched the steering wheel out of my hands.
The car spun around and around, spiralling down the motorway at sickening speed, before
finally skidding to a halt. I sat limply in my seat while my spinning head settled, feeling really
grateful I’d had seat belts installed, even though it was a classic car. My armour had
protected me from the sudden deceleration and probably a really nasty case of whiplash,
but I was still pretty dazed. And my wounded arm felt worse than ever. God alone knew what
damage the faerie arrow was doing to my system.
I checked the car over. Smoke was rising from under the bonnet, which is never a good
sign, but everything seemed still to be working. I considered using the EMP generator, but I
was pretty sure the Flying Saucerers would have shielded their craft against that. I would
have. Which just left…taking out the trash the old-fashioned way.
I undid my seat belt, forced open the door, and half crawled, half fell out of the car. I levered
myself upright by leaning most of my weight on the car door, and the heavy metal crumpled
under the strain of my golden fingers. I winced. That was going to be hell to beat out later. I
stood up, straight and tall, using all the armour’s support, and strode off down the motorway
towards the approaching saucers. The first dropped towards me and opened up a strafing
run with its energy weapons. And I drew my Colt Repeater and shot the Flying Saucerer in
the head. He’d protected his craft against EMPs, energy weapons, and magic attacks, but
he’d never expected to face a simple cold lead bullet. Guided by the gun’s unnatural nature,
the bullet punched through all the pilot’s shields and blew his head apart before he even

knew what was happening. The saucer dropped like a stone, skidded across the motorway,
leaving deep scars in the road behind it, and finally exploded in a rainbow of dissipating
energies. I turned slowly, and then shot every other Flying Saucerer out of the sky, one at a
time. Even the ones that turned and ran.
I aimed my last bullet very carefully, and the Colt shot the pilot in the gut. His saucer came
down in swoops and rolls and finally crashed just a few yards away from me. The saucer
shape flickered on and off, colours whorling around and around its surface like an oily film,
and then the shape collapsed, no longer held together by the pilot’s will. And all that was left
was a surprisingly ordinary-looking man lying crumpled on the verge, soaked in blood and
curled around his wound.
I walked over to him, grabbed him by the shoulder, and slammed him over onto his back. He
cried out miserably at the pain, and then cried out again in shock and horror as he saw the
golden armoured form standing over him. I’d overridden the stealth function. I wanted him to
see me. The whole of the front of his tunic was soaked in his blood. I placed one armoured
foot on his stomach, just lightly. Not pressing, not yet. He lay very still, looking up at me with
wide, frightened eyes. Like a deer brought down at the end of the chase.
"Talk," I said. "And I’ll let you call for help."
"I can’t…"
"Talk. You don’t have to die here. You don’t have to die slowly and horribly…"
"What do you want to know?"
I’m pretty sure I was bluffing. Pretty sure. But the Drood reputation goes a long way. I
pressed my foot down a little, and he yelled, blood spurting from his mouth.
"What the hell do you think I want to know?" I said.
"All right, all right! Jesus, take it easy, man. Fight’s over, okay? Look; we just wanted the
Soul of Albion, you know? We got directions, all the details, everything we needed on where
to find you, and a guarantee that no one would come to help you. The information came
from…inside the Drood family. Don’t hurt me! I’m telling the truth, I swear I am! We got the
word from someone high up in the family. I don’t know why, exactly; I’m not high enough in
the organisation to be trusted with information like that. I’m just a pilot!"
I considered this, while the pilot lay very still under my armoured foot. He was breathing
heavily, sweat soaking his colourless face. Too terrified to lie. Someone in my family wanted
me dead, wanted it badly enough to sacrifice the Soul of Albion itself…Why? I’m not that
important. I looked down at the pilot, ready to question him some more, but he was dead. I
couldn’t bring myself to feel bad about it. He would have seen me dead without a second
thought.
I went back to the Hirondel. It was scorched and blackened from fire and smoke, riddled with
bullet holes, and most of the paint was gone from the bonnet…but she still seemed basically
intact. Much like me, really. I leaned in through the open door and retrieved the Soul’s
lead-lined container. So much death and destruction over such a small thing. I opened the
box to check it was okay, and the Soul wasn’t there. Lying in the red plush velvet was a
simple homing device broadcasting my location to one and all. I took it out and crushed it in
my golden fist.
I’d never had the Soul of Albion. Somewhere along the line, someone had worked a switch.

And the only way that could have happened…was with the Matriarch’s sanction. She would
have known immediately if anything had happened to the Soul. And if she knew about the
homing device, she knew about everything. It all made sense now. Only the Matriarch could
have arranged for this much motorway to be sealed off and be sure of clearing up all the
mess afterwards. The Matriarch had sent me off on a wild-goose chase, sent me out here to
die. My own grandmother had thrown me to the wolves. But why? Why would she do that?
I armoured down and gasped as the smoky air hit my bare face. I looked at my left arm
hanging limp at my side. Blood soaked the whole length of my sleeve and dripped from my
numb fingertips. I studied the arrow shaft protruding from the meat of my shoulder. The metal
was a brilliant silver, shimmering and shining even in the bright sunlight. There were no
feathers; an arrow like this wouldn’t need them to fly true. I had to tell the family: the Fae had
found a weapon that could pierce our armour. Only I couldn’t tell them. The moment I called
home, the Matriarch would know I was still alive and send more people to kill me. I looked at
the arrow shaft again. Strange matter, from some other dimension. Probably poisonous.
Had to come out. Oh, shit, this was going to hurt.
I pulled a handkerchief out of my pocket, wadded it up, and bit down hard. Then I gripped the
shaft firmly and pushed it farther in, so that the barbed head punched out my back. The
handkerchief muffled my scream, but I still nearly fainted at the pain. I reached up and
around and awkwardly pulled the shaft all the way through and out. Blood was pouring down
my chest and back by the time I’d finished. My face ran with sweat, and my hands were
shaking. It had been a long time since I was hurt this bad. I spat out the handkerchief and
took the arrow shaft in both hands. It seemed to squirm in my grasp. I broke it in two, and it
screamed inside my head. I dropped the pieces on the ground, and they tried to turn into
something else before falling apart into sticky smears of something that couldn’t survive in
this world.
I sat down in the driver’s seat before my legs collapsed under me. After a while I pulled out
the first aid box, opened it, and took out a basic healer. Just a blob of preprogrammed
simple matter, full of all kinds of things that were good for me. I said the activating Word and
slapped it against the wound in my shoulder. The blob sealed it off immediately and pumped
some wonderful drug into me, cutting off the pain like a switch. I groaned aloud at the
sudden relief. The blob penetrated the wound with a narrow tendril, repairing as it went, and
emerged to seal off the wound in my back. I could feel all this, but only in a vague and
distanced way. I was sort of interested. I’d never had to use one before. But I had other
things on my mind.
I needed to know why my own grandmother had betrayed me. Why she’d sent me to my
death with a lie on her lips. I couldn’t go back to the Hall for answers. Even if I did get past all
the defences, she’d just call me a liar, declare me rogue and apostate, and order the family
to kill me. And everyone would believe her, and no one would believe me, because she was
the Matriarch and I was…Eddie Drood. Whom could I still talk to, whom could I still trust,
after everything that had happened? Maybe just one man. I took out my mobile phone and
called Uncle James on his very private number. He cut me off the moment he recognised my
voice.
"Stay where you are. I’ll be right with you."
And just like that, he was standing before me, his mobile phone still in his hand. The air
rippled around him, displaced by the teleport spell. We put away our phones and looked at
each other. Concern filled his face as he took in my condition and the blood still soaking my
left arm. He started towards me, but I stopped him with a raised hand. He nodded slowly.

"I know, Eddie. It’s always hard to learn you can’t trust anyone. You look like shit, by the
way."
"You should see the other guys, Uncle James."
He looked beyond me, at the carnage and wreckage I’d left stretched down the length of the
motorway, and he actually smiled a little.
"You did all that? I’m impressed, Eddie. Really."
"How did you get here so quickly, Uncle James?" I said slowly. "Teleport spells need exact
coordinates. How did you know exactly where to find me on this long stretch of motorway,
when even I’m not entirely sure exactly where I am? What’s going on, Uncle James?"
"The homing device told us where you were, before you destroyed it." Uncle James’s voice
was calm, conversational. "The Matriarch sent me here, Eddie. She gave me specific
orders…said that if somehow you had survived all the ambushes, I was to kill you myself. No
warnings, not a word; just shoot you down in cold blood. Why would she tell me to do that,
Eddie? What have you done?"
"I don’t know! I haven’t done anything! None of this makes any sense, Uncle James…"
"You’ve been officially declared rogue," he said. "A clear and present danger to the whole
family. Every Drood is authorised to kill you on sight. For the good of the family."
We stood looking at each other. Neither of us wore our armour. Neither of us had a weapon.
His face was cold, even calm, but in his eyes I could see a torment I’d never seen before.
For perhaps the first time in his life, James Drood didn’t know what to do for the best. He
was torn between what he’d been ordered to do and what was in his heart. Remember, this
was the Gray Fox, the most loyal and dependable agent the family had ever had. Uncle
James. Who’d been like a father to me. Who in the end wouldn’t, couldn’t, kill me.
We both sensed that at the same moment, and we both relaxed a little.
"So," I said. "What do we do now?"
"I go back to the Matriarch. Tell her you were already gone when I got here," Uncle James
said flatly. "You…you run. Run, and keep running. Hide yourself so deep that even I won’t be
able to find you. Because if we meet again, I will kill you, Eddie. I’ll have to. For the good of
the family."
CHAPTER EIGHT
Seduction of the Not Entirely Innocent
U ncle James disappeared without even saying good-bye, air rushing in to fill the space
where he’d been. I should have told him about the faerie arrow that pierced my armour, but
he hadn’t given me a chance, and anyway, I was still in shock. My family wanted me dead.
After everything I’d done for them, after ten long years of fighting the good fight on their
behalf, this was my reward: to be declared rogue. Traitor. Outcast. I might have had my
disagreements with them, but they were still my family. I would never have betrayed them. It’s
one thing to run away from home; quite another to be told you can’t go back because if you
do they’ll kill you on sight. I looked at the lead-lined container that should have held the Soul
of Albion, staring into its empty red plush interior as though it might have some answers for
me. It didn’t, so I threw it away.

I went back to the Hirondel and slid painfully in behind the wheel again. I might be hurting in
all kinds of ways, but I was still a professional, so I had the car’s defence systems run a
complete diagnostic, to make sure there weren’t any more bugs or tracking devices
anywhere on board. Or indeed any other nasty and possibly fatal surprises. The car
muttered to itself for a bit, and then gave itself a clean bill of health. I relaxed a little and
started up the engine. Even after all she’d been through, the Hirondel roared smoothly and
immediately to life, ready to take me anywhere I wanted. It was good to know there were still
a few things left in my life that wouldn’t let me down.
I headed the Hirondel back up the M4, away from the south, back towards London. My home
territory. If they were going to come for me, I wanted it to be on home ground. I passed dead
bodies and crashed vehicles, blazing fires and black smoke and all the other damage I’d
done. There seemed to be quite a lot of it. Poor damned fools, dying for nothing, over a
prize that was never there. And if there were similarities in that to how my life had turned out,
I tried not to think about it. The Hirondel laboured along, reluctant to hit high speeds
anymore, but I was in no hurry anyway. The family’s remote viewers couldn’t see or find me
as long as I wore the torc. Slowly my shock crystallised into anger, and then into something
colder and more determined. I wanted answers. My whole world had just been turned upside
down, and I needed to know why. According to James I had been officially declared a rogue,
so none of the other family out in the world would talk to me. Hell, most of them would try to
kill me the moment they set eyes on me. Droods have no mercy for traitors.
Which meant there was only one place left I could go for answers, for the truth: the people I’d
been fighting all my life. The bad guys.
I left the M4 by the first exit I came to. I needed to lose myself in country roads and back
lanes before the family’s search hounds came sniffing up the motorway after me. I hadn’t
gone half a mile down the exit before I was forced to slow down and stop by a police
barricade. It wasn’t a particularly impressive barricade; just a few rows of plastic cones
backed up by the presence of two uniformed officers and a squad car. A long line of
stationary vehicles faced me in the other lane, and a small crowd of impatient drivers had
gathered on the other side of the cones, taking it in turns to loudly berate the police officers.
They all looked around as I approached in the Hirondel, and they all seemed pretty surprised
to see me. I stopped the car a respectful distance away, and the police officers came over
to talk to me. I think they were quite pleased for an excuse to get away from the drivers. They
both did distinct double takes as they took in the condition of my car, and they stopped a
respectful distance away from me and ordered me to turn off my engine and get out of my
car. I smiled and did as I was told. They had answers, whether they knew it or not.
I sat on the bonnet of the Hirondel and waited for them to come to me. They approached
cautiously, pointing out the bullet holes and the shattered windscreen to each other. They
hadn’t expected to see anything like that on traffic duty. One of them started writing down my
license plate number in his little notebook, for all the good that would do him, while his
colleague came forward to interrogate me. I gave him a nice, friendly smile.
"Why is this section of the motorway sealed off?" I said innocently, getting my question in
before he could ask me for ID that I had absolutely no intention of providing.
"Seems there’s been a chemical spill, sir. Very serious, so they tell me. Are you sure you
haven’t seen anything, sir? This whole section of the M4 has been officially declared a
hazardous area."
"Well, yes," I said, allowing myself another smile. "I did find it rather hazardous in places…"

The police officer didn’t like the smile at all. "I think you’d better stay here with us for a while,
sir. I’m sure my superiors will want to ask you some more detailed questions down at the
station. And the hazmat people will want to make sure you haven’t been exposed to anything
dangerous." He stopped. I was smiling again. He looked at me coldly. "This is a very
serious matter, sir. Please move away from your vehicle. I need to see some identification."
"No, you don’t," I said. I drew my Colt Repeater from its shoulder holster. The police officer
put his hands in the air immediately, palms out to show they were empty. His colleague
started forward, and I raised the gun just a little.
"Stay where you are, Les, and don’t be a fool!" said the other officer.
"Remember your training!"
"It could be a replica," said Les, staying back but still scowling at me.
I aimed casually at the squad car, and the Colt shot out all four of the tyres. The small crowd
of drivers by the cones cried out in shock and alarm. People aren’t used to guns in England,
which on the whole I approve of. I gestured for both police officers to remove the cones from
the road, and they did so slowly and reluctantly. I kept a careful eye on them, making sure
they stuck together so I could cover both of them with the Colt. I had no intention of shooting
anyone, but they didn’t need to know that. The crowd of drivers was starting to get restive. I
needed to get under way before one of them decided he was a hero type and did something
stupid. Innocent bystanders can be a real pain in the arse sometimes. I backed away and
slid behind the wheel of the Hirondel. I was breaking the first rule of the field agent; I was
being noticed. So, when in doubt, confuse the issue.
"Tell your decadent government that the Tasmanian Separatist Alliance is on the move!" I
announced grandly. "The oppressor will be forced to bow down before our superior dogma!
All dolphins shall be freed, and no more penguins will be forced to smoke cigarettes!"
Which should give them something to think about. By the time they’d picked the bones out of
that and wasted even more time trying to track down a terrorist group (and a license plate)
that didn’t actually exist, I should have had plenty of time to go to ground. I was going to have
to lose the Hirondel. It had become too visible, too noticeable. I gunned the engine,
annoyed, and roared past the police officers, the crowd of drivers, and the long queue of
waiting vehicles. I had to get to London, and fast. Some people leaned out of their car
windows to try to photograph me with their mobile phones. I smiled obliging at them, secure
in the knowledge that my torc hid me from all forms of surveillance, scientific and magical.
How else could field agents like me operate in a world where someone is always watching
you?
I left the queue behind and quickly disappeared into side roads and bypasses. I had a
secret hideout on the outskirts of London, one of several I maintained for emergencies. The
one I was thinking of was nothing special, just a rented garage in a perfectly respectable
residential area. But it had everything I needed to go underground. To become invisible. I
always kept my hideouts up-to-date and stocked with useful items for those rare but
inevitable occasions when my cover was blown and I had to disappear in a hurry. I could go
into any of my boltholes as one man and come out as someone entirely different, complete
with totally new look and ID. The family didn’t know about these places. They knew nothing
about the way I operated. They’d never wanted to know.
I reached the outskirts of London without incident, though I sat tense and hunched behind the
wheel most of the way, in anticipation of a challenge or an attack that never actually
materialised. The battered and bullet-holed Hirondel drew many stares, but no one said or

did anything. This was England, after all. I headed into the respected residential area, and
my very respectable neighbours watched openmouthed as I brought the car to a halt before
my rented garage. I nodded and smiled to one and all, and they quickly looked the other
way. I’d ruined my reputation here, but it didn’t matter. I’d never be coming back. I opened
the garage door with a palm print, a retina scan, and a muttered Word, and then drove the
Hirondel inside. I got out and sealed the door behind me, and only then finally allowed myself
to relax.
I spent a good ten minutes just sitting on the bonnet, hugging myself tightly, too worn out
even to move. I was tired, bone-deep tired, and weary of spirit. So much had happened in
such a short time, and nearly all of it bad. But in the end I forced myself up and onto my feet
again. I couldn’t allow myself the luxury of a rest, or even a good brood. My family would
already have people out looking for me. Clever people, talented people. Dangerous people.
I was the enemy now, and I had good reason to know how the Droods treat their enemies.
I peeled off my bloodstained jacket and shirt, to check my shoulder wound. The first aid blob
had almost dried up, a shrivelled and puckered thing that only just covered the wound. I
peeled it carefully away and found the hole was now sealed behind a new knot of scar
tissue. The blob had used up its pseudolife to heal and repair me, and now it was just a
lump of undifferentiated protoplasm. I dropped it on the floor and said the right Word, and it
dissolved into a greasy stain on the bare concrete. First rule of an agent: leave no evidence
behind. Useful things, those blobs. I’d have felt easier if I’d had a few more, but if you’re
going to start wishing for things…I flexed my shoulder cautiously. It was stiff, and it still ached
dully, but it seemed sound enough. My hands drifted up to touch the golden collar around my
throat. My armour was no longer invulnerable. The protection and security I had taken so
casually all my life had been stripped away from me, all in a moment. I wondered if I’d ever
feel safe and confident again.
I sat down before the computer in the corner, fired it up, and pulled together a list of
addresses and general locations of various old enemies who might know something about
what was happening. Some of them might agree to help me, for the right consideration. Or
intimidation. There’s never any shortage of bad guys in and around London, but only a select
few would have access to the kind of information I was after. And most of them were very
powerful people, often with good reason to kill me on sight, once I revealed who I was. I
worked on the list, crossing out a name here and there where the risk was just too great, and
finally ended up with a dozen possibles. I printed out the revised list, shut down the
computer, and then just sat there for a while, gathering my courage. Even with my armour
operating at full strength, these were still very dangerous people. Daniel walking into the
lions’ den had nothing on what I was going to have to do.
But I had to get moving. My very respectable neighbours were bound to have called the
police by now. So I called a certain notorious taxi firm on my mobile phone; anonymous
black cabs whose drivers would take anyone anywhere and never ask awkward questions.
You learn how to find firms like that, in my game. They were reliable but expensive, and I
realised for the first time that money was going to be a problem. The family would have put a
stop on all my credit by now and flagged my name everywhere else. All I had was the cash in
my wallet. Fortunately, I’ve always been paranoid, and I think ahead. A small metal safe at
the back of the garage held half a dozen fake IDs and ten thousand pounds in used notes.
Enough to keep me going for a while.
I changed into a new set of clothes. They smelled a bit musty from hanging in the garage for
so long, but they were nicely anonymous. So typical and average, in fact, that any witnesses
would be hard-pressed to find anything specific about them to describe. I piled my old
bloodstained clothes on the floor, and then broke an acid capsule over them. Shame. I’d

really liked that jacket. One more stain on the floor.
I looked sadly at the Hirondel. I could never drive that marvellous old car again. It had
become too visible, too remembered; and I couldn’t let such a car, with all the Armourer’s
additions, fall into mundane hands. I smiled grimly. Even after all that had happened, I was
still protecting family security. Saying good-bye to the Hirondel was like leaving an old
friend, or a faithful steed, but it had to be done. I patted the discoloured bonnet once, and
then said the Words that would trigger the car’s auto-destruct. Nothing so blunt and
capricious as an explosion, of course; just a controlled elemental incendiary that would leave
nothing useful behind and scour the garage clean of all evidence. Police forensics could
work their fingers to the bone and still find nothing they could trace back to me.
I’m paranoid, I think ahead, and I’m very thorough.
I left the garage, locking the door behind me, and sure enough the taxi with no name was
already there waiting for me. I walked over to it and got in, and never once looked back. It’s
an important part of a field agent’s job: to be able to walk away from anyone or anything at a
moment’s notice and never look back.
The taxi took me back into London proper and dropped me off at the first Underground Tube
station we came to. I rode up and down on the trains, switching from one line to another at
random, until I was sure no one was following me. There was no way my family, or anyone
else, could have tracked me down so quickly, but I needed to be sure. I got off at Oxford
Street and went up and out into the open air. It was early evening now, and crowds of people
surged up and down the street, in the course of their everyday lives, as though this was just
another day. No one paid me any attention. That at least was normal, and reassuring.
The first name on my list was the Chelsea Lovers. Very secretive, and very hard to find. They
changed their location every twenty-four hours, and with good reason. The Chelsea Lovers
were hated and feared, worshipped and adored, petitioned and despised. And the only way
to find them was to read the cards. So I walked casually down Oxford Street till I reached the
rows of public phone kiosks, and I checked out the display of tart cards plastering the
interiors. Tart cards are business cards left in the kiosks by prostitutes advertising their
services. Sometimes there’s a photo (which you can be sure will bear little or no
resemblance to the real woman); more often a piece of suggestive art accompanied by a
brief jaunty message and a phone number.
The cards have a long history, dating back to Victorian times, and down the years have
developed a language all of their own. A girl who boasts an excellent knowledge of Greek,
for example, will not possess actual academic qualifications; though a visit to her would
almost certainly be an education in itself. But underneath all the euphemisms and double
entendres there is another, more secret language, for those who can read it. A wholly
different message, to be read in the placement of certain words and letters, telling you how
to find the current locations for darker and more dangerous pleasures. I worked out that day’
s message and phoned the indicated number, and a voice at the other end, which might
have been male or female, both or neither, gave me an address just beyond Covent Garden
and told me to ask for the Kit Kat Club. Nice to know someone still had a sense of humour.
The place wasn’t hard to find. From the outside it looked like just another building, behind a
bland anonymous front. No advertising, no clues. Either you knew exactly what the place
was, or you had no business being there. I studied the exterior thoughtfully, while people
passed me by, unknowing. The Kit Kat Club wasn’t the sort of place you rushed into. You
needed to gird your spiritual loins first.

The Chelsea Lovers were a group marriage of assorted mystical head cases, dedicated to
the darker areas of tantric sex magic, channelled through cutting-edge computer technology.
They organised orgies that ran twenty-four hours a day, with participants constantly coming
and going. With the kind of mystical power they were capable of generating, they could have
picked up the whole of London and spun it around a few times before dropping it again.
Only they never did, because…well, apparently because they were concerned with
something far more important. What that might be, no one knew for sure, and most were
afraid to ask. The Chelsea Lovers had links to every necrotech, psycho fetish, and
ceremonial sex club in the city, and were famous for knowing things no one else knew, or
would want to. They supported themselves by practicing entrapment and blackmail on
significant people: celebrities, politicians, and the like.
Which was why the Chelsea Lovers had good reason to want Edwin Drood dead. A year or
so back the family had sent me in to destroy the Chelsea Lovers’ main computers, and all
their files, after they’d made the mistake of trying to pressure someone sheltering under the
family’s protection. So I’d armoured up, forced my way in, and taken out their computers with
a tailored logic bomb fired from one of the Armourer’s special guns. The computers melted
down so fast there was nothing left but a puddle of silicon on the floor.
They never saw my real face; only the golden mask. So they had no reason to suspect
Shaman Bond. Except, of course, that the Chelsea Lovers were suspicious of everyone,
and quite rightly too. They worried people.
I went up to the perfectly ordinary front door and knocked politely. A concealed sliding panel
opened, and a pair of scowling eyes studied me silently. I gave them the password I’d
received on the phone, and that was enough to gain me entry. The sliding panel slammed
shut, and the door opened just enough to let me in. I had to turn sideways to squeeze
through, and the door was immediately locked behind me.
The security man leaned over me. He was big as a wardrobe, with muscles on his muscles. I
could tell this because he was entirely naked, apart from enough steel piercings in painful
places to make him a danger to be near during thunderstorms. He wanted me to take my
clothes off too (house rules), or at the very least submit to a thorough frisking. I gave him my
best hard look, and he decided to pass the question upward. I told him I was here to see the
founding quartet, and he raised a pierced eyebrow. I gave him their actual names, which
impressed him, and after nodding slowly for a moment, he lumbered off to find them.
I stayed put, by the door. I hadn’t been entirely sure what to expect. I mean, I’ve been around,
comes with the job, but the Chelsea Lovers were a whole new area of depravity to me. The
entire building had been hollowed out to form one large, open, and cavernous room. The Kit
Kat Club was lit by rotating coloured lights, giving the scene a kaleidoscopic, trippy feel.
Very fitting for a group whose origins lay in the sixties. Pretty much everywhere I looked
there were naked people, or people dressed in the kinds of dramatic fetish gear that makes
you look even more naked than naked. Leather and rubber, plastic and liquid latex, collar
and chains, spikes and masks and every kind of restraint you’d rather not think about. There
were no wallflowers here; everyone was involved with someone or something. They moved
smoothly together, all across the huge room, flesh rising and falling, skin sliding over sweaty
skin. There were no words, only moans and sighs and the sounds of a language older than
civilisation. The faces I could see held a self-absorbed, animal look; all wide eyes and bared
teeth.
Men and women everywhere, tangled together on the floor, up the walls, and on the ceiling,
and even floating in midair. Sex beat on the air in an overpowering presence, hot and
sweaty and pumped full of pheromones. I could smell sweat and perfumes and a whole

bunch of psychotropic drugs. I wasn’t worried. My torc would filter them out. Even quiescent
around my throat, my armour still protected me.
So much nakedness, so much sex, so much harnessed passion; but I couldn’t say I found it
arousing. It was scary. They were working magic here, invoking strange and potent energies
produced by people who had willingly driven themselves out of all control, people who would
do anything, receive anything, and not give a damn. There was no love here, no tenderness;
nothing but indulgence and transgression.
The wide cavernous room seemed much larger than the building should have been able to
contain. This was spatial magic, fuelled by the tantric energies. The room expanded to
contain the passion within. The walls, floor, and ceiling had taken on a puffy, organic look. All
pinks and purples and bloody shades, patterned with long traceries of pulsing veins. The
wall nearest me was sweating, as though turned on by the never-ending sex. The Kit Kat
Club was alive and part of the proceedings. Where men and women bumped against the
floor or walls or ceiling, they sank into the fleshy embrace as though into the arms of another
partner.
I shifted my feet uncomfortably, and the floor beneath me gave subtly, as though I were
standing on a water bed. People were drifting towards me, reaching out with inquiring
hands. There was something in their faces that wasn’t entirely human; or perhaps more than
human. Transformed by an emotion or desire so extreme I had no name for it. I was way out
of my depth. So of course I put on my most confident face, and even sneered a little, as
though I’d seen it all before and hadn’t been impressed then. I glared at anyone who came
too close, and they turned away immediately, losing interest.
As my eyes adjusted to the flaring lights and colours, I began to recognise faces in the
roiling throng: celebrities, footballers, politicians, even a few respectable businessmen from
the City that dear prudish Matthew would probably have been horrified to discover in a place
like this. I filed the faces away in my memory, for future thought. And perhaps a little
blackmail, if money became tight.
The walking wardrobe returned with the four founding members of the Chelsea Lovers. They
strolled with almost supernatural grace through the heaving crowds, which opened before
them and closed after them without once stopping or even slowing what they were doing.
The four founders walked on air, masters of their own space, touching nothing but each
other. Their hands wandered constantly over each other’s bare flesh. They sank slowly down
to hover before me, and the bouncer went back to his door. The four original Chelsea
Lovers: Dave and Annie, Stuart and Lenny. Two men and two women, but far beyond
anything so human now; instead they were as alien and other as anything I ever encountered
from another dimension. They had to be in their late sixties, but they still had the smooth
bodies of twenty-year-olds. Perfect as statues, lean and hungry, burning with unnatural
energies, sustained by an endless appetite that had nothing to do with food.
They looked much as they must have done when they first met in Chelsea, back in the
swinging sixties, when London swung like a pendulum. Two young couples, then, out on the
town and hungry for new experiences. They found something, or it found them, and they were
never the same afterwards. They started their first club in a little place just off Carnaby
Street, and what they did there shocked even the most hardened souls of the permissive
generation. The Chelsea Lovers hadn’t seen daylight since. They moved from location to
location, known only to those in the know, travelling the secret subterranean routes beneath
the city streets, flitting silently through the shadows of the undertown, with its ancient Roman
arches, where all the bad things congregate, for fun and profit. Nothing ever touched the
Chelsea Lovers. Even then, they were far too dangerous.

They stood before me, skin like chalk, eyes like pissholes in the snow. Colourless flyaway
hair, purple lips, and endless smiles that meant nothing, nothing at all. They were entirely
naked, untouched by piercings or tattoos or any such trappings. Such lesser things were not
for them. Just hanging on the air before me, silent and inviting, they were still the most
blatantly sexual things I had ever seen. They had all the impact of the first nude photos you
ever saw, the first object of desire, the first boy or girl you ever wanted, and the first you ever
lost. I wanted them and I was afraid of them, and God alone knows what I would have done if
my torc hadn’t been there to protect me from the worst of their influence.
I knew the four names, but not which was who. I don’t think anyone does anymore. Perhaps
not even them. One of the women spoke to me. Her voice sounded like she had ice in her
veins and a fever in her head.
"What do you want here? What’s your pleasure?"
I had to clear my throat before I could speak, and even then my voice wasn’t as steady as I
would have liked. "I need to consult your computers. I need information, the kind only you
might possess."
"What do you offer in payment?" said one of the men. His voice was calm, cheerful,
confidential, and about as human as a spider scuttling across your arm. "Information in
return, perhaps; or money, or your seed? You’d be surprised what we could make from your
seed, freely given."
"Information," I said quickly. My mouth was very dry, and my legs were shaking. "First, a
secret location used by a Drood field agent, on the outskirts of London." And I gave them the
address of the garage I’d just abandoned. "Second, the name of the Drood field agent who’
s just been declared rogue and is on the run here in London: Edwin Drood."
All four of them actually shivered with delight at the prospect of getting their hands on a new
rogue Drood, the first in years. They rose and fell on the air, laughing silently, their chalk
white skin shimmering brightly. If they could seduce and corrupt the rogue to their cause,
they would have access to secrets and information no one else had. They commanded me
to follow them and floated off towards the centre of the room, descending slowly until they
walked on the bodies that moved unstoppably beneath them. I struggled after them, my feet
slipping and sliding on the sweat-covered bodies. I stared straight ahead. You can’t keep
glancing down and apologising. And finally, in the exact centre of the cavernous room, the
four founding Chelsea Lovers impersonally levered people out of the way to reveal a large
puckered orifice in the floor. They gestured, and it dilated open, revealing only darkness and
a sudden pungent smell on the air, like supercharged cinnamon. One by one the four of them
floated down into what lay below the floor, disappearing into darkness, until only I was left
hesitating on the rim. In the end, I just shrugged and jumped in after them. This was what I’d
come for, after all.
And found myself suddenly in a brightly lit, high-tech environment that was the complete
antithesis of everything above. It was a circular room barely twenty feet in diameter, crowded
with all the latest computer equipment. But the computers had burst open, their silicon
contents spilling out like fruiting bodies, spreading themselves up the walls and across the
ceiling like silver ivy, even dropping down in encrustations like silicon stalactites. The
computers here were living things, growing things, fuelled by the sexual energies from
above. Self-centred, self-perpetuating. The air-conditioning gusted like heavy breathing, and
the monitor screens all around me could have been eyes or mouths or other orifices. The
four Chelsea Lovers stood together in the middle of it all, looking at me expectantly.

"Word is, there’s a traitor inside the Drood family," I said. "I want to know everything you
know about that."
They nodded in eerie unison, and one of them ran a hand caressingly over a computer
console. It was a slow, sensuous lover’s touch. I could feel beads of sweat popping out on
my forehead. Normal people weren’t supposed to be exposed to things like the Chelsea
Lovers. Just their presence was toxic to ordinary humans. The computers hummed
thoughtfully to themselves. The Chelsea Lovers stood together, in the same stance, even
breathing in unison. Their eyes didn’t blink as they considered me. I could feel a presence, a
pressure, forming in the room. A desire, a need, a physical imperative…
"What’s it all for?" I said abruptly. "I mean, all of this. The Chelsea Lovers. The Kit Kat Club.
The sex magic and the computers. What’s the point of it all?"
"Apocalypse," said one of the women, and they all smiled a little more widely. "The real
sexual revolution, come at last. We want to turn the whole world on. Using sex magic,
computer magic, ritual and passion, instinct and logic, flesh and silicon bonded together in
unthought-of ways, to work a tidal change in reality itself. We will make the whole world
sexual. Fetishize everything in it, the living and unliving, suffusing the whole world with a
passion and an appetite that will never end. A great joyous sexual apocalypse, the climax of
history. The biggest bang of all. Endless sensation, endless pleasure…And we shall all
worship the new flesh, forever and ever and ever…"
She broke off as a face appeared on all the monitor screens at once. The computers had
discovered the identity of the new rogue Drood, and it was me. My face was on every wall,
with my real name beneath it. The family had released my true identity to the world. The
Chelsea Lovers turned as one to orientate themselves on me. They weren’t smiling
anymore. They each thrust one hand out at me, and sex hit me like a fist. I cried out,
convulsing helplessly as passion burned in me like a fever, like the nightmares you have
when your temperature rises and your blood boils in your brain. I wanted to go to them, on
my hands and knees if necessary, and worship their flesh with my own. I would have
begged, would have died, for their lightest touch, for the pleasure of their favour.
But there was still just enough Drood training and pride left in me to hold them off, just
enough for me to be able to subvocalise the Words, and my armour flashed around me,
golden and glorious, sealing me off from all attack. I staggered backwards, suddenly myself
again, like a man who lurches back from the very edge of a cliff. The Chelsea Lovers cried
out in one awful voice, full of rage at the sight of Drood armour. I jumped up, the strength of
my legs amplified by my armour, and I went soaring up through the orifice and back into the
Kit Kat Club above.
I erupted back into that fleshy, cavernous place, and people fell back from me, shouting and
screaming. I had broken the mood, or the Chelsea Lovers had. I ran for the door, and all at
once, in answer to some unheard signal, everyone in the room surged forward to attack me.
Blows and kicks came from every direction, though I couldn’t feel them through the armour,
and naked people grabbed at my arms and legs, trying to pull me down. I ran on, kicking
and pushing people out of the way, and none of them could slow or stop me. They clutched
at me with endless hands and crowded in before me, blocking the way to the door with their
bare bodies. I focused on just moving forward, not striking out, though every instinct yelled in
me to fight. With my armour’s strength I could kill these people, and I didn’t want to do that.
Unlike some of my family, I still believed in (mostly) innocent bystanders.
I could see the door, up ahead. The huge bouncer came forward to stop me, his huge hands
opening and closing eagerly. I hit him once, and he fell backwards, blood flying on the air, to

be trampled underfoot by the packed crowds still pressing forward. Strange forces crackled
on the air around me, sex magic and computer energies from the room below, crawling over
my armour, trying to force a way in. There were screaming faces all around me now,
desperate people clutching at me, wrapping their arms around my legs, reaching down from
the ceiling to clatter their hands uselessly against my golden head. Naked men and women
crawled all over me, slowing me down by sheer weight and press of bodies.
I reached through my armoured side and drew my needle gun. I still had it. Strictly speaking,
I should have handed it in to the Armourer, but what with one thing and another I never got
around to it. There were only a few needles left. I aimed the gun at the nearest wall and shot
a holy-water ice needle into the nearest pulsing vein. The whole room convulsed, like a great
fleshy earthquake. Everywhere, naked men and women were falling away from me, clutching
at their heads, crying out in shock and horror. They forgot all about me as the room shook,
and I ran for the door.
I pulled the door wide open, and daylight poured in. More screams, as much fear as anger. I
looked back. The whole place was convulsing now, with great cracks opening up in the
drying-out walls. People dropped out of midair as the magics fell apart, no longer sustained
by the endless orgy. Men and women cried and howled and hit out at each other. I’d broken
the mood. I nodded, satisfied. I might not have learned anything useful here, but at least the
word would go out: that even though I no longer had the support of my family, I was still a
force to be reckoned with.
CHAPTER NINE
Dream a Little Dream for Me
S o I went back down into the Underground and took the Tube to Leicester Square station.
No one wanted to sit next to me in the carriage; in fact, people actually got up to move
farther away from me. It took me a while to realise I still stank of musk from the Kit Kat Club.
Still, several women did smile at me. And a couple of men. I finally emerged from the station
and wandered up St. Martin’s Lane. The evening was drawing on now, and people were out
on the town in happily chattering groups. No one paid me any attention, so I guessed the
musk was wearing off in the open air. It felt good to be safely anonymous again.
St. Martin’s Lane is in a nice enough area; all theatres and restaurants, pleasant stores and
businesses. All very civilised, in fact. I followed the curving street around till I came to the
next address on my list: the very secret home and lair of the Sceneshifters. Probably the
most dangerous group on the scene, in their own small way. And so tricky to deal with that I’
d never been allowed to have any direct contact with them, even though they were quite
definitely on my patch. The Sceneshifters were the exclusive responsibility of a special
group within the family; and I had been instructed very firmly to keep my distance.
But, things change.
Essentially, the Sceneshifters work behind the scenes of reality, changing small details here
and there, to turn the state of the world to their advantage. There are members of the Drood
family whose full-time job it is to detect these changes and put them back the way they were.
We assume we’re winning, on the grounds that the Sceneshifters don’t actually rule the
world yet. As far as we can tell…
From the outside, their address looked like just another building, part of a fairly modern row
with bright white stone and oversized windows, but there was something about the
place…something that raised the hackles on your neck and made you disinclined to linger.
People passing by increased their pace and averted their eyes without even realising they

were doing it. I stood before the main entrance, scowling thoughtfully. A field agent learns to
depend on his instincts, and every instinct I had was yelling at me to get the hell away from
this awful place. Just standing there, I felt…uneasy, disturbed, in peril of both body and soul.
As though if I went inside, I might see things I couldn’t stand to see, learn things I didn’t want
to know. Even with the torc around my throat, shielding me from outside influence, it still took
all my willpower to hold my ground.
As I stared intently at the building, refusing to look away, the details began to slip and flow,
like a melting painting. As though a top coat was being washed away, revealing the true
image beneath. Just like the family reports said, the Sceneshifters’ headquarters was
protected by an uncertainty spell. You had to be certain that what you were looking for was
there, or it wouldn’t be. It all came down to mental discipline. Which would be a shock for
certain members of my family, who’d been known to say loudly in classrooms that I didn’t
possess any.
As I watched, scowling fiercely with concentration, the office building before me just faded
away like a passing thought to reveal the true structure beneath. An old church, with a
massive wood and plaster fronting, an arched doorway, and medieval stained-glass
windows. It was half the size of the modern buildings towering on either side of it, but there
was a basic strength and solidity to the place that was somehow reassuring. My instincts
were still prickling, but at least I didn’t feel like running anymore. I strode up to the front door
and knocked like I had a reason to be there.
When you’re dealing with people who change reality on a daily basis, there’s not much point
in trying to sneak in. They probably knew I was coming to see them before I did. And I
certainly wasn’t planning on throwing my weight around; there were very definite limits to
what my armour could be expected to protect me from. When the door opened, I planned on
being extremely polite and using all the reasonableness at my command. I also planned on
smiling a lot, and running like a rabbit if my clothes started changing colour.
The door opened to reveal a cheerful-looking soul, a reassuringly ordinary guy in grubby
workman’s overalls. He was about my age, a bit scruffy, with a pleasant face and a cigarette
in the corner of his mouth that he didn’t bother to take out when he was speaking. He
nodded easily to me.
"Hello, squire. Looking for the Sceneshifters, are you? Thought so. I’m Bert. I do all the real
work around here, while they’re all off saving the world. Someone has to check the state of
the tubing and mop up the spills. Fancy a nice cup of tea? I’ve got the kettle on…Well suit
yourself. Don’t say I didn’t offer. Come on in, come on in…So, you’re the new rogue Drood,
are you? Edwin Drood? Nice to meet you. Sort of thought you’d be taller, somehow…Never
mind. Come here looking for sanctuary, have you?"
"News does get around," I said dryly as soon as I could get a word in edgeways. I stepped
inside the church, and he shut the door behind me. I listened carefully, but I didn’t hear him
lock it. The interior was typical old-fashioned religious, a bit on the gloomy side, with brightly
coloured light streaming in through the stained-glass windows. But there were no pews, no
altar, and the only religious symbols were those originally carved into the old stone walls. It
might be a church, but clearly no one had worshipped here for some time.
"Oh, we always know what’s going on," Bert said cheerfully. "We hear everything the
moment it happens, and sometimes several months before. I’ve always said we could make
a fortune with a good gossip magazine (very upmarket, nothing sleazy), but I can’t even get it
on the committee agenda. Got their heads in the clouds, that lot. Come to join us, have you,
Edwin? You should, you know; we’re doing important work here, when we’re not having

endless arguments about what constitutes a pivotal moment in history and which way we
should tip the balance. I ask you, who really believes World War Two could have been
averted by giving Hitler back his missing testicle? Still, tell you what, squire; you come along
with me and I’ll give you the basic tour while we’re waiting for the others to show up. How
would that be?"
"Won’t the others mind, us starting without them?" I said cautiously. I wasn’t sure what I’d
expected to find here, but Bert sure as hell wasn’t it.
"Course they won’t mind! You’re expected, squire; we’ve all been looking forward to you
turning up here. The things we could achieve with a Drood on our side! And we could use
some new blood in the group, to be honest. Not to mention someone with a propensity for
actually getting things done, instead of just sitting around talking about it. I swear we’d be
ruling this world by now if the committee could just get their heads out of their arses once in
a while."
He headed for the back of the church, his hands in his overall pockets and his cigarette still
protruding jauntily from one corner of his mouth. I followed along, keeping a wary eye out for
sneak attacks or mutating realities, but it all seemed very calm and peaceful.
"So," I said casually, "what is this important work that you’re doing here, Bert?"
"We’re defeating the Devil, one day at a time." For the first time Bert sounded entirely
serious. "He rules this world, you know. Not God. He hasn’t been in charge for ages. I mean,
you only have to look around you to see that for yourself. The world wasn’t supposed to be
like this. Not this…mess. We were supposed to live in paradise. But something happened
long ago, and the Devil’s been playing games with humanity ever since, the bastard. Telling
us lies, driving us to despair, torturing us every day with false hopes, impossible ambitions,
and chances snatched away at the last moment. Why do bad things happen to good
people? Why do bad guys thrive? Because the guy in charge gets a kick out of it, that’s why.
He’s making a Hell out of this world, just for the fun of it. Some say the greatest trick the
Devil ever pulled was to make us believe love was real…"
"Oh," I said. I couldn’t think of anything else to say, except perhaps Have you stopped taking
any medication recently?
"But bit by bit we’re changing the world the Devil made," Bert said cheerfully. "Rewriting
reality and transforming the world into something finer and fairer. We’re stealing back the
world, inch by inch, and making it something fit for people to live in. We’re all going home, to
paradise. That’s why the founding members chose this place for our HQ. Centuries of
accumulated faith and sanctity help keep the Devil from noticing we’re here."
"So the Devil hasn’t always ruled the world?" I said carefully. "God was in charge, once?"
"Oh, yes…Word is the Devil snatched control of the world away from God after he
persuaded the Romans to crucify the Christ. The Son of God was never supposed to die!
He was supposed to stay with us forever, teaching us how to live proper lives. But with him
gone, the Devil sneaked in and stole creation away from the Creator. And we’ve been stuck
with the bastard ever since. Screwing up everyone’s lives, in his own private torture
chamber, just for a giggle. This way, squire. Mind the step."
Bert led me out the back of the church and into a large antechamber packed with men and
women sitting around long tables. They all wore bright red robes, complete with hoods. They
were reading newspapers, magazines, and books, and making careful notes in their
laptops. A few looked up and nodded to Bert before returning to their work. All four walls

were lined with bookshelves crammed full of books and bound magazines from floor to
ceiling.
"Here is where we study the world," Bert said grandly. "Through its media, its history books,
and every up-to-date commentary. There’s another room where they do nothing but watch
every single news channel, all day long. We have to rotate those people on a regular basis,
or they start developing conspiracy theories, and next thing you know you’ve got a schism on
your hands. And of course there’s our wide-ranging net of supporters and fellow travellers
tucked away in governments and religions and big businesses all across the world, keeping
us aware of what’s really going on. If you knew what Bill Gates was planning to do next, you’
d shit yourself. We’re always looking for that crucial factor, that pivotal moment, when tipping
over one small domino will set all the others toppling…Come on, come on; lots more to
see."
He led the way down a long wooden spiral stairway that creaked alarmingly under our
weight and finally gave out onto a low-ceilinged stone chamber deep beneath the church, full
of bubbling chemical vats almost as tall as I was and a lot broader. Garishly coloured liquids
surged up out of the vats and along through what seemed like miles of thick rubber tubing
stapled to the walls and ceiling. All around there were gauges and valves and wheels and
some fairly primitive filtering systems. I’d seen stills that were more complicated. Bert darted
back and forth across the chamber, fussing over the equipment, adjusting a valve here and
turning a wheel there. He tapped one gauge with a knuckle, sniffed at the reading, and then
turned to smile proudly at me.
"It’s a very delicate setup," he said, patting a nearby vat affectionately. "Needs constant
monitoring, of course. The founders put all this together, years ago, and they won’t let me
change anything. Even though they’re far too intellectual to actually come down here and get
their hands dirty on a regular basis. Not that I want them messing about with things, now that
I’ve got everything running just right."
He looked at me, inviting me to say something. I hadn’t a clue what to say about his precious
setup, so I retreated to something else that had been bothering me.
"If the church’s sanctity is enough to hide you from the Devil, why do you need the uncertainty
spell as well?"
Bert looked distinctly disappointed in me but soldiered on with his answer. "That’s not
exactly a spell, as such. More what you’d call a side effect, really. Comes from the Red King,
down in the dream chamber. Or Professor Redmond, as he was. We call him the Red King
after the character in Through the Looking-Glass. Remember him? He was fast asleep and
dreaming, and everyone was afraid to wake him, because they believed he was dreaming
the world and everything in it. So if he did wake up, they’d all cease to exist. Would you like
to meet him? We don’t normally show him off to visitors, but then you’re special, aren’t you?"
I was still trying to form an answer to that one when we were interrupted by the arrival of a
man and a woman through the door on the far side of the chamber. They were both wearing
the ubiquitous long red robes, and they both carried a definite air of authority about them.
They were middle-aged, with long, ascetic faces and severe expressions. Bert just nodded
to them, conspicuously unimpressed.
"Thank you, Bert," said the man. "We’ll take it from here." He gave me a cold smile. "I’m
Brother Nathanial, and this is Sister Eliza. Welcome to the Sceneshifters, Edwin Drood."
I nodded coolly in return. I didn’t like his eyes, or hers. They both had that look; that certainty
beyond any doubt, inhumanly focused, merciless in their logic. Fanatic’s eyes.

"I’m here looking for some answers," I said.
"Aren’t we all?" said Nathanial. "Come; ask us anything. We shall conceal nothing from you.
Bert, there’s been a spillage in the secondary systems. If you wouldn’t mind…"
"All right, all right, I’ll go and clean up your mess while you give Edwin the old pep talk." He
nodded easily to me. "Have fun with the Red King, and his dreams. Don’t have nightmares
afterwards." He gave me one last cocky wink and left the room.
"Marvellous fellow," said Nathanial. "An invaluable member of our staff, though I’d never tell
him that. He might want paying more. Now then, Edwin; Sister Eliza and I run things here, in
as much as anyone does. We like to think of ourselves as a cooperative. Don’t expect dear
Eliza to say anything. She has no tongue anymore. Sometimes the small changes we make
have the most unexpected repercussions…"
"Bert said something about founding members," I said, just to be saying something.
"Oh, yes, that’s us. There were six, originally, but now there’s seven. Another side effect…"
"How many people are there in the Sceneshifters?" I said, trying for a question that might
possess even a slim chance of having a definite answer.
"Oh, more than you’d think," said Nathanial, smiling coolly. "Certainly far more than your
family thinks. You’d be surprised, Edwin. Our ranks are growing all the time, as we open
people’s eyes to the terrible truth. We’re the real salvation army, fighting a holy war against
the Devil and all his works. Bert has filled you in on the basics, hasn’t he? Good, good…I
think it’s time for you to meet the centre of our operations, our very own Red King, Professor
Redmond. We’re all very proud of him. This way, please…"
"But there are questions I need to ask you," I said. "About my family, and why I was declared
a rogue…"
"Yes, yes," said Nathanial. "All in good time. You really can’t appreciate what we’re doing
here until you’ve met the Red King."
He and the silent Sister Eliza ushered me politely but firmly through the maze of chemical
vats and looping tubes to a door at the back of the chamber, and then through it into a long
stone corridor that stretched away before us, sloping down into the earth. Thick pulsing
tubing was stapled to the rough stone walls, while from the ceiling hung a series of bare
electric bulbs. We followed the tubes down the corridor, descending for some time, until I
lost track of just how deep we were under the church and the London streets. The air was
chill and damp, and water ran down the walls.
"Don’t you have any security down here?" I said after a while, just to break the silence.
Nathanial shrugged easily. "The uncertainty effect keeps out the riffraff, while the church’s
sanctity hides us from the Devil and his disciples. And the Red King dreams he’s safe, so
he is…"
"How does this all work?" I said just a little desperately. "This whole…sceneshifting
business?"
"It’s really very simple," said Nathanial in that smug kind of way that tells you it isn’t going to
be at all simple. "While the Red King sleeps, he dreams. Constantly. And while in that state
he is able to see behind the scenes of reality, as it were. How things really work, and how
they’re put together. We can influence his dreams and persuade him to make small

changes. And the alterations he makes there, affect things here. In reality. We only deal in
small changes, never big ones, no matter how tempting. They might be noticed by…You
Know Who.
"I often wonder what it is the professor sees, exactly, in his dreams. We can only guess. And
whisper the odd suggestion in his ear. He’s in a very suggestive state. Though you have to
be very careful what you ask for; very specific. Did you know there used to be pyramids in
Scotland? Oh, yes; a huge tourist attraction, in fact. But the Red King dreamed them away,
and now they’re gone, and no one remembers them but us. Your family missed that one,
which I sometimes think is rather a shame…Still, enough small changes add up, when your
family doesn’t interfere. We’re so glad you’ve come to join us, Edwin."
"I haven’t decided anything yet," I said.
"But you will," said Nathanial. "You will."
Sister Eliza chuckled abruptly. The sound she made without a tongue was ugly, disturbing.
Even Nathanial flinched a little. The corridor turned around suddenly and spilled us out into a
small stone chamber, barely twelve feet in diameter, gloomily lit just enough to be restful on
the eyes. The walls had been roughly painted to resemble night skies, with whorls of stars
and a procession of moons in all its phases. In the centre of the room stood a marble
pedestal, and on top of that, held in place by an ornate latticework of copper wire, was a
severed human head. Male, middle-aged, slack features. From the look of the ragged
stump of the neck, whoever had cut it off hadn’t had much practice. Someone had placed a
fresh laurel wreath around the heavily lined brow. The head wasn’t breathing, but behind the
closed eyelids the eyes darted back and forth in the rapid eye movements of the dream
state. Around the base of the pedestal someone had drawn a traditional pentagram with
mathematical precision. And around that someone had traced a series of ceremonial
circles containing signs and pictograms from half a dozen forgotten cultures. Someone had
done their homework.
Nathanial gestured for me to examine the back of the head, so I walked around to take a
look. Thick rubber tubes had been plugged roughly into the back of the man’s head, trailing
away across the floor and out the door into the corridor, presumably all the way back up to
the chemical vats. I leaned forward for a better look and winced at the crude holes where the
tubes entered. No surgeon had done this. Someone had just drilled into the back of the skull,
and then pushed the tubes through into the exposed brain. I came back around to study the
face. It didn’t look happy or unhappy. If not for the eye movements, I’d never have known it
was still alive.
"Why just a head?" I said finally.
"Well," said Nathanial, "it wasn’t as if we really needed the rest of him, and keeping a whole
body alive and preserved would have added greatly to our expenses. We were quite a small
operation, when we started out. Just the professor and half a dozen of his finest
students…The tubes keep the head going, and the wires trickle a constant slow current
across the frontal lobes, ensuring that he remains asleep and deep in the dream state. The
tubes feed him certain preservatives and all the necessary drugs. He could last forever,
theoretically. Ah, yes, the drugs. We haven’t explained about those yet, have we? We’re
feeding the professor a rather special cocktail of powerful psychotropic chemicals,
everything from acid to taduki to datura. All according to the professor’s own theories. The
drugs push his mind up and out while he dreams, blasting the doors of perception right off
their hinges so he can see what lies behind, and beyond."

"Who was he, originally?" I said. "How did he come to this?"
"Well, it was all his own idea, originally," Nathanial said, smiling in a rather self-satisfied
way. "He was our professor at Thames University, back then. Remarkable mind; quite
remarkable. He became our leader, our inspiration. He gave us these fascinating lectures,
you see; all about shamanic drugs, and dream states, and how they could be combined to
access different levels of reality. He also talked a lot about something called experimenter’s
intent, where the scientist’s intent could actually change the outcome of the experiment he
was performing. It wasn’t that great a step to combine those ideas…
"The professor was really quite surprised when we finally went to him, all six of his favourite
students, and told him we’d found a way to translate his theories into a workable, practical
solution to all the world’s problems. He was even more surprised when we brought him
down here, showed him what we’d done, and explained to him that he had been granted the
singular honour of being our Red King. The man who would change the world and save us all
from the Devil. In fact, when we told him exactly what we intended to do, he reacted very
negatively. Actually started to cry when we showed him the bone saw and held him down…
"But that was all long ago. He’s done such good work since, sleeping and dreaming for all
these years, without interruption. The longer you sleep, you see, the more deeply you dream,
and the further the drugs can take you. He dreams very deeply and very powerfully these
days. I just know he’d be so proud of what we’ve done with his help…"
"I wouldn’t bet on it," I said. "After what you did to him, if he ever does wake up, it’ll be the
end of your world."
"You don’t know him like we did," said Nathanial. "He’d understand. He was always telling
us it was our duty to go out and change the world. And how we always had to be prepared to
make sacrifices for the greater good. And we did. We sacrificed him. You know, we’re still
struggling to understand the significance of just what it is we’re doing here. We don’t just sit
on our laurels, oh no! I sometimes wonder if perhaps the whole world, and everything in it, is
just a dream. The Devil’s dream. And that’s why the professor is able to access it and
change bits of it. If that is the case, we must be very careful not to disturb the Devil with our
changes, in case we wake him…"
"All right," I said. "That’s it. You’re a loony. You people don’t know anything for sure, do you?
It’s all theories and guesses and half-baked stolen philosophy."
"We’re learning by doing," said Nathanial more than a little smugly.
"Because anything has to be better than the world we’re forced to live in. That’s why you
have to join us, Edwin. Because we’re not the enemy your family says we are. We’re the
good guys. We’re humanity’s last hope."
"I don’t think so," I said. "I’ve read the family’s reports on what you’ve done and tried to do.
The changes you’ve tried to bring about. Every single one of them was concerned with
remaking the world in your image, not God’s. Changes to further your beliefs, your wishes,
your needs. To make the Sceneshifters powerful and important and a mighty voice in the
affairs of man."
"Of course," said Nathanial. "How else can we bring about real change? Permanent
change?"
"Your dreams are so small," I said. "So petty. No wonder you never achieved anything that
mattered. I’ll never join you."

"Of course you will," said Nathanial. "In fact, you already have. All the time you were chatting
so pleasantly with Bert, we were down here murmuring in the professor’s ear, and the Red
King dreamed his little dream and made the change so smoothly you didn’t even feel it
happening. You’re one of us, Edwin. You’ve always been one of us."
I looked down, and I was wearing a long red robe, just like him. Just like Sister Eliza. Of
course I was wearing it. It was the same robe I always wore when I came here to visit my
dear friends in the Sceneshifters. I’d been working for them for years, ever since I first came
to London, their very own mole in the Drood family. It was good to be back among my
friends, in my old familiar robes, in this familiar place. I smiled at Nathanial and Eliza, and
they smiled back at me. It was good to be home again.
The only thing that seemed out of place…was my wristwatch. I looked at it stupidly.
Something about it nagged at my mind. Nathanial spoke to me, but I wasn’t listening. There
was something about the watch, something important, something…special about it that I
was supposed to remember. My torc burned coldly around my throat, as though trying to
protect me, though I couldn’t think from what. I touched the wristwatch with my right hand,
trailing my fingertips across it, ignoring Nathanial’s increasingly angry words. The watch the
Armourer gave me, before I left the Hall. The reverse watch, that could rewind time…
I hit the button, and time stopped in its tracks and shifted into reverse. Light and sound
strobed painfully around me as the watch reversed recent time, taking me back to just
before Nathanial told me I’d been changed. And in that moment, while the future was still
pliable and in flux, I drew my Colt Repeater and shot Professor Redmond right between the
eyes.
The bullet slammed through his head, blowing bits of broken tubing and spattered brains out
the back of his skull. His eyes snapped open, and for the first time in years the Red King
was awake at last. His mouth stretched wide in a soundless scream of rage and horror, and
it was clear from his face and from his eyes that he knew what had been done to him, and
with him. And in the last few moments of his unnaturally extended life, using power brought
back from some terrible other place, the professor set himself to wiping out everything that
had been done in his name. He looked at Brother Nathanial with his awful eyes, and
Nathanial disappeared. Winking out of existence, not real, never had been. Sister Eliza
turned to flee, but the professor looked at her, and she was gone too.
I was already heading out the door when the dream chamber started to disappear around
me. The walls painted to look like the night skies became transparent and faded away, and I
could feel the professor’s power following me as I sprinted up the long stone corridor. There
was something behind me, but I didn’t dare look back. I burst out into the room of chemical
vats, and Bert looked around sharply in surprise. He cried out in shock as the great vats
began to fade away, but I was already out of the room and scrambling back up the spiral
staircase. Behind me, Bert’s voice cut off abruptly.
The wooden steps began to feel increasingly soft and insubstantial under my feet, but I
made it to the top, gasping for breath. I couldn’t spare the time it would take to call up my
armour, and I didn’t believe it could protect me from Professor Redmond’s wrath anyway. I
just kept running, through the library and on into the church. The medieval stained-glass
windows had already faded away to ordinary glass. The walls were disappearing too,
revealing something behind them too terrible to look at. There were great gaps in the floor,
and I jumped desperately over them, racing for the door.
I crashed through and out into the street, panting harshly for breath, and only then turned and
looked back. The church was gone; nothing left but a hole between the two modern

buildings, like a pulled tooth. The Sceneshifters were gone, never had been. The Red King
had woken at last from his long sleep; and he had not woken up in a good mood.
CHAPTER TEN
Cutting out the Middleman
M y next stop was on Shaftesbury Avenue, deep in the busy heart of London. I was looking
for the legendary Middleman. Shaftesbury Avenue is a long road in two parts. Walk one way
and all you’ll see is posh restaurants, top-rank hotels, and theatres with old and even famous
names. (Sad to say, one of these venerable establishments currently boasted a large
banner proclaiming their next big show. Jerry Springer, the Opera—On Ice. How are the
mighty fallen; but anything to bring in the tourists.) Walk the other way, and it’s all cheap
cafés, betting shops, and adult video stores with walk-in knocking shops on the top floor.
The kind of place where a card tacked on the door advertises the friendly availability of the
lovely Vera. It doesn’t tell you that there are in fact three lovely Veras, working eight-hour
shifts, which is why the bed is always warm. Not to mention the basement clubs where
underdressed and overly made-up hostesses encourage you to buy overpriced
"champagne" for the privilege of enjoying their company. Though usually it’s just the foreign
tourists who fall for that one these days.
I’d never met the Middleman before, but everyone knew he could be found right in the middle
of Shaftesbury Avenue, where good meets bad, and often combines into something
deliciously sinful. I was pretty sure the Middleman would know something useful, if I could get
him to talk to me. The Man had been around, on and off the scene, ever since the sixties,
and he knew everybody, good and bad and especially in between. His great skill and
passion was in putting people together for mutual profit. If you were planning a bigger than
usual heist, an underground conspiracy, or just to take over the world some day, the
Middleman could put you in contact with every kind of specialist you’d need. He could
arrange meetings, put together a team of like-minded professionals, or organise every step
of an assassination. For a percentage. He’d never been known to get his hands dirty himself
or take a risk that hadn’t been calculated to the smallest degree. Whatever happened, you
could be sure there were always more than enough cutouts in place so that nothing ever
came back to lodge at his door. Word was, the Middleman was so unbelievably rich these
days, after so many industrious years, that he didn’t need to do it for the money anymore. He
did it strictly for the thrill and for the challenge.
You find the Middleman behind a sleazy, deliberately run-down Thai restaurant. From the
outside, it looks decidedly appallingly grimy and off-putting, the kind of place only a truly
desperate or naïve tourist would try. In fact, the Thai language above the door supposedly
translates as Piss Off, Foreigner, and Take Your Stupid-Looking Eyes with You. I peered in
through the fly-specked window, past the indecipherable cardboard menu, and wasn’t
surprised to find the restaurant was completely empty at a time of the evening when it should
have been at its fullest. The rickety tables were covered in Formica, the chairs were cheap
plastic and none too clean, and the linoleum floor was unspeakable. Somehow I just knew
that if you were foolish or brave enough to enter, you’d never get anything you ordered, and if
you tried to eat it anyway, the staff would lean out the kitchen door watching you, giggling
and elbowing each other and going, Look! He’s actually eating it!
No one is ever supposed to eat there. It’s just a front for the Middleman. Even the staff send
out for takeaways.
I tucked my head down so no one would get a good look at my face, slammed the door
open, and strode briskly in. I ignored the startled Thai staff and headed straight for the

kitchen door at the back. The waiters were too surprised to stop me, only just starting to
react as I pushed the door open. I heard their cries behind me as I marched into the kitchen
like I’d come to condemn it on health grounds, and then I armoured up, overriding the stealth
function. The kitchen staff took one look at me in my golden armour and fell back with
shocked cries, like so many startled birds. The waiters burst in after me, having armed
themselves with knives and hatchets, only to lurch to a sudden halt as I turned unhurriedly to
look at them. My family’s reputation goes a very long way. The headwaiter put down a
butcher knife and gestured for everyone else to lower their weapons.
"Sod this for a lark," he said in decidedly East End accents. "Marcus isn’t paying us enough
to take on a Drood. You want to see the Middleman, golden boy? Follow me."
He led me through the surprisingly neat and clean kitchen, while the Thai staff watched me
pass with expressions that weren’t in the least inscrutable. There are places where looks
can kill, but fortunately this wasn’t one of them. The headwaiter took me out the back of the
kitchen and down a long narrow corridor with lighting so subdued it was positively gloomy.
The carpet was bloodred, and the deep purple walls pressed in from either side. The only
decorations were stuffed and mounted heads of various animals, peering down from
everywhere. Big cats and African wildlife, mostly. The eyes in the heads moved slowly to
follow me as I passed. Now, I’m used to weird shit; I grew up in the Hall, after all. But
something about those eyes seriously freaked me out.
"Let me guess," I said nonchalantly to my guide. "If I start any trouble, you just say the Word,
and the animals connected to those heads will come suddenly crashing through the walls
and have a go at me, right?"
The young Thai waiter looked at me strangely. "No," he said. "They’re just conversation
pieces. The boss bought them as a job lot, to brighten up the place."
"Sorry," I said. "It’s the company I’ve been keeping recently."
We reached the end of the corridor, and he knocked briefly on the only door before opening
it and standing back to usher me in. I stepped inside, and he immediately shut the door and
retreated back up the corridor. I didn’t take it personally. The room was more than
comfortably large, very luxurious, almost sybaritic. Deep pile carpet, padded furniture,
drapes and throw cushions everywhere. More subdued lighting, but upgraded to cosy rather
than gloomy. The air was perfumed sweetly with attar, the essence of roses, and just a hint
of opium. And there on the great circular bed was the Middleman himself, Marcus
Middleton, propped up against half a dozen pillows. He smiled at me in a resigned sort of
way but made no move to rise.
He was wearing green silk pajamas, stylishly cut, and sipping at a slender flute of
champagne. He was also smoking a slim black cigarillo set in a long ivory holder. His long
slender fingers were set off by jet-black nail polish. He was handsome enough, in an aged
and ruined sort of way, with flat black hair, surprisingly subtle makeup, and mild brown eyes
that had seen absolutely everything before. He studied me for a moment, and then
beckoned me forward with a vague smile and a languid gesture. I moved to stand at the foot
of the bed, facing him.
The bed was surrounded by dozens of phones, all in easy reach, in a variety of styles from
Victorian Gothic to the frankly futuristic. These were interspersed with a nice collection of
crystal balls, magic mirrors, and even a scrying pool in a chamber pot. At least, I hoped it
was a scrying pool. The Middleman started to say something but was interrupted by a
sudden ringing from one of his phones.

"Excuse me, dear boy," he said calmly. "But I have to get this. Do make yourself
comfortable."
He waved me towards a chair, but I declined, standing facing him with my golden arms
folded across my armoured chest. It’s hard to look fierce and imposing when you’re sitting
down, and I needed all the psychological edge I could get. The Middleman sighed
theatrically, flicked some ash from his cigarillo over the side of the bed, and picked up a
seventies Trimphone in puke yellow plastic.
"Oh, hello, Tarquin; what can I do you for? Dwarves…Really, dear heart, I told you only the
week before that there was going to be a shortage…They’re all working on this tacky new
fantasy film they’re shooting at Elstree Studios. Making good money too, from what I hear.
Are you sure you couldn’t settle for pixies? I could get you a really nice price on a group
booking…Has to be dwarves. I see. Well, leave it with me, duckie, and I’ll see what I can sort
out for you."
He put the Trimphone down with a graceful sweeping movement and a swirl of his green silk
sleeve, and then looked at me for a long moment, while taking another sip of champagne
and a deep drag on the cigarillo. If he was impressed by my armour, he was doing a really
good job of hiding it.
"Well, hello," he said finally, favouring me with an arch and decidedly self-satisfied smile.
"And which little Drood are you?"
"I’m Edwin," I said harshly. "The new rogue."
"Really? How thrilling…It’s been such a while since anyone was able to tempt one of you
away from the straight and narrow. Can I tempt you with anything? I have some fine beluga
caviar, or perhaps a little Martian red weed? It’s such a smooth smoke…No? There must be
something I can offer you, to make you feel more at home and relaxed. How about if I was to
call in a pretty Thai lady or ladyboy?"
"Definitely no," I said. "I’m here on business."
"How very tiresome." The Middleman sniffed loudly. "Typical Drood; you people just don’t
know how to have fun. I suppose it was too much to hope you might have been thrown out of
your nauseatingly self-righteous family for actually developing a few civilised vices. So, what
can I do for you, dear boy?"
"You’ve worked for the Drood family for years, off and on," I said carefully. "Helping us locate
just the right specialist, when needed for certain out of the ordinary operations."
"Yes, and don’t I know it, duckie; your family uses me ruthlessly and never pays a penny. I do
as I’m told, or they’ll shut me down. And they’re always so terribly rude to me. I don’t know
why; I merely provide a service. I put people of like minds together for mutual fun and profit.
What they do afterwards is no concern of mine."
"No," I said. "You don’t care how much trouble and suffering you cause. None of the blood
that ends up spilled ever stains your dainty fingers. You make awful things possible but
never take responsibility for your actions."
"Oh, how very tiresome. A philosopher Drood. But still something of a man of action, I hear.
It’s all over town, what you did to the Chelsea Lovers, the poor dears. It’ll take them years to
regain the ground you’ve lost them. Not that I care, of course. I never care; it’s bad for the
complexion. And I can’t help feeling they’d find my little peccadilloes far too bland for their

extreme tastes. I never had much time for revolutions anyway, of any stamp. I like the world
just the way it is." He reached across his pillows and took a Belgian chocolate from a large
open box. He popped it into his mouth, chewed for a moment, and then gestured vaguely at
me with one black-nailed hand. "What exactly did you come here for, dear boy? Do get to
the point. I have some important lounging about I should be getting on with."
"You have contacts inside my family," I said slowly. "You must…hear things. Do you know
why I was banished, declared rogue?"
"I’m afraid not, no. Haven’t heard a thing, I promise you. The news came out of nowhere, no
warning at all. You could have knocked me down with a feather, duckie. Cover me in
chocolate and throw me to the lady-boys, I thought. Not dear upright Eddie! You’ve
established quite a reputation here in the city, these last ten years. Honest, upright, and
depressingly incorruptible, I would have said. No wonder your family assembled such an
army to attack you on the motorway…"
"It was you," I said abruptly. "The penny’s just dropped. You organised the attacks on the
M4!"
"Well, of course, dear boy. Who else? And don’t think it was easy, contacting and putting
together so many disparate elements, and getting them to play nice with each other for the
duration of the attack. I wouldn’t have chosen half of them, but my instructions were very
specific; all bases were to be covered, scientific and magical. Honestly, the disputes I had
over orders of precedence! Half of them wouldn’t even talk to each other, except through
me. I would have had them all attack you at once, get it over with, and be sure of killing
you…but no, they all had to take their separate turn, to show what they could do…Why can’t
people be professional?"
I lowered my arms and took a step forward, and he actually flinched back against his pillows.
"There’s something else you haven’t been meaning to tell me, isn’t there?" I said. "What is it,
Marcus?"
"All right, all right! It’s just that…this particular commission didn’t come from your family. As
such. This was a private commission, from the Drood Matriarch herself. Dear old Martha,
bless her black vindictive little heart. I danced with her, you know, one memorable evening
back in the sixties, when Soho was still Soho…Of course, we were both a lot younger and
prettier in those days. Such a glamorous scene…It was only after the attack on you failed
that I got word you’d been officially declared rogue. What did you do to upset her?"
"Didn’t she tell you?" I said.
"Didn’t tell me one thing more than she absolutely had to, duckie. Just the hired help, that’s
all I was. And she wanted the whole package put together impossibly quickly, as well as
extremely secretly. Gave me less than twelve hours to get the job done, and then was very
rude to me when I tried to explain how difficult that was going to be. The words guts and
garters were mentioned, and not in a good way."
He carried on some more about how overworked and underappreciated he was, but I’d
stopped listening. Grandmother wanted me dead and had only resorted to declaring me
rogue when her assassination attempt failed. And twelve hours…that had to be significant.
What could have happened in that short time frame, to set the Matriarch so fiercely against
me? I did a good job at Saint Baphomet’s. Did everything I was ordered to do, and got out
clean.
"So you don’t know anything useful," I said finally, cutting across his well-rehearsed self-pity.

"I could ask around," he said with a vague and very languid gesture.
"But all you’ll get at this stage is gossip. Of course, now that you’re rogue…If you were
looking for a new role in the world, or a secure position, I’m sure I could find a use for you in
my organisation. If only because it would be absolutely killing for me to be able to say ever
so casually at one of my little soirées that I had my very own Drood on the payroll! I know
people who would just shit at the very thought! I could be very generous to you, Eddie. And
what better way to get back at your snotty family?"
"I don’t think so," I said. "I’m…otherwise engaged. There are answers out there, and I will
find them. Nothing is going to stop me."
"Of course, of course," said the Middleman. He shifted uneasily, disturbed at something he
heard in my voice. "But I’m afraid there’s nothing I can do to help you there. Nothing at all. I
deal in people, you understand, not information. I could put you together with certain
specialists who might be able to assist you in your quest. For a consideration, you
understand."
"How about you help me, in return for my not killing you in horrible and inventive ways?" I
said.
He sniffed and puffed sulkily on his cigarillo. "Typical Drood. Go ahead; threaten me, bully
me, see if I care. Why should you be any different from the rest of your appalling family? No
one appreciates what I go through for them. I swear, I’m so delicate these days that I’m not
long for this world…"
I raised a hand in self-defence. "All right! How about you help me for the satisfaction of
putting one over on the Drood family, who’ve been using you for years without paying you?
Wouldn’t you like that?"
He considered me thoughtfully. "Why should I risk upsetting your very powerful, not to
mention vengeful, family…when I could seriously ingratiate myself with them by handing you
over? They might be so grateful they’d finally let me off the hook."
"You really think they’d do that?" I said. "The Droods never give up anything they own. And
do you think you have any way of making me stay here till they come to collect me?"
"No…and no," the Middleman said sadly. "So…run along, dear boy. Don’t let me keep you;
you’re free to go. I never bother with a threat I can’t back up."
"If only everyone was so civilised," I said gravely.
I was turning to leave when the Middleman leaned forward suddenly. "There is someone you
could talk to. She knows many things, most of which she’s not supposed to. And she has
more reason than most to hate your family. The wild witch Molly Metcalf."
"Ah," I said. "Molly. Yes."
"Do I detect a problem? You don’t sound too enthusiastic."
"Molly and I have a history," I said.
The Middleman laughed and spread his hands as though embracing the universe. "Who
doesn’t, dear boy? It’s what makes the world go round!"
I armoured down as I walked out of the Thai café, the living armour melting back into my torc.

Never wear the gold in public. I smiled slightly. I might be outcast from my family, and on the
run, but I was still following their rules. Behind me, the Thai café staff hurried to lock the door
and pull down the blinds. I didn’t blame them. I stood outside for a while, thinking, and then
looked up suddenly as for the first time I realised how quiet the street was. I looked around
me, and there was no one to see anywhere, up or down the street. No traffic, no
pedestrians. The busy sounds of the city continued off in the distance, but my little part of it
was completely deserted. Which just didn’t happen at this time of the evening, unless the
whole area had been quietly and efficiently sealed off. And the only people with enough clout
to do that, in the very heart of London, were my family. No one says no to the Droods. So;
they’d found me. I looked around sharply as a man came strolling casually out of a side
street. A very smart, very smooth man, with a familiar face, looking inordinately pleased with
himself: Matthew Drood.
His manner was assured, even cocky, but I noticed he still came to a halt a respectful
distance away from me. He smiled and nodded, and I nodded to him. As far as I could tell,
he’d come alone, which worried me. That wasn’t family policy, when it came to dealing with
a rogue. He seemed to be expecting me to say something, to defend or justify myself, so I
just stood there, staring back at him. Matthew frowned slightly and shot the gleaming white
cuffs of his expensive City outfit.
"I knew you’d come here first, Eddie," he said smugly. "Simple deduction, old boy. All I had
to do was stake the place out and wait."
"Actually, this was my third stop," I said. "Late as always, Matthew. Why did they choose you
for this? Volunteer, did you, to impress the Matriarch? Or maybe Alex? You’re not still mad
at me over her, are you? It was a long time ago; we were just teenagers."
"Of course I volunteered," Matthew said angrily. "You’re a disgrace to the family, Eddie. I
always said you were no good, and now my judgement has been vindicated."
"What did they offer you?" I said. "Really; I’m curious. I mean, you wouldn’t have been my
first choice to take down a dangerous and experienced rogue. You’ve never been any good
at the physical side of what we do. The old ultraviolence…Leaning on stuffed shirts in the
City is more your level; putting the wind up stockbrokers who’ve been caught with their hand
in the till."
Matthew glared at me, bright red spots burning on his cheeks. "Once I’ve proved myself by
bringing you in, they’re going to give me all your territory and responsibilities, old boy, as
well as my own. I’ll be the biggest and best agent in one of the most important cities in the
world. The Matriarch gave me her word, personally."
"She’s using you, Matthew, just like she used me." I felt suddenly tired, worn down. "She’s
setting us both up. Can’t you see that? She’s ready to throw you away, just to slow me down
till more experienced agents can get here. We can’t trust the Matriarch anymore, Matthew.
She’s got her own agenda now."
Matthew looked at me as though I’d suddenly started speaking in tongues. "She’s…the
Matriarch. Her word is law. We live and die at her pleasure. That’s the way it’s always been.
And you’re just a dirty little traitor!"
I looked around me. There was still no sign of any backup for Matthew. Maybe he really had
been the only one close enough…
"I don’t need any help to take down a traitor like you," said Matthew.

"I’m not a traitor," I said, taking a step towards him. He stood his ground.
"You’ve always been a traitor," he said, and his smile was cold and unpleasant now. "To the
spirit of what we do. To the duty and traditions of the family. You should never have been
allowed so much freedom; see what it’s done to you. A mad dog, running loose, that has to
be put down for everybody’s good."
I studied him for a moment. There was definitely something in his voice and in his
smile…"This isn’t official, is it?" I said finally. "That’s why you’re here without backup. The
family doesn’t know anything about this. You’re here representing the Matriarch, and no one
else. You’re not here to bring me back alive, are you, Matthew?"
His smiled broadened. "What good would that serve?"
"I never liked you," I said. "You always were teacher’s pet."
We both armoured up, the living metal leaping into place around us. It was eerie, looking at
Matthew in his armour, like a mirror image. I didn’t know what weapons he might have, but I
didn’t think he’d use them, for fear I’d use mine. They’d make the situation too unpredictable.
And besides, we were both curious. We wanted to do this the hard way, head to head and
hand to hand, just because it had been centuries since anyone had tried that. It was very
rare for two Droods to fight in the gold. We were never allowed to do that outside of training
sessions, because it was unthinkable that Drood should fight Drood. There were records of
such clashes in the library, very old records, but they were long on flowery words and short
on detail. I wanted to do this, and so did he.
And if we were both doing this for the wrong reasons, there was no one here to stop us.
We sprang forward, golden hands outstretched. Equally motivated, equally fierce, equally
determined. We slammed together, and the impact of armour on armour sounded like a
great bell ringing in the depths of Hell. We hit each other hard, throwing punch after punch
with all our amplified strength behind it, not even bothering to defend ourselves. The awful
sound reverberated in the empty street, but neither of us took any hurt. Our armour protected
us. The unstoppable force meeting the immovable object. I barely felt the impact of his fists,
and I’m certain he didn’t feel mine. All we were doing was wearing each other out. We
wrestled clumsily for a while, chest to chest, neither of us able to gain an advantage.
Finally I tripped him up, and while he was down I kicked him so hard in the ribs he skidded
several yards down the street. I ran after him, and while he was still scrambling to his feet, I
grabbed him with both hands, picked him up, and threw him at the nearest building. He
crashed halfway through the wall, held in place for a moment while dislodged bricks rained
down on his armour. He pulled himself free with hardly an effort, and the wall collapsed
behind him. He launched himself at me, completely unfazed, and we slammed together
again.
We couldn’t hurt each other. Matthew pushed me away, reached out, and grabbed the steel
pole of a streetlight. He yanked it up out of its concrete setting, the jagged end trailing wires
and sparks. He wound up and swung the steel pole like a bat, and I couldn’t move quickly
enough to avoid it. The heavy steel smashed into my ribs, lifted me up off my feet, and sent
me flying through the air. I hit the ground hard several yards away, rolling over and over, and
was immediately up on my feet again, unhurt, not even breathing hard.
We went to it again, raging up and down the street, smashing everything we came in contact
with except each other. We hit out with everything we could lay our hands on, punched each
other through walls, demolishing the street from one end to the other. Buildings collapsed,

glass shattered, and fires broke out, and we didn’t even notice. We fought like gods,
trampling heedlessly through the paper and cardboard world of mere mortals.
Finally we ran out of room and came to the barricade set up at the end of the street. Behind
a row of steel posts strung with barbed wire, half a dozen police stood watching from behind
their parked cars. Behind them, a crowd of curious onlookers, drawn by the noise. They all
watched in dumbstruck horror as Matthew and I went at it hammer and tongs right in front of
them, so caught up in the righteous anger of what we were doing that we didn’t give a damn
about the armour being seen in public.
The police and the onlookers scattered as Matthew and I crashed into and through the
barrier, the barbed wire snapping instantly, as insubstantial as fog to our armoured strength.
We were outside the exclusion zone now, where everyone could see us, and the screams
brought me back to myself. I tried to back off, but Matthew was too far gone now to stop. He
picked up one of the police cars as though it weighed nothing and threw it at me. I ducked,
and it sailed past me to crash into a storefront. I grabbed a nearby parked car and threw it at
Matthew. He stood his ground, and the front half of the car concertinaed as it smashed
against his immovable form. It exploded suddenly into an expanding orange fireball. The
closer buildings caught alight, and the air shimmered from the intense heat. And Matthew
came walking out of the heart of the fireball, brushing blazing wreckage away from him,
entirely unhurt. People were running now, screaming hysterically, and the police were on
their radios yelling in unmanned voices for armed backup.
I looked at Matthew, in his gold, and the hairs stood up on the back of my neck. Was this
how people had seen me? This terrible, inhuman thing?
While I stood there, frozen by insight, Matthew picked up another car and smashed it down
on top of me, catching me off balance and throwing me to the ground. He leaned on the car
with all his strength, trying to pin me down, but I just pushed back, and the metal of the car
tore like tissue paper under our armoured strength. I rose up through the wreckage of the
car, and we threw the broken pieces aside to get at each other again. People were still
screaming in the background. They sounded like animals, maddened by something they
couldn’t comprehend. The fire was spreading. It occurred to me that the family were going to
have a hell of a time hushing this one up.
Matthew charged straight at me. I waited till the last moment, and then sidestepped. He
stumbled past me, off balance, one arm out to brace himself against the wall ahead of him. I
took out my portable door and slapped it against the brickwork, and he fell through the new
opening into the interior of the building. I ripped the door away, trapping him inside. And
then I used my armour’s strength to pull the whole damned building down on top of him.
Ton after ton of brick and stone and concrete and steel came thundering down, piling up on
top of Matthew. The ground shook with the impact, and the street filled with smoke. I waited
a while, tensed and ready, but nothing happened except for the great pile of rubble slowly
settling. I snapped my golden fingers at dear defeated Matthew. The armour would have
protected him even from this, but he’d still be a long while digging himself out. By which time
I fully intended to be long gone.
I took one of the abandoned police cars. The officers had retreated so quickly they’d actually
left the keys in the ignition. I drove off, armouring down as I went, turning down a side street
as I heard the approaching sirens of fire engines and police cars. I wasn’t in the mood for
any more confrontations. Soon enough I was back in the main flow of London traffic, driving
calmly and carefully, and no one looked at me twice. No one ever looks at a police car
unless they have to. I stopped the car as soon as I could and walked away from it. Once

again Shaman Bond was just another face in the crowd, no one special, nothing to look at.
My cover identity was the only real protection I had left. No one in the family knew my
use-name. They’d never asked. Never cared.
I headed for the Underground again. For better or worse, there was only one person I could
go to now for help and answers. The one person the Matriarch would be sure I’d never
approach. The wild witch Molly Metcalf. She shouldn’t be too angry at seeing me again. It
had been months since we last tried to kill each other.
You know, sometimes I swear the whole universe runs on irony.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Good Golly Miss Molly
Y ou hear a lot of stories about Molly Metcalf. How she once frightened a ghost out of the
house it was haunting. How she abducts aliens in order to run strange experiments on them.
How she once called up the Devil himself, just to tell him an endless stream of knock-knock
jokes. The most disturbing thing about these stories is that far too many of them are true. But
that’s the wild witch Molly Metcalf for you: free spirit of anarchy, Hawkwind fan, and queen of
all the wild places. Enemy to the Drood family and everything they stand for.
Somehow I just knew this meeting wasn’t going to go smoothly.
But there I was, on the run in London and hiding in the smoke, sticking to the darker and
nastier back streets because I couldn’t afford to be seen by old friends or enemies. Using
the secret shortcuts and subterranean ways that normal people never get to know about.
Heading reluctantly towards the one remaining person who might be able to find me a way
out of the mess I was in. My oldest and fiercest enemy, my opposite in every way: Molly
Metcalf. Sweet, petite, and overwhelmingly feminine, Molly specialised in forbidden old
magics, applied with much passion and not a little lateral thinking.
She once changed the magnetic patterns of force over London, just so that all the migrating
birds would have to pass over the Houses of Parliament and crap on them. She once
worked a subtle magic on certain bed fleas and venereal crabs, making them her eyes and
ears so that she could spy on the very important personages who patronised a brothel that
specialised in the rich and famous. As a result she learned many interesting things, and
blackmailed her victims ruthlessly. As much for the fun of it as the money. One of her victims
had to stand up in Parliament and recite the whole of "I’m a little teapot, here’s my spout,"
during the prime minister’s question time, before she’d let him off the hook. Given who it
was, I quite approved of that one…
And of course there was the time she bribed a group of disgruntled earth elementals into
causing massive earthquakes in the bedrock beneath the British mainland. Apparently she
wanted to split the United Kingdom into three separate island states: England and Wales
and Scotland. I only just stopped that one in time. And she was an enthusiastic part of the
Arcadia Project, a gathering of top-rank magicians dedicated to changing the rules of reality
itself, to bring about a new world constructed a lot more to their liking. Fortunately for the
world and reality, magicians have the biggest egos outside of show business and rarely play
well with each other. Half of them ended up turning the other half into various kinds of
livestock, and Molly lost her temper and called down a plague of frogs on the lot of them.
People were clearing frogs out of their gutters all over London for weeks after that.
Molly Metcalf resisted authority; any authority. She also hated my guts, with good reason.

We’d been on opposite sides of a dozen missions, with me standing for order and her for
chaos. We’d come close to killing each other several times, and neither of us had failed for
want of trying. If I went to her in my armour, wearing the golden face she had every reason to
hate, she’d attack me on sight. My only chance to get close to her was as Shaman Bond.
Molly knew Shaman, in a friendly if distant way, as just another face on the scene. We’d
even had the odd drink together, as part of my cover. I planned to use that, to get a foot in
her door.
Molly lived in Ladbrook Grove, in what had once been quite a trendy area that had now fallen
upon reduced circumstances. Her house was a simple two up, two down, in the middle of a
long terraced row. From the outside it appeared no different from any of the others: a bit
shabby, a bit neglected, and in urgent need of a new coat of paint. The street was full of
squabbling kids riding their bikes back and forth, kicking a football around, or just hanging
about in the hope something would happen. None of them paid me any attention as I went
up to Molly’s front door and leaned on the bell. There were always strangers coming and
going on a street like this. There was a long pause, long enough to make me consider
ringing again, and then the front door opened just enough to allow Molly to peer out.
"Shaman?" she said in her usual dark and sultry voice. "What brings you to my door,
uninvited? I wasn’t aware you even knew where I lived. Not many do, and I’ve killed most of
them. I hate being bothered."
I gave her my best charming smile. Molly Metcalf looked like a delicate china doll with big
bosoms. Bobbed black hair, huge dark eyes, ruby rosebud mouth. She wore a gown of
ruffled white silk, possibly to lend a touch of colour to her pale skin. She was beautiful, in an
eerie, threatening, and utterly disturbing way.
"Sorry to bother you, Molly," I said when it became clear the charming smile wasn’t having
any effect. "I need to talk to you. About the new rogue Drood, Edwin. I know something about
him that I think you need to know. May I come in? It is rather urgent."
She thought about it for a long moment, studying me with her dark unblinking eyes, but finally
nodded and stepped back, opening the door just a little wider. I squeezed in past her, and
she immediately shut the door behind us and locked it. I barely noticed. I was standing in a
vast forest glade, with my mouth hanging open. I didn’t know what I’d expected to find behind
the facade, but it sure as hell wasn’t this. Molly lived in style.
Towering trees surrounded me on every side, heavy with summer foliage. The clearing rose
and fell in grassy mounds, and a nearby waterfall tumbled down a jagged rock face into a
wide crystal clear pool. Out among the trees, deer watched solemnly from a safe distance,
while birds sang sweetly and heavy shafts of golden sunlight dropped down through the
overhead canopy. Dappled shadows gave the clearing a drowsy, cosy feel, and the air was
thick with the rich damp and earthy smell of woodland.
Molly ignored me, walking among a small stand of trees. She talked to them in a soft
whispered language I’d never heard before, and I swear they bowed down their heads to
listen. Wide-eyed deer came forward to nuzzle her with their soft mouths, and she rubbed
their muzzles with gentle hands. A russet squirrel dropped out of the overhead branches to
land lightly on her shoulder. It chattered urgently in her ear, and then looked straight at me.
"Hey, Molly," it said. "Who’s the rube? New boyfriend? About time; you get really moody
when you’re not getting your ashes hauled regularly."
"Not now, dear," Molly said indulgently. "Run along and play while I speak to the nice man.
And don’t eavesdrop or I’ll do something unpleasant to your nuts."

The squirrel pulled a face at her and leapt back up into the safety of the trees. Molly came
unhurriedly back to stand before me, beside the pool. I decided not to ask about the talking
squirrel. I didn’t want to get sidetracked into what promised to be a very long story.
"Talk to me, Shaman Bond," Molly said. "Tell me this thing you know. And it had better be
good, or there’ll be another cute little talking animal in my garden paradise."
"It’s about Edwin Drood," I said. "The new rogue. He’s in real trouble. Outlawed by his
family, forsaken by his friends, all alone and on the run. He has been given good reason to
doubt his family, or at least some part of it, and he wants to know the truth. He believes you
can tell him things that others couldn’t, or wouldn’t. In return for your help, he’s prepared to
offer you the one thing you want more than his head on a spike: a chance to bring down the
whole corrupt Drood family."
"Works for me," Molly said easily. She sat down on the edge of the pool and trailed her
fingers lazily through the lily-pad-covered waters. Fish came to nibble at her fingertips. I
stayed on my feet. I would have felt too vulnerable sitting. Molly looked up at me with her
dark, thoughtful eyes. "Where do you fit into this, Shaman? This is way out of your usual
league. Why should I believe you when you say these things?"
"Because I’m Edwin Drood," I said. "And I always have been."
I armoured up, the living gold covering me in a moment. Molly scrambled onto her feet,
glaring at me with wild, dangerous eyes. Her ruby mouth contorted with rage as she raised
one hand into a spell casting position. I made myself stand very still, my arms limp at my
sides, my hands conspicuously open and empty. She stood there, breathing harshly, and
then slowly she pulled back from the edge and lowered her hand.
"Take off the armour," she said harshly. "I won’t talk to you while you’re wearing the armour."
With the armour off, I’d be defenceless. She could kill me, torture me, or mindwipe me into
her slave; all things she’d threatened to do in the past. But I had come to her, so I had to
make the gesture of trust. Of vulnerability. I subvocalised the Words, and braced myself as
the living gold disappeared back into my torc. Molly looked me over, as though searching for
signs of treachery, and I looked back at her as calmly as I could. Molly nodded slowly and
moved a single step closer.
"I heard about what happened, on the motorway. About all the things your family sent after
you. People all over town are having a hard time believing you fought them all off. I mean, no
offence, Edwin, but…no one on the scene ever thought you were that good. Did one of the
Fae really shoot you with an arrow?"
Moving slowly and carefully, I unbuttoned my shirt and pushed it back to show her the arrow
wound in my shoulder. Molly took another step forward to study the healed wound more
closely. She didn’t touch me, but I could feel her warm breath on my bare skin as she leaned
in close. She pulled back again and met my gaze squarely. She was taller than I
remembered, her eyes almost on a level with mine. She smiled suddenly, and it was not a
pretty smile.
"So; Drood armour can be breached, after all. That’s a thing worth knowing. I could kill you
now, Shaman. Edwin."
"Yes," I said. "You could. But you won’t."
"Really? Are you sure about that?"

"No," I admitted. "You’ve never been…predictable, Molly. But I’m not your enemy anymore. I’
m not Drood: I’m rogue. That changes everything."
"Maybe," said Molly. "Convince me, Edwin. I can always kill you later, if I get bored."
I relaxed just a little and buttoned up my shirt again. Give me an inch, and I can talk anyone
into anything. "You’ve tried to kill me often enough, in the past," I said. "Remember the time
you blew up the whole Bradbury building, just to get me? The look on your face when I
walked unharmed out of the ruins! I thought you were going to pop an artery."
Molly nodded, smiling. "Do you remember the time you stuck me through the chest with
three feet of enchanted steel? Only to discover that like all good magicians, I keep my heart
safe and secure somewhere else? I thought you were going to have a fit."
"We’ve lived, haven’t we?" I said dryly, and she laughed briefly. "We can work together," I
said. "We want the same things in this, and who else has shared as much history as we
have?"
"That makes sense," said Molly. "In a warped kind of way. Who knows us better than our
enemies? Though I have to say the Shaman Bond thing came as a bit of a surprise." She
cocked her head to one side, like a bird, considering me. "Why did you come to me as
Shaman? You could have burst in here in your damned armour, safe from all my magics,
smashed through my defences, and demanded I help you."
"No, I couldn’t," I said. "You’d have told me to go to hell."
"True, very true. You do know me, Edwin."
"Please; call me Eddie. And besides, I wanted to make a point. That I would share my
secrets with you, if you would share yours with me. You know things, Molly, things few other
people know; things you’re not supposed to know. And there are things I need to know about
my family. Things that have been withheld from me." I looked around.
"And I really would like to know how you got a forest inside your house."
"Because I am the wild witch! I am the laughter in the woods, the promise of the night, the
delight of the soul, and the dazzle of the senses. And because I hired a really good interior
decorator. You never did appreciate me, Edwin."
"Eddie, please."
"Yes…You look like an Eddie. Now, if answers are truly what you want, look into my scrying
pool. But don’t blame me if the truth you learn is a truth you’d rather not know."
Molly sat down beside her pool again, gathering her long white gown around her, and I
crouched cautiously down beside her. The whole thing was a scrying pool? It had to be
twenty feet across, easy, which would make it hellishly powerful. Molly slapped the flat of her
left hand onto the surface of the waters, and the ripples spread out, pushing the lily pads to
the borders of the pond. The crystal clear water shimmered, and then blazed bright as the
sun, dazzling my eyes, before clearing abruptly to show me a vision of a man and a woman,
in two different rooms, talking on the phone. I leaned forward as I recognised them. The man
was the British prime minister; the woman was Martha Drood.
"You can See into the Hall?" I said, my voice hardly more than a breath. "That’s not
supposed to be possible!"

"It’s all right," said Molly. "They can’t see or hear us. But listen now, and pay attention. You
need to hear this."
"Look, this is your mess!" the prime minister was saying angrily.
"Drood agents, in full armour, fighting each other in full view of the public? Thank God the
media didn’t catch it. Do you even realise what it’s going to take to put this right? The
rebuilding, the witness intimidation programme, the hush money? All because you couldn’t
take care of your own dirty work!"
"Stop whining," said Martha, her voice cold as a slap in the face.
"Damage limitations is one of the few things you’re actually good at. Probably because you’
ve had so much experience at it. You will do everything you have to, and you’ll do it efficiently
and well and very quickly, or I’ll have you killed and see if your replacement learns anything
from the experience. Remember your place, Prime Minister. I got you elected so you could
serve the family’s interests, just like your predecessors. The family knows best. Always."
"All right! All right!" The prime minister said defensively. "I’m on top of this, Matriarch. You
don’t have anything to worry about."
"No, I don’t," said Martha. "But you do."
Molly took her hand off the water, and the vision disappeared. I looked numbly at Molly.
"How could she speak to him like that? How could he grovel to her like that? She wouldn’t
really have hurt him. We don’t do things like that. The family serves the powers that be; we
don’t interfere. That’s always been our duty and our responsibility. To preserve—"
"Poor Eddie," said Molly. "You only wanted to know the truth because you didn’t know how
much it would hurt. Well, here it is, so brace yourself. The family isn’t what you think it is, and
it never was. Only those Droods at the very top of the family tree know what the family is
really for. You protect the world, yes, but not for the people…for the establishment. The
Droods work to maintain the status quo, keeping everyone calm and controlled, and the
people in their proper place. Under the thumbs of those in authority. Droods aren’t the world’
s bodyguards, and never have been; you’re enforcers. Bullyboys. Hammering down any nail
that dares to stick its head above the rest.
"And after centuries of establishing power and control, along with the odd assassination of
those in power who wouldn’t or couldn’t learn to go along to get along, even those who make
up the official establishment have learned to be afraid of your family. Politicians all across
the world are allowed to hold power only as long as they answer to Drood authority. Your
family, Eddie, are the secret rulers of the world."
I just sat there, shocked into silence. My whole world had just been kicked away from under
my feet. Again. I wanted to believe she was lying, but I couldn’t. It all made too much sense.
Too many things I’d seen and heard that I wasn’t supposed to, so many hints and whispers
on the scene, so many little things that had never added up…till now. There is a reason why
things are the way they are; but it’s not a very nice one.
I think I might have swayed a little, because Molly tossed a handful of icy pond water into my
face. "Don’t you dare flake out on me, Eddie! Not when I’m just getting to the interesting bit."
"My family runs the world," I said numbly, cold water dripping unheeded from my face. "And I
never knew. How could I have been so blind?"
"It’s not all bad news," said Molly. "There is a resistance. And I’m part of it."

I looked at her. "You? I thought you always said you refused to belong to any group that
would accept the likes of you as a member. Especially after what happened last time, with
the Arcadia Project. As if that whole plague of frogs thing wasn’t bad enough, you ended up
pulling that Klan sorcerer’s intestines out through his nostrils."
"He annoyed me," said Molly. "And anyway, I work with the resistance, not for them, as and
when it suits me."
I considered that, not liking the taste. One of the Drood family’s greatest fears has always
been that another organisation might arise to work against them. An anti-family, as it were.
There had been several attempts, down the centuries, but the various bad guys had never
been able to find enough things in common to hold them together. They always ended up
arguing over ends and means, and matters of precedence, and who exactly was going to be
in charge. This led to factions and fighting, and it always ended in tears. Though admittedly it
didn’t usually involve intestines and nostrils.
"The new cabal is called Manifest Destiny," said Molly, just a little grandly, after it became
clear I had nothing to say for the moment.
"They, we, want humanity to be free from all outside control; by the Droods or anyone else.
Free to make its own destiny. The leaders of the cabal have brought together powers from
across the whole spectrum of opposition: the Loathly Ones, the Cult of the Crimson Altar, the
Dream Meme, Vril Power Inc., even the Lurkers on the Threshold."
"Ah," I said. "The usual unusual suspects."
"Well, yes; plus a whole army of powerful and committed fellow travellers. Like me. More
than you ever dreamed possible, determined to break the Droods’ stranglehold on
humanity, once and for all. Not to gain power for themselves, but just to set humanity free.
That’s what makes this cabal so different; for the first time it’s not about us."
"This…cabal," I said. "Were they behind recent attacks on my family home?"
Molly shrugged. "I don’t get involved in day-to-day decisions. I told you: I only work with them
when I feel like it, on matters of mutual interest."
"So I suppose you don’t know the identity of the traitor in my family, either? Or why I was
declared rogue?"
"I know there is a traitor. That’s old knowledge. And if it matters, word is he or she
approached Manifest Destiny, not the other way around." She looked at me coolly, almost
compassionately. "Poor little Drood; they’ve taken away your innocence, and now you have
to think for yourself. I don’t know why your family threw you to the wolves, Eddie, but I know a
few people who might. Why don’t you come with me and meet some of my friends and
associates? See what they’re really like, when you and they aren’t busy trying to kill each
other. Not all of those condemned by your family are one hundred percent dyed in the wool
bad guys. Even monsters aren’t monsters all the time, you know."
I nodded, too numb to muster any arguments. I wasn’t up to speed yet. There was a great
hole in my gut where my family used to be, and I hadn’t figured out what to fill it with. Molly
helped me to my feet, and then let go of my arm immediately. She still wasn’t used to being
this close to me. She turned abruptly and headed off deeper into the forest. I hurried after
her. We walked together, maintaining a comfortable distance, for quite some time.
Wherever this forest was, it wasn’t inside her house. The door must have been spelled to
transport me straight here, wherever here was.

I’d just about worked this out when we came to another door, standing on its own, upright
and unsupported. Molly stood before it, muttering Words under her breath. I wondered
where this door would lead; what charming underworld dive Molly wanted to show me. Café
Night, perhaps, where vampires flocked together to feast on willing victims. It started out as
a fashionable salon, but of late had lapsed into an S and M parlour. Vampires added whole
new shades of meaning to the phrase tops and bottoms. It might be the Black Magicians’
Circle, which once upon a time was the place to be, if you worshipped dark forces and could
boast your very own demonic familiar. These days it was more of a self-help and support
group. The Order of the Beyond was still going strong, in marvellous new high-tech premises
down on Grafton Way, where people offered themselves as temporary hosts to
outer-dimensional beings in return for forbidden and outré knowledge. Of course,
conversations in that place did tend towards the seriously weird…Molly pushed the door
open and stepped through, and I hurried in after her. And then I stopped abruptly and looked
around me.
"Wait a minute! This…this is the Wulfshead Club!"
And it was. Just as big and bold and brassy and hellishly noisy as it always was. Molly
looked at me pityingly.
"Of course. Where else? The Wulfshead has always been the hottest spot on the scene.
Everyone comes here; good and bad and in between. You never noticed the bad guys
because you always mix with your own crowd, and we all mix with ours. That’s what makes
the club’s truce workable. Come on; come and meet some of my friends. Looks like we
have an interesting crowd in tonight."
I was still a little dazed, so she grabbed me by the arm and dragged me through the crowd
in the direction of the bar. I let her. I felt I could use a whole bunch of very large drinks.
Several people nodded to Shaman Bond, and several more nodded to Molly Metcalf. Some
of them looked quite surprised and not a little intrigued at seeing the two of us so openly
together, but no one said anything. The Wulfshead crowd understands the need for
discretion and the occasional blind eye. Molly and I ended up at one end of the high-tech
bar, where the professionally uninterested bartender served us drinks. I had a very large
brandy, Molly had a Southern Comfort, and I ended up paying for both. She gestured for
certain personages to come and join her, and they drifted warily over.
Subway Sue I already knew. She drifted unseen among passengers using the Underground
trains, quietly leeching off a little luck from everyone she brushed up against. Which is why
so many people miss their trains or end up on the wrong platform. To look at her, you’d think
she was only one step up from homeless, buried under layers of charity clothes, but that was
just so that no one would notice her. There was always someone willing to pay her good
money for the stolen luck she hoarded. On the quiet, Subway Sue lived very well.
Girl Flower was an ancient Welsh elemental, made up of rose petals and owls’ claws long
and long ago by an ancient travelling sorcerer who might or might not have been Merlin. The
story changed every time she told it. She looked human enough, most of the time. Treat her
right, and she’d be soft as rose petals for you. Mistreat or wrong her, and the owls’ claws
would come out. And then the best you could hope for was when the authorities finally found
what was left of you, your relatives would be able to find an undertaker who was really into
jigsaw puzzles. Girl Flower had very high standards, which was why she was always so very
disappointed in men. But she remained optimistic, and the police kept fishing body parts
out of the Thames. Girl Flower dressed in bright pastel colours, in gypsy styles, and wore so
many bracelets they clattered deafeningly every time she gestured. She’d had one glass of
champagne and was already more than a bit tipsy.

Digger Browne was a short, stocky personage, in an old-fashioned wraparound coat with
mud stains on the sleeves. He wore heavy woollen gloves when he was out in public, to hide
his long horny fingernails made for digging and tearing. He also wore a wide-brimmed hat
that hid most of his face in shadow. Digger was a ghoul and smelt strongly of carrion and
recently disturbed earth.
"I’m just a part of nature," he said easily. "I take out the trash, clean up the garbage, and
generally keep the world tidy. So I enjoy my work; is that a sin? Not everyone has a taste for
the kind of work I do, but it has to be done. Someone’s got to eat all those bodies.
Remember the undertakers’ strike, back in the seventies? People couldn’t do enough for
me then…"
And finally, there was Mr. Stab. I didn’t need to be introduced to him. Everyone knew Mr.
Stab, if only by reputation: the notorious uncaught serial killer of old London Town. He’d
operated under many names, down the long years, and I don’t think even he knew for sure
exactly how many people he’d murdered since he started out with five unfortunate whores in
the East End in 1888. He gained something, some power, from what he did then. A
ceremony of blood, he called it; a celebration of slaughter. And now he goes on and on and
no one can stop him. When he was just being himself at the Wulfshead, he still dressed in
the formal dark clothes of his time, right down to the opera cloak and top hat.
Most of these people knew or at least knew of Shaman Bond, and it came as quite a shock
to them when Molly introduced me as Edwin Drood. Subway Sue looked around for the
nearest exit, Digger Browne chewed nervously on his finger snack, and Girl Flower giggled
at me owlishly over her glass. Mr. Stab smiled slowly, showing large blocky teeth stained
brown with age.
"So you’re Edwin Drood. The man behind the mask. You probably have a body count nearly
equal to mine."
"I kill to put an end to suffering," I said. "Not to celebrate it."
"I serve a purpose, just as you do."
"Don’t you dare try to justify yourself to me!" I said, and my voice was cold enough that
everyone except Mr. Stab fell back a step.
"Why not?" said Mr. Stab. "I am a part of the natural order, just like Mr. Browne here. I cull
the herd, thin out the weak and helpless, improve the stock. Someone has to do it, if the
herd is to stay healthy."
"You do it because you enjoy it!"
"That too."
I started to subvocalise the Words that would call up my armour. The only reason I hadn’t
killed Mr. Stab before this was because I’d never known where to look for him. I’d seen
some of his victims, or what he’d left of them, and that was enough for me. Molly guessed
what I was about to do, grabbed me by the arm, and pulled me around to glare right into my
face.
"Don’t you dare embarrass me in front of my friends!"
"This is a friend? Mr. Stab? Do you know how many women just like you he’s killed?"
"But he’s never harmed me, or any of my friends, and he has been there for me when I

needed him. Not even monsters are monsters all the time, remember? I’ve killed, in my time,
for what seemed like good reasons, and so have you. You really think the world sees you as
any different from him? How many grieving families have you left in your bloody wake, Edwin
Drood?"
I took a long slow breath and forced myself into a kind of calm. I’d come here looking for
answers, and the kind I needed could only be freely given. I nodded jerkily to Molly, and she
let go of my arm. We turned back to face the others.
"There’s a traitor in my family," I said stiffly. "I would be grateful for any information you could
give me."
"How grateful?" said Subway Sue. "Are we talking serious money?"
"If I had serious money, do you really think I’d be here talking to you?" I said just a bit
ungraciously. "I’m rogue, outcast, outlaw. All I have is what I stand up in."
"I’m sure we could make some kind of deal," said Girl Flower in her breathy voice, batting
her eyelashes at me, and then spoiled the mood by giggling.
"There is a traitor at the heart of the Droods," said Digger Browne.
"That’s common knowledge. But I don’t think anyone knows who."
"Lots of people have put forward names," said Mr. Stab. "But it’s all guesswork. Lots of
people thought it might be you, Edwin. A field agent operating on his own, far from Drood
central control, the only Drood ever to run away from home and not be hunted down like a
dog by his family. The only reason everyone didn’t think it was you was because that would
have been too obvious."
"And none of you know why I was made rogue?" I said.
"I’ve done some work for your family on occasion," said Digger. "I’d have sworn you were
depressingly squeaky clean, like most of your family. I mean, yes, you run the world and
everything, but—"
"I too have done work for the Droods," said Mr. Stab. He smiled crookedly at me. "Pretty
much everyone here has, at one time or another. It’s the Droods’ world; we just live in it."
"We would never deal with filth like you," I said, but my heart wasn’t in it. I didn’t know what
my family was capable of anymore.
"There are many like us," Molly said carefully. "Allowed to operate as long as we don’t rock
the boat too much. As long as we pay tithes, or perform the occasional service for them.
Dirty jobs, off-the-books cases; the kind you regular field agents aren’t suited for. The kind
you were never supposed to know about, because it might stain your precious honour. We’
ve all done the Droods’ dirty work. That’s why we’re all so ready to bring them down."
My head was spinning. I felt sick. Could I really have spent my whole life supporting a lie?
Was there really anything left to me now, except to bring down my own family?
CHAPTER TWELVE
Down, Down, Deeper and Down
T here are times in every man’s life when the woman you’ve taken up with suddenly

disappears on business of her own, and you’re left to make polite conversation with her
friends. Personally, I’d rather stick needles in my eyes, but it’s one of those things you just
have to do. Molly Metcalf produced a one-time-only mobile phone and headed for the
women’s toilet so she could reach her contact in Manifest Destiny without being glared at by
everyone else in the club. I approved of her sense of caution. One-time-only phones are
phones you can use only once, and then immediately discard and destroy. A call that can’t
be tapped and a phone that can’t be traced. It was good to know Manifest Destiny operated
in a professional way. But it did mean I was left alone with Molly’s friends, most of whom I
would have tried to kill on sight only a few days before. And vice versa, quite probably. So
we stood and smiled awkwardly at each other, while the only thing we had in common
disappeared into the ladies’.
"So," I said finally to the ghoul, Digger Browne, as the least obviously disquieting of the
bunch, "you say you’ve done work for my family, on occasion?"
He shrugged easily. "I help out, when called upon to do so. The price of existence, in these
hard times. My clan’s status is not what it was in the old days, when we had an honourable
place in society, cleaning up the mess left behind by man’s many battles…These days, your
family only ever call us in to devour those bodies deemed too costly or too dangerous to
otherwise dispose of. You know; the kind that might rise again, or regenerate, or melt down
into hazardous waste. There’s not much a ghoul can’t digest. Though admittedly our toilets
have to be rather more thorough than most…"
I raised a hand. "I think we’re rapidly approaching the point of too much information. How do
you feel about the Droods? Or this new resistance group, Manifest Destiny?"
Digger shrugged again. "The names change, faces come and go, but there’s always
someone in charge. I’ve yet to see any hard evidence that Manifest Destiny would be any
kinder or more just than the Droods…But it doesn’t really matter to me. Whoever’s running
things, there will always be work for me and my kind."
I turned, just a little reluctantly, to Mr. Stab. He was drinking a Perrier water with his little
finger crooked, every inch the calm and cultured gentleman. I once helped fish a victim of his
out of the Thames, down by Wapping. She’d been gutted, cut open from crotch to throat and
all her internal organs removed. He’d done other things to her too, before he finally killed her.
The only reason I wasn’t tearing him to pieces right now was because it might upset Molly,
and I needed her on my side. For now.
"I hear you got shot with an arrow," he said calmly. "Right through your celebrated armour."
"News does travel fast, doesn’t it?" I said, careful neither to confirm nor deny. "But I doubt
you’ve got anything that could touch me."
"You might be surprised," said Mr. Stab. "But you really should try to relax, Edwin. You’re in
no danger from me, as long as you’re with Molly. Dear girl. She’s an old friend, and I’d hate
to upset her."
"You said you’d done some work for my family," I said. "What did you do for the Droods?"
"Sometimes people can’t just be killed," Mr. Stab said smoothly.
"Sometimes it’s necessary for them to disappear completely. No trace of what was done to
them, or why. No body, no clues, just a gap in the world where someone important used to
be. Someone who thought no one could touch them. I’ve always been able to make people
disappear. The world only gets to see a small fraction of my many victims. The ones I want

seen, to keep my myth alive…to maintain my reputation. Vanity, vanity, all is vanity; but my
legend is all I have left, and I will not have it tarnished or diminished by my many inferior
imitators."
"How did you get to meet Molly?" I said.
"She tried very hard to kill me," said Mr. Stab, smiling fondly at the memory. "She was part
of a coven in those days, still learning her trade, when I found it necessary to kill one of her
witchy friends. After we’d exhausted ourselves trying to kill each other, we fell to talking and
discovered we had more in common than we thought. Certain people we detested, and with
good reason. People of power and influence that we couldn’t hope to reach on our own, but
together…Ah, those were happy times, teaching her the ways of slaughter."
"But did she ever forgive you for killing her friend?" I said.
"No; but she’s a practical soul. She knows that sometimes you have to go along, to get
along. I like to think we’re friends now. You can’t do the things we did and not grow…close.
And in all London, she is perhaps the only woman I have no desire to kill. I still remember her
friend, whose death brought us together. Her name was Dorothy. A dainty little thing, and
she screamed so prettily under my blade…Don’t, Edwin. Don’t even think about calling up
your armour. You can’t kill me. No one can. That’s part of what I bought, with what I did in
Whitechapel, all those years ago."
"I’ll find a way," I said. "If I have to."
Girl Flower moved quickly in to put a gentle hand on my sleeve.
"Boys, boys…lighten up, darlings. We’re all friends here, and we are very definitely not at
home to Mr. Grumpy." She rubbed her shoulder up against Mr. Stab, like an affectionate cat,
and he nodded briefly to her before giving all his attention to his Perrier water. Girl Flower
batted her overlong eyelashes at me and pouted with her dark lush mouth.
"Why do men always have to talk about such awful things? Life contains much that is good,
and much that is bad, and there’s nothing we can do that will change it. So why not just
choose to celebrate all the wonderful things in life? Like me! I am the lovely Girl Flower,
created just so that men might have the pleasure of adoring me! If they know what’s good for
them…Honestly, darlings, if everyone just had sex a lot more often, the world would be a far
happier place." She beamed at me. "Would you like to undo the buttons on my blouse and
play with my boobies, Edwin?"
"You know you shouldn’t drink, Flower," Subway Sue said kindly. "It goes straight to your
petals." She considered me thoughtfully. "I have to say, Edwin, you’re a more interesting sort
than most of the specimens Molly drags in here. For such an intelligent woman, she has
remarkably bad taste in men. I can’t help thinking the two are probably connected. You
should choose men with your heart, not your head. Not that I’ve had much luck with either
approach. Men! If there was an alternative that didn’t involve ending up living alone with too
many cats, I’d sign up tomorrow."
There didn’t seem any obvious answer to that, so I changed the subject. "Would I be right in
thinking you’ve also done work for my family?"
"Certainly not!" Subway Sue drew herself up proudly, bristling at the very thought. "I have my
principles, you know."
Perhaps fortunately, Molly chose that moment to come back and rejoin us, and I turned to

her with a certain amount of relief. I’ve never been very good at talking to a woman’s friends.
"Did you get through? Will they see me?"
Molly nodded curtly. "I had a lot of trouble getting through to anyone that mattered, but once I
made it clear I could deliver the new rogue Drood, they couldn’t wait for me to bring you in.
We can go right now, if you want. The head man himself is waiting to greet you with open
arms. They’ll offer you anything you want in exchange for the inside secrets of your family
and a chance to examine your armour in their laboratories."
"I don’t know that I’m ready to commit myself to their cause just yet," I said carefully.
Molly snorted loudly. "I should think not, in your position. This is just a meet and greet, a
chance for you and the head man to feel each other out, see if you can work together. But do
yourself a favour, Drood; drive a hard bargain. Take them for everything they’ve got.
Because once you’ve given up your secrets, you can’t sell them again."
"There’s more to me than just secrets," I said.
"Good bargaining position," said Molly.
"If you’re going to meet the actual leader of Manifest Destiny, I think I might come along too,"
Mr. Stab said suddenly. "Although I have performed some small services for them in the
past, in return for very generous recompense, I have to say I’m a little irritated that they have
never tried to recruit me. I would like to ask them why."
"If he’s going, I’m going too," said Girl Flower, clapping her soft little hands together
delightedly. "I never get to go anywhere."
I started to object, but Molly cut me off quickly. "Oh, let them, or they’ll both sulk. Besides, it’s
always easier to negotiate when you’ve got some serious backup."
She had a point. I looked inquiringly at Digger Browne, but he shook his head. "I’m afraid I
have a previous engagement. My family and I are having an old friend for dinner."
"And you couldn’t get me one inch closer to Manifest Destiny if you used a whip and a
chair," Subway Sue said very firmly. "I don’t trust any of these big organisations. There’s
never any room in them for the private entrepreneur. And anyway, I’ve heard things about
Manifest Destiny…Yes, yes, I know, Molly; you won’t hear a word said against them. But I’ve
been around a lot longer than you, and there are those who’ll talk to me who won’t talk to
you. I can’t help feeling there’s a lot more to Manifest Destiny than just bringing down the
Droods." She looked at me with cold, piercing eyes. "Ask them all the awkward questions,
Drood. Make them tell you everything, before you give them your trust."
She turned her back on us and stalked out of the Wulfshead. Digger Browne shook hands
politely with all of us and followed her out. And Molly Metcalf, Girl Flower, Mr. Stab, and I
went off to see Manifest Destiny. One witch of the wild woods, one elemental of rose petals
and owls’ claws, one legendary serial killer, and one very confused ex-agent for the good.
Some days you just shouldn’t get up in the morning.
We left the Wulfshead Club by a back door I didn’t recognise and ended up in a dimly lit
alley just off Denmark Street, deep in the dark heart of Soho. It was late evening now, with all
the twilight people spilling out onto the streets, rubbing the day’s sleep from their eyes.
Girding their weary loins to prey on the sheep, one more time. None of them paid us any
attention. We very obviously weren’t sheep. Molly strode out into the middle of the empty
road and looked around her, scowling.

"What are you looking for?" I said patiently. "You won’t find a taxi in this area, not at this time
of night."
She looked back at me and sighed heavily. "All right; lecture mode. Pay attention, Drood,
and you might just learn something useful. Once upon a time, way back during the most
paranoid days of the Cold War, the establishment of that time arranged for the construction
of a huge network of bunkers and tunnels deep under the streets of London. A last
desperate bolthole to which the important personages of that time could retreat in the event
of a nuclear strike. Presumably so they could continue to rule the radioactive ruins above. I
love a government that thinks ahead, don’t you? Anyway, this very large bolthole was fully
equipped and supplied, and very safe and secure. But the Cold War ended, officially, and
the network of bunkers and tunnels was declared redundant. Abandoned and left to rot,
guarded by just a few old Cold Warriors who were also pretty much redundant.
"Manifest Destiny occupies the network now, with, it is said, the winking acknowledgment of
the current powers that be. Unfortunately, and this is the part you’re really going to hate,
Edwin, the only way to access this network is via the city sewers. According to my contact,
there’s a manhole somewhere around here that will let us into the system, so stop just
standing around like a spare dick at a wedding and help me find it."
As it turned out, the manhole was right behind her. None of us said anything. She scowled
down at the heavy steel cover and snapped her fingers at it, and the cover shot up into the
air as though someone had goosed it. The cover hovered above us in midair, while we all
gathered around the hole and peered dubiously down into it. Molly generated a witchfire, a
shimmering silver glow around her left hand, but even that magical light could only show us a
series of metal rungs leading down into the darkness. The smell coming out was pretty ripe,
though. We all looked at each other, and finally Molly sighed heavily and led the way down
into the sewers.
Once we were all inside, the manhole cover dropped back into place, sealing us in.
Underground, the smell hit me like a fist in the face. Shocked tears ran down my cheeks as I
struggled to breathe only through my mouth. It didn’t help. The ladder deposited us in a long
dark tunnel with curving walls and an uncomfortably low ceiling. Molly boosted her witchlight,
pushing back the dark to give us a better view. The brick walls were slick with damp and
slime and filth, and dark churning waters surged through a deep central channel, thick with
refuse and unpleasantly familiar things floating in it. The walkway was only wide enough to
accommodate two of us at a time, and the old stone beneath our feet was encrusted with
foul matter. It was enough to make you vow never to use a toilet ever again. Girl Flower and
Mr. Stab appeared entirely unmoved, but Molly was almost gagging from the stench. Two
rats floated past us, crouched together on a particularly large…object. That was enough. I
started to armour up, to protect myself from plague, but Molly whirled angrily on me.
"Don’t!" she said, in a harsh whisper. "We don’t want to attract attention."
"Attention from whom?" I said, not unreasonably. "Who else would be dumb enough to come
down into the sewers at this time of night?"
"She has a point," said Girl Flower, glancing nervously about her.
"You do hear stories…Of things that have chosen to live down here, away from the light and
the scrutiny of man. Awful, unpleasant things, darling. Not at all the sort of people you want to
meet."
"Right," said Molly. "I’ve talked to people who work down here, and they all have stories to

share that the civilised world doesn’t want to listen to. Not everything that gets flushed is
gone forever. There are things down here that have learned to thrive in conditions like this,
and they’re always hungry. Strange fruit grown from rotten branches, monsters grown out of
discarded experiments, and some blighted shapes that might have been human, long and
long ago. I’ll generate a low-level field to protect us from…contamination, but any stronger
magic might call them to us."
"Maybe you should lose the witchlight, then," said Mr. Stab. "I’m almost sure I have a light
about me somewhere…"
"No!" Molly said quickly. "No flames or anything that might generate a spark. Methane gas
has a tendency to build up in pockets, and you can’t detect it through the general nasty
ambience. Until it’s far too late."
"In the old days," Mr. Stab said conversationally, "the workers used to bring down canaries
in cages. And when the canaries started to smoulder, they knew they were in trouble."
There was a pause, and then Molly said, "You’re really not helping, you know."
"Poor little birdies," said Girl Flower.
Molly conjured up her protective field, incorporating a simple directional spell that
manifested as a glowing arrow floating on the air before us. We started off after it, slipping
and sliding on the treacherous surface of the walkway. Our shadows leapt around us in the
witchlight, huge and menacing. Sudden noises echoed away through the long dark tunnels,
lingering on long after they should have died away. I kept a watchful eye on every shadowed
tunnel we passed, and sometimes I thought I saw twisted, distorted shapes lurching away in
the uncertain gloom ahead; but nothing ever ventured out into the witchlight to confront us.
The smell wasn’t getting any easier to take.
There were rats everywhere, scuttling and scurrying and pausing now and then to bare their
yellow teeth at us. Many were bigger by far than any rat had a right to be, and they didn’t
seem nearly scared enough of us to suit me. I’ve got a bit of a thing about rats. Most just
watched us pass from their holes and lairs, dark beady eyes gleaming malevolently. Molly
amused herself by pointing her finger at those who got too close, whereupon they
immediately exploded wetly in all directions at once. Girl Flower squeaked loudly every time
this happened and finally stopped to pick up most of a dead rat and hold it close to her
bosom.
"Poor little ratty."
"Oh, ick," said Molly.
"I am flowers, darling," Girl Flower said stubbornly. "And all dead things are compost to my
pretty petals."
She slipped the rat carcass inside the front of her dress, and it immediately disappeared.
Molly looked at me. "Think about that, the next time she invites you to unbutton her blouse."
I looked determinedly in another direction. "If she starts coughing up owl pellets, she’s going
back."
We moved on, into the darkness. Tunnel led to tunnel, twisting and turning deep under
London’s streets. Others had been here before us, leaving their marks upon the brick walls.
Some were hopeful; some were despairing messages to loved ones they never hoped to

see again. There were arrows, pointing in varying directions, and even the occasional crude
map scratched into the brick. Masonic symbols, odd phrases in old forgotten languages…I
half expected to find Arne Saknussemm’s initials. Or Cave Carson’s. We pressed on,
following Molly’s glowing arrow. Her protective field kept the filth at bay, even when we
occasionally had to wade through the revolting waters to get to another tunnel. Pity it couldn’t
do anything about the smell.
We stopped abruptly as Mr. Stab broke away from us to study a particular section of brick
wall close up. I moved in beside him for a look, but it seemed no different from any other wall
we’d passed. The curving surface ran with damp, as though sweating in the uncomfortable
heat, and the original colour of the brick was lost under layers of accumulated filth and
clumps of bulging white fungus. Mr. Stab ran his fingers caressingly over the surface,
ignoring the thick residue that appeared on his expensively tailored gloves. My first thought
was that it seemed there were definite limits to Molly’s protective field, and not to touch
anything with my hands, but I was quickly distracted by the look on Mr. Stab’s face. He was
smiling, and it wasn’t a very nice smile.
"I remember this place," he said, and something in his soft voice raised all the hackles on
the back of my neck. "It’s been a long time since I was down here. I think they were still
building this section then…I used to come here all the time, to get away from the bustle and
noise of Humanity…Yes, I remember this place."
He pressed a particular brick, and it sank inwards with a loud click. Mr. Stab put all his
weight against the wall, and a large section swung slowly inwards on concealed hinges. Only
darkness lay beyond, and silence. Mr. Stab gestured sharply for Molly to come forward, and
she thrust her illuminated hand into the new opening. We all crowded around, to see what
was to be seen, but Mr. Stab couldn’t wait. He took Molly by the shoulder and urged her
inside. They moved forward into the gloom, and Girl Flower and I followed close behind.
There was a room behind the brick wall, a very secret room. I stood still, just inside the
entrance, held there by what I saw. I felt appalled, and sickened, and terribly angry. My first
thought was that it looked like a ghastly doll’s house. The room had been fitted out as an old
Victorian parlour. Heavy furniture, thick carpeting, stiff-backed chairs on either side of a long
dining table, complete with heavy tablecloth, silver settings, and candlesticks. Even framed
portraits on the walls.
Dead women sat in the chairs on either side of the long table, dressed in the fashions of
widely varying times, all of the bodies in varying stages of decay. The enclosed setting had
preserved them to some degree, but that only added to the horror. The dead women stared
across the table at each other. Some had eyes; some did not. Some had faces; some did
not. They all carried their death wounds openly, and there were so many of them…Some
had the front of their dresses cut open, revealing bodies that had been hollowed out. A few
held teacups in their clawed hands, as though they were all attending some hideous tea
party.
"Hi, honey," said Mr. Stab. "I’m home."
Molly looked back at me. "I never knew about this, Eddie, I swear."
I stepped forward to stand between her and Mr. Stab. "This is sick! Give me one good
reason why I shouldn’t kill you right now!"
"How many have you killed down the years, young Drood?" said Mr. Stab, not even looking
at me. He moved slowly down the line of corpses, smiling slightly, trailing his fingers above
the bowed heads, not quite touching them. "Could a room this size even contain all those

you’ve cut down? I know; you were only obeying orders. You did what you did out of cold
duty; at least I’m honest enough to enjoy what I do." He leaned over one gray shoulder to
peer into a desiccated face. "I keep stashes of my victims all over London. In my secret
hidden places, where no one will ever find them. I like to visit them, and…play with them. I
enjoy the ambience, and the smell…Like coming home."
I looked at Molly. Her face was taut and strained, but the illuminated hand she held aloft was
still steady. "What was that you said?" I murmured. "About monsters not being monsters all
the time?"
"I never knew," she said. "Never even suspected…"
"You know nothing about me," said Mr. Stab.
He stood at the far end of the table, tall and proud like a typical Victorian patriarch, his chin
held high and his eyes alight with a terrible regard. "You know nothing about what drives me
to do the things I do. Once women fascinated me, and then they horrified me. Teasers, liars,
betrayers. I took a proud vengeance upon them, hurting them as I had been hurt, and gained
much in return…But now the only intimacy I can ever know is with my victims. That moment
when their eyes meet mine, that little sigh as the blade penetrates…is all I have, now. When I
was just beginning, when everyone called me Jack, I had no way of knowing that the
immortality I bought would be as an immortal killing machine. Driven to kill and kill, and never
know peace or rest. I go on and on, in a world that makes less and less sense to me, and all
that is left to me is to take what pleasure I can, from my endless work…"
"You can’t kill him, Eddie," Molly said quietly. "You can’t. Not even your armour could undo
what he did to himself."
"What about your magic?" I said.
"Don’t ask me that, Eddie. He has been my friend. He has done…good things, because I
asked him to."
"Enough to make up for this? And all the other stashes we don’t know about?"
"Don’t ask me that. Not here."
Girl Flower floated prettily around the room, bending over withered shoulders to stare into
corrupt faces, humming a happy song to herself.
"You shouldn’t let this get to you, darlings. All living things have their roots in dead things. It’s
the way of the world." She slipped a hand inside her dress and frowned prettily for a
moment, and when she brought her hand out again it was piled high with seeds. She walked
up and down both sides of the long table, dropping a few seeds into the gaping mouths and
empty eye sockets of every corpse. "Let new life bloom," she said. "It’s nature’s way."
Mr. Stab looked at her, and Girl Flower smiled happily back at him, entirely unafraid. And the
man who was once called Jack by a whole horrified city nodded slowly.
"Perhaps I’ll come back, in some future time," he said. "To see what strange new life has
blossomed here."
I didn’t kill him. As an agent in the field, you learn that sometimes you have to settle for little
victories.
Mr. Stab sealed up his private place, and we moved on through the sewers until finally we

came at last to Manifest Destiny’s hidden domain, their underground kingdom. I’d come a
long way in search of a credible resistance to my family’s newly exposed tyranny, and they
had better not disappoint me. I needed them to be something I could depend on in this
treacherously changing world. I needed them to be a weapon I could throw at the family who’
d betrayed me. The entrance point was a huge circular portal of solid steel set flush with the
old brick wall. Four very large and muscular men stood before the portal, wearing stark
black uniforms with discreet silver piping and covering us with heavy automatic weapons as
we approached.
"Cold iron," said Molly, indicating the portal. "Keeps magic out. They’re very security
conscious."
Mr. Stab sniffed loudly. "It would take more than that to keep me out, if I wanted in."
"Oh, get over your bad self," said Girl Flower, and Mr. Stab surprised us all with a brief bark
of laughter.
I armoured up as we approached the armed guards. I wasn’t ready yet to trust Manifest
Destiny with the secret of my Shaman Bond identity. The guards were visibly impressed at
the sight of my armour, gleaming golden in the gloom, and they quickly got on their radios to
check for instructions from someone higher up. Whatever they heard through their earpieces
clearly impressed them even more, and then they couldn’t open the portal fast enough for
me. I strode up to them as though I expected such treatment as my right, and they fell back,
raising their weapons in salute. All except for one, still blocking the way but not looking
especially happy about it.
He smiled nervously at my featureless golden mask, his eyes darting back and forth. The
lack of eyes on the mask really throws people. The guard swallowed hard. "Your pardon, sir,
Sir Drood, but…We have orders to admit you and the witch Molly Metcalf, but no one said
anything about your…companions. Perhaps they could wait here while you—"
"No," I said. "I don’t think so. This is Girl Flower and Mr. Stab. Upset them at your peril."
"Get out of my way or I’ll fillet you," said Mr. Stab in his most cold and sepulchral voice. The
watching guards retreated even farther, one of them making small squeaking noises. The
guard before us looked like he’d like to make some noises of his own. I gestured for him to
lead us in, and he nodded jerkily. Molly extinguished her witchfire, and the four of us strode
into Manifest Destiny’s most secret headquarters as though we were thinking of buying the
place. Of course Girl Flower had to spoil the moment by giggling.
A short tunnel led into a vast chamber whose walls and high ceiling were covered entirely
with gleaming steel. Presumably originally added to protect against the effects of atomic
blast, but useful now to keep magic at bay. No wonder my family had never suspected their
existence. You couldn’t hope to scry or remote view through this much cold iron. The guard
led us on through more gleaming steel corridors and chambers, and everything bristled with
urgent efficiency. There were banks of computers and monitor screens, maps and clocks
and operations tables, and any amount of cutting-edge communications equipment. It
reminded me of the Drood War Room, on a somewhat smaller scale. And everywhere there
were tall and splendid men and women in their black uniforms, sitting at workstations or
crowded around tables or just striding back and forth with important messages. The men
were all perfect masculine specimens, glowing with health and vitality and purpose. Perfect
soldiers. The women were tall and lithe, and just as heavily armed as the men. Valkyries,
warrior women. They all nodded respectfully to me as I passed. A few nodded familiarly to
Molly. None of them so much as looked directly at Mr. Stab or Girl Flower. I glanced across

at Molly. She didn’t seem very happy.
"Have you ever been here before?" I asked quietly.
"No. I was never important enough to be invited here. And I have to say…it isn’t what I
thought it would be. I don’t like the feel of this place…"
The guide led us on and on, through endless branching corridors, escorting us deeper and
deeper into this unexpected labyrinth far below the streets of London. A steel maze, with the
head of Manifest Destiny at its unknown heart.
"What do you know about this man we’re going to see?" I said quietly to Molly.
"Not much," she said just as quietly. "His name is Truman. Never met him. Don’t know
anyone who has. You should feel honoured, Eddie."
"Oh, I do," I said. "Really. You have no idea. How did you hook up with these people in the
first place?"
"I was recruited four years ago," said Molly. "By Solomon Krieg."
"Now him I have heard of," I said. "The Golem with the Atomic Brain, right? A Cold War
attempt at combining magic and science, to produce a Cold War supersoldier. Deadly in
his time, and a legend in those secret wars the public never get to hear about; but last I
heard, he’d been retired from the field."
"He was," Molly said. "Over ten years ago. His old masters didn’t need him anymore, but he
couldn’t be allowed to run loose, so they sent him down here to guard the bunkers. Word is,
they locked him in here and then changed all the combinations, just in case. Manifest
Destiny found him when they moved in, still standing guard, and Truman took him in and
gave him a new purpose. The Golem with the Atomic Brain has a new cause and a new
faith, and he’d die for Truman. You can’t buy loyalty like that.
"So now Solomon Krieg walks abroad in the world’s hidden places, its secret haunts and
clubs, recruiting people like me as allies to his new cause. He found me at the Wulfshead.
He can be…very persuasive. And there he is, right ahead, guarding his master’s lair."
Our soldier guide handed us over into Solomon Krieg’s care with visible relief and not a little
haste, barely managing a sketchy salute before hurrying back to his post at the entrance
portal. I studied Krieg openly. A legend in his own right, the most terrible secret weapon the
British Secret Service ever produced. The English Assassin, the British Bogeyman:
Solomon Krieg had many such names down the years. But there was nothing romantic
about the Golem with the Atomic Brain. In his own way, he was almost as disturbing as Mr.
Stab. A killer with no conscience, no compassion, and, many said, no soul. The greatest
secret agent of all, because he would do absolutely anything and never once question his
orders. He was a terror weapon from the coldest part of the Cold War, designed to scare
the shit out of whomever he was up against.
It was a very cold Cold War. Everyone did terrible things, then.
Krieg was a little over six feet tall, with jet-black hair and pale colourless skin that contrasted
eerily with his black uniform. He was muscular but not to any unusual extent. That wasn’t
where his strength came from. Krieg was carved from clay, made flesh with ancient magics,
and then supercharged with implanted mechanisms. The best technology of his day. Right
across his forehead ran a long deep scar, usually hidden by makeup in the old photos I’d
seen. It looked like they’d just sawed the top of his head off, popped in their amazing atomic

brain, and then jammed the top back on again. It wasn’t a subtle age, back then.
Just standing before us, calm and collected, his pale face empty of all emotion, Krieg
looked dangerous. Like a coiled snake or a crouching tiger, ready to strike out and kill at
any moment, without warning. I only had to look at him, and I believed every terrible story I’d
heard about him. When he finally did speak, his voice was a harsh whisper, uninflected and
uncaring.
"Edwin Drood," he said, and just hearing my name in such a cold voice was like listening to
my own death warrant. "It is right that you should come to us. Now that you’re rogue. You
understand what it is, to be betrayed by those you gave your life to. You must meet Mr.
Truman. He is a man of vision and destiny. You can trust him."
"Well," I said. "That’s good to know. Can my companions come too?"
Solomon Krieg looked them over with his cold, unblinking gaze. "If they behave themselves.
You understand: if they step out of line, I may have to spank them."
"Go right ahead," I said. "I’ll hold your coat."
"Come on, Solomon," said Molly. "You must remember me. You were the one who brought
me into Manifest Destiny, four years ago. At the Wulfshead. Remember?"
"No," said Solomon Krieg.
He led us down yet another steel corridor, around a corner, and into a simple, private office.
And there behind a simple desk sat the head of Manifest Destiny. Leader of the resistance
against the old and mighty power of the Droods. He sat in his swivel chair with his back to
us, watching as a dozen monitor screens blazed information at him. From the way he moved
his head slowly back and forth, it seemed he was taking it all in, though it was just a babble
of mixed-up noise to me. He made us wait a while, just to remind us who was in charge
here, and then he waved one hand at the screens, and they all shut down at once. He turned
slowly around to face us, while Solomon Krieg took up a place at his side. Truman had a
broad, kindly face, but that wasn’t what I was looking at. I’d seen some strange sights in my
time, but what Truman had done to himself was truly extraordinary.
Long steel rods thrust out of his shaven head at regular intervals, radiating out for over a foot
in length, connected by a wide steel hoop, like a great metal halo. The way the skin
puckered around the base of the rods suggested they’d been there for some time. The
combined weight must have been appalling, but Truman showed no sign of any strain. My
first thought was that he’d been in an accident, and this was some kind of head brace, but
the pride in his eyes and in his bearing suggested differently.
Look at what I have done to myself, his face said. Isn’t it magnificent?
"Yes," he said, in a deep authoritative voice. "It’s all my own work. I drilled the holes in my
skull myself, inserted the steel rods one at a time, forcing them a specific distance into my
brain, following my own very careful calculations. And then all I had to do was connect them
up with a reinforcing ring, and I became the first man to realise the true potential of the
human brain. Oh, yes, my friends, this crown of thorns serves a definite purpose."
"Really?" I said. "I’m so glad to hear that."
"It all arose out of my interest in acupuncture and trepanation," he said, carrying on with his
prepared speech as though he hadn’t even heard me, and perhaps he hadn’t. "The rods in
my brain activate the energy centres, expand my thoughts, and increase the power of my

mind beyond all normal limitations. My brain is now the equal of any computer, able to store
incredible amounts of information, make decisions at undreamt-of speed, and multitask like
you wouldn’t believe. I hold the entire organisation of Manifest Destiny in my head, down to
the smallest detail. Nothing escapes me.
"I can see all the scientific and magical forces at work in the world around me, all the things
that are hidden to most mortals. I can see all the invisible and intangible threats to the works
of man. And at the same time, I am invisible and invulnerable to all those forces who would
bring me down, if they could. No magic or science can touch me now."
I tried to interrupt, but he was on a roll. He must have said this many times before, to new
recruits, but I could tell he never got tired of it.
"I created Manifest Destiny through the force of my own will, bringing people to me and
convincing them of the need for an organisation like this. People of like mind and true
hearts, dedicated body and soul to the good and necessary work before us. Nothing less
than freeing humanity from the ancient yoke of the Droods. Nothing less than setting
mankind free, at last. Every day my agents walk abroad in the world, gathering new allies,
sabotaging the Drood infrastructure, and clawing the world back from them, inch by inch. We
’re not strong enough to go head-to-head with the Droods, not yet. But soon enough, we will
be. And then…we’ll see a whole new world, with mankind no longer held in check by Drood
authority, free to make our own destiny at last."
He leaned forward across his desk, fixing me with his powerful gaze. He was staring right
into the golden mask of Drood armour, but it didn’t seem to faze him at all. "Join us, Edwin.
You know now that everything your family taught you is a lie. Believe me; it is a far greater
honour to free a world than to rule it. With your help, with what you know, and with the secrets
of your incredible armour…there are no limits to what we might achieve! Join us, Edwin. Be
my agent. And I will give you a new cause and a new purpose. Just like Solomon here."
He smiled briefly at the artificial man standing beside him. "My faithful Solomon. He was a
lost soul when I found him. Discarded by his creators, abandoned by those he’d served so
faithfully and for so long. A warrior without a war. I opened his eyes to a new cause, new
possibilities, and now he is a part of the greatest and most important army this world has
ever known. An organisation dedicated to one end…setting mankind free."
"Tell me," I said when he finally paused for breath, "did you start getting these ideas before
or after you began drilling holes in your head?"
He stared at me blankly for a moment, and Solomon Krieg stirred ominously. And then
Truman laughed, a big open cheerful sound, and Solomon relaxed again. Truman shook his
head slowly, still chuckling.
"I know; I do tend to go on a bit once I get started, don’t I? But people expect a big speech
from the big man, so…Damn, it’s good to have someone in here who isn’t intimidated or
overawed by me! Do you have any idea how hard it is for me to have a normal conversation
around here? It’s hard to just chat with other people by the watercooler, when everyone’s
ready to agree with every word I say, as though it was holy writ…Come and join us, Edwin, if
only so I can have someone around me who isn’t afraid to tell me when I’m talking crap."
He grinned at me, and I couldn’t help grinning back. I liked him rather more now, even if I still
didn’t entirely trust him. First rule of an agent: if something seems too good to be true, it
probably is too good to be true. Truman turned his smile on Molly.
"How’s my little fellow traveller? Still spreading chaos among our enemies? Good,

good…You’ve done well, Molly, in bringing Edwin to me. I know how badly you must have
wanted to kill him. I’m not blind to the history you two have. But rest assured, having him here
changes everything. The time is coming when we will take Drood Hall by force, and you have
my word that you will be with us on that day and wade in Drood blood up to your ankles."
"You know what a girl wants to hear," said Molly.
Truman smiled at Mr. Stab and Girl Flower, if a little more distantly.
"Be welcome here, my friends. There is good work here for you to take up, should you
choose to accept it. If not, go freely and of your own will." He looked back at me, his smile
broadening again. "Tell me the truth, Edwin. Now that you’ve seen Manifest Destiny, what do
you think of it?"
"You have a very impressive organisation," I said carefully. "But doesn’t it all strike you as
just a bit…Aryan?"
"Hell, no," Truman said immediately. "That was the past. We’re only interested in the future.
We have military discipline here because you can’t get anything done without it. And
everyone is expected to achieve their full potential. But we are all dedicated to the cause
first, and ourselves second."
"I’m still not clear on the philosophy behind your cause," I said.
"Freedom is a marvellous concept, but a bit nebulous in practice. Overthrowing my family is
one thing; but what do you propose to replace them with? What, exactly, is Manifest Destiny
for?"
Truman sat back in his chair and considered me thoughtfully. He wasn’t smiling anymore. He
knew set speeches wouldn’t work with me. Tiny sparks manifested briefly among his halo of
steel rods, like passing thoughts. When he finally spoke, he chose his words carefully,
directing them only at me, ignoring everyone else in his office.
"Man has gotten soft," he said flatly. "Under Drood rule, he’s lost his courage and his pride.
The Droods have used unfair, nonhuman advantages to keep us in our place, like sheep.
They maintain a bland status quo that allows alien and magical forces and creatures to run
freely in what was always supposed to be our world. Man’s world. The Droods’ control over
us must be broken, by any means necessary, so that these inhuman beings can be driven
out of our world and man can be free to forge his own destiny at last."
"And yet," I murmured, "some of these beings are your allies. The Loathly Ones. The Lurkers
on the Threshold. Some might call these beings…evil. Certainly they have no love for
humanity."
Truman spread his hands. "I’m fighting a war, Edwin, against the greatest conspiracy this
world has ever known, against a powerful and implacable enemy. I have to take my allies
where I can find them. We work together, in common cause, to bring the Droods down.
Afterwards…things will be different."
I took a step forward, and Solomon Krieg tensed. I leaned forward over Truman’s desk so
he could see his own face reflected in my golden mask.
"If you want me on your side, tell me the truth, Truman. The whole truth. And don’t hold
anything back. This close, the armour will tell me if you lie, even by omission. Tell me
everything, or I walk out of here, right now."

I was bluffing about my armour being a lie detector, but he had no way of knowing that.
When my armour can do so many amazing things, what’s one more? I was gambling that
Truman was so desperate to get his hands on my secrets and my armour that he’d tell me
things he wouldn’t tell anyone else. Truman smiled slowly, his eyes bright with the glee of
someone who knows something you don’t know and can’t wait to impress you with it. Once
again he spoke only to me, ignoring my allies.
"Why not?" he said. "I knew you’d be someone I could talk to. Someone I could trust
with…everything. Science came from man’s mind. It is ours. We created it and we control it.
Magic…is a wild thing, unnatural and uncontrollable, and it always has its own agenda. We
make use of it when we must, but we can never trust it or those who use it. When we come
to power, science will replace magic. It’s the only way man can be truly independent. The
Droods are just our first and most important enemy. Once they have been thrown down, we
will stamp out every other form of magic, and every magical creature, and mankind shall be
free at last."
I glanced at Molly. She was shocked silent, her face drained of all colour. This was obviously
all news to her. I laid a golden hand gently on her arm, signalling her to hold in her anger till
we’d heard it all. I could tell from Truman’s face that there was more to come.
"Eliminate all undesirables?" I said. "That sounds like a huge undertaking."
"Oh, it is," said Truman, still smiling. "But we’ve made a good start. Would you like to see?"
"Yes," I said.
"Yes," said Molly.
Truman chuckled. "Why not? Let me show you the future, Molly. You’ll find it…educational.
Come with me, all of you," he said, but looking only at me. "I’ve waited such a long time for
someone I could share this with, Edwin. Someone who’d understand. Come with me, Edwin
Drood, and see what Manifest Destiny is all about."
Solomon Krieg wasn’t at all happy about this, but Truman overruled him, speaking quite
sharply in the end. So Krieg led us down into the levels below the bunkers into caverns they’
d carved out of the bedrock themselves to hold Manifest Destiny’s most important secret.
Something hidden from the rank and file. Krieg and Truman led the way, and I followed, with
Molly and the others behind me. At last we were heading into the true heart of the labyrinth,
where the final truth was waiting to be revealed.
We descended down bare stone stairwells, in single file, in silence. Whatever was ahead of
us, we could all feel it drawing closer; and it felt very cold. Molly stuck close to me, her face a
rigid mask. Truman breezed along, happily humming some tune under his breath that made
sense only to him.
We finally emerged into a great stone cavern, much of it in darkness. The air was cold and
damp, and the smell reminded me of the sewers. It was a sick, rotten smell, full of filth and
pain and death. Even Mr. Stab wrinkled his nose. None of us said anything. We all knew we’
d come to a bad place, where bad things happened. All except Truman, who was still
humming his happy tune. He turned on all the lights at once with a grand gesture, and the
cavern’s contents lay illuminated below us. We were standing on a narrow walkway halfway
up the cavern wall, looking down on long rows of cells, each with its own beaten-down
inhabitant. It reminded me of Dr. Dee’s establishment in Harley Street, except there were no
cages here. Only long rows and blocks of concrete stalls, with bare concrete floors and cold
iron gates. No beds or chairs, not even straw on the concrete floors; just iron grilles to carry

away some of the wastes.
"I didn’t know about this," Molly whispered to me. "I swear I didn’t know about this."
"Come and see, come and see," Truman said happily, leading us down from the walkway.
We followed him down, and he led us gaily along the central aisle, proudly showing off the
contents of his cells. The first thing he showed us was a werewolf, in full wolf form. Seven
feet from head to tail, with silver-gray fur, it had been spread-eagled on its back on the
concrete floor, pinned down with silver spikes through all four limbs, like a specimen laid out
on a dissecting board. It whined piteously as we looked in.
"We have to do that," Truman said. "Otherwise the brutes gnaw off their own limbs to
escape. Animals. Still, they’re not here long enough to suffer much."
All I could see was the basic doggy suffering in the creature’s trapped eyes. I had no love for
werewolves. I’d seen too many of his kind’s half-eaten kills in small towns and villages. But
this…this was no way to treat even a hated enemy.
Farther down the row, vampires were nailed to the concrete walls by wooden stakes
hammered through their arms and legs. They snapped and snarled at us feebly, all
intelligence driven out of their minds by continuous suffering. Then there were elf lords,
stripped naked of their usual finery, chained with heavy steel shackles. The cold iron burned
their pale flesh terribly where it touched, charring right down to the bone, but not one of the
elves would do anything but sneer at us when we looked in. They still had their pride.
Gryphons with their eyes cut out whined pitifully in their cells. They might not be able to see
the future anymore, but they all knew what was coming. There was a unicorn whose wings
had been broken, her horn gouged roughly out of her forehead, her glory much diminished.
And a water elemental who’d been frozen into an icy statue. Her solid eyes were still horribly
aware.
Cold-eyed, cold gray lizard men from the silent subterranean ways under South London;
smoke gray gargoyles snatched from the few churches and cathedrals they still haunted. A
clay-skinned bogeyman with both its arms and legs broken, dragging itself back and forth
across the concrete floor. And something with the stink of the Pit about it. A genuine
half-breed, born of a demon’s lust. A succubus stores semen from a man she sleeps with,
and then changes into its male form, an incubus, and deposits that stolen seed in a
receptive woman. The result: a human body with a demon soul. Half of this world, and half of
the world below. They fight for one side or the other, both and neither, and they’re not nearly
as rare as they ought to be. This half-breed was held in check by a pentagram etched
deeply into the concrete floor.
It inclined its head mockingly to Mr. Stab, as though acknowledging one of its own kind. It
couldn’t speak. Someone had cut out its tongue, just in case.
Truman looked at me again and again, waiting for me to say something, but I held myself in
check as he showed me horror after horror. Pretty much everything on display here was evil,
or had done evil in their time; but nothing to match the cold-blooded evil of what had been
done to them here. In my time as a Drood agent, I’d fought and killed many of the things
imprisoned here, but that had always been in the heat of battle and the hottest of blood. I’d
killed but I’d never tortured, never delighted in the agonies of my enemies. That wasn’t the
Drood way. We fought the good fight to keep the world safe, and we took pride in doing that
work well, but this…this was an abomination.
The last captive, in the last cell, was Subway Sue. Her ragged clothes were tattered and
torn, and there was blood on them and on her face. Someone had beaten the crap out of

her. She’d been blindfolded and shackled to the wall of her concrete pen. Molly moved in
close to the bars, her face terribly cold, her eyes dangerously angry. I looked at Truman.
"This," he said proudly, "is just today’s batch. Arrogant magical creatures who prey on
humanity, overpowered by the science and stealth of specially trained soldiers. My people
are very busy these days, hunting these vermin down and bringing them here for elimination.
We can’t kill in public, of course; that would draw too much attention. It’s better this magical
filth don’t know we’re out there, on their trail…I wish we could take the time to deal with them
properly, give them the kind of death they deserve. Make them suffer as they’ve made
humanity suffer. But we can’t take the risk. So we bring them in until the cells are full, and
then we kill them humanely and give their bodies to the cleansing flames. It’s a very efficient
operation. The ovens never grow cold. Solomon sees to that. One by one, creature by
creature, we’re winning our world back from the monsters who infect it."
"There’s only one monster here," said Mr. Stab. "And for once it isn’t me. Is there, by any
chance, a cell here with my name on it?"
"Not as long as you support the cause," said Truman, and he actually dropped Mr. Stab a
roguish wink.
"I know this woman," said Molly, still staring through the cold iron bars at Subway Sue. "She’
s my friend."
"She’s a leech," Truman said briskly. "Stealing good fortune from innocent men and women,
and selling it to those who don’t deserve it. Just another magical parasite on the human
race."
Molly spun around and glared at him. "She’s my friend!"
Truman wagged a finger at her like she was a recalcitrant child. "Don’t look at me like that,
little witch. Remember your place. We allow you to use your unnatural gifts on our behalf, and
in return you get to be part of the only organisation with a real chance of bringing down the
Droods you hate so much. Obey me, and you will be well rewarded in the world that’s
coming. There will be room for you and your kind in the new order, but only as long as you
remember your place."
"That’s the problem with tunnel vision," said Molly. "All I could see was the destruction of the
Droods you promised. So when I listened to your recruitment speech, all I heard was what I
wanted to hear. But you’ve opened my eyes at last, Truman." She turned back to the cell.
"Sue; it’s me, Molly. What do you suppose are the chances of all the locks on all these cells
falling open, all at once?"
"Not good," said Sue through cracked and swollen lips. "As long as these cold iron bars
hold my magic in check."
Molly looked at me. I grabbed the steel bars with one golden hand and ripped them right out
of their concrete setting. Molly gestured once, and Sue’s shackles fell away from her. Sue
stood up, stretched painfully, and pulled away her blindfold.
"Bingo," she said softly. And every lock on every cell fell open, all at once.
Truman looked at me, gaping blankly, as I crumpled the steel bars into a ball, and then
dropped it heavily on the ground before him.
"You’ll never replace my family," I said. "You think too small. And too nasty."

He turned and ran, yelling for Solomon Krieg to hold us back while he went for
reinforcements. The Golem with the Atomic Brain moved quickly to block the way while his
master scrambled up the steps to the walkway. All around us creatures were lurching and
spilling out of their pens, free at last. Sirens were blaring in the distance. Molly and Girl
Flower helped Subway Sue stumble out of her cell, while Mr. Stab and I faced up to
Solomon Krieg.
The artificial creature smiled for the first time, and there was no humour in it, only a terrible
satisfaction that at last he would get to do what he was made to do. He raised one hand,
and a gun muzzle poked out of a slit in his wrist. He sprayed Mr. Stab and then me with
machine gun fire but couldn’t hurt either of us. Bullets ricocheted harmlessly off my armoured
chest and seemed to pass through Mr. Stab as though he was nothing but smoke. Krieg
turned his aim on the three women, but I moved quickly to shield them. Krieg raised his other
hand, and a hidden flamethrower in his other arm bathed my armour in liquid fire. The heat
was so terrible that even Mr. Stab flinched back, but I felt nothing.
Solomon Krieg shut off his flames and frowned deeply, as though concentrating on some
difficult problem. Fat sparks of static electricity appeared spontaneously around his head,
like a halo of electric flies. They spat and crackled, growing fiercer and more powerful, and
then struck out at Mr. Stab like a hammer blow of unleashed energies. The blast picked him
up and threw him twenty feet or more before slamming him into a concrete wall with
devastating force. The whole wall crumbled into ruin under the impact, burying Mr. Stab
under a pile of rubble. Solomon Krieg, the Golem with the Atomic Brain. He turned to me
and I braced myself. Once I would have trusted my armour to protect me even from such an
attack as this, but after the incident with the elf lord’s arrow, I wasn’t as confident as I once
was. I still stood my ground. I was all that stood between the three women and Krieg’s
atomic blast.
And that was when the escaped prisoners fell upon Krieg like a pack of howling wolves.
Humans and inhumans, demons and creatures of the night, they fell upon their common foe
and sought to drag him down through sheer weight of numbers. Claws and fangs tore his
colourless flesh, but no blood flowed. Krieg swayed under their attack but did not fall. He
lashed out with his machine-driven arms, throwing dead and broken bodies this way and
that with appalling strength, not yielding an inch. More prisoners came running from every
direction, desperate for a chance to drag down their hated jailer and executioner.
While Krieg was safely preoccupied, I hurried over to search the rubble for Mr. Stab, but he
was already rising to his feet, entirely unhurt, fussily brushing dust from his coat and opera
cloak. He stooped down to retrieve his top hat and placed it on his head at a jaunty angle.
He might be the worst serial killer in history, but the man had style. He looked around him at
the block of concrete pens and shook his head firmly.
"No. I will not stand for this. I am no stranger to the joys of suffering and slaughter, Edwin, but
this…There are some things a gentleman just doesn’t do."
And he went with me among the cells, helping release those who couldn’t free themselves.
The werewolves and the vampires and the like. It went against the grain for me to free such
vicious and deadly creatures, after years of hunting them down and killing them, but I couldn’t
leave them here. For the ovens. As Mr. Stab said: some things are just beyond the pale.
We left the demon half-breed where he was, of course. We weren’t stupid.
We came back from the concrete pens to find Solomon Krieg still standing, surrounded by
the bodies of the dead and the fallen. Girl Flower threw herself at him, screaming something

obscene in old Welsh. Atomic forces erupted from the golem’s scarred forehead, hitting Girl
Flower and blowing her apart into a shower of rose petals. They churned and circled in
midair, and then transformed, becoming a razor storm of a thousand cutting owls’ claws.
They hit Solomon Krieg like a deadly hailstorm, ripping and tearing at his pale flesh, but still
he stood his ground and would not fall. I might have admired him, if I hadn’t hated him so
much. (The ovens never grew cold…) The razor storm finally collapsed, exhausted, and I
went forward to do battle with the Golem with the Atomic Brain. I needed to punish someone
for what had been done here, and he would do. I try hard, but sometimes I’m not a very nice
person.
The creatures of the night fell back as I strode through their midst. They recognised the
golden armour. Solomon saw me coming and smiled again. His face was hanging in tatters
from scratched and scored bone after Girl Flower’s attack, and one eye was just an empty
red socket, but still he smiled. He didn’t bother with his built-in gun or flamethrower. Just
stepped forward and threw a punch with all his mechanised strength behind it. I heard the
bones in his hand break as his fist glanced harmlessly from my golden mask. I grabbed his
arm with both hands before he could draw it back and broke it over my knee like a piece of
kindling. Bits of shattered tech flew out of the gaping wound. Solomon Krieg grunted once,
but that was all. I let go of his arm and grabbed his head, pulling it down and forward. He
fought me with all his legendary strength, but it wasn’t enough. Atomic forces sputtered and
shimmered on the air as he struggled to put an attack together. I ripped the top of his head
right off, tearing along the old scarred fault line on his forehead, and then reached into his
head with my other hand and tore his atomic brain out.
I held it in my golden hand for a moment, studying it, that nasty triumph of Cold War
technology, and then I dropped it on the ground and stamped on it. The brain shattered into
a thousand pieces, and Solomon Krieg’s empty body fell twitching to the floor. I walked
away, and the creatures of the night fell upon the body, tearing it to pieces in a frenzy of rage
and revenge.
And that was when a spatial portal opened in the air before us, and an army of
black-uniformed Manifest Destiny soldiers came pouring through, opening fire with
automatic weapons the moment they caught sight of us. Bullets ricocheted from my armour,
but I couldn’t shield everyone. Newly freed prisoners fell screaming and dying all around me.
I grew golden spikes on my armoured fists and charged into the midst of the coming
soldiers. I struck down men and women as they tried their best to kill me, and they did not
rise again. But more and more soldiers were spilling out of the portal, their faces alight with
the fury of the true fanatic. I broke necks and heads, and threw men and women through the
air with deadly force, but still more of them streamed past me like a river around a single
rock.
I fought on. It felt good to be striking them down. Manifest Destiny had betrayed me by not
being the hope I’d so desperately needed.
Mr. Stab stepped forward to stand at my side, a long scalpel gleaming thirstily in his hand.
Nothing the soldiers did could touch him, and he cut down all who came within his reach with
an elegant disdain. Standing in the midst of blood and slaughter, he was in his element at
last. Creatures of the night, hurt and weakened as they were, fought fiercely with the
black-clad soldiers, and everywhere there was blood and screaming. Step by step we
slowed the soldiers’ advance, and step by step we drove them back. Perhaps because their
fanaticism was no match for our fury. We forced our way forward, over their dead and ours,
until finally the surviving soldiers turned and fled back through the spatial portal, and it was
shut down from their end.

I stood among the dead, in my blood-spattered armour, and raised one spiked fist in
triumph. And all around me the creatures of the night howled their triumph and my name.
Molly yelled my name again and again until finally I lowered my fist and looked at her.
"Eddie! We have to get out of here! Truman must have emergency contingency plans for a
mass breakout, and I really don’t think we want to be here when he puts them into effect."
I nodded and strode over to her, kicking black-uniformed bodies aside. Blood and gore
dripped thickly from my hands as I made the spikes disappear. My breathing slowed, and
my head cleared. Mr. Stab walked beside me without a drop of blood on his elegant outfit.
"I know you want Truman dead," said Molly. "I do too. But there’s no way we can reach him
right now."
"Agreed," I said. "His time will come. Any suggestions on what we do next?"
"I open a spatial portal of my own, and we all get the hell out of here and scatter into the
night."
"Sounds like a plan to me," I said. "Where’s Girl Flower?"
"Oh, she’ll put herself back together again, over the next few days, in some place where she
feels safe." She looked at Mr. Stab. "Can I trust you to look after Sue? I have to stick with the
Drood. We have revenges to plan."
He inclined his head graciously. "Of course, my dear. She will be safe with me. You have my
word on it."
And strangely enough, I believed him. I didn’t think he’d lie to Molly. He offered Subway Sue
his arm, and she leaned on it gratefully. Molly opened a spatial portal, and we rushed the
surviving prisoners through it as fast as we could. I kept glancing around, ready for another
sneak attack, but it never came. The great cavern remained as silent as a mass grave. In
the end, only Molly and I were left.
"So now we have two mortal enemies on our trail," I said. "My family, and Manifest Destiny.
This day keeps getting better and better. Is there anyone left we can trust?"
"Maybe," said Molly. "A few names come to mind. But even if it was just you and me, I
wouldn’t back down or cry off. I will have justice, even if I have to kill everyone else in the
world to get it."
"You know," I said, "you’d have made a good Drood."
"Now you’re just being nasty," she said.
We left through the portal, back up into the cold clean air of London town.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Sleeping with the Enemy
M olly and I emerged from her portal exactly where I’d asked her to drop us off: at the
Greenwich docks, just down from that grand old sailing ship, the Cutty Sark. Dawn was
breaking, the early morning air deliciously cool and clear after the unhealthy atmosphere of
Manifest Destiny’s holding pens. Long crimson streaks stained the lightening sky, standing
out starkly behind the tall masts of the Cutty Sark naval museum. I looked up and down the

stone wharf, but the docks were deserted. And quite right too; normal people were tucked
up in bed by now, and I had every intention of catching up with them as soon as possible. It
had been a long day, what with one thing and another.
"You bring me to the nicest places, Eddie," said Molly. "Can I ask what the hell we’re doing
here, where even fallen angels would fear to tread without armed bodyguards and a written
guarantee of safe passage?"
"Greenwich is really very civilised these days," I said. "Practically gentrified, in some places.
I keep a barge tethered here, with all the comforts and necessities of home. Another of my
safe places, when I need somewhere off the beaten track to hide from everyone, even my
own family."
"They don’t know about this barge?"
"They never asked. My family never cared how I did what I did, as long as I did what I was
told. This way."
A few minutes’ stroll down the wharf brought us to my barge, the Lucky Lady. Just another
among a couple of dozen longboats and barges tied up to the wharf. A fairly inexpensive
way to live in an expensive part of London. You get a lot of actors here…The Lucky Lady
bobbed heavily in the dark tarry waters, her colours a bright racing red and green, and all
her brasswork shining in the amber light of the streetlamps. (I have a little brownie creature
who comes around every other week and keeps the old boat spotless in return for my
leaving out a bowl of single malt whiskey. I believe in upholding the old traditions. Especially
when it means I don’t have to get down on my hands and knees with the Duraglit. Hate
polishing brass.)
I would have preferred to take Molly back to my nice flat in Knightsbridge, but I didn’t dare.
My family knew about the flat. At best they’d have agents in place, watching and waiting in
case I was stupid enough to show my face. At worst, and much more likely, they’d have
already torn the flat apart looking for clues or incriminating documents leading to where I
was and what I might be doing. I knew the procedure. I’d done it myself often enough. Well,
let them look. I never left anything of value in my flat. Or anywhere else, really. A field agent
has to be ready to walk away from anything, at a moment’s notice, and never look back. We’
re not allowed to be sentimental or form attachments. Our only roots are in the family. The
family sees to that.
I said as much to Molly, and she nodded.
"They probably smashed up all your good stuff, just out of spite. I’ve seen how your family
operates. Are you sure there’s nothing there they can use to track you? I could find you
anywhere, just from holding some object that once belonged to you."
"Not as long as I wear the torc," I said. "My armour shields me from everything."
I handed Molly down onto the deck of my barge, and then stepped lightly down to join her.
Molly looked at me thoughtfully.
"Your armour comes from your family. Are you sure they don’t have some secret way of
finding you through the armour?"
"Positive. That’s always been our strength and our weakness. The same armour that makes
us so powerful also isolates us from everything else in the world."
"So you’re always alone?"

"Yes. That’s why so few Droods can cope, out in the world. Away from the all-embracing
arms of the family. Come on, it’s cold out here. Let’s go below."
I opened the hatch and down we went into the sumptuously furnished interior of the Lucky
Lady. Wherever I live, I like to live well. I won the barge several years back in a poker game
with a down-on-his-luck private detective. Poor bugger ended up living in his own office.
Served him right for trying to cheat. There’s nothing I enjoy more than out-cheating a cheat. I
can produce extra aces from places you wouldn’t believe.
I bustled around the long living area, lighting the old naval storm lamps and adjusting the
wicks, filling the barge’s interior with a warm golden glow. Molly oohed and aahed over the
luxurious furnishings, and positively cooed over the period details. The Lucky Lady has no
modern conveniences, no electricity. The whole point of being on the barge was to be cut off
from the modern world. (There is a chemical toilet. And a portable CD player. There’s no
point in being a fanatic about these things.) Finally we both settled ourselves on the
comfortably padded chaise longue, and I relaxed for the first time in what seemed like
forever.
"I like your place, Eddie," said Molly, tucking her legs up under her.
"It’s so not you. A bit solitary, though."
"That’s the point," I said.
She considered me seriously. "I can’t imagine what it must be like for you, to live a life so
alone…so cut off from everything and everyone. Never able to trust anyone who isn’t family."
"Comes with the job," I said. "And after growing up in a hall bursting at the seams with
family, I was glad to get away."
"Has there never been…anyone else? Anyone who mattered?"
"No. Never. I can’t get too close to anyone without telling them what I do. And the family
doesn’t allow that. Marriage, even…friendships, only take place at the family’s discretion.
They have to be approved. Especially for those of us out in the field and open to the world’s
temptations. From the moment we’re born, and they clap the golden torc around our infant
throats, we belong to the family, body and soul. I live alone, wherever I live, and though I may
invite people in to visit me from time to time, they’re never allowed to stay. For their own
safety."
"So…no girlfriends? No significant others? No real friends? What kind of a life is that?"
"A life of service, to a greater cause," I said. "That was what I believed. What I’d been
taught. How was I to know it was all a lie?"
"Is there anything here to eat and drink?" Molly said, kindly changing the subject. "I could eat,
if you had something."
"Of course," I said. "Let me just knock some weevils out of the hardtack."
I set about organising a basic cold meal out of the tins I keep in stock, and opened the bottle
of brandy I keep for medical emergencies. Molly busied herself by looking over my collection
of CDs and making disparaging comments about my taste in music.
"What is this? No Hawkwind, no Motörhead, not even any Meat Loaf? Just…Judy Collins,
Mary Hopkin, and Kate Bush…"

"I like female vocalists," I said, coming in with a tray.
"All right, I’ll lend you some of my Within Temptation imports. You’ll like them. They’re a
Dutch band with a magnificent female vocalist. A bit like ABBA on crack."
"Well," I said. "There’s something to look forward to."
We attacked our food with good appetite. Molly wolfed hers down, to my quiet approval. I
can’t stand people who pick at their food. Afterwards we sat together with the brandy
warming in our bellies, companionably close, still too buzzed from the day’s adrenaline to
sleep just yet. So we talked about old times, old cases, where we’d always been on different
sides and doing our best to kill each other, as often as not. There are some things you can
only talk about with old enemies. Because you had to be there, to understand.
The case of the millennium upgrade was a classic foul-up of almost legendary proportions.
My family got word that a rather eminent German scientist was about to defect from Vril
Power Inc., in Munich, and had come to London to sell the fruits of his research to the
highest bidder. That put it in my territory, so I was sent in to make sure that his work went to
someone the family approved of. Or to shut the scientist down, with extreme prejudice, if he
didn’t feel like cooperating.
We don’t normally get that excited over industrial espionage, but Herr Doktor Herman
Koenig worked at the cutting edge of the computer–human mind interface and had
apparently developed a means of direct contact between human thought and computer
capacities. Theoretically, this could result in a combination of the two capable of producing
a whole far greater than the sum of its parts. An awful lot of people were prepared to pay an
awful lot of money for exclusive rights to such a process, so it was up to me to ensure that
only the right sort of person got their hands on it. Or make sure no one did. My family can be
very dog in the manger about some things.
Doktor Koenig had set up a makeshift laboratory in a disused government think tank in the
old Bradbury Building, just down from Centre Point. Breaking in was child’s play. I was used
to the kind of security that throws a demon from Hell at you if you get it wrong. Electronic
locks and motion detectors aren’t really in the same league. Herr Doktor hadn’t even shelled
out for some armed guards, the cheap bastard. Really, some people deserve everything
that happens to them.
I let myself into the Bradbury Building lobby a good three hours before the auction was due
to start and made my way easily up through the quiet building. Everyone else had gone
home, oblivious to the drama to come. I armoured up and trotted easily up the forty-four
flights of stairs to the doktor’s floor. (Never trust an elevator.) I didn’t expect any serious
opposition on this case.
I didn’t know Molly Metcalf was already in the building.
She’d arrived on the roof via a shielded teleport spell, let herself in, and worked her way
down. She was there to protect Doktor Koenig from outside interference. Not because she
understood anything about the implications of the computer–human mind interface, or would
have approved of it if she had, but because she believed passionately in the right of people
to improve themselves by any means possible and thus help free the world from Drood
control.
Right, Molly said at this point. Computers baffle me. I can just about work my e-mail, and that
’s it. Though I do enjoy surfing dodgy porn sites.

So; we both burst into the doktor’s lab at the same moment, scaring the hell out of the guy,
and then stopped short to glare at each other. I knew Molly by reputation, and of course she
recognised the golden armour at once. We both struck out at each other with every weapon
we had, unleashing energies and forces that would have been immediately fatal to anyone
but us. Doktor Koenig cried out hysterically in German and tried to protect his precious
equipment with his own body. The whole thing escalated very quickly…and we brought the
house down. The Bradbury Building just crumbled and fell apart under the impact of the
forces we unleashed, and the whole place collapsed into ruin and rubble. Molly and I came
out of it entirely unscathed, of course, but Herr Doktor Koenig was gone, and all his
equipment with him. He got blamed for the explosion, but it was still hardly my finest hour.
Certain people in my family were very scathing.
And that was how I first met the wild witch Molly Metcalf.
The last mission we butted heads on was the case of the Pendragon reborn. It seemed like
every precog and medium in the country worth her salt was excitedly reporting the return of
the Pendragon: that Arthur had been reincarnated and would soon start to remember who
he really was. And so the race was on to find him, with all sides ready to claim him as their
own.
And brainwash the poor sod to their particular cause, Molly interrupted.
Well, quite, I said.
Anyway, my family always has the best information, and the Pendragon reborn was quickly
identified as one Paul Anderson, a young advertising executive based in Devon. As it turned
out, the only Drood agent in that area was still incapacitated after a very unfortunate incident
involving one of the local powers, Joan the Wad, so I was sent down to fill in on the grounds
that I was the only field agent not currently working in a case. The family couldn’t teleport me
there in case such a magic was detected and gave away our interest. So I had to take the
train down from London to Devon, and it’s a hell of a long journey.
The family wouldn’t even spring for a first-class ticket.
But I got to Paul Anderson first, explained the situation as best I could, showed him my
armour to prove I wasn’t crazy, and persuaded him to come back to the Hall with me, for
further testing. Just to make sure he was the real deal. (You’d be amazed how many
pretenders to the throne turn up every century. And don’t even get me started about the
bloody Fisher King.) Paul was actually rather relieved. Apparently he’d been having
recurring and very vivid dreams of knights in armour clashing bloodily on heaving
battlefields, which was a bit disturbing for a young advertising executive with prospects.
And then Molly turned up. Yelled for Paul to get the hell away from me, called me a liar and a
fascist stooge to my face, and then backed Paul up against the wall of his own living room
while she hit him with all her best arguments. I argued my corner just as fiercely, and soon
Molly and I were shouting right into each other’s faces. Unfortunately, all we succeeded in
doing was confusing the crap out of Paul, who yelled for both of us to get out of his house
and his life and never come back. Molly wasn’t used to being out-shouted, so she lashed out
at Paul with one of her best resolution spells, forcing his inherited core personality to the
surface.
And that was when it all went to hell in a handcart.
The spell hit something inside Paul Anderson, expanded out of all control, and blew up the
cottage we were standing in. At first I really thought Molly and I had done it again, but when

the smoke cleared the three of us were all standing safe and sound in the ruins of the
cottage. Me in my armour, Molly inside her protective shield, and Paul Anderson in
blackened and tattered clothing but with a whole new look on his face. Molly seized the
moment to attack me, determined that the Droods would not control and influence this
Pendragon reborn. I fought back, of course, and while the two of us were distracted, the new
Pendragon just walked away, into the night.
The first hint Molly and I got that something had gone terribly wrong was when the forest on
the hill behind the cottage exploded. We stopped trying to kill each other and looked around,
and for as far as I could see the whole horizon was on fire, as century-old trees burned
brightly against the night sky. The flames leapt up high, fierce and malevolent, driven by
more than natural forces. Molly and I agreed to a very temporary truce and went up the hill to
see what the hell was going on. I’ll never forget my first sight of the man who had been Paul
Anderson, transformed and transfigured, standing laughing in the flames, untouched by the
terrible heat, chanting ancient and awful spells in a forgotten tongue.
Turned out the precogs and mediums had only got it half right, as usual. Paul Anderson was
a Pendragon reborn, all right, but not Arthur. Paul was Mordred, son of Arthur, back again to
spread his malice in the world.
Molly and I approached him cautiously. We both knew who he was, who he had to be. I was
already thinking seriously about calling in reinforcements. If Mordred had come into his full
power, he was way out of my league. Fortunately, Molly’s spell had brought him back
prematurely, and he was still pretty confused. Or he’d never have launched such a basic
attack spell at my armour. The armour reflected the spell right back at him and blew his as
yet unprotected human form to pieces. Nothing left of him but bloody gobbets, spread over a
wide area.
Molly disappeared while I was organising a force to deal with the forest fire.
And the family were really scathing about this one.
That was pretty much the pattern, down the years. Molly and I would show up to claim some
important person or prize, always on different sides of every argument, more than ready to
kill each other to prevent the other from getting away with the prize or the person.
Sometimes I won, sometimes she did, but I’d say honours were about even, on the whole. I
can’t say I ever really hated her, and I was relieved to discover she felt the same way. It was
only ever business for both of us; just the job, nothing personal. Except in a strange way I
guess it became personal. There’s nothing like repeatedly trying to kill someone to really get
to know them, and admire them. To appreciate their qualities.
"How many people have you killed, Eddie?" Molly said finally, hugging her knees to her
chest.
I shrugged. The question didn’t make me feel uncomfortable, as such. It just wasn’t anything I
ever thought about. "I stopped counting years ago. You?"
"Surprisingly few, all things considered. It’s a big thing to kill someone. You don’t just kill who
they are, but everyone they might have become, and everything they might have done."
"Sometimes that’s the point," I said. It was important to me that she understood. That I was
an agent, not an assassin. "I like to think I’ve only ever killed in self-defence, or to protect the
world. To prevent future suffering or killing. But in the end…my job was just to do whatever
my family told me to do. And I did, because I trusted them. If they told me someone needed
killing, I always assumed they must have a good reason. In my defence, I would say that

mostly they were right, and obviously so. I have killed some really evil bastards, in my time. I
could give you names…"
"I probably already know them," said Molly. "You have quite a reputation, Eddie."
"Yes. I was proud of it, once. But not just as a killer, I hope?"
"Well…mostly. You never were the subtlest of agents, Eddie."
"Lot you know," I said airily. "Most of the jobs I did, I was in and out and never left a trace.
That’s the mark of a good agent: to get the job done, and no one ever knows you were
there."
"If you say so," said Molly, smiling. "But…did you never question any of your orders? Any of
your assignments?"
"Why should I? They were my family. We were all raised to fight the good fight, to protect the
world, to see ourselves as heroes in the greatest game of all. Family was the one thing you
could depend on, in an untrustworthy world. So I killed the people they told me to. And if
sometimes I wasn’t happy about what I did…I learned to live with it."
"That’s why you live alone," said Molly. "Apart from family, who could hope to understand the
things we do?"
We sat quietly for a while, listening to Enya sing on the portable CD player. From outside
came the low murmur of the wind, the sounds of the water and the wharf, and the distant
rumble of city traffic. A whole world going on, just as always, not knowing that everything had
changed. But that…was for tomorrow. I could feel my body slowly relaxing, winding down
from a day I thought would never end.
"So," Molly said finally. "What do we do next? What can we do next?"
"I don’t know," I said honestly. "I’ve learned a lot I didn’t know, but not the one thing I needed
to know. Why my family threw me to the wolves. Why I’ve been declared rogue from a family I
served faithfully all my life. Why my own grandmother is so determined to see me dead. I
must have done something, but I’m damned if I know what. I mean, I know now why my family
have hung on to power for so long. I know what the Drood family business really is. But it’s
not like I knew or even suspected any of this before today."
"Have you considered contacting other members of your family who’ve gone rogue?" Molly
said suddenly. "Would you like to? I mean, if nothing else, they should be able to give you
some solid hints on how to hide from your family, how to survive on your own, out in the
world."
I thought about that. I still had a definite distaste for the word rogue, even though I was one
now. There had always been rogues, throughout family history. Certain individuals who threw
off family authority and ran away into the world. Or had been driven out, for good reason.
Their names were struck from the family genealogy, and no one was permitted to mention
them, ever again. Even now, back in the Hall, someone was removing all traces of my
existence, and everyone who ever knew me would be instructed never to use my name
again. Even my uncle Jack and my uncle James would go along. For the family. Rogues
were worse than treacherous; they were an embarrassment. And so they spent their lives
hiding in deep cover, to avoid being hunted down and killed.
"The only rogue I’ve ever known," I said slowly, "was the Bloody Man, Arnold Drood. Evil little
shit. You know what he did? With the children? I can’t believe how he was able to hide it for

so long…Anyway, the family told me what he’d done and where he was hiding, and I went
straight there and killed him." A horrid thought struck me, and I looked anxiously at Molly.
"They told me…but was it really true? Did I kill an innocent man?"
"No," Molly said quickly, patting me comfortingly on the arm. "Relax, Eddie. He really did do
all the awful things everyone said he did. Your family weren’t the only ones on the Bloody
Man’s trail. But only one of you could get to him despite his armour." She considered me
thoughtfully for a moment. "How did you manage to kill him, Eddie?"
"Easy," I said. "I cheated. Let’s change the subject. Given that I’ve been such a good soldier
for so long, will any of the other rogues agree to talk to me?"
"They’ll talk to me," said Molly. "I’ve had dealings with some of them, in my time. Don’t look
so shocked, Eddie. You’re out in the real world now, and we do things differently here.
Alliances come and go, and we all deal with whomever we have to, to get things done. I don’
t have a family to back me up, so I made my own, out of the few people I really trust. I know
people everywhere. Also, I know people who know people. In fact, I know of three Drood
rogues living in and around London. If I vouch for you, they’ll agree to a meeting. Probably."
"I don’t care about just surviving," I said. "I won’t hide in a hole and pull it in after me, like the
other rogues. I need to bring my family down, all the way down, for what they’ve done. For
not being what they said they were. But…there has to be someone around strong enough to
stop Manifest Destiny. Bad as my family are, those bastards are worse. And you can bet all
the damage we did to them today won’t even slow them down. They’re big and they’re
organised and they’re rotten to the core. If I do break the Droods’ hold on the world…who
would be left strong enough to stop Truman from doing all the awful things he plans to do to
everyone who’s not Manifest Destiny?"
"There is one obvious answer," Molly said. "Set them both at each other’s throats."
"No," I said immediately. "I won’t be responsible for starting a war. Too many innocents
would die, caught in the cross fire. And not everyone in my family is dirty. Some of them are
good people, fighting the good fight not out of family duty but just because they believe it’s
the right thing to do."
"If you say so," said Molly.
It was my turn to consider her thoughtfully. "I couldn’t help noticing, Molly, that you’ve been
very…reticent today. Holding back, as it were. None of your usual wild magics in any of our
battles. In fact, you’ve let me do most of the hard work."
She grinned. "I was wondering when you’d notice. I’ve been watching you in action, Eddie.
Seeing what you can do. Trying to get a handle on who you really are. I’ve hated and fought
the Droods most of my life, and with good reason. They killed my parents when I was just a
child."
"I’m sorry," I said. "I didn’t know."
"I never found out why. Droods aren’t big on explaining their actions. That’s how Truman was
able to snare me so easily…But you were always different, Eddie. I’ve fought a dozen
different Drood agents in my time, but you…you were the only one who ever fought clean.
You’ve always…intrigued me, Eddie."
"I love it when a woman talks dirty," I said.
We were leaning towards each other when the barge’s proximity alarm went off, a silent

crimson light that filled the cabin. I gestured urgently for Molly to be quiet and rose quickly to
turn off the CD player. Outside, the wind was howling with a voice not all its own. I turned off
the crimson warning light with a sharp gesture and dropped down beside Molly again. I put
my mouth right next to her ear.
"Don’t move, don’t speak, don’t do anything. Something’s out there. And my security alarms
wouldn’t flare up like that unless there was something really nasty in the vicinity."
"Looking for us?" said Molly, barely breathing the words.
"Seems likely. But it’s not my family. That would set off an entirely different alarm."
"You got any weapons on this boat?"
"No. And no defences either. That’s the point of this place; nothing to attract any attention. It’
s supposed to be right off the map. Nothing for any enemy to detect."
We listened to the wind raging. The cabin was rising and falling jerkily now, as the waters
were disturbed. The temperature dropped sharply. My breath steamed on the air, mixing
with Molly’s.
"What do you think it is?" Molly whispered.
"Could be any number of really bad things. I’ve made some serious enemies in my time.
Probably think I’m vulnerable, now my family’s disowned me."
"But you’ve got your armour, and I’ve got my spells…"
"No. If we give away our position we’ll have to go on the run again. And I’m running out of
safe places to hide. Keep your head down and stay close to me. Just being this close to my
torc should hide you too."
We sat silently together as the barge shook and shuddered and the wind howled like a living
thing. One by one the storm lamps guttered and went out so that a darkening gloom filled the
cabin, as though there was something close that could not abide light and warmth. I could
feel the presence of something horribly other drawing inexorably closer, something fierce
and foul, like a thorn in my soul. I was shivering now, and so was Molly, and not just from the
bitter cold that penetrated the cabin. Something was looking for us, something dangerous to
our bodies and our souls, and it was perilously close. I took Molly in my arms, and she held
me tightly. Whether I held her to bring her closer to the torc, or just out of a desperate need
for human contact, I couldn’t say.
I could have armoured up. I was pretty sure my armour would protect me from whatever was
outside. But using such a strong magic would have given away my position immediately.
And Molly would have been left unprotected.
The presence outside finally moved on, and the night went back to normal. The wind fell
away to murmurs, and the barge stopped rocking as the waters stilled. The storm lamps
popped back on, one by one, and light and warmth slowly filled the cabin again. Molly
started to pull away from me, and I immediately let go of her. She shook her head slowly,
and then stretched theatrically.
"God, I’m tired. Don’t get any ideas, Eddie. We’re allies on this case, nothing more."
"Of course," I said. "I need to get some sleep. Would you like me to fix some hot chocolate
before we turn in?"

"Hot chocolate sounds very good," she said. "But where, exactly, are we turning in? How
many beds do you have here?"
"Just the one," I said. "In the bedroom at the far end. You can crash there, and I’ll put some
blankets on the floor here."
"My perfect gentle knight," said Molly, smiling.
I made two mugs of steaming hot chocolate in the tiny galley, and we sat together and talked
about nothing in particular for a while. Just winding down, from a long, hard day. Finally we
both started yawning, Molly’s eyelids drooped heavily, and she went to sleep right there on
the couch. I rescued the mug from her slowly relaxing fingers and put it to one side. The
sleeping draught I’d put in her mug had worked fine, disguised by the heavy taste of the
chocolate. It wasn’t that I entirely mistrusted her, but we had tried to kill each other too many
times, and I needed to feel safe while I slept.
I picked Molly up and carried her into the small enclosed bedroom at the far end of the
barge. I laid her out carefully on the bed and undid a few buttons at her throat. She moved
slowly in her sleep, murmuring like a dreaming child. I started to sort out a few spare
blankets to sleep on, but I was just too tired. And the bed was plenty big enough for two. I
stretched out beside her. Molly was already snoring gently. No doubt she’d have a few harsh
words to say when she woke up in the morning…but that could wait.
My bed fit me like a glove, and sleep had never felt so good.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Happy Daze
I was dreaming. A great voice spoke in my mind, saying: I can help you, if only you’ll let me.
There’s no end to the things we might achieve together, you and I. I am the answer to all your
questions, and all your problems. Just stop fighting me.
I wanted to believe the voice. I really did. But I’ve never been able to trust anyone apart from
me. The family saw to that.
I woke up with a knife at my throat. Molly was sitting astride my chest and not in a good way.
She was leaning right over me, the edge of her silver dagger pressing just hard enough into
my throat to cut the skin. It stung, more irritating than painful, but I could feel a slow trickle of
blood coursing down the side of my neck. I decided to lie very still. Molly’s face hung right
above mine, red with rage, but her eyes were cold as ice. Her hand was very steady, for the
moment, the razor-sharp edge resting just above my Adam’s apple. And I’d been having
such a good dream too. I gave Molly my very best polite smile.
"Good morning, Molly. Sleep well?"
"You drugged me, you bastard! Did you think I wouldn’t notice? And you slept in the same
bed as me after all that nonsense about blankets on the floor!"
"Yes," I said carefully. "I slept in the same bed as you. Emphasis on the word slept. You
needed a good night’s sleep, and so did I, so I just…helped things along a little."
Molly’s scowl deepened, becoming actually dangerous. "You drugged me. Do you really
expect me to ever trust you again after this? You could have done anything to me while I was
asleep!"

"Yes," I said. "I could have. But I didn’t. Still, you shouldn’t take it personally. I was very tired. I
’m sure I’ll do better next time."
"There won’t be a next time, you treacherous little toad," said Molly. But there might have
been just a hint of a smile tucked away in one corner of her mouth. She took her knife away
from my throat and climbed off my chest. I raised one hand to my throat, and then winced as
my fingertips came away wet with blood. Molly sniffed loudly as she got up off the bed. "Don’
t be such a big baby. You’ve cut yourself worse shaving. I don’t suppose there’s a shower
anywhere on this boat, is there? I feel really funky after sleeping in my clothes."
"No shower," I agreed. "But you can boil some hot water on the gas cooker, for a wash."
I started to roll out of bed, and then stopped abruptly, crying out despite myself as a stab of
pain filled my shoulder and left arm. It hurt like hell as I forced myself to sit up, cradling my left
arm to my chest. I tried flexing it slowly and yelped again as a vicious pain flashed all the
way from my shoulder to my fingertips. Just bending the elbow felt like someone had stuck a
screwdriver into the joint and twisted it. Even moving my fingers hurt. I looked across at
Molly, but she shook her head immediately.
"Nothing to do with me. Let’s have a look at your shoulder."
I couldn’t get my shirt off on my own. It hurt too much. Molly had to help me, unbuttoning and
then pushing the shirt back, not hurting me more than she had to. I turned my head carefully
to inspect my left shoulder. All around the scar tissue left by the healed arrow wound, my skin
was swollen and inflamed. Molly leaned in for a closer look, and then pressed the skin here
and there with surprisingly gentle fingers. I hissed at the pain, and she nodded slowly.
"Were you injured yesterday, fighting at the holding pens?"
"No," I said. "I was in my armour. I can’t be hurt while I’m in my armour."
"The elf lord’s arrow got through," said Molly, studying the scar tissue thoughtfully.
"Yes, but that was…extremely unusual. And I already used a med blob to heal the wound."
"Doesn’t seem to have made too good a job of it," said Molly. She stood back and traced a
series of complex symbols on the air, glowing trails following her fingertips to leave behind
alien characters hanging shimmering between us. Molly studied them silently for a while, and
then looked back at me as the symbols faded away. I didn’t like the expression on her face.
"Good of you to take an interest," I said, trying to keep it light. "But if you’re about to suggest
surgery with that knife of yours, I think I’ll pass."
"You’re no use to me as a cripple," she said. "Unfortunately, there’s nothing I can do for you.
The original wound has healed, but it seems the elf’s arrow left something behind after you
pulled it out. It’s not poison, as such. I could cope with that. But there’s something in your
body that shouldn’t be there. I can’t tell what it is, but it’s spreading."
I nodded slowly. "The arrow came from another dimension," I said. "That’s the only way it
could pierce my armour. I’ve seen the substance once before, in the Armourer’s lab. He
called it strange matter."
"Good name for it," said Molly. "My magic can detect it but not affect it. All I can tell you for
sure is that your body doesn’t have any defences against it. It’s bad now, and it’s only going
to get worse."

"Say it," I said. "Just say it."
"I’m sorry, Eddie. This strange matter is eating you alive, inch by inch, and I don’t have the
first idea on how to stop it."
"How long?" I said numbly.
"Three, four days tops."
"And after that?"
"There isn’t anything after that. I’m sorry, Eddie."
I sat on the edge of the bed, thinking. Not feeling much, not yet. "I thought I’d have more
time," I said finally. "To do all the things I need to do. But I suppose…it’s just another
deadline. And I can do deadlines. Help me get my shirt back on."
It took both of us to get my left arm back into the shirtsleeve, and I made some more noises,
even through gritted teeth. I sat quietly as she did up the buttons. I was breathing hard, and I
could feel cold sweat drying on my face. But all the time I was thinking, hard. Three days,
four tops. The only people who might be able to help me were the doctors back at the Hall.
And maybe the Armourer. Uncle Jack. All I knew about strange matter was what he’d told
me. That it came from somewhere else, that it had certain useful properties that no one
understood, and that it didn’t follow any of our rules. But even if I were to go back to the Hall,
give myself up, the odds were Grandmother would have given orders for me to be killed on
sight.
More than ever, I needed answers. Information. Options. And the only people who might
have those…were the other rogues.
Molly buttoned up my collar and wiped the sweat from my face with her handkerchief. I
nodded my thanks. I wasn’t used to needing help. I wasn’t used to hurting. The only way to
seriously damage a Drood was to catch him out of his armour, and we’re all very hard to
surprise. I hadn’t been really hurt since I was a teenager. Pain and weakness were new
things to me, and I hated them. Molly saw some of this in my face and smiled briefly.
"Welcome to the world the rest of us live in. What do you want to do now, Eddie?"
I stood up carefully. My left arm hung down at my side, quiet as long as I didn’t try to use it. I
needed to be up and moving, doing…something. "Who’s the best rogue to talk to? Who’s
most likely to know something about me and my family?"
"That would be Oddly John," Molly said immediately. "I’ve never been able to get much out
of him, but I’m pretty sure he knows important things."
"Is he far from here?"
"Two train journeys."
"Forget that. Call up another spatial portal."
"I’m not altogether sure that’s wise," Molly said carefully. "They’re really only for use in
emergencies. They take a lot out of me."
"Could anyone track us through the portal, once we’re gone?"
"No. But any number of people would detect a magic like that operating and come here to

check it out."
"Let them," I said. "It doesn’t matter. I doubt I’ll be coming back here again. We can’t afford
to travel openly in London anymore. By now both my family and Manifest Destiny will have
filled the city with agents looking for us. Tell me about this…Oddly John."
"He lives out in Flitwick," Molly said, not quite avoiding my eyes.
"Nice little commuter town some way outside London proper."
"There’s something you’re not telling me."
"There’s lots I’m not telling you. But this…you really need to see this for yourself, Eddie."
"All right," I said. "Let’s go."
The portal dropped us off just outside a small town and on top of a grassy hill overlooking an
old Georgian manor house set in its own spacious grounds. Birds were singing cheerfully
under a bright blue sky, and the early morning air was crisp and clear. All very picture
postcard, except for the high stone wall surrounding the manor grounds topped with iron
spikes and rolls of barbed wire. The only entrance was through a massive iron gate heavy
enough to stop a tank in its tracks. Looking beyond the high walls, I could just make out
people walking back and forth in the grounds. All very peaceful. But even from a distance,
the manor house had a dour and forbidding look, and there was something…wrong, about
the people in the grounds. Something about the way they moved, slowly and aimlessly, not
interacting with each other. I looked at Molly.
"All right," I said. "Spill it. What kind of a place have you brought me to?"
"This is Happy Acres," Molly said calmly. "A high-security installation for the criminally
insane. The locals call it Happy Daze."
"And our rogue is in there? What is he, crazy?"
"Yes, and no," said Molly. "You’ll have to see for yourself. Oddly John’s position here
is…complicated."
We started down the hillside, slipping and sliding on grass still wet from the dawn, heading
towards the home for the criminally insane. All at once, the heavy iron gate didn’t look nearly
heavy enough. I studied the manor house dubiously until the rising stone walls shut it off from
view. I’d never been to a madhouse before. I wasn’t sure what to expect. When Droods go
seriously crazy, we kill them. We have to. The armour makes them far too dangerous. Like
Arnold Drood, the Bloody Man. I can’t believe that bastard was able to fool us for so long.
Molly and I reached the bottom of the hill, and I trailed after Molly as she headed for the
entrance. I wasn’t holding back. It was just that Molly knew the way.
"So," I said. "Criminally insane. Are we talking…ax murderers and the like?"
"Oh, at least," Molly said cheerfully. "But not to worry; I’m sure everyone will make you feel
perfectly at home."
We stopped outside the iron gate, which seemed even bigger close up. It looked like it had
been cast in one piece, with bars so thick you couldn’t get a hand around them. Its design
was stark and purely functional. It was there to keep the inmates in, nothing more. Molly hit
the buzzer recessed into the thick stone pillar beside the gate, and after a lengthy pause a
heavyset man in hospital whites came over to glare suspiciously through the gate at us. The

leather belt around his thick waist held a radio, pepper spray, and a long heavy truncheon.
"Hello, George," Molly said easily. "Remember me? I’m here to see my uncle John again.
John Stapleton."
"You know the routine, Molly," said George in a surprisingly soft and pleasant voice. "You
have to show me a signed and dated pass from the hospital administration."
"Oh, sure," said Molly. She held an empty hand up before him, and he leaned forward for a
closer look, his lips moving slowly as he read the details on a nonexistent pass. He finally
nodded, and Molly quickly lowered her hand. George worked an electronic lock on the other
side of the gate, and there was the sound of heavy metal bolts disengaging. The gate swung
smoothly open on concealed hydraulics, and Molly led the way into the house grounds. The
gate swung shut behind us, locking us in with the inmates.
"Shall I call up to the house for an escort to take you the rest of the way?" said George, his
hands resting on his belt next to the pepper spray and the truncheon.
"No, that’s all right, George," said Molly. "I know the way."
I must have looked a bit disconcerted, because George smiled reassuringly at me. "First
visit? Don’t worry. None of the patients will bother you. Just stick to the path, and you’ll be
fine."
We set off up the wide gravel path. "What was that bit with the empty hand?" I said quietly.
"Basic illusion spell," Molly said briskly. "Lets people see what they expect to see."
"Uncle John," I said with some emphasis. "And you knew the guard’s name. Are you a
regular visitor here, by any chance?"
"Spot on, Sherlock. I found out who Oddly John really was by accident, and I’ve been
keeping it to myself ever since. I was hoping I could use him to dig up some useful dirt on
your family. Some secret piece of insider knowledge I could use as a weapon."
"And?"
She looked at me briefly, her expression unreadable. "Wait till you meet him. You’ll
understand then."
Wide green lawns stretched away on either side of the path, cropped and cultivated to within
an inch of their lives. Patients in dressing gowns, with wild hair and empty eyes, wandered
listlessly back and forth, taking the air. A handful of bored-looking guards in hospital whites
were enjoying a cigarette break by the ornamental fountain. Some of the patients muttered
to themselves. Some just made noises. None of them looked like an ax murderer. And none
of them even glanced at Molly and me, caught up in their own private worlds.
As Molly and I drew closer to the big house, I realised that all the windows were barred, with
heavy metal shutters ready to be swung into place. Swivelling exterior cameras watched us
approach. The main door looked very solid and very shut. Molly leaned over the electronic
combination lock set into the post by the door and pecked out four numbers.
"You’d think they’d change the number once in a while," she said fussily. "Or at least come
up with a decent combination. I mean, it’s been 4321 for as long as I’ve been coming here.
Just so the staff won’t have any trouble remembering it in an emergency. Anybody could
guess it! Or at least, anyone with the normal number of marbles. I’d write a stern letter to the

hospital governors, but you never know. I might need to break in here some day. Or break
out."
The door swung open, revealing a pleasant open lobby. Nice carpeting, comfortable
furnishings, plaques and commendations on the walls. The only off note was that the
receptionist sat in her own little cubicle behind heavy reinforced glass. She was a
middle-aged, matronly figure in the ubiquitous hospital whites, with an easy, welcoming
smile. Molly smiled and nodded familiarly back, and the receptionist pushed a guestbook
through a narrow slit in the glass for us to sign. After only a moment’s pause, I wrote Mr. &
Mrs. Jones.
"Oh, that’s nice," the receptionist said cheerfully. "Makes a change from all the Smiths we
get coming here. Most people don’t care to use their real names, when they come visiting
relations. Just in case someone finds out there’s a cannibal in the family. Though of course
we’re always very careful about things like that. Good to see you back again, Molly. Most
people don’t like to come to a place like this. We get all the bad ones here: the child killers,
the serial rapists, the animal mutilators…All the patients no one else wants, or can’t cope
with. We had the Dorset Ripper in here just the other week. No trouble at all; sweet as you
like."
"We’re here to see my uncle John," said Molly, cutting off a monologue that threatened to run
and run. "John Stapleton?"
"Of course you are, dear. Oddly John, we call him. He’s never a problem, bless him. Don’t
know what he did to get sent to a place like this, before my time, but it must have been pretty
bad, because there’s never any talk of transferring him to a less secure establishment, for all
his good behaviour. Remember: always watch your back here, dears. Many of the patients
in this place are the last faces a lot of people ever saw. Now, you make yourselves
comfortable, and I’ll call for an attendant to escort you up to the top floor."
Molly stretched out in a comfortable chair, but I didn’t feel like sitting. This was not a
comfortable place, for all the trimmings. I looked through an open door into an adjoining
parlour, where patients were just sitting around in dressing gowns. It wasn’t what I’d
expected. No thrashing figures in straitjackets, no muscular guards hovering, ready to beat
the crap out of anyone who misbehaved. Instead, just a collection of very ordinary-looking
people, sitting in chairs, flicking through papers and magazines, or watching morning
television shows. The only attendant nurse was sitting at the back, doing the Times
crossword puzzle. Molly moved in beside me, and I jumped a little despite myself.
"It’s all done with kindness, these days," she said quietly. "The chemical cosh. They’re all
doped to the eyeballs, so they won’t cause any trouble or talk back. It’s a lot cheaper than
restraints. Though you’ll notice there are surveillance cameras everywhere, just in case. The
real hard cases are kept out of sight, so as not to upset the visitors."
"That’s right," said our escort, appearing suddenly beside us. Another muscular man in
hospital whites, this time with a shaved head and a self-satisfied smirk on his face. He kept
one hand on his belt, right next to the truncheon. He didn’t offer to shake hands. "Hi; I’m
Tommy. Ask me about anything. I’ve been here, like, forever. It’s good money, with lots of
vacation time, and the work’s not exactly demanding most of the time. Hardly any
excitement, these days. The wonders of modern science; better living through chemistry."
He looked though the door into the parlour and sniggered openly. "Look at them. You could
set fire to their slippers, and they wouldn’t notice. Like your missus said, we keep the real
animals downstairs, in the Bear Pit." He sniggered again, looking sideways at Molly. "We
had to put your uncle John down there a few times, when he first came here. He didn’t give

us any more trouble after that."
"How is he?" said Molly. "Is my uncle having one of his good days?"
Tommy shrugged easily. "Hard to tell, with him. Long as he behaves himself, that’s all I care
about." He sniggered again, this time looking at me. "Oddly John—that’s what we call him.
He’s really not all there, poor bastard. First visit, is it? Don’t expect too much from the old
man. We keep him well tranked, so he won’t go wandering. A lot of them get restless
legs…"
"It’s nice to know you’re taking such good care of my uncle," said Molly. "I must be sure to
give you a little something, before I leave."
Tommy smiled and nodded, the fool.
He and Molly talked some more, but I stopped listening. I used the Sight the torc gave me to
see the lobby as it really was, hidden from merely mortal gaze. There were demons
everywhere, scuttling across the ceiling and clinging to the walls and riding on the backs of
the patients. Demons don’t cause madness, but they delight in the suffering it causes. Some
of the demons had grown fat and distended, like parasites gorged on too much blood. A
squat black insect thing squatted at the attendant nurse’s feet, like a faithful pet waiting for a
treat. Some of the demons realised I could See them. They stirred uneasily, sinking barbed
claws and hooks into the patients’ backs and shoulders, making it clear they wouldn’t give
up their victims without a fight. I wanted to kill every demon in the room, rip them off their
victims, feel their skulls and carapaces break and shatter under my golden fists, but I couldn’
t risk making a scene. I needed to see Oddly John. I needed to know what he knew.
I turned my back on the parlour and shut down my Sight. There’s a reason why I don’t use it
very often. If we could all See the world as it truly is, all the time, we couldn’t bear to live in it.
Not even Droods. Ignorance can be bliss.
I went back to stand with Molly, who immediately sensed my impatience. She stopped
pressing the guard for information and said she’d like to see her uncle now. Tommy
shrugged and led us over to the elevators. And all the time I was thinking, Three days, four
tops. Part of me wanted to sulk and stamp my feet and shout, Not fair! But when had my life
ever been fair? I couldn’t afford to give in to hysterics. Had to stay calm and focused.
Perhaps, at the end, all that would be left to me was to go down fighting and take as many of
my enemies with me as I could.
If so, I couldn’t wait to get started.
Tommy took us up to the top floor. The elevator had its own security override lock. I peered
unobtrusively over Tommy’s shoulder as he punched in the combination. Sure enough, it
was 4321. A bunch of determined Boy Scouts could burgle this place. Probably get a
badge, these days.
"Why Oddly John?" I said abruptly. "What is it that’s so…odd, about him?"
Tommy sniggered. I was getting really tired of that sound. "Because he talks to people that
aren’t there and often won’t talk to people that are. He sees things no one else can and talks
all kinds of rubbish about it, if you’ll let him. Lives in a world all his own, that one. Used to
have really bad nightmares, until we increased his medication. To be fair, though, he’s never
violent; eats up all his food and never makes a fuss about taking his pills. That’s the best
kind of patient, in a place like this."

He led us all the way down to the end of the corridor. Its walls had been painted in pale
pastel colours, so as not to overexcite the patients. Motion-sensitive cameras followed us all
the way. The door to Oddly John’s room stood halfway open. Tommy stood back and
gestured for Molly and me to go in.
"Any problems, there’s a big red panic button right by the door. Hit that, and I’ll come
running. Don’t be afraid to use it. We had a nurse here not long ago who let a guy get too
close to her, and he bit half her face off before we could pull him away. We kicked the crap
out of him afterwards, but it didn’t do her much good. Never came back. Don’t blame her.
Heard she got some really decent compensation money, though. Remember: no matter how
nice and sweet they are to you, you can’t trust any of them. They’re all sick, vicious bastards,
or they wouldn’t be here. No offence, Molly. You have a nice visit with your uncle John."
He ambled away, and Molly and I looked at each other. "Cheerful fellow," she said.
"I thought so."
"I really must remember to give him an appallingly fierce case of hemorrhoids before I
leave."
"I would. Shall we go in?"
We went in. The room seemed pleasant enough. More calming colours on the walls, a
comfortable-looking bed, and some basic furnishings, all clearly bolted to the floor. Some
books on a shelf, flowers in vases, and a television in one corner, turned off. The patient was
sitting quietly in a chair by the window, looking out through the bars. A frail old man, in a
faded dressing gown. He didn’t look around as we came in or react at all as we approached
him. I checked him out briefly with the Sight. He didn’t have a demon anywhere on him, but
he did have a golden collar around his throat. He was a Drood, all right. I moved around to
get a good look at his face, and then gasped and gaped openly.
"What?" said Molly. "What is it? Do you recognise him?"
"Hell, yes," I said. "His name isn’t John. This is William Dominic Drood. And he’s not a
rogue; he’s listed as missing. The family’s been looking for him for years. He used to be
head librarian, back at the Hall. One of our very best research scholars. He
just…disappeared one day, and was never seen again. And believe me, we all looked really
hard for him. He knew all kinds of things about the family and the Hall, secrets we couldn’t
afford anyone outside the family to know. But we never found him. His disappearance is one
of the great unsolved mysteries of my family. And all these years, he’s been…here?"
I stopped and looked abruptly at the surveillance camera in the far corner of the room.
"It’s all right," Molly said quickly. "I hit it with my illusion spell the moment we walked in here.
They’ll see just what they expect to see, nothing more. But it won’t last long. So talk to the
man. Call him by his right name. I’ve tried everything I could think of and never got more than
a dozen words out of him. See if you can do any better. But make it quick. Time is not on our
side."
"I know," I said. "Trust me, I know."
I crouched down beside Oddly John’s chair. It was easier to think of him that way, mostly
because of the really unsettling look in his eyes. Whatever he was seeing out of his window,
I was pretty sure I wouldn’t see it if I looked out. Or would want to.
"William?" I said. "William Dominic Drood. Can you hear me?"

He didn’t even look around. The sad, lost look on his face didn’t change for a moment.
"Try showing him your torc," Molly said suddenly. "That might jar something loose."
I opened the top buttons of my shirt with my right hand only, revealing the golden collar
around my throat. I took hold of Oddly John’s chin with my hand and turned his face gently
but firmly around to look at me. "Listen to me, William. I’m Edwin Drood, sent to find you.
See my torc. Do you remember me? I used to be in and out of the library all the time, when I
was just a kid."
He looked at the torc, and just like that, he woke up. It was eerie, even shocking, to see a
whole new personality flow into his face, like water pouring into a glass. He looked sharp
and intelligent, and not in the least mad or drugged. He jumped up out his chair and backed
away from me, both hands held out as though to ward me off.
"Is this it?" he said. "Have you come to kill me at last, for the family?"
"No, no!" I said quickly. "I mean you no harm. I’m not here for the family. I’ve been declared
rogue, and I don’t know why. I was hoping you might have some answers, or at least some
advice."
He calmed down almost immediately and came back to lower himself into his chair. "So,"
he said finally. "Eddie Drood. Of course I remember you. Always plaguing me with
questions, querying everything, borrowing books and never bringing them back. Best
student I ever had. And now you’re a rogue in the company of the infamous Molly Metcalf. No
offence, my dear."
"None taken," said Molly. "Do you remember me coming here before?"
"I’m afraid not. I don’t…come out much, anymore. Unless I absolutely have to. There was
some talk of transferring me out of here. I soon put a stop to that…"
"But why?" I said. "What are you doing here, in a place like this? What happened to you?"
He looked at me sadly. "I can See the ghosts of everyone you ever killed, Eddie. So many of
them…And there’s something inside you, something other…I See so clearly these days,
whether I want to or not." He looked across at Molly, crouching down now on the other side
of his chair. "And you’ve made so many unfortunate deals to get the power you wanted. To
avenge your poor parents. I can See the chains hanging around you, weighing you down. So
much weight to carry, for one so young…" He looked out his window again so he wouldn’t
have to look at Molly or me anymore.
"What do you See, out there?" I said.
"All the views from all the other dimensions that intersect with this one. I See a forest of
flowers, singing in awful harmonies. I See a great stone honeycomb, a thousand feet high,
with people crawling in and out of the stone cells and scuttling up the walls like insects. I See
towers of pure light, and waterfalls of blood, and a cemetery where they rise from their
graves to dance in the moonlight."
I looked across at Molly. "You think he really Sees these things?"
"Who knows?" said Molly. "He’s your family."
Oddly John looked sharply at me. "So; you’re rogue now. What did you do, Eddie?"

"I don’t know! I was hoping you might—"
"You didn’t come here for help," said Oddly John. "You came here looking for safety and
security, just like me. I faked madness to get into this place. Faked the symptoms, faked all
the paperwork. I was very convincing. I’m safe here. I’m not locked in; the family’s locked out.
They’ll never find me here. They want me dead, you know. Or at least, some of them do.
Because of what I know. What I found out…"
"I’m going to bring the family down," I said. "Break their hold on the world. Will you help?"
"No!" said Oddly John, suddenly banging his frail fists on the arms of his chair. "That’s not
enough! The family must be wiped out, slaughtered, down to the very last of us. Including you
and me. We have to die. The Drood family is vile, evil, utterly corrupt. Because of what we
did, and what we all are…There can be no forgiveness for such a sin. Only death can make
up for such a crime." He grabbed my hand in a painfully tight grip. "Are they still looking for
me? After all this time?"
"Yes. Of course. You’re very important to the family."
"They’re looking for me because of what I know." He let go of my hand and stared out the
window again. "They’ll never stop looking for me."
"What is it?" said Molly. "What do you know?"
"Their agents could be anywhere," Oddly John said craftily. "Visitors, patients, guards. But
they’ll never find William Drood, because he’s not here. Only Oddly John is here. I hide
inside him, so deep no one can see me…But you’re here. If you found me, so can they!"
He grew really agitated then, whipping his bony head back and forth. It took Molly and me
some time to calm him down again, hushing and comforting him like a small child after a
nightmare. "Why does the family want to find you so badly?" I said. "What is it that you
know?"
"I don’t know," Oddly John said miserably. "I can’t remember. I made myself forget, you see.
I had to. It was the only way to stay sane…I found out something; I know that. I read a book I
shouldn’t have, a very old book, and it told me something terrible about the family. About
what we really are."
"I know," I said. "It was a shock to me, too, to learn that we’re the secret masters of the
world."
"Not that," Oddly John said scornfully. "Who cares about that? I could live with that…No, this
was much worse…Sometimes, I dream I’m back in the Hall. I walk into the Sanctity, and
stand before the Heart…and then I wake up screaming. There’s something I don’t
remember, something I mustn’t remember, because it’s too awful, too terrible to bear. The
secret at the heart of the Droods…I left the Hall. I ran and I ran and I ran, and finally I came
here. I’m safe here. Safe from everything and everyone; even myself. I don’t know what’s
happening out in the world anymore, and I don’t care. Knowing things doesn’t make you
happy."
"No one followed me," I said quickly. "Noone knows we’re here. You’re still safe."
"Bless you, Eddie," he said. "I wish there was something I could do for you. But I can’t help
you. I can’t help any of us. We’re all damned, you see. All damned, because of what we did,
and what we are…"

And just like that, he went back inside himself again. William Dominic Drood disappeared,
and there was only Oddly John. The personality drained out of his face, leaving just the
empty shell behind, sitting quietly in his chair, looking out through the bars on his window at
the things only he could see. Hiding from my family, and from whatever it was he was so
desperate not to remember. What could he have discovered, what truth could he have
stumbled over, that was so much worse than what I already knew? There was no point in
asking Oddly John or William Drood.
If he hadn’t been crazy when he came in here, he sure as hell was now.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Chasing Eddie
B ack at the top of the grassy hill I turned slowly, looking out over the small town of Flitwick.
Picturesque houses, narrow streets, farms and farmlands off in the distance. All so very
ordinary, so everyday, so unknowing of all the terrible things that shared the world with them.
Once it was my job to protect people like them from all the bad things that hid and lurked in
the shadows; but the more I investigated, the deeper I dug, the more I discovered just how
deep and dark the shadows really were. And now it seemed my family were looking back at
me, out of the shadows. What could William have found out? What could be so terrible he
had to wipe it from his mind? If I found out, would I end up having to do the same?
I shivered, standing on the top of a hill in the middle of nowhere, looking out over a world I no
longer recognised.
My arm hurt. Even when I was careful not to move it, the damned thing ached like a bad
tooth. There was something inside me, eating me alive. Three days, four at the most. And
always, this constant pressure of needing to be doing something, anything, so as not to
waste a moment of the precious time I had left to me. And yet for all my digging, all my
questions, I still had nothing certain to lash out at. I knew the names of my enemies, but not
their reasons. I had to think, to plan; and still the clock was ticking, ticking…I looked at Molly,
standing silently beside me.
"Well," I said. "Thank you for bringing me here, Molly. That was…seriously depressing. Are
there any more bright and helpful fellow rogues you think I ought to meet?"
"I could just portal out of here and abandon you, you know," said Molly.
"You’d miss my sparkling personality."
"Look, don’t knock yourself, Eddie. You got a lot more out of Oddly John than I ever did. And
I do have another rogue in mind. Someone who could be very helpful. He knows a lot of
things. He’s called the Mole."
"Now there’s a name that inspires confidence."
"Do you want to meet him or not?"
"Does he have three friends called Ratty, Toad, and Badger?" I said hopefully.
Molly sighed. "This is revenge for me introducing you to Mr. Stab, isn’t it?"
"No, really, I can’t wait to meet Mr. Mole in his hole."
She looked at me. "Your arm’s worse, isn’t it?"

"Yes. Let’s go."
Molly summoned up another spatial portal, frowning with concentration. The process
seemed to take longer this time, and sweat ran freely down her face. The air churned and
whirled before us, spinning around and around like water going down a plughole. It plucked
us off the hilltop and into itself, and we were off on our travels again.
When Molly and I reappeared, we were standing in a toilet cubicle. It was very cramped.
Molly and I were pressed tightly together, face to face. Anywhen else, I might have taken a
moment to enjoy it, but unfortunately I had one leg jammed down the toilet bowl.
"Oh, shit," said Molly.
"Don’t even go there," I said, struggling to remove my foot from the bowl. "Do I take it we’re
not where we were supposed to be?"
"Of course not! But it could have been worse."
"Oh, shit," I said.
"What?"
"It would appear the previous occupant didn’t flush. Would you please breathe in so I can get
my foot out?"
We struggled together for a moment, banging loudly against the sides of the cubicle, and
finally I was able to jerk my foot free. The bottom of my trouser leg was soaked, and I didn’t
want to think what with. I glared at Molly.
"Today started out with a knife at my throat and yet still has managed to go steadily downhill.
Where the hell are we?"
"Paddington railway station."
"Really?" I said. "I remember it as being somewhat bigger."
"Fool. We’re in the ladies’ toilet at Paddington. Which means…someone tried to intercept
my portal spell."
Getting out of the cubicle took some cooperation and a certain amount of brute force, as the
door opened inwards, but eventually we spilled out into the main toilet area. Half a dozen
women stopped adjusting their dress and repairing their makeup to stare at us. Molly glared
right back at them.
"Come on; don’t tell me you’ve never thought about doing it in a cubicle."
"I feel like such a slut," I said. "Promise me you’ll spank me when we get home, mistress?"
The half dozen women couldn’t get out of the toilet fast enough. I grinned at Molly, but she
wasn’t in the mood.
"All right," I said. "On a scale of one to ten, how bad is this?"
"Oh, I think this one goes all the way up to eleven. Someone must have tried to override my
spell’s coordinates to make us arrive at a destination of their choosing. Where they could be
waiting for us. But, being the happy paranoid little soul that I am, I long ago preprogrammed
my spell to be prepared for such an eventuality and, at the first sign of outside tampering,

drop me off at a predesignated emergency arrival point."
"God, I love it when you talk technical."
"Shut up. I chose this place because a toilet cubicle is one of the few places where you can
just appear out of nowhere without being noticed. Do I really need to add that I did not have
two people in mind when I chose this arrival point?"
"Why Paddington?" I said.
"It’s a central London station, with trains always going somewhere. You can just pick one at
random, hop on, and disappear without a trace. Now, let’s get out of here. The only people
powerful enough to intercept a portal spell would have to be major league sorcerers. Which
could mean your family."
"Why not Manifest Destiny?" I said, just to be contrary.
"You heard Truman. They put their faith in science, not magic. My kind are only allowed in as
fellow travellers. What interests me is how your family could know that you’re travelling with
me now."
I shrugged. "We probably have agents buried deep within Manifest Destiny. We have
people everywhere, in every kind of organisation, so we won’t be surprised when they try to
start something nasty. How else do you think we know everything that’s going on?"
Molly looked at me. "And you didn’t think to tell me this before?"
"Sorry; I thought you knew how my family operates. Besides, I’ve been distracted. I’ve had a
lot on my mind, just recently."
"Is there anything else I ought to know?"
"There’s something squelching in my shoe."
"I should have stabbed you while you were still asleep," said Molly.
We made our way up and out and onto the Paddington station main concourse. The
wide-open space was full of people bustling back and forth as though their lives depended
on it or just standing together like sheep, staring vacantly at the changing displays on the
information screens. Train engines roared loudly, people spoke loudly into mobile phones,
doing their best to look as though their calls were vitally important, and every now and again
the station loudspeakers would blast out some deafening but totally incomprehensible
statement.
I relaxed a little. I like crowds. Always somewhere to hide, in a crowd. Molly and I pretended
to examine the menu on a nearby fast-food stall while taking a surreptitious look around. It all
seemed normal enough. Two armed policemen wandered by, burdened down with flack
jackets and equipment, alert for everyday problems. They weren’t interested in Molly and
me. They didn’t know people like Molly and me even existed, the lucky devils.
"I liked this place a lot better before they gave it a makeover," I said to Molly. "There used to
be a restaurant here where you could order chili con carne and chips, and beans and bacon
and sausages, and pile it as high as you liked. Now, that was a meal and a half. I used to
call it the cholesterol special. You could feel your arteries hardening just looking at it."
Molly regarded me with distaste bordering on disgust. "I’m amazed your heart didn’t just

explode."
"I always did like to live dangerously. Speaking of which, don’t turn around too quickly, but
spot the two guys approaching from four o’clock. I think we’ve been made."
"Already? Damn." Molly sneaked a look in the direction I’d indicated. Two men in
anonymous dark suits were striding towards us, holding their hands up to their faces and
talking to their wrists. Either they had radios up their sleeves or they were Care in the
Community. Molly scowled. "They could just be plainclothes policemen…"
The two men produced automatic weapons from slings under their jackets and opened up,
actually shooting through the packed crowd to get at us. Men and women crashed to the
ground, bleeding and screaming and dying. People were thrown this way and that by the
bullets’ impact, and one man’s head exploded. The woman with him sank to her knees
beside his kicking body, howling her grief and horror. People ran screaming in every
direction and dived for what little cover there was. And the two men with automatic weapons
ran straight at Molly and me, firing without pause. The armed police came running, and the
two men shot them down, hosing them with bullets till they stopped moving.
I ducked behind the fast-food stall, and Molly was right there with me. Above us, bowls of
soup shattered and blew apart, spraying hot liquid everywhere. The staff inside the stall
shrieked and ducked down, their screams almost drowned out by the chaos and the roar of
gunfire. The whole stall rocked and shuddered as bullets pounded into it again and again.
How many guns did these bastards have? Shouldn’t they be running out of ammo by now? I
risked a quick peek around the corner of the stall. The two men were coming right at us,
firing steadily, followed by a dozen more men in dark suits from all across the concourse,
running to join them. There were dead bodies everywhere in spreading pools of blood.
"We can’t stay here," I said to Molly. "I can armour up, but that won’t protect you."
"I don’t need protecting," said Molly. "I’ll arrange a diversion, and then we both run like hell
for the nearest street exit. Sound good to you?"
"Sounds like a plan to me. What kind of diversion?"
"Close your eyes and put your hands over them."
I did so, and a moment later came an incandescent flare that hurt my eyes even through
tightly squeezed eyelids. Raised voices cried out in shock and pain, and Molly grabbed me
by the shoulder and hauled me out from behind the bullet-riddled fast-food stall. I forced my
eyes open as I stumbled after her. Black spots blurred and jumped in my vision, but at least I
could see. The armed men were staggering around, tears streaming from half-open eyes,
firing their guns at any sudden sound or movement. And since most of the civilians were
gone, that mostly meant they were shooting at each other. I could live with that. I passed right
by one gunman as I followed Molly to the nearest street exit, and I paused just long enough to
break his neck with one blow. Never involve civilians in our wars, you bastard.
I would have liked to kill more of them, but there wasn’t time. I’m not an assassin, but
sometimes the only right thing remaining is to just kill the bastards until there aren’t any left. I
hate it when innocents get caught up in my world. That’s why I became an agent in the first
place: to protect innocents from what lives in my world.
The gunmen had to be Manifest Destiny. My family would have been more subtle. And, I still
believed, more sparing of the innocent. But how had Manifest Destiny found us so quickly?
Maybe they had all the railway stations staked out, just in case. Made sense. My bad arm

yelled at me as I ran after Molly, and I told it to shut the hell up. I was busy. A few bullets flew
past me, not even close. Some of the gunmen were getting their sight back. I could have
armoured up, but I couldn’t trust the stealth factor to work under these conditions, with so
many watching eyes, and I was still reluctant to expose my family’s greatest secret to public
gaze. Unless I had to.
I caught up with Molly as she stumbled to a halt halfway up the steep slope that led out into
the main traffic. We were both breathing hard. Cars and vans roared past unknowing, as
though it was just another day. I looked at Molly.
"What do we do now? Hail a taxi?"
"I wouldn’t. You can never be sure whom the drivers are really working for. I’ve got a better
idea."
She bent over and hiked up her dress, revealing a dainty silver charm bracelet around her
left ankle. She snapped one of the charms free and held it up: a delicate little silver
motorcycle. Molly muttered a few Words in a harsh language that must have hurt her throat
and breathed on the charm. It wriggled eerily on her palm, and then leapt off, growing rapidly
in midair until standing on the slope before us was a Vincent Black Shadow motorbike. A
big black beast of a bike, and a classic of its kind. I was impressed.
"I’m impressed," I said to Molly. "Really. You have excellent taste in motorcycles. If a tad
nostalgic."
"Don’t talk to me about modern bikes," said Molly. "No character."
More bullets flew past us. They were getting closer. I looked back down the slope. Men with
guns were staggering in our direction, tears still rolling down their cheeks. Their aim wasn’t
that accurate yet, but with automatic weapons it didn’t need to be.
"Get on the damn bike!" said Molly.
I looked around. The Vincent roared to life as she kick-started it, and then swung onto the
leather seat.
"Hold everything," I said. "I do not ride pillion."
"My bike, my ride. Get on."
"I am not riding pillion! I have my dignity to consider."
More bullets whined past us. They really were getting closer. Molly smiled sweetly at me.
"You and your dignity can always run alongside, if you like, but I am leaving…"
I growled something under my breath, and swung aboard the seat behind her. Molly
slammed the Vincent into gear and we shot off up the slope, pursued by bullets, and straight
out into the main flow of traffic. Outraged horns and voices greeted us from every side as we
appeared out of nowhere and just bullied our way in. Fortunately, the average speed of
London traffic is rarely more than about ten miles per hour between traffic lights, so we were
able to dodge and weave in and around the slower-moving vehicles and build up a healthy
acceleration. I held Molly tightly around the waist with my right arm. I tried to use the left as
well, but it was just too painful, so I let my forearm rest on Molly’s left thigh. She didn’t seem
to mind. Even tucked in close behind her, the air still hit my face like a slap and tugged at my
hair. I put my mouth next to Molly’s ear.

"Would it have killed you to conjure up a couple of crash helmets too?"
"Helmets are for sissies!" said Molly, shouting back over the roar of the Vincent’s engine.
She laughed joyously. "Hold on, Eddie!"
"I’ll just bet you’re not insured," I said.
We weaved in and out of moving cars as though they were standing still, steadily building up
speed. Taxi drivers shouted insults, and shop fronts blurred past on either side. We’d
already taken so many turns I hadn’t a clue where we were any longer. A big red London bus
pulled out in front of us, because London buses don’t give way to anything, and my heart
practically leapt out of my chest as Molly gunned the throttle and shot us through the
narrowing gap like a lemming on amphetamines. I may have screamed, just a little.
"Try to lean with me on the curves, Eddie!" Molly shouted back cheerfully. "It makes
manoeuvring so much easier."
We howled across intersections at scary speeds and treated stoplights with contempt. The
bike swayed this way and that, dodging and weaving as it plunged in and out of traffic,
slowing for no one. It would have been quite exhilarating, if I’d been driving. As it was, I just
clung on with my good arm and threw a series of hopeful prayers up to Saint Christopher,
the patron saint of travellers. He’s been officially decommissioned these days, but no one
asked my permission, so…
The first I knew that we were being pursued came when a bullet whined right past my ear. I
grabbed Molly tightly and risked a look back. Two big black cars were coming up fast
behind us. They must have been really heavily armoured, because they built up speed by just
shunting and slamming aside everything in front of them. When there wasn’t any room, the
big black cars would drive right over whatever was in front of them, crushing the lesser
vehicle like a tank. Other cars were driven right off the road or intimidated into taking sudden
side turnings they hadn’t intended to. The traffic between the black cars and us thinned
rapidly, and men leaned out of the cars’ shaded windows to fire automatic weapons at us.
Luckily, that’s a lot harder than it seems in the movies.
I turned back and yelled into Molly’s ear. "Manifest Destiny, right behind! And they’re
shooting at us!"
"I had noticed, actually. You sure it’s not your family?"
"Positive. They wouldn’t use guns. They’d use something much more extreme."
Molly sent the bike flying around a tight corner, leaning right over. I did my best to help,
leaning with her, but it was all I could do to hang on with just the one arm. The ground did
look awfully close there for a moment. Molly wrestled the Vincent upright again and opened
the throttle all the way. We roared down the street, flashing in and out of startled cars,
sometimes close enough to scrape their paintwork with our wing mirrors, all the time
dodging gunfire from behind. They were starting to get our range. I risked another look back,
turning right around on the leather seat. The black cars were smashing through everything in
their path, ramming cars out of their way. Skidding civilian cars slammed into each other,
some overturned, and there were pileups the length of the street behind us. The black cars
just kept coming, and the bullets got closer and closer, no matter how much we dodged and
weaved.
I armoured up. The living metal flowed smoothly over and around me in a moment, sealing
me off from a hostile world. Bullets hit my back and just ricocheted away. They couldn’t touch

me or Molly now. The rate of gunfire increased as the black cars drew nearer, bullets
spraying across my back, my shoulders, and the back of my head. I didn’t feel the impact,
but I could hear it. Armouring my left arm had made it strong again, if no less painful. I
slipped it carefully around Molly’s waist, and felt a little more secure.
The Vincent was really hammering along now, the passing world just a blur. Molly was
laughing out loud, whooping with the joy of speed. I was more concerned about what would
happen if just one of the bullets happened to hit the Vincent’s fuel tank. I mentioned this to
Molly.
"Don’t worry!" she yelled back. "This isn’t really a motorbike. It just looks like one."
"Not a real bike? Not a real Vincent Black Shadow?"
"Come on," said Molly. "What did you expect from a charm bracelet?"
"Just as long as it doesn’t turn back to a pumpkin at midnight…"
Molly laughed again and pushed the bike’s speed even harder. I took my right arm away
from Molly’s waist and drew the Colt Repeater from its shoulder holster. It took me a while,
and hurt my shoulder like hell, but I finally wrestled the gun out. I breathed hard for a moment,
controlling the pain and bracing myself for what I had to do next. I tightened my hold around
Molly’s waist with my strengthened left arm, turned around on the seat, and looked back at
the cars behind me. There were four of them now, with a fifth catching up, ploughing their
way through any traffic that didn’t get out of their way fast enough. Men were leaning out of
the car windows and firing at me with a whole assortment of weapons. One even had a
rocket launcher. He fired the thing, and the rocket shot out, slammed into my armoured side,
and ricocheted away to blow up a Gap store. I hoped there was nobody inside, but I had no
way of knowing. Manifest Destiny didn’t care who got hurt or killed. And that was when I
decided that just escaping these bastards wasn’t good enough.
They were all firing at me now, bullets bouncing off my chest and golden face mask. The
bike slammed this way and that as we shot in and out of a traffic jam. The extra pain in my
arm made me cry out, and tears ran down my face under the mask. But the Colt Repeater in
my right hand was steady as hell when I trained it on the pursuing cars.
I tried shooting out the tyres first. That always worked in the movies. But though I hit every
tyre I aimed at, not one of them blew. The armoured cars were running on solid rubber tyres.
Manifest Destiny must have seen those movies too. So I aimed at the driver of the nearest
car. He laughed at me, through his bulletproof glass windscreen, right up until the Colt
Repeater sent a bullet through the windscreen and blew his head apart. The car swerved
wildly, mounted the pavement, and rammed through three parking meters before sliding to a
halt. I aimed carefully and shot dead the other four drivers, and their cars skidded and
crashed and slammed into storefronts.
But more black cars were already joining the chase, screeching around corners from every
side street we passed. Soon there were a dozen new cars on our trail, swerving back and
forth to make my aiming harder. I kept blowing away their drivers, one at a time. Such aim
would have been impossible under normal conditions, but luckily the Colt Repeater did most
of the work for me. Thank you, Uncle Jack. Still more cars joined the pursuit, seeming to
come from everywhere at once, ploughing through the civilian traffic like it wasn’t even there,
tossing lighter cars aside or grinding them underneath. There was a chaos of crashed and
burning vehicles behind us for as far back as I could see. Wide-eyed men and women
huddled in shop doorways, yelling into mobile phones as we shot past.

The gunfire was constant now, slamming into me and the bike, trying to bring us down with
sheer pressure of bullets. Most of them ricocheted away, chewing up storefronts and cutting
down pedestrians. Manifest Destiny were using me to kill innocent people. I couldn’t let that
go on.
A black car came roaring out of a side street and drew alongside us. The man in the
backseat shot me in the face at point-blank range, crying out angrily as the bullet glanced off
the golden mask. They were on my left side, so I couldn’t shoot them. I risked letting go of
Molly’s waist with my left arm, punched through the car’s windscreen, pulled the driver out,
and threw him into the road ahead. The black car ran over him, skidded away, hit a parked
car, and flipped end over end before crashing to a halt. I put my aching arm back around
Molly’s waist.
A police car tried to get involved. It came screaming around a corner, siren blaring, lights
flashing. Two of the big black cars closed in on either side of it, and then both drivers jerked
their steering wheels over at the same time. The heavily armoured cars crushed the police
car between them, crunching up the standard steel chassis like so much tinfoil. The black
cars roared on as the police car skidded out of control and smashed through a glass
storefront, its siren still wailing forlornly. I felt bad for the cops in the car. The police aren’t
supposed to get involved in our wars. They’re not equipped to deal with the likes of us.
I turned back to yell in Molly’s ear. "There’re actually more cars after us now than when we
started! Are we going anywhere in particular?"
"Yes! Away!"
I had to laugh. "I’m so glad we’ve got a plan…"
"Anything else, Eddie, only I’m a bit busy at the moment…"
"Too many civilians are getting hurt! Maybe we should just stop and fight it out."
"Don’t even think that! The odds suck. You can bet the moment we stop moving, they’ll have
long-range sharpshooters in place to target us. Your armour can’t protect me from that. They
’d threaten to kill me, until you agreed to armour down. Then they’d shoot you full of tranks,
take you back to headquarters, and dissect you alive to get at all your family secrets and the
armour in particular. They’d probably do the same to me for turning traitor on them. I’d rather
go down fighting. Or at least escaping."
"You’ve really thought this through," I said.
"Hell," said Molly. "It’s what I’d do. Now hang on. Our only real hope is to lose these
bastards."
A black car emerged from a side alley and lurched out onto the street ahead of us. It spun
around on squealing wheels and came charging straight at us. We were blocked in by cars
on either side, with no room to manoeuvre. I could have jumped off. The armour would have
protected me. But that would have left Molly on her own…I was still trying to figure out what to
do when Molly revved the engine for all it was worth and aimed the bike right at the gleaming
radiator of the approaching black car. I could hear her chanting something, but the rushing
wind ripped her words away. The black car loomed up before us, close enough that I could
see the driver laughing at us, and then, at the very last moment, the Vincent rose up into the
air and sailed right over the top of the black car. We landed behind the car with only the
faintest of bumps and kept on going. I looked back just in time to see the Manifest Destiny
car smash into another black car that had been following right behind us. The two cars

slammed together, head to head, and then blew apart with a satisfying large explosion.
I turned back and hugged Molly tightly so I could yell in her ear. "I didn’t know the bike could
do that!"
"It can’t! But I can. Though not very often, so you’d better hope that doesn’t happen again."
I sent up some more prayers to St. Christopher.
Molly swung the bike around a sharp corner, and then hit the brakes so hard it would have
knocked all the breath out of me if I hadn’t been wearing my armour. The street ahead of us
was completely empty, cleared of all traffic and pedestrians. The only people who could
have arranged that so quickly were my family. And sure enough, there they were. I looked
over Molly’s shoulder and saw what she had already spotted. Halfway down the street three
golden figures stood like statues, the morning light gleaming brightly on their armour.
I was actually a little flattered. Three field agents, just to bring me in. I had no doubt they
could do it. So I put the Colt Repeater away and hit the stud on my reverse watch. God bless
you, Uncle Jack. Time rewound itself, spinning the world back thirty seconds, so that once
again Molly and I were just approaching the corner. As Molly started to turn, I yelled urgently
into her ear, and she brought the bike to a skidding halt, the back wheel sliding back and
forth as it locked. We both bailed off the bike, and she said the Words that turned it back
into a silver charm. I armoured down, and we both disappeared into the nearest side alley.
The three golden field agents were already sprinting towards us, but a dozen black cars
came screeching around the corner. They saw the field agents and drove their armoured
cars right at them, the fools. Molly and I watched from the shadows of the side alley as the
first car reached the first agent. He just stood his ground, and then slammed his golden fist
down onto the black car’s bonnet at the very last moment. The whole front of the car
compacted, ramming into the ground, the back came up, and the car somersaulted over the
agent’s head before crashing to the ground behind him.
The second agent launched himself through the windscreen of the next car, killed everyone
inside, and burst out the back of the car and onto the bonnet of the car following. The third
agent picked up one armoured car and used it to hit another. Black cars screeched to a halt,
and men spilled out, firing all kinds of weapons. Soon the whole street was full of men in
golden armour doing terrible things to men of ill will.
Made me feel proud to be a Drood.
"Time we were going," I said quietly to Molly.
"Damn, your people are good," she said.
We sneaked quietly away, just two more terrified pedestrians fleeing the carnage. I suddenly
realised there was blood on Molly’s face. It was dripping from her nose and spilling down
her chin from her mouth. She dabbed at it with a small silk square from up her sleeve, but all
she succeeded in doing was moving the blood around. I stopped her and took out my own
handkerchief. Molly stood quietly and allowed me to mop the blood from her face.
"What happened?" I said. "Were you hit? Did a bullet get you?"
"No," said Molly. "I did this to myself. I told you: spatial portals are serious magic. They take
a lot out of me. And then, what I did with the bike, on top of that…Magic always has to be
paid for, one way or another. That’s why rituals and preparation are so important; they raise
the energies necessary to power the spells I use. So I don’t have to draw on the energies of

my own body. And I have been doing a lot of quick and dirty magics for you just lately,
Eddie."
"I’m sorry," I said. "I didn’t know. Didn’t realise what I was asking of you. Don’t think I don’t
appreciate it. There. You look better now."
"Thanks."
"That’s okay. I couldn’t have you drawing attention to us, could I?"
"You are such a gentleman." She looked at me. "You look…pretty shit yourself, Eddie. How’
s the arm?"
"Worse without the armour."
"The poison’s spreading, isn’t it?"
"Yes. The pain’s moved beyond my shoulder and into my chest as well. Are we far from your
next rogue agent?"
"Not too far. I was heading in the right general direction all along. We can walk it from here."
"Good. Let’s go see the Mole in his hole."
"Funny you should say that," said Molly.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Home Alone
I wasn’t keen on going back down into the Underground train system again, but Molly
insisted. It did seem to me that every time I’d gone underground recently, bad things had
happened to me. But then, above ground hadn’t been that safe either. Molly and I walked
back the way we’d come, heading for Blackfriars station, and it was like walking through a
war zone. Crashed cars, shops on fire, damage and wreckage everywhere. People
stumbled around, dazed and confused, crying and clinging to each other. And bodies, in the
road or dragged out onto the pavement from burnt-out premises, sometimes decently
draped with a coat, more often not. I felt stunned, sickened. This wasn’t supposed to
happen. In all the secret wars I ever fought, I never once let them spill over into the real world.
I never, ever let civilians get hurt.
"Stop that," Molly said quietly. "None of this was your fault. Manifest Destiny is responsible
for what happened here, the bastards."
"We let them chase us," I said.
"What was the alternative? Stand our ground and die quickly, if we were lucky? I don’t think
so. You can’t allow yourself to be taken, Eddie. You can’t let Manifest Destiny get their hands
on a weapon like your armour. And besides, you have to stay free because you know the
truth. You have a responsibility to do something, to stop Manifest Destiny and your family
from running the world like their own private preserve. You’re the only hope these people
have."
"Then they’re in serious trouble," I said after a while.
"That’s better," said Molly. "Don’t let the bastards grind you down, Eddie."

The entrance to Blackfriars station was crammed with people, refugees hiding out from the
mayhem on the streets. They were all gabbling and yelling at each other, but it was clear
none of them had a clue as to what was really going on. Molly and I eased our way through
the crowds on the stairs and down towards the escalators. I had been concerned that
Manifest Destiny or my family might still have agents down in the stations, watching for us,
but in a crowd this size Molly and I were just two more people. Even the stalled escalators
were full of shocked and baffled people, some of them crying, some of them comforting or
being comforted. None of them understood what was happening, only that something much
bigger and nastier than them had intruded on their peaceful, everyday lives. The very thing I’
d spent my life fighting to prevent.
I felt like I’d failed them, and that mattered much more to me than failing my family ever had.
Down on the crowded platform, Molly and I unobtrusively made our way over to a soft-drinks
vending machine with an OUT OF ORDER sign on it. We glanced around to make sure no
one was watching, and then I pulled the vending machine forward. The machine moved
smoothly and easily to show the hidden door in the wall behind it. I had to smile. There are a
great many hidden doors down in the London Underground, many of them concealed behind
OUT OF ORDER vending machines. It’s a secret sign, for those in the know. That’s why so
many of these machines are always, apparently, out of order. The doors lead to all kinds of
interesting places that the general public are much better off not knowing about. Molly
muttered a few words at the concealed door in the wall, and it swung smoothly open before
us. Molly and I slipped through into the darkness beyond, and the door quietly shut itself
behind us.
Molly summoned up a handful of witchfire, and the shimmering silvery light spat and crackled
around her upheld hand. A dark, dank tunnel stretched away before us, showing curving
brick walls and a low ceiling sloping steadily down into the earth. Molly’s witchlight didn’t
penetrate far into the gloom, and the shadows were very dark.
"Is that glimmer really the best you can do?" I said.
"No. But this is as much as I’m prepared to risk. This isn’t a place where you want to attract
undue attention."
"Where exactly are we going? Tell me we’re not going down into the sewers again."
"We’re not going down into the sewers again."
"Oh, joy."
"You’re starting to get on my tits, Drood. This tunnel will lead us down into the systems
beneath the train system. Places left over and abandoned by the railways. Old stations that
no one goes to anymore, discontinued lines, workings that were never completed. That sort
of thing."
I nodded. I knew where we were, and where we were headed; I just wanted to show Molly
that I was back to myself again. I could hear the roar of trains passing by not that far away.
The sound faded as Molly and I headed down the sloping tunnel and into the dark.
"So," I said after a while. "What do we do if we run into trolls?"
"I plan on running. Try to keep up."
"Someone told me they’re getting ready to swarm again."

"Happens every five years, regular as clockwork. The trolls overpopulate the tunnels,
exhaust the food supply, and eventually the sheer pressure of numbers and hunger forces
them up towards the light, and people. So every few years the bounty hunters get to make
good money by going down into the tunnels and culling the herd back to an acceptable
number."
"I don’t see why we don’t just wipe the ugly bastards out," I said.
"Oh, we can’t do that," said Molly. "Every species performs a function in nature, even if we
can’t see what it is. Wipe out the trolls, and something much worse might step forward to fill
the gap. Better the ugly bastards you know than the ones you don’t."
We moved from one tunnel to another, and then another, always heading down, deeper into
the earth. The air became hot and sweaty, almost humid. We splashed through pools of
stagnant water on the floor, and more dripped from the ceiling. Fungi flourished in the
hothouse atmosphere, sprouting in thick white clumps where the wall met the floor and
scattered in puffy fleshy masses on the ceiling. Huge mats of green and blue moss covered
the walls, two to three inches deep, stretching away for as far as I could see. Long slow
ripples moved across the surface of the moss, as though it was disturbed by our presence.
"There are those who say if you eat or smoke the moss, it will grant you visions of things
unseen and other worlds," said Molly.
"I don’t need moss for that," I said. "That’s business as usual for me. Have you
noticed…there aren’t any rats down here? Anywhere."
"Yes," said Molly. "I had noticed. The trolls must have eaten them all. And if they’ve been
reduced to eating rats, it can only be because they’ve already eaten everything else. They
must be really close to swarming."
"Maybe we could come back and see the Mole some other time," I said.
"You’re really quite chicken for a Drood, aren’t you?"
"Cautious," I said. "I prefer the word cautious."
"Look; the authorities are bound to have sent bounty hunters down here by now."
"Yes," I said, stopping. "I think I’ve found one."
We both knelt down to study the wreckage of what had once been a human body. It lay on its
back in a pool of blood that had already dried enough to be tacky to the touch. Its leather
armour had been torn to ribbons, and the chest had been smashed in, to get at the meat
beneath. The arms and legs had been torn off, with only the gnawed bones remaining, lying
scattered on the stone floor. The face had been eaten away right down to the bone, leaving
empty eye sockets and grinning blood-smeared teeth.
"Any idea who it might have been?" I said. The state of the body didn’t bother me. I’ve seen
lots of bodies.
"No," said Molly, scowling. "The only bounty hunter I know is Janissary Jane, and that isn’t
her armour."
"You know Jane?" I said, surprised.
"We’ve worked a few cases together. I keep telling you, Eddie: the world isn’t as neatly

divided into black and white as your family wanted you to believe."
I picked up a machine pistol lying abandoned not far from the body and examined it closely.
"Doesn’t look like she got a shot off. But…where are the rest of the weapons? I can’t believe
any bounty hunter would go after trolls with just the one gun."
We looked around, but there was nothing else on or around the body. Molly and I looked at
each other.
"They couldn’t have taken them," said Molly.
"Why not?"
"Trolls are just animals! They don’t use tools or weapons."
"Animals evolve," I said. "Particularly under pressure from outside forces. Trolls who’ve
learned to use weapons; now, that is seriously scary."
"We need to get moving," said Molly, rising to her feet and looking quickly about her. "Get in
to see the Mole and get out again before the trolls swarm."
"Relax," I said. "They can’t touch us. I’ve got my armour, and you’ve got your magic."
"Your armour might protect you from direct attack, but a whole swarm of trolls could knock
you on your arse, carry you away to their deep larders, and just keep you there till you had to
come out of your armour. And then…" We both looked at the half-eaten bounty hunter.
"There’s a limit to what I can do with my magic now," Molly said reluctantly. "I’ve used up
most of my stored resources. Anything big would wipe me out."
"You couldn’t have mentioned that before we came down here?" I said.
We both looked around sharply. There were sounds in the darkness around us. Molly waved
her witchfire back and forth, illuminating the dark mouths of tunnel openings ahead and
behind us. From not far away came high-pitched hootings and howlings, and the slow sharp
sound of claws and talons scraping against stone. We looked quickly up and down the
tunnel, but the many overlapping echoes made it impossible to tell from which direction any
sound was coming. Molly and I stood back to back, breathing heavily. And then from behind
us, from back the way we’d come, there was the growing sound of heavy feet on the move,
of heavy bodies thundering down the tunnel towards us. Molly sprinted off into the darkness
ahead, and I was right behind her.
The deeper we went, the shabbier the tunnels became. The old brick walls began to crack
and fall apart. Fungi and moss flourished, hiding human workings under rounded organic
shapes. Tunnel openings were interspersed with rough holes smashed through the ancient
stonework, dark gaps raw as wounds. Things moved in the darkness, hissing at us as we
passed. Molly and I ran on, pushing ourselves as hard as we could, not even glancing into
the openings, and behind us came the thunder of the trolls, drawing steadily closer.
I could have armoured up and left them behind in a moment, but trolls were sensitive to
magic. They could have tracked my armour easily, even in complete darkness. Even the
small magic of the witchfire was a calculated risk.
"How much further to the Mole?" I said between panting breaths.
"I’m…not exactly sure," said Molly.

"What?"
"Hey, it’s been a long time since I was last down here! And I may have got a bit…turned
around."
Without slowing my pace at all, I reached inside my jacket and brought out the emergency
compass the Armourer had given me back at the Hall.
"I know which way is north," said Molly. "And it really isn’t helping."
"This particular compass is supposed to show me the best way out of any emergency
situation," I said, trying to hold the thing steady as I ran. The compass needle flicked back
and forth and then settled on northeast just as a new tunnel opening appeared in that
direction. The needle moved to point right at the opening. "This way!" I said.
"Your family always has the best toys," said Molly, and we plunged into the new tunnel
without slowing.
We ran on, following the needle from tunnel to tunnel. The hootings and howlings came from
all around us now. The tunnels finally ended in a natural stone chamber complete with
jagged stalactites and stalagmites. Strange mineral traces in the walls picked up the
witchfire and glowed brightly, pushing back the dark. The compass needle swung back and
forth, as though confused, and I stumbled to a halt while I waited for it to make up its mind.
Molly leaned on me, fighting for breath. I wasn’t much better off. My arm and shoulder were
killing me.
"We’re in trouble," said Molly.
"No, really?" I said. "You do surprise me. Show us the way to the Mole, you useless piece of
crap!" And I slapped the compass a few times, to show it I meant business.
"No," Molly said. "I mean, I don’t recognise this place at all. I’ve never been here on any of
my previous trips to the Mole’s lair. Are you sure that thing is reliable?"
"Of course," I lied. The compass needle finally settled for pointing straight ahead. I looked at
Molly. "Ready to run some more?"
She managed a quick grin. "I find the imminent prospect of being eaten alive tends to
concentrate the mind wonderfully."
"I love it when you talk literary," I said.
And that was when a whole crowd of trolls burst out of a side tunnel just behind us, fighting
and clawing at each other in their eagerness to get at us. Molly and I sprinted off again,
following the needle, but neither of us were as fast as we had been. I’d got only one quick
glimpse of the trolls behind us, but that was enough. I’d faced trolls before, and they hadn’t
changed. Trolls are huge, stooped creatures, bone white in colour, with long, lanky frames.
Jagged claws on bony hands, vicious talons on elongated feet. Spurs and thorns of bone
protrude from their backs, arms, and legs. Their heads are long, horselike, with muzzles
crammed full of thick, blocky teeth. Their eyes are big and black and unblinking. They run on
all fours, leaning on their knuckles like the great apes. They weren’t bothering with the
hooting and howling anymore, now they’d found their prey. Instead, from behind us came
deep bass coughing sounds, urgent and hungry.
I didn’t look back. I knew how fast they could move. And what they would do if they caught us.

They were close, and getting closer. My breath burned in my heaving chest, and my bad arm
and shoulder shrieked with pain. I could hear Molly straining for breath beside me. We were
slowing down, even though we knew it was death to do so. So I armoured up, grabbed Molly
in my strong golden arms, and sprinted through the dark tunnels at supernatural speed. Molly
didn’t have the breath to make any protest, beyond one surprised squeak, and then she
clung tightly to me as I flashed though the labyrinth of tunnels. She held the witchfire out
before us, the light reflecting brightly off my golden armour.
The trolls couldn’t match my augmented speed, but they didn’t give up either. I could still
hear them pounding along behind us. Cracked brick walls flashed past as I sped on,
concentrating on the needle of the compass set flush into my golden palm. Molly suddenly
cried out and pointed, and I skidded to a halt. Molly wriggled impatiently out of my arms as I
set her down, and she ran over to a recess in a stone wall that looked just like all the others
to me.
"This is it! This is the place! I recognise it…The door’s right here, Eddie! Right
here…somewhere…"
She leaned in close, running her hands over the rough stone surface. I couldn’t see any door.
I turned and looked back the way we’d come. I couldn’t see any trolls, but I could hear them
coming for us, out of the dark. They sounded really angry. Molly cried out again, and I turned
back to see her tracing the outline of a door in the dark grimy stone.
"This is definitely it! Leads straight to the Mole!"
"Then you might want to open it," I said. "The trolls will be here any minute."
"I can’t open this! Only the Mole can open it."
"Stand aside," I said. "I’ll smash it in."
"No, you bloody won’t," said Molly, grabbing me by one golden arm and glaring right into my
mask. "The Mole values his privacy, and you can bet good money that door is protected by
seriously heavy-duty security. You even look at it funny, and it could blow up this whole
section. Let me talk to the Mole. There’s a speakerphone here somewhere…" She went
back to the stone wall. "Mole! This is Molly Metcalf; remember me? I got you the complete
set of Desperate Housewives DVDs…Look, I’ve got the new rogue Drood with me, and we
really do need to come in and talk with you! Right now!"
There was a worryingly long pause. The trolls were getting closer. I could feel the vibrations
of their pounding feet through the stone floor. I sealed the compass away inside my armour
and started to reach for the Colt Repeater. The trolls burst out of the tunnel mouth behind us,
long spiked arms reaching for us. Molly yelled for me to close my eyes, and I squeezed them
shut just in time as she hit the trolls with the same incandescent flare she’d used up in
Paddington station. The trolls slammed to a halt, falling over each other as they clawed in
agony at their blinded, light-sensitive eyes. I stepped forward and killed the first half dozen
with my golden fists, smashing in their heavy skulls with my armoured hands. I pushed the
bodies back into the tunnel mouth, building a barricade to hold the other trolls back. More of
the creatures pushed hard from the other side, and it was all I and my armour could do to
hold them back.
"Eddie! The door’s open! Come on!"
I turned and ran for the narrow dark opening in the wall. Molly was already inside. She pulled
me in, and then slammed the door shut in the trolls’ faces, right behind me. The door didn’t

look like much, but it held firm, despite the pounding of heavy fists on the outside. The trolls
hooted and howled, slamming against the closed door in frustrated rage.
"Should we brace ourselves for an explosion?" I said to Molly.
"The Mole knows what’s going on now," she said breathlessly. "He’s expecting us. Eddie,
be nice to him. He’s not used to visitors."
I followed Molly down the narrow tunnel lit by naked electric lightbulbs hanging from the
ceiling at regular intervals. I reluctantly armoured down. As a rogue himself, the last thing the
Mole would want to see was a Drood in full armour coming straight at him. It did feel good
not to be running anymore, to get my breath back. I massaged my aching left arm, but it didn
’t help, so I just pushed the pain as far away as I could. I had more important things to think
about. If the Mole was as crazy as Oddly John, he’d need careful handling.
The tunnel walls were strung with overlapping layers of multicoloured electrical cables
interspersed with junction boxes and a whole bunch of technology that baffled me
completely. Swivelling security cameras kept track of Molly and me as we made our way
down the tunnel, and I did my best to smile back at them in a friendly and distinctly
unthreatening manner.
"You’ve been here before," I said. "What’s his place like?"
"Ah," said Molly, carefully not looking at me. "I haven’t actually been here before. Not in
person, that is. In fact, I don’t know anyone who has. You should be very flattered he let us in.
The Mole doesn’t normally allow visitors. In fact, he tends to discourage them by killing
anyone who turns up."
"Hold everything," I said. "You mean, there was a real chance he might not have opened that
door for us? That he might very well have just left us out there to die?"
"Well, that was a possibility, yes. But I was pretty sure he’d be so curious about you that he’d
let us in. Besides, he sort of likes me."
"He likes you."
"No, I mean, he likes me."
"How, if you’ve never been here before?"
"Oh, I’ve been in his lair lots of times, just not in the flesh. I’ve dreamwalked here a dozen
times, astral travelling. That’s how I knew the way. And we talk on the phone a lot. He can be
very chatty, as long as you keep your distance. I really was pretty sure he’d let us in."
"Because he likes you."
"Yes. I do him favours…"
"I’m almost afraid to ask. What kind of favours?"
"I find him these dodgy porn sites on the Net…"
"I was right. I didn’t want to know."
The tunnel opened up abruptly into a huge cavern carved out of the bedrock deep under
London. It was vast, almost overpowering in its scale, but the Mole had clearly had a lot of
time to make himself comfortable. The great open floor space was packed with every

modern appliance, every conceivable luxury and convenience. Along with mountains of
piled-up computer equipment. Huge flat plasma screens covered the walls, showing fifty
different views at once, with the sound turned off. And in every gap and space there were
computer monitors showing dozens of different sites all at once. Molly led me through the
maze of equipment and into the centre of the Mole’s lair, and there in the very heart of the
labyrinth sat the Mole himself in a great bright red leather swivel chair. He kept his back to
us until the very last moment, and then he reluctantly swung the chair around to glare at us.
He put up a hand to stop us coming any closer, and we stopped a good dozen feet away.
He looked us over, making no move to rise from his chair to greet us.
I’d expected the Mole to be a dumpy little guy with squinty eyes behind huge spectacles, and
that was exactly what he was. He was very pale, with long flyaway hair around a podgy face,
and he blinked and twitched quite a bit. He wore Bermuda shorts, grubby trainers, and a
T-shirt bearing the legend Tarzan, Lord of the Geeks. He also wore a Buddhist charm on a
chain around his neck: the All-Seeing Eye. And above that, the golden collar of the Droods.
One plump hand rose to touch it as he looked at me and the torc around my throat, and
finally he relaxed a little. He smiled briefly at me and nodded to Molly.
"Hello, my dear. So good to see you again. And in person, at last. Yes. But please, both of
you, don’t come any closer. I’m not used to company anymore. No. No. Hello, Edwin. Fellow
Drood, fellow rogue. Yes. I don’t normally allow visitors. They’re too hard on my nerves. But if
I can’t trust a fellow rogue…So, welcome to my lair. Edwin, Molly. Yes."
"Nice chair," I said for want of anything else polite and nonthreatening to say.
"It is, isn’t it?" said the Mole, brightening a little. "I ordered it specially. Through a whole
series of cutouts. I have to be very careful. The armrests hold coolers for soft drinks. Would
you care for one?"
"Not just now," I said.
"Good, because I’m running a bit short just at the moment. I must put a new order in. Yes. I
have very good people who smuggle all sorts of things down here to me, for a consideration,
but of course it’s not easy, getting things delivered. No. No. I have to be…circumspect.
About everything. I’m safe here, protected, and I intend to stay safe. Cut off from the world. It
isn’t just the family who want me dead, after all. Oh, no."
"Really?" I said. "Who else is after you?"
"Pretty much everybody," the Mole said sadly. "I know so many secrets, you see. So many
things that some people don’t want other people to know. Oh, the things I know! You’d be
amazed! Really. Yes."
"How do you power all this equipment?" I asked, genuinely curious.
The Mole shrugged. "I tap all the energy I need from the Underground. And the city. They don
’t notice. I have all the utilities down here, and I’ve never paid a bill. Though I could, if I chose.
I’m really quite remarkably wealthy. Oh, yes. So, Edwin; you’re the new rogue. Let me look at
you…I know you by reputation, of course. The only field agent to keep the family at arm’s
length for almost ten years. Unprecedented! Always knew it couldn’t last…The family doesn’t
trust anyone or anything it can’t control. I used to be Malcolm Drood, you know."
He said the name as though he expected me to recognise it, but I didn’t. We’re a big family.
He studied my face intently, and then frowned and pouted as he realised the name meant
nothing to me.

"So, I’ve been erased from the official family history. Scrubbed out. I suspected as much.
Yes. You will have been wiped out too by now, Edwin. As far as the next few generations of
the family are concerned, you will never have existed. All your history gone, oh, yes.
Everything you ever did for the family, all your battles and successes and achievements, will
be parcelled out and attributed to others. To agents who still toe the family line and bow
down to family authority. Matthew will probably get most of it. He always was hard-core
family, the humourless little prick. He’ll always be a good little soldier…Not like us, eh,
Edwin? We have minds of our own. Souls of our own. Yes. Yes!"
"Can they really do that?" Molly said to me. "Just write you out of history, as though you
never even existed?"
"Of course!" said the Mole. "It’s always been that way. As decided by the higher echelons of
the family. Of which I was once a valued member."
"What is it you do down here, exactly?" I said bluntly. "And what, if anything, can you do to
help me?"
He blinked and twitched at me for a while, not used to being so openly challenged in his own
private kingdom. One hand reached for remote controls set into his armrest, and then he
pulled the hand away again. He smiled nervously at me, and then at Molly. She gave him her
best cheerful, reassuring smile, and he calmed down a little.
"I watch the world," said the Mole just a little smugly. He turned back and forth in his chair,
indicating the many screens with one plump hand. "Down here I can see everything that
goes on, or at least everything that matters. I have hidden cameras in places you wouldn’t
believe. I spy, I eavesdrop, and I make notes. If you knew what Bill Gates was planning to do
next, you’d shit yourselves. Yes. Yes…I live on the Net, you know. Studying conspiracy
theories, searching for evidence of our family at work, and then passing the information on
to whomever I think will make best use of it. Wherever it will do the most good, or the most
harm to the family." He looked at me very solemnly. "Our family has to be stopped, Edwin.
Broken, humbled, brought down. For everything that’s been done to you and me and all the
others just like us. And I belong to a hundred different subversive organisations, under a
hundred different identities. Oh, yes! Nothing happens, nothing is planned that I don’t get to
know about in advance. I need to know everything, to make sense of what’s happening in
the world. Yes…A difficult job. An endless job…But someone’s got to do it."
"Do you by any chance belong to a group called Manifest Destiny?" said Molly.
"Of course. Paranoid, xenophobic, and definitely in thrall to the cult of the personality, and
downright sloppy when it comes to operations in the field…But I had great hopes of them
originally. I mean, yes, they were and are complete and utter bastards in many ways, but at
least they have an organisation that seems capable of taking on the Droods. I support them,
from a distance, trying to encourage them into more practical pursuits on the grounds that
anyone who opposes the family deserves supporting. Yes. Would you like to see the battle
that’s going on between their people and the three Drood field agents in the streets above
us?"
"That’s still happening?" said Molly.
"Oh, yes. Manifest Destiny are throwing everything they’ve got against the field agents. The
poor fools. You’ll never bring down the family through direct conflict. No. No…"
"Show me," I said.

The Mole worked the remote controls on the arm of his chair, and the biggest plasma
screen before us suddenly blared into new life, showing Manifest Destiny forces attacking
three golden armoured figures right out in the open. The depth and definition of the image
was outstanding, complete with full surround sound. It was just like being in the thick of the
battle. I could almost smell the blood and smoke. Truman must have sent half an army to
bring down the Drood field agents who’d dared defy him; and much good it had done him.
Armoured cars, armoured soldiers, attack helicopters raining down fire from above…The
street was full of thick black smoke from burning buildings, and burnt-out armoured cars, but
still the three golden figures moved through the thick of it, untouched.
They slammed through the advancing soldiers with supernatural speed, killing with a touch
and moving on. The dead and the dying lay in piles up and down the street. The golden
figures overturned armoured cars with a single heave, moving unscathed through a hail of
bullets and explosions. A black helicopter came in low for a strafing run, and one golden
figure leapt straight up into the air, propelled by the strength in his golden legs. He clung
onto the side of the helicopter, ripped the door off with one hand, and disappeared inside.
He threw the crew out one at a time, and they fell screaming to their deaths. The agent
stayed on board just long enough to aim the crashing helicopter at an armoured vehicle, and
then he jumped free at the last moment, landing easily and gracefully as his armoured legs
soaked up the impact. Manifest Destiny had every advantage of modern warfare on their
side, and it didn’t do them a damned bit of good against three Drood field agents.
It almost made me proud to be a Drood, to see so few standing firm against so many.
Almost.
"That last one had to be Matthew," said the Mole. "Always was a show-off."
"How the hell are they going to hush this up?" said Molly, staring fascinated at the carnage.
"This much death and destruction, a war zone, right in the middle of London?"
"Do you see any media people present?" said the Mole. "Any television crews or news
photographers? Any paparazzi even? No. These days, if it doesn’t appear on the television
news or in the tabloids, it didn’t happen. Any civilian witnesses will have their memories
altered, all CCTV footage will disappear, and the damage will be blamed on whatever
terrorists are the latest bogeymen. Or perhaps on a gas explosion. Or a plane falling out of
the sky. Whatever the family decides. Yes. Oh, stories will get out; they always do. The Net
does so love its urban legends. But no one will ever know the truth. The family’s had a lot of
practice at burying the truth. Oh yes."
"How are we seeing this?" I said. "If there aren’t any camera crews there…"
"I have cameras everywhere, remember?" said the Mole, blinking proudly. "I can tap into any
CCTV, any and all security systems, plus a whole bunch of assorted surveillance technology
that my people have planted in unobtrusive places. I have eyes and ears in every major city
in the world. Plus all those smaller places that the world doesn’t know are important. Though
I’m still having trouble getting into Area 53…But nothing happens in London that I don’t know
about sooner or later. Oh, no…I knew you’d come down here looking for me, even before
you did. Oh, yes! I had plenty of time to think about whether I was going to let you in here,
Edwin. It helped that you brought Molly with you. A double agent would never have hooked
up with the infamous Molly Metcalf."
He ignored Molly’s bristling, intent on the mayhem filling the big screen. The Manifest
Destiny soldiers were in full retreat, pursued by the three field agents. The Mole giggled.
"Good thing I’m recording this. I know people who’ll pay good money to see Drood field

agents in action. And others who’ll pay even more to see Manifest Destiny getting their nasty
arses kicked so convincingly. Oh, that reminds me. Excuse me a moment while I make sure
the machines are recording all my soaps properly. I hate it when I miss an episode because
the machines have recorded the wrong channel again."
He gave all his attention to fussing with his remote controls while Molly and I took the
opportunity to move a few steps away and talk quietly with each other. I kept my voice really
low. I wouldn’t put it past the Mole to bug his own lair, just in case.
"What do you think?" I murmured. "Can we trust him? I get the feeling he’s not too tightly
wrapped, to be honest."
"What did you expect?" said Molly just as quietly. "He’s lived down here in seclusion for God
knows how many years, his only contact with the world what he sees on his screens and
hears on the Net. Like Oddly John: if he wasn’t crazy when he came down here, he almost
certainly is now."
"But he says he knows things."
"Oh, he does. But whether they’re real things, or helpful things…It’s up to you, Eddie, to get
him to tell you what you need to know. I mean, the Mole’s a sweetie, but he literally doesn’t
live in the same world as the rest of us anymore."
"Then why did you bring me down here?" I said just a little tetchily.
"Because the Mole genuinely does know some things that no one else knows."
"Whispering is very bad manners," the Mole said loudly. "And we are not at home to Mister
Rude."
"Sorry," I said. "We didn’t want to disturb you. I was hoping you might know some things I
need to know."
"Try me," the Mole said grandly. "I am wise and know many things. Yes. Including a whole lot
I’m not supposed to know."
"Do you know why I was declared rogue?" I said flatly. "Why the Matriarch wants me dead
so badly?"
"Ah," said the Mole, his face dropping. He clasped his podgy hands across his protruding
belly. "I’m not privy to our family’s inner workings. Not anymore. No. I couldn’t even tell you
why I was made rogue." He blinked at me sadly through his heavy glasses and sighed
wistfully. "Back then, I was a respected family scholar. Never been out in the world, never
wanted to. I was working on an officially sanctioned history of the family. Full access to the
library, access to all documents, interview anyone I wanted. Lots of fascinating stories…The
next thing I know I’m on the run, with the pack baying at my heels. Luckily I was something of
a voyeur, even then." He sniggered. "Nothing malicious. Not really. I just liked knowing
things…It paid off, though; I was already out of the Hall with as many valuables as I could
stuff into a backpack before they’d officially given the order to detain me. Oh, yes…I went to
ground here. I knew about this place. I’m not the first Mole under London, you know. There
were others before me, for various reasons. I just built on what they started.
"But I still don’t know why I was outlawed. After all my years of digging and probing and
listening at electronic keyholes, I’m still no wiser. No. I can only assume…I must have been
on the edge of discovering something really important, some deep dark family secret that
the Droods have to keep hidden at all costs…I just wish I knew what it was. I’d sell it to

everyone, just to make the family pay for what they did to me."
Another dead end. I scowled, thinking. "That reminds me a lot of what happened to the old
librarian," I said finally.
"Ah, yes," said the Mole. "Poor old William. You know what happened to him?"
"Yes," I said. "Molly and I went to visit him this morning. He couldn’t tell us much."
"I’m amazed he told you anything," said the Mole. "I’ve been sending people in to talk to him
for years, without success. You must tell me absolutely everything he said to you before you
go, so I can record it. Everything, every word. Yes. I’ll study the recordings later, see if I can
cross-reference any useful connections."
"Do you know what it was he found out?" I said. "What it was that drove him crazy? He
mentioned the Sanctity and the Heart…"
"Did he? Did he now? That is interesting…Means nothing to me, though. No. I’ll have to think
about that. Yes. Still, I can’t help feeling we’re probably better off not knowing. Look what
knowing it did to a brilliant mind like his…" The Mole blinked rapidly several times, and then
deliberately changed the subject. "I’m still working on a history of the Drood family, you
know. From a safe distance. You’d be surprised how much information there is on the
Droods out in the world, where they can’t suppress it. Oh, yes. I’m constantly finding out all
kinds of awful things our family has done, Edwin, down the centuries. Oh, some of the things
we’re responsible for…Terrible, terrible things! Yes. Just lately I’ve been concentrating on
the real reasons behind certain important and well-known operations. For example, Edwin,
do you know why our family is so determined to wipe out the Loathly Ones?"
"Well, yes," I said. "They eat souls."
"Apart from that," said the Mole. "The family needs to silence them so everyone else won’t
find out that we were the ones who originally opened the dimensional door and let the
Loathly Ones into our reality. We brought them here to act as foot soldiers against Vril
Power Inc. during World War Two. Vril had grown powerful enough under Hitler to pose a
real threat to the family. Had their own army and everything. Oh, yes, there were a lot of
secret wars going on behind and underneath the real conflict, that the world never knew
about. Anyway, the Loathly Ones did the job all right, but when the time came for them to
return to their own dimension, as had been agreed, the Loathly Ones reneged on the deal
and refused to go. They liked it here. The feeding was just so good…The family’s been
trying to wipe them out ever since so no one will ever know we were the ones responsible
for inflicting them on the world."
"Dear God," I said.
"Oh, that’s nothing!" said the Mole, leaning eagerly forward in his chair. "That’s nothing
compared to some of the things I’ve found out! The family history that you and I were brought
up on only records the official version of events, not the failures and foul-ups and the secret
deals that went horribly wrong." The Mole paused, considering. "I have to say, I still believe
that most of what we were taught was true…as far as it went…but you have to place it in the
context of what it was all for in the end."
"So that we could be the secret rulers of the world," I said.
"Yes," said the Mole. "Sometimes I wonder…if perhaps there’s another context, beyond
that, that I don’t know about yet. Some very secret reason why we have to be the secret

rulers of the world, for everyone’s good. I’d like to believe that. Yes."
"Have you found any evidence for that?" I said.
"No," the Mole said sadly. "If only I could access the family library. All the reserved volumes
and the restricted books. Learn the whole true history of the Drood family…But not even my
resources can hack the Drood library. No. That’s why they’ve always kept everything on
paper, because of people like me. And of course I’ve never been able to sneak a single
surveillance camera into the Hall. No! No…"
"So you can’t tell me anything about why I was outlawed?" I persisted.
"You must know something," the Mole said sharply. "It’s always knowing things that make
you really dangerous to the Droods. Knowing things they don’t want anyone else to know.
Secrets that have to be kept inside their precious inner circle. The Matriarch, her council, her
favourites…The ones who really run the world."
"But I don’t know anything!" I said. I could hear the desperation in my voice.
"They think you do," the Mole said simply.
We both looked around sharply as loud music blasted suddenly through the cavern. It
seemed Molly had grown bored and wandered off on her own while the Mole and I argued
over family history. She’d found MTV on one of the screens and jacked up the volume. "She
Bangs" by Ricky Martin filled the air, the loud salsa beat echoing back from the stone walls.
And Molly danced joyously to the music, stamping her feet and shaking her head and
swirling her long dress about her. The Mole and I both watched, too entranced to think of
protesting, as the wild witch danced to the music. It felt good to see such a moment of happy
innocence in the middle of such dark discussions. Molly understood that life was for living,
and living in the moment. Anywhen else, I would have joined her, danced with her, but just the
thought made my bad arm ache the more fiercely.
The song finally finished, and the Mole worked his remote control, cutting off the next
number. Molly danced on for a moment, and then strode back to join us. Her face was
flushed, her eyes bright and happy.
"Spoilsport!" she said cheerfully to the Mole, and actually leaned over him to kiss him on the
cheek. The Mole blushed bright red. Molly looked at me.
"Are we finished here, Eddie?"
"Almost," I said. I turned back to the Mole. "What do you know about strange matter?"
"Ah," said the Mole. "Yes, yes! I heard about the elf lord’s arrow! It really punched right
through your armour? Interesting…That was, well, I won’t say unprecedented—there are
stories—but this is the first authenticated case I’ve ever encountered. All I can tell you for
sure is that strange matter comes from another dimension of reality, where the laws of
physics are subtly different. So that things which could never arise naturally here are
possible there. Like strange matter, with its amazing unnatural properties."
"It’s inside me," I said. "Poisoning me. Killing me. Is there a cure, an antidote? Something I
could use to drive it out of me?"
"I don’t know," said the Mole, and I could see it pained him to admit it. "I’d need to know
exactly where it came from. Only the elf lord could tell us that, and elves don’t talk to anyone
who isn’t an elf. I have some indirect contacts…Yes. Give me a few weeks, and I might have

something to tell you."
"I don’t have a few weeks," I said. "And I’m starting to think that the only place which could
help me, the only place with the answers I need, is the library back at the Hall."
"They won’t help you," said the Mole.
I smiled unpleasantly. It felt good. "I wasn’t planning on asking them," I said. "I was thinking
more about breaking into the Hall, ransacking the library, and taking what I bloody well need.
And if that happened to involve beating some answers out of various people, like
Grandmother’s beloved consort, that would just be a pleasant bonus."
"Now, that’s more like it!" said Molly, clapping her hands together gleefully. "Hard core,
Eddie! No one’s dared burgle the Hall in generations! Let me come too! Oh, please; I
promise I’ll make a real mess of the place!"
"Edwin, no; don’t even think it," the Mole said urgently. "You know what kind of security
protects the Hall. All the terrible things and forces our family rely on to protect their privacy.
Any safe words you might have known will have been cancelled by now. You don’t want to
end up as one of the scarecrows, do you?"
"Wait a minute; those are real?" said Molly. "I thought they were just stories to scare people
off."
"They’re real," I said. "I’ve heard them screaming. My family really is just as vicious and
vindictive towards uninvited visitors as all the stories say we are." I looked at the Mole. "You
probably know more about the Hall’s defences than anyone else who isn’t actually an
insider. If you were to come with us…"
"No! No. I couldn’t."
"Not even for a chance to strike back at the people who ruined your life?"
"You don’t understand," said the broken man who used to be Malcolm Drood. "I haven’t left
this place since I first came down here. All those years ago…This is the only place where I
feel safe anymore. Just the thought of leaving here…is more than I can bear. You’re the first
real, in the flesh visitors I’ve allowed in here since I first shut the door behind me and sealed
myself off from the world." He managed a small smile. "You should feel honoured."
"No company, ever?" said Molly. "I heard rumours, but I never really thought…How do you
stand it?"
"Because the alternatives are worse," said the Mole. "I live through my screens now, and on
the Net. A virtual life, but better than none."
"All those years," I said. "Gathering and collating information, but you’ve never done anything
to expose the truth about our family to any of the world’s media. Why not?"
"Because I’m not ready to die yet," said the Mole.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Time and Time Again
"S o," I said to the Mole, "is there by any chance a back way out of this place? I’m really not
too keen on fighting my way back through tunnels full of seriously pissed-off trolls just to get

back to Blackfriars station. Which is probably swarming with unfriendly people on the
lookout for Molly and me anyway."
"Of course there’s another way out," said the Mole. "You don’t think I’d allow myself to be
trapped anywhere, even in my own lair, do you? I may be paranoid, agoraphobic, and
unhealthily addicted to eBay, but I’m not stupid. No. I’ve always known that one day my many
enemies will track me down, and then I will have to leave my comfortable little bolthole.
Probably running. Yes. So, if you would care to make your way to the back of the chamber,
preferably without knocking against or in any way upsetting my very delicate equipment, you’
ll find an emergency elevator, ready and willing to take you straight to the surface."
"Where on the surface?" said Molly.
"Anywhere on the surface," the Mole said smugly. "Just tell the elevator where you want to
go, and it will deliver you there."
"Anywhere in London?" said Molly.
"Anywhere in the world," said the Mole. "You always did think too small, Molly."
"An elevator to anywhere in the world?" I said. "How is that even possible?"
The Mole smiled on me pityingly. "You wouldn’t understand even if I did explain it to you. Let’
s just say that quantum uncertainty is a wonderful thing and leave it at that. It was nice to
meet you at last, Molly. And you, Edwin. But don’t come back. You’re just too dangerous to
have around. Bye-bye. Safe journey. Why are you still here?"
Molly and I took the hint, nodded good-bye, and headed for the back of the cavern. Where
there was indeed a perfectly ordinary elevator door set flush into the black basalt cavern
wall. The door was polished steel, and beside it was a big red button, marked UP. I looked
at Molly.
"On to the next rogue, I suppose. For want of anything better to do. You do know of another
rogue?"
"Of course. Sebastian Drood. He has a nice little place in Knightsbridge, just down the road
from you."
I may have blinked a few times. "I never knew that."
"Lot of things you don’t know that I do," said Molly. "You’d be amazed. Sebastian’s been
around for ages, though he doesn’t bother to make the scene much. Likes to be thought of
as a gentleman thief, but he’s really just a professional burglar with delusions of grandeur."
"Can’t say I know the name," I said. "Probably got scrubbed from the family history, like the
Mole. And me."
"Sebastian’s a lot older than you," said Molly. "And though he’s not averse to involving
himself in the odd plot or intrigue, he’s always been a behind-the-scenes kind of player. A
real let’s you and him fight kind of guy. Never does anything unless there’s a profit in there
somewhere for him. But he might help you…just to get back at the family that dared to
outlaw him. Sebastian’s always been a great one for nursing a grudge."
She hit the UP button and announced the name of a street in upmarket Knightsbridge, and
the elevator door hissed open. The interior looked just like any other elevator. We stepped
inside, and the door shut quickly behind us. There was no control panel and no sensation of

upward movement, but just a moment later the door opened to reveal a street I recognised
that was only a few minutes’ walk from where I used to live. I stepped outside and looked
around cautiously. There was no sign of any Drood agents. Whatever surveillance there was
was probably concentrated around my old flat, just in case I was dumb enough to go back
there.
The sun was high in the sky. Half a day gone, and damn all to show for it. It was hard to think,
to plan properly, under such constant pressure. I looked back at Molly and wasn’t surprised
to discover that the elevator door had disappeared behind her.
"How is it you know Sebastian?" I said. "Have you worked with him too?"
"You have got to be joking," said Molly, curling her lip. "I wouldn’t touch that man with a
disinfected barge pole. He works alone because no one else trusts him. He’s a two-faced,
treacherous little turd who’s screwed over pretty much everyone at one time or another.
However…he can be the man to go to when you need to get your hands on a certain item
that no one else can supply, legally or illegally. Sebastian can get you anything, for the right
price, as long as it’s firmly understood that there isn’t going to be any provenance. Or any
protection if the original owner discovers you’ve got it. You can also be absolutely sure that
there won’t be any refund if the item in question turns out to be not entirely what you thought it
was. It’s up to you to be sure before you hand over any money. Buyer beware, and carry a
bloody big stick."
"And this is the man you thought might help me?" I said.
"I’d better phone ahead," said Molly, producing a bright pink phone with a Hello Kitty face on
it. "Make sure he’s in and that he’ll agree to see us."
"Might not be wise, using my name over a standard phone, on an open line," I said. "My
family have people who listen in on everything."
"Don’t teach your grandmother to throttle chickens," said Molly.
"I haven’t spoken over an open line in years. The angels themselves couldn’t listen in on one
of my calls without actual divine intervention on their side."
She moved a few steps away while she punched in the number. I leaned back against an
ornamental stone wall and considered my situation. I wasn’t impressed with the two rogues
Molly had introduced me to so far. Oddly John had gone mad, and the Mole was well on his
way in the same direction. Both of them trapped in prisons of their own making. And this
Sebastian sounded like a real scumbag. How could I trust anything a man like that might tell
me, even if I could persuade him to talk? But time was pressing, and I had to get answers
from somewhere. If nothing else, I was pretty sure I’d know the truth once I heard it. That I
would recognise it somehow. My left arm hurt like hell, even though I had my hand tucked
into my belt to carry some of the weight. I massaged the muscles with my other hand, but it
didn’t help. The pain beat sickly in my left shoulder and down into my chest. The strange
matter was spreading inexorably through my system. Three days, Molly had said. Maybe
four. Maybe not. I had to get my answers soon, while they were still some good to me.
Time was against me…
Molly turned off her phone and put it away. "He says he’ll see us, but only if we come over
right away. It’s just a few minutes’ walk from here. But Eddie…try to be nice to Sebastian.
He can be a real pain in the arse, but…he really does know things that no one else does. Is
there anything you might know that you could offer him in exchange? Some family secret,

perhaps, from after his time? Sebastian loves secrets. He can’t sell them on fast enough."
"I am wise," I said, "and know many things. And I shall be perfectly polite to Sebastian. Right
up to the point where he refuses to tell me something I need to know, and then I will bounce
him off the nearest wall until his eyes change colour. I really feel like beating the snot out of
someone obnoxious. It’s been that kind of a day. Is any of this going to be a problem for
you?"
"Hell," said Molly. "I’ll hold his arms while you hit him."
Sebastian turned out to have a magnificently appointed second-floor apartment over a very
refined and upmarket antiques shop called Time Past. I took a quick peek through the
window. The shop was full of those delicate kinds of items where, if you have to ask the
price, you definitely can’t afford them. Molly peered over my shoulder, sniffed dismissively at
the lot, and then rang the bell beside the discreet side door. There was a name card beside
the bell, and it wasn’t anything like Sebastian Drood. After a lengthy pause, while Sebastian
checked us out in some unobtrusive and probably highly arcane manner, the side door
swung open before us. Inside was a narrow set of stairs leading up. Narrow enough to
ensure that anyone ascending to Sebastian’s lair could only do so in single file. Good
defensive thinking. Molly went first. I followed after, sneering at the terribly passé hunting
prints on the wall.
The stairs ended in another door, solid oak barred with cold iron and silver. It opened by
itself as Molly and I approached, and we filed through into the gorgeously laid-out apartment
beyond. Sebastian was waiting for us. He stood, carefully poised and elegant, in the middle
of a bright spacious living room, and waited for us to come to him. Sebastian was tall,
handsome, and oh so sophisticated. You could tell. He’d put a lot of effort into making sure
you could tell. He had to be in his late sixties, but his hair was still jet-black, and his face had
a certain taut look to it that spoke of frequent face lifts and regular Botox injections. He had
cold blue eyes and a smile that came and went so quickly it meant nothing at all. He wore a
white roll-necked pullover above casually expensive slacks with the kind of handmade shoes
you have to take out a second mortgage to pay for. The roll neck hid the gold collar around
his throat, but I could tell it was there.
"Molly! Eddie!" he said in the kind of deep rich voice you only get by practicing, probably in
front of a mirror. "Do come in. Delighted to see you both."
He shook us both firmly by the hand but didn’t sit down or invite us to. It seemed we weren’t
expected to stay that long. Sebastian produced an antique silver snuffbox from his pocket
and opened it with a flourish. A hidden mechanism played a tinkly version of "The British
Grenadiers" while Sebastian tapped out two small mounds of dark powdered tobacco onto
the back of his hand and snorted them up one nostril at a time. He then sneezed explosively
into a silk handkerchief before putting it and the snuffbox away again. It was a performance
designed to impress. If it had been anyone else, I would have applauded.
"That stuff’s worse than coke," said Molly. "You’ll see; one of these days the whole inside of
your nose will just drop out."
"I like my vices old-fashioned," said Sebastian, quite unconcerned. "I find the qualities of the
past so much more satisfying than those of the present. As you can see…"
He indicated the contents of his apartment with a graceful wave of one long-fingered hand. It
was sumptuously appointed, every item of the highest quality. Upon the waxed and polished
bare board floor stood antique furnishings from a dozen different periods carefully arranged
and presented so the different styles wouldn’t clash. Original paintings on the walls, each

carefully illuminated by concealed track lighting. Plus a handful of Victorian pen-and-ink
erotica, ranging from the cheerfully vulgar to the actually appalling. There was even a glass
and diamond chandelier hanging from the ceiling. And yet for all the effort that had gone into
it, I couldn’t help thinking Sebastian’s living room looked more like a showcase than a room
where someone actually lived.
"Very nice," said Molly. "Very…you. Is that antiques shop downstairs yours as well?"
"Oh, of course. It makes for very good cover when I want to bring in something new that I’ve
just…acquired. I have this delightful young lady who runs the shop for me. Charming little filly.
She’s really just a golem with a concealing glamour spell, but the customers never seem to
notice. Now then, Eddie; let us talk business."
"Yes," I said. "Let’s."
He looked me over as though I was something he was considering buying, probably against
his better judgement. "So; you’re the latest rogue. Old goody-two-shoes Eddie, no less. The
whole area’s been full of family looking for you. I’ve hardly dared step outside my flat. I was
actually quite shocked when I heard the news. I’d gone to such pains to hide my presence
from you, all these years…and now you’re an official disgrace, just like me. Do you know
why I left the family, Eddie?"
"No," I said. "But I’m sure you’re about to tell me."
Molly hit me in the ribs with her elbow, but Sebastian didn’t notice. He had a story to tell, and
nothing short of an appearance by Death herself was going to stop him.
"The family sent me out into the world to be their agent," he said grandly. "But I decided that I
liked the world much more than I liked the family. Never any room in the family for personal
ambition or advancement or the acquisition of lovely things. So I just walked away,
disappeared behind the scenes, and set about using the torc for my own purposes. To
enrich my life and make it so much more comfortable. And I have! I have become quite
extraordinarily successful at my chosen profession, and I am one of the most admired
professional gentleman thieves in London. It could have been the world, but I do so hate to
travel.
"With the help of my armour, I can break into any establishment and walk off with anything I
take a fancy to. And I do. Alarms and security mean nothing to me when I’m in my armour. I
come and I go, and I take what I will, and no one ever knows anything about it until it’s far too
late. Scotland Yard, baffled again! I have the very best antique furniture, everything from a
Louis Quinze chair to a Hepplewhite sideboard. Famous paintings, in their original frames!
Whatever catches my eye. Nothing is safe from me.
"You know how I track it all down? I simply make it my business to patronise all the best
auctions and make a note of who buys what. There are those who hide behind anonymous
bids, but auction house security is a joke to such as us, Eddie. All the lovely things in this flat
originally belonged to someone else who couldn’t hold on to them. Probably didn’t
appreciate them, anyway. Not nearly as much as I do. I’m sure the pretty things are all much
happier here, with me."
"Wait just a minute!" Molly stalked over to a side table and snatched up a stylised statuette
of a black cat. "This is mine, you bastard! I always wondered what happened to it…This is
the Manx Cat of Bubastis! I went through all manner of hells to get my hand on this, and then
it just disappeared from my old place four years ago!"

"Really?" said Sebastian airily. "I honestly don’t remember where I acquired that particular
piece."
"It’s mine!" said Molly dangerously.
"It’s only yours if you can hang on to it, Molly dear. But if you’re going to make such a fuss
about it…"
"This leaves here with me," said Molly, striding back to my side with the Manx Cat firmly in
her grasp. "And if I hear one word of objection from you, Sebastian, I’ll rip your nipples off."
"Dear Molly," said Sebastian. "Gracious as ever."
"I thought we were going to be polite," I said, amused.
"You be polite," she growled. "He wouldn’t believe it if it came from me. The Manx Cat has
power I invested in it long ago. It can restore a lot of the energies I’ve been using up recently.
Though it’ll take a while."
I turned my attention back to Sebastian, who didn’t seem in the least put out by Molly’s
actions. "How have you stayed hidden from the family for so long?" I said. "Hell, how did you
stay hidden from me?"
"Oh, I’m pretty sure the family has always known roughly where I am," he said easily. "But
they know better than to rock the boat. You see, some years ago I took the precaution of
leaving certain very detailed information packets with a number of journalists, and other
interested parties, all over the world. In well-sealed caskets, set to open automatically in the
event of my death. Even our family couldn’t be sure they’d got all of them, so they leave me
alone. In fact, they’d do well to ensure that nothing ever happens to me…"
"How very…practical," I said. "But you could still die in an accident. What then?"
He shrugged. "If I’m dead, I won’t care. I’m sure the family will think of something. They
always do." He looked at me thoughtfully. "I really don’t think I can help you, Eddie. Whatever
it is you want, I can’t supply it. The family is very upset with you, and I don’t care to get caught
in the middle. I look out only for myself these days. And before you ask, no, I have no idea
why you were made rogue. I have no contact with anyone inside the family. I don’t even
speak to the other rogues. You’re just wasting both our time by being here."
"Then why did you agree to see me?" I said, feeling a slow hot anger build within me. "I don’t
have time to waste."
He sneered at me. "I always wondered if you’d be the one they sent to kill me. If they ever
did find a way to dismantle my little safeguards. You killed poor Arnold, after all, and you did
live just up the road from me."
"How did you kill the Bloody Man, Eddie?" said Molly. "I mean, I thought the armour made all
you Droods invulnerable."
"Only when we’re wearing it," I said. "I staked him out, learned his routine, and then shot him
through the head from a safe distance using a rifle with a telescopic sight. He never knew I
was there, never got the chance to armour up. Very effective; if not especially honourable.
But I was a lot younger then, and he was the Bloody Man. You don’t take chances with a man
like that."
Sebastian smiled. "Funny you should say that, Edwin."

There was a sudden sting in my neck even as I heard the window glass beside me shatter. I
started to turn. I thought, I’ve been shot. And then my legs were buckling, and I sank very
slowly to my knees. I put my hand up to my neck, and it seemed to take forever to get there.
Sound slowed, and my vision blurred, as though I was underwater. My numbing fingers found
a feathered dart in the side of my neck, just above the torc, and I pulled it out with the last of
my strength. Tranquilizer dart, I thought, and the words seemed to echo around and around
inside my head. I tried to call up my armour, but my thoughts were already too dulled to
concentrate on the activating Words. I slumped to the floor, hitting it in a boneless heap, and
I didn’t even feel the impact.
This all happened in a few seconds. Molly threw herself down beside me, below the
shattered window, out of the line of sight of any more darts. She put her hands on either side
of my face and muttered urgently under her breath. I could feel her touch when I couldn’t feel
anything else, and then I felt subtle magics flowing into me, fighting off the effects of the
tranquilizer. My body was still numb, still helpless, but my thoughts slowly began to clear.
Molly glared up at Sebastian.
"You bastard! You sold us out!"
"Of course," he said smoothly, giving all his attention to the adjusting of a cuff. "It’s what I do.
Rest assured, I got a very good price. For both of you. A certain Mr. Truman of Manifest
Destiny was very pleased to learn exactly where and when he could be sure of finding you. I
was on the phone to him the moment I stopped talking to you. And then all I had to do was
keep you entertained here until his people could get into position."
The door burst in, and a dozen armed men streamed into the apartment, all of them in
familiar black uniforms. They looked quickly around to make sure the place was secure,
their guns constantly trained on Molly and me. She stayed very still. I twitched my fingers
ever so slightly. Molly’s magics were fighting off the drug, but only very slowly. I looked at the
guns and wondered why the soldiers weren’t already shooting. I would have. One of the men
knelt down beside me, checked the sluggish pulse in my neck, and then stood up again,
satisfied. He yelled out the open door, and his group commander sauntered in. And if I hadn’
t been so tranked, I would have yelled out in shock and anger.
I knew the group commander. She wore battered old army fatigues still stiff with dried black
blood from fighting in a hell dimension. She wore her black hair cropped short, so enemies
couldn’t grab at it during close combat. Her scarred face was no longer pretty, and her bare
muscular arms were scarred too. I knew all these things about her because I knew her. She
was Janissary Jane, an old friend and colleague to Molly and to me. Except it wasn’t her.
Not really. Around her neck she wore a Kandarian amulet on a chain, and that meant this
was really my old adversary Archie Leech.
Archie Leech, serial possessor, occupying another stolen body. Only this time he’d taken
someone who mattered to me, no doubt in revenge for what I’d done to him in that cellar
under Harley Street. Archie/Jane swaggered forward into Sebastian’s apartment and
grinned down at me, proudly waggling the gun she’d used to shoot me. And then she shot
Sebastian in the neck with another tranquilizer dart. Sebastian crashed to the floor, thrashed
awkwardly for a moment, and then was still, an almost comical look of shock on his face. I
would have laughed if I could. The betrayer betrayed. Archie strolled over to him, his
exaggerated masculine movements out of place in Jane’s body.
"You really should have seen that one coming, Sebastian. You got soft, living on your own.
Playing at being the gentlemen thief. Got cocky, thinking no one could touch you. You should
have realised two Droods were always going to be worth more than one." She turned

abruptly back to look down on me and smiled happily. "How do you like my new body,
Eddie? I thought I’d slip into something a little more comfortable this time. You know…I hate
it when you destroy my bodies before I’m finished with them. Before I’ve squeezed every last
bit of fun out of them. So this time I went out of my way to take a friend of yours just to prove
that I’ll always be able to hurt you so much more than you can hurt me."
She kicked me in the ribs a couple of times just to make his point. The force of the blows
was enough to lift me up off the floor, but I hardly felt them. My hands and my feet were
tingling, and my face wasn’t as numb as it had been, but that was all. Molly’s magic was
working. My head was clearing fast. I probably could have armoured up, but I didn’t want to
risk it, not just yet. Not with so many guns trained on Molly as well as me. So I lay still,
watching and listening and biding my time. Molly stayed down beside me, also keeping very
still, giving Archie no reason to trank her too.
"What happens now?" she said, her voice carefully calm and nonthreatening.
"I deliver the three of you to Mr. Truman," said Archie. "My current and very generous
employer. He can’t wait to get his hands on two Droods and their torcs. I understand he has
a whole team of surgeons standing by, ready to take his two new prizes apart one piece at a
time, until they find out just what it is about a Drood and his torc that’s so special. A very
slow, very painful process, I should think…Maybe Mr. Truman will let me watch, if I ask nicely.
Apparently he was very impressed by what three armoured agents were able to do to the
very well-trained and expensive army he threw at them. He can’t wait till he’s able to put a
torc around the neck of every Manifest Destiny soldier, and then turn them loose on the
world. I do so admire a man with ambition…"
"He won’t learn a thing from vivisection," Molly said flatly. "Except to remember what
happened to the goose that laid golden eggs."
Archie shrugged with Jane’s shoulders. "I don’t think he cares that much. He just needs
someone to take out his rage on. He really is very upset at what those three Droods did to
his fine army. You should have heard him! I suggested he just kill Eddie and Sebastian, and
then bring them back as zombies. Then he’d have two Droods with torcs who’d do anything
he told them to. But apparently that wasn’t enough for him. The Droods have torcs, so he has
to have them too. It’s a parity thing. But you shouldn’t feel left out, Molly; I gather he has quite
detailed plans for you too. He keeps special torture cells for those of his own people who
turn on him."
Strength flooded suddenly through me as Molly’s magics stamped out the last of the drug’s
effects. Sensation flooded back through every part of me, and my thoughts were clear and
sharp. I looked up at Molly, caught her eye, and mouthed the word Now. She grinned back at
me and lashed out at the watching armed men with a simple tangle spell. All twelve of them
crashed to the floor at once, their muscles spasming helplessly as witchy lightning crawled
all over them, spitting and crackling. The spell hit Archie Leech too, but she just staggered
backwards, fighting the spell with the strength the amulet gave him.
I was already up on my feet, heading for Archie. And thinking desperately on how to stop
him without killing or even damaging Janissary Jane. I’d had to kill Archie’s last host body to
stop him, but I couldn’t do that here. No more dead innocents on my watch. Unfortunately that
gave him the advantage. He wouldn’t care what happened to Jane’s body; he could always
jump to another. I slammed into Archie’s stolen body just as she shrugged off the last of the
tangle spell, and the two of us hit the floor together. The gun flew from Archie’s hand, and
she struggled fiercely under me, fighting to draw the knife at her belt.

I grabbed the Kandarian amulet in both my hands. It tried to evade me, twisting this way and
that, but at such close quarters there was nowhere for it to go. I closed both my hands
around the awful thing, squeezing them tightly shut, and the amulet burned my palms with a
cold fiercer than any heat. I subvocalised my activating Words, and the golden armour
surged around me in a moment even as Archie finally got her knife free and thrust it at my
ribs. The heavy steel blade slammed and shattered against my armour as the living metal
flowed over both my hands and what they contained. The Kandarian amulet was now inside
my armour with me, sealed off and insulated from the rest of the world. And that was all it
took to sever Archie’s connection to the amulet.
I rolled away from Archie as he screamed like a damned soul, Jane’s body thrashing and
kicking as his possessing spirit lost its hold on her, and she forced him out. Archie had
nowhere to go; his original body had been destroyed long ago. I used my Sight and saw
Archie’s real shape superimposed over Jane’s, just for a moment. And then his soul fell
away from the world, howling horribly, summoned at last to the Hell that had been waiting for
him for so long. I turned off my Sight. I didn’t want to See what was waiting for him.
Janissary Jane lay unconscious on the floor, twitching and shuddering. Physically exhausted
and in psychic shock, probably. But she’d recover. She was a fighter and had known worse
in her time.
The Kandarian amulet writhed inside my enclosing hands like a living thing, burning colder
than the fiercest winter. A coldness of the heart, and of the soul. I could feel its presence
inside the armour with me, fighting to impose its will on mine. The armour couldn’t protect
me while the amulet was inside it. I seemed to a hear a dark inhuman chorus of voices
drawing slowly closer: Join us. Join us. Just the sound sickened me, as though something
had trailed slime across my mind. I armoured down, and the moment the living metal
disappeared from my hands, I threw the nasty thing away from me.
The amulet skidded across the floor and Sebastian snapped out of his apparent stupor,
rolled to one side, and snatched it up. He scrambled to his feet, smiling terribly as he
clutched his prize to his heart. "You’re not the only one who can play possum, Eddie; I
protected myself against all poisons years ago. And now…I have power beyond dreams.
Because if you haven’t got the balls to use this, Eddie, I have. I shall enjoy hundreds of
bodies, young bodies, and live lifetimes…"
"Throw it away," I said, rising slowly to my feet. "It’ll destroy you."
"Like that fool Archie Leech? I don’t think so. I can control it."
"No one can control it," I said. "It corrupts. That’s what it does. You’ll end up just like Archie,
a spiritual rapist."
"I need a new body," said Sebastian. "This one’s getting old. It’s slower, and it lets me
down. People like me shouldn’t have to grow old. Not when we enjoy life so much.
Appreciate its pleasures and its qualities so much. It isn’t right that someone like me should
die just because an old body is wearing out." He smiled at me, and it wasn’t his smile, not
anymore. "Maybe I’ll take your body, Eddie, just for a little test drive. See what it can do. And
maybe I’ll do awful, awful things with your body, just for the fun of it."
Molly hit him over the head from behind with the Manx Cat statuette, and he crumpled to the
floor, unconscious. He’d been so taken up in taunting me that he never even noticed Molly
sneaking up behind him. The Manx Cat cracked into pieces, crumbled, and fell apart. Molly
looked at me, shrugged and smiled, and brushed the last few bits off her hands. The
Kandarian amulet had spilled out of Sebastian’s hand as he collapsed, and now it lay on the

floor between us. Such a small thing, to be so evil. I stepped forward and stamped on it, and
the ancient stone crumbled into dust under my heel.
But with the Manx Cat shattered, the power sustaining Molly’s tangle spell was gone too,
and the dozen black-uniformed men scrambled to their feet again, raising their guns. Mad
as hell at being taken out so easily, they all opened fire on Molly. The bullets hit her again
and again, sending her staggering backwards under the repeated impacts. Blood spurted
from dozens of wounds, snapping her head back and forth, and she couldn’t get enough
breath to scream. Finally the men stopped firing, and Molly fell, as though that was all that
had been holding her up. I fell to my knees beside her and grabbed her hand. She tried to
say something to me, blood gushing and spraying painfully from her mouth, and all I could do
was hold her hand until at last the life went out of her eyes. I looked up at the armed men,
and they all fell back a step, afraid of whatever it was they saw in my face.
But I wasn’t going to kill them. That wasn’t enough.
I finally thought to hit the button on my reverse watch and rewind time. I’d almost left it too
long. The watch didn’t want to take me far enough back, but I just hit it again and again and
again, until finally it took me back to the point where the armed men were just starting to train
their guns on Molly. I threw myself in front of her, between her and the bullets, armouring up
as I went. The living metal swept over me even as the bullets flew through the air; and fast as
the bullets were, the armour was faster. Every single shot that would have killed Molly
ricocheted off me instead.
I threw myself upon the armed men, beat the crap out of them, and tossed them around the
room for a while, until Molly finally stepped in and stopped me. Not for their sakes, but for
mine. She knew I’d feel bad afterwards, if I killed them. I armoured down and smiled
tremulously at her. I’d come so close to losing her.
"I’m a witch," Molly said slowly, holding my eyes with hers. "I see things, and remember
things, that others can’t. I remember lying on that floor, dying…and then you rewrote history,
changed the world itself, just to save me. And risked your own life doing it. You couldn’t have
been sure the armour would cover you in time to save you from their guns. Why would you do
that, risk that, to save me?"
"Because I had to," I said.
"Eddie…" she said.
"Molly…" I said.
"Oh, God," said Molly. "Are we having a romantic moment?"
We looked at each other; and it would be hard to say which of us was more appalled at the
thought.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
Gone Fishing, on Golden Pool
"I ’ve made a decision," I said to Molly.
"Good for you," said Molly.
"I’ve decided I don’t want to meet any more rogues," I said.

"Not if they’re going to be like the ones I’ve already met. I mean, one crazy, one shut-in, and
one moral cripple? Is that the kind of future I’ve got to look forward to if by some miracle I
survive the next few days?"
"Probably," said Molly. "If you give up, like they did. They were all afraid to do anything that
mattered. How about you?"
"I’m going home," I said. And just like that, I was certain. "It’s all that’s left to me. I’m going
back to the Hall, and the library, and my backstabbing family. Because they’re the only ones
I can be sure have the answers I need."
"Good for you!" said Molly. "I’m coming too!"
"No, you’re bloody not," I said. "This is going to be difficult enough without having to look
after you as well."
"I do not need looking after," said Molly, her face clouding up dangerously.
"You could die in a hundred ways just trying to get onto the Hall’s grounds," I said, trying hard
to sound reasonable. "My family is protected in ways even I don’t like to think about
sometimes."
"If you think I’m going to miss out on an opportunity to stick it to the Droods where they live,
you’ve got another think coming. I’ve dreamed of revenge like this! Usually after eating
cheese. I’m going with you, and you can’t stop me!"
"Will you please keep the noise down?" growled Janissary Jane. She sat up slowly, wincing
and groaning, and then peered blearily about her, taking in the unconscious Manifest
Destiny soldiers piled up around her. "Must have been a hell of a party…Shaman? That
you? Where the hell am I? And what have I been doing…? It feels like someone took a dump
in my head."
"You were possessed by Archie Leech," I said, helping her to her feet.
"I drove his spirit out of your body, and then destroyed it. He won’t be coming back. Ever."
"Leech? That rat turd? He must have sneaked in while my defences were down. Hold
everything; you destroyed him? No offence, Shaman—I mean, well done and thanks for
everything and all that—but I never really saw you as being in Archie Leech’s league."
"Yeah, well, that’s because he isn’t Shaman Bond," said Molly. "He’s been fooling us all for
years with that mild-mannered reporter shit."
"Molly? You’re here too?" Janissary Jane squeezed her eyes shut and shook her head
slowly. It didn’t seem to help. "Well, if he isn’t Shaman Bond, who the hell is he?"
"There’s no easy way to say this," I said. "I’m a Drood, Jane. Eddie Drood, field agent, at
your service. Only I’m not an agent for the family anymore. They made me rogue, so I’m on
the run from everyone."
"I go to fight in the hell dimensions for one lousy month, and the whole world stops making
sense while I’m gone." Janissary Jane studied me suspiciously. "You’re a Drood, Shaman?
You? Bloody good disguise…Eddie. You two-faced little shit. Wait a minute; I’m still
catching up here. You’re a rogue? What did you do?"
"I don’t know. But my family wants me dead. That’s why Archie came after me." I thought it

best to keep the explanations simple for the moment. And I didn’t think I’d tell her that Archie
had targeted her specifically just to get back at me. I could do that later. From a safe
distance.
"At least you killed the bastard," Janissary Jane growled, running her hands over herself
vaguely, as though checking for signs of recent interference. "I’ll bet you didn’t even take the
time to torture him properly first, did you? No; I thought not. So, Eddie; why are we all here,
who are all those sleeping beauties, and why are you hanging out with the infamous Molly
Metcalf?"
"If I hear one more person use that word…" Molly said ominously.
"You mutilate a few cattle, abduct a few aliens, and you get a reputation…"
"Let us please not go there," I said quickly. "Jane, Molly and I are working together for the
moment. On matters of mutual interest."
"Like what?" said Janissary Jane. "What could you two possibly have in common?"
"We’re going back to his old family home to take names and kick arse," Molly said happily.
"And possibly burn the place to the ground while we’re at it."
"You’re not much of a one for keeping secrets, are you?" I said.
"You want to break into the Hall?" said Janissary Jane. "Better you than me. I’ve been to hell
and back so many times they made me up a special visa, and I still wouldn’t go anywhere
near the Hall. You couldn’t bust through their defences with a tactical nuke. The Chinese
tried, in ’sixty-four."
"Nineteen sixty-five, actually," I said.
"Shut up, Eddie; I’m on a roll," said Janissary Jane. "The point is, the Hall has serious
defences. A hundred different ways to kill your intruder, all of them quite spectacularly
vicious and nasty."
"Indeed," I said. "Spot on, in fact."
"So what you need," said Janissary Jane, "is a skeleton key."
Molly and I looked at each other. "What?" I said.
"You need something to get you through the Hall’s defences without them kicking off on you.
Something that’ll let you sneak through."
"No, hold everything," I said. "There’s no such thing. The whole point to my family’s many
and varied protections is that there are no weak points, no possibilities for overrides. My
family has spent generations designing and improving on their defences, including multiple
redundancies and a quite appalling attention to increasingly nasty details. It has to be that
way, or our enemies would have wiped us all out long ago. We have a lot of enemies."
And then I broke off as a new wave of pain shot through me. It stabbed through my shoulder
as though I’d just been shot again, a pain so bad it made me cry out despite myself, and
then it slammed down through the whole of my left side. It hurt so bad I couldn’t breathe,
couldn’t think. I staggered and would have fallen if Molly and Janissary Jane hadn’t been
there to grab me from both sides.

"Shaman? What is it? Molly, what’s wrong with him?"
"Elf lord shot him with an arrow made of strange matter," said Molly.
"The stuff’s still in his system, poisoning him. Eddie, can you hear me? Eddie?"
"I’m all right," I said, or thought I said.
"Jesus, he looks bad," said Janissary Jane. "Should we get him to a healer? I know some
good people, ask no questions…"
"It wouldn’t help," Molly said flatly.
"Oh," Janissary Jane said quietly. "Like that, is it?" And after a moment, she said, "Bloody
elves. Vicious little turds. Okay, strange matter…Nasty stuff, yes; other dimensional…Really
bad mojo, when you can get your hands on it, which mostly you can’t. Never dealt with the
stuff myself, but I know a man who has. Word is, he can even supply it direct from the source
on occasion."
I forced strength back into my legs until they straightened and could hold me up again, and
then I forced my head up to look at Janissary Jane. "Who?" I said.
"I think you need to lie down, Shaman. I mean, Eddie."
"Haven’t got the time. I’ll lie down when I’m dead." I breathed deeply, fighting down the pain
and pushing it away through sheer force of will. I gently eased my arms out of Molly’s and
Janissary Jane’s grips, and they immediately stepped back to give me some room, keeping
a watchful eye on me. I could feel cold sweat drying on my face, but my thoughts were clear
again. "Jane, who do you know that knows about strange matter?"
"The Blue Fairy."
"What?" said Molly. "Him? The man’s a major-league piss artist! Never met a bottle of
booze he didn’t like!"
"I saw him sober once," I said. "He looked awful."
Janissary Jane sighed loudly. "You of all people should know enough to look past the
surface. You do know why he’s called the Blue Fairy, don’t you?"
"Well, yes," I said. "Because he’s gay."
"No! I mean, yes, he’s gay, but that’s not where the name originally came from. It’s because
he’s half elf."
"Oh, come on!" said Molly. "Are we talking about the same guy? That useless little tit who’s
always sponging drinks at the Wulfshead?"
"He can’t be half elf," I said. "Elves never breed outside their own kind. It’s their strongest
taboo, utterly forbidden."
"There’s always a few who move to a different drummer," said Janissary Jane. "The elves
have a special name for those who indulge outside the permitted gene pool. They call them
perverts."
Molly smirked. "You mean they’re humosexuals?"

"Please," I said. "Let us not go there."
"The point," Janissary Jane said firmly, "is that the Blue Fairy has some elf abilities and
even a few direct contacts within the Fae. I would be prepared to bet you good money that
he was the one who supplied your elf lord with the strange matter to make his arrow. So he
might be the man to go to for a cure. Certainly he knows more about strange matter than
anyone else I know."
"All right," I said. I was feeling better, for the moment. "Any idea of where he’s hiding out at
the moment? He left his old place after the unfortunate incident with the kobold in Leicester
Square. Though what they ever saw in each other…"
"He moved around a lot after that," said Janissary Jane. "And he went downhill rapidly. He
didn’t want any of his old friends to see what he’d been reduced to."
"Hell, we wouldn’t have cared," said Molly.
"No, you probably wouldn’t," said Janissary Jane. "But he did. The point is, I know where to
find him. I throw him the odd commission, now and again, for old times’ sake. If you want, I
can take you right to him."
"I want," I said. "But we can’t go gallivanting across London in plain sight, not while Manifest
Destiny are after me. That’s who the sleeping beauties belong to, by the way."
"You’ve got them mad at you as well?" said Janissary Jane. "Good for you! You continue to
rise in my estimation, Eddie. Can’t stand these amateur-night wannabe soldiers, in their
pretty new uniforms. They give real mercenaries a bad name. Probably crap their pants and
then run a mile if you dropped them into a real war zone, crying for their mommies all the
way."
"Could we at least make an effort to stick to the subject?" I said just a little plaintively. "The
point is, it’s not safe for Molly and me to travel openly across London, and she’s all out of
spatial portals."
"Well, how did I get here?" Janissary Jane said reasonably. "How did the Manifest Destiny
arseholes get here? They must have had transport, right?"
We all moved over to the shattered window and looked out. Down in the street below were
three large black cars, parked in a row, that looked very familiar to me. I couldn’t help but
grin.
"Perfect," said Molly. "Look, they even have tinted windows, so no one can see in! No one’s
going to pay any attention to just another Manifest Destiny car out on patrol."
"All right," I said. "Let’s go and give the Blue Fairy his wake-up call."
Molly insisted we take a little time to leave a suitably insulting message for whoever came to
retrieve the unconscious Manifest Destiny soldiers. So she and Janissary Jane pulled down
all the soldiers’ trousers and underwear, commenting in loud and very unfair ways as they
went along, and arranged the unconscious men in an erotic daisy chain. Then they stood
back to admire their work and giggled a lot. Never let them give you to the women.
"I’d love to see them try to explain this to their superior officers when they turn up," Molly said
happily, and Janissary Jane nodded solemnly.
While they were busy, I had my own ideas for a little useful mischief. I picked up Sebastian’s

stylised Edwardian telephone and phoned home. As always, they picked up on the first ring,
and a familiar voice answered. One I’d never expected to talk to again.
"Hello, Penny," I said. "Guess who?"
There was a sharp intake of breath at the other end, and then Penny’s well-trained
professionalism quickly reasserted itself. "Hello, Eddie. Where are you calling from?"
"Trace the line," I said. "By the time you can get here, I’ll be long gone. But you’ll still find
something interesting waiting for you here. Now put me through to the Matriarch."
"You know I can’t do that, Eddie. You’ve been officially declared rogue. I’m sure it’s all a
terrible mistake. Tell me where you are, and I’ll send someone to pick you up."
"I want to talk to the Matriarch."
"She doesn’t want to talk to you, Eddie."
"Of course she does. That’s why she’s listening in right now. Talk to me, Grandmother, and I’
ll tell you about Sebastian."
"I’m here, Edwin," said Martha Drood. I could hear the difference on the line as she went to
secure mode. She knew we were about to discuss things that Penny wasn’t cleared to
know. Even though Penny was officially cleared to know everything.
"Hello, Grandmother," I said, after a pause. We both sounded so very civilised, as though
this was just a little family tiff, nothing that couldn’t be settled over a nice cup of tea. "How
does it feel, Martha, to be talking to a dead man? How did it feel to order the death of your
own grandson?"
"The family comes first, Edwin; you know that." The Matriarch’s voice was calm and even. "I
will always do what is necessary to protect the family. All you had to do was die; and you
couldn’t even get that right, could you?"
"I would have died for you, for the family," I said, holding the phone so tightly my hand hurt. "If
you’d given me a good reason, if you’d just trusted me enough to explain. I love the family, in
my own way. But not anymore. You made me rogue, so rogue I’ll be."
"Why did you call, Edwin? What do you want?"
"To tell you about Sebastian. Who is currently very unconscious in his flat. If you were to
send some people here, they could collect him while he’s helpless. And then you wouldn’t
have to worry about all those information parcels he’s been holding over your heads. You
see, my war is with you, Grandmother. Not with the family."
"I am the family. I am the Matriarch."
"Not for much longer," I said. "I’ve been digging up all your nasty little secrets, and I’m really
very angry with you, Grandmother. For what’s been done in the family name. I’m coming
home, and not as the prodigal son. I’m coming home for the truth, even if I have to tear the
family apart to get it. See you soon, Grandmother."
I hung up, and then just stood there for a moment. My hands were shaking. If I hadn’t already
known I was dying, I’d probably have been scared. I looked around for Molly and Janissary
Jane. They’d only just remembered to go through the pile of discarded trousers, looking for
car keys.

"Time to get moving, ladies. The family will be here soon."
"Okay," said Molly. "I think we’ve done about as much damage here as we can."
Janissary Jane drove the big black car through the streets of London because she knew the
way, and because she had the car keys and refused to give them up. Molly sat in the
backseat with me, arms tightly folded, sulking. She was never comfortable unless she was in
charge. Janissary Jane drove far too fast and manoeuvred aggressively at all times, to keep
our cover, she said, but finally we arrived at Wimbledon, still in one piece. Most people
associate the name only with tennis, but these days the area is eighty percent immigrant
population and a thriving small-business community. Brightly coloured posters in the shop
windows advertised unusual goods in Hindi and Urdu, and here and there blue-skinned
nautch dancers gyrated down the street to electric sitar music. Our black car with its
impenetrable tinted windows drew many cool and thoughtful glances as we glided smoothly
through the narrow streets. Eventually Janissary Jane drew up outside a hole-in-the-wall
liquor store, the kind of place that’s always open, twenty-four hours a day, and there’s always
a sale going on. We got out of the car, and Molly and I looked inquiringly at Janissary Jane.
"The Blue Fairy has a studio apartment here, above the store," she said. "Brace yourselves.
He’s not very house proud these days. And we’ll have to go through the shop to get to the
flat, so remember, we’re here to see Mr. Blue."
"Why…here?" I said.
"Would you look for him here?" said Janissary Jane, and I had to nod. She had a point.
Janissary Jane led the way into the liquor store. The walls were stacked from floor to ceiling
with every kind of booze under the sun, many of them boasting labels I didn’t even
recognise. The middle-aged Pakistani behind the counter greeted us cheerfully, nodding
quickly when he heard we were here to see Mr. Blue.
"Of course, indeed. Hello again, Miss Jane; it is very good to see you again. Mr. Blue is
indeed upstairs and at home; you go right up. He is resting, I believe, and a bit under the
weather. I am sure it will do him good to have some friendly company."
He showed us through to the back, still smiling. We ascended some dimly lit stairs to the
next floor and found a door with the right name next to a bell push. The door was standing
slightly ajar. Not a good sign. I drew my Colt Repeater, Janissary Jane drew her two punch
daggers, and Molly made her witch knife appear out of nowhere. I gestured for Janissary
Jane and Molly to stick behind me. They ignored me, pressing silently forward, and I sighed
inwardly. Janissary Jane pushed the door slowly open. It didn’t make a sound. The room
beyond was dark and shadowy, even though it was still afternoon. We slipped inside one at
a time, prepared for the worst, but nothing could have prepared us for what we encountered.
The room was a mess. A real mess. The kind of mess you have to work at. My first thought
was that the sitting room had been turned over by professionals looking for something, but it
quickly became clear that no self-respecting professional agent would sully his hands on the
general filth of this place. Grime and slime fought it out for most of the surfaces, what could
be seen of the carpet was stained a dozen colours, and junk and debris formed a layer on
the floor so thick we had to kick our way through it. Old clothes had piled up in the corner,
perhaps for washing but more likely for burning, and takeaway food cartons clung stickily to
each other. Something crunched wetly under my foot, and I really hoped it was just a
cockroach. The curtains weren’t drawn, but the window glass was so thickly smeared with
filth that the afternoon light had to fight its way through.

Empty bottles stood on every surface, mostly of India Pale Ale and Bombay Gin. There were
pill bottles, and not the kind you get on prescription. Crinkled tinfoil, for chasing the dragon.
And half a dozen syringes, with a cigarette lighter standing by to sterilize the needles. The
only thing left after this was drinking mentholated spirits straight from the bottle in a
cardboard box on the Charing Cross Embankment. Assuming the Blue Fairy lived that long.
We moved around the room as quietly as we could. No sign of any bad guys, and I was
beginning to wonder if we were looking for a corpse rather than a person. I pushed open the
bedroom door, and there was the Blue Fairy, lying facedown on his bed. Snoring gently and
making mouth noises in his sleep. We all relaxed a little and put away our weapons. The
Blue Fairy was wearing nothing but a pair of boxers well past their sell-by date and a charm
bracelet around his left ankle. Janissary Jane and Molly and I had a brief but animated
discussion over who was going to have to actually touch him long enough to turn him over.
We played a few quick games of paper scissors rock, and I lost. I still think they cheated
somehow. I took a firm hold on the Blue Fairy’s surprisingly hairy shoulder, turned him over,
and yelled his name right into his face. I then backed quickly away as he sat bolt upright in
bed, hacking and coughing.
"All right, all right, I’m awake! Lay off the rough stuff; I’m delicate. Especially first thing in the
morning."
"It’s afternoon," I said.
"To you, maybe. For me it’s the beginning of a new day and I really wish it wasn’t. You’ll have
to excuse me. The old gray matter is never at its best first thing, at least until I’ve had a few
cups of coffee and a ciggie. Now, who are you, what are you, and why are you persecuting a
poor fairy at this ungodly hour? I didn’t order out again, did I? I could have sworn the escort
agency said my credit wasn’t any good any more, the bastards."
He squeezed his eyes shut, coughed up half a lung, and then stared at me blearily. His eyes
widened as he finally got a good look at me, and then he scooted back across the crumpled
bedsheets, holding up his hands defensively, until he crashed into the headboard and
couldn’t go any farther. He tried to smile but couldn’t pull it off convincingly.
"Eddie! It’s you! If I’d known you were coming, I’d have tidied up a bit, made a bit of an
effort…Help yourself to anything you like, make yourself at home…Oh, God, Eddie, don’t kill
me, please! I’m no threat to you!"
"Interesting," I said. "You should only know me as Shaman Bond. But you know my real
name. How is that, Blue?"
"I can see your torc," he said, blinking rapidly. "I’m half elf, you know. Of course you know.
You Droods know everything. And I have been known to do the odd job for your family, on
occasion. I have to. They give me money. Don’t kill me, Eddie, please. They made me do
it!"
"All right, Eddie, lay off him," said Janissary Jane, moving forward to stand beside me.
"Hello, Blue. It’s me, Jane. You’ve got yourself into some real trouble this time, haven’t you?
Even I may not be able to get you out of this one. What exactly did you do for the Droods that
you’re so ashamed of?"
"Ah, Jane," said the Blue Fairy, calming down a little. "And Molly too. How nice. Welcome to
my humble abode. Excuse the mess, but I live here. And I just can’t seem to work up the
enthusiasm to give a damn anymore. Terribly lax of me, I know, but that’s life these days. My
life, anyway. Still, I’m glad you’re here. If one is about to die horribly, it is marginally better to

do it in the company of one’s friends. Could you perhaps persuade your friend the assassin
to let me put some clothes on? I really would prefer not to meet my maker wearing just my
underwear."
"Get dressed," I said, amused despite myself. "I’m not here to kill you, Blue. Just ask you
some questions."
"Wait till you hear the answers," said the Blue Fairy.
We all backed away from the bed, and he levered himself up off the slumping mattress and
pulled on a battered old silk wrap. He ran his hands through his thinning hair, took a
cigarette from the pack by the bed, lit it with a fingertip, and took a deep drag. He then had
another long coughing fit, accompanied by really horrible noises, and sat down on the bed
again, his face gray and sweaty. He was carrying too much weight, pronounced in the jowls
and puffy cheeks. His face had an unhealthy sheen, and his eyes were seriously bloodshot.
The word was, he’d been quite a dandy in his time, back in the heady days of glam rock, but
he hadn’t aged well. The Blue Fairy had lived not wisely but too well, and it showed. He
might have been a personage to be reckoned with once, but that was long ago. Still, if he
really had done half the things he was supposed to have done, in and out of bed, it was a
wonder he was still here at all. Presumably even half elves are very hard to kill.
"God, you’re a mess, Blue," said Janissary Jane. "You look worse than your room, and that’
s saying something."
"I know, I know," said Blue, drawing on his cigarette again and stifling another coughing fit
through sheer effort of will. "Think of me as a work in progress. I keep hoping that if I drink
enough, or ingest enough things that are bad for me, I won’t have to wake up again to this
awful room, this awful life. This hole that I dug for myself, this burrow I have crawled into…But
I always do. It’s hard to kill an elf, even when he’s cooperating as hard as he can. Even a half
elf. Bless dear old Daddy and his rampant gonads."
"For someone so determined to die, you seemed very concerned about me being here to
kill you," I said.
"I would prefer to go with some dignity," said the Blue Fairy. "Not kicking and screaming all
the way, as you reduce me to small bloody pieces. I know how you Droods operate."
"But why do you want to die at all?" said Molly. "If you don’t like your life, change it, turn it
around. There’s still time."
The Blue Fairy smiled fondly at her. "Ah, there speaks the innocence and optimism of youth.
When life still seems full of promise and possibilities. But no one loves a fairy when he’s fifty.
They want their magic from a younger bit of stuff. And my magic, sad to say, is not what it
was. It faded, along with my good looks…which were magnificent, once upon a time. I was
invited to all the very best parties, you know. Mixed with all the celebs, had my face in the
glossies every week…But alas, we half elves bloom early and fade fast. Daddy dearest’s
energies were never meant to be contained in a mostly human form. The candle that burns
twice as fast…turns out not to be much of a bargain, in the end.
"Now I’m no longer good-looking enough to hang on to all the pretty boys and pretty things
that alone make life worth living. Sweet young things do still turn up in my bed, but only when
I pay them. And the fortunes I once had, that I thought would last forever, are gone, long
gone. On this…and that. I never worried about money until I didn’t have it any more. Which is
why I have to take whatever work I can get these days. Even the jobs I know will come back
to haunt me afterwards."

"What have you done, Blue?" I said.
He looked at me pleadingly. "I didn’t have any choice. One of your people turned up here
quite unexpectedly. I didn’t think the Droods even knew I existed anymore, let alone where to
find me. But he had work for me, and the money was good. Very good. And the threat
behind it was very real. You don’t say no to a Drood. And since all he wanted was a little
strange matter…I didn’t see the harm. Acquiring unusual objects from other dimensions is
one of the few things I’m still good at. It’s in the genes, you see. I got some strange matter for
your family’s Armourer once, some years back, and it must have been on file somewhere,
because when they wanted some more they came to me."
"Who did they send?" I said.
"Matthew," said the Blue Fairy. "They always send Matthew when they’re not prepared to
take ‘Go to hell’ for an answer."
"Of course," I said. "It would have to be Matthew. He’d do anything for the family. Go on,
Blue."
The Blue Fairy blinked nervously at me, picking up on the coldness in my voice. He stubbed
out the last inch of his cigarette on the bedside table and tried to sit up straight, clasping his
hands together in his lap so they wouldn’t shake.
"Well," he said, "I went fishing. That’s what I do. Drop a line into the other realms and see
what I can hook. Strange matter isn’t easy to find. I call it that because I haven’t a clue what it
is, or what it’s for. It’s organic…maybe alive, maybe not, and it has some…quite unique
properties. Fishing the dimensions can be very dangerous, you know. You never can tell
when you’ll hook something big and nasty by mistake, and then up it comes through the
planes, mad as hell and looking for revenge…But I got Matthew what he wanted, and he
paid me in cash right there on the spot. Good money. Far too much, for someone in my
reduced circumstances. That was when I started to get suspicious. But I didn’t do anything. I
had new booze to drink and new drugs to take, and…he was a Drood, after all. You don’t
mess with the Droods. Then I heard you’d been ambushed by an elf lord with an arrow made
of strange matter and hired by the Droods…and I knew. I felt bad, Eddie; really I did. I’ve
always known you were a Drood; you can’t hide a torc from elf eyes. And we’d had some
good times together, in the old Wulfshead…You bought me drinks and listened to me talk,
and you never laughed at me. So after I heard…what had happened…I waited for you to
come looking for me. And here you are. But you’re not here to kill me, are you? You want
something."
"The strange matter’s still in my body," I said. "And it’s killing me. Can you get me a cure?"
"No," said the Blue Fairy, meeting my eyes steadily. "It doesn’t work that way. I need to know
exactly what I’m looking for when I go fishing, or I can’t find it. And I don’t know nearly enough
about strange matter to have any idea of what its counterpart might be. I’m sorry, Eddie;
really I am. I didn’t know what they were going to do!"
"Would it have made any difference if you had?" I said.
"Probably not," he admitted. "It was very good money."
"How would you like a chance to redeem yourself?" said Molly. "How would you like to go
fishing for something for us?"
"What did you have in mind?" said the Blue Fairy.

"We need a skeleton key, to get us past the Hall’s defences," I said.
"Is there such a thing?"
He smiled suddenly. "Oh, yes. There is…I’ve waited years for someone to come and ask
me. It’s really very simple. Quite elegant, actually. But are you sure you want to do this,
Eddie? Once word gets out that the Drood’s defences have been breached…"
"Let it," I said. "Let the whole family crash and burn, if that’s what it takes to get to the truth."
We went out into the next room. The Blue Fairy dug through a pile of debris and came up
with a very ordinary-looking fishing rod and reel. The kind of thing people use when they go
fishing for recreation rather than competitive sport. The Blue Fairy then produced a knife out
of nowhere, pulled up the left sleeve of his dressing gown, and made a shallow incision just
above the wrist. I could see a whole series of scars reaching up his arm to the elbow, some
old and some not, from where he’d done this before. Golden blood welled up from the cut,
and he held his arm out over the space he’d cleared on the floor before him. The blood
dripped down to form a golden pool. When it was about three or four inches in diameter, the
Blue Fairy pressed his fingers against the cut and muttered under his breath, and the wound
healed over immediately, leaving just another scar on his arm.
The Blue Fairy pulled his sleeve down again, not looking at the three of us watching, and
snapped out half a dozen words in Old Elvish. I caught some of it, but his accent was
unfamiliar. The pool on the floor blazed suddenly with a golden light and spread out on the
floor until it was almost a yard in diameter. It didn’t look like a pool of liquid anymore.
Looking into it was like staring into a deep well that just kept getting deeper the longer you
looked. I felt like I was off balance and might fall. I grabbed Molly’s arm for support just as
she grabbed mine. We both smiled at each other a little shamefacedly. Janissary Jane didn’
t look into the pool. She kept all her attention on the Blue Fairy. And she had both her punch
daggers at the ready.
The Blue Fairy took up his fishing rod, checked the hook was secure and the line was
running smoothly, and then dropped his line into the glowing golden pool. The hook
disappeared, followed by more and more line as the Blue Fairy kept feeding it in.
"How far down does it go?" said Molly.
"All the way," said the Blue Fairy.
"Some questions, you just know you’re not going to get an answer that helps," said Molly.
"Elf blood has many useful properties," the Blue Fairy said calmly.
"Even diluted, degraded blood like mine. All elves have an built-in talent for travelling. They
can walk sideways from the sun, access other planes of existence, enter dimensions you
and even I couldn’t even conceive, let alone operate in. But the blood itself is enough to
open doors and allow me to go fishing. Sometimes just for the fun of it, fishing at random for
whatever’s there…sometimes to order, for a price. If I concentrate hard enough, I can find
pretty much anything…and what you need, Eddie, is a Confusulum."
"A what?" I said.
"A Confusulum," the Blue Fairy said patiently. "Don’t ask me what it is is, because I’ve no
idea. That’s the point. It doesn’t actually change anything, just confuses the hell out of
everyone. It works on the uncertainty principle that nothing is necessarily what or where it
seems to be. I found the first one years ago, quite by accident, and it scared the crap out of

me. Everyone needs some certainties in their life. I threw it back in, but something about it
stuck in my mind. The Droods’ family defences are based around certainties: friend or foe,
permitted entry or not, that sort of thing. But the Confusulum will take all those certainties out
of the equation. The Hall’s defences will be so confused they won’t know whether they’re
operating or not, whether you’re permitted entry or not, even whether you’re actually there or
not. They’ll be so confused you’ll be able to walk right through them while they’re still
struggling to make up their minds. By the time anyone at the Hall notices that their defences
have just had a major nervous breakdown, you’ll be in.
"The Confusulum isn’t one hundred percent guaranteed; its uncertainty even applies to its
own nature. So there’s no telling exactly what its effects will be or how long they’ll last. But
since I’m the only one ever to encounter a Confusulum, you can be sure your family have no
specific defences against it."
He fished randomly for a while, just getting himself in the mood, and Molly and Jane and I sat
more or less patiently around the golden pool, watching. I was having trouble getting used to
the idea that I could be going home so soon, and that my family’s notorious protections
could be brushed aside so easily. And all because of a little man nursing a grudge and just
waiting to be asked.
The first thing he pulled out of the pool was a seven-league boot with a hole in its soul,
followed by a small black lacquered puzzle box, a stuffed moomintroll, and a statue of a
black bird. The Blue Fairy threw them all back, and then stared into the pool with a look of
fierce concentration on his face. His eyes bulged, and his lips drew back from his gritted
teeth in a fixed snarl. Beads of sweat popped out all over his straining face. His line jerked
suddenly, sending slow ripples across the surface of the glowing pool. The Blue Fairy let out
a long breath and began to slowly reel his line back in. He took his time, keeping a light but
constant pressure on the line, staring so intently he wasn’t even breathing anymore. And
finally he brought something up out of the golden pool.
I couldn’t tell you what it was, exactly. It clung to the hook, writhing and twisting like a living
thing, even though I knew on some deep instinctive level that it wasn’t alive and never could
be. It changed size and colour, shape and texture, from moment to moment, its dimensions
snapping in and out and back and forth. It looked like all the things you see out of the corners
of your eyes when you’ve just woken up and you’re still half asleep.
"Quick!" said the Blue Fairy, his face contorted with concentration.
"I brought it here for you, Eddie, so it’s up to you to give it a shape in this dimension. Impose
a single nature on it, so it can survive here. The link you make will mean it will serve you and
only you. But do it quickly, before it becomes something we can’t bear to see with only
human eyes."
I concentrated on the first image that came to me. It just popped into my mind: a simple
circular badge I’d seen in an old head shop in Denmark Street years ago, a white badge
bearing the legend Go Lemmings Go. And just like that, the twisting unnerving thing on the
hook was gone and the badge was resting on the palm of my hand. It looked and felt
perfectly normal, perfectly innocent. I pinned it carefully on the lapel of my jacket.
"All the things you could have chosen," said Molly. "Everything from Excalibur to the Holy
Hand Grenade of Saint Antioch, and you had to choose that. The workings of your mind
remain a complete mystery to me, Eddie."
"That’s the nicest thing you’ve ever said to me," I said, and we both smiled.

"By any chance, are the two of you an item?" Janissary Jane said suddenly.
"We haven’t decided yet," I said.
"We’re still working on it," said Molly.
"We’re…partners, on this particular enterprise."
"Partners in crime."
"Or possibly a suicide pact."
"You two deserve each other," said Janissary Jane, shaking her head.
None of us had noticed that the Blue Fairy had inadvertently allowed his line to drop back
into the glowing pool. He cried out abruptly as something below grabbed the hook and
tugged hard on the line. The Blue Fairy was almost pulled forward, and the line whirred
through the reel until it ran all the way. The Blue Fairy was jerked forward again but hung on
grimly.
"What have you got?" I said. "What were you concentrating on?"
"I wasn’t thinking about anything! I didn’t catch this; it caught me!"
I hit the button on my reverse watch, and nothing happened. I hit the button again, and still
nothing. I shook my wrist vigorously.
"Oh, shit," I said.
"It sounds so much more helpless when he says it," said Janissary Jane.
"He’s had a lot of practice recently," said Molly. "What’s wrong, Eddie?"
"I appear to have broken the reverse watch," I said. "Or exhausted its batteries, or whatever
the hell the damn thing runs on. I think I asked too much of it when I forced it to save you."
"So it’s my fault?" said Molly.
"Always," I said, smiling.
We all looked on as the Blue Fairy wrestled with the fishing rod, the taut line jerking back
and forth across the pool. It snapped abruptly, and the Blue Fairy stumbled back. And
something huge and long and inhumanly strong burst up out of the golden pool, reaching for
him. It was a single tentacle, dark purple in colour and lined with rows of suckers full of
grinding teeth. More and more of it burst up out of the pool, snapping back and forth.
"Get out of here!" yelled the Blue Fairy. "I’ll handle this!"
"Don’t be a damned fool!" Janissary Jane yelled back at him. "You can’t handle this on your
own!"
"It came through my blood," the Blue Fairy said grimly. "So only I can put it back down. Go.
You’ve got things to do. Things that matter. This…is my business. No damned thing from the
vasty deeps is going to get the better of me in my own home! Will you all please get the hell
out of here, so I can concentrate? And Eddie, make your family pay! For what they did to
you, and what they did to me."

More and more of the tentacle was forcing its way into the room, yards and yards of it,
straining against the edges of the pool that contained it. The Blue Fairy threw his fishing rod
aside and sketched ancient signs and sigils on the air with dancing hands, leaving bright
incandescent trails on the air. He was chanting in Elvish in a form so old I couldn’t follow one
word in ten. Magic spat and crackled all around him, and for the first time, he was smiling. A
cold, inhuman smile.
Molly and Janissary Jane and I left him there, standing on the edge of the golden pool,
defying the monstrous thing that had come fishing for him. I left him there, because I had
important things to do, and because…it was the only gift I could give him, for his help. A
chance to stand alone against a fearsome foe and either win back his pride…or gain the
good death he craved. I looked back at him, one last time, before I closed the door. He
stood tall and proud and powerful in his magic; and for the first time it wasn’t difficult at all to
see the elf in him.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
You Can Go Home Again (Provided You Carry a Really Big Stick)
M olly and Janissary Jane and I stood in the street outside the liquor store, looking up at the
Blue Fairy’s window. The vivid flashes of light had stopped, and it had all gone very quiet.
People passed by, paying us no attention. Thinking this was just another day, no different
than any other. They didn’t know there was another world, a more dangerous world, that they
would see if they would only stop and look. Molly and Janissary Jane and I looked up at a
silent, empty window and finally turned away.
"Should we…?" said Molly.
"No," said Janissary Jane. "Either way, it’s over. Finished."
"It’s time to go home," I said. "For I have promises to keep, and miles to go before I sleep."
"I love it when you talk literary," said Molly.
"Eddie…" Janissary Jane said. "I’m sorry, but I’m not going with you. I know my limitations.
Fighting demons in Hell dimensions is one thing; taking on your family in the seat of their
power…that’s way out of my league. I’d just get in your way. So…I think I’ll sit this one out, if
that’s all right with you."
"It’s all right, Jane," I said. "I understand. Trust me; if I didn’t have to do this, I wouldn’t be
doing it either." I looked at Molly. "You don’t have to do this, Molly. My family probably doesn’
t even know you’re involved. You could still walk away. I’d understand."
"Hell with that," Molly said cheerfully. "I’ve been dreaming of sticking it to the Droods where
they live for years. Besides, you wouldn’t last ten minutes without me to back you up, and
you know it."
"Thank you, Molly," I said. "That means a lot to me."
"Just promise me one thing," she said. She held my gaze with hers, fierce and demanding.
"Promise me that we’re going back to tear the place down. Promise me you won’t go soft
and beg them to take you back."
"Not a chance in hell," I said, meeting her gaze. "This isn’t about what my family did to me
anymore. It’s about what they’ve done to everyone."

"You’ve come a long way, Eddie," said Molly. "I wish…I could do something to help you. To
save you from what’s inside you. All those years I spent trying to kill you, and now something
else is beating me to it…I would save you if I could, Eddie. You do know that?"
"I know," I said. "But…I’ve lived more these last few days with you than in all those years on
my own."
"Oh, get a room, you two," said Janissary Jane. "I’m out of here before you start comparing
favourite poems."
"We are not an item!" said Molly.
"Definitely not," I said solemnly.
"Yeah, right," said Janissary Jane. "I’ll take the black car, and visit my local union branch.
See if I can organise some direct action against Manifest Destiny for allowing Archie Leech
to use me as a weapon in their fight. The mercenaries’ guild looks after its own. And we’ve
always come down very hard on unfair competition from amateurs. If secret societies want
to build up their own private armies, they should come to us. And pay the going rate.
So…Eddie, Molly. This is good-bye. Good luck, guys. You’re going to need it. And
Eddie…thank you. For saving me from Leech. You could have just destroyed my body and
got rid of him that way. It’s what most people would have done."
"I’m not most people," I said.
"Got that right," said Molly.
We all laughed a little, and then Janissary Jane turned and walked away without looking
back. She’s always been a sentimental sort, for a mercenary. Molly and I watched her drive
away in the big black car, and then we stood together on the pavement outside the liquor
store and looked at each other. I really didn’t know what to say to her. Were we an item?
Were we…a couple? This was all new to me. Unfamiliar territory. I admired Molly. Liked her,
respected her, enjoyed her company…and I risked my life to save hers without even thinking
about it. Could this be love, come to me late in life, and unexpected? The family allows its
agents to have friends, even lovers, but never loves. Marriages are decided by the family. It’
s just another way of controlling us. Love is something that comes afterwards, if you’re lucky.
Duty and family must always come first.
Because we protect the world. I’d kill them all, for that lie.
And because I of all people know my family aren’t fit to rule the world. They had to be
stopped, brought down, and humbled. While I was still strong enough to do it. I might not be
able to save myself, but I could still save the world. One last time.
"I know what you’re thinking," said Molly.
"Rather doubt that," I said.
"Let’s just say I’m as much in the dark as you are," said Molly, her hand resting gently on my
right arm. "You’re a good man, Eddie. I think I could become very fond of you…in time. But
we don’t have much time, do we? So let’s just do what we have to and worry about other
things afterwards. If there is an afterwards." She smiled suddenly. "Hell, your family will
probably kill us both anyway. So let’s just concentrate on what we’re going to do next."
"Yes," I said. "Let’s do that."

"Starting with that thing on your lapel," said Molly, leaning in close for a better look at the
badge. "The Confusulum. Any idea how you work it?"
I frowned, peering down at the badge. "The Blue Fairy didn’t say. And there wasn’t exactly
an opportunity to ask for an instruction manual." I tapped the badge with a fingertip. "Hello?
Is there anyone in there?"
And just like that, I made contact with something. Not with my mind; more like with my soul. I
could feel something inside my head and inside my heart; not human, not in any way human,
but large and laughing, playful and curious. The Confusulum found everything marvellously
funny, from this fascinating new world it was in to its own form and nature. It was alive and
not alive, more than alive…As much a force and a purpose as a person. This new world,
and all the people in it, were just a fascinating novelty to the Confusulum, to be enjoyed and
played with for a while. Until it got bored. The Confusulum would serve me for as long as it
remained amused, and then it would go somewhere else and do something else. It tried to
show me what, but I couldn’t understand or appreciate any of it. The Confusulum laughed
again, like a child playing with a brand-new toy, and broke the contact. I looked at Molly.
"Well?" she said.
"I think it’ll do whatever we want," I said cautiously. "It’s…very strange. I don’t know if it’ll
confuse our enemies, but it baffles the hell out of me."
Molly sniffed. "Should have given it to me. I’d soon teach it to sit up and beg. I’m used to
dealing with magical items with minds of their own. You have to show them who’s boss."
"Oh, I’m pretty sure it knows who’s boss," I said.
"Look, can it help us with our most urgent problem? Namely, how we’re supposed to get to
the Hall? All the usual and unusual ways out of London are bound to be closely monitored
now, either by your family or Manifest Destiny, and I don’t have nearly enough energy left in
me to summon a spatial portal. If only I hadn’t had to smash the Manx Cat to save your life. I
could have drawn a lot of power from that statue."
"So this is all my fault, then?"
"Everything is your fault, Drood, until proven otherwise."
"All right," I said patiently. "Let’s start with that. Confusulum, can you help Molly get her
power back?"
Oh, sure! said a happy voice in my ear. Easy peasy!
The badge on my lapel pulsed with an otherworldly light, and all around us the world became
uncertain. The Confusulum exerted its unique nature and confused the issue so much that
the universe itself wasn’t sure whether Molly had her power or not. It was as though someone
had nudged the universe in the ribs so that it skipped a beat, and just like that…the world
was subtly different. Magic spat and crackled on the air all around Molly as power surged
through her, and she laughed aloud with sheer exhilaration. She swept her hands back and
forth, and shimmering trails of energy followed her hands. Molly’s face was flushed with an
almost sexual excitement, and she looked incredibly alive, full to bursting with all the
energies of the wild woods.
I thought she’d never looked more beautiful.
(There were side effects to the change. Posters in the shop windows were suddenly

different colours, or had different names. Red roses bloomed in the gutters. And a sheep
walked solemnly backwards down the street.)
"Damn!" Molly said, grinning from ear to ear. "This is…amazing! I feel like I could take on
the whole damned world and make it cry like a baby! You want a spatial portal, Eddie? I feel
like I could transport this whole damned street from one end of the country to the other!"
"Actually, I think that might be a bit conspicuous," I said in what I hoped was a calm,
reasonable, and very soothing voice. "And anyway, we can’t risk using a spatial portal to get
us to the Hall. My family’s defences would detect that. No, our only chance is to sneak in and
take my family by surprise."
"You said you wanted to bring your family down!"
"I do, I do! But even with you back at your best, there’s still no way we can hope to go
head-to-head with my family and survive. You know that, Molly."
She scowled. "All right, maybe I do. So, how are we going to get to the Hall?"
"We use the Confusulum," I said. "If it can confuse the whole universe about whether you
have magic, it can confuse the world about where we really are. Right, badge?"
Oh, sure! No problem! I just live to confuse the issue! You know, you think very clearly for a
three-dimensional entity!
So the Confusulum exerted itself, the world threw up its hands and said, Oh, have it your way
then, and Molly and I appeared just inside the Hall’s grounds. Vast grassy lawns stretched
away before us, with the house looming up ahead on the horizon. It was early evening now,
the light already going out of the day. The sky was full of lowering clouds, and the air was hot
and heavy. I looked quickly around, but there didn’t seem to be anyone about. I was half
crouching, tense with anticipation for alarms going off and defences activating, but
everything seemed calm and quiet, the peace of the evening undisturbed except by the
singing of a few drowsy birds and the whickering of the unicorns in their stables. The peace
didn’t fool me. The Hall and its grounds were seriously protected at all times by quite
appallingly vicious scientific and magical means. All of which, it seemed, were currently
utterly bewildered by the Confusulum. I straightened up and nodded slowly.
I’d come home.
"Stick close to me," I said to Molly. "The family can’t view me remotely while I wear the torc,
and as long as you’re right beside me it should protect you too."
"I can protect myself," Molly said automatically. She was staring about her with wide eyes
and a disbelieving smile. "Oh, Eddie, you should have told me…This place is fabulous! I
mean, the size of these grounds…You could land an airplane on lawns this size! And you’ve
got fountains, and your own lake…and swans! Oooh…I just love swans!"
"Me too," I said. "Delicious."
"Barbarian! Are those peacocks over there?"
"Yes. Try not to set them off. They can make more noise than the alarms."
"I always figured you guys lived well, but this is incredible. I know some landed gentry who
don’t have it as good as this!"

"Welcome to my home," I said. "One day, absolutely none of this will be mine."
Molly looked at me. "Why drop us off here, so far from the Hall? Why not arrive somewhere
useful, inside the house?"
"Because that would have set off alarms," I said. "Even the Confusulum couldn’t handle the
kind of security my family has set up throughout the Hall. The kind of alarms primed to go off
if they’re even suspicious or just have a bad dream. The defences out here are more
straightforward: on/off, kill/don’t kill, that sort of thing. Child’s play for the Confusulum."
Molly grinned cheerfully. "If I’d known burgling the Hall was this easy, I’d have done it years
ago."
We moved cautiously forward across the lawns, towards the house. We stayed off the gravel
path, far too noisy, and we gave the peacocks plenty of room. A few sounded off, but no one
in the house would give their plaintive cries any attention. Molly and I actually covered quite a
distance before half a dozen robot guns rose suddenly out of the ground from their hidden
silos. Big, ugly, brutal weapons, they swivelled back and forth as their fire computers
struggled to target the intruders whose proximity had set them off. Molly and I stood very still
while I rested one hand on the badge at my lapel. The Confusulum did its thing, and the guns
swivelled jerkily back and forth, increasingly confused and upset by conflicting impulses. So
in the end the stupid things decided that since they were the only things moving, they must
be the intruders. And they shot the hell out of each other. Muzzles roared, bullets flew, and
one by one the robot guns exploded messily in bursts of fire and smoke. None of the bullets
came anywhere near Molly or me.
"So much for sneaking in," said Molly as the last echoes of gunfire died away.
"Shut up and run," I said.
We sprinted forward across the lawns. Lights were coming on inside the Hall. I had no doubt
people would be crowding around their security monitors, trying to figure out what was
happening. Hopefully the Confusulum would keep them guessing for a while. The robot guns
had been known to malfunction before; they were one of Alistair’s ideas.
"Up ahead," said Molly. "What are those ugly-looking things?"
"Oh, shit," I said.
"I really hate it when you say that."
"Just stick really close to me, okay?"
Two of the gryphons came lumbering across the grass towards us, great lumpy things with
gray scaly bodies and long, morose faces. They were the only ones who looked forward to
intruders, because they got to eat them. The Confusulum had to be having some effect on
them, or they would have foreseen our coming and warned the house. But this close, the
simple creatures believed what their senses were telling them, no matter how confused they
might feel. I waited till they were almost upon us, and then sank down onto my haunches and
spoke easily to them, calm and friendly, letting them remember my voice as they got my
scent. They approached me slowly, gave me a good sniff all over, and then nuzzled my
hands with their soft mouths. They blinked suspiciously at Molly, but I just kept talking
soothingly to them, keeping their attention on me. They sat down and leaned their great
weight against me, making happy snuffling sounds.
"Those things smell really horrible," said Molly.

"Hush," I said. "You’ll hurt their feelings. They’re gryphons. Better than guard dogs because
they can actually see the near future. Usually. But because they never met a piece of carrion
they didn’t want to roll in, they’re never allowed inside the house. I always felt sorry for them
when I was just a kid; left out here alone, in all weathers. So I used to sneak out at night and
feed them bits of offal and stuff from the kitchens. It seems they remember me…"
"You soppy old softy, you," said Molly. She reached cautiously over and scratched one of the
gryphons behind its long pointed ear, and it snuffled loudly in gratitude.
"Down!" I said suddenly.
Molly and I crouched down with the gryphons, just a gray silhouette in the growing dusk,
while I watched the Sarjeant-at-Arms stalk out of the Hall’s main front entrance. He looked
around the grounds, taking his time, but his gaze swept over Molly and me and the gryphons
without slowing. Of course he wouldn’t believe the guns blowing each other up was just a
malfunction. He lived to defend the Hall. More members of the family poured out of the
entrance behind him, and the Sarjeant directed them this way and that with curt instructions.
They swarmed around the exterior of the house, looking for signs of an attack or a break-in,
while others fanned out across the grounds. A few even took off from the landing pads on
the roof, in those clumsy old da Vinci helicopter chairs that the Armourer’s been trying to get
the bugs out of for years. Rather them than me. They roared by overhead, spotlights
stabbing down through the gathering gloom. I hadn’t expected such a dramatic response to
a single incident. Presumably everyone was still on edge after the attack on the Heart. Or
perhaps it was because I’d phoned and told them I was coming home…I liked to think so.
"You had to tell them you were coming," said Molly.
"The grounds defences have all been activated," I said to avoid answering her. "But as long
as the Confusulum’s operating, they shouldn’t be able to lock on to us."
"Why are they all carrying weapons?" Molly said suddenly. "I thought you people mostly
relied on your armour."
"Mostly, yes. But just recently there’ve been some serious attacks on the Hall. Really nasty
ones. No one feels like taking chances anymore."
"Attacks?" said Molly. "By anyone I might know?"
"We don’t know who’s behind them," I said. "And if my family doesn’t know, no one knows.
But that’s why they’re pulling out all the stops. The very thing I’d hoped to avoid, by sneaking
in. Bloody Alistair and his stupid bloody robot guns."
"Should we leave?" said Molly. "Maybe come back some other time?"
"We don’t have the time," I said. "For better or worse, this is the only chance we’ll get. You
still game?"
"Always," she said, grinning. "Let’s go start some trouble."
"Let’s," I said, grinning back at her.
We gave the gryphons a few last pats, and then pushed them firmly away and sprinted
across the open lawns towards the house. In the growing dusk, we should look like just two
more moving figures. If the family were bracing themselves for an attack by the kind of thing
that had broken into the Sanctity, they shouldn’t be looking for merely human targets. I could
feel the grounds’ defences trying to kick in: all the hidden trapdoors and deadly weapons, all

the scientific and magical devices in their underground silos, but none of them could lock on
to Molly or me as long as we were protected by the Confusulum. Force shields snapped on
and off all around us, magical energies manifested and dispersed in a moment, and none of
them could touch us. The grounds’ defences were baffled. But there were still far too many
people around, too many Droods between us and the Hall. Someone would be bound to
challenge us soon.
"We need a diversion," I said to Molly. "Something big and dramatic, to draw people away
from the front of the house."
"No problem," said Molly, breathing just a little hard from the running. "Watch this."
She muttered under her breath and gestured sharply, and suddenly a huge dragon was
hovering over the Hall. A massive creature, with a long golden-scaled body and vast,
flapping membranous wings. It shrieked horribly as it descended on the Hall, a horrid horned
head thrusting forward on the end of a snakelike neck. It was impossibly big, half the size of
the house, and it tore great holes in the outer wall of the east wing with casual blows from its
clawed hands. It breathed fire across the landing pads on the roof, sweeping away all the
vehicles there in one great blast of flames. It screamed in triumph and slammed into the Hall
with one great shoulder so hard that the whole building shook.
"Will that do?" said Molly.
"Where the hell did you find a dragon that size?" I said. "I am officially impressed, Molly.
Honest. But that is my home, and I would rather like to have some of it left at the end of the
day! Does the word overkill ring any bells with you? Are you sure you can even control it?"
"Of course," said Molly. "I once took a thorn out of its paw. Relax, Eddie, it’s not a real
dragon. Just another charm off my bracelet."
"So the damage it’s doing to the Hall isn’t real either?"
Molly frowned. "Well, yes and no."
"Let’s get inside quick," I said. "Before the family works out what’s happening."
Most of the family had gone around to the back of the house by now to deal with the most
obvious threat, leaving the front of the Hall undefended. Just open lawns between me and
the front entrance. And then the scarecrows appeared out of nowhere, blinking in to block
my way. First one, then two, and finally an even dozen. I grabbed Molly by the arm, and we
skidded to a halt well short of them. They moved stiffly to take up defensive positions
between us and the front entrance, their gloved hands stiff as claws. Unnaturally still,
impossibly strong. Twelve scarecrows come down off their crosses, wearing battered
clothes from various periods all the way back to the seventeenth century. The Drood family’s
most hated enemies, made over into scarecrows to guard the Hall they’d threatened. Just
because we could. The scarecrows’ faces were weather-beaten, taut, brown as parchment,
and just as brittle. Tufts of straw protruded from the ears and from the mouths, but their eyes
remained still alive, endlessly suffering.
"Are those the…?" said Molly.
"Yes," I said. "Someone in the Hall has panicked and let the scarecrows loose. Our fiercest
enemies, defeated and put to use. Their bodies hollowed out and filled with straw while they
were still alive, and then bound by unbreakable pacts to defend the Hall, to their destruction
if necessary. Not dead, any of them. They couldn’t still suffer, if we let them die. If you listen in

on the right supernatural frequency, you can hear them screaming."
"Oh, my God," said Molly. "That’s Laura Lye, the water elemental assassin, the one they
called the Liquidator. And that’s Mad Frankie Phantasm. I always wondered what happened
to them."
"No one attacks the family where we live and gets away with it," I said.
"We take that personally. And we always did like a splash of irony with our revenge. So now
you know what waits for us, if we get this wrong."
"Why isn’t the Confusulum dealing with them?" said Molly.
"Good question. I think…because the scarecrows exist on the border between life and
death, neither one nor the other. Their nature is already so confused the Confusulum
probably couldn’t make it worse if it tried."
"Are we in trouble here?" Molly said carefully.
"Absolutely," I said. "Because of what they are, and what was done to them, the scarecrows
can’t be hurt, stopped, or turned aside."
"So what do we do?"
"We take them down hard," I said. "Because in the end they’re just scarecrows, while we’re
Eddie Drood and Molly Metcalf."
"Damn right," said Molly.
I armoured up, the living metal sweeping over me, and I went to meet the scarecrows as they
lurched forward. The golden armour made me strong again, despite the pain stabbing
through all of my left side now. I slammed into the first scarecrow and tore it apart with brute
armoured force. I ripped its arms off, smashed in its chest, and then tore the head right off
its shoulders and threw it away. The other scarecrows crowded around me, beating at me
with their stone-hard fists, pulling at my shoulders, but even their unnatural strength was no
match for my armour.
(It was never intended that they should be able to take down a Drood. We never take the
chance that our own weapons might be used against us.)
They pulled at my golden legs, trying to overturn me, pressing in from all sides, but I stood
firm and would not fall. I tore them apart, limb from limb, and no blood ever flowed, just more
straw sticking out of ragged sockets. I ripped their hollow bodies apart, throwing the pieces
this way and that. Heads rolled across the grass, the eyes still alive, still suffering and hating.
When this was over, the family would just put them back together again. No rest for those
who dared to be wicked against us.
Molly took out her fair share of the scarecrows. She hit them with the four elements, all at
once. Hurricane winds whipped up out of nowhere, picked up the scarecrows, threw them
high into the sky, and then slammed them to the ground again. Sudden downpours targeted
individual scarecrows and soaked them so heavily they could hardly move. Others burst into
flames that burned so fiercely that the straw-filled bodies were consumed in seconds. And
finally the earth itself cracked open, swallowed up all the scarecrows left standing, and then
slammed itself together again, trapping the scarecrows underground. Molly looked around
her and nodded once, satisfied.

"Damn, we’re good."
"Yes," I said. "We are."
I could have used the Confusulum to interrupt the forces that kept the scarecrows going. I
could have used it to free the trapped spirits from their scarecrow bodies. But I didn’t.
Because they had attacked my family where we live, and we never forgive that.
We were almost at the Hall when a voice in my ear suddenly said, Sorry! That’s it! Business
calls and I have to be going! It was fun; we must do this again sometime! I looked down, and
the badge on my lapel was gone. Just like that, the Confusulum had abandoned me. About
to enter the centre of my family’s power, Molly and I were on our own. Which…was just
typical of the way my life had been going recently. I decided not to tell Molly. It would only
upset her.
I strode up to the main front entrance, pushed open the door with a flourish, and marched on
into the hallway beyond. Molly couldn’t wait to get in, actually pushing past me in her
eagerness. I shut the door carefully behind us, and the background roar of my family fighting
the dragon was immediately shut off. Inside the house, everything was quiet and peaceful,
just like always. The slow ticking of old clocks; the smell of beeswax and polish and dust.
Home. And then the Sarjeant-at-Arms stepped out of his security alcove to confront me, and
I remembered why I’d been so happy to leave in the first place. He stood solidly before me,
blocking my way, stiff and formal as always in his old-fashioned butler’s outfit. The man who
had always been so much more than just a butler. I stood very still. I was still wearing my
armour. I looked like any other Drood. There was a chance…
"I know it’s you, Edwin," said the Sarjeant. "I recognise the way you move. You always were
sloppy, undisciplined. When the defences in the ground couldn’t lock on to anyone, I knew it
had to be you. Always the lateral thinker, the sneak, skulking in the shadows. And your
companion is the infamous Molly Metcalf? Didn’t take you long to fall into bad company. I
always knew you were no good, Edwin. Even when you were just a boy."
I armoured down to face him. I wanted him to be able to see my face. "I haven’t been a boy
for a long time, Sarjeant. I’m not afraid of you anymore. You see this man, Molly? He made
my life miserable when I was a child. He made all our lives miserable. Nothing we did as
children was ever good enough for him. You see, all adult members of the family can
override the collars of the children. So they can discipline us, control us…Punish us. We’re a
very old family, very old-fashioned, and we never did believe in sparing the rod. And this
man…loved to punish children. For any reason, or none. Just because he could. We all lived
in fear of the Sarjeant-at-Arms when we were kids."
"It was for your own good," the Sarjeant said calmly. "You had to learn. And you were always
so very slow to learn, Edwin."
I armoured up again and held up my fist. Golden spikes rose up out of the heavy knuckles.
"Step aside, Sarjeant. I’m not going to be stopped this time."
"It’s not too late," said the Sarjeant. "You could still surrender. Submit to family discipline.
Make atonement for your crimes."
"I never committed any crimes! Never! But the family has."
The Sarjeant sighed. "You never listen, and you never learn. Lose your armour, Edwin. Or I’ll
make your companion suffer."

He pulled weapons out of the air. His singular talent, given to him so that he could protect the
Hall. A gun appeared in one hand, a flamethrower in the other. He aimed them at Molly, and I
lunged forward to protect her. Bullets hammered against my armoured chest and ricocheted
away, but the flames swept right past me to threaten Molly…only to turn aside at the last
moment, deflected by Molly’s magic. She jabbed out a hand at the Sarjeant, and he
staggered backwards from the unseen impact. Molly laughed at him.
"My companion can look after herself," I said to the Sarjeant.
"Damn right," said Molly.
The Sarjeant started to subvocalise the Words that would call up his armour. He should have
done that the moment he recognised me, but in his pride he still saw me as a child to be
chastised. But even as he started the Words, Molly hit him with a rain of rats. They fell on him
out of nowhere, streams of big black rats swarming all over him, clawing and biting. He cried
out in shock and pain, slapping at the rats and trying to shake them off, unable to
concentrate long enough to say the Words that would have brought up his armour to protect
him. He staggered back and forth, beating at the rats with his bare hands. One sank its teeth
deep into his palm and hung there, kicking and wriggling as he tried in vain to shake it off.
Another ripped at his ear. Blood ran down his face as they tore open his scalp.
I would have liked to stand around for a while and watch him suffer, but I didn’t have the time.
So I stepped forward and punched him out. The strength behind the golden fist almost took
his head off, and he crashed to the floor, barely twitching. Molly disappeared the rats with a
gesture. I stood over the Sarjeant-at-Arms, looking down at him, and it felt good, so good, to
have finally avenged myself for years of pain and scorn. Now he didn’t look nearly as big as I
remembered him. He was still conscious, just.
"How many children did you whip for running in the hallways?" I said. "How many did you flog
for being late or not being where they should be? For answering back? For daring to have
minds and hopes and dreams of their own?"
The Sarjeant stirred painfully, blood running out the corner of his torn mouth as he smiled. "It’
s a hard world, boy. Had to toughen you up so you could survive it. You learned your lessons
well, Edwin. Proud of you, boy."
"We were just children!" I said, but he was unconscious and couldn’t hear me anymore.
"Your family do love their mind games, don’t they?" said Molly.
"Not now, " I said. "Please."
I stepped into the Sarjeant’s security alcove and opened the emergency alarms locker. It
was keyed to open to anyone wearing a torc. I looked at all the switches set out before me,
grinned, and then hit every single one of them. Interior alarms, exterior alarms, fire, flood,
witchcraft, and Luddites. (Some of our alarms go way back.) Bells and sirens went off
throughout the Hall, ringing and howling and clanging in an ungodly cacophony of noise.
Lights flared and flashed, emergency doors slammed shut, steel grilles came crashing
down, and members of the family ran wildly this way and that, driven mad by the whooping
alarms. I always said we needed more emergency drills.
I walked confidently through the hallways and corridors with Molly at my side. People rushed
by, shouting and gesturing, but none of them paid me any attention. To them I was just
another Drood, anonymous in my armour. And if Molly was with me, well, then she must be
just another authorised guest. In an emergency, people have time to see only what they

expect to see.
I led Molly deeper into the Hall, and she oohed and aahed as she took in all the luxurious
furnishings, the portraits and paintings, the statues and works of art, and all the other
marvellous loot my family has acquired down the centuries. I grew up with it all, so I still
mostly took it for granted, and I had to smile as Molly went ecstatic and rapturous over this
rare piece or that. I actually had to drag her away from a few things she wanted to examine
more closely. We had to keep moving; time was not on our side. Molly pouted rebelliously,
but she understood.
"Colour me majorly impressed," she said. "I’d heard stories about this place, but…I had no
idea. There are things here they haven’t even got in museums! Paintings by major artists
that aren’t in any of the catalogues! So many beautiful things…and probably wasted on you,
you philistine. No wonder Sebastian had such excellent taste…I’m not leaving here without
stuffing a few things in a bag."
"Later," I said. "We have to get to the Armoury."
"Why?"
"Because there’s something there I need. Something I can use to bring the house down."
The Armoury should have been closed, shut down, sealed and guarded, according to the
emergency protocols. I’d half expected to have to fight my way through armed guards and
force the blast-proof doors open with my armoured strength. Or have Molly use her magics.
But in the end the heavy doors stood wide open, entirely unguarded, which was…unheard
of. I edged over to the blast-proof doors and peered cautiously through into the Armoury. It
gave every indication of being deserted. I insisted on going in first, and Molly made her
disapproval clear by crowding close behind, almost stepping on my heels.
The cellars were deserted, all the workstations shut down. The quiet was eerie. None of the
usual fires or explosions or sudden surprised cursings. One man was waiting for us, sitting
at ease in his favourite chair right in the middle of everything. He watched, smiling wryly, as
Molly and I cautiously approached him. A tall middle-aged man with a bald pate and tufty
white eyebrows, wearing a stained white lab coat over a T-shirt bearing the legend Guns
Don’t Kill People—Unless You Aim Them Properly. The Armourer. My uncle Jack. I should
have known he would stand his ground when everyone else had fled.
"Hello, Eddie," he said calmly. "I’ve been expecting you."
He held up something in his right hand. A simple clicker in the shape of a small green frog.
He snapped it once, and my armour went back into my collar, just like that. I gaped at the
Armourer, shocked speechless, and he laughed softly.
"Just a little toy I put together long ago and kept for myself. After all, you never know when it
might come in handy…When I heard all the alarms go off at once, I knew it had to be you,
Eddie. You always did have a taste for the dramatic. Why did you come back? You know it’s
death for you to be here, now you’re rogue. And why have you brought one of your oldest
enemies into the most confidential part of the Hall?"
"I’m not sure who the enemy really is anymore, Uncle Jack," I said.
"You know Molly Metcalf?"
"Of course I know who she is, boy. I know all the names that matter. I was an agent in the
field for twenty years, and I still leaf through all the reports. How else would I know what to

design for agents today? What is the infamous Molly Metcalf doing here, Eddie?"
"Why does everyone keep using that word?" said Molly. "I am not infamous!"
"She’s with me," I said.
The Armourer smiled suddenly. "Oh, it’s like that, is it? Well, it’s about time." He grinned
charmingly at Molly. "Delighted to meet you, my dear. I’m afraid I only know you by
reputation, and quite a fearsome reputation it is."
"I earned it," said Molly. "Though I’ve always preferred to think of myself as a fun person."
"Did you really turn the whole Berkshire Hunt into foxes for forty-eight hours?"
"Of course," said Molly. "I thought it might give them a little insight."
"Good for you, girl," said the Armourer. "Never did approve of foxhunting. Barbarous sport,
mostly followed these days by inbred aristos and nouveau riche arriviste arseholes. So,
Eddie…you finally brought a girlfriend home to meet the family. I was beginning to worry
about you."
"She is not my…well…" I said. "We’re still working on what we are."
"Right," said Molly. "It’s…complicated."
"How do you feel about him, Molly?" said the Armourer, leaning forward.
"I’m fond of him," she said thoughtfully. "Like a big shaggy dog that no one wants, that’s
come in out of the rain, and you haven’t the heart to drive out again."
The Armourer winked at me. "She’s crazy about you, kid."
"Woof woof," I said.
"Now then, lad," said the Armourer, briskly back to business. "What the hell are you doing
here? And whatever possessed you to phone ahead? The Matriarch went mad. She’s been
beside herself, issuing orders for you to be killed on sight. I’m committing treason against
the family just for talking to you like this." He sniffed loudly. "Like that’s going to stop me. I’ve
never needed someone else to tell me what’s in the family’s best interests. If you ask me,
Mother’s not all there, these days. But even so, you can’t expect me to actually assist you
in…whatever you came here for. You should never have come back, Eddie. What did you
think you’d find here, for God’s sake?"
"Armourer," I said, "I came here looking for the truth. Just like you always taught me, Uncle
Jack."
He sighed heavily and clicked his green frog again. "Oh, all right; there’s your armour back
again. I just know I’m going to regret this…I always was too softhearted for my own good.
Why did you come down here, Eddie? What do you want from me?"
"I need to discover the real reason why I was made rogue," I said slowly. "I was never a
traitor to the family, Uncle Jack. You know that."
"Yes," the Armourer admitted. "I know that. Anyone else I might have believed, but not you,
Eddie. You were always so honest and open about your doubts…I couldn’t believe it when
they told me. Wouldn’t believe it, till they told me to shut up and do as I was told. Something’
s happening in the family, Eddie, that I don’t understand. Factions, infighting, deep divisions

over arguments I can’t even follow…And now different parts of the family are actually
keeping secrets from each other. I’m being deliberately kept out of the loop, as well, and that
’s never happened before. Mother would never have permitted it…She always used to trust
my judgement. But things have changed dramatically in the years since you left, Eddie, and
not for the better. Do I really need to tell you that stepping down as Armourer in favour of
dear little Alexandra wasn’t my idea? Thought not."
"I need your help, Uncle Jack," I said. "I need you to trust me."
"I’m really not going to like this, am I?" He rose to his feet and clapped me on the shoulder.
"You’ll probably do less damage if I help you. Look, if you want answers, you need the
library. Everything’s in there, somewhere." He fished a key ring out of his pocket, and took
off one small key. He handed it to me. "The library will have gone into automatic shutdown
once the alarms started, but that key will open all the doors for you. Take good care of that
key, Eddie; I want it back. Now get the hell out of here before someone comes in and
catches me talking to you."
"Thanks for the key," I said. "But I need something else from you."
"Oh, yes; of course! Molly’s a delightful young lady, Eddie. You have my blessing."
"Not that! Well, thanks for that, but…I need something from the armoury. To be exact, I need
something from the Armageddon Codex."
The Armourer stopped smiling. "You want me to give you one of the forbidden weapons?"
"Yes. I need Oath Breaker."
He looked at me for a long moment, and his gaze was very cold.
"Why in the name of the good God would you want that awful thing?"
"There’s something rotten at the heart of the family," I said, meeting his gaze steadily. "You
know that as well as I do. I need the one weapon no member of the family can hope to stand
against. The one weapon they won’t even think of challenging. It’s the only way I can be sure
of avoiding bloodshed, Uncle Jack."
"No, boy," the Armourer said flatly. "You’re asking too much."
"He has to," said Molly. "He doesn’t have time to be subtle. He was shot with an arrow made
of strange matter. It’s still in his system, poisoning him."
The Armourer looked at me sharply. "Is this true, Eddie?"
I nodded stiffly. "Punched right through my armour. I thought I’d healed the wound with a med
blob, but the strange matter’s still in me. And it’s spreading."
"Dear God…How long have you got, Eddie?"
"Three days," I said. "Maybe less."
"Oh, my dear boy…I heard about the arrow, but I never knew…Strange matter. Cursed stuff.
I destroyed the only samples I had. Let me call up some old notes, see what I can do…There
must be something I can do…"
"I don’t have the time, Uncle Jack," I said. "That’s why I have to do this quickly, and that’s why
I need Oath Breaker. You have my word I won’t do anything with it that would hurt the family."

"I don’t know…" said the Armourer.
"I do," said a harsh, cold, and very familiar voice behind me. "You get nothing, traitor, except
what’s coming to you."
We all looked around, and there stood Alexandra, tall and proud as ever. She was dressed
all in black and carrying something awful in her hands. Molly started towards her, and I
grabbed her arm and held her back. The Armourer grabbed her other arm.
"Don’t move, Molly," he said quietly. "She’s holding one of our most dangerous weapons.
She’s holding Torc Cutter."
"What the hell’s that?" said Molly, but she didn’t try to fight us.
"Just what it sounds like," I said. "Hello, Alexandra. You’re looking…very yourself. What are
you doing with Torc Cutter?"
"I took it out of the security locker just for you, Eddie," she said. Her voice was almost
teasing, but she wasn’t smiling, and her eyes were very cold. "Time’s up, Eddie. Game
over."
"Would someone please tell me why everyone’s acting so dramatic?" said Molly.
"The shears she’s holding are the only thing that can sever a Drood’s torc," the Armourer
said. "It breaks the lifelong connection between a Drood and his armour. The operation is
always fatal. Torc Cutter is a very ancient weapon, older than family history. It’s only ever
supposed to be used as a last resort, to bring down a rogue who threatens the whole family,
when all else has failed. It hasn’t been used in centuries."
"They look like gardening shears," said Molly, and she had a point. The shears were made
of black iron, not steel, and looked like what they were: a simple cutting tool. Bleak and
functional, but to the eyes of any Drood they were ugly with vicious significance. One of the
few things absolutely guaranteed to kill a Drood. I stood very still and made sure Molly did
too. Alexandra wouldn’t hesitate to use Torc Cutter. It occurred to me that I wasn’t entirely
sure why she hadn’t already used them. I would have. Perhaps…there was just a chance that
part of her wanted me to talk her out of using them. We had been close, once.
"Don’t do this, Alex," I said carefully. "You know this is all bullshit. You know I could never be
a traitor. You were the one who knew me best of all, once."
"I thought I did," she said. "But then you went away, and you didn’t take me with you."
"I did ask," I said.
"You knew I couldn’t go! I had to make a new life for myself here at the Hall. A life in which I
have become very powerful, Eddie. And you are most definitely a traitor, to the true spirit of
the family. You’re a threat to the family’s future, Eddie. And I can’t, I won’t allow that."
She stepped forward, raising Torc Cutter, and the Armourer snapped out a single Word.
The ugly black shears jumped right out of Alexandra’s hands and into the Armourer’s. She
looked at him with something like shock as he stuffed the shears carelessly into his coat
pocket, smiling smugly.
"I put a Safe Word into everything that passes through my lab, just in case they should fall
into the wrong hands. And all the most deadly weapons have passed through the Armoury
just recently, thanks to the Matriarch’s instructions. Mother always was a little paranoid, and

luckily she passed a healthy dose of it on to her children." He then took a needle gun out of
his other pocket and shot Alexandra in the throat. She just had time to slap a hand to her
neck, and then she crumpled to the floor, out like a light. The Armourer blew imaginary
smoke off the barrel of his gun, and then put it away again. "I always keep that handy for
when my lab assistants get a bit overexcited. She’ll sleep for an hour or so. Put her
somewhere comfortable, Eddie, while I go get the key for the Codex."
"Then you’ll help me?" I said.
"Yes. I won’t let you die with a traitor’s name hanging over you, Eddie. I can do that much for
you. Besides, if Alexandra’s running around armed with Torc Cutter, God alone knows what
else is out there. You’re going to need Oath Breaker."
"I promise I’ll return it safely," I said.
"Too bloody right you will," said the Armourer. "Don’t make me come after you, Eddie. I
know some dirty tricks you never dreamed of in all your years in the field."
"I always wondered why your old files were blocked," I said.
Molly and I propped Alexandra up in a corner. She muttered querulously in her sleep, but that
was all. Molly looked down at her.
"Would she really have killed you with that thing?"
"Probably," I said.
"Want me to kick her while she’s down?"
"No. I don’t do that."
"Wimp." She looked at me consideringly. "So, this Alexandra was once an old flame of
yours?"
"A long time ago," I said. "When we were both a lot younger. She wasn’t always like this, you
know. You’re not jealous, are you?"
"Me? No! Why would I be jealous? I’ve had lots of boyfriends in my time. Dozens!"
"They probably didn’t appreciate you like I do," I said.
The family keeps the Armageddon Codex in a pocket dimension for extra security. Only the
Armourer and his designated successor can even approach it, let alone access it. The
Codex contains the family’s most powerful weapons, too dangerous to be used unless
reality itself is under threat. Normally you have to fill out reams of paperwork before you’re
even allowed to approach the Matriarch with a request. The Armourer was trusting me a lot,
to let me take Oath Breaker. He wouldn’t do that, for all his sympathy, unless he was already
convinced that there was something seriously wrong with the family.
To get to the Armageddon Codex, you have to pass through the Lion’s Jaws. At the very
back of what used to be the old wine cellars, before they were converted into the present
armoury, there is a giant stone carving of a lion’s head, complete with mane. Perfect in
every detail, twenty feet tall and almost as wide, carved out of the dark blue-veined stone
that makes up the cellar’s furthest reaches. The lion’s eyes seem to glare, the mouth seems
to snarl, and the whole thing looks like life itself frozen in stone. As though just waiting to
pounce, if it could only force the rest of its body through the stone wall that held it. Not all that

surprisingly, Molly fell in love with it at first sight and stood right before the stone face,
running her hands over the detailed carving and cooing delightedly.
The Armourer stepped up to the lion’s snarling mouth and slipped a long brass key into a
hole in the mouth that I couldn’t even see. He turned the key twice, subvocalising a whole
series of Words, and then withdrew the key and stepped smartly back as the Lion’s Jaws
grated slowly open. The upper lip rose steadily, operated by some hidden mechanism,
revealing huge jagged teeth, above and below. The jaws continued to open, until the lion’s
mouth gaped wide, revealing a tunnel big enough to walk through without having to duck
your head. The throat of the lion, which led to the Armageddon Codex.
"Is it…alive?" Molly murmured.
"We don’t think so, but no one knows for sure," I said. "It’s as old as the house. Maybe older.
The family might have made it, or just made use of it. Legend has it that if you pass through
the Lion’s Jaws, you must be pure of heart and pure of purpose, or the jaws will close on
you."
"And then?" said Molly.
"Have you never seen anyone eaten by a stone head?" said the Armourer.
"I did, once," I said. "I was down in Cornwall—"
"I was speaking rhetorically!" snapped the Armourer. "I’m sorry, Molly, my dear; he always
was terribly literal, even as a child."
"You mean it really does eat people?" said Molly. "If they’re not…pure in heart?"
"Oh, yes," I said.
"Think I’ll wait out here," said Molly.
"Relax," said the Armourer. "It’s just a story we tell the children to stop them from messing
around with the jaws. The crafty little buggers are always getting into things they’re not
supposed to. Trust me, Molly; you’ll be perfectly safe as long as you’re with us. Just as well,
really. I haven’t been pure in heart since I was ten years old, with my first erection."
He waggled his bushy eyebrows at her, and Molly smiled dutifully. She still stood very close
to me as we followed the Armourer through the Lion’s Jaws and down its throat into the
Armageddon Codex. Which turned out to be just another stone cavern but with terrible
weapons hanging in rows upon the stone walls, like ornaments in Hell. Some hung on
plaques; others stood in special niches carved from the bare stone. None of them were
identified; either you knew what they were and what they could do, or you had no business
touching them. I knew some of the weapons by sight and reputation from my extensive
reading in the library.
There was Sunwrack, for putting out the stars one at a time. Beside it was the Juggernaut
Jumpsuit. And there, the Time Hammer, for changing the past through brute force.
The Armourer noted me studying the hammer and nodded quickly. "Studying that gave me
the idea for the reverse watch I gave you, Eddie. A lot of thought went into that. I hope you’re
taking good care of it."
I just nodded absently, still fascinated by the terrible weapons arrayed before me, things I’d
never dreamed I might someday see in person. There was Winter’s Sorrow, a simple crystal

ball full of swirling snowflakes. It might have been a paperweight or a child’s toy. But all you
had to do was break the crystal, and it would unleash the Fimbulwinter: an endless season
of cold and ice, all across the world, forever and ever and ever. Molly reached out a hand to
touch it, saying, "Oh, cute!" And the Armourer and I both yelled at her and dragged her away.
We sent her back to stand at the entrance, and she went, sulking. And then, finally, there was
Oath Breaker.
It wasn’t much to look at. Just a long stick of ironwood deeply carved with prehuman
symbols. An ancient weapon, older than Torc Cutter, older than family history. Older than the
family, probably. We have no idea who created it, or why. Perhaps they used it, and that’s
why there’s no record of them anywhere. The Armourer finally reached out with a steady
hand, and took the stick down. He grimaced, as though just the touch of it was disturbing to
him. He hefted it in his hand once, and then turned abruptly and gave it to me. I accepted it
gingerly. It felt…heavy, weighed down with spiritual weight rather than physical. A burden to
the body and to the soul.
Because of what it was, and what it could do.
"But…it’s just a stick," said Molly. She’d sneaked forward to join us again. "Is that it? I mean,
is that all of it? Does it change into something else if you strike it on the ground? Or do you
just plan to beat people over the head with it?"
"This is Oath Breaker," I said. My mouth was very dry, even while my hands were sweating.
"It undoes all agreements, all bonds. Right down to the atomic level, if necessary."
"All right," said Molly. "Now you’re scaring me."
"Good," I said. "Because it scares the crap out of me. Armourer, give Molly Torc Cutter. Just
in case."
"Go to the library," said the Armourer. "And learn what you need to know. I’ll keep an eye on
Alexandra. But don’t take too long, Eddie. Those alarms and excursions you set off won’t
fool people for long."
"I know, Uncle Jack."
"The family…isn’t what it was, Eddie. Part of me…wishes I could go with you when you
leave. But someone has to stay and fight for the soul of the family. For the sake of the
Droods, and the world."
CHAPTER TWENTY
Getting to the Heart of the Matter
"U h-oh," said Molly as we reentered the labs.
I looked at her. "This isn’t going to be good news, is it?"
"The dragon charm just reappeared on my bracelet.
Which means someone in your family finally rubbed two brain cells together, realised a
dragon that big couldn’t possibly be real, and worked a simple dispersion spell on it. My little
diversion is now officially at an end."
"They’ll all head straight back into the Hall," I said, frowning. "To find out just what the dragon
was diverting them from. So any minute now the whole place will be swarming with really

pissed-off Droods looking for someone to take it out on…Time we were going, Molly. It was
good to see you again, Uncle Jack."
"How far is it to the library?" said Molly, practical as always.
"Too far," said the Armourer. "You’re not even in the right wing."
"No problem," said Molly. "I’ll just call up a spatial portal, take us right there."
"No, you won’t," the Armourer said flatly. "The Hall’s inner defences don’t permit teleports,
magical or scientific, for security reasons. Even I couldn’t produce anything powerful enough
to break through the Hall’s defences." He broke off and scowled thoughtfully. "Not unless I
can persuade the council to fund my black hole research after all…"
"If we could please stick to the subject," I said.
"There must be some way we can get to the library without being spotted," said Molly. "How
about an illusion spell? I could whip up something simple, make us look like someone else.
Or an aversion spell: make everyone look everywhere except at us."
"Wouldn’t work," I said, "Our torcs alerts us to that kind of spell automatically. They’d just fire
up their Sight and look right through them."
"When in doubt, keep it simple," said the Armourer just a little smugly. He produced two
battered old lab coats from a nearby locker and thrust them at us. "Put these on. Anyone you
meet will look at the coats, not your faces. The family’s used to my lab assistants turning up
everywhere and getting under their feet. Just keep your heads down and keep moving, and
you’ll be fine. Damn, I’m good…"
Molly and I slipped the lab coats on. They were both covered with an assortment of quite
appalling stains, not to mention rips, cuts, and, in my case, one really serious-looking bite
mark. Molly’s came right down to her ankles, but I had enough sense not to smile.
"My coat smells funny," she said, glaring at me mutinously.
"Be grateful," I said. "Mine smells downright disgusting."
I turned to the Armourer, and we shook hands just a bit awkwardly. It wasn’t something we
did, as a rule. But we both knew we might not get a chance to do it again.
"Good-bye, Eddie," the Armourer said, meeting my gaze squarely. "I wish…there was more
I could do for you."
"You’ve already done far more than I had any right to expect," I said.
"Good-bye, Uncle Jack."
He smiled at Molly and shook her hand too. "I’m glad Eddie’s taste in women finally
improved. It was a pleasure to meet you, Molly. Now get out there and give them all hell."
"Damn right," said Molly.
Molly and I left the Armoury and carefully shut the blast-proof doors behind us. No point in
advertising that the Armoury had been left open to casual visitors. I couldn’t allow the
Armourer to come to harm for helping me. I could already hear my family coursing through
the outer sections of the Hall, searching for intruders. They were drawing steadily closer,
shouting instructions and findings and comments back and forth in loud and excited voices.

It sounded like the whole damned family had been mobilised. The Matriarch wasn’t taking
any chances. The lab coats would get us past a few people, but not crowds like these…All it
would take was a moment of recognition, one raised voice…
Fortunately, there was another option. Just not a very nice one.
"Back when I was a kid," I said conversationally to Molly as we hurried down an empty
corridor, "I worked out various ways of getting around the Hall without being seen. Because
if you got caught in places where you weren’t supposed to be, you got punished. Often
severely punished. But luckily the Hall is very old, and down the years certain very useful
hidden doors and secret passages became lost, forgotten, displaced. And because I did a
lot of reading in the library, especially in sections I wasn’t supposed to have access to, I was
able to turn up certain old books describing the exact locations of these very useful
shortcuts.
"There are doors that can take you from one room to another, from one wing to another,
without having to cross the intervening space. There are narrow passages within thick,
hollow walls that used to be part of the old central heating and ventilation processes. There’s
a trapdoor in the basement that opens out into the attic and some rooms that are only there
on certain dates. I must have used them all, at one time or another, in my never-ending quest
to discover things I wasn’t supposed to know about."
"Didn’t your family ever suspect?" said Molly.
"Oh, sure. Finding these old passages is a sort of rite of passage for young Droods; tacitly
permitted, if not actually encouraged. The family likes to see initiative in its children. As long
as they follow the accepted rules and traditions. But I found some very odd ways that no one
else even dreamed existed, and I never told anyone. I needed something that was mine,
back then, and not the family’s."
"Am I to take it that you know a shortcut to the library?" said Molly.
"Yes. There’s an opening into a crawl space within the wall not far from here."
"Then why didn’t you say so before?"
"Well," I said.
"There’s bad news, isn’t there? Somehow I just know there’s bad news."
"It’s dangerous," I said.
"How dangerous?"
"The crawl space is…inhabited. You see, the Hall has to put its electrical cables and gas
pipes and so on somewhere out of sight, but for security purposes they can’t just be hidden
away inside the walls; they have to be protected. Against sabotage and the like. So all our
crawl spaces and hidden maintenance areas are located in attached pocket dimensions.
Like the Armageddon Codex and the Lion’s Jaws, but on a much smaller and less dramatic
scale. And a lot easier for people to get into, obviously. Anyway, some of these pocket
dimensions have been around so long they’ve acquired their own inhabitants. Things that
wandered in and…mutated. Or evolved."
"What exactly inhabits this particular crawl space?" said Molly.
"Spiders," I said unhappily. "Big spiders. And I mean really big spiders; things the size of

your head! Plus a whole bunch of other really nasty creepy-crawly things that the spiders
feed on."
"Spiders don’t bother me," said Molly. "That’s more a boy thing. It’s slugs that weird me out.
And snails. Do you know how snails have sex?"
"These spiders will bother you," I said firmly, refusing to be sidetracked. "Hopefully they’re
not actually as big and nasty as my childhood memories insist, because there’s no way of
avoiding them. Their webs are everywhere. I still have nightmares, sometimes, about all the
times they chased me through the crawl space…with their scuttling legs and glowing
eyes…"
"Then why did you keep using that particular shortcut?" said Molly.
"Because I’ve never let anything stop me from doing what I need to do," I said. "Not even my
own fear. Perhaps especially not that."
"And there’s no other way of getting to the library?"
"Not safely."
Molly sniffed. "You have a really weird idea of what’s safe and what’s not, Drood."
I led her down a shadowy side corridor, past a long row of tall standing vases from the third
Ming dynasty and then past a glass display case full of exquisite Venetian glass, until I came
to a wood-panelled wall that stretched away into the distance. I had to keep pulling Molly
along, as she got distracted by so much wealth within easy snatching distance. I counted off
the panels until I came to a particular carved wooden rose motif, and then I turned it carefully
left and right the correct number of times until the primitive combination lock reluctantly fell
into place. The rose clicked loudly, and a panel in the wall slid jerkily open. The ancient
mechanism must be wearing out. Beyond the panel and inside the wall, there was only
darkness.
The opening that had been more than ample for a child was only just big enough to let Molly
and me squeeze through. We crouched down before the opening and peered into the
darkness. A slow cold breeze came out of the dark, carrying a dry, dusty smell. Molly
wrinkled her nose but said nothing. Thick strands of cobweb hung down inside the opening,
swaying heavily on the breeze. There was no sign that anybody had been in the crawl space
in years. I listened quietly, gesturing sharply for Molly to keep still when she fidgeted. I couldn
’t hear anything. For the moment. I took a deep breath, braced myself, and then squeezed
quickly through the cramped opening before I could change my mind. Molly followed me in,
crowding right behind me, and the wooden panel slid jerkily back into place.
The darkness was absolute. Molly quickly conjured up a handful of her trademark witchfire,
and the shimmering silver light showed us a narrow stone tunnel, the rough gray walls all but
buried under accumulated layers of colour-coded wiring, cables, and copper and brass
tubing. Thick mats of webbing crawled across the surface of both walls. I grimaced despite
myself, even though I was careful not to touch or disturb any of it. Molly’s witchlight showed
the tunnel stretching away before us, but if there was a ceiling, the light couldn’t reach high
enough to find it. A thick streamer of webbing blew away from one wall, carried on the
gusting breeze, and I flinched away from it.
"You big baby," said Molly, grinning broadly.
"Isn’t that a slug by your foot?" I said, and grinned as Molly made a loud eeking noise.

I led the way down the tunnel. Pride would allow no less. The floor was thick with undisturbed
dust. Even the smallest sounds we made seemed to echo on forever; the only sounds in that
endless eerie silence. The tunnel steadily widened until it seemed the size of a room, and
then a hall, and then abruptly it widened out still farther until I could no longer tell how big a
space we were moving in. I stuck close to the right-hand wall, its familiar man-made cables
and piping a comfort to me. Until they became so thickly buried under webbing I could no
longer see them clearly.
Molly boosted her witchlight as much as possible, but the light didn’t travel far. Beyond a
certain point, the darkness just seemed to soak it up. There was a feeling of
spae…stretching away, endlessly. We walked and walked, and the journey was just as bad
as I remembered. Perhaps more so; I kept coming across suddenly familiar details that I
hadn’t let myself remember. Like the hollow husks of really big insects and beetles scattered
across the floor, their insides chewed out. And the thick strands of webbing that hung down
from somewhere high above us, twitching and twisting even though the breeze was no
longer blowing. I was amazed I’d found the courage to come this way back when I was just a
kid. But thinking of the Sarjeant-at-Arms’s punishments had made it easy. I was far more
scared of him than I ever was of giant spiders. Even though I was pretty sure he wouldn’t
have actually killed me.
There were noises out in the dark. Scuttling, scurrying noises. Molly and I stopped short and
looked around us. Molly held her handful of light up high, but it didn’t help. Soft wet sounds
came from behind and up ahead, along with slow scraping sounds, like claws on stone.
"Okay," said Molly. "This is seriously creeping me out."
"Are you sure you can’t make any more light?" I said. "I don’t think they like the light."
"I’m giving it all I’ve got," snapped Molly, sounding just a bit strained.
"Something in this pocket dimension of yours doesn’t like light. It’s all I can do to maintain
what I’ve got. How much farther to the library?"
"Still some way yet," I said. "If I’m remembering correctly. Follow me, hurry as much as you
can, but don’t run. They chase anything that runs. I found that out the hard way."
We moved on, striding quickly through the dark. The webbing hanging down from above
was getting thicker, heavier, like hanging curtains of dirty gauze. I ducked around them,
careful not to let any of them touch me. They were all stirring restlessly now, twitching as
though disturbed from a long sleep. And always there were the noises out in the dark, slowly
but steadily closing in on us. Molly and I moved as quickly as we could without actually
running. We were both breathing hard.
We almost ran straight into the massive web that blocked our way, its silver gray threads
only showing up in the witchlight at the very last moment. It hung unsupported on the air
before us, huge and intricate, radiating away beyond the limits of the witchlight. It would take
a spider the size of a bus to spin a web that size. Or an awful lot of smaller spiders working
together. I wasn’t sure which thought was the most disturbing. It very definitely hadn’t been
here the last time I came this way.
"That…is a big web," said Molly. "Still, I’ve got some shears and you’ve got a bloody big
stick. Do we smash our way through?"
"Can’t help feeling that’s a bad idea," I said. "But we don’t have any choice. We have to go
on…"

"Look," said Molly. "If you’re really that worried, armour up."
"I can’t," I said. "The rules of reality work differently here. The armour won’t come. I found that
out the hard way too."
"Now he tells me," said Molly. "Okay, it’s time to squeeze one out or get off the pot. We can’t
go back, so…burn, baby, burn!"
She thrust her handful of witchfire into the nearest clump of threads, and they caught alight
immediately, burning with a fierce blue light. The fires shot up and along the trembling
threads, spreading quickly across the huge cobweb. And in this new, revealing light, Molly
and I could at last see what it was that had been following us all this time. We were
surrounded by an army of spiders, thousands of them, stretching away for as far as the light
carried, and probably beyond. And they were all really big spiders. Black furry bodies the
size of my head, many-jointed legs a yard or more long, clusters of eyes that glowed like
precious jewels. And heavy mouth parts that clacked viciously together, drooling a thick
saliva.
"Run," I said.
Molly and I burst through the burning remains of the web, slapping aside the entangling
threads. The spiders came after us like a great black wave, silent except for the pattering of
their many legs on the dusty stone floor. This close, I could smell them; a sour, bitter smell,
like acid and spoiled meat. Something else I’d made myself forget, down the years…Molly
and I sprinted through the dark, pushing ourselves as hard as we could. Horrid pain
slammed through the whole of my left side with every step, forcing tortured sounds past my
clenched teeth. So much tension and exercise must be spreading the strange matter farther
through my system. I managed a small smile at the thought of the spiders behind me.
Hope I poison you, you bastards…
I could feel myself slowing. Molly was leaving me behind as she kept up a pace I could no
longer match. I could have called out to her, but I didn’t. One of us had to get out. She looked
back anyway, realised she was getting too far ahead, and dropped back to grab me by the
arm and urge me on. Thank God she grabbed my good arm. A spider came sailing through
the air towards me on the end of a long streamer of webbing, like a big black hairy balloon. I
lashed out with Oath Breaker, and the heavy ironwood stick struck the giant spider right
among its eyes. The body exploded in a wet splatter of flying innards. More spiders came
sailing out of the darkness. I struck about me with Oath Breaker, killing everything I hit. Molly
threw handfuls of witchfire this way and that, and burning spider bodies fell out of the air.
We ran on, not as swiftly as before, our feet squelching heavily through pulped spider
remains on the floor, sometimes still shuddering and twitching. The spiders were swarming
close behind us now, almost on our heels. I thought longingly about the Colt Repeater in its
shoulder holster, but in the time it would take me to stop and wrestle the gun out of the
holster, the spiders would be all over me. So I just kept going, fighting for breath now, crying
out at the pain within me, lashing increasingly wildly about me with Oath Breaker, which
seemed to grow heavier with every blow.
The exit from the crawl space wasn’t far now, I was sure. I was almost sure.
We slowed still more, exhausted by the long day, and the spiders caught up and swarmed
all over us, clawing and biting. Molly and I stumbled on, crying out in pain and shock and
disgust. I pulped their soft squishy bodies with my bare hands, thrusting Oath Breaker
through my belt. Molly brushed the spiders away with her handful of witchfire, and the burning

bodies fell away from her to skitter madly back and forth on the floor, blazing brightly in the
dark. But there were always more climbing all over us, dropping out of the air. Both Molly
and I were yelling out loud now as we beat the things away. More scurried around our
moving feet, darting up our legs or trying to trip us, but they were too light and flimsy, for all
their size. We crushed them underfoot and stumbled on.
Until finally I saw, in the flickering witchlight, a familiar sight up ahead. The exit panel for the
crawl space, leading back into the Hall. Into light and warmth and sanity. I could see it up
ahead, light from outside shining brightly past its edges, clear as day in the endless crawl
space dark.
I pointed it out to Molly, and we found a few last vestiges of strength to hurry us on. The panel
slid jerkily open as we approached, activated by our presence, and then stuck halfway just
long enough to scare me with the thought that the ancient mechanism had broken down. And
then it started moving again, spilling painfully bright light into the darkness.
I pushed Molly through the narrow gap and squeezed myself through right behind her. I spun
around and twisted the carved wooden rose on the wall, and the panel closed itself with a
series of heavy, slow jerks. One last giant spider forced its way through after us, rearing up,
only to collapse and die on the floor, its long multijointed legs scrabbling weakly. The
oversized thing couldn’t exist in our reality. The spiders that still clung to Molly and me slowly
fell away, also dying. They scuttled weakly across the waxed and polished floor, trying to get
back to the safety of the dark, but Molly and I stamped on them, pulping them under our feet.
They would have died anyway, but we needed to kill them.
Even dead, some of the spiders still clung to Molly and me, their clawed and barbed legs
embedded in our torn and bloody clothing and in our flesh. Molly and I took turns to pull the
nasty things off each other, flinching at every touch, until it was over. We were both dead
tired, breathing so harshly it hurt, our hearts pounding in our chests, bloodied and hurting
from a hundred cuts and bites. We stumbled away from the dead spiders, and then just held
each other tightly, shuddering and shaking and making quiet shocked noises. We clung to
each other like children newly wakened from a bad dream, and it would have been hard to
say who was comforting whom. Finally we let go and stood back. Too embarrassed to look
at each other for a while, partly because neither of us were used to being weak, but mostly
because of the unexpected depth of our emotions.
"All right," said Molly, her voice nearly back to normal. "I admit it; those were really big
spiders."
"Persistent little bastards, weren’t they?" I said, trying for a light touch and only just missing
it.
"You’re hurt," said Molly.
"So are you."
Somehow she found the strength for a quick healing spell, just enough to heal our bites and
close over the scratches. I can’t say it made me feel any better, but I acted as though it did.
She didn’t need to know about the spreading pains in my left side. Three days, maybe four?
I didn’t think so.
"I know where we are," I said. "The library’s only a few minutes away."
"Then let’s go," said Molly. "But this library of yours had better be worth the trip, Drood."

I had to smile.
We trotted down the corridor, glad to be back in our own comfortable world again. The light
was clear and warm, and the Hall was full of human sights and scents. For the first time in a
long time, I was glad to be home. It felt as though I’d spent years in the crawl space dark.
How did I ever stand it as a child? Maybe it was I could run faster back then.
Molly and I rounded a corner, and half a dozen members of my family came strolling down
the corridor towards us, chattering animatedly about the false dragon’s attack. All kinds of
names came up as possible suspects, but none of them so much as mentioned me. I didn’t
know whether to feel relieved or insulted. They glanced briefly in our direction, and then just
as the Armourer said, they looked away again the moment they took in our lab coats. Just to
be on the safe side, I’d already buried my face in my hands, as though I’d been injured. Molly
caught on immediately and half supported me as we passed the other Droods.
"It’s your own fault!" she said loudly. "I’ve no sympathy for you. How can anyone mistake
gunpowder for snuff?"
"My nose," I moaned. "Did anyone find my nose?"
The other Droods laughed briefly and kept going. Just another lab mishap, nothing to see,
keep moving. Molly and I kept up the act until we were safely around the next corner, and
there was the library, right before us. No one else was around. I tried the doors, but they
were locked, as expected. Still no one standing guard, though. Everyone must have run
outside to get a look at the dragon. Very sloppy security, entirely unprofessional and bad
discipline. What was the family coming to? No doubt the Sarjeant-at-Arms would have a
thing or two to say, when he finally woke up. I used the key the Armourer gave me, and the
doors swung open at a touch. I ushered Molly in and quickly closed and locked the doors
behind us. I didn’t want to be disturbed. I didn’t know how long this was going to take.
The library appeared to be completely deserted. I called out a few times, and no one
emerged from the towering stacks to hush me. Molly stared about her, gaping openly. I
nodded, understanding. The sheer size of the library always hit new visitors hard.
"Welcome to the Drood family library," I said just a bit grandly. "No shouting, no running
between the stacks, no peeing in the shallow end. And no, it isn’t as big as it looks; it’s
bigger. Takes up the whole lower floor of this wing. The whole world is in here, somewhere.
If you can find it."
"It’s…huge," Molly said finally. "How do you find anything in here?"
"Mostly we don’t," I had to admit. "William was the last librarian to try and put together an
official index, and most of his papers disappeared with him. We’re always adding books,
losing books, and misfiling them. At least the sections are clearly marked."
"You look for family history," said Molly, pulling herself together and putting on her most
efficient manner. "I’m going to work my way through the medical section. There must be
something here I can use to help you. Even if it’s just to slow down the progress of the
strange matter till we can get you to someone who can help you."
"Molly…"
"No, Eddie. I don’t want to hear it. I’m not giving up, and neither should you. I won’t let you
die. Not when you risked your life to save me. I can’t…There has to be someone out there
who can put you right! Hell, if all else fails, I know half a dozen people who can bring you

back from the dead as a zombie."
"Thanks for the thought," I said. "Medical section is down there; twenty stacks along, third
right, then follow the—"
"Oh, hell," said Molly. "I never was any good at directions. I’d better use a locator spell, or we
’ll be here all night." She pulled a pendulum on a silver wire out of a hidden pocket and set it
spinning. The pendulum slammed to a halt pointing right at me. Molly frowned. "That’
s…interesting. It’s reading a power source on you, and it’s not Oath Breaker. In fact, I’m
picking up quite a lot of undischarged magic still attached to the key the Armourer gave
you."
She put the pendulum away as I pulled out the key and looked at it. The Armourer had made
a point of giving me the key, even though he had to know I could just armour up and kick the
doors in. Was the key a clue of some kind? To some secret he couldn’t quite bring himself
to say in person? I studied the key with my Sight, and there was a second spell written on it
so clearly even I could tell what it was. A spell to work a hidden lock, to open a hidden door.
Here, in the library? There’d never been even a whisper about a secret door in the library…
I turned the key back and forth, and the spell flared up briefly when it pointed in one particular
direction. I followed the key through the stacks, Molly trotting along at my side. Until finally we
came to the old portrait on the southwest wall.
It was the only painting in the library. A huge piece, a good eight feet tall and five feet wide,
contained in a solid steel frame. It was centuries old, older than the Hall itself, some said;
artist unknown. The portrait depicted another library whose many shelves were packed with
massive leather-bound volumes and parchment scrolls tied with colourful ribbons. There
were no people in the painting, no symbolic objects, no obvious arrangement of important
items. No meaning, no message; just the old library. Molly and I stood before the painting,
considering it.
"I’m no expert," said Molly, "But that…is a seriously boring painting. Is it significant to the
family?"
"Sort of," I said. "This portrait shows the old library, the original repository of Drood
knowledge. In this first library was held all the early history of the Droods, perhaps even
knowledge of our true beginnings, long lost to us. You see, the old library was destroyed in a
fire set by our enemies. One of our greatest tragedies. The whole house burned down with
the library, which is why the family moved here, in the time of King Henry V. This portrait is all
that remains from that time, to remind us of what we lost."
"There’s something weird about this painting," Molly said slowly. "I can feel magic in it. In the
frame and the canvas, in the paint and the very brushstrokes. Can you feel it?"
I studied the painting closely with my Sight, holding the key tightly in my hand, and the whole
portrait seemed to blaze with an inner light. And finally I noticed something I’d never seen
before. There was a small, carefully disguised keyhole in the silver frame, hidden in some
ornate scrollwork. I pointed it out to Molly, and then slowly eased the Armourer’s key into the
hole. It fit perfectly. I turned the key, and just like that the whole portrait came alive. I wasn’t
looking at a painting anymore but a scene from life, an opening into another place. A
doorway into the old library. I took Molly by the hand, and together we stepped through.
The old library wasn’t lost, wasn’t gone, just hidden in plain sight. Hanging in front of all our
eyes, for all these years. The old library, real and intact, all its ancient history and knowledge
preserved after all. (Preserved for whom? No. Think about that later.) I stood very still just

inside the doorway, looking about me. The old library stretched away in every direction,
endless towering stacks and shelves packed with books and manuscripts and scrolls for as
far as the eye could see. I looked behind me, and beyond the open space of the doorway I
could see more stacks, more shelves.
I walked slowly forward down the aisle before me, almost numb with shock. The greatest
tragedy in my family’s history was a lie. I shouldn’t have been surprised, after everything else
I’d learned, but to deliberately conceal so much knowledge, so much wisdom…was a sin
almost beyond understanding. I took down some of the oversized books, handling them very
carefully, and opened them. The leather bindings creaked noisily, and the pages seemed to
exhale dust and ancient smells. They were handwritten, illuminated manuscripts, the kind
monks laboured over for years. Latin mostly, some ancient Greek. Other tongues, equally
old or obscure. There were palimpsests and parchments and piles of scrolls, some so
delicate looking I didn’t want even to breathe too heavily near them.
"There’s some kind of magic suppressor field operating in here," Molly said suddenly. "I can
feel it."
"I’m not surprised," I said absently, absorbed in a scroll concerning King Harold and the
Soul of Albion. "Must be a security measure, to protect the contents."
"I could probably force through a few small magics, if necessary," said Molly. "If we have to
defend ourselves."
"Will you relax?" I said. "We’re the only ones in here."
I rolled the scroll up again, retied the ribbon, and carefully put in back in its place. The
answer to my earlier thought was clear. The only people who could have hidden the old
library like this…were the inner circle of the Droods. The Matriarch, her council, and her
favourites. Our history and true beginnings weren’t lost, weren’t destroyed; they were
deliberately hidden away from the rest of us for the benefit of the chosen few. But what could
be here that was so important, so dangerous, that it had to be hidden away? That they
couldn’t, or wouldn’t, share with the rest of us? I moved on through the stacks, opening
books and scrolls at random, almost drunk on the prospect of so many answers to so many
questions, and all mine for the taking. (Maybe that’s why they kept it just for themselves…so
they could feel like this.) As I moved deeper into the stacks, I discovered histories written in
languages no one had used for centuries; works put down on parchment and tanned hide by
the Saxons, the Celts, the Angles and the Danes and the Norse. And other tongues so old
nobody had spoken them aloud in centuries.
"All this was here," I said finally. "And I never knew it. My family’s true heritage, stolen away
from us by those we were always taught to trust and revere. This should have been made
freely available to all of us. We have a right to know where we came from! Who our
ancestors were, what they did, and why they did it. It makes me wonder what other secrets
the inner circle have been hiding from the rest of us; from the rank and file and all the good
little soldiers who went out to fight and die for the honour of the family…We’ve reached the
end of the trail, Molly. The answer is here; I know it."
"The answer?" Molly said carefully. "Which particular answer is that, Eddie?"
"To how it all started! Where we came from. Where the armour came from. How we became
Droods." I looked at Molly. "I did wonder, sometimes, if maybe my ancestors made some
kind of deal with the Devil."
"No," Molly said immediately. "If that was the case, I would have known."

I decided I wouldn’t ask. This was no time to get distracted. I looked around, using my Sight.
A complex latticework of protective spells lay over everything, some of them quite
impressively strong. And nasty. Some books and scrolls shone brightly on their shelves,
radiating strange energies. And one blazed like a beacon, full of ancient power. It turned out
to be a simple scroll, words inked on roughly tanned animal hide. The outer markings were
in a language I didn’t even recognise. Molly crowded in close beside me.
"Any idea what that is?"
"The answer," I said.
"Well, yes, but apart from that…"
"Only one way to find out," I said, and touched the wax seals holding the scroll closed with
Oath Breaker. The activating Words just popped into my mind from the old ironwood staff
itself, and as I said them, one by one, the protections around the scroll shattered and
disappeared. I unrolled it very carefully, and the dark ink on the interior stood out clearly
against the coffee-coloured hide. The text was Druidic, from Roman times. Which was
unusual in itself, because Druidic learning was strictly an oral tradition, passed down mouth
to mouth from generation to generation. Never written down, in case it might fall into the
hands of enemies. But they’d made an exception for this; and I could see why.
"It’s Latin," said Molly, peering curiously over my shoulder. "Strange dialect. Something
about a bargain."
"You read Latin?" I said, unable to keep the surprise out of my voice.
She glared at me. "I may not have had the benefits of your private education, but I know a
thing or two. You can’t work any of the major magics without at least a working knowledge of
Latin. Most of the old pacts and bindings are written in it. What we’re looking at here…is a
spell. A spell to reveal hidden truths…about the beginnings of the Drood family! You were
right, Eddie; it is the answer. So, do we use the spell? Right here and now?"
"Of course," I said. "We might not get another chance."
"Is this something you need to do alone?" said Molly. "I mean, I’d understand if you—"
"No," I said immediately. "We’ve come this far together; it’s only right we go the last mile
together too."
So we both spoke the spell in unison, chanting the ancient Latin aloud, and the world we
knew blew away on a wave of wild magic, as the spell gave us a vision of time past.
We were not there. We saw and heard everything, but we were not present. This was the
past, and we had no place in it, except as observers.
Before us lay old Britain. The Romans called it the Tin Islands, because that was all we had
that interested them. The land of the Britons: a savage place, back when we all lived in the
forest, in the wild woods, in the dark places the Romans dared not follow us. The vision
shifted and changed, showing us sights charged with meaning and significance. We
watched, and learned.
In this time, Drood history began. Fierce men in ragged furs, with blue woad daubed on their
snarling faces, ran howling through the trees. My ancestors, the Druids. So fierce, so
savage, they shocked even the hardened Roman legionnaires. They fought; tribes against
armies, bronze against steel. And yet at first the Druids won, forcing the invading Romans all

the way back to their waiting ships, and then slaughtering them in the shallows until it
seemed the whole ocean ran red with their blood. The survivors sailed away; but they came
back. The Romans came again, and again, until finally they triumphed through steel and
tactics and weight of numbers. Because they were an army, and we were just scattered
tribes who often hated each other as much as we did the invaders.
The Romans feared the Druid priests most of all, and wiped them out, destroying their
spoken knowledge and traditions along with their savage religion. And so it might have
gone…until the Heart came, and everything changed.
It did not fall from the sky, as the official story says. It did not fall like an angel from heaven, or
a meteor from outer space. It downloaded itself from another dimension, a different kind of
reality. Imposing itself upon our world through an act of sheer will. The impact of its arrival
killed every living thing in the vicinity and flattened all the trees for miles around. The ground
shook for days, and strange bright lights and energies burned in the skies. But the Druids,
though sensibly cautious, were scared of nothing and sent emissaries to the Heart.
Those Druids would become the very first Droods.
They walked among fallen trees for mile after mile, and though they saw wonders and
horrors and living things twisted and mutated by the terrible energies released through the
Heart’s arrival, they did not stop or turn aside. They were shamans whose job it was to
defend and protect the tribe from outside threats. And finally they came to the great clearing
of dead and blasted earth in which the Heart lay. A diamond as big as a hill, brilliant and
beautiful; and alive. It spoke to the Druid shamans who came to it, and they worshipped it as
a sign from the gods or perhaps even one of the gods themselves.
The Heart was quite content for them to do this. It was lost and far from home and weakened
by its long journey. It had come to our world fleeing something else. Something the Heart
was still very much afraid of. So it proposed a bargain to the Druid shamans. It would make
them powerful, make them as gods among their own kind, and in return they would revere
and protect the Heart against all enemies. In this world…and without.
The Heart gave the Druids their living armour, and they became more than men.
Originally, the shamans only used the armour to protect the tribes against the dark powers
and forces of evil who walked more openly in the world in those days. But the armour made
these Droods very powerful, and all power tends to corrupt…The greatest threat to the tribes
were the invading Romans, but the shamans were wise enough to know that not even the
golden armour could hold off the Roman armies forever. So they went to the Romans and
made a deal. Rome would rule…through the Droods. And thus the tribes would be protected
from the worst of Rome’s power. When, five centuries later, the Roman Empire finally
declined and fell, and Roman authority left Britain, the Droods just kept going. Operating
secretly, to protect the tribes from all threats, from without…and within.
But what was the armour, this glorious golden living metal? Where did it come from? And
what price did the Heart demand to make those first few Droods so much more than
human?
A Drood stood before the Heart, presenting a pair of twin babies to the massive diamond.
One of the babies was snatched out of the Drood’s arms by an unseen force, and it hung on
the air before the Heart, kicking and screaming. And then it was suddenly sucked into the
Heart’s shining surface and disappeared inside. Its screams cut off abruptly. And around the
neck of the baby still held by the Drood, a shining golden collar appeared. The vision
showed other sacrifices, other sights, down many years, until the secret of the family’s

armour was plain.
All the Druids exposed to the energies of the Heart underwent predetermined genetic
changes, and from that point on all Drood children were born as identical twins. Soon after
birth, one child was given to the Heart, which absorbed its body and its soul, so that the
surviving twin might wear the golden armour and serve the family. When I wore the living
metal, I was surrounding myself with all that was left of my sacrificed twin. The brother I never
knew. Every time I armoured up, I was wearing my brother like a second skin.
How many twins, how many lives, had been sacrificed to the Heart, down the long centuries?
How many innocent children denied their chance at life, so the Droods could be more than
human?
The vision showed us more. It got worse.
As more and more babies were given to the Heart, the other-dimensional being grew
brighter, stronger. The souls of the sacrificed children were held and sealed within the Heart,
trapped there to generate the power that created our armour, that powered our magics and
our sciences, that made our family strong.
I felt sick. Soiled. I had been brought up to revere and protect the Heart in its Sanctity,
without ever knowing what it really was. An eater of souls. Just like those disgusting entities
the Loathly Ones, but on a far greater scale. All those babies…all those generations of
trapped souls, denied an afterlife, condemned to never-ending existence within the Heart, to
make it powerful. Did they know? Were they aware in there? Did they suffer endlessly?
Were they screaming all the time, behind the gleaming facets of that massive diamond?
The vision ended, and Molly and I fell back into our bodies. We both looked at each other,
shocked speechless. I’d never felt so angry in my life. I rolled the scroll up very carefully,
retied the ribbons, and set it back on its shelf. I couldn’t risk it being damaged. It was
evidence of a crime. My anger burned cold within me, and I had never felt so focused, so
determined. Molly reached out to me, and then stopped at the last moment. As though I
might have burned her fingers. I don’t think she liked what she saw in my face, in my eyes.
"Eddie…"
"It’s all right," I said, though something in my voice made her flinch.
"I’ve always known my family was rotten to the heart."
I didn’t hear anything, didn’t see anything, but suddenly I just knew that he was there,
standing behind me. And since I’m not at all easy to sneak up on, I knew who it was, who it
had to be. I turned slowly, and there he was, with a gun pointed at me. Molly turned too, and
then instinctively moved a little closer to me. The Matriarch had sent the greatest field agent
of all to deal with me.
"Hello, Uncle James," I said.
He nodded, not smiling, tall and dark and handsome as ever, splendidly elegant in a formal
tuxedo, the gun seeming almost out of place in his hand, as it covered Molly and me. He
might have just come from a cocktail party or an ambassador’s ball. Some important
occasion, where the high and the mighty gathered to discuss all the matters that mattered.
Uncle James was always at home in the very best circles, when he wasn’t chasing the scum
of the earth through backstreet bars or hidden lairs, the Amazonian rain forests, or the
darkest canyons of the urban jungle.

"Hello, Eddie," he said, and his voice didn’t sound at all strained.
"You never would do what you were told, even as a child. I told you not to come back here.
Told you I’d have to kill you if we ever met again. And yet here you are, and here I am.
So…Aren’t you at least going to introduce me to your young lady?"
"Heavens," I said. "Of course; what was I thinking? Uncle James, this is Molly Metcalf, the
witch of the wild woods. Molly, this is my uncle James. Better known in disreputable circles
as the Gray Fox."
"Really?" said Molly, looking actually impressed for the first time since I’d met her. "The Gray
Fox? Damn! Eddie, you never told me the legendary Gray Fox was your uncle! It’s an honour
to meet you, sir. Really. I’ve followed your career for years, from a distance of course. You
took on the Unholy Inspectres, the Bloody Beast of Bodmin Moor, and the Murder Mystics—
"
"Not that last one," Uncle James said graciously. "My brother Jack took down the Murder
Mystics. He never did get the renown he deserved."
"You have a gun," I said. "You could have shot me in the back the moment you walked in
here, before I even knew you’d found me. It would have been the sensible thing to do, before
I could armour up."
"Yes," he said easily. "I could have killed you and your young lady, but I didn’t. I needed to
talk to you first, Eddie. I know you’ve opened the scroll, said the Words, seen the vision.
When you broke the seals, that set off a silent alarm, and we all knew it had to be you. So I
said I’d come down here and take care of things. How did you break the seal, Eddie?"
"I have Oath Breaker," I said, and showed him the ironwood staff.
"So you do. You’ve been to see Jack, haven’t you? Of course you have. He always was the
softhearted one. I shall have to have words with him later. Put the staff down on the floor,
Eddie. Very carefully."
I crouched down, laid the stick on the floor, and then straightened up again, never once
taking my eyes off Uncle James.
"Who sent you?" I said. "The council, or the Matriarch? How deep does the rot go?"
"The council and the Matriarch," said Uncle James. "You’ve pissed off pretty much
everybody, Eddie."
"Do you know the secret of the scroll?" I said. "The truth behind the armour, and the Heart?"
"Of course I know. It’s the first thing they tell you when you join the council."
I raised an eyebrow. "I wasn’t aware field agents were allowed to serve on the council."
"Exceptions are made, for exceptional people," said James. He wasn’t boasting, just stating
a fact.
"What did you do?" I said. "When you found out about all the children who’ve been sacrificed
so we could become what we are?"
"Oh, I was shocked," said Uncle James. "Horrified. But I got over it. Just as you will, in time.
The original bargain was made in a simpler, more savage time, by savage people. But the

family has become too important, too necessary to risk undoing the bargain. We don’t just
protect the tribe anymore; we protect humanity. We have a duty, a responsibility, to stand
between them and the forces of darkness that they must never know about. And the
secret…is just part of the burden we have to bear so we can do the things that have to be
done."
"Like ruling the world from behind the scenes?" said Molly. "Like stamping down hard on
anyone or anything that doesn’t fit your narrow criteria of what’s acceptable?"
"Getting upset won’t change anything," said Uncle James, still looking only at me. "It won’t
bring back your twin brother, or mine. They died so we could wear the armour, so we could
be a force for good in a world that needs us now more than ever. We can’t tell everyone in
the family, Eddie; you must know that. Most of them have no idea what it’s like out in the
world. They wouldn’t understand…how necessary some things can be. That’s why only the
Matriarch and the council know: those of us who’ve proven our worth through long service to
the family. And to the world. We bear the burden of the truth so others don’t have to. So we
can go on saving the world every day."
"That’s it?" I said. "The end justifies the means? Come on, Uncle James; you can do better
than that."
"I insisted they send me down here," Uncle James said urgently. "Because I’m the only one
who wouldn’t shoot you on sight. I needed to talk to you, Eddie, make you understand. I don’t
want to have to kill you, Eddie. Not when you could still do so much for the family. You have
so much potential…and you remind me so much of your mother."
"Don’t go there," I said, and I could hear how cold my voice was.
He didn’t flinch. "My sister was one of the best field agents of her generation," said Uncle
James. "Only makes sense that her son would be special too. I raised you, Eddie. Taught
you everything I knew. I always saw you…as the son I never had."
"You raised me to know right from wrong," I said. "To fight evil wherever I found it. That’s
what I’m doing, Uncle James."
"We keep the world safe," Uncle James said almost pleadingly. "We protect humanity from
all the forces that would destroy them if we weren’t there."
"You are one of the forces that would destroy us," said Molly.
Uncle James still ignored her, concentrating only on me. "Someone has to be in charge,
Eddie. You can’t trust politicians to do what’s right, not when it’s always so much easier to
do what’s expedient. Do you have any idea how many wars we’ve prevented, down the
centuries, by working behind the scenes? How many world wars that never happened
thanks to us? There have been times when the family was all that stood between humanity
and utter extinction. Our record may not be perfect, but the world would have been a far
worse place without us."
"You don’t know that," said Molly. "Not for sure. Who can say what kind of a world we might
have made for ourselves if we’d been forced to make our own mistakes and learn from
them?"
"We’ve been a force for good," said Uncle James, holding my gaze with his.
"Yes," I said. "On the whole, I believe we have. But the price…is too high. You can’t be just a
little bit corrupt, Uncle James. Maybe that’s why we went from serving and protecting the

world to running it."
"Please," he said. "Surrender. Don’t make me kill you, Eddie. We can still work this out. It’s
not too late. I’ll speak for you before the council. Your grandmother isn’t a monster, Eddie. If
she can find a way to save you, she will. You know she will."
"I can’t let this go on," I said. "Not now that I know. I’m here to set the world free, Uncle
James. To tear off all their shackles and let them run free. We were meant to be the world’s
shepherds, not their jailors. We’ve become the very thing we were raised to fight. The family
must fall for what it’s done to the world, and to itself; and to me. No more lies, Uncle James.
No more dead babies. No more Droods walking around unknowing in the living skins of
their murdered twins. This should be just between you and me, Uncle James. Will you let
Molly go? If she agreed to just walk away?"
"I’m sorry," he said, and he sounded as though he meant it. "You know I can’t let her leave,
Eddie. Not now that she knows the secret. If she stands with you, she dies with you. But…if
you were to come back into the family, perhaps something could be arranged…As your
wife, she’d be family too."
"Wait just a minute!" said Molly.
"Be quiet, child," said Uncle James. "I’m trying to save your life. The two of you could never
leave the Hall again, Eddie, but you could still live long, useful, productive lives here."
"Serving the family," I said.
"Yes."
"Work for the Droods?" said Molly. "Screw that shit. I’d rather die. No offence, Eddie."
"I have to do what’s right," I said. "I have to fight evil wherever I find it. Just like you taught
me, Uncle James."
"Eddie…" he said, taking a step forward.
"I’m sorry."
"So am I." Uncle James sighed heavily, but his voice was calm and his eyes were so cold
as to seem almost disinterested. "Don’t bother armouring up, Eddie. This gun came from
the Armourer, long ago. He made me some special armour-piercing bullets out of strange
matter. They’ll punch right through your armour. Just like the arrow on the motorway."
"You knew about the ambush all along!" I said, almost surprised to find I could still feel
shocked after so many secrets. "Did you know the arrow would leave some of itself in my
body, poisoning me, killing me by inches?"
"No!" Uncle James said quickly. "It was supposed to be a clean kill. They promised me it
would be quick, or I would never have agreed. You weren’t supposed to suffer…You were
supposed to die valiantly on the motorway, facing the family’s fiercest enemies. It seems…I
taught you better than I realised. I am proud of you, Eddie. And I promise it will be a clean kill
this time. For you and your young lady."
"Like hell," said Molly.
All the time Uncle James had been talking so passionately, concentrating all his attention on
me, I’d been quietly aware of Molly subvocalising Words of power, a trick she’d learned from

me, struggling to raise just enough power to force one good spell through the security
measures suppressing magic in the old library. And now the spell activated, opening one
small spatial portal right beside Uncle James’s hand. It sucked the gun right out of his grasp
and started to pull his arm in too before the security measures reasserted themselves and
shut the portal down. It snapped out of existence, and Molly almost collapsed, exhausted by
the strain. She grabbed at a heavy book stack to support herself and grinned at me.
"There you go, Eddie! Level playing field. Now kick his self-righteous, hypocritical arse!"
Uncle James looked at his empty gun hand as though he couldn’t quite believe it, and then
he looked at me. I smiled, and suddenly so did he. That old familiar devil-take-the-hindmost
grin.
"All right, Eddie. Let’s do it. Show me how much you’ve learned."
"You always were a big drama queen, Uncle James," I said.
We armoured up, the living golden metal enclosing both of us in a moment. The terrible pain
in my left side was immediately muted, and I didn’t realise how bad it had got until it wasn’t
there anymore. The golden armour made me strong and powerful again. My dead brother
made me strong…but I couldn’t think about that now. I had to concentrate everything I had on
Uncle James, or he would kill me. He was, after all, the most proficient and deadly field
agent the family had ever produced.
But he’d never had to face someone like me. A semi-rogue who’d learned all his best tricks
outside the family. Tempered in the fires of two appalling days, made stronger than ever
before by what I’d had to do to survive. And Uncle James didn’t have my outrage, my anger,
my righteous cause. No; he’d never met a Drood like me.
We circled each other slowly, warily, gleaming golden and glorious in the muted light of the
old library. I didn’t know what weapons he might have under his armour, but the odds were
he wouldn’t dare use them, for fear of damaging the old library. Just a few sparks in the
wrong place could cause a terrible fire…And all I had left was the Colt Repeater, its
everyday bullets useless against his armour. So it all came down to him and me, one to one,
man to man.
I grew heavy spikes on the knuckles of my golden hands. Uncle James grew long slender
blades out of his golden hands. The edges looked very sharp. I’d never known a Drood who
could do that with his armour before, but the Gray Fox always was the best of us. Champion
of a thousand undisputed victories against the forces of evil. He knew tricks no one else did,
learned the hard way in thirty years of fighting in dirty secret wars. Deep down…I knew I
couldn’t beat him. But I had to try. If only to buy Molly a chance to escape and take the truth
with her. Uncle James stood between us and the only exit, the painting’s frame that led back
into the main library. So I had to drive him back, drive him away, fight him to a standstill; die
on my feet if that was what it took to buy Molly her chance.
My one advantage over the Gray Fox: I was already dying. So I had nothing to lose.
I surged forward, driven by all the supernatural strength and speed my armour could
produce, and still Uncle James was ready for me. He sidestepped gracefully, and his
right-hand sword came sweeping around, the supernaturally sharp edge slicing right through
the armour over my right side. My armour healed itself immediately, closing the cut, but I
wasn’t so lucky. Pain flared across my ribs, and I could feel thick blood coursing down my
right side under my armour. I’d never felt that before. I charged Uncle James again and
again, knowing my only hope was to get in close and grapple with him, and every time he

avoided me like a toreador with a bull, his impossibly sharp blades cutting through my
golden armour again and again, cutting me, hurting me, slowing me down through
accumulated shock and blood loss. The Gray Fox circled me, staying carefully out of my
reach, watching for the first sign of weakness so he could move in for the kill.
So I gave him a sign. I pretended to stumble, almost going down on one knee, and he came
gliding in for the kill, smooth as any dancer. Only to find me waiting for him. I lunged forward,
forcing him backwards, off balance. He quickly got his feet back under him again and
straightened up, but by that time I had both my hands around his throat, my golden fingers
pressing down on his golden throat. I concentrated and grew sharp barbs on the insides of
my fingers, digging them deep into the living metal around his neck. And Uncle James
couldn’t grab my wrists to force my hands away without giving up his swords.
He drew back his right arm and slammed his right sword forward with all his armour’s
strength behind it. The golden blade punched right through the armour over my left side,
through me, and out my back. The pain was horrific. I cried out, and there was blood in my
mouth. It coursed down my chin, under my golden mask. I almost passed out. I probably
would have if I hadn’t been so angry.
I clung onto his throat with both hands, searching desperately for some last trick I could use
against him; and that was when I remembered how I’d once fused both my golden hands
together to contain and seal off Archie Leech’s Kandarian amulet. If I could fuse my armour
together, why not mine and Uncle James’s? Just for a moment. Just long enough to do what
I had to do. I concentrated, focusing all my willpower, sweat running down my face under my
mask, and the living metal around his throat yielded to my greater will, my greater fury. His
armour fused with mine, and suddenly my bare hands were around his bare throat, and I
bore down hard.
He struggled fiercely, not understanding what was happening, throwing me this way and that
by sheer brute strength, but I wouldn’t let go. He pulled his right hand back, jerking the sword
blade out of me, and I cried out again as I felt things break and tear within me, but still I
wouldn’t let go. Not even when he ran me through again, and again, sinking the blade deep
in my guts and twisting it back and forth.
He was weakening fast, but so was I, and God alone knows what might have happened if
not for Molly.
We’d been so caught up in ourselves, fighting face to golden face, that we’d both lost track
of Molly Metcalf. She came up behind Uncle James in his blind spot, and she had Torc
Cutter in her hands. She jammed the ugly shears up against the back of his neck, yelled the
activating Words, and cut through his golden armour, right where his collar should be. Uncle
James screamed once, like a soul newly damned to Hell, and then his armour disappeared
all in a moment, and his whole body went limp in my hands. It took me a moment to realise
what had happened, and a moment more to armour down and unclench my hands from
around his throat, but finally I let go, and his body fell to the floor and did not move again. I
sat down suddenly beside him, my legs just giving way. I hurt so bad I could hardly breathe.
There was blood all over me. My uncle James was dead. I wanted to hold him in my arms,
tell him I was sorry, but my arms wouldn’t work. I would have cried, but somehow…I was just
too tired. Too deathly tired.
Molly crouched down beside me and put her arm across my shoulders. "I had to do it," she
said. "He could still have won. And he would have killed you, Eddie."
"Of course he would," I said. "He was the Gray Fox. He was the best. He knew the mission

always comes first."
"I killed him," said Molly. "So you wouldn’t have to."
"I know," I said. "That was kind of you. But…he was my dad, in every way that mattered. The
one Drood I always loved and admired. The man I most wanted to be."
I cried then, and Molly did her best to comfort me. After a while she retrieved Oath Breaker
from where I’d left it and hauled me back up onto my feet so she could half lead, half carry
me out of the old library, back through the painting, into the main library again. Blood poured
down my sides with every movement, my face was slick with sweat, and my hands hung
numbly at my side. Away from the old library’s magic suppressor field, she was able to run a
whole bunch of healing spells over me, but though she closed my wounds and stopped the
bleeding, I couldn’t say I felt any better.
"It’s the strange matter in you," she said finally, frowning. "It’s interfering with my magics. I’ve
stabilised you, but that’s about all I can do for you."
"That’s all right," I said, smiling at her. It didn’t feel like much of a smile, but I did my best. "It
doesn’t matter, Molly. I’m dying anyway. And none of that three or four days shit, either.
Just…hold me together long enough for me to do what I need to do."
"What can we do?" Molly said desperately. "Against something like the Heart?"
"You have Torc Cutter, and I have Oath Breaker," I said. "I’m going to destroy the Heart, and
bring the whole damned family down."
"Because they betrayed you," said Molly.
"Because they lied," I said. "They lied to all of us. About who we are and what we are. We
were never the heroes of our story. All along, we were the real bad guys."
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
A Family at War
T here was only one way to fatally weaken the family. To break their hold on the world. Take
away the power that made them strong, made them untouchable: their glorious golden
armour. And the only way to do that was to destroy the source of the armour: the Heart. Only
a few days ago I would have found that unthinkable; hell, I’d risked my life to defend the
damned thing from outside attack. But step by painful step I had been driven to this place,
this moment, forced to turn away from everything I’d been taught and brought up to believe
in. All that was left to me now was to destroy the one thing I was raised to revere and protect
above all others. The rotten, corrupt, lying Heart of the Droods.
Life’s a bitch sometimes.
I hefted Oath Breaker in my hand. Just a stick, really; a long wooden cane carved with
symbols I couldn’t even read. It didn’t look like much, to destroy an invader from another
dimension and bring an end to centuries of lies. But as with so many other things where my
family was concerned, appearances were deceiving. I only had to glance at Oath Breaker
with my Sight to see a power so great, so terrible, I had to look away or it would blast the
eyes from my head. Oath Breaker was ancient and awful, made when the world was young
specifically to undo things that could not be allowed to exist. There were stories that said
Oath Breaker had thrown down cities and continents in its time, and killed old gods so
thoroughly that no one even remembered their names anymore.

It occurred to me that by destroying the source of the family’s armour, I might be signing my
own death warrant. And that of everyone else in my family. I’d seen Torc Cutter kill my uncle
James by severing his collar. It could be that no Drood would survive if I took their armour
away. But I’d come too far now to even consider turning back. The family that had bowed
down to the Heart’s murderous demands for so long, that had chosen to rule humanity
instead of protect it, that had embraced the ruthless aims of Zero Tolerance…was not a
family I recognised anymore. All that was left to me was to save the family’s honour or put it
out of its misery forever.
And what the hell; I was dying anyway.
At least with the Heart destroyed, there was a chance that all the sacrificed souls trapped
inside the massive diamond would be freed at last to pass on to the afterlife denied them for
so long. Perhaps they would speak for me at the gates of Heaven or Hell, and ask that I not
be judged too harshly for all my crimes and sins. That I had done at least one good thing in
my life.
"The only way to use Oath Breaker," I said to Molly, "is up close and personal. That means
we have to get into the Sanctity, the most closely guarded chamber in the Hall, and stand
before the Heart itself."
"Hold everything," said Molly. "Even assuming we can get there, which I’m not, but just for
the sake of argument, isn’t there just the smallest possibility that destroying an alien life-form
like the Heart could be extremely bloody dangerous? I mean, you use an unknown weapon
like Oath Breaker on an unknown other-dimensional thing like the Heart, and God alone
knows what kind of forces and energies might be released. You could blow up the whole
house. Hell, you might even blow up the whole country."
"Why think so small?" I said. "We might blow up the whole world. But you know what, Molly? I
just don’t care anymore. This is something I have to do, and it’s something I’m going to do.
Whatever the cost. You don’t have to come with me if you don’t want to…"
"Oh, screw that," Molly said briskly. "I didn’t come this far to miss out on seeing the Droods’
power broken once and for all. This is what I signed on for, Eddie, and don’t you forget it. To
have my revenge on the family who murdered my parents."
"The family killed my parents too," I said. "Though they would never admit it. So I
suppose…this is my revenge too."
"Besides," said Molly. "You’d probably mess it up on your own anyway. You need me,
Eddie."
I smiled at her. "Thank you," I said. "For everything."
"Wouldn’t have missed it for the world," she said, and smiled back at me.
"We’ve come a long way together," I said. "All those years we wasted, trying to kill each
other…"
"Don’t get all sloppy and sentimental on me now, Eddie. We have things to do. Maybe later
there will be time for…other things."
"If there is a later."
"Oh, look on the bright side: the odds are your family will kill us long before we get anywhere
near the Heart."

We laughed quietly together, and then I took her in my arms and held her close. I couldn’t
hold her tightly—it hurt my left side too much—but she understood. She held me like I was
the most precious thing in her life, which might crack and break if handled too roughly, and
buried her face in my shoulder. We stood like that for some time, and then we made
ourselves let go. It was all the time we could allow ourselves. We kissed, quickly, and then
we stepped back and took on our professional aspects again. The rogue Drood and the
wild witch, determined to do or die and probably both.
"So," said Molly, entirely businesslike again. "Do you know of anymore shortcuts that can
take us from here to the Sanctity? Preferably one that doesn’t involve being chased by a
whole bunch of hungry spiders with severe glandular problems?"
"Unfortunately, no," I said. "The Sanctity is sealed off from the rest of the Hall by really
powerful forces. Partly to protect the Heart from outside attack, and partly to protect the
family from the Heart’s various emissions and energies. You can access the Sanctity only by
approaching it via the single officially authorised route. Anything else will trigger the Hall’s
internal security responses…and we really don’t want to do that. If you thought the defences
in the grounds were bad, they’re nothing compared to what’s inside the Hall. Death could be
the kindest thing that would happen to us."
"God, you’re depressing to be around sometimes," said Molly. "Surely the official route will
be heavily guarded by now?"
"Of course. And don’t call me—"
"Don’t you dare."
"Sorry. Imminent death and danger always brings out my flippant side. No, we’re going to
have to fight our way through a whole army of armoured Droods just to get to the Sanctity."
Molly produced Torc Cutter from a hidden pocket in her dress and scowled darkly at the ugly
shears. "They’ll probably pack the corridors with cannon fodder. All the inexperienced,
expendable Droods. It’s what I’d do. Just how many more of your family are you prepared to
see die, Eddie?"
"There’s already been one death in the family too many. There has to be another way…"
Molly waited patiently while I thought fiercely, coming up with plan after plan and turning them
all down. The family had had centuries to come up with counters to every possible way of
taking the corridors by storm. The corridors…I looked at Molly and grinned suddenly.
"When I’m in the armour, I’m stronger, faster, more powerful. Stronger by far than the fragile
world I move in. So why walk along the corridors, going this way and that to reach my
destination, when there’s a much quicker way? Why not walk in a straight line to the Sanctity,
smashing my way through everything in my path?"
"Sounds like a plan to me," said Molly, her eyes sparkling.
I slipped Oath Breaker through my back belt and armoured up. My Sight showed me the
straight line I needed from where I was to where the Sanctity was. I turned to the
wood-panelled wall on my left and punched a great jagged hole through the heavy teak. I
pulled my golden hand back, and a whole panel came away. I stuck both hands into the gap
and tore the wall apart with the armour’s strength. The dense wood ripped and tore as
though it was paper. Molly jumped up and down, cheering and clapping her hands together
delightedly. I forced my way through the wall and into the room beyond, and Molly hurried

through after me.
The room was full of couches and settees and love seats in various periods and styles, all of
them pleasantly comfortable and cosy. A perfect place to relax and indulge in quiet
contemplation. I strode across the room, kicking the heavy furniture out of my way, headed
for the next wall. Molly followed behind, murmuring, "Typical man…" just loudly enough for
me to hear. And then the door burst open, and a dozen armoured Droods charged into the
room, splintering the door frame as they all tried to squeeze through at once. It was obvious
from their haste and clumsiness, as well as the haphazard way they grouped themselves
before me, that none of them had any combat experience. Probably just house Droods,
pressed into service. Thrown into my path to slow me down until more experienced fighters
could get to me here. Poor bastards. Just more innocents sacrificed for the family good. I
studied them as they fanned nervously out into a semicircle before me, gleaming and
golden, and then just stood there facing me. Clearly none of them wanted to be the one to
make the first move.
"Get out of my way," I said, and it wasn’t difficult at all to sound cold and nasty and
dangerous.
Give them credit, none of them backed off. One Drood actually managed a step forward.
From his voice he was young, but even though he had to be scared shitless his tone was
firm and steady.
"We can’t let you pass. You’re rogue. We fight for the honour of the family."
"So do I," I said. "If you only knew. Stand aside. You know you can’t stop me. I’m field
trained."
The young Drood didn’t move. "Anything for the family."
I nodded slowly, understanding, acknowledging them all. "Of course. Whatever happens, I’m
proud of all of you."
I charged forward and slammed the young Drood out of my way with a single backhand that
lifted him up off his feet and sent him flying across the room. The other Droods hesitated,
frozen where they were by uncertainty and shock, and then I was in and among them. Even
house Droods have to go through basic training when they’re kids, but most never raise a
hand in anger in their lives, in armour or out of it. They never stood a chance. I knocked them
down and kicked them away, picked them up and threw them this way and that. They couldn’
t be hurt inside their armour, but it knocked all the pepper out of them. A few tried to make a
fight out of it, coming at me with wildly swinging fists. I picked them up and threw them at
walls, and they crashed right through the woodwork. Molly used her magic to collapse the
walls on top of them, pinning them down with the weight of the wreckage. They’d dig
themselves out eventually, but by then we’d be long gone.
I smashed through the opposite wall and into the next room, and then the next wall and the
next room, or the next corridor, on and on, heading always in a straight line through the
structure of the Hall. At least the Sanctity was in the central building, and not one of the other
wings, or it could have taken me hours. Walls that had stood for centuries fell under my
armoured strength and cold, cold anger, and though more Droods came to meet me, in
armour and out, and with all kinds of weapons, none of them came close to stopping me.
Occasionally the odds would get a bit heavy, as family members filled a room before me,
but still none of them had field experience, and it was child’s play to outthink and
outmanoeuvre them. I could have killed so many of them, but I didn’t. It wasn’t necessary.

Sometimes I fooled them into fighting each other; one golden form looks much like another.
Sometimes I buried them under piles of furniture or wrapped them in precious tapestries
they didn’t dare tear. Once Molly stopped an entire crowd by threatening to overturn a glass
display case full of delicate china, and a dozen voices cried out in horrified protest.
"Those pieces are irreplaceable!" cried an anguished voice as Molly tilted the case slowly
so the china pieces slid jerkily across the shelves.
"They’re priceless! Historical treasures!"
"Then why are you hoarding them for yourselves?" snapped Molly.
"Why aren’t they in a museum so everyone can enjoy them? Back the hell off, or I’ll create a
china jigsaw like you’ve never seen!"
"We’re backing, we’re backing!" cried the Droods. "Barbarian! Philistine!"
They all got out of our way in a hurry. Molly and I picked up the display case and carried it
across the room, and the Droods scattered before us, crying out piteously for us to be more
careful. I smashed a hole in the wall and stepped through, and Molly dragged the case into
position to block the hole. We laughed, secure in the knowledge that the Droods would
spend ages carefully moving the case aside so as not to risk damaging the contents.
More Droods in the corridor beyond. And these at least had seen some training. They held
themselves well, all ten of them, fanning out so as not to bunch up and make an easy target. I
didn’t waste time talking to them. I concentrated, applying what I’d learned from James, and
grew supernaturally sharp claws on my golden hands. First thing a field agent learns is that
any trick is a fair trick if it means you win and they lose. I took them down, one by one,
fighting hand to hand, up close and personal. My claws ripped through their armour, and they
cried out in shock as well as pain. Their flesh was torn, and they bled inside their armour,
and that had never happened before. Some just turned and ran. The rest fell back,
scattering, and Molly and I went straight through them.
A few saw Molly as an easier target. They went for her, reaching out with their golden hands,
and she laughed in their featureless faces. She conjured up a howling storm wind that
bellowed down the narrow corridor, picking them up and carrying them away, tumbling
helplessly end over end like discarded toys the whole length of the corridor.
The remaining Droods all tackled me at once, knocking me off balance, and then piling on
top of me as I crashed to the floor, trying to pin me down with the sheer weight of armoured
bodies. Good tactic. Probably would have worked against anyone who wasn’t field trained
and used to thinking around corners. I cracked open the floor beneath us with one sharp
blow from a golden elbow, and our combined weight collapsed the floor. A great hole
opened up and we all fell through, the other Droods kicking and screaming and grabbing at
each other all the way down into the room below. I of course just grabbed the side of the hole
with one hand and pulled myself up and out. The Droods below were so inexperienced it
probably wouldn’t even occur to them that they could use the armoured power of their legs to
jump back up again. Or at least not until Molly and I had already moved on.
The next room was a trap.
I recognised the place the moment I entered it. The room was called Time Out, and it was full
of ornate clocks and timepieces from across the centuries, covering all four walls with
everything from water clocks to atomic devices. I never did like Time Out; always struck me
as a sinister place, when I was young. Full of the ticking of a million mad clocks. In this room

time itself could be slowed down, extended. A day could pass in here between the tick and
tock of a clock outside. Time Out was originally put together back in the nineteenth century
to make possible the observation of certain delicate scientific and magical experiments, but
these days it was mostly used by students reviewing and cramming for an imminent exam.
I knew something was wrong before I was halfway across the room. All the heavy ticks and
tocks around me had taken on a strange dying fall, and the air was thick as syrup. I looked
back at Molly, still stuck in the hole in the wall I’d made, her movements little more than a
snail’s pace. There was nothing wrong with her. It was the room. Time was slowing down,
trapping me in the room like an insect in amber. Like a prisoner in a cell with invisible,
intangible bars. I could cross the room in a few seconds only to find that days had passed
outside it, and the whole family waiting to meet me.
I raised my Sight, and the air seemed to shimmer around me, thick with slowly congealing
forces. It wasn’t something I could fight with my armour. All its strength and speed meant
nothing next to the inexorable power of time. From all around me came the slowing
remorseless ticking of the million mad clocks, nailing me down, pinning me in place like an
insect on display, transfixed on a spike.
I lashed out at the grandfather clock next to me, and the heavy wooden case exploded under
the impact. I ripped out the chains and the pendulum and threw them aside, and the great
old clock was silenced. And time’s growing hold on me seemed to hesitate…I grabbed up a
seventeenth century carriage clock and crushed it in my golden hand, and cogs and
pinwheels flew out of it. Time’s hold slipped away from me just a little. I could feel it. I
laughed aloud and rampaged round the room, smashing all the clocks, destroying
everything I could lay my hands on, until Molly was suddenly striding across the room
towards me, demanding to know what the hell I was doing. She hadn’t noticed anything. I
stopped, breathing hard, and looked around me. The room was a mess. And time moved
normally on its way, ticking and tocking along as though nothing had happened. I shook my
head at Molly and headed for the far wall. No point in trying to explain. There wasn’t enough
time.
I smashed through the wall as though it was cardboard and stepped through into the corridor
beyond. My feet shot out from under me, and suddenly I was plummeting the length of the
hallway, scrabbling frantically for handholds on the walls as they rushed past me. Someone
had changed the direction of gravity so that the wall at the far end of the long hallway was
now the floor, and the two walls just the sides of a really long drop. I fell all the way to the
bottom, tumbling helplessly, until the far wall came flying up towards me like a flyswatter. I
tucked myself up into a ball, got my feet underneath me, and used my armoured legs to soak
up the impact as I hit.
Luckily, it was a really solid wall. Old stone, thick and sturdy. I hit hard, and the stone cracked
from top to bottom, but it held. I took a moment to get my breath back. The hallway stretched
endlessly above me, the walls like mountainsides. I could see Molly way above me, looking
out of the hole I’d made in the wall, peering anxiously down at me. I yelled at her to stay put. I
thought hard as my heart rate slowed reluctantly back to something like normal. The family
had to know the fall alone wouldn’t be enough to kill me. This was just another delaying
tactic. It was all they had.
I forced myself out of the broken stone wall, damaging it still further, and looked up at Molly.
"Stay put! I’ll climb up to you!"
"I could retrieve you with my magic!" she yelled back. "Maybe even undo the gravity
inversion!"

She really did look a long way off. Maybe someone was messing about with space here, as
well as gravity. Or were they connected anyway? It was a long time since my old science
classes.
"No!" I yelled back. "Don’t do anything! Your magic could set off the Hall’s inner defences!"
"You mean this isn’t—"
"Hell, no! This is just some crafty little bugger showing off his lateral thinking."
I punched a hole in the left-hand wall that used to be the floor, carefully pulled my golden
hand back out again, and then made another hole. I kept on punching holes until I had
enough hand-and footholds to get started, and then I climbed up the wall, heading back to
Molly. I picked up speed as I got the hang of it and got a rhythm going, and soon I was
scuttling up the wall like a giant spider. ( I winced as the thought occurred to me, and I
pushed it firmly away.) I soon reached the hole in the wall where Molly was waiting, and she
helped pull me back through. We both looked down at the long drop below us, and the wall
opposite.
"Now what?" said Molly.
"When in doubt, use brute force and ignorance," I said. "Climb on my back."
She gave me hard look but finally did so, holding on tightly as I walked back across the room
we’d just come through. Then I took a good run up to get some speed going, jumped through
the hole and across the gap, and smashed through the far wall into the room opposite. Molly
jumped down from me, slapping dust and splinters from her hair and shoulders.
"I don’t want to have to do that again, ever," she said firmly. "Next time, I’ll fly us across."
I looked at her. "I didn’t know you could fly."
"Lot of things you don’t know about me. You should see what I can do with a Ping-Pong
ball."
I looked around the room and once again I recognised it. I always thought of the long narrow
chamber as the souvenir room. It was crammed full of old trophies and mementos and a
whole bunch of basically interesting old stuff that my various ancestors had brought back
from their travels around the world. Books and maps, objects and artefacts, and some odd
and obscure items that presumably meant something to someone once but whose stories
were now lost and forgotten. To a young Drood like me, they were all wonderfully interesting
and fascinating, with their hints of a much bigger world outside the Hall. I spent a lot of time
here as a child, leafing through the books and playing with the pieces. At least partly
because I knew I wasn’t supposed to. I was still fond of a lot of the exhibits, so I was careful
not to break anything else as I made my way across the room. I pointed out a few of my
favourites to Molly.
"That’s the skull of a vodyanoi from pre-Soviet Russia. Those are genuine Thuggee
strangling cords from the Hindu Kush. That lumpy-looking hairy thing is a badly stuffed
Chupacabras from Chile. Which if anything smells worse dead than it does when it’s alive.
And all the intricate carvings in that cabinet are scrimshaw carved from the bones of a great
white whale."
"You should charge admittance to the Hall," said Molly. "You could make a fortune out of the
summer trade."

The door ahead of us slammed open and my grandmother Martha Drood, the family
Matriarch herself, strode into the room to face me, accompanied as always by her consort,
Alistair. I stopped abruptly, facing them, and they stopped where they were, maintaining a
cautious distance. Molly moved in close beside me, reassuring and supporting me with her
presence. I was glad she was there. Even after all that had happened, after all that I’d
discovered…Martha was still the Matriarch, the will and authority of the Droods. And once I
would have died rather than fail her.
The Matriarch wasn’t wearing her armour. Of course not. That might have come across as
an admission of weakness, and Martha’s arrogance would never allow her to see me as a
serious threat. Not even after all I’d done. For a rogue to triumph against the will of the family
was unthinkable.
So I armoured down too. Just to show my contempt.
"Hello, Grandmother," I said. "Alistair. How did you know where to find me?"
Alistair smirked. "Intercepting your path wasn’t exactly difficult, Edwin. All we had to do was
follow the wreckage and destruction, draw a straight line to the Sanctity, and then get here
ahead of you."
"You always were very direct, even as a child," said the Matriarch.
"That’s why I chose this room, for our…little chat. The number of times I had to send
someone to drag you out of here because you weren’t where you were supposed to
be…You always were such a disappointment to me, Edwin."
Molly looked at me. "It’s your family, Edwin. How do you want to handle this?"
"Very carefully," I said. "My grandmother wouldn’t be in here, facing me without serious
backup, unless she was confident she had some really nasty cards to play."
"This is the Drood Matriarch?" said Molly. "Well, colour me impressed. The queen bitch of
the family that runs the whole world. Hatchet-faced old cow, isn’t she?"
The Matriarch ignored her, fixing me with her cold gaze. "Where is James?" she said
harshly. "What did you do to James?"
"I…killed him, Grandmother," I said.
She cried out briefly then; a lost, devastated sound. She crumpled as though I’d hit her and
might have fallen if Alistair hadn’t been there to hold her up. She pressed her face against
his chest, eyes squeezed shut to keep the tears from falling. Alistair glared at me over her
bent head. I wanted to see her suffer for what she’d done to me, to all of us, even to Uncle
James, but in the end it was disturbing and even sad to see such a legendary facade crack
and fall apart right in front of me. I’d never seen her show any honest emotion in public
before.
"You killed my son," she said finally, pushing herself away from Alistair. "My son…your
uncle…He was the best of us! How could you, Edwin?"
"You sent him to his death, Grandmother," I said steadily. "Just like you tried to send me to
mine on the motorway. Remember?"
I stepped forward to confront her with all the other things I had to say, but to my surprise
Alistair stepped forward to face me, putting himself between his wife and the rogue who

threatened her. He stood tall and proud, doing his best to stare me down, and for the first
time, he actually looked like a Drood.
"Get out of my way, Alistair," I said.
"No." His voice was high but steady. He had no authority, no power, and he knew it, but in
his refusal to remove himself from the line of fire, he had a kind of dignity at last. "I won’t let
you hurt her anymore."
"I don’t want to hurt her," I said almost tiredly. "I don’t want to hurt anyone. That’s not why I
came back. But I have something important to do and not much time to do it in. Take her out
of here, Alistair."
"No. This ends here."
"I have Oath Breaker," I said. "And Molly has Torc Cutter. Even the Gray Fox couldn’t stand
against that."
"You used Torc Cutter on your own uncle?" Alistair looked at me with horror. "Dear God;
what have you become, Edwin?"
"I don’t know," I said honestly. "Awake, perhaps, to all the lies and betrayals…It’s time to cut
the rotten heart out of the family."
"I have a weapon too," Alistair said abruptly, and just like that there was an old-fashioned
pistol in his right hand. It would have looked primitive, even pathetic, if I hadn’t recognised it.
If I hadn’t known it for what it was. Alistair nodded grimly, seeing the knowledge in my face.
Even Martha was shaken out of her grief by the sight of the gun.
"Alistair! Wherever did you get that? You can’t use it! I forbid it!"
"I’ll do whatever I have to to protect you, Martha." Alistair was looking at me, but the gun was
trained steadily on Molly. "You stand very still, Edwin. Or I’ll hurt your woman, just as you’ve
hurt mine. I know none of you ever really thought of me as one of the family. Never thought I
had it in me to fight the good fight like the rest of you. But I love this family and all it stands
for, just as I’ve always loved you, Martha. And this is where I prove it."
"Please, Alistair," said Martha, trying for a calm and reasonable voice.
"Put away the gun. Let me handle this."
"How can you love the family?" I said to Alistair. "Knowing what you do about the Heart?
About the price we pay to be what we are?"
He frowned, suddenly uncertain. "Martha? What’s he talking about?"
I looked at Martha. "He doesn’t know, does he, Grandmother? You never told him. Never
told him why he can’t ever wear the golden torc."
"He’s not part of the council," she said dully. "He never needed to know, so I never told him.
It would have been…cruel. You always were too softhearted, Alistair."
"Not here, not now," he said. "Not when he dares to threaten you and the whole family. You
do know what this gun is, don’t you, Edwin? Of course you do. Why don’t you tell your little
witch friend what it is?"
"Yes, Eddie," said Molly. "You know I hate to be left out of things."

"That…is a Salem Special," I said. "It’s a witch killer. It shoots flames summoned up from
Hell itself. Or so the records say. No one’s used the awful thing in centuries." I glared at
Alistair. "I can’t believe you’re even thinking of using a Salem Special. You put your soul at
risk just by handling it."
"It’ll stop you, and that’s all that matters," he said. He smiled briefly, nervously. "Fight fire with
fire, eh? Oh, I know it won’t hurt you, Eddie. You’ll get your armour up in time to protect you.
But it’ll do terrible things to your pretty girlfriend…So you’re going to stand very still, Edwin,
until the rest of the family get here, take your weapons away, and put you under arrest. Or I’ll
burn your woman alive before your eyes."
"Don’t be a fool, Alistair!" snapped the Matriarch, some of her old authority returning. "You’
re not a field agent! I protected you from all that!"
"I never asked you to protect me, Martha."
"He’ll kill you!"
"You never did have any faith in me," said Alistair. "But this is where I prove you all wrong.
You thought you could stop him with your authority, thought you could intimidate him into just
giving up. I never believed that. He was never intimidated by authority in his life. But look at
him now. Look at him! Afraid to move a muscle because of me!"
He took his eyes off me to glare at her, and that was all I needed. In the moment when he
was distracted, I whipped Oath Breaker out from under my belt, and brought it around in a
swift arc. He started to turn back, raising the Salem Special, but the long ironwood staff
undid the binding seals on the ancient pistol, and it exploded, all its stored hellfire bursting
out at once. Supernaturally bright flames consumed Alistair’s hand and arm, burning the
meat down to the bone in seconds. The stench of brimstone and burnt flesh filled the air.
Alistair fell back, howling and shrieking. He flapped his arm wildly, as though he could shake
off the flames. What remained of his right hand fell away as the hellfire consumed the small
connecting bones in his wrist. It fell to the floor, still wrapped around what was left of the
Salem Special.
Alistair screamed horribly as the flames leapt up to take hold of his right shoulder. Martha
beat at the flames with her bare hands, crying out at the pain but still trying to help. I
armoured up and moved quickly forward to smother the flames with my golden hands, but
even though the flames couldn’t burn me, I couldn’t beat them out. In the end Molly stepped
forward and reeled off some Latin, and all the flames disappeared in a moment. Alistair’s
cries fell away to shocked moans, and he sat down suddenly on the floor, looking dully at
what little was left of his right arm. Martha sat there with him, holding him in her arms, trying
to comfort him. I armoured down and looked at Molly.
"Those were hellfires…How did you—"
"Please," she said. "Remember who you’re talking to."
Alistair’s moans stopped as he finally, mercifully, passed out. Less than half of his upper
right arm remained, charred down to the blackened bone. It would have to be removed; it
would never heal. Martha rocked him back and forth, crooning to him like a sleeping child.
She was crying. I’d never seen her cry before. I tried to feel sorry for Alistair, but this was
what he would have done to my Molly if I hadn’t stopped him.
"Martha…" I said.

"Don’t. Don’t pretend you care, you unnatural child."
"So many tears," I said. "For Uncle James, for Alistair. But how many tears would you have
shed over my death, Grandmother, if I had died on that motorway? Or if Uncle James had
killed me like you ordered? Did you cry over my twin brother when he was sacrificed to the
Heart? He was your grandson too. How did you choose between us? Flip a coin, perhaps?
Or did you just leave it up to the Heart so you wouldn’t have to feel accountable?"
But she wasn’t listening. All she cared about was her Alistair and what I’d done to him. Molly
gently pulled me away.
"We have to go, Eddie. Others will be coming. You know that."
I let her lead the way to the far end of the room. I always thought that in the end the traitor
within the family would turn out to be Alistair. Because he never was one of us, really. I
wanted it to be him. But in the end…he fought well and valiantly to protect the woman he
loved from my anger. I admired him. The poor damned fool. I didn’t need to smash through
the far wall. Just opened the door and stepped through into the next room, leaving Martha
and Alistair behind.
The next room was huge, all gleaming white tiles on the walls and hygienically clean
surfaces packed full of assorted computers and other advanced technology in an
hermetically controlled environment. A whole room full of machines just to monitor and
regulate conditions inside the Sanctity. They protected the Heart from all outside influences
and protected those who lived in the Hall from the various disruptive energies and
dangerous forces that emanated from the Heart. Normally there’d be half a hundred
technicians scattered across the massive room, carefully tending the equipment and making
constant small but necessary changes and adjustments to the Sanctity’s delicate
balance…but the place was deserted. Presumably they’d been evacuated once it was clear
I was coming here. I threaded my way through the bulky machinery, heading for the door at
the other end of the room. Beyond that door lay the Sanctity, and the Heart, and my revenge.
Molly and I were almost there when the door suddenly opened and Matthew and Alexandra
stepped through. I stopped abruptly, and Molly moved in close beside me again. Matthew
looked sharp and smooth as always, the family’s blue-eyed boy in his immaculate Armani
suit. He smiled dazzlingly at me. Alexandra’s smile was cold, and so were her eyes. I
nodded briefly to them both, doing my best to look entirely unimpressed.
"Matthew," I said. "I should have known you’d turn up. You never could bear to miss out on
anything important. But I honestly can’t say I was expecting to see you again, Alex."
"You of all people should know I don’t give up that easily." Alexandra’s voice was sharp and
pointed. "And you really should have expected to see Matty and me here together, at the
last. But then you never were very quick at figuring out what was really going on, were you?"
I frowned first at her, then at Matthew. There was something about their smiles, their easy
confidence, their air of I know something you don’t know. I’d missed something. And I couldn
’t afford to make mistakes, not when I was this close to the Heart and its destruction…What
could I have missed? Neither Matthew nor Alexandra was wearing the armour, even though
they both had good reason to see me as a threat. Something significant was happening
here. I could feel it. They had to be planning something…I risked a quick glance with my
Sight. Both Matthew and Alexandra were carrying concealed weapons radiating enormous
amounts of power, but so were Molly and I. I checked the room around us. No booby traps,
no hidden assassins. Just Matthew and Alexandra, with their cold calculating smiles. I
looked straight at Alexandra.

"What did you do to the Armourer, Alex?"
She shrugged easily. "You didn’t really think you could take me out that easily, did you? I
maintain a constantly updated protection against all forms of poison. Basic security
measure. And he really should have known better than to turn his back on me…But he’d got
old and soft, like so many of the family today. We’re going to change all that."
And with that we, the penny finally dropped. "You, and Matthew…you’re part of the Zero
Tolerance faction! The hard-core family fanatics who want to change everything! Kill all the
bad guys, and to hell with the consequences!"
"Yes," said Matthew. "That’s us. Only we prefer to call ourselves Manifest Destiny."
I must have made a shocked sound. Their smiles widened, and Molly grabbed on to my
good arm and hung on tightly. Perhaps she thought I’d attack them. I was too stunned.
Matthew and Alexandra laughed at the expressions on our faces.
"Truman only thinks he runs things," Alexandra said lightly. "But he’s just our front, our public
face, so the rest of the world won’t realise that the Droods are actually bankrolling and
running Manifest Destiny for our own reasons. Won’t realise until it’s far too late."
"But…you fought their troops," I said to Matthew. "I saw you, in London…"
He shrugged. "A necessary deception. And occasionally the troops have to be put in their
place. It keeps Truman from getting too uppity if we slap him down hard now and again."
"Working behind the scenes has always been the Drood way," said Alexandra.
"Kingmakers rather than kings. Zero Tolerance is the only way forward for the Droods,
Eddie. The family’s got very old-fashioned, very set in its ways, and far too complacent. Too
content with the way things are in the world…Most of the younger generations follow us now,
impatient to change the world for the better instead of risking their lives just to maintain the
status quo. And after all, why should they? Look around you. The status quo sucks. It’s time
we take the lead, stamp out all the bad guys once and for all, and make a better world for
everyone."
"But who gets to decide what’s better?" I said. "The Droods? Manifest Destiny? You?"
"The family will decide," said Matthew. "And who better? We’re the only ones who know
what’s really going on in the world."
"I thought you of all people would understand, Eddie," said Alexandra. "You were always the
great rebel…the renowned freethinker of the family. You opened my eyes. Showed me there
was more to life than just duty and responsibility. After you left, I waited and waited for you to
do…something. But you settled for being just another field agent. Such a disappointment."
"Funny, Alex," I said. "That’s just what I was thinking about you. I thought you were smarter
than this. Matthew; he’s always been out for himself, but you…You’ve become the very thing
this family has always stood against. Just another would-be dictator with delusions of
grandeur."
"Oh, they’re not delusions," said Matthew. "Not anymore. We have followers, weapons, and
far-reaching plans. It is our time, our destiny. Tomorrow belongs to us."
"The family’s spent far too long at war with the supernatural," Alexandra said briskly.
"Spending our lives in their countless secret wars just to maintain their precious status quo.
The time has come to put an end to all the wars, by winning once and for all. We will wipe out

everything that isn’t human, isn’t natural. No more magics, only dependable, rational
science. We’ll make the world a cleaner, simpler place. A human world, where human
destiny is controlled only by humans."
"No more magic?" said Molly. "No more miracles, no more winged unicorns, no more
dancing on moonbeams or laughter in the wild woods?"
"Oh, we’ll probably keep a few of you around," said Matthew. "As pets."
"With the Drood family in charge," said Molly.
"Of course," said Alexandra. "No more hiding our light in the shadows, doing good from a
distance. We’ve earned our time in the spotlight. We’ve been planning this for so long…Only
you came so terribly close to derailing everything, Eddie."
"I did?" I said. "How very like me."
"We were the ones who found and reprogrammed the Karma Catechist," said Matthew.
"We planned to use his accumulated knowledge in the coming war. Only the process went
wrong…He’d been through so many hands, you see, down the years. So many different
groups with their different views and aims. I have to tell you, Eddie, the inside of his head
was a real mess. So we slipped the poor fellow into Saint Baphomet’s very secretly to be
repaired. By certain medical experts sympathetic to the cause of Manifest Destiny."
"And then you came along," said Alexandra. "What were you doing in his room anyway,
Eddie? It wasn’t part of your mission. You weren’t even supposed to be on his floor! But you
never could be trusted to just do the job…We couldn’t risk what he might have told you about
us and our plans. He knew our names, knew everything. And we just knew you wouldn’t go
along with what we’d all worked so hard to bring about…So we whispered in the Matriarch’s
ear, told her you deliberately murdered the Karma Catechist because you were a part of
Manifest Destiny. It really wasn’t that difficult to convince her. You always were the black
sheep of the family. A rogue in all but name. We persuaded her that you were a clear and
present danger to the family, and Eddie…she signed your death warrant without even
hesitating. Terrible old woman."
Matthew grinned broadly. "We always knew the way to power was through her. So
we…cultivated her. Fed her paranoia. We might not have been council members, but we
were her favourites for years, and she kept nothing from us."
"He never told me anything," I said harshly. "The Karma Catechist. He killed himself first.
This…everything that’s happened…it was all completely unnecessary. All for nothing."
Alexandra shrugged. "We gave him the poison tooth and programmed him to use it if he felt
at all compromised. Perhaps we shouldn’t have given him such a hair trigger on the thing.
But it doesn’t make any difference. You’ve actually been very useful to us, Eddie. You made
such a wonderfully visible scapegoat, holding the family’s attention while we quietly put our
plans into operation."
"We would have had to destabilise and weaken the family first anyway before we could take
control," said Matthew. "But now you’ve done that for us! You’ve demoralised the family,
taken out most of their heavy hitters, and destroyed the Matriarch by destroying her beloved
Alistair. James is dead, Jack is dead—"
"You killed him? You killed the Armourer?" I said to Alexandra, shocked, and she winced at
what she heard in my voice.

"He was in the way," she said. "He should have retired long ago."
"I’ll see you burn in Hell for that," I said, and my voice was cold enough to throw both of them
for a moment.
"You always were a sentimental soul," said Alexandra.
"Right now there’s a power vacuum at the heart of the family," said Matthew. "And who
better to step into the breach than the Matriarch’s acknowledged favourites? Especially
when we have such a large and determined popular following within the family?"
"The council won’t know what’s hit it," said Alexandra. "Until it’s far, far too late."
"Do you know about the Heart?" I said. "The bargain that was made and the price we’re still
paying for our armour and our power?"
"Oh, that," said Matthew. "The Matriarch told us all about it long ago. She didn’t believe in
keeping secrets from her beloved favourites. It was a bit of an eye-opener, I’ll admit, but as
Lexxy said, there’s no room for sentimentality in a family that’s going places. We have a
world to put to rights. What are a few lives in the face of that? It’s just…the way things are."
"You can’t take the moral high ground with innocent blood on your hands," I said.
"Watch us," said Alexandra.
"Or not, as you please," said Matthew. "It’s really up to you, Eddie. Surrender to us and
serve Manifest Destiny (after a suitable amount of brainwashing and reprogramming, of
course), or die right here and now."
I laughed in his face. "The Armourer opened the Armageddon Codex for me. I have Oath
Breaker."
Alexandra and Matthew looked at each other sharply, their confidence shaken for the first
time. This hadn’t been part of their plan. But they still didn’t believe they could fail after
coming this far, and they stared at me haughtily.
"That wooden stick is the mighty and legendary Oath Breaker?" said Matthew. "I don’t think
so."
"You wouldn’t have the balls to use Oath Breaker," said Alexandra.
"It’s too big, too powerful, for a little man like you."
"We have weapons," said Matthew. "Real weapons. Terrible weapons! And the will to use
them."
Alexandra held up her right hand, and suddenly there was a long scalpel in it, shining
supernaturally bright. "This is Dissector, the ultimate scalpel created by the ultimate
surgeon, Baron Von Frankenstein. It can cut through anything, neat as you like. It can cut you
open and reduce you to your component parts with just a thought. You even touch that nasty
old staff, Eddie, and I’ll take your hand off at the wrist. Or maybe I’ll just cut your little witch’s
throat."
"You’re really starting to get on my tits," said Molly.
"You always were a vindictive soul, Alex," I said.

"And I have Dominator," said Matthew, more than a little grandly. He snapped his fingers
imperiously, and a laurel wreath fashioned from pure silver appeared on his head. "With
this, my thoughts become your thoughts, my wishes become your wishes. I’ll enjoy seeing
you kneel to me, Eddie."
"Really?" I said. "I always heard your tastes went the other way."
"Surrender or die," Alexandra said sharply. "No more talking. Your precious uncle Jack isn’t
here to save you with his Safe Words this time."
Matthew chuckled nastily. A halo of psychic energies was already forming around his head.
I concentrated on Alexandra, trying to reach her with the sincerity in my voice. "Don’t do this,
Alex. For old times’ sake…for what we used to be to each other…You mustn’t do this. It’s
not worthy of you or the family."
"What do you know about the family?" she said flatly. "You haven’t been a part of it in ten
years. I don’t know that you ever were, really. Always had to go your own way, live your own
life, leaving the rest of us to struggle on under the yoke…until we found our own way out. And
how can you talk about the family being worthy, when you know the secret of the Heart? The
deal with the Devil our ancestors made so long ago? We’re not what we thought we were,
Eddie. Never were. It was all a lie. Manifest Destiny is the only truth."
"You can’t use forbidden weapons, forbidden methods, to save the world," I said. "You’ll
destroy it, trying to make it over into what you want it to be."
"So what?" she said. "What has the world ever done for us except lie to us? Better to die
free than to live a lie one day longer. We’re going to make the world make sense, whether it
wants to or not, whatever the price. This is our time, our destiny, and nothing can stop us."
"Wrong, as usual," said a familiar voice behind me.
We all looked around sharply, and there behind us was the Armourer, Uncle Jack himself,
standing swaying on his own two feet. He wore a simple breastplate of an unfamiliar
crimson metal over his lab coat. Caked blood had dried all down one side of his face from a
vicious scalp wound on his bald pate. He nodded briefly to me and Molly, and then grinned
nastily at Matthew and Alexandra. And as they stood there gaping at him, he spoke two
Safe Words in a language I didn’t even recognise, and Dissector vanished from Alexandra’s
hand as Dominator vanished from Matthew’s brow. They both jumped, startled, and looked
at the Armourer with wide, wild eyes.
"I thought you were dead!" Alexandra said loudly. "Damn you, why aren’t you dead?"
The Armourer sniffed loudly. "I was a field agent for twenty years, remember? I don’t die that
easily, girl."
"We have other weapons," said Matthew too loudly. "There’s a whole army on its way here,
armed to the teeth!"
"See this breastplate?" said the Armourer. "This is the Juggernaut Jumpsuit. Yes, that one,
from the Codex. Bring on your weapons and your army. It won’t do you any good. Eddie, you
go on, boy. You’ve got work to do."
"Listen," said Alexandra. "Hear those running feet? That’s our reinforcements. Dozens of
them. You can’t stop us all, old man."

And that was when the ghost of old Jacob Drood appeared. Out of his chapel at last, for the
first time he looked truly frightening. We all shrank back from him as he manifested on the
air before us in a rush of air cold as death itself. He didn’t look like a grumpy old ancestor
anymore; he looked like what he was: a dead man hanging on to existence through a terrible
act of will. A stark, spectral figure, more a presence than a person, his face was all hollows
and shadows, his eyes burning with unearthly fires. Just looking at him froze the blood in my
veins and closed a cold hand around my heart. We were in the presence of death now, stark
and awful and utterly unrelenting.
Time for me to take a hand, said the ghost of old Jacob, in a harsh and terrible voice that
resonated inside my head. This is what I’ve been waiting for all these years. Even though I
often forgot for years at a time, still I hung on, just for this. Bring on your army, Matthew and
Alexandra, and I will show them all the awful things I’ve learned to do since I died. He looked
at me, and I flinched away despite myself. Go to the Heart, Eddie. That’s where all the
answers are. And do…what you have to do.
Jacob and the Armourer headed towards Matthew and Alexandra, and they backed quickly
away, leaving open the way to the Sanctity’s door. Molly and I hurried forward. A door to our
right burst open, and a whole crowd of armoured Droods rushed in. They saw the Armourer
and the terrible ghost of old Jacob, and they stumbled to a halt. Molly and I opened the door
to the Sanctity and ran through, pulling the door shut behind us.
And as the door closed, the screaming began.
CHAPTER TWENTY-TWO
Heart Breaker
S tanding there in the Sanctity, with the door slamming shut behind me, I felt like a vandal
breaking into a cathedral. The Heart blazed before me, shining like the sun, so bright I had
to force myself to look at it. A single massive, magnificent diamond, so big it filled most of
the huge chamber my family had built to contain and protect it all those centuries ago. Just
standing in the presence of the Heart took my breath away, made me feel small and
insignificant in its presence. But I didn’t believe that anymore. I knew better now. I glared into
the light, refusing to look away or bow my head, even as the simmering light seemed to
blaze right through me, seeing everything in my mind and in my soul.
The feeling of awe snapped off just like that. The light was just as bright, the Heart was just
as huge, but its presence wasn’t overpowering anymore. It was just a really big diamond. I
heard Molly make a soft, relaxed sound at my side as she felt the sudden change too, and I
started guiltily as I realised I’d forgotten she was even there. The Heart’s presence could do
that to you. Molly and I advanced slowly on the Heart until we were almost close enough to
touch it. The curving side of the diamond rose up before us like a multifaceted cliff face, but
there was no trace of our reflections. The light blazing from inside the Heart overpowered
everything else. I could feel the light on my skin, crawling slightly, like I had dived into an icy
cold pond. And for the first time I got the impression that the Heart knew I was there, knew
why I had come, and that it was looking directly at me.
"Hello, Eddie," said the Heart. Its voice was warm and friendly, male and female, and it
seemed to come from everywhere at once. "Normally I take great pains to maintain a
suitably spiritual and refined atmosphere in here, manipulating the emotions of all who come
before me, so as to keep everyone in a properly respectful attitude. But there’s no point with
you, is there? You know my little secret, and you came here for the truth. Poor boy. As if your
little mind could contain or appreciate all my truths."

"You can talk?" I said. A bit obvious, I know, but I was honestly shocked. The Heart had
never spoken to any Drood that I knew of, not since it made the original bargain with my
Druid ancestors.
"Are you really so surprised to find that I’m a living, thinking thing?" said the Heart. "Not all
intelligence is based in meat."
"Did you really come here from another dimension?" said Molly, just to make it clear she
wasn’t being left out of anything.
"From a higher dimension," said the Heart. "What can I say; I always did have a thing for
slumming."
"Why have you never spoken before?" I said.
"I have," said the Heart. "But only to the ruling Matriarch of your tribe. By long tradition, each
Matriarch has to agree to continue our long-standing bargain. Bind her family to me, body
and soul. And in return, I grant you all just a little of my power. I speak to you only now, Eddie,
because you carry Oath Breaker. Nasty little thing. I’ve been trying to persuade your family to
get rid of it for generations."
"Because it could destroy you," said Molly.
"Of course," said the Heart.
"Why did you come here?" I said harshly. I was so close to answers now, I could barely
stand it. I wanted to know everything. I’d come so far, lost so much, and I could feel Death
herself tapping on my shoulder as the strange matter moved through me…but whatever
happened here, I was to determined to know the truth at last. "You were on the run, weren’t
you? Being chased across the dimensions by something that scared you. So what did you
do, that you had to download yourself into this small, primitive dimension?"
"I was just having a little fun," said the Heart. Its voice had changed subtly. It still sounded
warm and friendly and ingratiating, but underneath it sounded like it enjoyed pulling the
wings off flies, or stamping on butterflies, just because it could. "I like to play. And if
sometimes I play a little too roughly and break my toys, well…there are always more toys."
"Toys?" I said. "Is that all we are to you?"
"What else could you be? Such limited, short-lived things; you flicker in and out so fast I can
hardly keep track of you. I have lived for millennia!"
"And you can’t think of anything better to do than play with toys?" said Molly.
"To be loved and worshipped and obeyed without question," said the Heart happily. "What
could be more important than that?"
"And if your toys ever dare to rebel?" I said.
"Then I crush them," said the Heart. "Toys must know their place. That’s why I allowed you in
here, Eddie. I made you what you are. I gave you the gift of my golden collar, and you wore it
for years like the good little doggie you are. But it’s still my collar."
The torc around my neck burned icy cold as the golden living metal swept over and around
me in a moment, even though I hadn’t called it. The armour enclosed me like a prison cell,
insulating me from the world and holding me helpless within. I said the activating Words

again and again, but nothing happened. I strained my arms and legs against the encasing
metal, but the armour held me still. I wasn’t in control anymore. The Heart was. I was just a
gleaming golden puppet now, with a man trapped inside it.
"Kill the woman," the Heart said happily, greedily, and the armour moved to obey, advancing
on Molly despite everything I could do to stop it.
Molly called out to me as the armour closed in on her, but she couldn’t hear my answer. And
since the Heart took up most of the space in the Sanctity, there wasn’t really anywhere for
her to go. She backed away around the perimeter of the great chamber, trying to keep a
safe distance between her and the advancing armour. There were two exits out of the
Sanctity, but she had to know the armour would be upon her before she could even open a
door. I was screaming the activating Words now, and screaming at Molly to get away, but
none of it got past the featureless golden mask that covered my face.
Molly realised she couldn’t reach me and stood her ground. Her face became calm and
coldly resolved. She conjured up a roaring storm wind that came howling in out of nowhere,
sweeping the air before it like a battering ram. It tried to pick me up and blow me away, but
my armour grew heavy spikes out of the bottom of its golden feet and anchored itself to the
wooden floor. The wind battered harmlessly against my golden exterior, failed to find any
purchase, and dropped away to nothing. The armour took a step forward.
Molly conjured up handfuls of hellfire and threw them at me. Flames from the deepest part of
the Pit, designed to sear both body and soul, and still they couldn’t touch me through the
golden armour. The flames scoured and blackened the floor around me, and the air
shimmered in a vicious heat haze, but I felt nothing. The armour took a step forward.
Monsters appeared out of nowhere to block my path. Huge, awful creatures, with armoured
hides and lashing barbed tentacles and wide snapping mouths full of razor teeth. But the
armour walked right through the illusions to get to Molly. She backed away, dismissing the
illusions with a wave of her hand, and conjured up a bottomless pit between her and me. The
effort brought beads of sweat to her face. The armour leaped easily over the gap to stand
before her, propelled by the unnatural strength of its armoured legs. Molly called up a
shimmering screen of pure magic to stand between her and me. It snapped and crackled on
the air, supported by her iron will. The armour placed a single golden hand against the
screen and pushed slowly, remorselessly, with all the armour’s boundless strength behind it.
Until the screen shattered and broke and disappeared, and Molly fell back, crying out in
shock and pain. Because in the end Molly was human, and the armour wasn’t.
Molly was clearly exhausted now, all her inner resources drained. She stumbled backwards,
away from me, clinging to the wall for support, and the armour went after her. Its deadly
golden hands stretched out towards her, and there wasn’t a damned thing I could do to stop
it.
"Eddie," said Molly, in a voice trying hard to be calm and steady, "I hope you can hear me in
there. I know this…isn’t you. I’ve done all I can. It’s up to you to stop the armour now. But if
you can’t…I want you to know I understand. I understand it won’t be you, doing it. So don’t
blame yourself. Just…find a way to make the Heart pay. Good-bye, Eddie. My one true
love."
I couldn’t even answer her.
I’d exhausted all my strength, fighting helplessly inside the armour. Setting my human
strength against its inhuman power. I couldn’t move any part of me except as the armour

moved me. It was like having my hand disobey me, pick up a weapon, and commit murder,
while I could only watch and scream helplessly at it to stop. It didn’t help that so much stress
had weakened my defences, and the strange matter had flooded into all of my body now. I
could feel it pulsing within me. The pain was sickening, and I was so weak I would probably
have fallen if the armour hadn’t been holding me up. I was so tired. I’d fought for so long,
refusing to give in, and all for nothing.
And then a little voice at the back of my head said, Then stop fighting, you idiot. The voice
didn’t sound anything like mine. It didn’t sound like the Heart’s, either. So I took a gamble
and stopped fighting.
I let the weakness flood through me, taking all the strength from my arms and legs. I stopped
resisting and let the strange matter do what it would. I gave up…and the armour lurched to a
sudden halt. Its golden hands stopped a few inches short of Molly’s throat, and then slowly
and ponderously the armour sank to its knees before her. Because the torc was linked to
me, body and soul, and even the Heart couldn’t break that link. The armour is only ever as
strong as the man within, and this man…had nothing left. The golden living metal rippled
over my skin, struggling to obey the Heart’s orders, but it was overridden by my stubborn
weakness, backed by the strange matter’s presence in my body. A small amount of control
came back to me, and I slowly forced the golden metal away from my face so Molly could
see and hear me. She crouched down before me, and I think she could see death in my
face. She started to cry.
"Sorry, Molly," I said. "But this is as far as I go. We always knew I probably wouldn’t get to
see the end of the story…The strange matter’s all through me now. Only one thing left you
can do for me now. Quickly, before the Heart finds a way to force control of the armour away
from me, take Torc Cutter and cut the torc around my neck. That destroys the armour. It won’
t be able to hurt you. Then take Oath Breaker and smash that smug talking diamond into a
million pieces."
"I can’t do that, Eddie! It’ll kill you!"
"I’m dying anyway! Do it, Molly. Please. Protect yourself. At least this way…my death will
have some meaning. Some purpose."
"Eddie…"
"If you love me, kill me. Because I’d rather die than see you hurt."
"I wish things could have been different."
"Me too. Good-bye, Molly. My one true love."
I lowered my golden head, showing her my neck. Already my movements were getting stiff
as the Heart fought to regain control. Molly produced the ugly black shears and set them
against the side of my golden neck. Somewhere in the background, the Heart was shouting
orders, but neither of us was listening. Molly forced the shears together, and the black
blades cut through my torc. My golden armour disappeared in a moment, and the two halves
of my golden collar fell to the floor.
And I laughed out loud as new strength flooded through me.
I rose to my feet, still laughing, and lifted Molly up with me as she stared blankly into my face.
She started to laugh herself from sheer relief. I took her in my arms and held her close, and
she held me, and I felt strong and well and at peace at last. Molly and I clung on to each other

for what seemed like forever, and it felt good, so good to be alive. Finally we let go and
stood back and looked into each other’s faces.
"Eddie, you’re alive…"
"I know! Isn’t it great?"
"How…Eddie, there’s a collar around your throat. And it’s silver."
"I know," I said. "It’s the strange matter. Apparently there’s been something of a
misunderstanding…"
"To put it mildly," said a new voice. "I was beginning to think I’d never get through to you in
time."
The new voice was large and powerful and very sane, and it thundered through the Sanctity.
It emanated from me, but it wasn’t me speaking. The Heart cried out in rage and despair,
but it sounded like a very small thing compared to the new voice. The strange matter,
speaking through me.
"Time for the truth at last," it said. "Know now the true history of that foul and evil creature you
know as the Heart. Criminal. Sinner. Thief. Coward. Murderer. It came here because it was
running scared. Because it knew I was close behind it, coming to capture it and take it back
to where it came from, for judgement and punishment. For all the awful things it has done in
so many dimensions. The Heart has been on the run for millennia, passing through
dimension after dimension and preying on whatever it found there.
"I am the shaman of my tribe, much like your Druid ancestors. We protect the innocent and
punish the guilty, and we never give up.
"I’d almost lost track of the Heart. The trail had gone cold, and I had searched so many
places. And then a small opening appeared between the dimensions. It was like nothing I’d
ever seen before: vague and unfocused, quite primitive really. It was the Blue Fairy using his
gift at random to go fishing and see what he might find. Intrigued, I allowed him to catch just
a small piece of myself and take it through into his primitive backwater dimension. And there
was the Heart! Hidden away, in the back of beyond where no one would think to look. I could
sense its presence, but its exact location was hidden from me. So I manipulated the Blue
Fairy into passing the small piece of me onto the most powerful group in this dimension, the
Drood family. And sure enough, once I was brought here, I was able to locate the Heart.
Unfortunately, there wasn’t enough of me to break through the defences your family had put
in place around the Heart.
"So I waited. And soon enough the Blue Fairy went fishing again, and I allowed him to catch
more of me. And then I manipulated him, and the Drood traitors, and finally the elf lord, all so
that he would fire an arrow of me into you, Eddie. So that you could bring me here, into the
presence of the Heart. Inside all its protections. I never meant to cause you such pain,
Eddie. All the suffering and weakness were caused by my strange matter clashing with the
Heart’s collar. What you might call a short circuit. The human body was never meant to
contain such diametrically opposed other-dimensional materials."
"Why didn’t I die when Molly cut the torc from me?" I said.
"Droods only die when separated from their torcs because that’s what the Heart wanted,"
said the voice. "It couldn’t risk any of its toys getting loose. But that’s all over now. The Heart
can’t hurt you anymore, Eddie. Not while I’m here to protect you. And it won’t be able to hurt

your family anymore, once it’s been destroyed. And though I’ve chased the Heart for so very
long…I think it’s your privilege to put an end to the Heart, Eddie. If you want it."
"I want it," I said, and I drew Oath Breaker from my belt and turned to face the Heart.
"You can’t do this!" it screamed. "I made you what you are! I made your family powerful! I put
you in charge of this stupid little world! You don’t dare hurt me! I’m your god!"
"Bad god," I said.
I raised Oath Breaker over my head and brought it smashing down on the huge diamond.
The ancient weapon took on its simple brutal aspect and undid all the forces that bound the
other-dimensional being together. The Heart screamed shrilly, its light flaring in great
staccato pulses, and then the massive diamond exploded soundlessly. It shattered into
millions of lifeless fragments, falling to the floor like sand until nothing was left of the Heart.
There hadn’t been much to it, after all. The Heart was hollow all along.
And with the Heart finally destroyed, all the souls that had been trapped within it for so long
were finally set free. They manifested briefly on the still air of the Sanctity, one after another,
flashing on and off, countless shimmering forms exploding like so many soundless fireworks
in one last display of joy at their freedom before finally passing on to whatever comes next.
Molly cried out in delight, clapping her hands together.
And at the very end, one small soul came to me. My twin. My brother. He hung on the air
before me, just a baby, only a few days old, and then he expanded suddenly into adult form,
my size, my age. He looked…like the face I see in the mirror every day, only without all the
lines driven into it by pain, and loss, and duty. My brother considered me for a long moment,
and then he smiled at me, and winked, and was gone.
And that was that.
Epilogue
W ith the Heart gone, the Sanctity didn’t feel like the Sanctity anymore. It felt like the quiet
after the explosion, the calm after the storm, the incredible peace of waking up and knowing
that the nightmare is finally over. The Sanctity was just an empty room now, wide and
echoing, with a layer of sand on the floor. The dragon was dead, but I didn’t feel like a
dragonslayer.
"How do you feel, Eddie?" said Molly.
"Pretty good," I said. "The pain is gone, the weakness is gone, and I’m back to normal
again."
"No, Eddie," she said gently. "How do you feel?"
"I don’t know," I said. "Numb. Lost…I used to know what I was, what my life was all about.
Then that was taken away from me. I used to have a family, and that’s gone too. All gone…"
"You still have me," said Molly.
"Do I?"
She put her hands on my shoulders, pulled me in close, and kissed me. "Try to get rid of me,
idiot."

"So," I said after a while. "The Heart’s dead. What do we do now?"
"You mean for an encore?" said Molly. "Haven’t you done enough?"
The door behind us swung open, and we both spun around, ready to defend ourselves, but it
was just the Armourer and the ghost of old Jacob. Molly and I relaxed a little as they came
over to join us. The Armourer’s face was still half buried under dried blood, but he looked a
lot steadier on his feet. Jacob had resumed his grumpy old ghost form, with garish Hawaiian
shorts and a grubby T-shirt bearing the legend Dead Men Don’t Eat Quiche.
"Eddie, my boy," said the Armourer. "Are you okay? We heard all kinds of noises from in
here, but we couldn’t get in till now. Not even Casper the Unfriendly Ghost here. And what
the hell happened to the Heart?"
"Look down," I said. "You’re standing in what’s left of it."
He looked down, winced, and then shook his head. "So that’s what Oath Breaker does. I
always wondered."
"Here," I said, handing the ironwood staff back to him. "The sooner this is back in the
Armageddon Codex, the safer we’ll all be. Molly, give him Torc Cutter."
"Oh poo," said Molly, pouting. "I was hoping to keep it as a souvenir."
The Armourer gave her one of his hard looks, and she handed the shears over without
another word.
"So," I said, "that’s it, at last. All over. Someone lead me to a comfortable chair and place a
nice cup of tea in my hand. It’s been a busy few days…but at least it’s finished now."
"You have got to be joking," the Armourer said sternly. "After all the damage you’ve done
here, you think you can just sit back and take it easy? You’ve done more in one evening to
bring the Drood family to its knees than centuries of enemy action. It’s up to you to save the
family, Eddie. I didn’t bring you up to leave a job half done. You brought the family down; only
you can raise it up again."
"To hell with that!" Molly said sharply. "This is what I lived for: to see the high and mighty
Droods humbled and forced to their knees, made to live down here in the dirt with the rest of
us. Don’t listen to him, Eddie. You’ve taken the Droods’ foot off the neck of everyone in the
world. We’re free at last!"
"Free?" I said, reluctantly. "No, Molly. It’s not that simple, and it never was. Truman’s
Manifest Destiny is still out there, remember? Free from Drood influence and control and still
determined to wipe out everything that doesn’t fit their narrow definition of normal and
human. Who’s going to stop them, if not the family? And then there are all the other dark
forces only kept in check by fear of what the family would do if they ever got out of hand.
There has to be another power in place to stop the forces of darkness from overrunning the
world. But if there has to be a Drood family, it’s going to be a new kind of family."
"Now you’re talking," said Jacob. "Always knew you were destined for great things, Eddie.
Even if I couldn’t remember why."
I considered him thoughtfully. "You just remembered you were only hanging about here in
order to help me destroy the Heart…So, and don’t take this the wrong way, but…why are
you still here?"

He gave me his usual shifty grin and shrugged vaguely. Little bubbles of blue-gray
ectoplasm jumped up from his shoulders before slowly settling back into him again. "Guess I
’ve just got used to hanging around here. And besides, I really am curious to see what’s
going to happen next. I haven’t had so much fun since the Great Gender Swap of 1741. We
never did find out who was behind that…"
"I don’t see Alexandra or Matthew," I said carefully. "What have you done with them, Jacob?"
He met my gaze easily, and just for a moment something of his old terrifying self surfaced in
his gaze. "They won’t be coming back. Ever."
"Don’t ask," the Armourer said stiffly. "Trust me, you really don’t want to know."
"Poor Alex," I said, and I meant it.
"Just what was this Alex person to you, anyway?" said Molly.
"It was more…what she might have been," I said. "If things had gone differently."
"Oh…" said Molly. "Yeah. I’ve had lots of relationships like that."
I looked at her for a moment. "I won’t ask," I said finally.
"Best not to," she agreed.
And then, finally, I looked at the Armourer, my uncle Jack, and said the one thing I’d been
putting off, the one thing I knew I’d have to say the moment I saw him coming through the
door. "I’m sorry, Uncle Jack. I’m really sorry, but…Uncle James is dead."
"I know," said the Armourer. "You couldn’t have done anything else, Eddie. James wouldn’t
have given you any other choice. For him, the family always came first. And he never could
say no to Mother."
"He was supposed to kill me on the motorway," I said. "But he let me go. Gave me a
chance…made all this possible."
"Good for him," said the Armourer. "Maybe he was growing up, at last. So, the Gray Fox is
dead…Good bartenders and bad women will be weeping bitter tears in bars all around the
world once word gets out."
There was no point in telling him that Molly had actually killed my uncle James. The family
was going to have enough problems accepting her as it was.
Jacob fixed me with a firm look. "You have to address the family, Eddie. Here, now! Explain
to them what’s been going on. They need to know the truth. I’ll summon them here, and you
can tell them what needs to be done to put the family back together again."
"What?" I said. "I don’t know what to tell them!"
"You’ll think of something," said the Armourer. "You have to take charge, Eddie. Push
change through before the old guard take control again."
"Wait just a minute!" I said quickly. "I never even wanted to be a regular part of the family, let
alone tell them how to run things! I ran away from this family the first chance I got,
remember?"
"Well, you can’t run away this time," said the Armourer. "Not after all the trouble you’ve

caused. You’ve smashed our defences, wrecked the Hall, demoralised the family fighters,
destroyed the Heart, and taken away everyone’s torcs! You have a duty to undo the damage
you’ve done."
"But—" I said.
"Only you can tell them the truth," said Jacob.
"It’s what your uncle James would have wanted," the Armourer said solemnly.
I glared at him. "I never knew you were so proficient at emotional blackmail."
He grinned. "Runs in the family."
And then we all winced and shuddered as Jacob took on his deathly aspect again. His
spectral presence filled the chamber, cold and distant and only remotely human, powerful
beyond imagination now that he was no longer bound by life’s limitations. His voice spread
out through all of the Hall, ordering every member of the family to attend the Sanctity. Right
now, no omissions, no excuses. I caught only the edges of the ghostly summons, and that
was still enough to make me sway on my feet. The sheer power in Jacob’s voice was like
nothing in this world. No one in the family would dare disobey.
And soon enough they came streaming through the great double doors and into the huge
empty chamber of the Sanctity in ones and twos, and then in groups, and finally in crowds
until there was a steady flow of bewildered Droods pressing in through the two doorways.
Many of them were still wide-eyed with shock from the sudden loss of their torcs. For the first
time in their lives they felt utterly defenceless and vulnerable, and they were desperate for
answers and reassurances. They came in gabbling and shouting, only to subside instantly
into murmurs and mutterings once they saw who was waiting for them. The family rogue, the
family ghost, the bloodied Armourer, and the infamous Molly Metcalf. Whatever answers
were coming, they clearly weren’t going to be very reassuring. Still they kept streaming into
the Sanctity, house Droods and security Droods, researchers and planners and house staff,
and every other member of the family. Right down to some extremely wide-eyed children,
the smallest carried in their parents’ arms. The Sanctity filled up from wall to wall with
Droods pressed shoulder to shoulder, while more peered in through the doorways.
"Make a start," the Armourer said to me. "Before people start getting crushed in the pack."
I looked at Molly, and she conjured up an invisible platform for the four of us to stand on, and
then raised it several feet into the air, so everyone could see and hear me.
"It helps that they have to look up to us," she muttered in my ear.
"Gives us the psychological edge. Now go on; promise them bread and circuses, or
something."
"Speaking of edges," said the Armourer just a little testily. "Could you perhaps put a little
colour into the edges of this damned platform so some of us can see where the bloody
things are? It’s a long way to fall, and some of us are feeling a bit fragile just at the moment."
The edges of the platform glared suddenly silver. They were a lot closer than I’d realised.
The chamber was now packed to bursting, with more faces peering in through the open
doors. The muttering kept threatening to break out into something more, but didn’t, because
any time someone started to raise their voice they found Jacob glaring at them, and then
they got all tongue-tied and went right off the idea. The crowd went completely silent as the

Matriarch finally arrived, pushing her way through the crowd. Everyone made as much room
for her as they could to let her pass. She reached the front of the crowd and glared up at me
on my platform. Instead of Alistair at her side stood the Sarjeant-at-Arms. His face was
bruised and swollen, but his gaze was as cold and direct as ever. I nodded to the Matriarch.
"Hello, Grandmother. How’s Alistair?"
"Alive. Barely. He’s in the infirmary. They’re trying to save his face."
"He surprised me," I said, aware everyone in the Sanctity was hanging on our every word.
"He was a good man, and true, at the end."
"I’ve always known that," said the Matriarch. "He served the family. Not like you. What have
you done to us, Edwin? Where are our torcs? Where is the Heart?"
"That’s what you’re all here for," I said. "To hear the truth at last." I looked out over the crowd,
at all the confused, frightened, desperate faces. "You’re here to learn the truth about
everything that’s happened. Everything that’s been hidden from you down all the centuries of
this family’s existence. The secrets only a Drood can tell you."
"We know you," said a female voice from deep in the crowd. "But what’s the infamous Molly
Metcalf doing up there with you?"
There was a general murmur of agreement, quickly cut off as Molly snapped her fingers and
the woman in the crowd squeaked loudly as all her clothes suddenly disappeared. Molly
smiled sweetly upon the crowd.
"Any more questions? I just love answering questions from the crowd."
And while the crowd was quiet, I told them everything.
I explained to them what the Heart really was and the true nature of the bargain that had
given us all our torcs. There were shocked cries and gasps, but no one challenged me. I told
them how the bargain had to be confirmed by every new Matriarch, and every eye in the
chamber went to Martha Drood. She ignored them all, glaring coldly up at me. I explained
how I’d destroyed the Heart, and why they hadn’t all died when their torcs disappeared. And
then I told them the final awful secret of the Droods, known only to the inner circle. That we
were not the secret defenders of humanity, but their secret rulers.
I think there would have been a riot then, as various factions in the family shouted and
pushed at each other, but Jacob rose suddenly up into the air and took on his spectral
aspect again. The temperature in the Sanctity plummeted, and we all shuddered, and not
just from the cold. Death was in the chamber and looking right at us. Jacob glared about him
with no longer human eyes, and everyone went very quiet and very still, not wanting to draw
his attention. Jacob sank slowly back onto the platform and resumed his usual form.
From the silence, one voice rose. The Matriarch cursed me, naming me traitor to the family,
calling me a fool and a liar and an enemy of everything the Droods stood for. She said I was
no grandson of hers and called on every Drood present to rise up and drag me down and kill
me. Her voice rose and rose, shrill with fury and hysteria, spittle flying from her mouth, until
suddenly the Sarjeant-at-Arms dropped a hand on her shoulder and gave her a good shake.
Her voice cut off abruptly, and she looked at him, shocked. The Sarjeant let go of her and
turned his back on her to address the crowd.
"You all know me," he said, and his familiar harsh voice held everyone’s attention. "You all
know what I stand for. And I tell you, Edwin has earned the right to be heard. He’s the truest

son this family ever had. Go on, boy. Tell them what they need to know."
"Thanks," I said. "I still hate your guts, mind."
"Goes with the job," he said, entirely unconcerned. "Get on with it."
So I told them the rest: how I’d been falsely outlawed by the Zero Tolerance faction who were
secretly running Manifest Destiny. That really put the cat among the pigeons. They all knew
about Truman and what his people stood for.
"We’ve been lied to," I said finally, tiredly. "We’re not who we thought we were. We aren’t the
good guys, and haven’t been for centuries. But we can be; we can be what we were meant
to be. If you’re prepared to fight for it."
The men and women before me didn’t look much like fighters at the moment. Most of them
looked pretty shell-shocked, as though someone had just punched them all in the gut, after
hearing so many unpleasant and unsuspected truths one after the other. They looked at
each other uncertainly, and then back at me, until finally a voice at the back of the crowd
said:
"What do you want us to do?"
"I want us to do what we were born to do! I want us to be what we were always supposed to
be: shamans to the tribe, protecting people from all the evil forces that threaten them! Only
now the tribe is humanity, and we have to be warriors of the world, fighting the good fight; not
for ourselves, but just because it’s the right thing to do! We have to earn the right to be proud
to be Droods again!"
"But…how can we fight, without our torcs?" said another voice.
I smiled and let one hand rise to the silver torc at my throat. "The Heart is gone, but
fortunately I’ve found a new sponsor for the family." And I subvocalised, Show them, strange
matter.
The new armour flowed over me in a moment, encasing me completely in shining silver. The
crowd cried out; some even applauded. A great voice spoke to them then, the strange
matter addressing the family through me, its voice full of peace and calm and good
fellowship:
"Long and long have I pursued the creature you knew as the Heart, across all the many
dimensions, to punish it for all its terrible crimes. Now it is gone, I will stay here to help undo
the evil it did. I will be your new protector, and there shall be torcs for all."
"How long do you plan on sticking around?" said a practical voice.
"Until I’ve taught you all how to be strong without armour," said the voice. "You have no idea
of your true potential."
There was a lot more murmuring in the crowd about that.
"But what price do we have to pay for this new armour?" said another voice in the crowd.
"The Heart wanted our children. Our unknown brothers and sisters. What do you want?"
"Just to help," said the voice. "That’s my job. And you’ve already paid me, by destroying the
Heart. You have no idea how long I’ve spent chasing that damned thing. I’m just glad it’s
finally over…I’m entitled to some leave, so I think I’ll spend it here. Just for a few millennia.

Fascinating dimension, fascinating people. You’re really going to have to tell me more about
this sex thing you do…"
"Later," I said quickly, subvocalising. "You know, I can’t keep calling you ‘strange matter.’
Don’t you have a name I can use?"
How about Ethel? said the voice in my head. That’s a good name.
"We’ll discuss that later, too," I said. "Now get this armour off me, please."
Oh sure.
The silver armour disappeared back into my torc, and I looked out over the family again.
"Follow me, and you’ll all have armour again. And we will all be…what the family was
supposed to be, before we lost our way."
"Under your leadership?" the Matriarch said loudly, her voice harsh and unforgiving.
"Not if I have anything to say about it," I said. "Never wanted that. Too much like hard work."
There were a few chuckles from the crowd.
"No; we’ve had enough leaders. They can’t be trusted. You all agreed to the Heart’s bargain,
Grandmother; generations of Matriarchs agreeing to the slaughter of generations of
children."
"We had no choice!" she said fiercely. "We had to be strong, to fight the forces of
darkness!"
"You always had a choice," I said. "We never did. We never agreed to the sacrifice of our
brothers and sisters, Grandmother."
And there must have been something in my voice, because she looked away and did not
answer.
"I suggest an elected council," I said to the crowd. "You can sort out the rules. Except that all
current members of the council must be banned. They were part of the conspiracy. Part of
the lies. I’ll see things through the transition, and then…I’m out of here. Back to being a field
agent again. That’s where I belong."
"If you’re planning to run out on the family, why should we listen to you?" said a female voice
in the crowd, only to duck her head down again as Molly looked at her thoughtfully.
"I’m not leaving the family," I said firmly. "Just going back to doing what I do best. Kicking the
bad guys’ arses, and making them cry like a baby. Manifest Destiny’s still out there and all
the other monsters who’d attack us in a minute if they thought we were weak."
"We are weak!" said the Matriarch. "You’ve shown them our defences can be broken!"
"We became weak under you, because you allowed the family to split into factions," I said,
and once again she looked away. "We have to be strong, united. Shepherds to the flock, not
wolves. Hell, if fighting evil was easy, everyone would be doing it. But don’t worry,
Grandmother; from now on there will be no more fanatics. Just men and women of good will,
fighting the good fight. And anyone who can’t or won’t go along with that can hit the road.
Without torcs."
The Armourer stepped forward. "This is Edwin Drood. He took on the whole family and won.

Who better to lead us? To make us strong again? To make us what we were always
supposed to be? I am the Armourer, and he has my support."
"And mine," said the ghost of old Jacob.
"And mine," said the Sarjeant-at-Arms.
The crowd looked at the Matriarch. She looked slowly around her, taking in what she saw in
their faces, and finally her proud shoulders slumped, and she turned away.
"I’m tired," she said. "And Alistair needs me. Do what you want. You will anyway."
She turned her back on me and walked away through the crowd, pushing out blindly with her
hands, and again the people opened up to let her pass. No one said anything; no one
jeered. She was the Matriarch, after all. And even after all that had happened, after all she’d
done, to me and so many others, it still hurt me to see her humbled and broken. She was my
grandmother, and she always gave me the best toys at Christmas when I was little, and
nursed me when I was sick.
"Edwin leads us now!" said the Armourer, grabbing my hand and holding it over my head
like a prizefighter. "The greatest field agent of all time! The truest, bravest son this family
ever had! Edwin! Edwin!"
The crowd took up the chant, yelling my name, working themselves into a frenzy as the great
chamber filled with the sound of the family cheering me, over and over. I found it just a bit
scary. I’d never wanted to lead the family, but it seemed I wasn’t being given any choice. So I
’d stick around for a while. Do what I could. And run away again, first chance I got. I eased
my arm out of the Armourer’s grasp, turned to Molly, and grinned at her.
"It’s been a crazy few days, hasn’t it?" I said. I had to raise my voice to be heard over the din
of the crowd. "Who would have thought we’d end up here, eh?"
"I’m glad for you, Eddie. But where do I fit into all this?"
"Wherever you want. The family is going to have to reach out to many of those who were
once our enemies. I’ve seen for myself that the distance between us and the bad guys isn’t
as clear and distinct as I was brought up to believe. We have to learn to work together
against the real threats. Like Manifest Destiny. And who better than you to be our
emissary?"
She smiled. "That the only reason you want me to stick around?"
"No," I said. "I need you here because…I need you."
"So," she said. "We are having a relationship, after all?"
"Looks that way," I said.
And that’s how I ended up running the family business. It’s a strange old world sometimes.
Shaman Bond will return
in
DAEMONS ARE FOREVER
Coming from Roc in June 2008

