
Guidelines for Failure Mode and 
Effects Analysis for Automotive, 
Aerospace and General 
Manufacturing Industries 
IMPORTANT! CAREFULLY READ THE FOLLOWING DISCLAIMER BEFORE 
READING OR OTHERWISE USING THESE GUIDELINES. BY USING THESE 
GUIDELINES, YOU, AS THE END USER, ACKNOWLEDGE THAT YOU HAVE 
READ THIS DISCALIMER, UNDERSTAND AND ACCEPT ALL THE TERMS AND 
CONDITIONS AND THAT YOU INTEND TO BE LEGALLY BOUND BY THEM. IF 
YOU DO NOT AGREE WITH THE TERMS OF THIS DISCLAIMER, DO NOT READ 
OR OTHERWISE USE THESE GUIDELINES AND RETURN IT WITH TO THE 
PLACE OF PURCHASE WITHIN 15 DAYS OF DELIVERY FOR A FULL REFUND. 
DISCLAIMER 
The information and material here within has been prepared in part by Dyadem 
Engineering Corporation (hitherto known as “DEC”) for the Dyadem Press (hitherto 
known as “DP”) and CRC Press is intended, in good faith, to assist you with 
identification of hazards and risk issues throughout a product’s life cycle as a part of the 
quality system. It remains your responsibility to determine its application, specific 
suitability and the manner in which such intended applications should be executed. It is 
furthermore assumed that you or your appointed personnel or appointed representatives 
shall be appropriately qualified for its interpretation and applicability. These guidelines 
are solely to assist you in the methodologies and techniques here within presented and are 
not to be relied upon or intended as a substitute for your own specific decision making 
requirements, your own specific hazards and risk analyses requirements, including, but 
not limited to, such techniques as, Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), Design 
FMEA, Process FMEA, Service FMEA, Application FMEA, Hardware FMEA, Software 
FMEA, Failure Modes and Effects Criticality Analysis (FMECA), Hazard and 
Operability Analysis (HAZOP), and Fault Tree Analysis, and so forth, or as a substitute 
for professional advice associated with the aforementioned. These guidelines cannot and 
do not replace a qualified engineering analysis, other professional analysis and advice in 
the field of hazards identification, risk assessment, risk reduction, the management of 
risk, Risk Management Planning (RMP), Advanced Quality Planning (AQP), Product 
Quality Control Plans, Dynamic Control Plans, and so forth either in general or in part. It 
is incumbent upon you to perform your own assessment and analysis and to obtain 
professional advice. While every attempt has been made to present the material as 
accurately as possible, it does not preclude the possibility of error, either factual, 
typographical, contextual, interpretative, nor of you nor your personnel nor 
representatives making interpretation(s) unintended by DEC, CRC Press or DP. 

Furthermore, you are reminded that these guidelines are not intended to replace analyses 
performed by qualified professional personnel. The entire risk as to the data or 
information supplied, use, calculations, performance results and/or consequences of these 
guidelines and risk analysis is with you. You assume full responsibility for compliance 
with rules, regulations and statutes, and for environmental, quality control, quality 
assurance liability, statutory or otherwise, risks, and risk assessments. You acknowledge 
and understand that no regulatory body or association endorses or otherwise approves 
these guidelines. 
The examples presented as part of these guidelines do not contain information about 
any specific known plant, process, company or individual. In addition, these guidelines 
do not reflect the policies of any known specific company. The subject matter is 
considered to be pertinent at the time of publication. However, it does not preclude the 
possibility of partial or total invalidation that may result from later legislation, 
methodologies, standards and so forth. 
In particular, in relation to the subject matter contained within, you are reminded that 
attempts to predict and guard against potential hazards can never be guaranteed, since 
risk can never be totally eliminated, however diligent the efforts may be. Neither DEC, 
DP nor Dyadem International Ltd. (hitherto known as “DIL”) shall be held liable for 
special or consequential damages arising directly or indirectly from the use or misuse of 
the information and material here within contained or referenced. In no event will DEC, 
DP, CRC Press DIL, the distributors or agents be liable for any damages, howsoever 
caused, including but not limited to, any lost profits or revenue, loss of market share, lost 
savings, loss of use or lack of availability or corruption of facilities including without 
limitation computer resources, information and stored data, indirect, special, incidental, 
punitive, exemplary, aggravated, economic or consequential damages, adverse outcomes, 
personal injury or death, contribution or indemnity, arising out of the use, or inability to 
use these guidelines, or for claim by any other party, even if DEC, DP, CRC Press, DIL 
or any of its lawful agents, distributors or employees have been advised of the possibility 
of such damages or claim. In no case will DEC, DP, CRC Press, DIL distributors or 
agents be liable in total, whether in contract, tort or otherwise and your exclusive remedy 
shall be regardless of the number of claims, for no more than the amount paid by you for 
these guidelines. Some jurisdictions do not allow the exclusion or limitation of implied 
warranties or limitation of liability for incidental or consequential damages, so the above 
limitation or exclusion may not apply to you. The foregoing paragraphs on warranty 
disclaimer and limitations on liability shall survive any transfer of ownership or any form 
of reallocation. 
By using these guidelines you acknowledge and understand that any dispute that arises 
shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of Ontario and federal 
laws of Canada applicable therein and shall be treated, in all respects, as an Ontario 
contract. The Parties irrevocably submit to the non-exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of 
Ontario. The Parties hereby expressly exclude the application of the United Nations 
Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods and the Sale of Goods Act 
(Ontario) as amended, replaced or re-enacted from time to time. 

COPYRIGHT: All applicable copyright laws governing United States, Canadian and 
international copyright and intellectual property laws and treaties protect these 
guidelines. You agree that these guidelines (except for any publicly available data 
contained therein) are confidential to and rights to or embodied in this manual is owned 
by the DP. DP retains all rights not expressly granted. Copyright © 2003 Dyadem Press  

Guidelines for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis for Automotive, Aerospace and 
General Manufacturing Industries 
Copyright © 2003 by Dyadem Press 
ISBN 0849319080 
Co-Published and distributed by CRC Press 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any 
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher. 
For information, write to: 
Dyadem Press,  9050 Yonge Street, Suite 401  Richmond Hill, Ontario  Canada  L4C 
9S6 
Phone: 905–882–5055  Fax: 905–882–5057  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CRC PRESS 
Boca Raton London New York Washington, D.C. 

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 
 “To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or 
 Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to  
http://www.ebookstore.tandf.co.uk/.” 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Catalog record is available from the Library of Congress 
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reprinted 
material is quoted with permission, and  sources are indicated. A wide variety of references are 
listed. Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information,  but the author 
and the publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or for the 
consequences of their use. 
Neither this book nor any part may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, 
electronic or mechanical, including  photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or by any 
information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from  the publisher. 
The consent of CRC Press LLC does not extend to copying for general distribution, for promotion, 
for creating new works, or for resale.  Specific permission must be obtained in writing from CRC 
Press LLC for such copying. 
Direct all inquiries to CRC Press LLC 2000 N.W. Corporate Blvd., Boca Raton, Florida 33431. 
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and  explanation, without intent to infringe. 
Visit the CRC Press Web site at www.crcpress.com 
© 2003 by CRC Press LLC 
No claim to original U.S. Government works 
ISBN 0-203-00968-1 Master e-book ISBN 
International Standard Book Number 0-8493-1908-0 (Print Edition) 

About Dyadem Engineering Corporation 
 
Dyadem Engineering Corporation focuses on controlling the risks associated with major 
hazards in the automotive, aerospace, process, medical device and general manufacturing 
industries, delivering a wide spectrum of services in the fields of process design, risk 
management, incident investigation and risk study facilitation. 
We offer professional training services for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis, Process 
Hazards Analysis, Job Safety Analysis and Ergonomics. Dyadem has also become a 
respected publisher of engineering manuals. Our successful Guidelines series also 
includes Guidelines for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis for Medical Devices and the 
popular Guidelines for Process Hazards Analysis, Hazards Identification & Risk 
Analysis.  

Table of Contents 
 
  
   Glossary 
  
x 
  
CHAPTER 1   Introduction 
  
1 
CHAPTER 2   General Manufacturing, Automotive and Aerospace Quality 
System Standards 
  
4 
CHAPTER 3   Industry Specific Standards for Failure Mode & Effects 
Analysis 
  23 
CHAPTER 4   Risk Management Planning 
  30 
CHAPTER 5   Risk Analysis Methodologies 
  33 
CHAPTER 6   Overview of FMEA 
  37 
CHAPTER 7   FMEA Procedures 
  41 
CHAPTER 8   FMEA Team 
  52 
CHAPTER 9   Common Tools Used with FMEA 
  54 
CHAPTER 
10   
Pitfalls with FMEA 
  
59 
CHAPTER 
11   
Product Life Cycle & FMEA 
  
61 
CHAPTER 
12   
Product/Design FMEA 
  
67 
CHAPTER 
13   
Process FMEA 
  
73 
CHAPTER 
14   
Machinery FMEA 
  
79 
CHAPTER 
15   
Application FMEA 
  
86 

CHAPTER 
16   
Service FMEA 
  
92 
CHAPTER 
17   
Hardware and Software FMEA 
  
99 
CHAPTER 
18   
Analysis of FMEA Results 
  
102 
CHAPTER 
19   
Overview of Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis 
(FMECA) 
  
104 
CHAPTER 
20   
Post FMEA Study 
  
111 
CHAPTER 
21   
FMEA in Advanced Quality Planning/Advanced Product 
Quality Planning 
  
112 
CHAPTER 
22   
Product Quality Control Plans and Dynamic Control Plans   
118 
  
   References 
  129 

Glossary 
 
Acceptable Quality Level (AQL): For the purposes of sampling inspection, AQL is the 
maximum percent defective that can be considered satisfactory as a process average. 
Average Outgoing Quality Limit (AOQL): For a given sampling plan, it is the 
maximum average quality of outgoing product after 100% screening of rejected lots. 
Characteristics: Distinguishing features of a process or its output on which variables or 
attributes data can be collected. 
Control Plans: A description of the system for controlling parts and processes. It is 
written by suppliers to address the important characteristics and engineering 
requirements of the product. 
Cpk (process capability per thousand): An index that considers both the process spread 
and the proximity of the process spread to specifications limits. 
Design Defect: An imperfection that causes a product to inadequately protect against 
risks of injury, fail to perform intended functions safely, inadequately safeguard 
against a specific danger, create unreasonably dangerous side effects, or fail to 
minimize avoidable consequences in the event of an accident. 
Design for Manufacturability (DFM)/Design for Assembly (DFA): A simultaneous 
engineering process designed to optimize the relationship between design function, 
manufacturability, and ease of assembly. 
Design of Experiment (DOE): An experimental technique used to manipulate process 
inputs in order to better understand their effects on process outputs. 
Detection: The probability of the failure being detected before the impact of the effect is 
realized. 
Facilitator: An expert who ideally has no vested interest in the process under 
investigation, but who has the knowledge and ability to guide the project leader and 
the team through the various process improvement steps. The facilitator will work 
with the client to identify the opportunity, develop a structure for the project, and 
contract for the boundaries of the project and timing issues. He or she should be aware 
of sources for information, expert advice and practical assistance. 
Failure Mode: A symptom, condition or fashion in which hardware fails. A failure mode 
might be identified as loss of function, premature function (function without demand), 
an out-of-tolerance condition, or a simple physical characteristic such as a leak 
observed during inspection. 
Failure Modes and Effects Analysis (FMEA): A systematic, tabular method for 
evaluating and documenting the causes and effects of known types of component 
failures. 
Failure Modes, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA): A variation of FMEA that 
includes a quantitative estimate of the significance of the consequences of a failure 
mode. 

Fault Tree: A logic model that graphically portrays the combinations of failures that can 
lead to specific main failure or accident. 
Hazard: Any situation with the potential for causing damage to life, property or the 
environment. 
Human Error: Any human action (or lack thereof) that exceeds some limit of 
acceptability (i.e., an out-of-tolerance action) where the limits of human performance 
are defined by the system. Human errors include actions by designers, operators or 
managers that may contribute to or result in accidents. 
Likelihood: A measure of the expected probability or frequency of an event’s 
occurrence. 
Manufacturing Defect: An imperfection that causes a product to fail to meet the 
manufacturer’s own specifications. Manufacturing defects occur when the raw 
materials or components used in making the product contain unacceptable flaws, or 
there are assembly mistakes. 
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM): Entity holding design rights to any 
product. The OEM is not necessarily the manufacturer, designer or distributor of the 
product. 
Occurrence: The probability or frequency of the failure occurring. 
Process Capability Index (CpK): A measure of both process dispersion and its 
centering about the average. 
Quality Function Deployment (QFD): A structured method in which customer 
requirements are translated into appropriate technical requirements for each stage of 
product, development and production. 
Quality System: The organization, structure, responsibilities, procedures, processes and 
resources for implementing quality management. It is a method of maintaining 
consistent quality for producing products or providing services that consistently meet 
or exceed the customer’s implied or stated needs. 
Quantitative Risk Analysis: The systematic development of numerical estimates of the 
expected frequency and/or consequence of potential accidents associated with a 
facility or operation based on engineering evaluation and mathematical techniques. 
Repeatability: Variation in measurements obtained with one gage when used several 
times by one appraiser while measuring a characteristic on one part. 
Reproducibility: Variation in the average of the measurements made by different 
appraisers using the same gage when measuring a characteristic on one part. 
Residual Risk: Risk remaining after protective measures have been taken. 
Risk: A measure of the consequence of a hazard and the frequency with which it is likely 
to occur. 
Risk Analysis: Systematic use of available information to identify hazards and to 
estimate the risk. 
Risk Assessment: Overall process of risk analysis and risk evaluation. 
Risk Evaluation: Judgment based on the risk analysis to determine whether the risk is 
acceptable given the context and the current values of society. 
Risk Management: The systematic application of management policies, procedures and 
practices to the tasks of analyzing, assessing and controlling risk in order to protect 
employees, the general public, the environment and company assets. 

Safety: A judgment of the acceptability of risk. An activity is deemed as “safe” if its 
risks are judged to be acceptable when compared with other common daily activities. 
No activity is totally free from risk. Provided the activity is undertaken, risk can never 
be totally eliminated. However, it can usually be reduced to acceptable levels with the 
use of adequate safeguarding. 
Statistical Process Control (SPC): Use of statistical techniques to analyze a process or 
its output in order to take appropriate actions to achieve and maintain a state of 
statistical control and to improve the capability of the process. 
Value Engineering (VE): A planned, clean sheet approach to problem solving, focusing 
on specific product design and process characteristics. Value engineering is employed 
to maximize value prior to expenditures of facilities and tooling money. 

CHAPTER 1  
Introduction 
 
Product quality planning and assessment are critical to assure that a product meets the 
requirements of the customer and that it satisfies all safety and regulatory requirements. 
One of the key elements to success is to manage and reduce risk effectively throughout 
the product’s life cycle. This requires a delicate balance between risk, cost and 
performance. Risk management provides the required decision framework centered on 
understanding risks and evaluating their acceptability by weighting technical and 
economic practicability against risk/benefits. It manages the residue risk, as risk cannot 
be completely eliminated. 
To reduce risk, it is essential to identify hazards, evaluate the associated potential 
consequences and their likelihood, and then estimate the risk. A number of analysis 
techniques, including top-down and bottom-up approaches, can be used. These 
techniques include Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), Hazard and Operability 
Analysis (HAZOP) and Fault Tree Analysis (FTA). 
These Guidelines focus on FMEA and its application throughout the product’s life 
cycle. Other topics include regulatory requirements relating quality system analysis in the 
automotive, aerospace and general manufacturing industries, risk management, Failure 
Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA), Control Plans and Advanced Product 
Quality Planning.  
The following list describes the organization of the manual: 
Chapter 2—Automotive, Aerospace and General Manufacturing Quality System 
Standards 
Quality system regulations and specifications associated with the automotive, aerospace 
and general manufacturing industries are reviewed in this chapter for the purpose of 
identifying the requirements for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis and Control Plans in 
the Product Quality Cycle. The intent of this chapter is to provide the readers with a 
general overview of the regulatory requirements related to the above-mentioned 
industries in the United States and in Europe. 
Chapter 3—Industry Specific Standards for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis 
This chapter reviews the current industry-specific standards and technical specifications 
that provide guidelines for performing FMEA. 

Chapter 4—Risk Management Planning 
This chapter briefly describes the essence of risk management planning. 
Chapter 5—Risk Analysis Methodologies 
This chapter gives an overview of Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP) and Fault 
Tree Analysis (FTA), which are risk analysis techniques commonly used in the 
automotive, aerospace and general manufacturing industries as alternatives to Failure 
Mode and Effects Analysis. 
Chapter 6—Overview of FMEA 
This chapter is an introduction to Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA). It outlines 
the objectives of FMEA, reasons and benefits of performing FMEA and the limitations of 
the technique. 
Chapter 7—FMEA Procedures 
This chapter describes the basic terminology and process used in FMEA. In addition, the 
procedures for setting up, conducting and following up FMEA are described.  
Chapter 8—FMEA Team 
This chapter describes the responsibilities of FMEA team members and the 
facilitator/team leader. 
Chapter 9—Common Tools Used with FMEA 
This chapter gives an overview of tools commonly used with FMEA, including process 
flowcharts, block diagrams and Pareto charts. 
Chapter 10—Pitfalls with FMEA 
This chapter describes some major pitfalls that can arise while conducting FMEA studies. 
Chapter 11—Product Life Cycle & FMEA 
This chapter outlines the application of FMEA at various stages in a product’s life cycle. 
It also introduces the use of Control Plans as a tool to document the design and process 
characteristics required for the manufacturing of an item/component or system. 
Chapter 12—Product/Design FMEA 
This chapter describes the objectives of Product/Design FMEA (D-FMEA), 
recommended team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA 
worksheet. It also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. 
Chapter 13—Process FMEA 
This chapter describes the objectives of Process FMEA (P-FMEA), recommended team 
members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It also 
provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. 
Chapter 14—Machinery FMEA 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     2

This chapter describes the objectives of Machinery FMEA (M-FMEA), recommended 
team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It 
also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection.  
Chapter 15—Application FMEA 
This chapter describes the objectives of Application FMEA (A-FMEA), recommended 
team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It 
also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. 
Chapter 16—Service FMEA 
This chapter describes the objectives of Service FMEA (S-FMEA), recommended team 
members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It also 
provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. 
Chapter 17—Hardware and Software FMEA 
This chapter provides an overview of Hardware and Software FMEA. 
Chapter 18—Analysis of FMEA Results 
This chapter provides a brief overview of Failure Mode Ratios, Failure Equivalence 
Numbers and process variation indices. 
Chapter 19—Overview of Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis (FMECA) 
This chapter provides an overview of Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis 
(FMECA), including the terminology and the worksheets used in the analysis for both 
quantitative and qualitative approaches. 
Chapter 20—Post FMEA Study 
This chapter describes the required steps to be taken after the completion of the FMEA. 
Chapter 21—FMEA in Advanced Quality Planning/Advanced Product Quality 
Planning 
This chapter provides a brief overview of Advanced Quality Planning (AQP) and 
Advanced Product Quality Planning (APQP) and the use of FMEA in quality planning. 
Chapter 22—Product Quality Control Plans and Dynamic Control Plans 
This chapter provides an overview of Control Plans and Dynamic Control Plans and their 
elements.  
 
Introduction     3

CHAPTER 2  
General Manufacturing, Automotive and 
Aerospace Quality System Standards 
 
Quality system standards and specifications associated with the automotive, aerospace 
and general manufacturing industries are reviewed in this chapter for the purpose of 
identifying the requirements for Failure Mode and Effects Analysis and Control Plans in 
the Product Quality Cycle. This chapter provides only a brief overview of each 
document, and anyone who wants to fulfill the regulatory and industrial requirements 
should obtain a copy of the respective documents from the International Organization for 
Standardization (ISO), Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) or other publishing 
organizations in order to ensure that all documentation required for registration is 
completed. As regulations and standards are periodically updated, it is the reader’s 
responsibility to ensure the applicability of these documents.  
General Manufacturing Industry 
ISO 9000 Series 
The ISO 9000 family of international quality management standards and guidelines has 
earned a global reputation as the basis for establishing quality management systems. The 
familiar three standards—ISO 9001, ISO 9002 and ISO 9003—have been integrated into 
the new ISO 9001:2000. This new standard specifies requirements for a quality 
management system for any organization that needs to demonstrate its ability to 
consistently provide products that meet customer and applicable regulatory requirements 
and 
aims 
to 
enhance 
customer 
satisfaction. 
The 
standard 
is 
used 
for 
certification/registration and contractual purposes by organizations seeking recognition of 
their quality management system. 
The greatest value is obtained when the entire family of standards is used in an 
integrated manner. In order to achieve a first level of performance, it is suggested that 
ISO 9001:2000 be adopted, beginning with ISO 9000:2000. The practices described in 
ISO 9004:2000 may then be implemented to make the quality management system 
increasingly effective in achieving the business goals. 
ISO 9001:2000 and ISO 9004:2000 have been formatted as a consistent pair of 
standards to facilitate their use. Using the standards in this way will allow them to be 

related to other management systems (e.g. environmental) and many sector-specific 
requirements (such as ISO/TS/16949 in the automotive industry), and it will help to gain 
recognition through national awards programs.  
The following table presents all the standards listed in the ISO 9000 series:  
Table 2.1: List of standards in the ISO 9000 
series  
Standard Title 
Description 
ISO 9000:2000, Quality management 
systems—Fundamentals and vocabulary 
Establishes a starting point for understanding the 
standards and defines the fundamental terms and 
definitions used in the ISO 9000 family so you 
avoid misunderstandings in their use. 
ISO 9001:2000, Quality management 
systems—Requirements 
This is the requirement standard you use to assess 
your ability to meet customer and applicable 
regulatory requirements and thereby address 
customer satisfaction. It is now the only standard 
in the ISO 9000 family against which third-party 
certification can be carried. 
ISO 9004:2000, Quality management 
systems—Guidelines for performance 
improvements 
This guideline standard provides guidance for 
continual improvement of your quality 
management system to benefit all parties through 
sustained customer satisfaction. 
ISO 19011, Guidelines on Quality and/or 
Environmental Management Systems Auditing 
(currently under development) 
Provides you with guidelines for verifying the 
system’s ability to achieve defined quality 
objectives. You can use this standard internally or 
for auditing your suppliers. 
ISO 10005:1995, Quality management 
Guidelines for quality plans 
Provides guidelines to assist in the preparation, 
review, acceptance and revision of quality plans. 
ISO 10006:1997, Quality management 
Guidelines to quality in project management 
Guidelines to help you ensure the quality of both 
the project processes and the project products. 
Standard Title 
Description 
ISO 10007:1995, Quality management—
Guidelines for configuration management 
Gives you guidelines to ensure that a complex 
product continues to function when components 
are changed individually. 
ISO/DIS 10012, Quality assurance 
requirements for measuring equipment—Part 
1: Metrological confirmation system for 
measuring equipment 
Give you guidelines on the main features of a 
calibration system to ensure that measurements are 
made with the intended accuracy. 
ISO 10012–2:1997, Quality assurance for 
measuring equipment—Part 2: Guidelines for 
control of measurement of processes 
Provides supplementary guidance on the 
application of statistical process control when this 
is appropriate for achieving the objectives of Part 
1. 
ISO 10013:1995, Guidelines for developing
Provides guidelines for the development and
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     5

quality manuals 
maintenance of quality manuals tailored to your 
specific needs. 
ISO/TR 10014:1998, Guidelines for managing 
the economics of quality 
Provides guidance on how to achieve economic 
benefits from the application of quality 
management. 
ISO 10015:1999, Quality management 
Guidelines for training 
Provides guidance on the development, 
implementation, maintenance and improvement of 
strategies and systems for training that affects the 
quality of products. 
ISO/TS 16949:1999, Quality systems—
Automotive Suppliers—Particular 
requirements for the Application of ISO 
9001:1994 
Sector-specific guidance to the application of ISO 
9001 in the automotive industry. 
Automotive Industry 
a. Quality System Requirements—QS 9000:1998 
Quality System Requirements, QS-9000 was developed by the Chrysler/Ford/General 
Motors Supplier Quality Requirements Task Force. This system was developed to 
standardize the reporting formats, technical nomenclature and reference manuals. QS-
9000 is a harmonization of Chrysler’s Supplier Quality Assurance Manual, Ford’s Q-101 
Quality System Standard and General Motors’ NAO targets for Excellence. 
QS-9000 is structured according to ISO 9001:1994 Section 4 and includes automotive 
specific requirements to the general ISO requirements for a supplier’s quality system. 
QS-9000 applies to the following: 
Internal and external supplier sites of— 
a. Production materials; 
b. Production or service parts; 
c. Heat treating, painting, plating or other finishing services directly to OEM customers 
subscribing to QS-9000. 
Providers of— 
a. Semiconductors in conjunction with the Semiconductor Supplement issued by 
Chrysler, Ford and Delco Electronics; 
b. Tooling and equipment in conjunction with the Tooling and Equipment (TE) 
Supplement issued by the Big Three (Chrysler/Ford/General Motors). 
Proof of conformance to QS-9000 is certification/registration by an accredited third party, 
such as Underwriter’s Laboratories (UL) or the American Bureau of Shipping (ABS). 
Companies that become registered under QS-9000 will be considered to have higher 
standards and better-quality products.  
QS-9000 has the following two sections: 
Section 1: contains ISO-based Requirements (section 4 of ISO 9000:1994). 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     6

Section 2: contains customer-specific requirements (Ford, Chrysler, GM and OEM 
specific requirements). 
QS-9000 is sometimes seen as being identical to ISO 9000, but this is not true. Even 
though each element of ISO 9000 is an element of QS-9000, QS-9000 adds clauses to the 
majority of the ISO 9000 elements. For example, QS-9000 adds requirements for a 
business plan, tracking customer satisfaction and bench marking to element 4.1 of ISO 
9000, Management Responsibility. QS-9000 also uses sector-specific requirements. 
The following requirements are not based on ISO 9000: 
• Production part approval process; 
• The requirements for gaining approval from the customer to run a new or altered part or 
process; 
• Continuous improvement; 
• Automotive suppliers are required to have systems in place to ensure that organized, 
measurable improvement activities take place for a variety for business aspects; 
• Ensure sufficient manufacturing capabilities; 
• Requirements for planning and effectiveness for equipment, facilities and processes; 
• Requirements for mistake proofing and tooling management. 
Section I—ISO 9000-based requirements include the following 
elements as per ISO 9000:1994 section 4 
4.1 Management Responsibility 
• This element and its sub-elements require the company to define and document the 
objectives for quality and its commitment to quality; 
• A clear structure of responsibility and authority levels should be established to meet the 
quality requirements; 
• A management review should be conducted to ensure that the quality system 
requirements are met continuously; 
• The supplier should maintain a well-documented business plan, although this document 
is not subject to third party audit; 
• The supplier should document trends in quality, productivity, efficiency, effectiveness, 
and cost of poor quality and periodically compare with those of competitors; 
• A well-documented process should be maintained to determine customer satisfaction. 
4.2 Quality System 
• A quality system should be established and maintained to ensure the conformity of the 
product to specified requirements. Quality planning is key to the establishment of a 
good quality system. Preparation of quality plans, as per 4.2.3, include the following: 
Identification and acquisition of controls, processes, equipment, fixtures, resources 
and skills for the required quality; 
Ensuring the capability of the design, the production process, installation, servicing, 
inspection and test procedures;  
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     7

Updating of quality control, inspection and testing techniques as required; 
Identification of measurement requirements for the needed capability; 
Identification of suitable verification at appropriate stages; 
Clarification of standards of acceptability; 
Identification and preparation of quality records. 
• Advanced Product Quality Planning (APQP) should be established and implemented. 
The APQP should include these elements: 
Development/finalization of special characteristics (this could be identified from the 
dimensional, material, appearance, performance product characteristic categories); 
Feasibility reviews to ensure the capability of producing the proposed products; 
Product Safety should be considered in the design control/process control policies; 
Development and review of FMEAs: 
▪ Process FMEA should consider all special characteristics. Methods for defect 
prevention should be encouraged instead of defect detection; 
▪ Establishment of actions to reduce the potential failure modes with high risk 
priority numbers. 
Mistake-proofing methods should be established; 
Development/review of Control Plans: 
▪ Control Plans should be developed at the system, subsystem and component or 
material level; 
▪ Control Plans should be established for the Prototype, Pre-launch and 
Production phases of the product. The output of APQP is the Control Plan. 
Control Plans are reviewed and updated when any of the following happens:  
▪ Change in product;  
▪ Change in process; 
▪ Increased variance in the process (highly unstable); 
▪ Processes become non-capable; 
▪ Inspection, method, frequency, etc. is revised. 
Product Part Approval should be established as required by the Product Part 
Approval Process (PPAP) documentation released by the Automotive industry; 
Efforts should be taken/established/defined for the continuous improvement of 
product quality; 
The following techniques could be used for the continuous improvement of the 
product: 
▪ Control charts; 
▪ Design of experiments; 
▪ Theory of constraints; 
▪ Overall equipment effectiveness; 
▪ Parts-per-million analysis; 
▪ Value analysis; 
▪ Benchmarking; 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     8

▪ Analysis of motion/ergonomics; 
▪ Mistake proofing. 
Documentation should be established to ensure the effectiveness of facilities, 
equipment, tooling and process planning. 
4.3 Contract Review 
Procedures should be established and documented for the selection of suppliers, award of 
contracts, etc.  
4.4 Design Control 
This element applies to suppliers who are responsible for the design of a new product or 
who have the authority to change/modify an existing product design. 
A plan for each design and development activity should be established. 
Design Input requirements relating to the product, including applicable statutory and 
regulatory requirements, should be identified and documented. 
Design Output should be verified, validated and documented. As per the Design 
Output—Supplemental—4.4.5.1 of this document, the supplier’s design output shall be 
the result of a process that includes: 
• Efforts to simplify, optimize, innovate, and reduce waste (e.g. QFD, DFM/DFA, VE, 
DOE, Tolerance studies, response methodology, or appropriate alternatives); 
• Utilization of geometric dimensioning and tolerancing, as applicable; 
• Analysis of cost/performance/risk trade-offs; 
• Use of feedback from testing, production and field; 
• Use of design FMEAs. 
Reviews of design results should be conducted and documented at appropriate stages. 
Design changes should be documented and approved before implementation.  
4.5 Document and Data Control 
As per Document and Data Control Element 4.5.1, the Supplier shall establish and 
maintain documented procedures to control all documents and data that relate to the 
requirements of ISO 9000 including, to the extent applicable, documents of external 
origin such as standards and customer drawings. 
Examples of appropriate documents include: 
▪ Engineering drawings; 
▪ Engineering standards; 
▪ Math (CAD) data; 
▪ Inspection instructions; 
▪ Test procedures; 
▪ Work instructions; 
▪ Operation sheets; 
▪ Quality manual; 
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     9

▪ Operational procedures; 
▪ Quality assurance procedures; 
▪ Material specifications. 
Engineering Specifications—4.5.2.1 requires the supplier to establish a procedure to 
assure timely review (e.g. business “days” not weeks or months), distribution and 
implementation of all customer engineering standards/specifications and changes. 
The supplier shall maintain a record of the date on which each change is implemented 
in production. A change in the engineering specification should require updated 
Production Part Approval Process (PPAP) documents i.e. FMEAs, Control Plans, etc., 
when these specifications are referenced on the design record.  
4.6 Purchasing 
The supplier should establish and maintain documented procedures to ensure that the 
purchased product for ongoing production conforms to specified requirements, including 
Government, Safety and Environmental regulations (4.6.1.1 & 4.6.1.2). 
Requirements for the selection of contractors and subcontractors should be defined 
and documented. 
The supplier shall perform subcontractor quality system development with the goal of 
subcontractor compliance to QS-9000 using Section I of QS-9000 as their fundamental 
quality system requirement. 
Required product identification information for the purchased products and the 
verification methods should be defined and documented. 
4.7 Control of Customer Supplied Product 
Procedures for the control of verification, storage and maintenance of a customer 
supplied product should be established and documented. 
4.8 Product Identification and Traceability 
Procedures should be established to identify the product from production, delivery, 
installation and storage stages.  
4.9 Process Control 
Production, installation and servicing processes that would adversely affect the quality of 
the product should be identified, planned and carried out under the following controlled 
conditions: 
▪ Stepwise documentation for production, installation and servicing and the impact of 
these procedures on product quality; 
▪ Use of suitable equipment and working environment; 
▪ Identification and documentation of contingency plans in case of emergency; 
▪ Compliance with reference, standards/codes and quality plans; 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     10

▪ Process parameters and product characteristics, especially defined special 
characteristics, which would affect the product’s safety, compliance with government 
regulations, fit, function, appearance or quality of subsequent operations should be 
monitored; 
▪ Routine for approval of processes and equipment; 
▪ Documented criteria for workmanship; 
▪ Documentation for suitable maintenance/preventive maintenance for equipment. 
Each employee responsible for the operation and monitoring of the process should have 
documented operator instructions. The instructions can be included in any of the 
following documents: 
▪ Process sheets; 
▪ Inspection and laboratory test instructions; 
▪ Test procedures; 
▪ Standard operation sheets. 
Process control should be maintained by ensuring process capability or performance as 
approved via PPAP. When product data indicate a high degree of capability, the Control 
Plan should be revised. Process changes should be documented and maintained.  
4.10 Inspection and Testing 
Procedures for inspection and testing activities to verify that the requirements for the 
product are met should be established, documented and maintained. 
Procedures should be established to ensure that the incoming product is inspected and 
tested before it is used in the production. Procedures should be established as required by 
the quality plan i.e. Control Plans and/or other documented procedures to inspect the 
manufactured product, and the test results should be recorded and maintained. 
4.11 Control of Inspection, Measuring and Test Equipment 
Procedures should be established for the calibration, inspection and control of the test 
equipment used to demonstrate the conformance of the product to the specified 
requirements, and the records should be maintained. Appropriate Statistical Analysis 
tools should be used to evaluate the variation in the measurement analysis. 
4.12 Inspection and Test Status 
Based on the inspection and test status, the conformance/nonconformance of the product 
should be documented. This should be conducted as defined in the Quality Plan (Control 
Plan) throughout production, installation and servicing of the product to ensure that 
products that meet the conformance are released to the customer.  
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     11

4.13 Control of Nonconforming Product 
Procedures should be established and maintained for the identification, documentation, 
evaluation, segregation and disposition of products that do not conform to specified 
requirements. 
4.14 Corrective and Preventive Action 
Required procedures for corrective action implementation (as per 4.14.2): 
▪ Effective handling of customer complaints and product nonconformities reports; 
▪ Investigation and recording of the cause of nonconformitites; 
▪ Required corrective action and the application of controls to eliminate the cause of 
nonconformities. 
Required procedures for preventive action implementation (as per 4.14.3): 
▪ Appropriate sources of information (processes/operations that affect product quality, 
concessions, audit results, quality records, service reports and customer complaints) to 
detect, analyze and eliminate potential causes of nonconformities; 
▪ Identification of problems requiring preventive action; 
▪ Initiation of preventive action and application of controls. This is to ensure the 
preventive action is effective; 
▪ Information on actions taken is submitted for management review. 
4.15 Handling, Storage, Packaging, Preservation and Delivery 
Procedures should be established for the handling, storage, packaging, preservation and 
delivery of products. These procedures should include: 
▪ Methods of handling the product; 
▪ Storage conditions; 
▪ Packaging standards; 
▪ Labeling systems; 
▪ Delivery performance monitoring; 
▪ Electronic communication and shipment notification system. 
4.16 Control of Quality Records 
Procedures should be established and documented for the identification, collection, 
indexing, access, filing, storage, maintenance and disposition of quality records. 
Quality performance records—i.e., control charts, inspection and test results—should 
be retained for a minimum of one calendar year after the year in which they were created. 
Records of internal quality system audits and management review should be retained 
for a minimum of three years. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     12

4.17 Internal Quality Audits 
Procedures should be established for the implementation of quality audits to verify the 
effectiveness of the quality system.  
4.18 Training 
Procedures should be established for conducting the training of all personnel. Training 
records should be maintained and the effectiveness of the training program should be 
reviewed periodically. 
4.19 Servicing 
When servicing of the product is a requirement, procedures should be established 
defining the specifications for servicing and verifying that specified requirements are 
met. 
4.20 Statistical Techniques 
Statistical tools should be identified during product quality planning and must be 
included in the Control Plan. 
Section II—Customer-Specific Requirements 
Chrysler-Specific Requirements 
• Production and part suppliers to Chrysler should be QS-9000 registered; 
• Products should be developed based on Product Assurance Planning (PAP) method or 
APQP and Control Plan; 
• Significant characteristics should be identified and Special Characteristics should be 
identified by the symbols specified by Chrysler; 
• An annual layout inspection to ensure continuous conformance to all Chrysler 
requirements should be conducted; 
• Product Verification/Design Validation should be performed based on Chrysler’s 
specification; 
• Internal Quality Audits should be conducted at least once per year. 
The Corrective Action Plan should include the following: 
• Description of the nonconformance; 
• Definition/root cause; 
• Interim action and effective date; 
• Permanent action and effective date; 
• Verification; 
• Control; 
• Prevention; 
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     13

• Approval of appearance masters, process approval, packaging, shipping and labeling 
should be performed according to Chrysler specifications. 
Ford-Specific Requirements 
• Suppliers to Ford are not required to have third party registration, except for Ford 
Australia’s unique suppliers, who should have third party registration; 
• Control Item parts that have critical characteristics that may affect the safe operation of 
the vehicle and/or compliance with government regulations are required to have 
Control Plans and FMEAs approved by Ford’s design and quality engineers; 
• All product characteristics are required to be measured annually to demonstrate 
conformance to specified requirements; 
• Setup verification is required for all critical and significant characteristics; 
• Lot traceability and Material Analysis for heat-treated and non-heat-treated parts should 
be included in the Control Plan for control items. And those who provide heat treating 
should comply with Ford’s requirements (W-HTX, WSS-M99A3-A); 
• Process changes and design changes for supplier-responsible designs require Ford’s 
approval if specified in the design record; 
• Corrective action should be taken if engineering specification does not confirm design 
intent; 
• Ford’s Quality Operating System methodology should be implemented; 
• APQP guidelines should be used. 
GM-Specific Requirements 
QS-9000 applies to all contracted GM suppliers. GM suppliers should refer to the forms 
noted in QS-9000 to address the requirements that are applicable to them. 
Other OEM-Specific Requirements 
Suppliers to Mack Trucks Inc., Navistar International Transportation Corp., PACCAR 
Inc., Volvo Truck North America, Mitsubishi Motors—Australia and Toyota Australia 
require QS-9000 registration and additional supplier quality requirements. 
b. ISO/TS 16949:1999—Quality Systems—Automotive Suppliers—
Particular Requirements for the Application of ISO 9001:1994 
TS 16949 is a new sector-specific automotive standard for the application of ISO 
9001:1994. TS 16949 is a standard that has support from automotive groups from around 
the world. The concept is to have a single standard that all automotive suppliers can 
implement, and it is recognized in the U.S., Europe, Asia, Mexico, etc. Currently, a 
company doing business in different parts of the world with different auto manufacturers 
has to get certified to the local standard. 
This technical specification is applicable to production and service part supplier and 
subcontractor “sites” providing: 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     14

a. Parts or materials, or 
b. Heat treating, painting, plating or other finishing services, or 
c. Other customer-specified products. 
The International Automotive Task Force (IATF) has been working with the ISO 
community on updating ISO/TS 16949 to align it with ISO 9001:2000. The expectation is 
that, sometime in 2002, the new ISO/TS 16949 will be released for use by automotive 
suppliers around the world. How APQP, PPAP and the other AIAG reference manuals 
will figure into the new ISO/TS 16949 is still not clear, although Ford has just announced 
in its new Q1–2002 program that its suppliers must be registered to either QS-9000 or 
ISO/TS 16949 and to ISO 14001 (Environmental management system—specification 
with guidance for use) 
c. QS 9000 vs. ISO/TS 16949 
ISO/TS 16949 harmonizes the supplier quality requirements of the U.S. Big Three (QS-
9000, Third Edition) and French, German and Italian automakers. Of the European 
requirements, perhaps the most familiar in the United States is the German VDA 6.1, to 
which Volkswagen has required North American suppliers to its Mexican operations to 
be registered. The goal was to create a single document and a single third-party 
registration that the European automakers and the U.S. Big Three would accept. 
Each company considering registration to ISO/TS 16949 should obtain the document 
as quickly as possible, because a close reading of ISO/TS 16949 will be necessary to 
determine the extent of needed revisions. However, the following element-by-element 
summary explains the direction and extent of the changes. 
4.1—Management responsibility: 
• A number of additions to this element are clearly intended to focus suppliers’ attention 
on continuous quality improvement; 
• Suppliers must establish goals, objectives and measurements to develop their quality 
policies; 
• Continuous improvement in quality, service, cost and technology must be covered in the 
quality policy; 
• Quality-responsible personnel’s authority to stop production is no longer a “note” or 
suggestion, as in QS-9000, but a requirement; 
• All production shifts must be staffed with personnel responsible for quality;  
• The management review requirement is expanded to include the “performance (of the 
QMS) over time as an essential part of the continuous improvement process;”  
• Evaluation of the cost of poor quality was a parenthetical note in QS-9000, but is a 
specific requirement of ISO/TS 16949; 
• Suppliers must develop a process for motivating employees to achieve quality 
objectives and providing employees at all levels with “quality awareness;” 
• Customer experience with the supplier’s product must be communicated in a timely 
manner; 
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     15

• Finally, the “due care for product safety” requirement from QS-9000 has been expanded 
to minimize risks to employees, customers and the environment. 
4.2—Quality system: 
• The term “product realization” is introduced to cover the entire process of designing, 
planning and delivering products that meet customer requirements; 
• A requirement for a project manager and a project team is introduced;  
• The modifying phrase “If a project management approach is used” suggests that this 
approach is preferred, if not actually required. Continuing to expand the project 
management concept, ISO/TS 16949 requires that a method be established for 
measuring the product-realization process against appropriate mileposts, with 
appropriate analysis and management review; 
• The factors to be measured include quality, risks, costs and lead times. Process 
capability studies must be conducted on all new processes; 
• Results for the capability studies must be used to establish requirements for production 
equipment where applicable. Inclusion of all special characteristics on Control Plans, 
although always implicit, is now explicitly required; 
• ISO/TS 16949 also has a requirement for procedures on developing and verifying the 
product-realization process; 
• Detailed procedural requirements for process design inputs and outputs have been 
added, including a verification of the inputs vs. the outputs; 
• The use of the “customer-recognized product approval process” (e.g., production part 
approval process [PPAP]) is mandated rather than recommended as in QS-9000, 
although General Motors has had a customer-specific requirement for subsupplier 
PPAP for some time; 
• Additionally, when the customer so requires, special verification methods for new 
products must be implemented. 
4.3—Contract review: 
Suppliers must have a formal process for identifying cost elements and employ this 
process in the preparation of price quotations for new products.  
4.4—Design control: 
• The requirement for skill qualifications of the supplier’s design team is now a “shall” 
rather than a “should”; 
• Suppliers must have access to research and development to support product innovation. 
Analysis of competitive products is identified as one alternative source of input for the 
design process; 
• For design changes, the impact on the customer’s assembly operations is added to the 
factors that the supplier must consider for each change. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     16

4.5—Document and data control: 
There are no significant changes in this section. 
4.6—Purchasing: 
Suppliers must encourage their subsuppliers to comply with ISO/TS 16949. However, 
there’s no target date for compliance, nor is there an expectation of third-party 
registration for subsuppliers. 
4.7—Control of customer-supplied products: 
There are no significant changes in this section. 
4.8—Product identification and traceability: 
There are no significant changes in this section.  
4.9—Process control: 
• The term “process monitoring and operator instructions” has been replaced with the 
simpler “job instructions,” which “shall” rather than “should” be accessible at the job 
station without disruption; 
• These job instructions shall be derived from “appropriate sources,” including the 
Control Plan and the entire product-realization process; 
• Significant process events shall be noted on control charts. 
4.10—Inspection and testing: 
• The incoming material requirements now allow the customer to waive the required 
control methods; 
• Following the precedent of the Third Edition of QS-9000, requirements for internal 
laboratories are further strengthened. These laboratories, which include precision 
metrology and calibration as well as traditional laboratory functions, must now 
comply with ISO/IEC 17025 (General requirement for the competence of testing & 
calibration laboratories), although third-party accreditation to that document is not 
required. 
4.11—Control of inspection, measuring and test equipment: 
Methods and criteria for measurement system analysis shall conform to customer 
reference manuals (e.g., the Big Three Measurement Systems Analysis manual). 
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     17

4.12—Inspection and test status: 
There are no significant changes in this section.  
4.13—Control of nonconforming product: 
Progress on corrective action plans shall be regularly reviewed. A requirement has been 
added for customer notification when nonconforming material has been shipped. 
4.14—Corrective and preventive action: 
There are no significant changes in this section. 
4.15—Handling, storage, packaging, preservation and delivery: 
• The controls implemented for nonconforming products must also be used for obsolete 
products; 
• If delivery will not happen according to schedule, the supplier must notify the carrier as 
well as the customer of the anticipated delivery problem. 
4.16—Control of quality records: 
• The requirements for scheduling the supplier’s production process have been defined in 
greater detail; 
• There must be a scheduling process based on meeting the customers’ requirements, 
such as just-in-time; 
• The information technology must support access to production data at key production 
checkpoints. 
4.17—Internal quality auditing: 
• Internal audits must be performed on all shifts and must include all activities affected by 
ISO/TS 16949 and all relevant customer requirements. Specifically, the internal audit 
must include an evaluation of the effectiveness of the product-realization and 
production process; 
• A product audit has been included in 4.17 that includes the “final product” audit 
required in QS-9000 and expands it to include all specified requirements at 
appropriate points in the production and delivery process; 
• Internal auditors must meet customer-established criteria. 
4.18—Training: 
Additions include requirements for on-the-job training for new or modified jobs affecting 
quality and for training on customer-specific requirements. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     18

4.19—Servicing: 
If the supplier provides post-sale servicing, the effectiveness of service centers’ special 
equipment and personnel training must be re-evaluated. 
4.20—Statistical techniques: 
Appropriate statistical methods shall be determined during the planning process, and 
these methods shall be understood throughout the organization. 
The sheer number and broad implications of these additions clearly indicate that a 
great deal of effort will be required to migrate from a QS-9000-based Quality 
Management System (QMS) to one that can be registered to ISO/TS 16949. However, 
there’s no need to drop everything for ISO/TS16949 now; it will exist as an alternative to 
QS-9000 for a substantial period, perhaps 12 to 24 months. ISO/TS 16949 will be revised 
to mesh with the new ISO 9001. At that time, the countdown will begin for the possible 
replacement of QS-9000 with ISO/TS 16949. Nevertheless, automotive suppliers will 
want to prepare for ISO/TS 16949 with greater urgency than this scenario might suggest: 
Early evaluation of ISO/TS 16949 will allow suppliers to develop the most cost-effective 
ways to meet these new and revised requirements. 
d. VDA 6.1 
VDA 6.1 is the German Quality Management System for the automotive industry. 
Verband der Automobilindustrie e. V. (VDA) issued the 4th edition in December 1998 
and it became mandatory for all German car manufacturers on April 1, 1999. Based on 
ISO 9001:1994, it includes all elements of QS-9000, with an additional four requirements 
specific to VDA 6.1 as follows: 
• Element 06.3 Recognition of product risks—These are the risks of the product fulfilling 
its own function and its effect on the whole assembly; 
• Element Z1.5 Employee satisfaction—The perception of the employees of the company, 
as well as the needs and expectations of the employees that will be met through the 
company’s quality approach; 
• Element 07.3 Quotation structure—A customer or market is offered products for 
purchase or made available to own or to use; 
• Element 12.4 Quality history—The system describes the quality history of customer 
supplied product and gives an overview of the situation during a particular period. 
The VDA standard is broken into two parts, with the first classed as management and the 
second focusing on products and processes. Any company that goes through an audit 
must achieve at least 90 percent correct on all questions to obtain registration.  
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     19

Aerospace Industry 
a. AS9000—Aerospace Basic Quality System 
AS9000, Aerospace Basic Quality System, is the aerospace version of ISO 9000 and was 
published in 1997. AS9000 contains ISO 9001 in its entirety with the addition of 27 
clarifications or qualifiers and eight notes to the existing 20 elements of ISO 9001. A 
consortium of aerospace prime contractors, operating as a subcommittee (Americas 
Aerospace Quality Group, AAQG) under the Aerospace and Defense Division of the 
American Society for Quality Control, developed the document. Companies that 
contributed to the development of AS9000 include the following: 
• AlliedSignal; 
• Allison Engine Company; 
• Boeing; 
• General Electric Engines; 
• Lockheed Martin; 
• McDonnell Douglas; 
• Northrop Grumman; 
• Pratt & Whitney; 
• Rockwell—Collins; 
• Sikorsky Aircraft; 
• Sundstrand. 
Aerospace is significantly more safety and quality sensitive than most other industries. 
Procurement Quality Assurance at prime contractors believes ISO alone is not sufficient 
to define supplier quality system requirements. Primes currently require purchase order 
adders for ISO 9000 registered suppliers with each prime having their own unique adders. 
The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) believes ISO alone is not adequate to meet 
regulatory requirements and FAA expectations. FAA has indicated that it will accept 
AS9000 under defined circumstances including: 
• Primes maintain liability and responsibility; 
• Primes must demonstrate oversight of all third-party audits; 
• Criteria for acceptance of demonstrated compliance must be defined. 
The Department of Defense (DOD) accepts ISO 9000, however, DOD expects more than 
ISO 9000 at primes. The DOD has expectations of advanced quality systems from prime 
contractors, and many DOD requirements (i.e., configuration management) are added by 
other required specifications. In addition to contractual requirements, DOD primes have a 
significant financial exposure with regard to supplier quality. 
AS9000 represents a dramatic streamlining of current aerospace quality standards. 
From the DOD through the FAA, to each prime contractor and subcontractor, there is a 
multiplicity of unique requirements imposed on the aerospace suppliers, creating a huge 
burden with little added value. AS9000 represents a significant step towards 
standardizing and consolidating the aerospace quality processes. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     20

b. AS9100—Quality Systems Aerospace—Model for Quality 
Assurance in Design, Development, Production, Installation, and 
Servicing 
The Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE International) published AS9100 Quality 
Systems—Aerospace—Model for Quality Assurance in Design, Development, 
Production, Installation, and Servicing, in March 2000, the first international aerospace 
quality systems standard. AS9100 is technically equivalent to the European version, 
published by The European Association of Aerospace Industries (AECMA) as 
prEN9100. 
In North America, AS9100 replaces AS9000 as the registration standard for suppliers 
to the aerospace industry. AS9000 will become obsolete when revisions to AS9100 based 
on ISO 9001:2000 revisions are incorporated. The existing version of ISO 9100 and 
AS9100 is expected to remain available for use until November 2003. This will allow 
users to transition to the new version. 
The ISO Aerospace Technical Committee 20, Working Group 11, in association with 
the American Aerospace Quality Group (AAQG) in the U.S. and the European 
Association of Aerospace Industries, AECMA in Europe, and other countries such as 
Japan, China, Mexico and Brazil, developed the quality systems standard for use by 
aerospace companies worldwide. AS9100 was developed using ISO9001, AS9000 and 
EN9000–1, and it builds upon their requirements to produce a globally harmonized 
standard that meets the requirements of aerospace companies worldwide. The first 
standard available for use across the global aerospace community, AS9100, adds the 
additional requirements necessary to address both civil and military aviation and 
aerospace needs. 
Based on industry need, major changes to the AS9000 document have been made to 
accommodate the changes in the industry and worldwide focus on quality and safety. 
Significant changes and/or additions have been made in the following areas: 
configuration management; reliability, maintainability, and safety; process control; 
purchasing; design verification and validation testing; first article inspection; corrective 
action; inspection and test status; servicing, delivery, investigation, and control of 
technical documentation and expansion of the internal audit requirement. With major 
industry manufacturers on board, companies at all levels in the aerospace supply chain 
will need this document to keep up with the worldwide changes in standardization and 
stay competitive in the industry. 
AS9100 is based on ISO 9001. AS9100 adds the additional requirements necessary to 
address both civil and military aviation and aerospace needs. AS9100 provides additional 
requirements to all but one of the 20 elements of ISO 9001. (The exception is element 
4.7, Control of Customer Supplied Product.) 
The major areas of emphasis that supplement the elements of ISO 9001 are: 
• Key product/process characteristics; 
• Design and development management planning; 
• Customer and regulatory requirements; 
• Verification and validation documentation and testing; 
• Documentation and data changes; 
General manufacturing, automotive and aerospace quality system standards     21

• Supplier (the AS9100 organization) purchasing and subcontractor evaluation, data and 
product verification; 
• Product identification and traceability; 
• Process control documentation and process changes; 
• Qualification and control of special processes; 
• First article inspection; 
• Inclusion of all inspection, measuring and test equipment devices; 
• Nonconforming material review authority and disposition; 
• Flow down of corrective action to the appropriate subcontractor(s); 
• Flow down of requirements from the Quality Manual to work instructions for use on 
Internal Quality Audits; 
• Where servicing is a requirement, the procedure(s) will address specifics on data, 
technical documentation, repair schemes and controls; 
• In the event statistical techniques are required, some specific areas and techniques 
offered for consideration include the following: 
Design verification; 
Process control; 
Inspection; 
Quality management; 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis. 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     22

CHAPTER 3  
Industry Specific Standards for Failure 
Mode & Effects Analysis 
 
Aerospace Industry 
SAE.ARP5580—Recommended Failure Modes and Effects Analysis 
(FMEA) Practices for Non-Automobile Applications 
This document provides guidance to perform Failure Mode and Effects Analysis for the 
non-automotive industry, utilizing the information published in MIL-Std 1629A and SAE 
recommended Practice J1739. It is intended for use by organizations whose product 
development processes use FMEA as a tool for assessing the safety and reliability of 
system elements. It provides an overview of the FMEA process with details on the 
overall enhanced methodology. It also introduces the following types of FMEA: 
• Functional FMEA 
• Interface FMEA 
• Detailed FMEA 
Different Types of FMEAs in APR 5580 
Functional FMEA 
This type of Failure Mode and Effects Analysis is initiated during the conceptual or 
preliminary design phase. Functional FMEA is performed on the conceptual design to 
support the architectural definition and verify necessary design compensation and failure 
recovery requirements derived by the Functional Requirements Analysis. Functional 
FMEA can be performed on control systems, processes, software and complex devices 
whose functionality is more readily understood than the details of their operation. 
Functional FMEA focuses on the functions that an item, group of items or process 
performs rather than on the characteristics of the specific implementation. 

Interface FMEA 
This type of FMEA is initiated during the preliminary or detailed design phase. Similar to 
Functional FMEA, Interface FMEA is performed to verify compliance to design, safety 
and regulatory requirements. Unlike Functional FMEA, Interface FMEA is the process of 
determining and recording characteristics of failures in the interconnections between 
interfacing system elements. Interface FMEA is done to evaluate interconnections 
between hardware elements (i.e. wires, cables, fiber optic lines, etc.) and software 
elements. While conducting an Interface FMEA, failure modes specific to the interfaces 
are defined and their characteristics (effects and fault signatures) are determined. 
Detailed FMEA 
This type of analysis is initiated during the detailed design phase, but in some cases the 
functional analysis may be updated during the detailed design phase rather than doing a 
Detailed FMEA. Detailed FMEA is performed to verify that the design complies with 
requirements for failures that can cause loss of end item functions, single point failures, 
fault detection and fault isolation. In Hardware Detailed FMEA, the components 
comprise the physical system design. In Software Detailed FMEA, the components are 
from the source code. The characteristics of the failure of each and every component is 
determined and documented in this process. The Detailed FMEA is initiated as the design 
of each element matures and the detailed design schematics, part lists, and detailed 
software design documents and source code become available. 
FMEA Verification 
This process is initiated during the design verification and validation phase. Verification 
of FMEA ensures that adequate actions are taken to control, prevent and reduce the end 
effects of the identified potential failure modes. 
Documentation 
This document suggests that the documentation set should include the following: 
Description of the system or subsystem analyzed; 
Worksheets for the types of FMEA conducted; 
Summary of the analysis results. 
FMEA Applications 
Applications of FMEA can be categorized into Product Design Hardware and Software 
FMEA, and Process Design FMEA. Functional, Interface and Detailed analysis could be 
done for both product design hardware and software FMEA. 
The following guidelines are provided in SAE ARP 5580. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     24

Product Design Hardware FMEA 
Product design hardware FMEAs are applied to the physical design of the product, i.e., 
electrical, mechanical and hydraulic subsystems and the interfaces between those 
subsystems.  
Hardware Functional FMEA 
Hardware Functional FMEA is first applied early in the design cycle after the major 
system functional components and their interactions have been defined. 
Typical functional failure modes pertain to a particular function not being performed 
or being performed incorrectly. Failure effects associated with the different modes of 
operation should be evaluated and recorded. 
Hardware Functional FMEA is also used later in the design cycle for complex 
subsystems or components, such as integrated circuits and control systems, whose 
functionality is more readily described than the operation of individual components. 
Hardware Interface FMEA 
Hardware Interface FMEA is performed on the physical interfaces between major 
functional system elements, i.e., LRUs (Line Replaceable Units), which include 
mechanical linkages, hydraulic lines or electrical cabling. 
Typical failure modes include low pressure in hydraulic lines, improper grounding of 
an electric cable, etc. 
Hardware Detailed FMEA 
Hardware Detailed FMEA is the most common type of FMEA. This is done at the lowest 
piece/part level of design and generally involves individual system components. Standard 
lists of potential failure modes are available for many of the widely used components.  
Product Design Software FMEA 
Software includes programs, their related data elements, their execution as tasks that 
implement various system functions and also includes program interfaces with hardware 
and the interfaces between different programs or tasks. 
Software Functional FMEA 
Software Functional FMEA is applied to the Computer Software Configuration Item 
(CSCI) during top-level software design. 
Failure modes associated to the individual functions, which have been assigned to 
Computer Software Components and to individual modules, are developed and applied to 
the software design to determine the effect on the system performance and safety of 
incorrect performance of the software element. 
The primary outputs of the Software Functional FMEA are used to identify software 
architectural changes to reduce failure exposure. They are also used to identify 
Industry specific standards for failure mode & effects analysis     25

requirements to ensure that incorrect software behavior can be detected and that 
appropriate system corrective actions are instituted. 
Software Interface FMEA 
Software Interface FMEA is similar to a Functional FMEA for software but focuses on 
the interfaces between disparate software and hardware elements. Failure modes specific 
to the message and/or data type being passed are postulated and the system level effects 
are identified. 
Software Detailed FMEA 
Software Detailed FMEA is generally done for systems that do not include robust 
hardware protection of memory elements, processing results and data transfers. The 
intent of the Detailed FMEA is to supplement the Functional and Interface FMEAs with a 
detailed assessment of the response of the as-developed software to plausible faults and 
failures. Both the Functional and Interface FMEAs will have to be updated at the time the 
Software Detailed FMEA is performed to reflect the ultimate software architecture.  
Process Design FMEA 
Process FMEA evaluates the failure modes associated with the manufacturing and 
assembly process deficiencies. Process FMEA assumes that the product as designed will 
meet the design intent provided the product is manufactured properly. Process FMEAs 
are conducted for new parts and processes, changed parts and processes, and new 
applications and environments for product manufacturing and assembly. 
SAE ARP 5580 also provides guidance on FMEA planning, functional requirement 
analysis, FMEA task analysis (including failure analysis, failure ratios, process capability 
indices and risk criteria), documentation and reporting requirements. 
The following table from SAE ARP5580 summarizes the application of various types 
of FMEA and related tasks during the design phase.  
Table 3–1 
FMEA Task 
Value/Use 
Timing 
Recommendations 
Functional 
Requirements 
Analysis 
Defines the design 
requirements for fault 
compensation, mitigation 
and monitoring 
provisions. 
Initiated during 
conceptual 
design phase. 
Should always be 
performed. 
Functional 
Failure Mode 
and Effects 
Analysis 
Supports functional 
assessment of system 
architecture. Supports 
early verification of the 
conceptual baseline: 
• Completeness of fault 
compensation
Initiated during 
conceptual or 
preliminary 
design phase. 
Should always be 
performed. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     26

requirements 
• Requirements for FD/FI 
provisions. 
Identifies critical 
functions for more 
detailed analysis. 
Interface 
Failure Mode 
and Effects 
Analysis 
Supports system level 
assessment of down-
stream failure effects (e.g. 
cascading faults). 
Provides a system view to 
the response of the FD/FI 
provisions. 
Provides an assessment of 
the 
Initiated during 
preliminary or 
detailed design 
phase. 
Performed when analyzing a 
system or subsystem or 
when required by the 
system integrator. 
FMEA Task 
Value/Use 
Timing 
Recommendations 
  
overall system 
architecture. 
  
  
Hardware 
Detailed 
Failure Mode 
and Effects 
Analysis 
Provides a higher 
fidelity assessment for 
critical and safety 
related functions. 
Provides a detailed 
assessment of LRU and 
SRU failure conditions. 
Initiated during 
detailed design 
phase. 
Should be limited to safety 
or mission critical functions 
identified during the 
Functional Failure Mode 
and Effects Analysis. 
Software 
Detailed 
Failure Mode 
and Effects 
Analysis 
Provides evaluation of 
single variable or 
instruction failures in 
software. 
Initiated in 
detailed software 
design phase. 
Should be limited to systems 
without hardware protection 
of memory, processing 
results or data transfers. 
Latency 
Assessment 
Accounts for multiple 
simultaneous failure 
modes. 
Performed as 
part of each 
analysis type. 
Performed when there are 
safety concerns. 
FMEA 
Verification 
Verifies accuracy of 
analysis results. 
Validates analysis 
ground rules. 
Initiated in 
verification and 
validation phase. 
Done in conjunction with 
system verification testing, 
especially when the analyst 
is uncertain of the failure 
consequences, or when 
required by contract or there 
is concern about ground 
rules. 
Industry specific standards for failure mode & effects analysis     27

Automotive Industry 
SAE.J1739—Potential Failure Mode and Effects Analysis in Design 
(Design FMEA), Potential Failure Modes and Effects Analysis in 
Manufacturing and Assembly Processes (Process FMEA), and 
Potential Failure Mode and Effects Analysis for Machinery 
(Machinery FMEA) 
This document provides guidance in the application of Failure Mode and Effects 
Analysis. It’s a recommended practice that gives the freedom to each team to use it in the 
most effective way for a given situation. 
The document states the following three basic cases for which FMEAs are generated, 
each with a different scope:  
Case 
Scope 
New design, technology or process 
Focus on complete design, technology or 
process 
Modifications to existing design or process (assumes 
there is a FMEA for the existing design or process) 
Focus on modification to design or 
process, possible interactions due to the 
modification, and field history 
Use of existing design or process in a new 
environment, location or application (assumes there is 
a FMEA for the existing design or process) 
Focus on the impact of the new 
environment or location on the existing 
design or process 
Guidelines for the following three types of FMEAs are provided in this document: 
• Design FMEA (D-FMEA)—Design FMEA evaluates the initial design for 
manufacturing, assembly, service and recycling requirements, including functional 
requirements and design alternatives. Design FMEA should be initiated before or at 
design concept finalization and be continually updated as changes occur or additional 
information is obtained throughout the phases of product development. Design FMEA 
should be completed before the production drawings are released for tooling. 
Suggested criteria for the evaluation of severity, occurrence and detection for D-
FMEA are provided in Tables 1, 2 and 3 of SAE J1739. 
• Process FMEA (P-FMEA)—Process FMEA is utilized to accomplish the following: 
• Identify the process functions and requirements; 
• Identify potential product- and process-related failure modes; 
• Assess the potential customer effects of the failures; 
• Identify the potential manufacturing/assembly process causes and identify process 
variables on which to focus controls for occurrence reduction or detection of the 
failure conditions; 
• Identify process variables on which to focus process controls; 
• Develop a ranked list of potential failure modes, thus establishing a priority system 
for preventive/corrective action considerations; 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     28

• Document the results of the manufacturing/assembly process. 
Process FMEA should be initiated before or at the feasibility stage and prior to tooling 
for production. It should take into account all manufacturing operations from individual 
components to assemblies. 
Suggested criteria for the evaluation of severity, occurrence and detection for P-
FMEA are provided in Tables 4, 5 and 6 of SAE J1739.  
• Machinery FMEA (M-FMEA)—The Machinery FMEA supports the design process 
in reducing the risk of failures by: 
• Aiding in the objective evaluation of equipment functions, design requirements and 
design alternatives; 
• Increasing the probability that potential failure modes and their effects on the 
machinery have been considered in the design and development process; 
• Providing additional information to aid in the planning of thorough and efficient 
design, validation and development programs; 
• Developing a ranked list of potential failure modes ranked according to their effect 
on the “customer,” thus establishing a priority system for design improvements, 
development and validation testing analysis. 
Machinery FMEA should be initiated during design concept development and should 
be continually updated as changes occur or additional information is obtained throughout 
the phases of machinery development. The analysis should be completed before 
engineering release for construction. Suggested criteria for the evaluation of severity, 
occurrence and detection for Machinery FMEA are provided in Tables 7, 8 and 9 of SAE 
J1739. 
Industry specific standards for failure mode & effects analysis     29

CHAPTER 4  
Risk Management Planning 
 
Risk Management 
The focus of risk management is to identify the hazards associated with functional units 
and their accessories, estimate and evaluate the risks, control these risks and monitor the 
effectiveness of the control. 
The foundation of effective risk management is a clear commitment from corporate 
management. There are three key commitments that must be made in order to build the 
necessary infrastructure for a cost-effective risk management program: 
• Organize and maintain the knowledge and information on the design, development and 
manufacturing of the product and ensure this data is up-to-date and accurate. This 
process is essential as the quality of the risk management program depends directly on 
this information. 
• Provide knowledgeable and competent personnel throughout the organization to 
manage the risk management process and to participate in risk assessment and other 
work activities. 
• Create a system that not only documents and maintains risk management files, but also 
records management’s response to these studies and enforces an audit system to 
ensure that all approved risk reduction actions are implemented in a timely manner. 
The risk management process in general includes the following elements: 
• Risk Management Plan; 
• Risk Assessment—covering both Risk Analysis and Risk Evaluation; 
• Risk Control; 
• Post-Production Information. 
Risk Management Plan 
Management must clearly define the objectives and scope of the project, which are 
dependent on a number of factors: 
• The part of the product/process/system on which the project focuses; 
• The phase of the product’s life cycle in which the project takes place; 
• The amount of information available. 

Responsibility and resources should be allocated to ensure that no responsibility is 
omitted. 
Decisions concerning risk acceptability may be based on operational, technical, 
financial, legal, social, humanitarian or other criteria. The decisions can be justified by 
doing the following: 
• Using product-specific standards. If standards are properly implemented and the 
product is tested, an acceptable level of risk should result. 
• Comparing with levels of risk evident from other similar products/systems on the 
market, which should consider similarities and differences in: 
○ Functionality/intended use; 
○ Hazards; 
○ Risk; 
○ Safety features; 
○ Historical data; 
• Following appropriate guidance documents. 
Risk Assessment (Risk Analysis & Risk Evaluation) 
Risk analysis addresses three specific questions: 
• What can go wrong? 
• How likely is it?  
• What are the impacts? 
In order to answer the above questions, it is essential to understand the intended use or 
purpose of the product, including any foreseeable misuse, and to identify the product 
characteristics that could impact on safety. 
The next step is to identify hazards associated with the product and determine the 
related causes and consequences, and ultimately estimate the risk. 
Some potential hazards (if applicable) that should be evaluated include these factors: 
• Toxicity, flammability and reactivity of raw materials and wastes; 
• Sensitivity to environmental factors such as temperature and humidity; 
• Mechanical or electronic hazards; 
• Human factors associated with the operator-equipment interface. 
The risk analysis is not restricted to only the design of the product but should also be 
done for the manufacturing process (e.g. assembly process, packaging) and the process of 
delivering the product to its intended location. For products that involve materials that are 
sensitive to the environment (e.g., heat, humidity, cold or light), storage and 
transportation methods need to be reviewed. If problems are identified, appropriate 
changes should be made in packaging or warnings on storage or packaging containers. 
The software used in the functioning of a product to control or monitor systems also 
needs to be reviewed. The consequences of software errors can be unpredictable, 
particularly those that involve data corruption or false alarms. In such cases, the product 
should have a means of detecting software errors or the consequences. For example, 
Risk management planning     31

consider installing separate redundant alarms or interlocks on critical aspects of the 
system/product. 
Depending on the complexity of the system/product, one or a combination of risk 
analysis techniques can be used to identify hazards. Some common techniques include 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA), Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP) 
and Fault Tree Analysis (FTA). The FMEA methodology and its application throughout 
the entire life cycle of the system/product are addressed later in this manual. The other 
two techniques are described in the next chapter. 
Once the risk estimation for all hazards is completed, the acceptability of risk is 
determined based on the company’s risk-acceptability criteria (based on what was 
established in the risk management plan) and, if it is too high, the risk needs to be 
mitigated. 
Risk Control 
Risk reduction should focus on reducing the hazard severity, the probability of 
occurrence, or both. The following are examples of risk control: 
• Inherent safety by design; 
• Use of consensus standards; 
• Protective design measures (e.g. incorporating alarms and interlocks into the design to 
mitigate risks that cannot be eliminated); 
• Protective manufacturing measures, with improved process or test capabilities; 
• Safety information (labeling, instructions for use, training, etc.). 
The technical and economic practicality of implementing the options should be evaluated. 
Once the risk reduction decisions are made, the associated risk reduction actions should 
be implemented and monitored throughout the product’s life cycle.  
Post-Production Information 
Throughout the product’s lifetime, new information 
obtained during postmarketing vigilance regarding a new 
hazard or risk must be assessed and recorded in the risk 
management file. Hence, risk analysis and management is 
an ongoing process throughout a product’s lifetime and it 
is the continuous responsibility of the manufacturer to 
ensure the product/system safety. 
Risk management should start at the early design stage to establish the highest level of 
inherent safety. This can significantly offset the cost of implementing risk-mitigating 
measures.  
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     32

CHAPTER 5  
Risk Analysis Methodologies 
 
This chapter gives an overview of Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP) and Fault 
Tree Analysis (FTA), which are risk analysis techniques commonly used in the industry 
as alternatives to Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA). 
Hazard and Operability Analysis (HAZOP) 
This technique was originally developed for use in the chemical process industry for 
identifying hazards and operability problems. 
HAZOP is a highly structured bottom-up methodology. It uses the combination of 
design parameter and guide word to help identify deviation from design intent. The 
following are examples of guide words and design parameters: 
Guide Words 
• More or High or Higher or Greater (words that imply an excess), when compared to 
the design intent; 
• No, None, Less or Low or Lower or Reduced (words that imply insufficiency), when 
compared to the design intent; 
• Part of or Not all of or Partially (words that imply incompleteness), when compared 
to the design intent. 
Design Parameters 
Applicable parameters typically include: 
• Pressure; 
• Temperature; 
• Flow; 
• Composition; 
• Level; 
• Reaction Rate; 
• Viscosity; 
• pH. 

Applicable operations typically include: 
• Filling; 
• Transferring; 
• Purging; 
• Emptying; 
• Draining; 
• Venting; 
• Maintenance; 
• Start-up; 
• Shut-down. 
Deviations 
  
 
For example: 
■ 
When Property=Parameter: 
  
High 
+ 
Flow 
= 
High Flow 
  
Low 
+ 
Pressure 
= 
Low Pressure 
  
More 
+ 
Reaction 
= 
Greater Reactivity 
■ 
When Property=Operation: 
  
No 
+ 
Transfer 
= 
No Transfer 
  
Less 
+ 
Empty 
= 
Residue Remaining 
■ 
When Property=Material: 
  
No 
+ 
Steam 
= 
No Steam 
  
More 
+ 
Diluent 
= 
More Diluent 
Fault Tree Analysis (FTA) 
Fault Tree Analysis is a top-down methodology. The analysis starts with the undesired 
consequence or top event and identifies the various combinations of faulty and normal 
possible events occurring in the system. This procedure deduces the root cause(s) of the 
top event. The events and logical relationships between events are represented 
graphically in a tree structure using both logic and event symbols, as shown in Tables 5–1 
and 5–2, respectively. An example of a fault tree is shown in Figure 5–1. 
FTA can be used to identify multiple failure conditions where two or more events 
must occur for the top-level event to occur. If estimates of failure rates are available for 
individual events, the probability of the top event can be predicted.  
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     34

Table 5–1: Logic Gate Symbols 
Gate Symbol 
Gate Name 
Causal Relation 
 
AND 
Output event occurs if all input events occur simultaneously 
 
OR 
Output event occurs if any one of the input events occurs 
Table 5–2: Event Symbols 
Event Symbol 
Event Name 
Meaning 
 
CIRCLE 
Basic event with sufficient data 
 
DIAMOND 
Undeveloped event 
 
RECTANGLE 
Event represented by a gate 
 
TRIANGLE 
Transfer symbol 
Risk analysis methodologies     35

 
Figure 5–1: Fault Tree Analysis 
Example 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     36

CHAPTER 6  
Overview of FMEA 
 
This chapter is an introduction to Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA). It outlines 
the objectives of FMEA, reasons and benefits of performing FMEA and the limitations of 
the technique. 
Overview 
The need for continuous improvement of product quality, reliability and safety arises 
from product recalls (see Table 6–1), government regulatory requirements, agency 
recommendations, legal implications and above all a company’s desire to improve its 
market position and customer satisfaction. These issues require product manufacturers to 
perform risk analyses that identify and minimize part/system failures throughout the 
product’s life cycle. 
The FMEA methodology is one of the risk analysis techniques recommended by 
international standards. It is a systematic process to identify potential failures to fulfill the 
intended function, to identify possible failure causes so the causes can be eliminated, and 
to locate the failure impacts so the impacts can be reduced. The process of FMEA has 
three main focuses: 
▪ The recognition and evaluation of potential failures and their effects; 
▪ The identification and prioritization of actions that could eliminate the potential failures, 
reduce their chances of occurring or reduce their risks; 
▪ The documentation of these identification, evaluation and corrective activities so that 
product quality improves over time. 
FMEA is primarily adapted for material and equipment failures, but in a broad sense, 
human error, performance and software errors can also be included.  
By applying the FMEA methodology during the various phases of a product’s life 
cycle, the methodology provides a systematic and disciplined strategy for examining all 
the ways in which a product can fail. The results of FMEA in turn affect the product 
design, process development, sourcing and suppliers’ quality, downstream (referring to 
downstream of a process or user of the product) application, and field service. 
The following are some of the benefits of conducting a FMEA study: 
▪ Ensures that the potential failures and their effects on the system have been identified 
and evaluated, consequently helping to identify errors and define corrective actions; 
▪ Provides a means for reviewing product and process design; 
▪ Helps to identify critical characteristics of the products and processes; 

▪ Improves productivity, quality, safety and cost efficiency; 
▪ Helps to determine the need for selecting alternative materials, parts, devices, 
components and tasks; 
▪ Assists in documenting the reasons for changes; 
▪ Provides a means of communication between different departments; 
▪ Helps increase customer satisfaction; 
▪ Improves a company’s image and competitiveness. 
Table 6–1: List of Product Recalls 
Model/Type of 
Product 
Quantity 
Recalled 
Problem 
Failure Effect 
Automotive 
2001 Nissan Sentra 
130,000 
passenger cars 
One or more of the 
attachment bolts for the 
front-suspension, lower 
control arms may break. 
Unusual noise or 
vibration felt through 
the steering wheel 
when hitting bumps.  
2000 and 2001 Chrysler 
Neon 
515,000 from 
USA, Canada, 
Mexico and 
foreign markets 
Brake booster vacuum hose 
may loosen. 
Harder for drivers to 
stop the vehicle. 
Greater pedal pressure 
may be required to 
stop the vehicle. 
1997-2000 Chevrolet 
Venture, Pontiac Trans 
Sport/Montana and 
Oldsmobile Silhouette 
54,700 minivans 
Passenger side power 
sliding doors may close but 
not latch. 
Door could open 
while the car is in 
motion. 
Pontiac Grand Am, Buick 
Skylark and Oldsmobile 
Achieva 
778,000 cars 
High current flows and 
heat in the ignition switch 
when key held in the start 
position for an extended 
period of time. 
Fires could occur in 
the steering system. 
Reports of three 
injuries from electrical 
fires. 
GM light trucks and 
sports utilities 
1.38 million 
vehicles 
Brake pedal will be lower 
than normal and stopping 
distances will be longer. 
Crash could occur 
when stopping 
distance is smaller. 
Model/Type of 
Product 
Quantity 
Recalled 
Problem 
Failure Effect 
Home Products 
Take 2, Travel 
Solutions, Pioneer, 
Travelite, Pro Sport 4-
in-1 strollers 
650,000 
strollers 
Strollers can unexpectedly 
collapse or the car 
seat/carrier adapter can 
unexpectedly detach. 
Infants can suffer serious 
injuries. 681 incidents 
including 250 injuries 
reported. 
Star Cruiser and Rock 
Rider swings (backyard 
gym sets) 
190,000 sets 
Screws that hold the swing 
together can fall out, 
causing the seat to fall to
291 incidents of seats 
separating and 19 injuries 
reported. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     38

the ground. 
Ariens Scotts and 
Husqvarna walk-behind 
lawnmowers 
40,000 
lawnmowers 
Piece attaching the blade to 
the mower can crack and 
break off. 
Possible injury to the 
operator or bystander. 
Zep commercial cleaner 1.4 million 32 
oz. bottles 
Leaking occurs through the 
cap when bottles are turned 
on their side. 
Cleaner causes irritation 
and burns to the skin and 
eyes. 10 bottle leaks and 
three injuries reported. 
AquaStar natural gas 
water heaters 
320 units 
Produces dangerous levels 
of carbon monoxide in 
exhaust gas. 
Serious injuries and death 
possible. 
Model/Type of 
Product 
Quantity Recalled Problem 
Failure Effect 
Children’s Toys and Consumer Goods 
Princess Ariel costumes 54,000 costumes 
Fabric ignites easily. 
A burn injury to a 
four-year-old girl and 
one case of ignition 
reported. 
Accessory to a video 
game—baseball bats 
140,000 baseball 
video games to 
replace the bats 
Bats can separate during 
swinging. 
A split lip, facial 
lacerations, a bump on 
the head and bruising 
reported. 
Nike Trunner LX and 
Jordan Trunner 2000 
cross trainers 
225,000 pairs 
Thin metal strip on the 
outside of the heel can 
protrude from the shoe. 
Forms a sharp edge 
that can cut. 16 reports 
of cuts to the lower 
legs. Some stitches to 
close. 
Scuba buoyancy 
compensator devices 
(BCDs) by Sheico PKS 
Inc. 
10,000 units 
Overpressure valve can 
stick in the open 
position. 
Risk of drowning to 
divers. 
Medical Devices and Pharmaceuticals 
Inter-Op shells by 
Sulzer Orthopedics 
Approximately 
17,500 patients 
worldwide have 
received the recalled 
Inter-Op shells. 
Lubricant residue may 
cause the shells to come 
loose and may prevent 
implant from bonding 
with the bone, causing 
the shells to loosen. 
129 cases of loosening 
reported. All presented 
symptoms of aseptic 
loosening within six 
months of 
implantation. 
Migraine drug 
Sandomigran DS 
(pizotifen, double 
strength) by Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals 
Canada 
941 large bottles sent 
out to pharmacists 
still need to be 
located 
Muscle relaxant tablets 
were found in some 
bottles. 
These foreign tablets 
could lead to drops in 
blood pressure. 
Overview of FMEA     39

Model/Type of 
Product 
Quantity 
Recalled 
Problem 
Failure Effect 
Consumer Electronics 
Electric drills 
58,000 units Switches on these power 
tools can stick. 
Drills can continue to 
operate after the trigger is 
released. Risk of injury to 
user. 
Nightlights by Dura 
Kleen Inc. 
459,000 
nightlights 
Electrical connections are 
loose; made of flammable 
plastic, and power switch 
does not work. 
Poses shock and fire 
hazards to consumers. 
Black & Decker miter 
saws 
118,400 
units 
Bolts can loosen. 
Risk of lacerations to the 
user. 
Batteries in Dell 
Inspiron 5000 and 5000e 
notebook computers 
284,000 
batteries 
Can overcharge and become 
very hot. 
Possible smoke and fire. 
Limitations of FMEA 
Using Failure Mode and Effects Analysis can potentially be disadvantageous for the 
following reasons: 
▪ Analysis of complex systems that have multiple functions consisting of a number of 
components can be tedious and difficult; 
▪ Compound failure effects cannot be analyzed;  
▪ Incorporating all possible factors influencing the product/process, such as human errors 
and environmental impacts, can make the analysis lengthy and require a thorough 
knowledge of the characteristics and performance of the different components of the 
system; 
▪ Successful completion requires expertise, experience and good team skills; 
▪ Dealing with data redundancies can be difficult; 
▪ Can be costly and time consuming. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     40

CHAPTER 7  
FMEA Procedures 
 
This chapter describes the basic terminology and process used in FMEA. In addition, the 
procedures for setting up, conducting and following up FMEA are described. 
Introduction 
Similar to a HAZOP, the FMEA is a bottom-up approach starting with components and 
using a single-point failure approach to progressively work up to the top level. During the 
FMEA study, risk is estimated by rating the severity of failure effects, the likelihood of 
causes, and the likelihood of detecting the cause of a failure or the failure mode. Table 7–
1 shows a sample FMEA worksheet for documenting the results of the analysis. The 
terminology used on the worksheet and the FMEA procedures are described below. 
FMEA Terminology 
Item Function 
Item function specifies the function of the part or item under review. 
Potential Failure Mode 
A potential failure mode is the manner in which a failure can occur i.e. the ways in which 
the reviewed item can fail to perform its intended design function, or perform the 
function but fail to meet the objective. The potential failure mode may also be the cause 
of another potential failure mode in a higher-level subsystem or system, or be the effect 
of one in a lower-level component.  
Typical potential failure modes include the following: 
▪ Fail to open/close; 
▪ Brittle; 
▪ Cracked; 
▪ Warped; 
▪ Underfilled; 
▪ Undersized/Oversized. 

Potential Failure Causes 
Potential failure causes identify the root cause of the potential failure mode, not the 
symptoms, and provide an indication of a design weakness that leads to the failure mode. 
The prompt identification of the root cause is important for the implementation of 
preventive or corrective measures. Failure causes often include these types of problems: 
▪ Overstressing; 
▪ Incorrect material specified; 
▪ Improper wall thickness; 
▪ Improper tolerance. 
Potential Failure Effects 
Potential failure effects refer to the potential outcome of the failure on the system, design, 
process or service. The potential failure effects need to be analyzed based on the local 
and global impacts. A local effect is an outcome with only an isolated impact that does 
not affect other functions. A global effect, on the other hand, affects other 
functions/components and has a domino effect on the system.  
For a design, three types of potential failure effects need to be considered: 
▪ The effect on the end user of the product (end effect); 
▪ The effect on the local/reviewed area (local effect); 
▪ The effect on aspects situated between the above two (next high level effect). 
For a manufacturing process, two types of potential failure effects need to be considered: 
▪ The effect on the product;  
▪ The effect on local and downstream processes. 
The severity of a particular failure is determined based on the failure effect. The more 
serious the effect is, the higher the severity. 
Potential failure effects might include these examples: 
▪ Erratic operation; 
▪ Failure to operate; 
▪ Noise; 
▪ Loss of life. 
Current Controls 
Current controls are the safeguarding measures in place at the time of review that are 
intended to do the following: 
▪ Eliminate causes of failure; 
▪ Identify or detect failure; 
▪ Reduce impacts/consequences of failure.  
This list includes common examples of current controls: 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     42

▪ Statistical Process Control (SPC) analysis; 
▪ Product capability studies; 
▪ Function tests; 
▪ Gauge repeatability and reproducibility (R&R) studies; 
▪ Durability tests; 
▪ Design reviews and design guidelines; 
▪ Operator training. 
Severity (S) 
Severity is the seriousness of the effects of the failure. Severity is an assessment of the 
failure effects on the end user, local area and in-between (next higher) areas. The severity 
rating applies only to the effects. 
The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If such a design 
change is attainable, the failure can possibly be eliminated. 
Occurrence (O) 
Occurrence is the frequency of the failure—that is, how often the failure can be expected 
to take place. 
Detection (D) 
Detection is the ability to identify the failure before it reaches the end user/customer.  
Risk Priority Number (RPN) 
An RPN is a measurement of relative risk. It is calculated by multiplying together the 
severity, occurrence and detection ratings. The RPN is determined before implementing 
recommended corrective actions, and it is used to prioritize the actions. The value, by 
itself, does not have any other significance.  
  
 
Recommended Corrective Action 
The recommended corrective action is intended to reduce the RPN by reducing the 
severity, occurrence or detection ranking, or all three together. 
Corrective Actions Taken 
It is a brief description of the actual actions taken, after identifying recommended 
corrective actions. 
FMEA procedures     43

Resulting Severity 
After a corrective action has been chosen/identified, “estimate” and record the resulting 
severity rating. 
Resulting Occurrence 
After a corrective action has been chosen/identified, “estimate” and record the resulting 
occurrence rating. 
Resulting Detection 
After a corrective action has been chosen/identified, “estimate” and record the resulting 
detection rating.  
Resulting RPN 
The resulting RPN is determined based on the resulting severity, occurrence and 
detection. 
Critical Characteristics 
Critical characteristics are characteristics that can affect compliance with government 
regulations or product safety. Critical characteristics are defined by: 
▪ The courts—through product liability; 
▪ Regulatory agencies—through formal laws and/or regulations; 
▪ Industrial standards—through generally accepted practices in the industry; 
▪ Customer requisitions—through their wants, needs and expectations; 
▪ Internal engineering requirements—through historical data, or leading edge technology, 
or experiences with products or services. 
Such characteristics require specific producer, assembly, shipping or monitoring actions 
and inclusion on Control Plans. Examples of critical characteristics include part or 
process requirements, such as dimensions, specifications, tests, processes, assembly 
sequences, tooling, torque, welds, attachments and component usages. 
Significant Characteristics 
Significant characteristics are characteristics of products, processes and tests where a 
reduction in variation within a specified tolerance around a proper target will improve 
customer satisfaction. Significant characteristics must be supported with Control Plans.  
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     44

Control Items 
Control items are parts that can affect either compliance with government regulations or 
safe product/process operation. They are identified by the customer’s product engineering 
on drawings and specifications with a specific and unique symbol. 
FMEA Steps 
During an FMEA study, the product/process/service/system being reviewed is broken 
down into smaller items/subsystems. For each item, the following steps are performed: 
1. Define the item being analyzed. 
2. Define the functions of the item being analyzed. 
3. Identify all potential failure modes for the item. 
4. Determine the causes of each potential failure mode. 
5. Identify the effects of each potential failure mode without consideration of current 
control. 
6. Identify and list the current controls for each potential failure mode. 
7. Determine the most appropriate corrective/preventive actions and recommendations 
based on the analysis of risk. 
After going through all the items for each failure, assign a rating (from 1 to 10, low to 
high) for severity, occurrence and detection. Determine the RPN and use it to prioritize 
the recommendations. The severity rating should be based on the worst effect of the 
potential failure mode. 
When the severity is very high (8 to 10), special attention must be given to ensure that 
the risk is addressed through existing design controls or corrective/preventive actions, 
regardless of the RPN.  
If there are no recommended actions for a specific potential failure mode, failure cause 
or existing control, enter “None”. 
If this is a follow-up of an existing FMEA, note any action taken to eliminate or 
reduce the risk of failure modes. Determine the resulting RPN as the risk of the potential 
failure modes are reduced or eliminated. 
Once corrective action has been taken, the resulting RPN is determined by 
reevaluating the severity, occurrence and detection ratings. Improvement and corrective 
action must continue until the resulting RPN is at an acceptable level for all potential 
failure modes.  
FMEA procedures     45

Table 7–1: Sample FMEA worksheet 
Initial 
Conditions 
Action 
Results 
Item Item 
Fun 
ction 
Fail 
ure 
Mo 
des 
Ca 
uses 
Critical/ 
Control/
Signi 
ficant 
item 
Fail
ure 
Ef 
fects S O D RPN 
Curr
ent 
Con
trols
Recom
mended 
Corre 
ctive 
Action 
Corre
ctive 
Action 
Taken S O D RPN 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
  
Preliminary Consideration of FMEA 
It is important that the scope of the FMEA study is clearly defined. This allows the 
FMEA team to suggest and implement improvements freely within the defined 
boundaries. The following is a list of questions that help to define the boundaries of the 
study: 
▪ What aspects of the FMEA is the team responsible for? e.g. FMEA analysis, 
recommendations for improvement, implementation of improvements. 
▪ What is the budget for the FMEA? 
▪ Does the project have a deadline? 
▪ What is the scope of the FMEA? 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     46

When it comes to planning the meeting, the following is a suggested list of 
considerations: 
▪ People—People involved in all meetings may differ in values, attitudes, experiences, 
gender, age and education. All these differences must be accounted for in the planning 
of the meeting. 
▪ Purpose—As mentioned before, the scope of the study—the purpose, objective and the 
goal—must be understood by all, both management and participants. 
▪ Atmosphere or climate—The atmosphere contributes to the effectiveness of the 
meeting. It is imperative that whoever plans the meeting takes into consideration the 
climate and atmosphere.  
▪ Place and space—All meetings are held in a place and a space. Therefore, planners 
must consider the following: 
○ Access to the space, available parking; 
○ Size of the space; 
○ Acoustics, lighting, temperature control; 
○ Cost; 
○ Equipment requirements. 
▪ Costs—The FMEA budget should take into consideration the required preparation time, 
as it can be lengthy. The required preparation work is discussed further in the next 
section. As the system, design, process or service personnel assigned to do the FMEA 
may be in different places, one should consider the travel expenses of participants. 
▪ Time dimensions—When estimating the time required for conducting the FMEA, one 
should consider the conditions, objectives and complexity of the project. The time 
constraints should be fully evaluated. If the meeting is going to be prolonged, the 
agenda items and objects should be adjusted accordingly. 
▪ Prework and “after the official meeting work”—The quality of the FMEA study 
depends on good preparation work, which is discussed further in the next section. 
▪ Plans, program and agenda—All meetings have an agenda, for without an agenda, 
there cannot be a meeting. A detailed planned program or agenda, which can be shared 
(no surprises) by all participants, is a valuable addition to a meeting. When planning 
the agenda, make sure all the objectives of the meeting are covered.  
▪ Follow-up—After the meetings have ended, there is a need for some follow-up in these 
areas: 
○ Implementing action items; 
○ Communicating information to all appropriate personnel; 
○ Publishing the documented study and writing the report. 
Preparation Before FMEA Sessions 
Before conducting a FMEA, preparation work should be done to ensure that the FMEA 
study is carried out smoothly. The following are the recommended procedures for doing 
so: 
FMEA procedures     47

1. Define scope 
After considering the questions outlined in the previous section, the study scope should 
be defined and documented. This would help prevent the FMEA team from focusing on 
the wrong aspect of the product, process or service during the FMEA. It would also assist 
the process of data collection (next step). 
2. Collect data 
On the basis of the scope defined in step 1, assemble as much information as possible. 
The following are some examples: 
▪ Product prototype; 
▪ Design specification; 
▪ Design drawings; 
▪ Process flow diagram; 
▪ Operating manual; 
▪ Maintenance log. 
3. Break down the system 
During the process of breaking down the product/process/service into smaller items, 
consider the following: 
▪ If items are too small, you can lose your sense of analysis and incur excessive 
repetition; 
▪ If items are too large, they can become confusing and hard to handle. The best way to 
size an item is based on item function. 
4. Prepare list of potential failure modes  
The list of potential failure modes prepared at this stage acts as a starting point for the 
FMEA section. It is not intended to replace the effort of identifying the potential failure 
modes during the FMEA section. The list can be established based on this information: 
▪ Failure history of products with similar design; 
▪ Product recalls; 
▪ Failure records of the product/process/system; 
▪ Review of the product/process/system. 
5. Assemble FMEA team 
A FMEA study requires efforts of experts from different areas. It cannot be done on an 
individual basis. Hence, the team should be cross-functional and multi-disciplined. It is 
important to ensure that the appropriate individuals are going to participate.  
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     48

6. Choose the right tool for transcribing FMEA 
Choosing the right tool for transcribing the FMEA ensures efficiency of conducting the 
analysis. There are three different methods (non-computer and computer based): 
▪ Manual transcription; 
▪ Spreadsheet-type software; 
▪ Risk analysis software (Windows based). 
Table 7–2 compares the features of the above methods. Each feature is ranked from 10 to 
1, with 10 being the best performance. It is concluded that using risk analysis software is 
the best and most efficient method.  
Table 7–2: Comparison of features of different 
methods of transcribing risk analysis 
Feature 
Manual 
Transcription 
Spreadsheets
Risk analysis software 
(Windows based) 
Learning Curve 
Required 
None 
(10) 
Little 
(7) 
Some 
(4) 
User Friendliness 
Maximum 
(10) 
Good 
(7) 
Good 
(7) 
Productivity 
Poor 
(1) 
Fair 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Customization 
Features 
Very Good 
(10) 
Good 
(7) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Copying Capabilities 
None 
(1) 
Some 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Team Participation 
No 
(1) 
Some 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Quality Assurance 
None 
(1) 
Little 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Assists Auditing of 
FMEA 
No 
(1) 
Little 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Good Documentation 
No 
(1) 
Fair 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
“Power” Features 
None 
(1) 
Some 
(4) 
Very Good 
(10) 
Overall Assessment 
Poor 
(37) 
Fair 
(49) 
Very Good 
(91) 
FMEA procedures     49

Conducting FMEA Sessions 
The FMEA team is led by the team leader or the facilitator. The team leader/facilitator 
provides assistance and guidance to the team to ensure that the FMEA session is 
conducted effectively on a timely basis. A typical FMEA session would follow the steps 
outlined below: 
1. Facilitator or team leader explains 
The facilitator or one of the team members explains the purpose and scope of the FMEA 
and sets the rules for the study. 
2. Review the system being studied 
The system is reviewed to ensure everyone on the FMEA team has the same 
understanding of the system. 
3. Perform the analysis 
The FMEA process described earlier is applied to the product/process/system. When 
FMEA is performed on commodity items, it would be efficient to perform group FMEAs 
on similar or identical items and then address the out-of-the-ordinary conditions as 
separate items. 
4. Review FMEA 
At the end of the FMEA, the team should ensure that the function, purpose and objective 
have been met. Some helpful hints include the following questions: 
• Is the problem identification specific? 
• Was a root cause, effect or symptom identified? 
• Is the corrective action measurable? 
• Is the corrective action proactive? 
• Is the use of terminology current and consistent? 
Follow-Up of FMEA 
▪ The facilitator/team leader would issue a preliminary FMEA report including the 
following: 
○ Attendance; 
○ Study Outline; 
○ Detail Report; 
○ Action Register. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     50

▪ The FMEA is a living document and should always reflect the latest level of the system 
being analyzed, as well as the latest relevant actions, including those occurring after 
the start of production. 
▪ The distribution is a controlled document and should be treated as such. 
▪ Each recommendation must be assigned to the appropriate personnel to ensure it has 
been implemented or adequately addressed. 
▪ A person should be assigned to oversee the progress of implementing all 
recommendations and to ensure all actions are carried out properly. 
 
FMEA procedures     51

CHAPTER 8  
FMEA Team 
 
This chapter describes the responsibilities of FMEA team members and the facilitator/ 
team leader. 
Introduction 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is a team function and cannot be done on an 
individual basis. The makeup of the FMEA team is cross-functional and multi-disciplined 
for each study. The knowledge that is required for a specific problem is often unique to 
that problem and may require personnel from other specialized departments as well. 
Team Size 
▪ The best size for the team is usually four to six people; 
▪ The minimum number of people can be dictated by the number of areas that are affected 
by the FMEA; 
▪ When appropriate, consider offering team membership to the customer, whether internal 
or external to the organization. 
Team Membership 
The responsibilities of team members are as follows: 
▪ Participate; 
▪ Contribute knowledge and experience; 
▪ Be open-minded for discussion, negotiation and compromise; 
▪ Share adequate information with colleagues. 
Team Leader (Facilitator) 
The team leader is responsible for coordinating the FMEA process: 

▪ Setting up and facilitating meetings; 
▪ Ensuring that the team has the necessary resources available; 
▪ Making sure the team is progressing toward the completion of the FMEA. 
The team leader should not dominate the team and does not normally have the final word 
on team decisions. The team leader’s role is more like that of a facilitator than a decision-
maker. 
Arrangements should be made for a scribe to be responsible for documenting the study 
during the FMEA sessions. The scribe’s role is often rotated among all team members, 
except the team leader. This spreads the burden equally among all participants.  
 
FMEA team     53

CHAPTER 9  
Common Tools Used with FMEA 
 
This chapter gives an overview of tools commonly used with FMEA, including process 
flowcharts, block diagrams and Pareto charts. 
Process Mapping/Process Flowcharts 
The concept of process mapping is to capture knowledge and sequence of flow of 
operations about processes and then represent that knowledge using boxes and arrows. 
Process mapping provides a clear picture of the process and allows easy identification of 
the main sequence of activities, and it clarifies critical connections across individual 
operations and departments. Table 9–1 shows some commonly used symbols in process 
mapping. An example process map is given in Figure 9–1.  
Table 9–1: Common Symbols Used in Process 
Mapping 
Symbol 
Meaning 
Examples 
 
Decision 
• Is the part to customer spec? 
• Is the supplier the correct one? 
 
Control/Inspection 
• Inspect part. 
• Is it the correct quality/quantity? 
 
Operation 
• An action or process. 
• Is it manual or automatic? 
 
Movement/Transfer 
• Material handling. 
• Movement of people. 
• Data transfer. 
Symbol 
Meaning 
Examples 
 
Delay 
• Down time or setup time. 
• Items in queue. 
• Waiting for additional information. 

 
Storage/Inventory 
• Inventory materials, finished products. 
 
Reject 
• Items rejected. 
• What happens to rejected part and subsequent 
parts? 
Here are just a few of the typical symbols used in process mapping. By using symbols and words, a 
picture of a company’s manufacturing process can be drawn. 
 
Figure 9–1: Sample Process Map for 
Order Entry 
Common tools used with FMEA     55

Block Diagrams/Functional Flow Diagrams 
Block diagrams illustrate the operation, interrelationships and interdependencies of the 
functions of a system, which are required to show the sequence and the series dependence 
or independence of functions and operations. Block diagrams may be constructed in 
conjunction with, or after, defining the system and shall present the system breakdown of 
its major functions. More than one block diagram is sometimes required to represent 
alternative modes of operation, depending upon the definition established for the system. 
Two types of block diagrams are used in FMEA: 
▪ Functional block diagrams—Functional block diagrams illustrate the operation and 
interrelationships between functional entities of a system as defined in engineering 
data and schematics. An example is given in Figure 9–2. 
▪ Reliability block diagrams—This type is useful for identifying the series dependence or 
independence of major components, subsystems or detail parts in achieving required 
functions. An example is given in Figure 9–3. 
 
Figure 9–2: Functional Block 
Diagram 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     56

 
Figure 9–3: Reliability Block 
Diagram 
Pareto Charts 
The Pareto Chart combines a bar graph with a cumulative line graph. The bars are placed 
from left to right in descending order. The cumulative line graph shows the percent 
contribution of all preceding bars. The Pareto Chart shows where effort can be focused 
for maximum benefit. It may take two or more Pareto Charts to focus the problem to a 
level that can be successfully analyzed. 
In FMEA, Pareto Charts are usually used for the following: 
▪ Comparison of RPNs between different failure modes of the item analyzed and 
identification of high RPN failure modes. 
▪ Comparison of total RPNs between items and identification of high RPN items. The 
total RPN of each item is the summation of RPNs of all failure modes of the item. 
In either case, the team must set a cut-off RPN, where any failure modes or items with an 
RPN above that point require further attention. An example Pareto Chart for comparison 
of RPNs between different failure modes is given in Figure 9–4.  
Common tools used with FMEA     57

 
Figure 9–4: Pareto Chart for 
comparison of RPNs between 
different failure modes 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     58

CHAPTER 10  
Pitfalls with FMEA 
 
This chapter describes some major pitfalls that can arise while conducting FMEA studies. 
Prepare FMEA Team 
Inadequate preparation may: 
▪ Slow down the team; 
▪ Result in excessive study times. 
Do Not Assume Everyone Understands FMEA 
Prepare the team. This objective can be achieved through the services of risk 
management consultants. 
Choose Team Members Carefully 
The wrong team players can negatively impact the FMEA. See Chapters 12 to 16 for a 
suggested list of team members for different types of FMEA. 
Avoid Getting Sidetracked 
▪ Avoid getting off topic; 
▪ Avoid “hobby horses;” 
▪ Avoid redesigning during the FMEA. Identify Action Items for further study. 
Do Not Run Excessively Long Sessions 
FMEA sessions should not exceed six to seven hours since the team will become very 
exhausted and will be ineffective.  

Use the Right Type of FMEA Methodology 
Selecting the right type of FMEA methodology depends on which stage the product cycle 
is at. For example, during the preliminary design stage, Product/Design FMEA should be 
used to review the design of the product, while Process FMEA should be used in the 
process planning stage. 
Address Group Participation 
▪ Avoid team sessions being dominated totally by one or two people; 
▪ Ensure everyone is encouraged to input by using “round table” techniques and sharing 
the responsibility of the FMEA. 
List Action Items Effectively 
▪ Record the Action Item so that it can be acted upon by the responsible person 
designated to execute it. Avoid indecisive instructions such as “Consider studying…” 
▪ Do not propose Actions that are just “wish lists.” Excessive numbers of Actions tend to 
devalue their worth. Be critical, but not over or under zealous. 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     60

CHAPTER 11  
Product Life Cycle & FMEA 
 
This chapter outlines the application of FMEA at various stages in a product’s life cycle. 
It also introduces the use of Control Plans as a tool to document the design and process 
characteristics for the manufacturing of a product. 
Introduction 
During the process of design, development and manufacture, the following issues affect 
the reliability (safety, durability and robustness) of components: 
• Design of process and product; 
• Verification of product design;  
• Quality of parts purchased from suppliers; 
• Validation of processes for production; 
• Amount of process variation; 
• Clarity of the device instruction. 
Applying FMEA at different stages in the product’s life cycle helps in the identification 
of not only design and manufacturing defects but also the product and process 
characteristics that need to be controlled, monitored and tested. Such information, 
together with the methods of monitoring and testing, are documented in the Control Plan. 
A Control Plan is a written summary of the producer’s quality planning actions for a 
specific process, product and/or service. The Control Plan lists all process parameters and 
design characteristics considered important to customer satisfaction and which require 
specific quality planning actions. It also describes the actions and reactions required to 
ensure that the process is maintained in a state of statistical control, as agreed upon 
between the design team, customer and supplier. It supports verification and validation of 
the product and the process. It also helps minimize process variation. 
Figure 11–1 is an illustration of how various types of FMEAs and Control Plans can 
be integrated into the product’s life cycle. The various types of FMEAs in Figure 11–1, 
their application in the product’s life cycle and the use of Control Plans are described in 
the following sections. The various FMEA methodologies are discussed in Chapters 12 to 
16.  

 
Figure 11–1: Relationship between 
FMEA, Control Plan and product 
cycle. 
Different Types of FMEAs 
Table 11–1 summaries the focuses of the various types of FMEAs. Each type of FMEA is 
briefly described below: 
Product/Design FMEA (D-FMEA) 
The primary focus of D-FMEA is on the product. This includes the components/parts, 
raw materials used and the features/characteristics of the product. The D-FMEA is 
important in a product’s life cycle as approximately 76 percent of all engineering changes 
are due to the correction of bad designs, and the rest are the result of other improvements. 
Therefore, identifying all potential failures in the design stage is crucial. 
Process FMEA (P-FMEA) 
Process FMEA focuses on the manufacturing process, including the process steps, 
process equipment, process conditions, tooling/fixtures, operator errors, materials quality 
and so on. This methodology identifies potential or known failure modes and provides 
follow-up and corrective actions before the first or subsequent production runs. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     62

Application FMEA (A-FMEA) 
Application FMEA focuses on the design application. There are two types of A-FMEA: 
supplier-side A-FMEA and downstream customer-side A-FMEA. The purpose of the 
supplier-side A-FMEA is to detect any potential failures of the product relating to the 
application, design and manufacturing processes of parts and materials acquired from an 
outside supplier. The downstream customer-side A-FMEA investigates the effects of the 
customer’s application of the product on the product itself and on the customer. It is used 
to eliminate confusion and customer complaints.  
Service FMEA (S-FMEA) 
Service FMEA focuses on field service after sales—for example, serviceability, spare 
parts availability and service manpower availability. The objectives of the FMEA are to 
define, demonstrate and maximize solutions in response to quality, reliability, 
maintainability, cost and productivity as defined by the design specifications and the 
customer. These goals are achieved through the active participation of personnel in the 
departments of customer service, product development, research, quality assurance, 
marketing and operations. Thus, the focus of the Service FMEA is to minimize failure 
effects on the service, regardless of what level of FMEA is performed, and to maximize 
customer satisfaction. 
Table 11–1: Focuses of various types of FMEAs 
Type 
of 
FMEA 
Product 
/Design 
FMEA  
Process 
FMEA 
Application 
FMEA/ 
Supplier 
Side 
Appl 
ication 
FMEA/Down
stream 
Customer 
Side 
Service 
FMEA 
Review 
Item 
Design of the 
product 
Process 
(manufacturing 
and assembly 
processes) 
Your product 
& the 
application 
process 
Your product 
customer’s 
process 
Product 
Focus 
Determine what 
could go wrong 
with the product 
in both 
manufacturing 
operations and 
in services as a 
result of 
weaknesses in 
the design 
Concentrate on 
potential failures 
during 
manufacturing 
and in service 
resulting from 
non-compliance 
to specification 
and/or design 
intent 
Focus on 
failures of your 
product 
relating to 
parts and 
components 
from outside 
suppliers 
Focus on 
failures of your 
product, which 
affect 
downstream 
customer’s 
process 
Minimize 
service failures 
on the total 
organization 
Failure
On product, e.g.
On
On the product On the product 
On the
Product life cycle & FMEA     63

Modes 
components, 
sub-systems, 
sub-assemblies 
manufacturing & 
process, e.g. 
equipment, 
machines, 
tooling, process 
steps 
product/service 
Causes From 
engineering 
efforts, e.g. 
• Improper 
tolerance 
• Incorrect stress 
calculations 
• Wrong 
assumptions 
From 
manufacturing 
and process, e.g. 
• Missing parts 
• Adjustment 
error 
• Equipment not 
set up properly 
• Hardware 
failure 
From the 
supplier, e.g. 
• Ambiguous 
instruction 
• Insufficient 
information in 
user manual 
From the 
customer, e.g. 
• Wrong 
interpretation of 
instruction 
From the 
service 
provider, e.g. 
• Human error 
• Failure to 
enforce process 
and quality 
controls 
• Improper 
selection of 
component 
parts 
Effects 
• Impacts to the 
item being 
reviewed (Local 
effects) 
• Impacts on the 
end user (End 
effects) 
• Impacts 
between local 
and end user 
(Next higher 
level effects) 
• Impacts on the 
operation itself 
(Local process 
effects) 
• Impacts to 
downstream 
operations 
(Downstream 
process effects) 
• The end user of 
the produced 
product (End 
Product Effects) 
• Impacts on 
the significant 
characteristics 
of the product 
(Local effects) 
• Impacts on 
the end user 
(End effects) 
• Impacts on the 
significant 
characteristics of 
the product 
(Local effects) 
• Impacts on the 
end user (End 
effects) 
• Impacts on 
the 
product/service 
(Local effects) 
• Impacts on 
the end user 
(End effects) 
Integration of FMEA and Control Plan to Product Cycle 
Based on Figure 11–1, the following discusses the integration of the FMEAs and Control 
Plan to the product’s life cycle. 
Feasibility Phase 
At this stage, financial and technological feasibility studies are established. The 
feasibility phase is concluded with the product design target specifications. 
Product Design and Development Phase 
At the beginning of the design phase, several candidate concepts are usually developed 
based on the product design target specifications established in the feasibility phase. 
Design FMEA (D-FMEA) can be used in the selection of the most promising concept by 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     64

providing a means of locating respective weaknesses. Although there is often little 
information made available at this stage, the failure modes can either be established 
through design analysis or recalls of products with similar design. The causes of failure 
modes would be mainly engineering related. 
Once a design is selected, the associated critical characteristics identified in D-FMEA 
are recorded in the Control Plan. The primary purpose of the Control Plan at this stage is 
to document and communicate the initial plan for process control. At the end of the 
design phase, preliminary design and mechanical drawings are available, and the basic 
process operations (manufacturing and assembly) have been defined. 
During the development phase, before building the prototype, a more detailed D-
FMEA can be performed to minimize design defects, eliminate all high-severity hazards 
and reduce as many medium- and low-severity hazards as possible. As there is 
considerable flexibility at this early design stage, the cost of major changes to make the 
device inherently safer would be minimal. The critical design characteristics identified in 
the FMEA are recorded in the Control Plan (prototype Control Plan).  
Process Design and Development Phase 
Based on the product criteria, features and mission requirements, conceptual process 
designs are established. A preliminary Process FMEA (P-FMEA) can be used in the 
selection of the most promising concept by providing a means of locating respective 
weaknesses. The preliminary P-FMEA is also used to solidify product design 
characteristics and manufacturing processes. When the process design is selected, the P-
FMEA is expanded by incorporating product characteristics that are identified in the 
Control Plan. The failure modes in the D-FMEA identify their own causes in the system. 
These failure modes, which affect the production processes, will also be used for the P-
FMEA. 
At the end of the development phase, the P-FMEA reflects the final design of both the 
product and process and provides risk control/mitigation activities for personnel in 
production, product support and quality control. The critical process characteristics 
identified in the FMEA are recorded in the Control Plan (pre-launch Control Plan). 
Purchasing Phase 
At this stage, production and tooling planning take place with the P-FMEA focusing on 
the key characteristics of the processes in production. 
A-FMEA (supplier side) can be used to evaluate the potential process failures 
resulting from application of parts, components and materials from outside suppliers. The 
causes are due to suppliers’ manufacturing processes or designs, but the effects would be 
on the respective product manufacturing process. The failure modes in the A-FMEA 
identify their own causes in the system. These failure modes, which affect the 
manufacturing process, will also be used for the P-FMEA. The key characteristics 
identified in the FMEA would be recorded in the Control Plan (production Control Plan).  
Product life cycle & FMEA     65

Production Phase 
The production Control Plan is executed in the production phase. Prior to post-production 
activities (e.g. product verification, packaging, distribution and servicing), A-FMEA 
(customer side) can be used for evaluating the application of the product by the customer 
(if the product is involved in the customer’s downstream manufacturing process) or the 
end user (if it is the end product, e.g. reviewing the user instruction manual). 
In the S-FMEA, the end product is the focus. It is very difficult to evaluate the entire 
service, especially in the early stage or initiation of the services. In most cases, the 
service evaluation develops over time and as such the S-FMEA becomes a living 
document to reflect the changes of the services. The failure causes in the D-FMEA and P-
FMEA, if not corrected, would have an effect on the end product, which in turn would 
result in failure modes in the Service FMEA and would lead to product recalls. 
Table 11–2 shows how each type of FMEA interacts with the Control Plan at various 
stages of the product cycle. 
Table 11–2: Relationship between FMEA, 
product cycle and Control Plan 
Stages in 
Product  
Cycle 
Function 
Type of 
 FMEA 
FMEA 
 Focuses 
Control 
Plan  
Status 
Product Design 
Engineering 
Product FMEA 
Balanced Design 
Started 
Process Planning 
Processing 
Process FMEA 
Process Seq. & Flow 
Study 
Continued 
Sourcing & 
Suppliers, Quality 
Planning 
Purchasing 
Supplier-Side 
Application FMEA 
Key Characteristics of 
Parts Identified 
Continued 
Production, 
Tooling Planning 
Manufacturing Process FMEA 
Key Characteristics of 
Process Identified 
Executed 
Product Usage & 
Application 
Services 
Customer-Side 
Application FMEA & 
Service FMEA 
Key Characteristics of 
Product Identified 
Monitored 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     66

CHAPTER 12  
Product/Design FMEA 
 
This chapter describes the objectives of Product/Design FMEA (D-FMEA), 
recommended team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA 
worksheet. It also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. Based 
on the company’s needs and requirements, additional information can be included in the 
worksheet. The rating guidelines provided in this chapter are not universal, and each 
company can modify them to reflect the needs of its organization and the product, as well 
as the concerns of customers. 
Objectives 
▪ Focus on failure modes caused by design deficiencies; 
▪ Maximize design quality, reliability and maintainability while optimizing expenses; 
▪ Aim to identify, eliminate or minimize the impact of potential risks to the product and 
user to an acceptable level with the current state of technology; 
▪ Identify critical and/or significant characteristics of the product; 
▪ Prioritize the engineering efforts and resources based on the assessment of potential 
failure impacts to the product or user; 
▪ Establish links between design engineering efforts and production, quality and service, 
together with marketing efforts. 
Recommended Team Members 
The following is a list of recommended team members for Product/Design FMEA: 
▪ Product and Development/Manufacturing Engineering; 
▪ Quality Assurance; 
▪ Research and Development; 
▪ Test Engineering; 
▪ Reliability Engineering; 
▪ Purchasing/Marketing/Customer Service/Complaints Group; 
▪ Legal team for product liability purposes for new product development. 

Recommended Information in the Product/Design FMEA Worksheet 
A recommended worksheet for documenting a D-FMEA is given in Figure 12–1. The 
worksheet is divided into two main sections: general information inserted above the 
columns and the actual worksheet columns. Each item in the worksheet is described 
below.  
General Information 
1. System, Subsystem, or 
Component name and number 
Indicate the level of analysis and enter the system, 
subsystem or component name and number 
2. Prepared By 
Indicate the name, telephone number and company of the 
engineer responsible of preparing the FMEA 
3. Design Responsibility 
Record the salable number studied or reviewed. 
4. FMEA Number 
Enter the D-FMEA number used for tracking the 
document. 
5. Page__ of__ 
Indicate the number of pages of the FMEA worksheet. 
6. Key Date 
Indicate the initial FMEA due date, this date should not 
exceed the schedule production design release date. 
7. FMEA Date (Orig.) 
Specify the date on which the original FMEA study was 
conducted, and the latest revision date. 
8. FMEA Date 
(Rev.) 
Specify the latest revision date. 
9. Core Team 
Enter the names of individuals and departments that have authority to 
identify and/or perform tasks. 
Columns On the D-FMEA Worksheet 
10. Item 
Enter the reviewed item’s name and part number. 
11. Item 
Function 
Define the function of the item being studied: the purpose, goal or objective of 
the design. 
Note: The reviewed item may have more than one function, and each of these 
functions may have different potential failure modes. In this case, list the 
functions separately 
12. Potential 
Failure Mode 
List the potential failure modes based on failure of the component, subsystem 
or system under review to perform or deliver the intended function. A good 
starting point is a review of past things-gone-wrong, concerns, reports and 
group brainstorming. 
Examples: leaking, cracked, loosened, inadequate support. 
13. Potential 
Effect(s) of 
Failure 
The potential effects of failure are the impacts and consequences to the 
affected area. State clearly if the failure mode could impact safety or non-
compliance to regulations.  
Examples of failure effects: 
Noise, erratic operation, inoperative, regulatory non-compliance. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     68

14. Severity(S) 
Severity is an assessment of the most serious effect for a given failure mode. 
Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A 
suggested severity ranking is given in Table 12–1. 
Note: The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If 
such a design modification is attainable, the failure can possibly be 
eliminated. 
15. Class 
Use this column to classify any special characteristic, i.e. control, critical, 
major, key, and significant. This label is not the function. Control items may 
be controlled by government regulations because failure might affect the 
general public. Critical items may be safety-related items. Significant items 
are those, which the designer/engineer has identified as having particular 
importance to the product. 
16. Potential 
Cause(s)/ 
Mechanism(s) of 
Failure 
List all potential causes and or failure mechanism for each failure mode. 
These causes of failure are an indication of design weakness. Typical 
failure causes may include, but are not limited to: 
○ Incorrect material specified; 
○ Over-stressing; 
○ Improper friction material specified; 
○ Excessive heat; 
○ Corrosion. 
17. Occurrence (O) 
Occurrence is the likelihood that a specific failure mode, which is the 
result of a specific cause under current design control, will happen. 
Occurrence is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. 
A suggested occurrence ranking is given in Table 12–2. 
18. Current Design 
Controls 
Prevention 
Indicate all controls intended to prevent the causes or mechanism of 
failure from occurring, or reduce their rates of occurrence. Current 
controls include those used with the same or similar designs. 
The initial occurrence rankings will be affected by the prevention controls, 
provided they are integrated as part of the design intent. 
19. Current Design 
Controls 
Detection 
Indicate all controls (analytical of physical methods) intended to detect the 
causes or mechanism before the item is released to production. Current 
controls include those used with the same or similar designs. 
The initial rankings for detection will be based on design controls that 
either detects the cause of failure or the failure mode. 
20. Detection(D) 
Detection is an assessment of the ability of current design controls to 
identify any potential failure mode if it does occur. Detection is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested detection 
ranking is given in Table 12–3. 
21. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
The Risk Priority Number represents the multi-effects of severity, 
occurrence and detection. The RPN is calculated by multiplying together 
these three ratings: 
 
Severity, occurrence and detection must have a value greater than zero. 
22. Recommended 
Actions 
List your study group’s recommendations for preventing the failure mode 
or limiting its consequences. 
The following are examples of corrective actions:  
Product/Design FMEA     69

○ Revised design geometry and/or tolerances; 
○ Revised material specification; 
○ Design of experiments; 
○ Revised test plan. 
In all cases where the effect of an identified potential failure mode could 
be a hazard to the end user, preventive/corrective actions should be 
considered to avoid the failure mode by eliminating, mitigating or 
controlling the causes. 
23. Responsibility 
State the name(s) of the team member(s) responsible for ensuring that the 
recommendations are implemented or properly addressed. 
24. Target 
Completion Date 
Specify the target date for completing the necessary actions. 
Action Results 
After the preventive/corrective action has been identified, estimate and record the 
resulting severity, occurrence and detection rankings. Calculate the resulting RPN. If no 
actions are taken, leave the related ranking columns blank.  
25. Actions Taken 
List all corrective measures that have been implemented. 
26. Severity 
The severity rating in this section should indicate the seriousness of the 
effects of the potential design failure mode after the corrective measures 
have been implemented. 
27. Occurrence 
Indicate the occurrence rating after the corrective measures in the “Existing 
Product Conditions” section have been implemented. 
28. Detection 
Record the resulting detection rating after the corrective actions have been 
identified. 
29. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
Recalculate the Risk Priority Number after the actions have been taken:  
 
Suggested Risk Guidelines for Product/Design FMEA (D-FMEA) 
The suggested risk guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection of D-FMEA are 
given in Tables 12–1, 12–2 and 12–3, respectively.  
Table 12–1: Suggested Severity Ranking for D-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Effect 
Rank 
Criteria 
None 
1 
No effect. 
Very Slight 
2 
Negligible effect on product performance. User not affected. 
Slight 
3 
Slight effect on product performance. Non-vital faults will be noticed 
most of the time. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     70

Minor 
4 
Minor effect on product performance. User slightly dissatisfied. 
Moderate 
5 
Reduced performance with gradual performance degradation. User 
dissatisfied. 
Severe 
6 
Product operable and safe but performance degraded. User dissatisfied. 
High Severity 
7 
Product performance severely affected. User very dissatisfied. 
Very High 
Severity 
8 
Product inoperable but safe. User very dissatisfied. 
Extreme 
Severity 
9 
Product failure resulting in hazardous effects highly probable. 
Compliance with government regulations in jeopardy. 
Maximum 
Severity 
10 
Product failure resulting in hazardous effects almost certain. Non-
compliance with government regulations. 
Table 12–2: Suggested Occurrence Ranking for 
D-FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Occurrence 
Rank 
Criteria 
Extremely Unlikely 
1 
Failure highly unlikely. 
Remote Likelihood 
2 
Rare number of failures likely. 
Very Low Likelihood 
3 
Very few failures likely. 
Low Likelihood 
4 
Few failures likely. 
Moderately Low Likelihood 
5 
Occasional failures likely. 
Medium Likelihood 
6 
Medium number of failures likely. 
Moderately High Likelihood 
7 
Moderately high number of failures likely. 
High Likelihood 
8 
High number of failures likely. 
Very High Likelihood 
9 
Very high number of failures likely. 
Extremely Likely 
10 
Failure almost certain. 
Table 12–3: Suggested Detection Ranking for D-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Detection 
Rank
Criteria 
Extremely Likely 
1 
Can be corrected prior to engineering prototype. 
Very High Likelihood 
2 
Can be detected and corrected prior to engineering design 
release. 
High Likelihood 
3 
Has high effectiveness. 
Moderately High 
Likelihood 
4 
Has moderately high effectiveness. 
Medium Likelihood 
5 
Has medium effectiveness. 
Product/Design FMEA     71

Moderately Low 
Likelihood 
6 
Has moderately low effectiveness. 
Low Likelihood 
7 
Has low effectiveness. 
Very Low Likelihood 
8 
Has lowest effectiveness in each applicable category. 
Remote Likelihood 
9 
Is unproven, unreliable or unknown. 
Extremely Unlikely 
10 
No design technique available or known, and/or none is 
planned. 
Figure 12–1: Sample D-FMEA 
Worksheet 
 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     72

CHAPTER 13  
Process FMEA 
 
This chapter describes the objectives of Process FMEA (P-FMEA), recommended team 
members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It also 
provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. Based on the 
company’s needs and requirements, additional information can be included in the 
worksheet. The rating guidelines provided in this chapter are not universal, and each 
company can modify them to reflect the needs of its organization and product, as well as 
the concerns of customers. 
Objectives 
• Focus on failure modes caused by process or assembly deficiencies; 
• Maximize the total process quality, reliability, maintainability and productivity while 
optimizing expenses; 
• Aim to identify, eliminate or minimize the impact of potential risks to the process and 
product, as well as to the end user to an acceptable level with the current state of 
technology;  
• Identify critical and/or significant characteristics, which help in developing Control 
Plans; 
• Prioritize the manufacturing engineering efforts and resources; 
• Establish links between manufacturing effort, design engineering, quality and service 
together with marketing efforts. 
Recommended Team Members 
The following is a list of recommended team members for Process FMEA: 
▪ Manufacturing Engineering; 
▪ Product Development; 
▪ Quality Assurance; 
▪ Reliability Engineering; 
▪ Purchasing/Marketing/Customer Service/Complaints Group; 
▪ Production Control; 

▪ Testing Engineering. 
Recommended Information in the Process FMEA Worksheet 
A recommended worksheet for documenting a P-FMEA is given in Figure 13–1. The 
worksheet is divided into two main sections: general information inserted above the 
columns and the actual worksheet columns. Each item in the worksheet is described 
below.  
General Information 
1. System, Subsystem, or 
Component name and number 
Indicate the level of analysis and enter the system, 
subsystem or component name and number 
2. Prepared By 
Indicate the name, telephone number and company of the 
engineer responsible of preparing the FMEA 
3. Process Responsibility 
Record the salable number studied or reviewed. 
4. FMEA Number 
Enter the P-FMEA number used for tracking the 
document. 
5. Page__ of__ 
Indicate the number of pages of the FMEA worksheet. 
6. Key Date 
Indicate the initial FMEA due date, this date should not 
exceed the schedule production design release date. 
7. FMEA Date (Orig.) 
Specify the date on which the original FMEA study was 
conducted, and the latest revision date. 
8. FMEA Date 
(Rev.) 
Specify the latest revision date. 
9. Core Team 
Enter the names of individuals and departments that have authority to 
identify and/or perform tasks. 
Columns On the P-FMEA Worksheet 
10. Item 
Enter the reviewed item’s name and part number. 
11. Item 
Function 
Define the function of the item being studied: the purpose, goal or objective of 
the design. 
Note: The reviewed item may have more than one function, and each of these 
functions may have different potential failure modes. In this case, list the 
functions separately 
12. Potential 
Failure 
Mode 
List the potential failure modes based on failure of the component, subsystem or 
system under review to perform or deliver the intended function. A good 
starting point is a review of past things-gone-wrong, concerns, reports and 
group brainstorming. 
Examples: leaking, cracked, loosened, inadequate support. 
13. Potential
The potential effects of failure are the impacts and consequences to the affected
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     74

Effect(s) of 
Failure 
area. State clearly if the failure mode could impact safety or non-compliance to 
regulations. 
Examples of failure effects: 
Noise, erratic operation, inoperative, regulatory non- compliance. 
14. Severity (S) Severity is an assessment of the most serious effect for a given failure mode. 
Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A 
suggested severity ranking is given in Table 13–1. 
Note: The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If such 
a design modification is attainable, the failure can possibly be eliminated. 
15. Class 
Use this column to classify any special characteristic, i.e. control, critical, 
major, key, significant. This label is not the function. Control items may be 
controlled by government regulations because failure might affect the general 
public. Critical items may be safety-related items. Significant items are those 
which the designer/engineer has identified as having particular importance to 
the product. 
16. Potential 
Cause(s)/ 
Mechanism(s) of 
Failure 
List all potential causes and or failure mechanism for each failure mode. 
These causes of failure are an indication of design weakness. Typical 
failure causes may include, but are not limited to: 
a. Incorrect material specified; 
b. Over-stressing; 
c. Improper friction material specified; 
d. Excessive heat; 
e. Corrosion. 
17. Occurrence (O) 
Occurrence is the likelihood that a specific failure mode, which is the 
result of a specific cause under current design control, will happen. 
Occurrence is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. 
A suggested occurrence ranking is given in Table 13–2. 
18. Current Process 
Controls 
Prevention 
Indicate all controls intended to prevent the causes or mechanism of failure 
from occurring, or reduce their rates of occurrence. Current controls 
include those used with the same or similar designs. 
The initial occurrence rankings will be affected by the prevention controls, 
provided they are integrated as part of the design intent. 
19. Current Process 
Controls 
Detection 
Indicate all controls (analytical of physical methods) intended to detect the 
causes or mechanism before the item is released to production. Current 
controls include those used with the same or similar designs. The initial 
rankings for detection will be based on design controls that either detects 
the cause of failure or the failure mode. 
20. Detection(D) 
Detection is an assessment of the ability of current design controls to 
identify any potential failure mode if it does occur. Detection is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested detection 
ranking is given in Table 13–3. 
21. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
The Risk Priority Number represents the multi-effects of severity, 
occurrence and detection. The RPN is calculated by multiplying together 
these three ratings: 
 
Severity, occurrence and detection must have a value greater than zero. 
Process FMEA     75

22. Recommended 
Actions 
List your study group’s recommendations for preventing the failure mode 
or limiting its consequences. 
The following are examples of corrective actions:  
○ Revised design geometry and/or tolerances; 
○ Revised material specification; 
○ Design of experiments; 
○ Revised test plan. 
In all cases where the effect of an identified potential failure mode could 
be a hazard to the end user, preventive/corrective actions should be 
considered to avoid the failure mode by eliminating, mitigating or 
controlling the causes. 
23. Responsibility 
State the name(s) of the team member(s) responsible for ensuring that the 
recommendations are implemented or properly addressed. 
24. Target 
Completion Date 
Specify the target date for completing the necessary actions. 
Action Results 
After the preventive/corrective action has been identified, estimate and record the 
resulting severity, occurrence and detection rankings. Calculate the resulting RPN. If no 
actions are taken, leave the related ranking columns blank.  
25. Actions Taken 
List all corrective measures that have been implemented. 
26. Severity 
The severity rating in this section should indicate the seriousness of the 
effects of the potential design failure mode after the corrective measures 
have been implemented. 
27. Occurrence 
Indicate the occurrence rating after the corrective measures in the “Existing 
Product Conditions” section have been implemented. 
28. Detection 
Record the resulting detection rating after the corrective actions have been 
identified. 
29. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
Recalculate the Risk Priority Number after the actions have been taken: 
 
Suggested Risk Guidelines for Process FMEA (P-FMEA) 
The suggested risk guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection of P-FMEA are 
given in Tables 13–1, 13–2 and 13–3, respectively.  
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     76

Table 13–1: Suggested Severity Ranking for P-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Effect 
Rank 
Criteria 
None 
1 
Might be noticeable by the operator (Process). Improbable/not noticeable 
by the user (Product). 
Very slight 
2 
No downstream effect (Process). Insignificant/negligible effect (Product). 
Slight 
3 
User will probably notice the effect but the effect is slight (Process and 
Product). 
Minor 
4 
Local and/or downstream processes might be affected (Process). User will 
experience minor negative impact on the product (Product). 
Moderate 
5 
Impacts will be noticeable throughout operations (Process). Reduced 
performance with gradual performance degradation. User dissatisfied 
(Product). 
Severe 
6 
Disruption to downstream process (Process). Product operable and safe but 
performance degraded. User dissatisfied (Product). 
High Severity 
7 
Significant downtime (Process). Product performance severely affected. 
User very dissatisfied (Product). 
Very High 
Severity 
8 
Significant downtime and major financial impacts (Process). Product 
inoperable but safe. User very dissatisfied (Product). 
Extreme 
Severity 
9 
Failure resulting in hazardous effects highly probable. Safety and 
regulatory concerns (Process and Product). 
Maximum 
Severity 
10 
Failure resulting in hazardous effects almost certain. Non- Injury or harm to 
operating personnel (Process). compliance with government regulations 
(Product). 
Table 13–2: Suggested Occurrence Ranking for P-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Occurrence 
Rank 
Criteria 
Extremely Unlikely 
1 
Failure highly unlikely. 
Remote Likelihood 
2 
Rare number of failures likely. 
Very Low Likelihood 
3 
Very few failures likely. 
Low Likelihood 
4 
Few failures likely. 
Moderately Low Likelihood 
5 
Occasional failures likely. 
Medium Likelihood 
6 
Medium number of failures likely. 
Moderately High Likelihood 
7 
Moderately high number of failures likely. 
High Likelihood 
8 
High number of failures likely. 
Very High Likelihood 
9 
Very high number of failures likely. 
Process FMEA     77

Extremely Likely 
10 
Failure almost certain. 
Table 13–3: Suggested Detection Ranking for P-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Detection 
Rank
Criteria 
Extremely Likely 
1 
Controls will almost certainly detect the existence of the defect. 
Very High Likelihood 
2 
Controls have a very high probability of detecting the existence 
of failure. 
High Likelihood 
3 
Has high effectiveness for detection. 
Moderately High 
Likelihood 
4 
Has moderately high effectiveness for detection. 
Medium Likelihood 
5 
Has medium effectiveness for detection. 
Moderately Low 
Likelihood 
6 
Has moderately low effectiveness for detection. 
Low Likelihood 
7 
Has low effectiveness for detection. 
Very Low Likelihood 
8 
Has lowest effectiveness in each applicable category. 
Remote Likelihood 
9 
Controls have a very low probability of detecting the existence 
of a defect. 
Extremely Unlikely 
10 
Controls will almost certainly not detect the existence of a 
defect. 
Figure 13–1: Sample P-FMEA 
Worksheet 
 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     78

CHAPTER 14  
Machinery FMEA 
 
This chapter describes the objectives of Machinery FMEA (M-FMEA), recommended 
team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It 
also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. Based on the 
company’s needs and requirements, additional information can be included in the 
worksheet. The rating guidelines provided in this chapter are not universal, and each 
company can modify them to reflect the needs of its organization and the product, as well 
as the concerns of customers. 
Objectives 
▪ Ensure that potential failure modes and their effects on the machinery were identified 
during the design and development process; 
▪ Reduce life cycle costs by improving the reliability and durability of the machinery; 
▪ Provide information for the development of an efficient preventive maintenance plan; 
▪ Aim to identify, eliminate or minimize the impact of potential risks to the product and 
user to an acceptable level with the current state of technology; 
▪ Identify critical and/or significant characteristics of the product; 
▪ Prioritize the engineering efforts and resources based on the assessment of potential 
failure impacts to the product or user; 
▪ Establish links between design engineering efforts and production, quality and service, 
together with marketing efforts. 
Recommended Team Members 
The following is a list of recommended team members for Machinery FMEA: 
▪ Machinery-responsible Engineer; 
▪ Quality Engineer; 
▪ Safety Engineer; 
▪ Production Engineer; 
▪ Reliability Engineering; 
▪ Product and Development/Manufacturing Engineering; 

▪ Purchasing/Marketing/Customer Service/Complaints Group; 
▪ Legal team for product liability purposes for new product development. 
Recommended Information in the Machinery FMEA Worksheet 
A recommended worksheet for documenting an M-FMEA is given in Figure 14–1. The 
worksheet is divided into two main sections: general information inserted above the 
columns and the actual worksheet columns. Each item in the worksheet is described 
below.  
General Information 
1. Machinery/System, 
 Subsystem, or Component 
name and number 
Indicate the level of analysis and enter the system, 
subsystem or component name and number 
2. Prepared By 
Indicate the name, telephone number and  
company of the engineer responsible of preparing the 
FMEA 
3. Design Responsibility 
Indicate the OEM, department or supplier name if 
applicable. 
4. FMEA Number 
Enter the M-FMEA number used for tracking the 
document. 
5. Page__ of__ 
Indicate the number of pages of the FMEA worksheet. 
6. Key Date 
Indicate the initial FMEA due date, this date should not 
exceed the schedule production design release date. 
7. FMEA Date 
(Orig.) 
Specify the date on which the original FMEA study was conducted, and the 
latest revision date. 
8. FMEA Date 
(Rev.) 
Specify the latest revision date. 
9. Core Team 
Enter the names of individuals and departments that have authority to 
identify and/or perform tasks. 
Columns On the M-FMEA Worksheet 
10. Item 
Enter the reviewed item’s name and part number. 
11. Item Function 
Define the function of the item being studied: the purpose, goal or objective 
of the design. 
Note: The reviewed item may have more than one function, and each of 
these functions may have different potential failure modes. In this case, list 
the functions separately 
12. Potential 
Failure Mode 
List the potential failure modes based on failure of the component, 
subsystem or system under review to perform or deliver the intended 
function. A good starting point is a review of past things-gone-wrong,
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     80

concerns, reports and group brainstorming. 
Examples: leaking, cracked, loosened, inadequate support. 
13. Potential 
Effect(s) of 
Failure 
The potential effects of failure are the impacts and consequences to the 
affected area. State clearly if the failure mode could impact safety or non-
compliance to regulations. 
Examples of failure effects: 
Noise, erratic operation, inoperative, regulatory non- compliance. 
14. Severity(S) 
Severity is an assessment of the most serious effect for a given failure 
mode. Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual 
FMEA. A suggested severity ranking is given in Table 14–1. 
Note: The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If 
such a design modification is attainable, the failure can possibly be 
eliminated. 
15. Class 
Use this column to classify any special characteristic, i.e. control, critical, 
major, key, significant. This label is not the function. Control items may 
be controlled by government regulations because failure might affect the 
general public. Critical items may be safety-related items. Significant 
items are those which the designer/engineer has identified as having 
particular importance to the product. 
16. Potential 
Cause(s)/ 
Mechanism(s) of 
Failure 
List all potential causes and or failure mechanism for each failure mode. 
These causes of failure are an indication of design weakness. Typical 
failure causes may include, but are not limited to: 
○ Incorrect material specified; 
○ Over-stressing; 
○ Improper friction material specified; 
○ Excessive heat; 
○ Corrosion. 
17. Occurrence (O) 
Occurrence is the likelihood that a specific failure mode, which is the 
result of a specific cause under current design control, will happen. 
Occurrence is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual 
FMEA. A suggested occurrence ranking is given in Table 14–2. 
18. Current 
Machinery 
Controls 
Prevention 
Indicate all controls intended to prevent the causes or mechanism of 
failure from occurring, or reduce their rates of occurrence. Current 
controls include those used with the same or similar designs. The initial 
occurrence rankings will be affected by the prevention controls, provided 
they are integrated as part of the design intent. 
19. Current 
Machinery 
Controls 
Detection 
Indicate all controls (analytical of physical methods) intended to detect 
the causes or mechanism before the item is released to production. 
Current controls include those used with the same or similar designs. The 
initial rankings for detection will be based on design controls that either 
detects the cause of failure or the failure mode. 
20. Detection(D) 
Detection is an assessment of the ability of current design controls to 
identify any potential failure mode if it does occur. Detection is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested detection 
ranking is given in Table 14–3. 
21. Risk Priority
The Risk Priority Number represents the multi-effects of severity,
Machinery FMEA     81

Number (RPN) 
occurrence and detection. The RPN is calculated by multiplying together 
these three ratings: 
 
Severity, occurrence and detection must have a value greater than zero. 
22. Recommended 
Actions 
List your study group’s recommendations for preventing the failure mode 
or limiting its consequences. 
The following are examples of corrective actions: 
○ Revised design geometry and/or tolerances; 
○ Revised material specification; 
○ Design of experiments; 
○ Revised test plan. 
In all cases where the effect of an identified potential failure mode could 
be a hazard to the end user, preventive/corrective actions should be 
considered to avoid the failure mode by eliminating, mitigating or 
controlling the causes. 
23. Responsibility 
State the name(s) of the team member(s) responsible for ensuring that the 
recommendations are implemented or properly addressed. 
24. Target 
Completion Date 
Specify the target date for completing the necessary actions actions. 
Action Results 
After the preventive/corrective action has been identified, estimate and record the 
resulting severity, occurrence and detection rankings. Calculate the resulting RPN. If no 
actions are taken, leave the related ranking columns blank. 
25. Actions 
Taken 
List all corrective measures that have been implemented. 
26. Severity 
The severity rating in this section should indicate the seriousness of the effects 
of the potential design failure mode after the corrective measures have been 
implemented. 
27. Occurrence 
Indicate the occurrence rating after the corrective measures in the “Existing 
Product Conditions” section have been implemented. 
28. Detection 
Record the resulting detection rating after the corrective actions have been 
identified. 
29. Risk Priority Number 
(RPN) 
Recalculate the Risk Priority Number after the actions have been 
taken: 
 
Suggested Risk Guidelines for Machinery FMEA (M-FMEA) 
The following risk guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection for M-FMEA shown 
in Tables 14–1, 14–2 and 14–3 respectively are extracted from SAE J1739 Section 5.  
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     82

Table 14–1: Suggested Severity Ranking for M-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Effect 
Rank
Criteria 
None 
1 
Process parameter variability within specification limits. Adjustment 
or process controls can be done during normal maintenance. 
Very Minor 
2 
Process parameter variability not within specification limits. 
Adjustment or other process controls need to be taken during 
production. No downtime and no production of defective parts. 
Minor 
3 
Downtime of up to 10 minutes but no production of defective parts. 
Very Low 
4 
Downtime of between 10 and 30 minutes but no production of 
defective parts. 
Low 
5 
Downtime of between 30 minutes and 1 hour or the production of 
defective parts for up to 1 hour. 
Moderate 
6 
Downtime of between 1 and 4 hours or the production of defective 
parts for between 1 and 2 hours. 
High 
7 
Downtime of between 4 and 8 hours or the production of defective 
parts for more than 4 hours. 
Very High 
8 
Downtime of more than 8 hours or the production of defective parts 
for more than 4 hours. 
Hazardous—With 
Warning 
9 
High severity ranking—affects operator, plant or maintenance 
personnel and safety and/or affects non-compliance with government 
regulations with warning. 
Hazardous—
Without Warning 
10 
Very high severity ranking—affects operator, plant or maintenance 
personnel and safety and/or affects non-compliance with government 
regulations without warning. 
Table 14–2: Suggested Occurrence Ranking for 
M-FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Rank 
Occurrence
Criteria: Possible Number 
of Failures within Hours of 
Operation 
Criteria: The Reliability 
Based on the User’s 
Required Time 
Failure Occurs 
every 5 Years 
1 
1 in 25,000 
R(t)=98 %: MTBF is 50 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every 2 Years 
2 
1 in 10,000 
R(t)=95 %: MTBF is 20 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Year 
3 
1 in 5,000 
R(t)=90 %: MTBF is 10 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Machinery FMEA     83

Failure Occurs 
every 6 
Months 
4 
1 in 2,500 
R(t)=85 %: MTBF is 6 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every 3 
Months 
5 
1 in 1,000 
R(t)=78 %: MTBF is 4 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Month 
6 
1 in 350 
R(t)=60 %: MTBF is 2 times 
greater than the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Week 
7 
1 in 80 
R(t)=37 %: MTBF is equal to 
the User’s required time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Day 
8 
1 in 24 
R(t)=20 %: MTBF is about 
60% of the User’s required 
time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Shift 
9 
1 in 8 
R(t)=5 %: MTBF is about 30% 
of the User’s required time. 
Failure Occurs 
every Hour 
10 
1 in 1 
R(t)<1 %: MTBF is about 10% 
of the User’s required time. 
Table 14–3: Suggested Detection Ranking for M-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Detection 
Rank
Criteria 
Almost Certain 
1 
Design controls almost certain to detect a potential cause and 
subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls not required. 
Very High 
2 
Very high chance that designs controls will detect a potential cause and 
subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls may not be required. 
High 
3 
High chance that design controls will detect a potential cause and 
subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls will prevent an imminent 
failure and isolate the cause. 
Moderately High 
Likelihood 
4 
Moderately high chance that design controls will detect a potential 
cause and subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls will prevent 
imminent failure. 
Medium 
Likelihood 
5 
Medium chance that design controls will detect a potential cause and 
subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls will prevent imminent 
failure. 
Moderately Low 
Likelihood 
6 
Low chance that design or machinery controls will detect a potential 
cause and subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls will provide an 
indicator of imminent failure. 
Low Likelihood 
7 
Design or machinery controls do not prevent the failure from occurring. 
Machinery controls will isolate the cause and subsequent failure mode 
after the failure has occurred. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     84

Very Low 
Likelihood 
8 
Remote chance that design or machinery controls will detect a potential 
cause and subsequent failure mode. Machinery controls will provide 
indication of failure. 
Remote 
Likelihood 
9 
Very remote chance that design or machinery controls will detect a 
potential cause and subsequent failure mode. 
Extremely 
Unlikely 
10 
Design or machinery controls cannot detect a potential cause and 
subsequent failure, or there are no design or machinery controls. 
Figure 14–1: Sample M-FMEA 
Worksheet 
 
 
Machinery FMEA     85

CHAPTER 15  
Application FMEA 
 
This chapter describes the objectives of Application FMEA (A-FMEA), recommended 
team members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It 
also provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. Based on the 
company’s needs and requirements, additional information can be included in the 
worksheet. The rating guidelines provided in this chapter are not universal, and each 
company can modify them to reflect the needs of its organization and product as well as 
the concerns of customers. 
Objectives 
• Focus on failure modes caused by the design application; 
• Aim to identify, eliminate or minimize the impact of potential risks associated with the 
user or customer interface to an acceptable level with the current state of technology; 
• Identify the product’s significant characteristics in terms of form, fit, function and 
appearance; 
• Identify the downstream customer’s or upstream supplier’s key characteristics that may 
affect the product’s significant characteristics;  
• Prioritize the engineering efforts and resources by assessing any potential failure 
impacts to the product or user; 
• Establish link between design engineering efforts and customer interface to ensure field 
complaints are eliminated or minimized. 
Recommended Team Members 
The following is a list of recommended team members for Application FMEA: 
▪ Product and Development/Manufacturing Engineering; 
▪ Quality Assurance; 
▪ Research & Development; 
▪ Test Engineering; 
▪ Reliability Engineering; 
▪ Purchasing/Marketing/Customer Service/Complaints Group; 

▪ Legal Counseling. 
Recommended Information in the Application FMEA Worksheet 
A recommended worksheet for documenting an A-FMEA is given in Figure 15–1. The 
worksheet is divided into two main sections: general information inserted above the 
columns and the actual worksheet columns. Each item in the worksheet is described 
below.  
General Information 
1. Product Description 
Enter the name of the product. 
2. Product Code/Model Number 
Indicate the product code and/or model number, if 
applicable. 
3. Catalog Number 
Record the salable number of the product studied or 
reviewed. 
4. Primary Product 
Responsibility 
Record the name of the project leader. 
5. FMEA Date 
Record the date on which the FMEA study is conducted. 
6. FMEA Revision Number 
Enter the revision number, if applicable. 
7. 
Product Development 
(PD) Engineer 
State the name of the product development engineer. 
8. 
Independent 
Reviewer 
Enter the name of the independent reviewer, who is a team member 
taking part in the product FMEA but who does not have direct 
responsibility for the design. 
9. 
Other Information 
Record any information not already covered in steps 1 to 8 that is 
important. 
10. Team Members 
Enter the names of the individuals who participated in the study. 
Columns On the Application FMEA Worksheet 
11. User 
Application Step 
Enter the name and/or sequence ID number of the customer’s process 
being studied. 
12. Reviewed Step 
Application 
Function 
Describe the function of the process being studied. The reviewed step may 
have more than one function, and each of these functions may have 
different potential failure modes. In this case, list the functions separately. 
13. Potential 
Function Failure 
Modes 
This is not your customer’s or supplier’s product/process failure, but rather 
the failure of your product. 
14. Potential Causes 
of Failure 
For each potential failure mode of the product, list all conceivable failure 
causes with respect to the customer/end user and supplier. The listed
Application FMEA     87

causes should pertain to your supplier’s or customer’s significant 
product/process characteristic so that the corrective actions can be aimed 
effectively and timely. 
15. Potential Effects 
of Failure 
The potential effects of failure are the impacts and consequences to the 
affected area. State clearly if the failure mode could impact safety or non-
compliance to regulations. 
This section is divided into three subsections: 
End effects: impacts on the end product user; 
Local effects: immediate impacts to the item being reviewed; 
Next high-level effects: impacts between the local and end user. 
16. Control/Critical/ 
Significant Steps 
Designate each item as being a “Control,” “Critical” or “Significant” 
step/item. This designation is not the function. Control steps/items may 
be controlled by government regulations because failure might affect 
the general public. Critical steps/items may be safety-related items. 
Significant steps/items are those of significant importance to the 
product. 
Existing Conditions 
17. Current 
Controls 
List all the controls in place intended to assist the customer/supplier to prevent 
the causes of failure from occurring, detect the causes of failure modes earlier 
should they occur, or reduce the impacts of failure. 
The preferred approach is to first use prevention controls, if possible. The 
initial occurrence rankings will be affected by the prevention controls, provided 
they are integrated as part of the design intent. The initial rankings for 
detection will be based on design controls that either detect the cause of failure 
or the failure mode. 
18. Severity 
Severity is an assessment of the failure effects on the end user, local area and 
the next high-level effects—that is, the intermediate effects that occur between 
these other two categories of effects. The severity rating applies only to the 
effects, but you must be able to specify the effects clearly enough. 
Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. 
A suggested severity ranking is given in Table 15–1. 
Note: The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If your 
company is able to carry out such design modifications, it may be possible to 
eliminate the failure. 
19. Occurrence 
Occurrence is the likelihood that a specific failure mode, which is the result of 
a specific cause under current control, will happen. Occurrence is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested occurrence 
ranking is given in Table 15–2. 
20. Detection 
Detection is an assessment of the ability of current design controls to 
identify any potential failure mode if it does occur. Detection is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested detection 
ranking is given in Table 15–3. 
21. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
The Risk Priority Number is a measure of the multi-effects of severity, 
occurrence and detection. The RPN is calculated by multiplying together 
these three values, and not through the use of a Risk Matrix: 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     88

 
Severity, occurrence and detection must have a value greater than zero. 
22. Recommended 
Corrective 
Actions 
List all of your team’s recommendations for preventing the failure mode 
or limiting its consequences. 
In all cases where the effect of an identified potential failure mode could 
be a hazard to the end user, preventive/corrective actions should be 
considered to avoid the failure mode by eliminating, mitigating or 
controlling the causes. 
23. Responsibility 
State the name of the team member who is responsible for implementing 
each recommendation. 
24. Target 
Completion Date 
Indicate the target date for completing the necessary actions for 
implementing each recommendation. 
Action Results 
After the preventive/corrective action has been identified, estimate and record the 
resulting severity, occurrence and detection rankings. Calculate the resulting RPN. If no 
actions are taken, leave the related ranking columns blank. 
25. Actions 
Taken 
Specify the corrective measures that have been implemented. 
26. Severity 
The severity rating in this section should indicate the seriousness of the effect 
of the potential design failure mode after the corrective measures have been 
identified. 
27. Occurrence 
Estimate and record the occurrence rating after the corrective action has been 
taken. 
28. Detection 
Estimate the detection rating after the corrective actions have been identified. 
29. Risk Priority Number 
(RPN) 
Recalculate the Risk Priority Number after the actions have been 
taken: 
 
30. Comments (Optional) 
Enter any supplementary comments that you want to incorporate in 
the study. 
Suggested Risk Guidelines for Application FMEA (A-FMEA) 
The suggested risk guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection of A-FMEA are 
given in Tables 15–1, 15–2 and 15–3, respectively.  
Application FMEA     89

Table 15–1: Suggested Severity Ranking for A-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Effect 
Rank Criteria 
None 
1 
Improbable/not noticeable by the user. 
Very Slight 
2 
Insignificant/negligible effect. 
Slight 
3 
User will probably notice the effect but the effect is only slight. 
Minor 
4 
User will experience minor negative impact on the product. 
Moderate 
5 
Reduced performance with gradual performance degradation. User 
dissatisfied (Product). 
Severe 
6 
Product operable and safe but performance degraded. User dissatisfied. 
High Severity 
7 
Product performance severely affected. User very dissatisfied. 
Very High 
Severity 
8 
Product inoperable but safe. User very dissatisfied. 
Extreme 
Severity 
9 
Failure resulting in hazardous effects highly probable. Safety and 
regulatory concerns. 
Maximum 
Severity 
10 
Failure resulting in hazardous effects almost certain. 
Table 15–2: Suggested Occurrence Ranking for 
A-FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Occurrence 
Rank 
Criteria 
Extremely Unlikely 
1 
Failure highly unlikely. 
Remote Likelihood 
2 
Rare number of failures likely. 
Very Low Likelihood 
3 
Very few failures likely. 
Low Likelihood 
4 
Few failures likely. 
Moderately Low Likelihood 
5 
Occasional failures likely. 
Medium Likelihood 
6 
Medium number of failures likely. 
Moderately High Likelihood 
7 
Moderately high number of failures likely. 
High Likelihood 
8 
High number of failures likely. 
Very High Likelihood 
9 
Very high number of failures likely. 
Extremely Likely 
10 
Failure almost certain. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     90

Table 15–3: Suggested Detection Ranking for A-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Detection 
Rank Criteria 
Extremely Likely 
1 
Controls will almost certainly detect the existence of the defect. 
Supply chain detects. 
Very High 
Likelihood 
2 
Controls have a very high probability of detecting the existence of 
failure. User will detect prior to purchasing. 
High Likelihood 
3 
User will be able to detect when package is open. 
Moderately High 
Likelihood 
4 
Defect is detectable prior to using the product. 
Medium Likelihood 
5 
Has medium effectiveness for detection. 
Moderately Low 
Likelihood 
6 
Defect is detectable during use. User will be able to correct it. 
Low Likelihood 
7 
Defect is detectable after use. User will be able to correct the 
defect/situation. 
Very Low 
Likelihood 
8 
Defect is detectable after use. User will be able to correct the 
defect/situation with certain limitations. 
Remote Likelihood 
9 
Defect is detectable after use. User won’t be able to correct it. 
Extremely Unlikely 
10 
Controls will almost certainly not detect the existence of a defect. 
Undetectable until failure occurs. 
Figure 15–1: Sample A-FMEA 
Worksheet 
 
 
Application FMEA     91

CHAPTER 16  
Service FMEA 
 
This chapter describes the objectives of Service FMEA (S-FMEA), recommended team 
members and recommended information to be included in the FMEA worksheet. It also 
provides rating guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection. Based on the 
company’s needs and requirements, additional information can be included in the 
worksheet. The rating guidelines provided in this chapter are not universal, and each 
company can modify them to reflect the needs of its organization and product, as well as 
the concerns of customers. 
Objectives 
• Focus on failure modes caused by deficiencies of field service after sales; 
• Maximize the customer satisfaction through quality reliability and service; 
• Aim to identify, eliminate or minimize the impact of potential risks to the process, 
operation, product, user or customer to an acceptable level with the current state of 
technology; 
• Identify critical and/or significant tasks or processes; 
• Establish a priority for improvement actions. 
Recommended Team Members 
The following is a list of recommended team members for Service FMEA:  
▪ Department Head; 
▪ Department Supervisor; 
▪ Personnel involved with the service; 
▪ Marketing Representatives; 
▪ Material Manager; 
▪ Field Service Manger. 

Recommended Information in the Service FMEA Worksheet 
A recommended worksheet for documenting an S-FMEA is given in Figure 16–1. The 
worksheet is divided into two main sections: general information inserted above the 
columns and the actual worksheet columns. Each item in the worksheet is described 
below. 
General Information 
1. 
Product 
Description 
Enter the name of the product. 
2. 
Product 
Code/Model 
Number 
Indicate the product code and/or model number, if applicable. 
3. 
Catalog Number 
Record the salable number studied or reviewed. 
4. 
Service Date 
Identify the date (month/day/year) that the service/complaint was 
recorded. 
5. 
Product Release 
Date 
Record the date the product was marketed/shipped from the 
manufacturing site. 
6. 
Involvement of 
Suppliers 
State the names of contact people and the names of the companies. 
7. 
FMEA Date 
Record the date on which the FMEA study is conducted. 
8. 
FMEA Revision 
Number 
Enter the revision number, if applicable. 
9. 
Quality Assurance 
Manager 
Enter the name of the quality assurance manager. 
10. Independent 
Reviewer 
State the name of the independent reviewer, who is a team member 
taking part in the product FMEA but who is not directly responsible for 
the design. 
11. Other Information Enter any other information not covered in the above items that you 
want to include. 
12. Team Members 
Enter the names of individuals who participated in the study. 
Columns On the Service FMEA Worksheet 
13. Service 
Identification 
Identify the service name, reference number or service code, as 
appropriate. 
14. Function 
Describe the function of the service being studied: purpose, goal or 
objective of the service. The reviewed item may have more than one 
function and each of these functions may have different potential failure 
modes, in which case you must list the functions separately. 
Service FMEA     93

15. Potential 
Failure Modes 
Service failures occur when a service does not adequately protect against 
risks of injury, fails to perform intended functions safely, fails to minimize 
avoidable consequences in the event of an accident, or fails to deliver the 
expected service. 
Examples of failure modes: 
○ Bad service; 
○ Poor communication; 
○ Poor customer service; 
○ Cashier not knowledgeable about returns. 
16. Potential Causes 
of Failure 
The cause of a service failure mode is the service deficiency that results in 
the failure mode. The basic questions to ask are: 
○ In what ways can this service fail to perform its intended function and 
why? 
○ What circumstances could cause the failure? 
○ How or why can the service fail to meet its customer specifications? 
Examples of potential causes of failure: 
○ Improper selection of component parts; 
○ Inadequate control procedures; 
○ Failure to enforce process and quality controls; 
○ Human error;  
○ Improper training. 
17. Potential Effects of 
Failure 
The potential effects of failure are the impacts and consequences to the 
affected area. State clearly if the failure mode could impact safety or 
non-compliance to regulations. 
The questions usually asked are: 
○ What does the customer experience as a result of the failure mode 
described? 
○ What happens or what are the ramifications of this problem or failure? 
Often, the failure effect is evaluated from a customer’s perspective or 
experience. Examples of potential effects of failure may be: 
○ Task function incomplete; 
○ Poor service performance; 
○ Customer completely dissatisfied; 
○ May not comply with government regulations. 
18. Control/Critical/ 
Significant Items 
Designate each item as being a “Control,” “Critical” or Significant item. 
This label is not the function. Control items may be controlled by 
government regulations because failure might affect the general public. 
Critical items may be safety-related items. Significant items are those 
which the designer/engineer has identified as being of significant 
importance to the product. 
Existing Conditions 
19. Current 
Controls 
List all controls intended to prevent the causes of failure from occurring, detect 
the causes of failure modes earlier should they occur, or reduce the impacts of 
failure. 
The preferred approach is to first use prevention controls, if possible. The initial 
occurrence rankings will be affected by the prevention controls, provided they are 
integrated as part of the design intent. The initial rankings for detection will be
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     94

based on design controls that either detect the cause of failure or the failure mode. 
Typical controls may include:  
○ Checklists for completeness of the documentation; 
○ Trail testing; 
○ Design of experiments; 
○ Process verification testing. 
20. Severity 
Severity is an assessment of the failure effects on the end user, the local 
area and the next high level effects—that is, the intermediate effects that 
occur between these other two categories of effects. The next higher 
severity rating applies only to the effects, but the effects must be specified 
clearly enough. 
Severity is a relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. 
A suggested severity ranking is given in Table 16–1. 
Note: The severity can be reduced only through a change in the design. If 
such a design change is attainable, the failure can possibly be eliminated. 
21. Occurrence 
Occurrence is the likelihood that a specific failure mode, which results 
from a specific cause under current control, will happen. Occurrence is a 
relative ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested 
occurrence ranking is given in Table 16–2. 
22. Detection 
Detection is an assessment of the ability of current design controls to 
identify any potential failure mode if it does occur. Detection is a relative 
ranking within the scope of the individual FMEA. A suggested detection 
ranking is given in Table 16–3. 
23. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
A Risk Priority Number is a quantitative measure of the multi-effects of 
severity, occurrence and detection. No Risk Matrix is used. Instead, you 
must multiply these three values together: 
 
Severity, occurrence and detection must all have a value greater than zero. 
24. Recommended 
Corrective 
Actions 
List the recommended actions to remedy the situation. 
In all cases where the effect of an identified potential failure mode could be 
a hazard to the end user, preventive/corrective actions should be considered 
to avoid the failure mode by eliminating, mitigating or controlling the 
causes. 
Typical recommendations may be: 
○ Add built-in detection devices; 
○ Provide alternatives to the design/service; 
○ Add redundant subsystems. 
25. Responsibility 
State the name of the team member who is responsible for 
implementing each recommendation. 
26. Target Completion 
Date 
Indicate the target date for completing the necessary actions for 
implementing each recommendation. 
Service FMEA     95

Action Results 
After the preventive/corrective action has been identified, estimate and record the 
resulting severity, occurrence and detection rankings. Calculate the resulting RPN. If no 
actions are taken, leave the related ranking columns blank.  
27. Actions Taken 
List the corrective measures that have been implemented. 
28. Severity 
The severity rating in this section should indicate the seriousness of the 
effect of the potential design failure mode after the corrective measures have 
been implemented. 
29. Occurrence 
Indicate the occurrence rating after the corrective action has been identified 
in the “Existing Product Conditions” section. 
30. Detection 
Record the resulting detection rating after the corrective actions have been 
identified. 
31. Risk Priority 
Number (RPN) 
Recalculate the Risk Priority Number after the actions have been taken: 
 
32. Comments 
(Optional) 
Record any further comments that you want to include in the study. 
Suggested Risk Guidelines for Service FMEA (S-FMEA) 
The suggested risk guidelines for severity, occurrence and detection of S-FMEA are 
given in Tables 16–1, 16–2 and 16–3, respectively.  
Table 16–1: Suggested Severity Ranking for S-
FMEA (1-10 qualitative scale) 
Effect 
Rank Criteria 
None 
1 
Improbable/not noticeable by the user (Product). 
Might be noticeable by the operator (Process). 
Very Slight 
2 
Insignificant/negligible effect (Product). 
No downstream effect (Process). 
Slight 
3 
User will probably notice the effect but the effect is slight (Product and 
Process). 
Minor 
4 
User will experience minor negative impact on the product (Product). 
Local and/or downstream processes might be affected (Process). 
Moderate 
5 
Reduced performance with gradual performance degradation. User 
dissatisfied (Product). 
Impacts will be noticeable throughout operations (Process). 
Severe 
6 
Product operable and safe but performance degraded. User dissatisfied 
(Product). 
Disruption to downstream process (Process). 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     96

High Severity 7 
Product performance severely affected. User very dissatisfied (Product). 
Significant downtime (Process). 
Very High 
Severity 
8 
Product inoperable but safe. User very dissatisfied (Product).  
Significant downtime and major financial impacts (Process). 
Extreme 
Severity 
9 
Failure resulting in hazardous effects highly probable. Safety and 
regulatory concerns (Product and Process). 
Maximum 
Severity 
10 
Hazardous effects with injury or harm to operating personnel almost 
certain. Non-compliance with government regulations (Process). 
Table 16–2: Suggested Occurrence Ranking for S-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Occurrence 
Rank 
Criteria 
Extremely Unlikely 
1 
Failure highly unlikely. 
Remote Likelihood 
2 
Rare number of failures likely. 
Very Low Likelihood 
3 
Very few failures likely. 
Low Likelihood 
4 
Few failures likely. 
Moderately Low Likelihood 
5 
Occasional failures likely. 
Medium Likelihood 
6 
Medium number of failures likely. 
Moderately High Likelihood 
7 
Moderately high number of failures likely. 
High Likelihood 
8 
High number of failures likely. 
Very High Likelihood 
9 
Very high number of failures likely. 
Extremely Likely 
10 
Failure almost certain. 
Table 16–3: Suggested Detection Ranking for S-
FMEA (1–10 qualitative scale) 
Detection 
Rank Criteria 
Extremely Likely 
1 
Controls will almost certainly detect the existence of the defect. 
Very High Likelihood 
2 
Controls have a very high probability of detecting the existence 
of failure. 
High Likelihood 
3 
Has high effectiveness for detection. 
Moderately High 
Likelihood 
4 
Has moderately high effectiveness for detection. 
Medium Likelihood 
5 
Has medium effectiveness for detection. 
Moderately Low 
Likelihood 
6 
Has moderately low effectiveness for detection. 
Low Likelihood 
7 
Has low effectiveness for detection. 
Service FMEA     97

Very Low Likelihood 
8 
Has lowest effectiveness in each applicable category. 
Remote Likelihood 
9 
Controls have a very low probability of detecting the existence 
of a defect. 
Extremely Unlikely 
10 
Controls will almost certainly not detect the existence of a 
defect. 
Figure 16–1: Sample S-FMEA 
Worksheet 
 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     98

CHAPTER 17  
Hardware and Software FMEA 
 
Failure Mode and Effects Analysis is applied to a wide variety of products, from single-
component systems to complex multi-component systems. As discussed in the preceding 
chapters, recent applications of FMEA have extended the analysis to the processes by 
which a product is built as well as to the software that contains the instructions for the 
functionality of the system 
Hardware FMEA 
Hardware FMEAs are applied to electrical, mechanical and hydraulic subsystems and the 
interfaces between these subsystems. The technique is first applied early in the design 
cycle after the major functional components and their interfaces have been defined. 
Three types of analysis can be performed in a Hardware FMEA: 
• Functional analysis; 
• Interface analysis; 
• Detail analysis. 
In functional analysis, failure modes appropriate to each functional component are 
evaluated. Typical functional failure modes are that a particular function is not performed 
or it is performed incorrectly. When performing functional failure analysis, the team must 
be aware of the environment in which the system/equipment operates and the different 
operating modes. This knowledge would enable the team to effectively identify the 
failure consequences for different operating modes, as opposed to a general list of failure 
consequences. 
Hardware interface failure analysis is performed on the physical interfaces between 
major functional system elements, which are usually called Line Replaceable Units or 
LRUs. Typical failure modes considered in the interface failure analysis are low pressure 
in a hydraulic line, no grounding of an electric cable, etc. 
Hardware detailed failure analysis is done at the smallest/lowest component level of 
design and involves individual system components. The Reliability Analysis Center 
(http://rac.iitri.org/) contains failure modes associated with most of the components. 
Typical failure modes are: 
• Stuck high; 

• Stuck low; 
• Open; 
• Closed; 
• Short; 
• Binding or sticking; 
• Excessive play; 
• Contaminated. 
Software FMEA 
Software FMEA is done on programs, related data elements, execution of tasks that 
implement various system functions, program interfaces with hardware and interfaces 
between different programs or tasks. 
Software FMEAs are quite labor intensive and costly. Therefore, it is crucial that the 
scope of the FMEA and the limit are defined clearly prior to the analysis. Software 
FMEA costs can be minimized if the software system has been designed with effective 
partitioning between critical and non-critical software elements. 
The Software FMEA team assumes that the design—as represented in design 
documents, pseudo code and later high-level language code—is an accurate 
representation of the system that will be implemented.  
Software FMEA too can be analyzed based on functional, interface or detailed 
analysis. 
Software Functional FMEA is applied to the Computer Software Configuration Item 
(CSCI) during top-level software design. The primary outputs of the Software Functional 
FMEA are used to identify software architectural changes to reduce failure exposure and 
to identify requirements to ensure that incorrect software behavior can be detected and 
appropriate system corrective actions are implemented. In most cases, the following four 
failure modes are of particular interest when applied to the software elements within the 
architecture: 
• Failure to execute; 
• Incomplete execution; 
• Execution at an incorrect time; 
• Errors in the software element’s assigned functioning. 
Software Interface FMEA focuses on the interface/linkage between two or more separate 
software or hardware elements. For example, this could be between the systems for 
messaging and data transfer. The failure modes, such as incorrect data transfer, etc., could 
be postulated to evaluate the effects on the system. The following four failure modes are 
applied to each software interface: 
• Failure of the interface to update a value; 
• Incomplete update of the interface value; 
• Updates to interface values occur at an incorrect time; 
• Errors in the values or messages provided at the software interface. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     100

Software Detailed FMEA is used to evaluate the impact of single variable or instruction 
failure. The analysis is generally conducted on systems that do not include adequate 
hardware protection of memory elements, processing results (e.g. arithmetic residue 
codes, etc.) and data transfers. The intent of the Detailed FMEA is to supplement the 
Functional and Interface FMEAs with a detailed assessment of the response of the as-
developed software to potential faults and failures. If the language used is not limited to 
well-defined elements, the results of a Software Detailed FMEA may be incomplete or 
inaccurate. 
 
Hardware and software FMEA     101

CHAPTER 18  
Analysis of FMEA Results 
 
The following are used to analyze and evaluate the state of the system for which the 
FMEA has been conducted. 
Failure Mode Ratios 
Failure Mode Ratio is the fraction of item failures that are in the given failure mode. Item 
failure modes are considered to be mutually exclusive and the set of failure modes 
complete. Therefore, the sum of the failure mode ratios over all the item failure modes is 
considered to be 1. 
Failure Mode Equivalence 
The failure modes that exhibit identical consequences are termed “Fault Equivalence 
Failure Modes” and they are grouped by the same fault equivalence number. 
Identification of fault equivalence groups permits the analyst to manage failure 
consequences instead of individual failure modes. 
The use of fault equivalence numbers for group failure modes with identical 
consequences facilitates integrating the Functional FMEA with subsequent Interface and 
Detailed FMEAs. It also supports timely feedback to the designer/person responsible for 
corrections/changes, etc. 
Process Variation  
The probability that an item parameter will be out of specification due to variations in the 
manufacturing process is given by the Process Capability Index (Cpk). It considers both 
the process spread and the proximity of the process spread to specification limits. 
Process capability analysis examines: 
• The variability in process characteristics relative to product specifications; 
• Whether the process is capable of producing a product that conforms to specifications. 

Record the Process Capability Index (Cpk), which is a measure of both process dispersion 
and its centering about the average. Cpk is calculated to be the minimum of 
and 
 
Where: 
USL=Upper Specification Limit 
LSL=Lower Specification Limit 
=Process Mean 
σ=Standard Deviation 
As a general rule in most production operations, a Cpk of 1.33 is the minimum 
acceptable level. Once the process drops below this level, containment actions are 
expected. A typical expectation is that 100% inspection and sorting process 
improvements are to be made. With a Cpk above 1.33, containment action is not expected. 
An action plan is needed to continually improve process potential through reduction of 
variation. 
The Process Capability Index is a more direct indicator of the ability of the process to 
meet the specifications. It can be calculated for the product’s Key Characteristics, which 
are identified during the FMEA study. Key characteristics are measurement indicators 
that provide rapid feedback to the process and thus provide the opportunity to 
immediately correct quality issues.  
 
Analysis of FMEA results     103

CHAPTER 19  
Overview of Failure Mode, Effects and 
Criticality Analysis (FMECA) 
 
Chapter 19 provides an overview of Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis 
(FMECA), including the terminology and the worksheets used in the analysis for both 
quantitative and qualitative approaches. This chapter also recommends the information to 
be included in the worksheets. 
Overview of Criticality Analysis 
Criticality describes the severity of the consequences of a failure. Criticality is designated 
by categories, or levels, that are functions of the dangers and losses of system capabilities 
and, sometimes, of the probabilities of their occurrence. MIL-STD-1629A defines the 
categories, and FMECA team members can either use these categories or define their 
own categories. Probability is best identified separately. 
A logical extension of Failure Mode and Effects Analysis (FMEA) is to consider the 
criticality and probability of occurrence of the identified potential failure modes. This 
criticality analysis is widely known as Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis 
(FMECA). 
Depending on the availability of part failure data, criticality analysis can be performed 
qualitatively or quantitatively. The qualitative approach is suitable when specific failure 
rate data are not available, and the quantitative approach is used when data are available. 
In the qualitative approach, failure modes are assessed in terms of probability of 
occurrence. In the quantitative approach, the criticality numbers for each failure mode 
reviewed and also for the item under consideration are calculated using failure rate data. 
The criticality concept in Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality Analysis adds greatly 
to the benefits of the FMEA process by considering the following: 
▪ Items to be given more intensive study to eliminate a particular hazard, increase the 
probability of a fail-safe outcome, or reduce the failure rate or extent and risk of 
resultant damage; 
▪ Items requiring special attention during manufacturing, as well as stringent quality 
assurance or special handling controls; 

▪ Special requirements in purchasing specifications concerning design, performance, 
reliability, safety or quality assurance; 
▪ Acceptance standards for subcontractors’ products, including parameters that should be 
stringently tested; 
▪ Any special procedures, safeguards, protective equipment, monitoring devices or 
warning systems; 
▪ The most cost-effective application of accident prevention resources. 
Criticality Analysis Terminology 
▪ Failure Modes 
List each potential failure mode for an item. 
▪ Failure Causes 
Identify all the potential causes for each failure mode. 
▪ Severity Classification 
Evaluate each failure mode in terms of worst potential effect, and assign a 
severity classification. 
▪ Failure Probability of Occurrence Level (for qualitative analysis only) 
Assess failure modes in terms of probability of occurrence in the qualitative 
approach of the criticality analysis. The following failure probability of 
occurrence levels are based on MIL-STD-1629A: 
Level A—Frequent 
The single failure mode probability of occurrence is greater than 0.20 of the 
overall probability of failure during the item operating time interval. 
Level B—Reasonably Probable 
The single failure mode probability of occurrence is more than 0.10 but less than 
0.20 of the overall probability of failure during the item operating time interval. 
Level C—Occasional 
The single failure mode probability of occurrence is more than 0.01 but less than 
0.10 of the overall probability of failure during the item operating time interval. 
Level D—Remote 
The single failure mode probability of occurrence is more than 0.001 but less than 
0.01 of the overall probability of failure during the item operating time interval. 
Level E—Extremely Unlikely 
The single failure mode probability of occurrence is less than 0.001 of the overall 
probability of failure during the item operating time interval. 
▪ Failure Rate Data Source (for quantitative analysis only) 
Overview of failure mode, effects and criticality analysis     105

The data source used to obtain the failure rate data, such as Mil-Hdbk-217, must 
be listed in the worksheet for approval purposes. This information is necessary 
only for the quantitative analysis worksheet since failure rate data are not used in 
qualitative analysis. 
▪ Failure Effect Probability (β) 
The failure effect probability value is the conditional probability that the failure 
effect will result in the identified criticality classification, provided that the failure 
mode occurs. 
The following table presents failure effect probability values, as listed in MIL-
STD-1629A. This list can be customized if a study team wants to use values 
obtained from other resources. 
Failure Effect 
β Value 
Actual loss 
1.00 
Probable loss 
0.10<β<1.00 
Possible loss 
0<β≤0.10 
No effect 
0 
▪ Failure Mode Ratio (α) 
The failure mode ratio is the probability—expressed as a decimal fraction—that 
the part or item will fail in the identified mode. 
If all potential failure modes of a particular part or item are listed, the sum of the 
failure mode ratios for that part or item will be equal to 1.0. 
The failure mode ratio is the fraction of the part failure rate (λp) that is related to 
the particular failure mode under consideration. 
▪ Part Failure Rate (λp) 
The part failure rate is derived from the appropriate reliability prediction, or is 
calculated by using the procedure described in Mil-Hdbk-217. The part failure 
rate is usually defined in terms of failures per million hours (for example, 
failures×10−6 hours−1). 
▪ Operating Time (t) 
Operating time is the number of hours or the number of operating cycles per 
operation. 
▪ Failure Mode Criticality Number (Cm) 
The failure mode criticality number is the portion of the criticality number for the 
item corresponding to one of its failure modes under a particular severity 
classification. 
The Cm is calculated using the following formula: 
 
 
  
Where: 
Cm=Criticality number for failure mode 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     106

β=Conditional probability of mission loss 
α=Failure mode ratio 
λp=Part failure rate 
t=Duration of applicable operation time (hours or number of operating cycles) 
▪ Item Criticality Number (Cr) 
The item criticality number for an item is the number of system failures of a 
specific type that are expected due to the failure modes. For a particular severity 
classification for the item’s failure modes, the Cr for an item is the sum of the 
failure mode criticality numbers calculated using the following formula: 
 
 
  
Where: 
Cr=Criticality number for the item 
n=The failure modes in the items that fall under a particular criticality 
classification 
j=Last failure mode in the item under the criticality classification 
▪ Criticality Matrix 
The criticality matrix provides a means of identifying and comparing each failure 
mode to all other failure modes with respect to severity. The criticality matrix is 
constructed by inserting the item or failure mode identification numbers in matrix 
locations representing the severity categories, and then inserting either the 
probability of occurrence level or the criticality number (Cr) for the item’s failure 
modes.  
Criticality Worksheet/Report Format 
Recommended Product Information to be Included in Both the 
Quantitative and Qualitative Criticality Analysis Worksheet 
Figures 19–1 and 19–2 show the worksheet format for qualitative and quantitative 
criticality analysis, respectively. Figure 19–3 shows the criticality matrix report format 
for qualitative criticality analysis. The report format for quantitative criticality analysis is 
given in Figure 19–4. 
1. Product Name and Description 
Enter the name and description of the product. 
2. Catalog Number 
Record the salable number studied or reviewed. 
3. Product Code/Model Number 
Specify the product code and/or model number, if applicable. 
4. Item Description/Function 
Describe the item being evaluated and its function. 
Overview of failure mode, effects and criticality analysis     107

5. Team Members 
Enter the names of individuals who participated in the study. 
6. FMECA Date 
State the date on which the FMECA study is conducted. 
7. FMECA Revision Number 
Record the revision number, if applicable. 
8. Product Development Engineer or Engineer in Charge 
Enter the name of the product development engineer or engineer in charge. 
9. Independent Reviewer 
Enter the name of the independent reviewer, who is a team member taking part in 
the Product FMEA but who does not have direct responsibility for the design. 
10. Other Information Defined by the Team 
Figure 19–1: Criticality Analysis 
Worksheet—Qualitative Analysis 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     108

Figure 19–2: Criticality Analysis 
Worksheet—Quantitative Analysis 
 
Figure 19–3: Criticality Matrix—
Report Format for FMECA 
 
Overview of failure mode, effects and criticality analysis     109

Figure 19–4: Criticality Matrix—
Report Format for FMECA 
 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     110

CHAPTER 20  
Post FMEA Study 
 
This chapter describes the required steps to be taken after the completion of the FMEA. 
1. Highlight the high-risk areas 
High-risk areas need to be identified by reviewing the critical/control/safety 
related characteristics, as well as the severity and Risk Priority Number (RPN) 
columns. An RPN greater than or equal to 100 (when severity, occurrence and 
detection are ranked from 1 to 10) indicates that there might be a high-risk item. 
Severity greater than 5 (when severity is ranked from 1 to 10) would require 
design changes. These values may vary from company to company, so the FMEA 
team needs to be aware of the internal and regulatory requirements. 
2. Ensure that a Control Plan exists and is being followed 
All major characteristics require a documented plan—that is, a Control Plan for 
controlling, improving and/or handling changes. Control Plans provide guidance 
to manufacturing on how to control the product, improve product quality and 
meet customer/design requirements. 
3. Conduct capability studies 
Product capability needs to be studied once the Control Plan and SPC (Statistical 
Process Control) have been established. 
4. Work on processes that have a CpK less than or equal to 1.33 
Generally, a Process Capability Index (CpK) equal to 1.33 is considered to be 
acceptable as the minimum goal, but the acceptable CpK might vary, based on 
individual company quality requirements. For example, Ford Motor Company 
requires a CpK of 1.67, and Motorola requires a CpK of 2.00. The goal is to 
improve product and process quality by reducing variation in product 
characteristics and produce products on target. Companies should try to reach or 
exceed a CpK of 2.00 and should continuously try to improve product quality by 
exceeding minimum product quality requirements.  
 

CHAPTER 21  
FMEA in Advanced Quality 
Planning/Advanced Product Quality 
Planning 
 
This chapter discusses Advanced Quality Planning, how to use this methodology and 
what the main benefits are. Quality planning takes place every day in every organization. 
To obtain the most when applying this methodology to develop products or services that 
satisfy customers needs, the organization has to be viewed as a system where every 
person and department is interrelated. 
For a more detailed description of how to apply and implement AQP, refer to the 
Advanced Product Quality Planning and Control Plan reference manual issued by Ford, 
Chrysler and General Motors in July 1994. 
What is AQP/APQP? 
AQP (Advanced Quality Planning) is the generic methodology for all quality planning 
activities in all industries. APQP (Advanced Product Quality Planning) is AQP; however 
it emphasizes the product orientation of quality. APQP is a structured process to 
determine customer’s needs and expectations. 
APQP is used specifically in the automotive industry. AQP is a methodology that 
yields a quality plan for the creation of a process, product or service consistent with 
customer requirements. AQP offers the customer and the supplier a systematic approach 
to quality planning, defect prevention and continuous improvement. The Big Three (Ford, 
GM and Chrysler) have developed a standardized approach to AQP and it is a 
requirement for the QS-9000 certification.  
AQP is used in the following situations: 
• During the development of new products and processes; 
• Prior to changes in processes and products; 
• When reacting to processes or products with reported quality concerns; 
• Before tooling is transferred to new producers or new plants; 
• Prior to process or product changes affecting product safety or compliance regulations. 
The basic requirements for an effective AQP include these items: 

• Team approach; 
• Systematic development of products, services and processes; 
• Reduction in variation (should be able to reduce variation in product characteristics 
even before it reaches the customer); 
• Development of a Control Plan. 
AQP allows the supplier to effectively identify the following: 
• Where the bottlenecks are (if any); 
• What kinds of problems will be encountered; 
• How problems will be overcome for successful delivery. 
The process of APQP is broad and involves many individuals. The success of a good 
APQP depends on the team and the precise goals of the team. A typical APQP team 
consists of core and extended team members. Core team members could include the 
following: 
• Manufacturing engineer; 
• Industrial engineer; 
• Production personnel; 
• Quality assurance; 
• Project engineer; 
• Material engineer. 
Extended team members could include the following: 
• Packaging engineer; 
• Facilities engineer; 
• Tooling engineer; 
• Supplier engineer; 
• Purchasing engineer; 
• Customer quality; 
• Customer design; 
• Maintenance. 
The requirements for quality planning may vary from one organization to another. The 
following is an example of a typical quality planning check-off list, and Table 21–1 lists 
the requirements of Ford, Chrysler and General Motors. 
Checklist 21–1: Typical Quality Planning Check-Off List (Stamatis, 
D.H. 1998) 
Quality Systems 
• Is the system approved by the customer? 
• Prints/specifications 
• Design FMEA/failure product analysis (FPA) 
FMEA in advanced quality planning/advanced product quality     113

Key Characteristics 
• Are design actions identified? 
• Can product be manufactured, assembled, and tested? 
• Are preventive process actions identified? 
• Field/plant concerns 
• Are engineering changes required? 
Feasibility Analysis 
• Have customer requirements been identified and taken into consideration? 
• Process/inspection flow chart 
• Process FMEA 
• Equipment 
• Previous statistical studies (surrogate data may be used) 
• Design of experiments 
• Cause and effect diagram 
• Have characteristics for sensitive processes been identified for SPC? 
• Can control charts be used on all key characteristics? 
• Can causes of field/plant concerns be monitored? 
Manufacturing Analysis 
• Quality systems/procedures 
• Key product/process characteristics 
• Sample size/frequency 
• Inspection methods 
• Reaction plan 
• Statistical methods 
• Problem-solving discipline 
• Are operating and SPC procedures sufficient to make control plan work? 
• Is 100% inspection required? 
• Does control plan have customer concurrence? 
Process Potential Study 
• Statistical training 
• Implementation 
• Results 
• Is the process ready for sign-off? 
• Are process changes needed to improve feasibility? 
Process Sign-Off 
• Process sheets 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     114

• Inspection instructions 
• Test equipment/gage 
• Initial samples 
• Packaging 
• Was the process FMEA used to develop process sheets? 
• Was the process FMEA used to develop a dynamic control plan? 
• Does customer feedback suggest control plan changes? 
• Does the process conform to control plan requirements? 
Table 21–1: AQP Requirements of Ford, Chrysler 
and GM (Stamatis, D.H. 1998) 
Chrysler’s AQP 
Schedule 
Ford’s AQP Status Reporting 
GM’s AQP Status 
Reporting 
Feasibility sign-off 
Sourcing decisions (Alternative suppliers, 
Customer awareness) 
D-FMEA 
Major characteristics 
Customer input requirements 
Design reviews 
Field failure mode 
analysis 
D-FMEA 
Design verification plan 
Consuming plant 
concerns 
Design reviews 
Facilities, tools and gages 
D-FMEA (tooling) 
Design verification plan 
Prototype build Control 
Plan 
Gage design 
Subcontractor AQP status 
Prototype builds 
Previous statistical 
studies 
Facilities, tools and gages 
Drawing and specifications 
P-FMEA 
Prototype build Control Plan 
Team feasibility 
commitment 
Prototype parts 
Prototype builds 
Manufacturing Process 
Flow chart 
PFD 
Drawing and specifications 
P-FMEA 
Factory Floor Plan 
Team feasibility commitment 
Measurement systems 
evaluation 
New equipment list 
Manufacturing Process flow chart 
Pre-launch Control Plan 
Manufacturing Control 
Plan 
P-FMEA 
Operator Process 
instructions 
Process Potential 
studies 
Measurements systems evaluation 
Packaging specifications 
Process Sign-off 
Pre-launch Control Plan 
Production trial run 
Process Sheet 
Operator process instructions 
Production Control Plan 
FMEA in advanced quality planning/advanced product quality     115

Initial samples 
Packaging specifications 
Preliminary process 
capability study 
Packaging design 
Production trial run 
Production validation 
testing 
  
Production Control Plan 
Production part approval 
  
Preliminary process capability study 
  
  
Production validation testing 
  
  
Production Part Approval 
  
  
Part submission warrant part delivery at 
material required date 
  
 
Figure 21–1: Flow Chart showing 
the relationship of the FMEA in the 
AQP/APQP process (Stamatis, D.H. 
1998) 
The Use of FMEA in Advanced Quality Planning 
The above listed schedules (Figure 21–1) indicate that both Design and Process FMEAs 
are part of the AQP. Design FMEA (D-FMEA) is a method used for identifying potential 
problems and is a key component to determine design feasibility. D-FMEA is also a 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     116

problem-solving tool to identify design failures prior to release of the print without the 
identification of probable problems and an early capability assessment of high risk 
priority items, product/process control is unlikely. Failure to perform D-FMEA results in 
existing problems reappearing in future products and an increased likelihood that 
customer needs and various regulatory requirements from government agencies will not 
be met. During the D-FMEA/P-FMEA portion of AQP, the selection of significant and 
control or key characteristics is accomplished. 
Control Items are parts that can affect either compliance with government regulations 
or safe product/process operation. These items are identified by the customer’s product 
engineering on drawings and specifications with a specific and unique symbol. 
Significant and Critical characteristics are those product, process and test characteristics 
for which quality-planning actions must be summarized on Control Plans. These are 
identified by the team based on product knowledge and can be critical or significant to 
the quality, reliability, durability, fit or function of the product/process. 
Process FMEA is a problem-solving tool used to eliminate problems from production 
systems prior to the official process design date for the product/process. All P-FMEA 
results should be incorporated into Control Plans and process/instruction sheets. 
Control Plans are considered as the result or major output of the AQP process, and 
they become the basis for process control methodology. Through a Control Plan, one can 
identify if the control system strategy is prevention or detection oriented, as well as 
identify all the points at which special characteristics are affected by the process. Control 
Plans are addressed in more detail in the following chapter.  
Implementation and control of the manufacturing product/process is crucial. 
Scrutinizing and confirming manufacturing capability always remains the assignment of 
the AQP team. 
 
FMEA in advanced quality planning/advanced product quality     117

CHAPTER 22  
Product Quality Control Plans and 
Dynamic Control Plans 
 
This chapter outlines the benefits of creating a Control Plan and what information should 
be included. This discussion is accompanied by a sample template (Figure 22–1). 
Introduction 
The purpose of the Control Plan methodology is to aid in the manufacture of quality 
products according to customer requirements. It does this by providing a structured 
approach for the design, selection and implementation of value-added control methods 
for the total system. 
A Control Plan focuses on the Product/Process and inspection requirements for a 
particular product. 
The key items that need to be controlled and maintained to ensure product quality are 
as follows: 
• Control of supplier products; 
• Manufacturing process capability; 
• SPC; 
• Inspection and laboratory test inspection instructions; 
• Measuring and testing equipment; 
• Engineering performance testing; 
• Product qualification and lot sampling; 
• Control of non-conforming products; 
• Layout inspection; 
• Drawing and change control; 
• Quality system and product performance records. 
Although there are different formats for Control Plans, the automotive industry requires a 
standard form as included in the APQP manual. 
A Control Plan is basically a written summary that describes the methods and tools 
that the process is using so that variation is minimized. This should not be replaced with 
the information contained in detailed operator instructions. Instead, the Control Plan 
supplements it, especially in the area of quality activities such as the following: 

• When to use sampling; 
• How much sampling is required; 
• Frequency of inspection; 
• Specified usage of SPC. 
Control Plans are used in conjunction with other quality-related tools and are used 
throughout the product’s life cycle: 
Initial stage—documents and communicates the initial plan for process 
control; 
Next stage—guides manufacturing in how to control process to ensure 
maximum product quality; 
Later stage—continues to be a living document that contains 
current/up-to-date control methods. Since processes are updated and 
improved, the Control Plan is a continuous improvement tool as well as a 
control document. 
Control Plans can be categorized into the following three types: 
Prototype—A description of the dimensional measurements, materials 
and performance tests occurring during Prototype build. 
Pre-launch—A description of the dimensional measurements, 
materials and performance tests that will occur after Prototype and before 
normal production. 
Production—A comprehensive documentation of Product/Process 
characteristics, Process controls, tests and measurement systems occurring 
during normal production. 
Control Plans include the following sections: 
▪ A list of critical and significant characteristics; 
▪ Sample sizes and frequency of evaluation; 
▪ Method of evaluation; 
▪ Correction and prevention plans/reaction plans. 
A single Control Plan may apply to a group or family of products that are produced by 
the same Process at the same source. A Control Plan is a living document that should be 
updated to reflect the current methods of control and used throughout the product’s life 
cycle. 
Benefits of Developing and Implementing Control Plans 
▪ Improve quality of products during design, manufacturing and assembly; 
▪ Help to identify process characteristics and their sources of variation, which cause 
variation in product characteristics; 
Product quality Control plans and dynamic control plans     119

▪ Help to focus resources on processes and products related to characteristics that are 
important to the customer, which consequently increases customer satisfaction; 
▪ Provide proper channel for communicating changes in the product/process 
characteristics, control method and characteristic measurement. 
Information Used to Develop Control Plans 
The following is a suggested list of information used to develop a Control Plan: 
▪ Process flow diagram; 
▪ Design/Process Failure Mode and Effects Analysis; 
▪ Special Characteristics; 
▪ Lessons learned from similar parts; 
▪ Team’s knowledge of the process; 
▪ Design reviews. 
Control Plan Terminology and Recommended Information to Include 
Figure 22–1 is a recommended Control Plan template. The following is a list of items in 
the template. These items are not mandatory. 
1. Control Plan Type 
Identify whether the Control Plan is for a prototype, pre-launch item or for a 
product under production. 
2. Control Plan Number 
Enter the Control Plan document number used for tracking, if applicable. 
3. Supplier/Plant 
Specify the name of the supplier/plant. 
4. Supplier Code 
Provide the identification number (Duns, Z-code and so on), as requested by the 
procuring organization. 
5. Engineering Drawing Number/ID 
Enter the Engineering Drawing Number of the part or process being controlled. 
6. Key Contact Name 
Enter the name of the primary contact responsible for the Control Plan. 
7. Key Contact Phone Number 
Enter the phone number of the primary contact responsible for the Control Plan. 
8. Engineering Approval Date 
Record the engineering approval date for the process/product Control Plan. 
9. Supplier/Plant Approval Date 
Specify the approval date obtained by the responsible manufacturing plant. 
10. Other Approval/Date (if applicable): 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     120

Record any other approval necessary 
11. Control Plan Date (Original Release Date) 
Record the date on which the original Control Plan was compiled. 
12. Control Plan Revision Date 
Specify the date of the latest Control Plan updates. 
13. Customer/Engineering Approval Date (Specifications Approval Date) 
If applicable, enter the customer approval date for the process/product Control 
Plan. 
14. Customer Quality Approval Date 
Specify the date of approval by the responsible supplier quality representative. 
15. Part/Process Number/Latest Change Level 
Enter the number of the system, subsystem or component being controlled. When 
applicable, enter the latest engineering change level and/or issue date from the 
drawing specification. 
16. Process Name/Operation Description 
All steps in the manufacturing of a system, subsystem or component should be 
described in a process flow diagram. From this diagram, identify the 
process/operation name that best describes the activity being addressed. 
17. Core Team List 
Record the names and telephone numbers of the individuals responsible for 
preparing the latest revision of the Control Plan. All of the team members’ names, 
phone numbers and locations should be included on an attached distribution list. 
18. Part/Process Number 
Record the number of the process or part being controlled. 
19. Process/Part Description 
Describe the process and/or part being controlled. 
20. Machine, Device, Jig, Tools for Manufacturing 
For each operation that is described, identify the processing equipment, such as 
machine device, or other tools for manufacturing, as appropriate.  
21. Characteristics 
A distinguishing feature, dimension or property of a process or product on which 
variable or attribute data can be collected. 
a. Characteristics Number 
Enter the characteristics number from all applicable documents, such as but 
not limited to, process flow diagram, numbered blue print, FMEA and so on, if 
required or applicable. 
b. Product Characteristics 
Record the product characteristics, which are features or properties of parts or 
a group of components (assembly) that are described on drawings or other 
primary engineering information. Examples of product characteristics include 
appearance, wall thickness, part O.D., part I.D. and so forth. 
Product quality Control plans and dynamic control plans     121

c. Process Characteristics/Variables 
Enter the process variables, which are factors that have a cause and effect 
relationship with the identified product characteristic. There could be one or 
more process characteristics listed for each product characteristic. In some 
processes, one process characteristic may affect several product characteristics. 
Examples of process variables include raw material mixing ratio, process 
temperature, process pressure and so on. 
d. Special Characteristics Classification 
Indicate the special characteristics classification, which includes critical, key 
and significant characteristics. 
22. Methods 
a. Product/Process Specification Tolerance 
Enter the product specification tolerance obtained from engineering resources. 
Specification tolerance should be based on design requirements. 
b. Evaluation Measurement Technique 
Identify the technique used to measure the product/process characteristics. 
c. Gages Repeatability and Reproducibility (GR&R) 
Record the total repeatability and reproducibility of the measuring device used 
for evaluation of product characteristics. Repeatability is the error due to the 
gage (precision), and reproducibility is the error due to differences in 
conditions in each repetition. 
d. Confidence Level 
d1. Sample Size 
Specify the number of samples to be used in the evaluation. 
d2. Sample Frequency 
Indicate how often the samples should be tested/evaluated for further 
quality control purposes. 
d3. AQL/AOQL 
This is a target-setting column to decide in-house production vs. 
outsourcing. Enter the Acceptable Quality Level (AQL) or the Acceptable 
Outgoing Quality Level (AOQL). The following Military standards can be 
used as references to determine the values for internal target setting: Mil-
Std-105E for AQL and Mil-Std-1235 for AOQL. 
d4. CpK Index (Process Capability Index) 
Process capability analysis examines: 
• The variability in process characteristics relative to product 
specifications; 
• Whether the process is capable of producing a product that conforms to 
specifications. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     122

Record the Process Capability Index (CpK), which is a measure of both process 
dispersion and its centering about the average. CpK is calculated to be the minimum of 
and 
 
Where: 
USL=Upper Specification Limit 
LSL=Lower Specification Limit 
=Process Mean 
σ=Standard Deviation 
e. Control Method Enter a brief description of how the operation will be controlled. 
Control methods are unique to the process and should reflect the planning and 
strategy being implemented in the manufacturing process. If control procedures 
exist, the identification numbers of each of these procedures should also be 
included. 
23. Reaction Plan/Corrective Action/Preventive Plan Record the reaction plan, which 
specifies the corrective actions necessary to avoid producing nonconforming products 
or operating out of control. The reaction plan should also include the person 
responsible for the corrective/preventive action. 
 
Figure 22–1: Sample Control Plan 
Template 
Dynamic Control Plans (DCP) 
A Dynamic Control Plan is a combination of FMEA and Control Plan. A DCP ensures 
that the customer expectations/requirements, in the form of product design requirements, 
Product quality Control plans and dynamic control plans     123

are understood, deployed and controlled in the manufacturing and assembly processes. A 
Dynamic Control Plan is required of all Powertrain operations plants and their suppliers. 
A Dynamic Control Plan details the actions required at each phase of the product 
manufacturing and assembly process to assure all the parts produced will be uniform and 
conform to the customer’s satisfaction. 
The goal of Dynamic Control Plans is to implement effective control methods and 
reliable reaction plans that make it possible to produce all characteristics to specification 
on a production basis. It should be noted that a Dynamic Control Plan is applied to all 
characteristics, not just the special characteristics alone. The automotive industry requires 
that all Significant characteristics must be in a state of statistical control with a Ppk≥1.67 
and Cpk≥1.33. 
Dynamic Control Plan is manufacturing process focused and product and process 
characteristics are considered together for each manufacturing operation from raw 
material receiving to product assembly and packaging. A sample Dynamic Control Plan 
is shown in Figure 22–2. 
As with Product Quality Control Plans, Dynamic Control Plans are living documents 
and should be updated when appropriate. Actions that require modifications and/or 
revisions include the following: 
• Changes or modifications in the Process (i.e. operating conditions, etc.); 
• Changes or modifications in the Product (i.e. design, material, etc.); 
• Changes or modifications in customer requirements; 
• Changes or modifications in product safety, control or testing methods. 
Teamwork is crucial for effective dynamic control planning and it should include 
production people, product engineers, manufacturing engineers, customers, suppliers, etc. 
Figure 22–2: Recommended Format 
for Dynamic Control Plan 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     124

Dynamic Control Plan Elements 
As illustrated in Figure 22–2, a Dynamic Control Plan contains the following elements: 
1. Company/Plant Name 
Name and identification of the company. 
2. Department 
Name of the department using the control plan 
3. Process Description/Name 
Name and description of the process for which the DCP is carried out. 
4. Operation # 
Number of the operation 
5. Machine 
Machine description or identification if applicable. 
6. Part Name 
Product or part name for which the Dynamic Control Plan is carried out. 
7. Part Number 
Product or Part identification number, usually referenced from the process flow 
chart. 
8. Control Plan Revision Date 
Revision date of the corresponding Control Plan, if one exists. 
9. Process Sheet Revision Date 
Revision date of the corresponding Process sheet. 
10. Issue Date 
Dynamic Control Plan issue date. 
11. Characteristic # 
Cross-reference number from all applicable documents, if required. 
12. Characteristic Description 
Description of whether it is a product or process characteristic. Product 
characteristics are the features or properties of a part, component or assembly that 
are described on drawings or other primary engineering information. Process 
characteristics are the process variables that have a cause and effect relationship 
with the identified product characteristic. 
13. Specification 
Product/Process specification from various engineering documents, including 
tolerance. 
14. Failure Mode 
Failure modes associated with the product/process characteristic under review. 
15. Failure Effects 
Effects of the failure corresponding to the failure modes. 
16. Severity 
Severity of the effects of failure should be identified and ranked. 
Product quality Control plans and dynamic control plans     125

17. Causes of Failure 
Appropriate causes for the failure modes should be listed. 
18. Occurrence 
The probability of occurrence of the causes for the failure mode should be 
documented. 
19. Current Controls 
The methods, systems, routines, etc. in place to prevent/mitigate the causes of 
failure should be identified and documented. 
20. Detection 
The effectiveness of the current controls in terms of detectability of causes of 
failure should be evaluated and documented. 
21. RPN 
The Risk Priority Number, as discussed previously, is a multiplication of severity, 
occurrence and detection. The RPN is used to risk rank the failure modes 
associated with each product/process characteristic. 
22. Recommended Actions 
Based on the risk analysis, the actions required or recommended to improve the 
safety of the system. 
23. Area Responsible & Date 
The department responsible to carry out the recommended actions and the 
suggested target date. 
24. Actions Taken 
Based on the recommended actions, the actions that were taken/implemented and 
comments if any.  
25. Control Factor 
Control factors could be the following: 
a. Fixture/Pallet dominant (F)—the fixtures or pallets holding the parts are the greatest 
source of inconsistency; 
b. Machine dominant (M)—the machine producing the characteristic is the greatest 
source of inconsistency; 
c. Component dominant (C)—incoming component nonconformity is the primary 
source of product variability; 
d. Setup dominant (S)—the characteristic is highly reproducible once the setup has 
occurred; 
e. Tool dominant (T)—the characteristic is uniform but drifts over time from tool 
wear; 
f. Operator dominant (O)—uniformity of the characteristic is highly dependent on 
operator skill; 
g. Preventive Maintenance dominant (P)—process consistency is dependent upon 
scheduled maintenance activities; 
h. Environment dominant (E)—the characteristic is susceptible to environmental 
conditions. 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     126

26. Classification 
Characteristic classification is the process of categorizing characteristics for the 
purposes of control planning. The following are standard classifications: 
Critical Characteristics (CC)—Part or process requirements that affect 
government regulatory compliance for safe product function and require specific 
supplier, manufacturing, assembly, shipping, monitoring and/or inspections. 
Significant Characteristics (SC)—Categorized characteristics of products, 
processes and tests where a reduction in variation within a specified tolerance 
around a proper target will improve customer satisfaction. 
High Impact Characteristics (HIC)—Product or process characteristics that, when 
outside the specification tolerance, can severely affect subsequent manufacturing 
operations or customer satisfaction. However, the product will not be unsafe. 
27. Control Method 
Control methods such as control charts, X-bar and R charts should be documented 
if implemented. 
28. Tool 
Identify the tools required for the manufacturing operation. 
29. Gage Description, Master, Detail 
Description of the specific gage as a means of measuring or testing and its 
respective master. 
30. GR & R and Date 
Record the total repeatability and reproducibility of the measuring device used for 
evaluation of product characteristics. Repeatability is the error due to the gage 
(precision), and reproducibility is the error due to differences in conditions in 
each repetition. 
31. Cp/Cpk (target) & Date 
Process capability analysis examines: 
• The variability in process characteristics relative to product specifications; 
• Whether the process is capable of producing a product that conforms to 
specifications. 
Record the Process Capability Index (CpK), which is a measure of both process 
dispersion and its centering about the average. CpK is calculated to be the minimum or 
and 
 
Where: 
USL=Upper Specification Limit 
LSL=Lower Specification Limit 
=Process Mean 
a=Standard Deviation 
Product quality Control plans and dynamic control plans     127

32. Reaction Plans 
Record the reaction plan, which specifies the corrective actions necessary to avoid 
producing nonconforming products or operating out of control. The reaction plan 
should also include the person responsible for the corrective/preventive action. 
Dynamic Control Plan Question Log 
A question log is used in conjunction with Dynamic Control Plans to track open issues 
and maintain a history of knowledge gained. It is specifically used to: 
• Coordinate team activities; 
• Record open questions, issues and concerns; 
• Capture ideas for future consideration; 
• Track progress and record knowledge gained. 
 
Guidelines for failure mode and effects analysis     128

References 
 
International Standards and Guidelines 
1. ISO 9000 Guidelines for Selection and Use of Suitable Models, Geneva, Switzerland, 
International Organization for Standardization (1994) 
2. ISO 9000 Quality Management Systems—Fundamentals and Vocabulary, Geneva, Switzerland, 
International Organization for Standardization (2000) 
3. ISO 9001 Quality Systems—Model for Quality Assurance in Design, Development, Production 
and Installation, and Servicing, Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for 
Standardization (1994) 
4. ISO 9001 Quality Management Systems—Requirements, Geneva, Switzerland, International 
Organization for Standardization (2000) 
5. ISO 9002 Quality Systems—Model for Quality Assurance in Production, Installation and 
Servicing, Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (1994) 
6. ISO 9003 Quality Systems—Model for Quality Assurance in Final Inspection and Test, Geneva, 
Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (1994) 
7. ISO 9004 Guidelines for Quality Management and Quality System Elements, Geneva, 
Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (1994) 
8. ISO 9004 Quality Management Systems—Guidelines for Performance Improvements, Geneva, 
Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (2000) 
9. ISO 14001 Environmental management system—Specification with guidance for use, Geneva, 
Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (1996) 
10. ISO/IEC 17025 General requirement for the competence of testing & calibration laboratories, 
Geneva, Switzerland, International Organization for Standardization (1999) 
U.S. Standards 
11. MIL-HDBK-217D Reliability stress and failure data for electronic equipment, U.S. Department 
of Defense (1982) 
12. MIL-STD-1629A Procedures for performing a failure mode, effects and criticality analysis, 
U.S. Department of Defense (1980) 
Technical Specifications/Recommended Practices 
13. Advanced Product Quality Planning and Control Plan—APQP, Reference Manual, (Chrysler, 
Ford & GM). (1994) 

14. Aerospace Recommended Practice SAE ARP5580—Recommended Failure Modes and Effects 
Analysis (FMEA) Practices for Non-Automobile Applications. The Engineering Society For 
Advancing Mobility Land Sea Air and Space (2001) 
15. AS9000-Aerospace Basic Quality System, The Engineering Society For Advancing Mobility 
Land Sea Air and Space (1996) 
16. AS9100—Quality Systems Aerospace—Model for Quality Assurance in Design, Development, 
Production, Installation, and Servicing. The Engineering Society For Advancing Mobility Land 
Sea Air and Space (2001) 
17. ISO/TS 16949 Quality Systems—Automotive suppliers—Particular requirements for the 
application of ISO 9001:1994 (Technical Specification), Geneva, Switzerland, International 
Organization for Standardization 
18. QS-9000 Quality System Requirements-Third Edition, (1998) 
19. Surface Vehicle Recommended Practice SAE J1 739—Potential Failure Mode and Effects 
Analysis in Design (Design FMEA), Potential Failure Mode and Effects Analysis in 
Manufacturing and Assembly Processes (Process FMEA) and Potential Failure Mode and 
Effects Analysis for Machinery (Machinery FMEA). The Engineering Society For Advancing 
Mobility Land Sea Air and Space (2000) 
20. VDA 6.1 Verband der Automobilindustrie (German Quality Management System for the 
automotive industry), 4th edition, (December 1998) 
Publications 
21. Bradford, L.P., Making meetings work: A guide for leaders and group members, University 
Associates (1976) 
22. Nicoll, D.R., Meeting Management. In the 1981 annual handbook for group facilitators, edited 
by J.W.Pfeiffer and J.E.Jones. University Associates (1981) 
Books 
23. Kececioglu, D., Reliability Engineering Handbook. Vols. 1 and 2, Prentice Hall (1991) 
24. Kuwahara, S.S., Quality Systems and GMP Regulations for Device Manufacturers-A Practical 
Guide to U.S., European, and ISO Requirements, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, ASQ Quality Press 
(1998) 
25. McDermott, R.E., Mikulak, R.J. and Beauregard, M.R., The Basics of FMEA, Productivity 
(1996) 
26. Stamatis, D.H., Advanced Quality Planning—A Commonsense Guide to AQP and APQP, 
Productivity Press (1998) 
27. Stamatis, D.H., Failure Mode and Effect Analysis—FMEA from Theory to Execution, ASQ 
Quality Press (1995) 
28. Schindler-Rainman, E., R.Lippit, and J.Cole, Taking your meetings out of the doldrums. Rev. 
ed. University Associates (1988) 
29. Dennis Arter, J.P.Russell, ISO Lesson Guide 2000–Pocket Guide to Q9001–2000, second 
edition, (2001) 
 
References     130

