
GUIDE
TO
GRAPHIC
DESIGN


Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco Upper Saddle River
Amsterdam Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montréal Toronto
Delhi Mexico City São Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo
GUIDE
TO
GRAPHIC
DESIGN
Scott W. Santoro
WITH CONTRIBUTIONS 
AND EDITING BY JOAN LEVINSON 
AND MARY GAWLIK

Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this textbook 
appear on the appropriate page within text and on pages 339–342.
Use of the trademark(s) or company name(s) implies (imply) no relationship, sponsorship, endorsement, sale, or 
promotion on the part of Pearson Education, Inc. or its affiliates. 
Copyright © 2014 by Pearson Education, Inc, Prentice Hall. All rights reserved. Manufactured in the United States 
of America. This publication is protected by Copyright, and permission should be obtained from the publisher 
prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or transmission in any form or by any means, 
electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain permission(s) to use material from this 
work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, One Lake Street, 
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458.
Many of the designations by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. 
Where those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the 
designations have been printed in initial caps or all caps.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
 
Santoro, Scott W.
Guide to graphic design / Scott W. Santoro. — 1st ed.
       pages cm
ISBN 978-0-13-230070-4 (pbk.)
1.  Graphic arts—Textbooks. 2.  Commercial art —Textbooks.  I. Title.
NC997.S265 2012
741.6—dc23
 
 2012035445
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
Editorial Director: Craig Campanella
Editor in Chief: Sarah Touborg
Acquisitions Editor: Billy Grieco
Assistant Editor: David Nitti
Editorial Assistant: Laura Carlson
Editor-in-Chief, Development: Rochelle Diogenes
Development Editor: Mary Gawlik
Media Director: Brian Hyland
Senior Media Editor: David Alick
Media Project Manager: Rich Barnes
Vice President of Marketing: Brandy Dawson
Executive Marketing Manager: Kate Stewart
Senior Managing Editor: Melissa Feimer
Senior Project Manager: Lynne Breitfeller
Senior Manufacturing Manager: Mary Fisher
Senior Operations Specialist: Diane Peirano
Senior Art Director: Pat Smythe
Interior Design: Scott W. Santoro
Cover Designer: Scott W. Santoro
Manager, Rights and Permissions: Paul Sarkis
Manager, Visual Research: Ben Ferrini
Project Management: PreMediaGlobal
Printer/Binder: Courier / Kendallville
Cover Printer: Courier / Kendallville
Typefaces: Adobe Minion Pro by Robert Slimbach  
and Adobe Myriad Pro by Robert Slimbach  
and Carol Twombly. 
ISBN 10: 0-13-230070-2 
ISBN 13: 978-0-13-230070-4
Dedicated to my sons, Ellis and Lowell Santoro—and to future generations of graphic designers.

V
3
Chapter 1 
About Graphic Design
35
Chapter 2 
A Brief History of Graphic Design
75
Chapter 3 
Graphic Design Concepts
103
Chapter 4 
Researching a Graphic Design Project
127
Chapter 5 
Generating Ideas
151
Chapter 6 
The Elements and Principles of Form
181
Chapter 7
Type and Typography
215
Chapter 8 
Proportion Systems: Grids and Alignments
239
Chapter 9 
Concepts in Action
255
Chapter 10 
Visual Coding: Loading Form with Meaning
277
Chapter 11 
Interaction and Motion Design
305
Chapter 12 
Becoming a Designer
Contents
Chapter 2: Steven Heller
Chapter 1: Scott W. Santoro
Chapter 3: George Tscherny
Chapter 6: Paul Sahre
Chapter 5: Luba Lukova
Chapter 4: Somi Kim
Chapter 9: Hillman Curtis
Chapter 7: Paul Shaw
Chapter 8: Barbara Glauber
Chapter 11: Agnieszka Gasparska
Chapter 12: Scott Stowell
Chapter 10: Greenblatt-Wexler
BRIEF CONTENTS
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
XII
Preface 
Virtual Crit Wall, Dear Reader, and Features

e of Contents
VI
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
About Graphic Design
This chapter describes graphic design as a creative 
process and explains its basic components. Because 
graphic design’s inherent nature involves delivering a 
message, it has a strong relationship to the public 
and the community in which it exists.
myartslab.com Video: Scott W. Santoro
3
Chapter Objectives
6
Graphic Design’s Heritage
6  The Coining of the Term
7  The Expanding Field of Design
7  excerpt: The Name Game 
by Michael Worthington
8   Graphic Design Categories
8  Corporate Design
9  Environmental Design
9  Motion Design
10  Interaction Design
10  Type Design
10
speakout: Motion Design’s Evolving Role 
by Barry Deck
11  Publication Design
11  Book Design
12  Book Jacket Design
12  Signage Design
13  Brand and Identity Design
13  Package Design
14  Information Design
14  Collateral Design
15  Advertising Design
16
Being a Graphic Designer
17
Voice and Vision
18
speakout: Design Can Make a Difference
by Kali Nikitas
20  designer vignette: Defining Graphic 
Design, with Katherine McCoy
22
Addressing the Personal and the Public
22
speakout: Intuitive Knowledge
by Maya Drozdz
24
Influences in Graphic Design
26  excerpt: Emptying the Spoon, Enlarging 
the Plate; Some Thoughts on Graphic Design 
Education by Warren Lehrer
28
The Nuts and Bolts Process of Graphic Design
28
Components of a Successful Design Solution
29  The Graphic Design Process
31  worklist: How to Be Critiqued
by Randall Hoyt
32
In Perspective
32
Key terms
32
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
A Brief History of Graphic Design
A strong knowledge of the history of graphic design 
is essential to the professional designer. This chapter 
offers a brief history of the field, highlighting significant 
historical periods. Students will learn how graphic 
design has been shaped by social and cultural events, and 
they will realize how it integrates with the larger field 
of fine arts.
myartslab.com Video: Steven Heller
35
Chapter Objectives
36
Industrial Expansion
37
excerpt: The Pencil of Nature by Fox Talbot 
39  A Turn-of-the-Century Response to 
Industrialization 
40
designer vignette: The Value of Learning 
Graphic Design History, with Steven Heller
42  Arts and Crafts Movement (1880–1910)
42  Aestheticism (1870–1914)
42  Art Nouveau (1890–1910)
44  Moving Toward a Modern Sensibility
46  The Modern World
46  Cubism (1907–1921)
47  Futurism (1910–1918)
48  Suprematism (1915–1934)
48  Dada (1916–1923)
49  Surrealism (1924–1955)
50  Designing Utopia
50  Constructivism (1919–1934)
52  De Stijl (1917–1931)
53  Bauhaus (1919–1933)
54  Ideological Independents and the 
New Typography
56  Modernism in America
56
speakout: Cipe Pineles by Jan Uretsky
61  The Swiss International Style
62
speakout: Hans Rudolf Bosshard by Willi Kunz
63  1960s Psychedelic Language
64  Advertising Design and the New York School
66
speakout: Armin Hofmann, Tadanori Yokoo, 
and Herb Lubalin by Peter Wong
66  Conceptual Image Makers
68  Postmodernism and the Digital Age
72  In Perspective
72  Key Terms
72
speakout: Vaughan Oliver by Tamar Cohen
73
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS

Table of
Graphic Design Concepts
This chapter explores ways in which designers bring 
design ideas to a visual solution, emphasizing the 
importance of cohesive integration of concept and form. 
Students will learn the difference between ideas and 
concepts as well as how one can lead to the other. Then, 
students will explore ways to develop ideas and methods 
for using them as the building blocks of strong design.
myartslab.com Video: George Tscherny
75
Chapter Objectives
75
From Ideas to Concepts
76
speakout: A Unique Game by Doug Kisor
78  Problem Solving
78  Keeping Records
79
Concepts Go Further 
80  designer vignette: Graphic Design 
Concepts, with Joseph Roberts
82
Metaphoric Concepts
83  steps in the design process: 
Poster Design for Macbeth
84  speakout: Polish Poster Design: 
A Conceptual Approach by Jacek Mrowczyk
85
speakout: Logicaland by Martin Woodtli
86   Special Applications of Metaphor in 
Design Communication 
87  The Montage Process 
89  speakout: Cadence and Subaudition
by Xu Guiying
90
Analytic Concepts
92
Meta Concepts
95
Applying Conceptual Approaches
97  speakout: Cast Down Your Buckets Where 
You Are by Saki Mafundikwa
98  speakout: Translating Concepts into Forms
by Inyoung Choi
99
In Perspective
99
Key Terms
99
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Researching a Graphic Design Project
Proper research is vital to the design process. Through 
research, students can infuse their projects with mean-
ingful content and understand what they are doing 
within a clear context. This chapter explains how to apply 
focused analysis and problem-solving skills. Students 
will learn the importance of knowing about their clients, 
audience, and subject matter. All the basic tools needed 
for good research are discussed, including best practices 
for using research wisely. 
myartslab.com Video: Somi Kim
103
Chapter Objectives
104
Gathering Information 
104  The Client, Subject, and Audience 
104  excerpt: Contempt of Consumer
by Seth Godin
105  Asking the Right Questions
106  Preparing the Design Brief
107  speakout: The Value of Writing
by Michele Washington
108  designer vignette: Researching a Graphic 
Design Project, with Somi Kim
110  Conducting Virtual and Actual World Research
111  Using Design’s Rear-View Mirror
112  Doing Individual Research 
112
excerpt: The Far Side by Gary Larson
114  worklist: Package Design Research
by Jeff Zack
114  Observational Research and Focus Groups
115  speakout: The Chrysler Corporation 
Cleaning Manual by Katherine McCoy
116
speakout: Design Intervention by Tina Park
117
Defining the Problem
118
speakout: Getting There by Anna Gerber
118  Using Deconstruction to Define a Problem
119  worklist: Researching a Project
by Kareem Collie
120  Considering the Overlapping Interests of Design
120
Techniques for Visualizing Research
121  Mood Boards
121  Positioning Charts
122  Word Techniques
123  speakout: Daily Research by Kjell Reigstad
124
The Saturation Point
124
In Perspective
124
Key Terms
125
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
VII

ontents
Ta
VIII
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Generating Ideas
Creativity is frequently perceived as being abstract 
or random. This chapter brings an active and applied 
approach to the creative process with a discussion of 
techniques such as sketching, montaging, word play, and 
benefitting from accidents or chance. Many ideas for 
exploring and recording ideas are presented, including 
tips for expanding one's thinking process beyond the 
commonplace. 
myartslab.com Video: Luba Lukova
127
Chapter Objectives
128
Making a Creative Work Environment
128
Actively Generating Ideas 
129  Brainstorming
129  Thinking beyond the Obvious
130   worklist: Helpful Questions to Expand 
Design Thinking
131  Creating Thumbnail Sketches
132
excerpt: A Psychological Tip by Piet Hein
134  designer vignette: Bringing Ideas 
to Form, with Luba Lukova
136  Associating Words with Ideas
137  steps in the design process: 
The Random Word Technique
138
worklist: Poster Design
139  speakout: On Visualizing Ideas 
by Charles Goslin
140
Generating Montaged Ideas
141  excerpt: Through the Looking-Glass
by Lewis Carroll
142
Benefitting from Playful Accidents
143  steps in the design process: Creating 
a Graphic Montage
146
Refreshing Your Vision 
146  speakout: The Character of Accidents
by Stephen Banham
147
In Perspective
147
Key Terms
147
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
The Elements and Principles of Form
The elements and principles of form are basic aesthetic 
components that all artists must master to turn ideas into 
compelling graphic designs. The form an idea takes will 
draw the viewer into a work and keep that viewer there 
long enough to comprehend the message being conveyed. 
As this chapter explains, when form and an intellectual 
idea unite, they create a solid communication. In effect, 
form becomes as much a part of the content as the 
information being presented. 
myartslab.com Video: Paul Sahre
151
Chapter Objectives
152
Form and Function
153
Compositional Elements
153   Line
154  Shape
155   Pattern and Texture 
156
designer vignette: Form is Content, 
with April Greiman
158   Space 
158
worklist: Compositional Exploration
160   Depth
161   Color 
161
speakout: About Rudolf Arnheim
by Gusty Lange
164
Color Systems
165  Color Temperature
166  Psychological Effects of Color
167
Compositional Principles
167   Balance 
169   Contrast
170   Direction
171  speakout: Make without Knowing
by Matthias Brendler
172   Dominance
174   Proportion
175   Rhythm
176   Unity
177
In Perspective
177
Key Terms
178
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS

Type and Typography
Developing a deep understanding of typography is 
essential for the design student. Type is the essence of 
almost any graphic design project. This chapter includes 
a discussion of the finer points of type use, typeface 
design, and type as a graphic image. Students will learn 
about the history of type as well as how to use type as a 
tool and as an element within the broader context of 
a complete design. 
myartslab.com Video: Paul Shaw
181
Chapter Objectives
181
Speaking with Type 
183
Historical Type
184
worklist: Eighteenth, Nineteenth, and Early 
Twentieth Century Typefaces
184
Type Classifications
186
Typeface Anatomy
186
Components
186
Stress
187
Optical Considerations
188
Typeface Families and Fonts
189
speakout: Amazon Brand Identity
190
designer vignette: The Importance of 
 
 Typography, with Philippe Apeloig
192
Typeface Fonts
192
Type Size
193
Analytic Typography
194
speakout: Typographic Narrative 
by Joshua Ray Stephens
195
Readable Texture
195
Letter Spacing
197
speakout: Casual or Spontaneous Writing
by Paul Shaw
198
Leading
198
Paragraph Spacing
199
Text Alignment
201
Metaphoric Typography
203
Vernacular Inspiration
205
Recontextualizing Type
206
speakout: Designing a Typeface
by Jonathan Hoefler
209
Type in the Third Dimension
211
In Perspective
211
Key Terms
211
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Proportion Systems: Grids and Alignments
Structural harmony helps to make a composition work 
visually and conceptually. This chapter demystifies how 
to build a proportion system into a design. It explains 
modular and grid structures, proportion, balance, 
layouts, and sizing. These components are all practical 
elements of design that enable designers to express 
their ideas more clearly and vividly.
myartslab.com Video: Barbara Glauber
215
Chapter Objectives
216
Defining a Grid
217
Developing Modular Grids
219
Developing Modular Patterns
220
Typographic Grids
222
designer vignette: Understanding Grids 
and Alignments, with Willi Kunz
224
Grid System Research
225
Pages and Spreads
226
Text Columns
229
Website Column Grids
230
Freestyle Alignments
231
speakout: On Constraints by Khoi Vinh
232
Exploiting the Grid
233
The Golden Ratio
234
Paper Formats
234
Paper-Fold Formats
235
The Rule of Thirds 
236
In Perspective
236
Key Terms
236
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
TABLE OF CONTENTS
IX
e of Contents

X
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Table of Conte
Concepts in Action
In this chapter, well-known designers discuss their 
projects as case studies, revealing their own 
conceptual approaches and their successes in the 
problem-solving activity of graphic design. Looking 
to the work of others is one of the best ways of 
learning a new art. These designers have much to 
teach about their creative processes and studio 
practice. 
myartslab.com Video: Hillman Curtis
239
Chapter Objectives
240
designer vignette: The Process of 
Developing a Concept, with Michael Bierut
242
Concepts Inspired by a Subject’s Location
242
Poster for Monadnock Paper by George Tscherny
243
Times Square Alliance Identity by Alan Dye
244
Bond No. 9 New York by Laurice Rahmé
245
Analytic-Based Concepts
245
Creating a Framework by Andrew Blauvelt
246
Japan Society 100 Years Website Design
by Agnieszka Gasparska
247
Using Research as a Conceptual Approach
247  Brown University Friedman Study Center 
Signage System by Scott Stowell
248
Throwing Apples at the Sun by Elliot Peter Earls
249
Bringing a Bigger Idea to a Concept
249
Iconoclasts Title Design by Greg Hahn
250
Vitra Workspirit 10: Net ‘n’ Nest by COMA
251
On Student Assignments, with Barbara Glauber
252
speakout: Conceptual Healing 
by Louise Sandhaus
253
excerpt: Paragraphs on Conceptual Art 
by Sol LeWitt
253
In Perspective
253
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Visual Coding: Loading Form with Meaning
This chapter explains how form can be loaded with 
meaning. In other words, the way something looks has 
meaning, and that meaning will make a design more 
effective to the viewer. The main focus here is to help 
students become aware of how a viewer perceives a 
design. The chapter explores semiotics, gestalt theory, 
and symbols. In addition, imagery, color, and form are 
loaded with meaning that is unique to every culture. 
The discussion covers ways that one can use these 
coded meanings when designing to carry messages 
and bring a greater depth to every project.
myartslab.com Video: Greenblatt-Wexler
255
Chapter Objectives
256
Visual Codes Do Send Messages
258
Tools for Visual Coding 
259
Typographic Coding
259
Color Coding
260
worklist: Meaningful Color
261
Codes and Contexts
262
designer vignette: The Value of Visual 
Codes, with Kim Kiser
264
Coded Treatments in Advertising 
264
Gestalt Perception
265
Design Using Gestalt Perception
266
speakout: A Summary of Gestalt Concepts
by Kim Kiser
267
Semiotics
267
Syntactics
268
Semantics
268
Pragmatics
268
Icon, Index, and Symbol
269
Icon
269
Index
269
Symbol
269
Visually Coded Identities
270
speakout: CARE Logo by Michael Thibodeau
271
Logo Application
272
worklist: Visual Identity
272
The Psychedelic Language
273
Why Create Meaning in a Design
274
In Perspective
274
Key Terms
274
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS

Tab
TABLE OF CONTENTS
XI
Interaction and Motion Design
This chapter explores relatively new multimedia areas of 
interaction, motion, and sound, where the possibilities 
of conceptual thinking expand into broader realms. 
Elements such as contrast, emphasis, and unity merge 
with motion, time, and sound to create interactive 
experiences for the user. This field of design is growing 
rapidly as technology advances. Active designers must 
become familiar with the available software and learn 
about the amazing things they can do with it.
myartslab.com Video: Agnieszka Gasparska
277
Chapter Objectives
278
speakout: Website Principles by Justin Bakse
278  Designing for a Virtual Space 
278
Interaction Design
279
Motion Design
280
The Overlap of Electronic Media
282  Interaction and Motion Concepts
282
Interaction Concepts
283
Motion Design Concepts
284
designer vignette: The Convergence 
of Interaction and Motion Design,
with Hillman Curtis
286
excerpt: Models by Charles Eames
286
Interactive Architecture: Website Anatomy
286
Website Navigation
286
First-Level—Home Page
288
Second- and Third-Level Web Pages
288
Wireframing a Website
290
worklist: Creating a Website
290
Digital Storytelling
291
Storyboarding a Motion Design
292
Type in Motion
293
speakout: Storyboarding Pointers
by Kelli Miller
294
The Design of Sound
295
Sound Effects
296
Music
296
excerpt: Silence: Lectures and Writings, 
“The Future of Music: Credo,” by John Cage 
297
Voice-Over Narration
297  The Expanding Realm of Graphic Design
300  In Perspective
300  Key Terms
300
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Becoming a Designer
Practical issues of getting started in the graphic design 
field, putting together a portfolio, interviewing, and 
creating promotional materials such as a sample book 
and website are discussed in this chapter. The goal: to 
learn how to present oneself as a designer and how 
to continue on that career path.
myartslab.com Video: Scott Stowell
305
Chapter Objectives
306
Getting a Job in Graphic Design
306
Cover Letter and Résumé
307
Creating a Graphic Design Portfolio
308
worklist: Graphic Design Portfolio 
Presentation
310
worklist: Graphic Design Portfolio Projects
310  Personal Website and Design Blog
311  Interviewing
312
excerpt: The Cheese Monkeys, A Novel in 
Two Semesters (P.S.) by Chip Kidd
313  The Business of Design
313  speakout: Trust Your Instincts 
by Connie Birdsall
314  designer vignette: Point of View,
with Sean Adams
316
Starting Your Own Practice
317
Design Ethics
318
Environmental Sustainability
318
worklist: Sustainability by Noble Cumming
318  The You in Your Work
320  speakouts from the field:
Personal Style by Chakaras Johnson, Workflow
by Alex Zolotarev, The Design Language by 
Kareem Collie, An Information Gap by Monica 
Maccaux, Survival Techniques by Matthew 
McNerney, Design Collaboration by Rick Griffith
320
Designing within a Group Environment
320
Your Voice in Advertising Design
321  Design and Technology
322
designer vignette: Personal Style, 
with Rick Valicenti 
324
worklist: Advertising Design Parameters
324  Design and the Fine Arts
325
excerpt: Never Give Up. Never Give In
by Charles Goslin
326  In Perspective
326  Key Terms
326
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS

XII
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
VIRTUAL CRIT WALL
Follow Guide to Graphic Design on 
Instagram @guide2graphicdesign to see some 
of the best student work currently on the 
critique wall in Scott Santoro’s classroom, plus 
his encounters with great graphic design in his 
hometown of New York City.
Join the design conversation by using the 
hashtag #mycritwall to submit your own work, 
your class’s critique wall, or examples of great 
design in your neighborhood.
PR E FAC E

DEAR READER
XIII
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Photo: Robert A. Ripps
Scott W. Santoro is principal of Worksight, a graphic 
design studio in New York City. He holds graphic 
design degrees from Pratt Institute (BFA) and Cran-
brook Academy of Art (MFA). He is also an adjunct 
professor of graphic design at Pratt Institute in Brook-
lyn, New York. As an active speaker on graphic design, 
he has lectured around the world including Australia 
and the Czech Republic. Scott has served as vice presi-
dent of the New York Chapter of the American Insti-
tute of Design (AIGA) and as a national screening 
committee member for the Fulbright program.
Worksight has been a noticeable entity within the 
design community for more than twenty years and is 
well known for its “design for the everyday” approach 
to graphic communication. Its work connects with 
diverse audiences: an annual report for the Brooklyn 
Public Library; a series of brand logos for Steelcase 
Furniture; an alumni magazine for Purchase College; 
a book jacket and interior design for The Sea Around 
Us, Rachel Carson’s environmental classic; a website 
design and maintenance for a New Jersey textile man-
ufacturer—Absecon Mills; and now, with Guide to 
Graphic Design, a textbook for college students. The 
studio has won awards from the AIGA, NY Bookbind-
ers Guild, and Print Magazine, and was a grant recipi-
ent for Sappi Paper’s annual Ideas that Matter program 
that brings design to charitable organizations.
DEAR READER
Years ago I took a week-long workshop with famed graphic designer Paul Rand. I was in such 
awe of Rand that when he assigned his first project I felt creatively immobilized. He came over to 
give me a one-on-one desk critique, but I had nothing to show him, confessing that I didn’t know 
where to begin. Rand looked me straight in the eyes, put his hand under my chin, and with a thick 
Brooklynese accent said, “Think.” 
Guide to Graphic Design emphasizes what Rand stated so genuinely—that no matter what the 
context or problem, one starts any graphic design project by thinking. This fundamental is why 
graphic design is so “cool” (sorry, I just don’t know how else to say it). There’s hardly a better job 
than one that pays you to think (to go through an intellectual process) and then to play (to work 
ideas out in aesthetically inventive ways). As my mentor Charlie Goslin used to say, “An idea is the 
hat rack that everything hangs on.” My own design practice and simultaneous teaching is based on 
this approach. The result is an integration of meaning and form. It’s the way to go.
The eclectic spirit of Guide to Graphic Design is no accident. Designers throughout the book 
have contributed short essays on their work styles, their studio habits, and their inspirations. Each 
designer offers a new perspective and approach to possible working methods. At the same time, 
they all show a passion for design and communication.
Guide to Graphic Design is supplemented by videos of talented graphic designers—in other 
words, great thinkers (see myartslab.com). Every student who reads this book has the same core 
talent that they began with. Do something with your talent as these designers did; learn the mecha-
nisms used to convey information, integrate ideas and form into full concepts, but most important, 
learn how to think like a graphic designer. When you do, the identities you create for companies 
and organizations will define your own personal identity. You will care more about the work you 
make, and that care will make your work better. 

XIV
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
FEATURES OF THE BOOK
Why study graphic design—after all, isn’t it just moving type and image around the page?
Guide to Graphic Design presents design as a layered and evolving profession. Each feature of the 
book is focused on that principle and seeks to guide students toward a successful and fulfilling 
career as a graphic designer. To do this, it highlights step-by-step design processes and how to 
build good work habits. It illustrates and supports each chapter with work from top design firms 
and design school programs. It guides and motivates students with thoughts from AIGA Medalists 
Katherine McCoy, Steven Heller, April Greiman, Michael Bierut, Rick Valicenti, and many others. 
All of these features are meant to inspire, encourage, and steer students through the contents 
of this book. 
Specifically, each chapter contains:
t
Designer Vignettes feature interviews from well-known designers intended 
to inspire students and pique their interest in the material being discussed. 
t
Chapter Objectives list key learning goals that readers can work 
to achieve in each chapter. 
t
In Practice provides tips that offer a real-world perspective to the specific 
design problems being discussed. 
t
Steps in the Design Process gives readers step-by-step instructions on how to 
approach solving a specific design task. 
t
Worklist offers sets of checkpoints and practicalities that students 
can use throughout the design process. 
t
Speakout features personal accounts and experiences from designers 
and educators, intended to expose students to unique and varied perspectives 
on the field of graphic design. 

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
XV
E XERCISES AND PROJEC TS
With each exercise and project students will get better at making decisions and understanding the 
connection between an idea and its execution. Any book on graphic design should be considered 
as nothing more than a guide to an exciting and unique field that continually focuses on solving 
communication problems with creative and skillful solutions. With mindful reflection, research, 
and practice, each student can start designing, turning his or her creative thoughts into forms that 
communicate and developing a graphic design career.
Each chapter presents quick, in-class exercises and longer, more complicated projects. Suc-
cessful solutions to these practice opportunities will be determined by the level of commitment a 
student brings to them. The idea is for students to practice creating effective designs by:
t  
 keeping up with currents events and culture, which can influence 
their effectiveness as a designer,
t  
using the design skills they have learned,
t  
reflecting on the design work of others, and 
t  
researching history, issues, and expectations related to a project.
A great portfolio of intelligent work goes a long way. The text encourages students to approach 
these exercises and projects as potential pieces for their portfolios, watching for breakthrough 
points in their work—times when they really took a chance and did something out of the 
ordinary—and then adding that work to an evolving portfolio. Students will get the best results and 
opportunities to practice professional skills if they approach their work as if they were “on the job”:
1
Complete the assignment (expected of professionals).
2
Do all necessary research (required for creative, professional approaches).
3
Make preliminary sketches (allows exploration and refinement).
4  
 Follow the specifications in each design brief (good practice for 
meeting a client’s expectations).
5
Consider your audience (required for a design to be effective).
6 
 Choose imagery that is symbolic and evocative of your message 
(pushes practice in research to reach an effective solution).
7 
 Try to provoke a thoughtful response from the viewer (combines 
research with design knowledge).
8 
 Use typography to enhance your design (pushes practice using an important 
tool in a sophisticated way).
9 
 Make every presentation neat and clean (good professional practice 
that enhances a portfolio).
10 
 Meet all deadlines given by your instructor (another opportunity 
to practice a professional expectation).

XVI
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
MYARTSL AB
This program will provide a better teaching and learning experience for you and your students.
Here’s how: 
The new MyArtsLab delivers proven results in helping individual students succeed. Its auto-
matically graded assessments, personalized study plan, and interactive eText provide engaging 
experiences that personalize, stimulate, and measure learning for each student. And, it comes from 
a trusted partner with educational expertise and a deep commitment to helping students, instruc-
tors, and departments achieve their goals.
The Pearson eText lets students access their textbook anytime, anywhere, and any way they 
want, including downloading the text to an iPad®.
t 
 A personalized study plan—written by Dahn Hiuni, a graphic design instructor at SUNY 
Old Westbury—for each student promotes critical-thinking skills. Assessment tied to the 
book enables both instructors and students to track progress and get immediate feedback.
t
Closer Look tours—interactive walkthroughs featuring the author’s narration—offer in-
depth looks at designs from the text, enabling students to zoom in on details they couldn’t 
otherwise see. 
t
12 Designer Profile videos, recorded by the late Hillman Curtis, are intimate portraits of 
designers in their studios talking about their approaches, ideas, and love for the field of 
graphic design. 
t
Chapter Audio, read by Scott W. Santoro, allows students to listen to the entire text—a key 
feature for allowing design students to focus on each example. 
t
MediaShare—a new digital drop box and portfolio tool—can help students submit their 
work to instructors and facilitate online peer critiques. 
t 
 Henry Sayre’s Writing About Art 6th edition is now available online in its entirety as an eText 
within MyArtsLab. This straightforward guide prepares students to describe, interpret, and 
write about works of art and design in meaningful and lasting terms. This skill strengthens 
their ability to support their own design work, too.

VIDEO SERIES
XVII
VIDEO SERIES
This special interview series, filmed by the late Hillman Curtis, introduces students to twelve work-
ing graphic designers. Each designer is a featured voice in the book, contributing their work and 
thoughts in a Designer Vignette within each chapter. 
These short films are an intimate look into the daily life of each designer as they offer their 
thoughts, guidance, and passion for the field of graphic design. 
Featuring designers both established and new, young and old, and from all walks of life and 
areas of the world, this series will be a revealing perspective for students who want to understand 
the life of a designer. 
Each video is accessible through each chapter of your Pearson eText.

XVIII
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
PEARSON CHOICES AND RESOURCES
Give your students choices.
Pearson arts titles are available in the following formats to give you and your students more 
choices—and more ways to save.
The CourseSmart eTextbook offers the same content as the printed text in a convenient online 
format—with highlighting, online search, and printing capabilities. www.coursesmart.com
The Books à la Carte edition offers a convenient, three-hole-punched, loose-leaf version of 
the traditional text at a discounted price—allowing students to take only what they need to class. 
Books à la Carte editions are available both with and without access to MyArtsLab.
Build your own Pearson Custom course material.
Work with a dedicated Pearson Custom editor to create your ideal textbook and web mate-
rial—publishing your own original content or mixing and matching Pearson content. Contact your 
Pearson representative to get started.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND REVIEWS
XIX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS AND REVIEWS
First and foremost, thank you Billy Grieco, acquisitions editor at Pearson Education who fully 
understood and supported Guide to Graphic Design.
Thank you editors. Without your thorough effort this book would not have been completed: 
Joan Levinson for tying the text together so elegantly; and Mary Gawlik for making pragmatic 
changes and comments that refined this book.
Thank you to the many design instructors, professionals, and students who submitted their 
work and added to the many Speakouts, Excerpts, and Worklists. The breadth and depth of ideas 
from around the world demonstrate how expressive and intellectual graphic design can be.
And finally, a thank you to the following professors listed below who have reviewed this book 
and made their voices heard. Your devotion to teaching and your mentoring of the next generation 
of graphic designers enriches all our lives.
Trudy Abadie, Savannah College 
of Art and Design
Scott Anderson, Cape Cod 
Community College
Stephanie Bacon, Boise State University
Louis Baker, Savannah College 
of Art and Design
Tobias Brauer, Northern Kentucky 
University
Michele Bazemore, Prince George
Leslie Becker, California College 
of the Arts
David Begley, University of North Florida
Zoran Belic, Savannah College 
of Art and Design
Tim Birch, KCTCS
Sherry Blankenship, Ohio University
Henry Brimmer, Michigan State University
Robyn Brooks, Tunxis Community College
Mike Brown, Northeastern State University
Robert Canger, Brevard Community 
College
Lloyd Carr, New York City College 
of Technology
Karen Cheng, University of Washington
Eric Chimenti, Chapman University
Randy Clark, South Dakota State 
University
Sharon Covington, Tarrant County 
College Southeast
Lori Crawford, Delaware State University
Beckham Dossett, University of Houston
Thomas Elder, Boise State University
Eve Faulkes, West Virginia University
Ricardo Febre, Humboldt State University
Tom Fillebrown, Sierra College
Grace Fowler, Palomar College
Lynne Fleury, Western Iowa Tech CC
David Gilbert, Pellissippi State 
Community College
Mary Grassell, Marshall University
Jamie Gray, Kansas City Art Institute
Sabrina Habib, University of Florida
Kevin Hagan, University of Louisiana 
at Lafayette
James Haizlett, West Liberty State College
Alma Hale, Southwest Minnesota 
State University
John Harkins, Savannah College 
of Art and Design
Mary Hart, Middlesex Community 
College
Mariah Hausman, University of Miami
Nathaniel Hein, Delta State University
Merrick Henry, Savannah College 
of Art and Design
Pete Herzfeld, Frostburg State University
Dahn Hiuni, SUNY—Old Westbury
Brockett Horne, Maryland Institute 
College of Art
Jason W. Howell, Oral Roberts University
Jacqueline Irwin, Cowley College
Claudine Jaenichen, Chapman University
Courtney Kimball, Central Piedmont 
Community College
Kathleen Klos, Anne Arundel Community 
College
Joel Knueven, Cincinnati State
David Koeth, Bakersfield College
Cathy Latourelle, Northern Essex 
Community College
Joe Litow, SUNY Orange County 
Community College
Bobby Martin, Northeastern State 
University 
Lynda Mcintyre, University of Vermont
Brenda McManus, Pratt Institute
Sean McNaughton, S.I. Newhouse School 
of Public Communications
Jon Mehlferber, North Georgia College 
& State University
Jerry Nevins, Albertus Magnus College
Laura Osterweis, Framingham State 
University
Myung Park, California State University, 
Sacramento
Mookesh Patel, Herberger Institute 
for Design and the Arts
Dan Paulus, University of Wisconsin-
River Falls
Tamara Powell, Louisiana Tech University
Mat Rappaport, Columbia College
Elizabeth Resnick, Massachusetts College 
of Art and Design
Louise Sandhaus, California Institute 
of the Arts
Adel Shafik, Bakersfield College
Shawn Simmons, Kent State University
Kenneth Smith, Radford University
Kelly Statum, Lenoir Community College
Keith Tam, School of Design, Hong Kong 
Polytechnic University
Norman Taber, SUNY Plattsburgh
James Thorpe, University of Maryland
Michael Toti, Manchester Community 
College
Gwen Wagner-Amos, CSU, Sacraemento
Jonathan Walsh, South Carolina 
State University
Joyce Walsh, Boston University
Diane Webster, Mercer County 
Community College
David Weintraub, University 
of South Carolina
Eleanor Willard, Pitt Community College
Michael Williams, University of Kansas
Jennifer E. Wood, Boise State University
Bruce Younger, Monroe Community 
College
Dana Zurzolo, Pepperdine University

2
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Sequence the heritage of graphic design, beginning 
with early cave paintings, noting the first use of the term, 
and continuing through to present times.
t 
 Summarize the many categories of graphic design.
t 
  Describe what it means to be a graphic designer.
t 
 Distinguish art forms and theories that have influenced 
the development of graphic design.
t 
 Sequence the steps of the design process, from the first 
contact with a client to the finished work.
t 
 Characterize the basic components of a graphic 
design solution.
t
Exercises and Projects
Research categories of graphic design; critique graphic designs; 
design a T-shirt using text and image; visually document and 
present a business through the eyes of a graphic designer.
3
1
About Graphic Design 
The field uses the two words graphic and design because of the dual nature 
of its process. Successful design solutions stimulate viewers intellectually 
and move them emotionally by including both familiar and surprising 
elements. As a result, a design communication can not only explain some-
thing to an audience but also affect that group on another level. 
If you apply this complex thinking to your design process, the 
results will reflect your intentions, and your messages will be clear. A 
website is user friendly when its pages are attractive and its navigation 
simple; a book’s content might be more accessible when its cover presents 
an expressive visual metaphor; a building is easier to navigate when the 
architect has applied a logical system of signage to its passageways. Each 
of these situations presents a unique communication problem, solved 
with specific design approaches. 
Being a designer also involves finding ways to reveal the beauty 
in something that others may not see and expressing a thought in an 
raphic design is so much a part of our lives that at times it goes 
unnoticed. The layout of type and imagery on the page you’re reading right 
now is a key aspect of graphic design. This book was designed by organizing 
all the visual and textual information into a communicable message, an 
object bound between two covers. But if organizing were the only job of 
graphic designers, the computer would have replaced us by now.
Opposite page: KAREEM COLLIE.
Opening page (detail) for 
Man behind the Curtain (full 
image, see Figure 1.31).
G
I think design in essence has to 
have an authentic honesty 
built into it. The main goal is 
to convey something that makes 
a difference in other people’s 
lives. —Scott W. Santoro
Watch the Video on myartslab.com

4
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
unexpected way—a mission through which blending the useful with 
the aesthetically appealing has one primary goal—to communicate. For 
example, Rafael Esquer embraced the notion of giving instead of receiving 
by transforming a clothing collection bag into a typographic call to action 
(Figure 1.1). The fresh approach was also a declaration that read visually 
as “This idea is so clever, I want to help.” According to the designer, most 
people liked the design so much that they kept it as a laundry bag and sent 
their clothing donations in plain bags and boxes.
In another example, Pierre Bernard transformed the scaffolding 
for an architectural renovation into a sidewalk spectacle for the Centre 
Pompidou in Paris (Figure 1.2). A giant program listed the museum’s 
monthly events, and, after each event was over, it was manually crossed 
out by mountaineers hoisting themselves down on ropes. This creative 
idea made a simple calendar into a continually dramatic and entertain-
ing performance. The designer found an idea and pushed it further than 
anyone would have expected. A graphic designer needs to be part artist, 
scientist, researcher, psychologist, and businessperson.
Design work incorporates aesthetics (to achieve notions of beauty) 
structure (to organize and arrange), emotion (to accentuate feelings), and 
1.1 RAFAEL ESQUER. Clothing 
donation bag sent to clients 
for the holidays as a way to 
help people in need.

1.2 PIERRE BERNARD, ATELIER DE
CRÉATION GRAPHIQUE. For the 
Centre Pompidou renovation 
in Paris, a temporary system 
of signs was devised. Type was 
hoisted up, crossed out, and 
ultimately removed. 
utility (for use). Whether designing for an individual, a small business, or 
a large corporation, the designer brings a degree of art, craft, intelligence, 
and intuition to every project.
Graphic designers often collaborate with writers, illustrators, pho-
tographers, and printers, making for an energizing work environment. 
Clients sometimes invest large sums of money, and an audience of mil-
lions just might see the designer’s work, but the most exciting aspect of 
the graphic designer’s job—and the most admirable one—is saying some-
thing that matters, and saying it with both grace and intelligence. 
  Everything is design. Everything! 
—Paul Rand
5
View a Closer Look for the Centre Pompidou on myartslab.com

6
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Graphic Design’s Heritage
Graphic design (the art of conveying messages) has always been a part 
of us, even as far back as the early cave paintings of approximately 16,000 
years ago. Scenes of the hunt—like the ones pictured at Lascaux—may 
have been more than merely decorative, possibly serving a number of 
purposes (Figure 1.3). One purpose may have been to literally describe 
the animals as an instruction manual might, picturing what to chase and 
what to avoid. Another likely purpose may have been to bring good for-
tune by symbolically capturing the animals on the wall. Made with only 
burnt sticks and colored pigments, these beautifully executed designs 
could have motivated the hunting group and helped it to survive.
Fast-forwarding 14,000 years, a stone mosaic from Pompeii was 
used to communicate an important message: “Beware of the dog” (Figure 
1.4). A ferocious dog perfectly translated into the black and white mosaic 
along with words of caution made its point clearly to visitors. Forward 
another 1,700 years to America’s first political cartoon, Join or Die, a
woodcut by Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) (Figure 1.5). Franklin’s wit 
and conviction can be seen in the design of a snake severed into eighths, 
each segment representing a British American colony or region. The 
design inspired colonial unity in a yet-to-be-born country. 
Today, digital printing and electronic media have replaced cave wall 
paintings, mosaics, and woodcuts. But the functional aspect of graphic 
design is the same—to educate, symbolize, and even compel us to action. 
Understanding graphic design in the context of its history is essen-
tial to being a good designer. In Chapter 2, A Brief History of Graphic 
Design, you will come to see why this context is so important.
The Coining of the Term
The great book designer W. A. Dwiggins (1880–1956) coined the term 
“graphic design” in 1922. Since then, graphic design has grown into 
its own, legitimate profession. Dwiggins had it right in two ways. First 
by blending the words graphic and design, he better explained the pro-
cess—graphic sensibility fused with planning and organizing. Second, by 
naming the profession, he categorized it as its own, legitimate activity.
Although graphic design had an association with commerce, just as 
printing, lettering, and the advertising trades did, it was no longer con-
sidered a subcategory of those trades but a valid field in its own right. 
Dwiggins’s term was just abstract enough to encompass many kinds of 
design. (See the upcoming Excerpt from “The Name Game,” by Michael 
Worthington.) The categories of graphic design, as described in this chap-
ter, all have their own particular practices, and what unites them is the 
process graphic designers go through to communicate a concept.
As you continue reading this book, you will see just how that con-
cept of process applies to the art of graphic design. The field is as much 
1.3 Lascaux cave paintings, 
Dordogne, France.
1.4 Cave canem (beware of 
the dog) mosaic, Pompeii, Italy. 
Late first century AD. 
1.5 Benjamin Franklin’s political cartoon 
that appeared in the Pennsylvania 
Gazette, his American newspaper from 
1754. In Franklin’s time, a superstition 
existed that a snake cut to pieces could 
be brought back to life if the pieces were 
put back together before sunset.

GRAPHIC DESIGN’S HERITAGE 
7
EXCERPT: The Name Game by Michael Worthington 
(AIGA Journal, Vol. 16, No. 2, p. 37)
Eventually I realized it is the vagueness of the term “graphic design” that makes it so 
appropriate. The same reason my grandmother initially couldn’t understand that term is the 
very reason it works. It can cover myriad skills, cope with technological innovations 
and changes in the profession, but still refer to the larger concerns of visual communication, 
representation, and issues of creating meaning through content. This flexibility allows me 
to take on the role of an interface designer, website designer, or motion typographer, and add 
that knowledge to the variety of skills that currently fall under the title “graphic designer,” 
a term that itself is as unfinished and malleable as any digital piece of work.
about problem solving, clear thinking, and creativity as it is about the end 
result, the final design.
In Practice: Oddly enough, it wasn’t until the late 1970s that 
the media began to refer to the profession as “graphic design.” 
Until then it was mistakenly called “graphics design,” describing 
only the end product (the design of graphics), and neglecting 
the idea that there was an approach to the process, which the term 
graphic design more accurately describes. The media dropped 
the “s” (Figure 1.6). 
The Expanding Field of Design 
One of the wonderful things about the graphic design field is that it 
encourages creative people to develop personally challenging goals. Push-
ing further, beyond the most obvious design solution, is integral to being 
a good designer. This effort includes pushing how we develop concepts, 
how computer technology enables us to complete our tasks, and how new 
media can help expand graphic design language itself.
And we have academic support. In the last few decades, an increas-
ing number of students have been pursuing master’s degrees in graphic 
design and contributing to the rich mixture of ideas and culture. As a 
result, the field has grown and become a more sophisticated, serious field 
of study. Even a doctoral degree, the highest degree awarded in most dis-
ciplines, is now attainable as a course of study in graphic design, advanc-
ing research and enriching scholarship within the field. Books, journals, 
and magazines on the subject of design flourish, acknowledging the field’s 
history, theory, methods, and influence. Graphic designers work in count-
less industries and throughout the world. And yet, design is still a bit of 
a subculture. Its professionals need to be constantly self-critical to ensure 
that the field expands beyond the mere styling of information. Graphic 
design reflects and shapes the culture in which it exists. 
1.6 The s in graphics was 
eventually dropped by the 
media at the insistence of 
the profession. 
Graphics Design

8
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Graphic Design Categories
To varying degrees, the intent of design is to persuade, identify, or inform. 
A book jacket informs the viewer of the book’s content, persuades the 
reader to buy, and identifies the writer. The same is true in food packag-
ing where persuasion, identity on the shelf, and information all matter. 
Even a geographical map’s organization and clarity requires the designer 
to decide on what to include and exclude as well as how to present the 
information. A clear map is more likely to be purchased and used than a 
confusing map. 
A designer’s clients can range from a small, nonprofit organiza-
tion in need of a few hundred educational posters (Figure 1.7) to a major 
corporation requiring a set of streamlined, easy-to-read forms that are 
printed in the millions (Figure 1.8). Take the time to get to know your 
clients as well as you can. It can help tremendously in producing a design 
that fits their needs. Each of the specialized areas of graphic design has 
its own particular problems to solve. The job of a publication design is 
not the same as that of a package design, for example. But with each 
project, it is you, the designer, who will bring a graphic sensibility to the 
final product.
Corporate Design
Corporations have large, internal design departments, hire independent 
design consultants, and devote relatively large amounts of money for their 
graphic design projects. Corporations need to project a consistent visual 
identity—one that brands a corporation into the minds (and hearts) of 
the general public. 
1.7 DAVID PLUNKERT, SPUR DESIGN. 
Posters for TurnAround, a nonprofit 
agency serving victims of sexual 
assault and domestic violence.
1.8 LANDOR ASSOCIATES. 
FedEx Express airbill. 
FedEx servicemark used by permission.

GRAPHIC DESIGN CATEGORIES 
9
Environmental Design 
Creating a three-dimensional experience for the visitor 
is the goal of an environmental designer (Figure 1.9). 
The category includes the design of museum exhibits, 
trade shows, and convention booths. Environmental 
design overlaps with signage design in the sense that 
both types of designers work closely with architects as 
well as interior and landscape designers and must have 
an understanding of structural materials. In addition, 
environmental designers must know audio/visual media, 
including lighting and sound techniques, and interac-
tion design. Environmental design usually includes the 
display of signs, information designs, and other types of 
promotional materials. The overall design must remain 
in keeping with the objects or designs it contains. 
Motion Design 
This evolving field of design involves adding sound, 
motion, and time sequencing to pictures and words. 
Filmmaking, animation, and visual effects converge to 
tell a story or visually articulate a concept. Motion design 
projects include film title sequences, trailers, animations, 
and broadcast identifications (a short spot that confirms 
the channel being watched). The finished projects are 
displayed on television, in the cinema, on computer 
screens, and even through cell phones (Figure 1.10). (See 
the Speakout by Barry Deck on page 10.)
1.9 KUHLMANN LEAVITT, INC. 
Design for Formica Group Neocon 
exhibition space.
1.10 NUMBER 17, NYC; EMILY OBERMAN, 
art direction; NAZ SAHIN AND
JESSICA ZADNIK, design; MARY ELLEN
MATTHEWS, live action. Opening 
titles for Saturday Night Live. 

10
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Interaction Design 
Designers involved in this computer-based medium create user experi-
ences through Internet browsers and touch-screen devices. Software 
allows for interaction through body movement and speech. This field 
is a quickly evolving one, and designers need to stay current with the 
latest software and hardware advancements. The field requires a working 
knowledge of programming languages (Figure 1.11).
Type Design 
A type designer creates new letterforms and fonts (variations such as italic 
and bold) to develop a complete typeface family. The elements include let-
ters, numerals, ligatures (where two letters are joined), and punctuation. 
The designer must have a sharp sensitivity to detail to create a unified 
feeling within a typeface. It is important to have a strong knowledge of the 
history of type and an understanding of the theoretical issues involved. 
As with all design fields, good skills in the latest computer technology 
will simplify your task. Type design involves a great deal of effort and the 
results may not be obvious to the general public, but designers under-
stand how expressive a typeface can be and how it can subtly influence 
those who read it (Figure 1.12).
1.12 JONATHAN HOEFLER. 
Hoefler & Frere-Jones cover 
for specimens of type, 
8th edition.
1.11 MODE. Website design for 
Mellow Mushroom restaurant.
SPEAKOUT: Motion Design’s Evolving Role by Barry Deck, BarryDeckGroup
 
 Although the practice of graphic design began with print, designers are being asked with increas-
ing frequency to consider time, motion, and sound in their work. This is part of a general trend in 
communication, which may have started with cave paintings and could lead to the making of full-
on virtual reality experiences. Most of the messages that were conveyed in print only a century ago 
have now shifted to onscreen media, like movies, television, software, games, and the Internet. In El 
Lissitzky’s 1923 manifesto, Topography of Typography, (which appeared in Kurt Schwitters’s Dadaist 
magazine Merz), he wrote exuberantly, “The printed sheet overcomes space and time. The printed 
sheet, the infinity of the book, has to be overcome. THE ELECTRO-LIBRARY.” That future is here, 
and technology continues to evolve. As the possibilities of the technology change, the designer’s 
role begins to overlap with other disciplines. The difference between design and art has always been 
a subject of debate. Boundaries between graphic design and writing, software design, behavioral 
science, film directing, and editing do indeed blur. The graphic designers of the future will have 
more responsibilities and collaborators than ever, but there will always be a role for people skilled 
in telling stories visually. 

GRAPHIC DESIGN CATEGORIES 
11
Publication Design 
Magazines, newspapers, newsletters, and other peri-
odicals all fall within the umbrella of publication 
design. Thousands of periodicals are published each 
year in the United States alone, and other countries are 
equally invested in their own periodicals. Categories 
include news, business, travel, retail, entertainment, 
and fashion, and these publications are distributed 
weekly, monthly, quarterly, or annually. Each peri-
odical strives for a unique identity, and the elements 
that provide this uniqueness are a blend of photog-
raphy, typography, and continuity from page to page. 
In terms of design, a newspaper or newsletter might 
stress utility of reading, whereas a magazine will stress creative interpreta-
tion of each story (Figure 1.13). Now that most publications have both a 
print and online presence, designers have to consider how their designs 
will function in both platforms. A particular printed font may not work 
well online, or a sequence of images in print may not present themselves 
in the same way on the screen. Do you design for print and adapt it for the 
Web or vice versa? Or do you design with both formats in mind from the 
beginning? These decisions challenge publication designers every day. As 
online technology advances, such design decisions become not only more 
complex but also more important for the publication. 
Book Design 
Book publishers give the final, edited text to designers for layout. It is 
important that the designer understand the content when making deci-
sions about the font, headers, and all other design elements. The style 
decisions need to be consistent with the subject matter (Figure 1.14). 
Illustrated books present a whole different set of design challenges.
1.13 ANDREA FELLA. PAPER MAGAZINE.
Layout spread for this New York 
City-based independent magazine 
focusing on fashion, pop-culture, 
nightlife, music, art, and film.
1.14 MUCCA DESIGN. Layout 
spread for a dictionary of words 
that are a single letter in length. 
Initial letters were also designed 
specifically for the book, here 
a large letter M.

12
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Book Jacket Design 
The success of a book, or a series of books, may be dependent on the cover 
design. The cover relays a great deal of nonverbal information about the 
content. The ultimate test is the bookshelf—either at actual book stores 
or on a website where a book becomes a miniposter. The designer’s job is 
to attract notice and provide a point of entry for the book (Figure 1.15).
Signage Design 
Helping people find their way through stores, airports, highways, and 
buildings is the main goal of signage design. A strong understanding of 
typography is essential in this area of design, as is an understanding of 
building plans, floor plans, construction, and exit procedures. Signage 
designers work with interior and landscape designers as well as architects 
to create signage—a sign, or system of signs, that will be highly visible but 
also will integrate with the space for which they are planned (Figure 1.16).
1.15 KEENAN. Book jacket for The 
Bug, Vintage Books. The image of 
computer keys illustrates this novel 
about the fate between a software 
programmer and the bug she sets 
out to eliminate.
1.16 MICHAEL GERICKE/PENTAGRAM. 
Signage and wayfinding for 
Terminal 1 at Lester B. Pearson 
International Airport, Toronto.
  A book is a container to save things 
permanently; better than a picture 
frame or filing cabinet. 
—Alvin Eisenman

GRAPHIC DESIGN CATEGORIES 
13
1.18 WORKSIGHT. Pocket folder and 
capability brochure for Automatic 
Data Processing (ADP). Computerized 
transaction processing is abstracted 
as a cover image for ADP’s pocket 
folder. Inside, the brochure literally 
translates the end result of the 
cover—a mailed piece.
1.17 DUFFY & PARTNERS. Logo for Tall 
Tales Restaurant. The handcrafted 
illustration brings warmth and charm 
to this Gander Mountain restaurant. 
Brand and Identity Design
For any company to succeed, it must establish its own, unique brand (an 
identifying personality) that is burnt into the mind of its audience. A logo 
(a graphic or symbolic representation) can accomplish this function by 
presenting a face for the viewer to see—a visual identity (Figure 1.17). 
A logo also differentiates one company from another, becoming quite 
valuable if used consistently in advertising, print collateral, websites, and 
broadcast media. 
Graphic designers who work at corporations create a wide array 
of materials. Style manuals help coordinate how a corporate identity is 
applied to various communications from the annual report and websites, 
to business cards, advertising layouts, and environmental signage. The 
goal is to create a comfort zone for the general public by consistently pre-
senting a familiar, instantly recognizable face (Figure 1.18).
Package Design
Package design must function three-dimensionally and often utilizes tex-
ture as well as text and image. Industrial packaging is a major field, but it’s 
the consumer category that holds the most presence for industry, includ-
ing food and beverages, cosmetics, household products, pharmaceuticals, 
and smaller groups. Decisions about size and shape are often impacted 
by government regulations, and decisions about the overall personality 
and approach are often determined based on focus groups and consumer 
feedback (Figure 1.19).
1.19 LARSEN. Photography Lars Hansen. Le Saucier package 
design using contemporary typography and photography 
to bring a distinctive look and feel to this product. 

14
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Information Design
The presentation of information and data is both an art and a science. 
The designer must make data understandable and easy to use in a way 
that is effective, efficient, and attractive. Typical examples might include 
instructions for product use, signs, public information systems, computer 
interfaces, websites, forms, educational materials, maps, charts, graphs, 
and diagrams (Figure 1.20). 
Collateral Design
Promotion that supports or reinforces an identity, service, or event is 
considered collateral material. This type of material includes brochures, 
mailers, catalogs, announcements, and so on. These materials usually 
require copywriting (composing the words), photography, and illus-
tration (stylized drawing/painting). While advertising agencies handle 
major campaigns for promoting a brand’s product or service, they will 
often commission designers to produce collateral pieces (Figure 1.21).
1.21 JASON ACKLEY, MORNINGSTAR. 
Morningstar FundInvestor and 
StockInvestor newsletters that 
project a clarity and vibrancy 
to complicated financial 
information.
1.20 NIGEL HOLMES. A map of 
Manhattan/World Trade Center 
for Rolling Stone magazine 
that helped readers locate the 
specific 9/11 site known as 
“Ground Zero.”

GRAPHIC DESIGN CATEGORIES 
15
Advertising Design 
Graphic designers working within advertising media fuse their under-
standing of visual identity with campaign marketing strategies. Magazine 
advertising and direct mail are two potential directions for designers to 
take in this category. Designers can bring a graphic sensibility to tradi-
tional campaigns and help integrate type and image to strengthen adver-
tising concepts. Advertising designers usually have a strong background 
in marketing (Figure 1.22). 
Self-Publishing 
A digitally interactive performance is an example of how new 
media and activities can be incorporated into a self-published 
project. In the example shown here, the designer Elliot Earls com-
bines elements of music, poetry, typography, design criticism, and 
performance into a piece that enters territory traditionally defined 
as fine art (Figure 1.23).
1.22 SCOTT STOWELL, OPEN.
The “Between” campaign, 
developed in collaboration 
with ad agency Wieden + 
Kennedy advertising agency, 
tries to make Coca-Cola more 
a part of everyday Japanese 
life. Each print ad defines a 
moment (and chance to drink 
Coke) by what came before 
and what comes after. In 
this example, the theme was 
“between heartbreaks.”
1.23 ELIOT EARLS. Video still. 
Eye Sling Shot incorporates a 
mélange of typography, sound, 
video fragments, interactive 
digital video, simulated live 
performance, short films, 
and pop music—all controlled 
by means of midi (musical 
instrument digital instrument). 
  The secret of all effective advertising 
is not the creation of new and tricky 
words and pictures, but one of 
putting familiar words and pictures 
into new relationships. 
—Leo Burnett (1891–1971)

16
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Being a Graphic Designer
The field of graphic design is always changing and advancing. Keeping 
up with these changes means the life of a designer is continually exciting. 
The software applications used to create and assemble designs are making 
production effortless, digital printing technology is advancing every day, 
and critical writing on design has gained respect as a legitimate field. The 
general public seems to be more aware of the design world and of the huge 
impact graphic design has on daily life. 
The design field can be so much more than a straightforward job. 
Designers are paid to be creative and expressive—something so few 
people in other occupations can claim. But the field also offers the chance 
to contribute to the community in a positive way. From social to political 
to environmental causes, each project offers an opportunity to make a 
difference in the world. 
Contributing to the community in which you live begins with an 
awareness of that community. A conscious observation of how informa-
tion is presented and how meaning is read must become your path of 
study. To be an informed designer, you need to be continually aware of 
current events as well as political, economic, and social issues. In other 
words, you need to take responsibility for your place in the world by read-
ing newspapers, books, and magazines and by listening to the news. You 
should also keep up with what is happening in your community cultur-
ally—by going to museums, galleries, concerts, and theater. If you can 
present yourself to a client as a person who is intelligent and worldly, the 
client will trust your judgment ever so much more than if you appear to 
be uninformed. All this knowledge will help with your design work on 
a very practical level. The abilities we use to interpret culture and social 
issues are the same ones we exercise to solve design problems. 
As a case in point, consider the Poetry Slam logo by Travis Olson 
and Carmichael Lynch Thorburn (Figure 1.24). Here the designers have 
created a humorous character to convey the organization’s spirit; the 
starburst inside the voice bubble evokes a sense of passion about poetry 
readings. These events are not the tame readings you might have gone to 
in college. A poetry slam is a raucous, exciting, and creative affair. The 
simple colors of black and red further reflect the emotional charge of 
slamming. When form and content blend as well as they do here (with 
bold and simple lines and shapes), they achieve an effective whole, giving 
the design vitality through its consistency. The designers have been to 
poetry slams and know what they’re about. They use that knowledge to 
create meaningful designs.
1.24 TRAVIS OLSON, CARMICHAEL 
LYNCH THORBURN. Logo design 
for Poetry Slam, Inc.

BEING A GRAPHIC DESIGNER 
17
Voice and Vision
Acknowledging your individual point of view in your 
own work also has significant value. The places you’ve 
been, the things you’ve seen, felt, or heard, all feed into 
your ability to approach a design project in a unique 
way. Your life experiences, as well as your education, 
will have a profound impact on your designs. Because of 
these influences, your work will have a distinct identity 
and will be a contribution to the field and to the commu-
nity. (See the Speakout by Kali Nikitas and Figure 1.27.) 
So many charts are a mundane representation of 
data, but the “Move Our Money” chart is anything but 
dull (Figure 1.25). The designers blended creativity with 
politics through an unusual medium—an inflatable bal-
loon. Part of a traveling road show, the sculpture dra-
matized extreme military spending, creating a spectacle 
wherever it went. The designers’ voice and vision made 
an otherwise dull set of statistics become very much alive. The light-
hearted approach brought a disarming aspect to the information, adding 
to the message by presenting horrifying data in a ridiculous way. The piece 
spoke effectively because there was an informed opinion to begin with. 
In the context of a business-oriented problem, Cheryl Heller used 
a similar approach to create the package identity for LouisBoston (Figure 
1.26). She used a witty voice and adept vision to promote the store’s 
expanded offering for women and younger customers. A light-hearted 
presentation with an approachable style, the shopping bag design is 
humorous as well as engaging and intelligently communicates “young and 
fresh” at the same time. Its success derives from the insightful blend of 
form and content into a meaningful concept.
1.25 STEFAN SAGMEISTER AND
HJALTI KARLSSON. “Move Our 
Money” charts as part of a 
traveling road show.
1.26 CHERYL HELLER. Package 
identity for LouisBoston. 

18
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
1.27 KALI NIKITAS AND RICH
SHELTON. Graphic Design for 
Love(+$). “Honor the Workers” 
was one of 200 banners 
designed for “The Urban Forest 
Project,” an outdoor banner 
exhibit created for the Times 
Square Alliance. Profits from 
the sale of the banner designs 
went to help the Worldstudio 
AIGA Scholarships program.
SPEAKOUT: Design Can Make a Difference by Kali Nikitas, chair, Communications 
Department, Otis College of Art and Design (Figure 1.27)
 
 In the past, kids were raised to believe that in order to make a difference in the world, they had to 
study to be lawyers, doctors, or engineers. However, graphic design has recently been credited with 
playing a significant role in society. Through word and image, on products, in the environment, 
on the web, in publications, and in advertising, graphic design has become a viable career path for 
instigating change. 
 
 Design students and practitioners can shift and alter ways of thinking and enrich the way we experi-
ence our everyday life. As image-makers and idea generators, we contribute to what people buy, how 
people vote, and the ways in which individuals live as citizens. Once students realize the profound 
potential of their major, they tend to develop a sense of responsibility and urgency towards contrib-
uting to the profession and the world socially, economically, politically, and environmentally.
  Steal ideas—just not from 
other graphic designers. 
—Ed Fella

BEING A GRAPHIC DESIGNER 
19
  The creative process is not 
performed by the skilled hand 
alone, or by the intellect alone, 
but must be a unified process 
in which head, heart, and hand 
play a simultaneous role.
—Herbert Bayer
In Janet Froelich’s cover for The New York Times Magazine (Figure 
1.28), she created a mathematical equation comprising images of objects, 
the sum of which was inspiration. The article itself answers the question 
as to where inspiration comes from, while the cover poses the question in 
a way that suggests that the answer is direct and concrete. Of course read-
ers will want to find out why the particular images were chosen. Froelich 
knew how to make the most of the elements supplied to draw the viewer 
in and to give the form meaning. Design like this example doesn’t happen 
unless there is someone behind the work who has a voice to verbalize the 
idea and the vision to carry it out through graphic form. 
The computer has given almost everyone the ability to move type 
and images around the page into pleasing arrangements. But the com-
puter can’t translate the spirit of the times or bring a personal touch to a 
communication. Simply put, the voice and vision that designers give to 
their projects make the communication more human and more effective. 
Good designers have the ability to create meaning and create change. (See 
the Speakout by Maya Drozdz.)
1.28 JANET FROELICH. Cover 
for The New York Times 
Magazine.
From The New York Times, 11/30/2003 © 2012 The New York Times. All rights reserved. Used by permission and protected by the Copyright Laws of the 
United States. The printing, copying, redistribution, or retransmission of this Content without express written permission is prohibited.

How do you define graphic design—what 
does it mean to you?
Graphic design is both a process and an arti-
fact—software and hardware. Communications 
design involves serious cerebral activity, 
including research, analysis, conceptualizing, 
and planning. All this rational activity must be 
translated through the designer’s personal 
talent, intuition, experience, and a scientifically 
indescribable connection between body and 
brain. In that mysterious mix, original expres-
sions are born which bring the design brief to 
life and resonate with the audience. These 
expressions take eloquent form in the tangible 
artifacts that we see in museums and design 
exhibitions, including posters, books, brochures, 
and many other graphic media, and also in 
nonphysical communications in the digital 
realm. At the end of the day, it is the audience’s 
interaction with the graphic message, and their 
response, that really counts.
How do you see design evolving? 
Is it morphing into something designers 
won’t recognize in 100 years or are 
there staples that hold true?
The staples hold true, but rapidly changing 
media challenge designers to develop new 
conceptual theories, processes, and skills. 
Interactive electronic communications require 
far more education to understand how 
audiences navigate and make meaning out of 
nonphysical communications spaces. Electronic 
communications design now involves sound, 
motion, and interactivity.
What advice or insight can you give to 
students studying graphic design?
Passion is the largest requirement. This is a 
challenging, competitive, and rapidly evolving 
field, so it is essential that prospective designers 
feel a real love of the conceptual and form-
giving elements. 
Vignette 1.1 Cranbrook 
Crane symbol, Cranbrook 
Educational Community.
Katherine McCoy was cochair of the design department at Cranbrook Academy of Art for twenty-
four years, a distinguished visiting professor at London’s Royal College of Art, and a senior lecturer 
at Illinois Institute of Technology’s Institute of Design. Her graphic design practice and teaching 
have garnered her a medal from the American Institute of Design (AIGA), election to the Alliance 
Graphique International, and an honorary Ph.D. from the Kansas City Art Institute. She served as 
national vice president of AIGA and is a past president of both the Industrial Designers Society of 
America and the American Center for Design. She writes frequently on design criticism and history, 
has coproduced a television documentary on Japanese design, and chaired the first Living Surfaces 
Conference on interactive communications design. Currently the Hall Distinguished Professor at 
Kansas City Art Institute, she is also a partner, with her husband Michael McCoy, of High Ground, 
a design workshop and studio based in Colorado.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  D E F I N I N G  G R A P H I C  D E S I G N ,  W I T H   KATHERINE McCOY
20
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
“Passion is the largest 
requirement.” 

Vignette 1.4 KATHERINE MCCOY
& DANIEL LIBESKIND. Architecture 
Symbol and Interpretation 
exhibition poster. An announce-
ment for an exhibition refers 
to the rational and irrational in 
architecture. A reconstruction 
of a De Chirico painting includes 
an early Renaissance perspec-
tive drawing and diagrammatic 
notations from an Edgar Allan 
Poe short story.
Vignette 1.3 Fluxus exhibit 
catalog cover. This cover’s 
structure refers to a diagram 
of the history of Fluxus by the 
movement’s founder, George 
Maciunas. The bright colors of 
cheap printing paper are in the 
provocative spirit of Fluxus.
Vignette 1.2 Cranbrook 
Metalsmithing poster. A staged 
photograph makes a landscape 
of recent student work. Here, 
a schematic plan for the pitcher 
is superimposed and metallic 
forms of silver and copper cut 
into the photograph.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: KATHERINE MCCOY 
21

SPEAKOUT: Intuitive Knowledge by Maya Drozdz, visualingual.
wordpress.com
 
 Design is something to which you have been exposed your entire life. You 
take your cues from design as you make even the most mundane choices, 
including shopping for groceries or interpreting road signs. If you ever 
feel overwhelmed by how much you don’t yet know about design, con-
sider and draw on the wealth of design knowledge you already have. You 
may lack the specialized vocabulary to articulate what you know, but you 
already have an intuitive knowledge about the subject.
22
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Addressing the Personal and the Public
There is both a personal and a public side to graphic 
design. In other words, the same communication tools 
that designers use in service to the business commu-
nity can also be redirected in service to the social com-
munity. Graphic designers have that potential, and 
they work in both arenas. The emotionally charged 
thought is easily expressed when words and images are 
at our fingertips. 
The flier What Is Your Culture? by Loan Lam 
does just that (Figure 1.29). After noticing a newspa-
per article about a law banning the use of fireworks 
being enforced in Chinatown, especially during the 
Chinese New Year, Lam felt the need to speak out. 
After researching the subject, she used her design to 
make the point that banning fireworks during the Chi-
nese New Year was as culturally insensitive as banning 
turkey during Thanksgiving or a decorated tree during 
Christmas. She used an image of a cooked duck—a 
classic icon of Chinese culture seen hanging in most 
Chinatown restaurant windows. In a surreal twist, a 
firecracker is being removed from the duck’s dissected 
body. It is an emotional translation as much as a literal 
one. The ban on fireworks rips something vital out of 
Chinese culture. The image is confrontational and cre-
ates the kind of public dialogue the designer wanted. 
In Practice: A cooked duck is used as a cultural icon to represent Chinese 
culture. The dominance of the image draws the specific audience in, while smaller 
images and text explain the social issue being challenged. 
Another equally passionate student project is a design titled Man 
behind the Curtain (Figures 1.30 and 1.31) by Kareem Collie. The piece 
1.29 LOAN LAM. Design for a flier 
titled What Is Your Culture?
questioning a law banning the 
use of fireworks in New York 
City’s Chinatown.

BEING A GRAPHIC DESIGNER 
23
notes that in Crown Heights, a neighborhood in Brooklyn whose popula-
tion is primarily of African descent, there are many bronze statues com-
memorating civic leaders, but not one of them is black. The student asks: 
“How can I create a home in a place that feels like someone else’s living 
room?” His answer is expressed in the design. A 
bronze hand transforms into the designer’s own 
hand. The “tag” is a graffiti signature that takes 
some representation away from the past and 
moves it into the present day. In both projects, 
the designers use personal convictions, a strong 
connection with their heritage, and awareness 
of their surroundings to make a social concern 
more public. What Is Your Culture? deals with 
the conflict between Chinese culture and West-
ern law. Man behind the Curtain explains neigh-
borhood graffiti as a proud expression of black 
presence. In this sense, the personal, expressed 
publicly, makes for what we might call a citizen 
designer, an important role in the field. 
1.30 KAREEM COLLIE. Design 
project (series) on revealing 
a neighborhood’s cultural 
icon discrepencies; titled Man 
behind the Curtain.
1.31 KAREEM COLLIE. 
Opening page to Man 
behind the Curtain.

24
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
Influences on Graphic Design
Graphic design is affected by many other fields within 
the visual arts. We see the influence of sculpture and 
architecture in the exhibition design by Abbott Miller for 
Rolling Stone magazine in which a giant, fractured, three-
dimensional letter e from the rock magazine’s own mast-
head emerges (Figure 1.32). There is a definite sensibility 
reminiscent of the colossal sculptures of Swedish artist 
Claes Oldenburg as well as the fragmented deconstruc-
tivism of contemporary architect Frank Gehry. These 
keen references are pulled into the box of the designer’s 
own problem. The result is a design solution that has 
visual impact and cultural significance. 
Designers can also embrace literature for its story-
telling, philosophy for its ethics, science for its objective-
ness, linguistics for its syntax, and so on. Noticing the 
nonlinear storyline of a movie you saw could inspire 
the way you handle the type in your design; the warm 
yellow street sign against the backdrop of cool green 
leaves might influence your project’s color palette; and 
the step-by-step process you went through to build your 
bookshelves (easy at first, then more complex, finishing 
with a satisfying last instruction) may possibly affect the 
way you sequence pages in the layout of a magazine. The pure, utilitarian 
compositions of Theo van Doesburg help us to realize how affected we are 
by the concept of abstraction (Figure 1.33). The Vancouver Culture Guide 
by Ricky Castro and Brooke Mackay was clearly influenced by this type 
of stark abstraction. The clear structure and playful grid further interprets 
this abstract yet useful sensibility (Figure 1.34). 
1.32 ABBOTT MILLER/PENTAGRAM. 
Exhibition design for “The 30th 
Anniversary Covers Tour” for 
Rolling Stone magazine.
1.33 THEO VAN DOESBURG. 
Contra-Composition of 
Dissonances, XVI. 1925.
1.34 RICKY CASTRO AND BROOKE
MACKAY. Vancouver Culture 
Guide.
View a Closer Look for the Rolling Stone exhibit on myartslab.com

INFLUENCES ON GRAPHIC DESIGN 
25
Music also has a large influence. A reoc-
curring melody in a piece of classical music from 
300 years ago may help a designer understand 
how to bring unity and rhythm to a series of 
printed pages with a repeating graphic element. 
Or, similarly, a designer’s work may be energized 
by the influence of the punk rock movement of 
the late 1970s and early 1980s. The structure, the 
beat, and the melody of music can all have an 
impact on a design. Some of the designers pro-
filed in this book talk directly about their influ-
ences. In all the work presented here, you will 
learn to discern the influences, and more impor-
tant, you will learn to look to outside sources to 
inform your own design work. 
The fliers by Art Chantry take an unusual 
approach to punk rock (Figure 1.35). Their 
tough photocopier aesthetic complemented the 
“street” environment of the fliers—taped and 
stapled to telephone poles and sides of build-
ings. The visual language also worked back-
wards: distressed graphics became an alternative 
language to counter the bland aesthetic conven-
tions toward which design seemed to be heading 
during that time period, for example, uninven-
tive grids and overuse of the typeface Helvetica.
In Practice: László Moholy-Nagy (1895–1946), 
believed that a strong interrelationship exists between 
the fine and applied arts. In his 1947 book Vision in 
Motion, Moholy-Nagy wrote of design’s broad scope: 
“There is design in organization of emotional 
experiences, in family life, in labor relations, in city 
planning, in working together as civilized human 
beings.” A very basic, reductive approach was a way 
to connect the various fields. Architecture, painting, photography, industrial and 
graphic design, and so forth, all shared an aesthetic based on a simple but inventive 
use of materials and production. A refinement of this approach translated into 
the clean, organized Swiss style of the 1950s.
Designing is no
1.35 ART CHANTRY. Black and 
white offset poster for the music 
band Gang of Four.
  Designing is not a profession but an attitude. 
—László Moholy-Nagy

26
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
1.36 SIEGEL & GALE. The New 
School visual identity.
EXCERPT: Emptying the Spoon, Enlarging the Plate; Some Thoughts 
on Graphic Design Education by Warren Lehrer, The Education of a Graphic Designer, 
Second Edition, Allworth Press, 2005
 
 
graphic design is an art
graphic design is a business
graphic design is a profession
graphic design is next week’s garbage
graphic design gives shape to culture
graphic design gives shape to ideas
graphic design gives shape to information
graphic design gives shape to misinformation
graphic design gives shape to feelings
graphic design gives shape to stories
graphic design gives shape to dreams and experiments
graphic design gives shape to experience
graphic design creates experience
graphic design is the visualization of language
graphic design facilitates dialogue
graphic design boils things down like poetry
graphic design diagrams teeming complexities
graphic design grows out of local traditions
graphic design drains local traditions
graphic design is manifest through invention
graphic design can help save lives
graphic design can destroy lives
graphic design can pose questions and illuminate ambiguities
graphic design can help transform consciousness
graphic design can make the ordinary sacred
graphic design can be used as a weapon
graphic design can be cool, slick, objective
graphic design can be personal, idiosyncratic, hot, 
deep, strange, lovely
graphic design can be playful, funny, ironic, or biting
graphic design can make the useless mandatory
graphic design can make the unseen visible
graphic design can make the incomprehensible clear
graphic design can be condescending, misinformed, 
and insulting
graphic design can be a flower blooming on a rainy day
graphic design can help perpetuate stereotypes or 
dispel them
graphic design can help facilitate democracy
graphic design can help fake democracy and enable fascism
graphic design is a powerful gift/responsibility
graphic design can be a one- or a two-trick pony
graphic design reveals the society that produces it
graphic design can be the life you make it
The agitated, expressive spontaneity of punk rock still influences 
design today, an example of which is even seen in the visual identity for 
The New School in New York City by the design firm Siegel & Gale. Its 
graffiti aesthetic has an unexpected edge that reflects not only the urban 
environment of the school itself but also its socialist underpinnings 
(Figure 1.36). 
In the excerpt by Warren Lehrer, many of the definitions, associa-
tions, and contradictions of design are fleshed out in poetic form. Its most 
poignant line is his last: graphic design can be the life you make it.

INFLUENCES ON GRAPHIC DESIGN 
27
The SCI-Arc lecture series poster demonstrates the production 
value of a design idea (Figure 1.37). The event hosts cross-disciplinary 
speakers that push the technological boundaries of architecture. In this 
spirit, the piece twists the idea of a traditional announcement. It is created 
with a silkscreen, a common printing method used to make posters, but 
one printed onto a clear, inflatable plastic poster. It must be pumped up 
to be read and, in so doing, transforms into a three-dimensional, toy-like 
object. 
Knowledge of every possible medium is quite valuable to the 
graphic designer. How something looks in its texture and feel is built into 
the images a designer uses, but texture and feel also become part of the 
printing of a brochure or the functioning links on a website. These subtle 
finishes can make or break a design. A crisply folded brochure or a web-
site’s seamless flow through efficient coding all become part of the design 
process, too. Knowing what the possibilities are can greatly expand your 
creativity. 
1.37 MICHAEL WORTHINGTON.
SCI-Arc lecture series poster 
using an inflatable poster to 
draw attention. 

28
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
1.38 Elements of a successful 
design solution.
The Nuts and Bolts of Graphic Design
The design process is typically linear. Steps include the initial brief, 
research, roughs, and so on. Along the way are basic components (or 
elements) that designers must consider and factor into every distinctive 
design solution (Figure 1.38). 
Components of a Successful Design Solution
Time/Budget: The most concrete of graphic design components, making 
graphic design an applied art with constraints. 
Content: What needs to be included in the communication being made. 
Form: The shape a design takes based on the content it needs to convey. 
Function: The basic determination of a project’s goals. For example, a 
promotion for an event will have, as its main objective, to convince people 
to attend. Function defines the direction a design will take. 
Structure: A hierarchy to the audience: what to see and read first, then 
second, third, and so on. Every design benefits from some kind of struc-
ture or planned order to convey information. 
Usefulness: A practical consideration to make the design useful for the 
audience. Usefulness can include many aspects. For example, an edgy 
aesthetic with distressed type might be useful for a music magazine, but 
not for instructions on a medicine bottle, which must be in a clear, easily 
readable typeface. 
Aesthetics: The way a design looks, which can attract or repel the audi-
ence. Aesthetics is tied to usefulness in this way. An environmentally 
friendly product that is packaged with a cold, industrial aesthetic isn’t 
going to connect as logically as one that is packaged using earth tones 
and organic shapes. A design that is tough or sweet, mundane or excit-
ing, should be made with the subject and audience in mind. Remember, 
though, that aesthetics can be a matter of taste and are influenced by cul-
tural norms. You need to know your audience and the context in which 
your work will be seen. 
Distinction: The ways a design can be different from all that is around it. 
We are bombarded with all sorts of messages and images. Your design must 
somehow stand out. If a wall full of posters shouts, a unique quality might 
be achieved by one that whispers. The ephemeral nature of graphic design 
offers the possibility for distinction to be made by what a design does (it is 
functional, structured, useful, and aesthetic), but also by what it doesn’t do. 
In Practice: There is a joke within the profession in which a typical client is 
always presented with three options—a kind of a triangle, as it were. The options 
are as follows: a project can be done quickly, well, and cheaply, but the client can 
pick only two of those options. The combinations are as follows: (1) design made 
quickly and at a high quality, but at a cost that will not be cheap, (2) design made 
quickly and cheaply, but not of high quality, and( 3) design with high quality 
and made cheaply, but done slowly.
Everything should be made as 
simple as possible, but not simpler.
—Albert Einstein
G R A P H I C
D E S I G N
( T I M E / B U D G E T )
F O R M
C O N T E N T
U S E F U L N E S S
( A U D I E N C E  P R A G M AT I C S )
A E S T H E T I C S
( F O R M  E N H A N C E M E N T )
F U N C T I O N
( P R O J E C T  G O A L S )
S T R U C T U R E
( H I E R A R C H Y,  O R D E R )

THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF GRAPHIC DESIGN 
29
The Graphic Design Process
Getting a design brief from a client is generally the first step in the design 
process (Figure 1.39). A brief might include a rough outline about the 
company initiating the project, its history and mission, the goals of the 
company’s communication, a target audience (age, sex, and social levels), 
and the general requirements (media, budget, and time frame). 
Once the client has submitted the brief, the designer creates a sched-
ule (Figure 1.40). If no brief exists, then the designers might want to create 
one. This information becomes part of the project’s research (for more 
details on research, see Chapter 4). Research helps determine what the 
project is really about and where it can go. A company’s competitors—
along with any of their solutions designed along the same terms—help 
a designer get started. Knowing design history, how past designers have 
approached similar communication problems, becomes very valuable at 
this early stage of the process. 
When a designer has done enough research and starts to feel 
comfortable with the knowledge attained, she begins developing ideas. 
Designers record these ideas as small drawings, known as thumbnails,
on paper or on a computer screen. Here the designer begins to indicate 
words and images with the simplest lines and shapes (Figure 1.41). The 
point is to generate as many thumbnails as possible and to do it as quickly 
as they occur so they aren’t forgotten. Many idea-generating techniques 
come into play during this phase of the process (see Chapter 5 for a dis-
cussion of such techniques). 
Selecting from the thumbnails, designers then enlarge a few of the 
best ideas into rough approximations of the design (Figure 1.42). These 
roughs help determine how the design ideas can be better visualized and 
further refined. Designers present these roughs to their colleagues in a 
session called a critique. A critique is an evaluation in which a profes-
sor, classmates, and, when you’re working at a design firm, your manager 
1.41 Thumbnail sketches 
indicating ideas, in this case, 
creating a map of company 
locations as a three-dimen-
sional construction that can 
be photographed.
1.39 Client brief outlining 
project goals, coordinates, 
and suggestions.
1.40 Schedule notating 
what is due, and when. 

30
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
1.42 A “rough” example of an 
actual map sketched in against 
the corner of a wall.
and coworkers, review the solutions you have created. Critiques also help 
you to clarify ideas; asking questions about your own work can begin the 
process. For example: Is the objective being met? Is the concept commu-
nicating? How is the design being packaged and does the solution work 
within the company’s brand image and strategy? Is the form creative and 
eye-catching? Is the overall design pushed as far as it can go, or is there 
another level that the concept can step toward? The answers and the dis-
cussion that follow these kinds of questions will help you move forward. 
Ultimately, the critique will help you clarify ideas and recharge your cre-
ativity. (See the Worklist: How to Be Critiqued by Randall Hoyt.) 
Final comprehensives, or comps as they’re called, are the polished 
and finished versions of roughs. Comps are prepared for the client and, 
therefore, typography, imagery, and layout are more refined. For example, 
a poster should be scaled to 100 percent to realize its full effect, a website
presented in the context of a computer screen, a package’s label wrapped 
around its container—all with the intention of bringing the comp as close 
to the real thing as possible. 
At the presentation, the designer shows the finished comp to the 
client, explaining the ideas behind the solution and going over the entire 
concept. Designers do their best to make sure the client feels that the pri-
mary goals are being met, with the design balancing creativity, integrity, 
clear communication, and budget. 
If approved, the design goes into actual production in whatever 
media it is intended. At this point, the designer or design team needs to 
prepare the final artwork (Figure 1.43), shoot the photographs, edit the 
text, and assemble all the parts into the design’s composition (Figure 1.44).
1.44 MICHAEL BRALEY. Final 
design as it appears in the 
printed brochure.
1.43 A studio setup where 
the map construction is made 
ready for photographing.

THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF GRAPHIC DESIGN 
31
W O R K L I S T
How to Be Critiqued by Randall Hoyt, associate professor of 
communication design, University of Connecticut
The critique process is essential in graphic design education, but we forget 
how much of a skill it actually is. Design students must be prepared to take 
advantage of the experience. Following are twelve steps to a healthy and 
memorable critique:
1  
 Get some sleep: Preferably a good night’s sleep, but no fewer than 
three hours.
2  
 Look sharp: Engage in the rituals of hygiene. Take a shower 
and put on clean clothes free of tears and stains. How your ideas 
are perceived is in direct relation to how you are perceived. 
Dress accordingly.
3 
 Bring some work: If you don’t have work, then come anyway 
and listen. When it is your turn, respectfully decline. 
4 
  Shut up and listen: Give a brief introduction to your work, 
and then hear what others have to say.
5 
  Rehearse your introduction: Write it down, but don’t read it. 
Spend no more than 2–4 minutes explaining it. 
6 
 Present your work well: Work should be well crafted, clean, 
and neat. Keep process materials well preserved and organized.
7 
  Know your issues: Facilitate your critique by asking for 
commentary on specific issues in your introduction. But don’t 
direct it—allow for a fresh response from your reviewers.
8 
 Don’t critique yourself or your work: Give yourself a break 
and let everyone else do what they came to do.
9 
 Don’t be defensive: You can explain confusing aspects of the work 
when necessary, but do not try to convince people that your way is 
correct. Let the discussion run its course—listen to all sides.
10 
 Take notes (or have someone take them for you): Critiques go 
quickly, so record what happens. They are an invaluable resource. 
11 
 Don’t take it personally: Try to remain detached while your work 
is discussed. If you think your critique was too personal, talk about 
it with your instructor outside of class.
12 
 Thank everyone: Appreciate the effort of those involved and thank 
everyone for their time in discussing your work.

32
CHAPTER 1: ABOUT GRAPHIC DESIGN
In Perspective
There are many areas of graphic design, but whatever the final form, the 
designer’s job includes assembling words, numbers, and images into a 
coherent whole. Thinking is required in all the processes of design. This 
discipline is not an intuitive art; it is an art of rationality combined with 
creativity. The designer combines all the elements into a cohesive whole, 
giving a unique identity to a product, service, or company, just as one’s 
manner of speech, facial features, or the clothes one wears shout THIS 
IS ME! 
As ideas, aesthetics, and digital technology merge more cohesively, 
the understanding of graphic design as an applied art will change, too. 
This energized path is just starting to emerge in this early part of the 
twenty-first century. It includes design solutions that are printed, yet ani-
mate, that are projected, but interact with the user. As you will see in 
the following chapter on the history of graphic design, design has been 
vital to our culture and to the world. Its goal for the future remains the 
same—to create communications that are meaningful.
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Categories of Design): Research two categories of graphic 
design, for example, package design and motion design. Then find at least 
two design firms that specialize in those areas. Use the Internet, maga-
zines, books, and design competition annuals in your search. Create a 
five-minute presentation reviewing the two categories, the two firms, 
their locations, and how they approach their projects. Include the skills 
you think are especially necessary for each of the two design categories. 
Exercise 2 (Design Ideas): Find an example of graphic design that you 
think is terrible. It can take any form—an advertisement, website, motion 
design, package, and so on. What is the basis for your choice? What is the 
design lacking? Next, choose an example of graphic design that you think 
is fabulous. What makes it so successful? Present both to the class and 
give the reasons for your choices.
Project 1 (T-Shirt Design): Design a T-shirt using both text and image 
that together define graphic design for you. The text must include the 
words “graphic design is.” Begin by researching at libraries, bookstores, 
and the Internet. Consider the audience and the context in which the shirt 
will exist. When you’re ready, begin sketching until you have two or three 
ideas that you can refine further. Think in terms of symbols—not illustra-
tion. Reach beyond the most obvious and try bringing a related activity or 
subject to help paraphrase what design is, for example: “Graphic design is 
like a….” “Creating graphics is just like….” Consider iconography, various 
typefaces, typography, scale, and punctuation. There are no restrictions 
Brand (p. 13)
Comprehensives (comps)
(p. 30)
Copywriting (p. 14)
Critique (p. 29)
Design brief (p. 29)
Graphic design (p. 6)
Illustration (p. 14)
Logo (p. 13)
Presentation (p. 30)
Production (p. 30)
Research (p. 29)
Roughs (p. 29)
Signage (p. 12)
Silkscreen (p. 27)
Thumbnails (p. 29)
K E Y  T E R M S
Project 1 GENELLE SALAZAR.
T-shirt design with the state-
ment: GRAPHIC DESIGN IS 
ALL WORK & NO PLAY.
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
33
on color or style of shirt. Use the back of the shirt only if it works with 
your idea. For the finished piece, either present a flat 11" × 17" laser print-
out with the design located within a shirt, or use a real shirt (instructor’s 
preference).
Project 2 (Design Emergency): Find a business or organization and visu-
ally document as much as you can about it: its visual identity, location, 
advertising, collateral materials, and web presence. Consider something 
fun and treat your response as a kind of design emergency in how you 
believe design can help them succeed. Make your presentation on two 
full-color poster-sized sheets (18" × 24"). Include as much supplemental 
information as you feel necessary, including charts, categories, a list of 
their products or services, their context in a store, their competition, and 
anything else that seems relevant. 
Things to Consider: Be sure to consider the social aspect of a T-shirt. It has to be something 
wearable, but also fun to look at. Also think about how the design might be produced—screen 
printing or heat press.
Things to Consider: Be as outrageous as you can be in your choice of subject 
and in the presentation design you make. 
Project 2 ABBY HIRSH.
Student project using data 
to create a visual document 
that promotes a bagel 
store’s many variations.

34
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN

2
35
A Brief History of 
Graphic Design
raphic design has been shaped by social, cultural, political, and 
technological circumstances throughout its evolution. Egyptian 
hieroglyphs were created to record history, chiseled into stone to last an 
eternity (Figure 2.1). Chinese woodblock printing, which began in the 
third century as a method of printing on cloth, made the reproduction 
of both text and image economically possible (Figure 2.2).
Opposite page: APRIL GREIMAN. 
Poster (detail) from Design 
Quarterly, no. 133, 1987 (full 
image, see Figure 2.83).
I feel that any course of study 
that fosters visual literacy is 
extremely valuable, particularly 
now when our attention levels 
are reduced considerably. 
—Steven Heller
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
G
2.1 Ancient Egyptian carving 
of offerings being made to 
the sacred barque of Amun at 
the great temple of Amun at 
Karnak, Luxor in Egypt.
2.2 Chinese woodblock print 
of Wenshu, Bodhisattva of 
Supreme Wisdom. ca. 950 A.D.
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Discuss how the Industrial Revolution led to graphic design 
as a distinct profession. 
t 
 Summarize how the Arts and Crafts, Aestheticism, and Art 
Nouveau movements evolved in response to industrialization.
t 
 Explain how the trend toward abstraction enabled artists, 
designers, and architects to convey ideas with more complexity.
t 
 Analyze how Modernist movements were expressed in 
graphic design.
t 
 Describe how political and social changes were expressed 
through art, design, and architecture.
t 
 Explain how utopian concepts led to the New Typography.
t 
 Compare the styles of graphic design inspired by Modernist
ideas from Europe.
t 
 Describe the New York School’s approach to design.
t 
 Explain how graphic designers pushed Modernist thought 
further by taking a more conceptual approach.
t 
 Analyze Postmodernism’s origins and growth in the digital age.
t
Exercises and Projects
Research and write about a graphic designer; match a designer with 
a musical genre; pair examples of architecture with graphic designs; 
research a twentieth-century graphic designer and create a poster 
on him or her.
Photograph © 2012 Museum of Fine Arts, Boston

36
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Paper, invented in China as a substitute for printing on cloth, later became 
a substitute for parchment skins in the West in the eighth century. The first 
bound books made entirely of paper soon followed in the Middle East, 
their pages protected from humidity by flattening against one another. 
Although the Chinese had started printing processes, European Bibles 
continued to be scribed with quill pens for centuries. The exhaustive, 
time-consuming process was a religious rite for monks serving as copy-
ists, editors, and teachers (Figure 2.3), until Johannes Gutenberg printed 
a Bible using movable type (see Chapter 7). Each innovation reflected the 
cultural and economic needs of the society that produced it.
Today is no different. The imagination of graphic designers is guided 
by the innovations and needs of contemporary society; their designs are a 
reflection of the social, cultural, and political worlds in which they live. In 
looking back at the history of their art, graphic designers can better under-
stand their own work within a broad context. As with any field, knowing 
the history gives one the knowledge and freedom to innovate and grow.
Industrial Expansion
An acceleration of technology began to take hold in Europe in the late 
1700s as economies shifted from manual labor to machine-based man-
ufacture. Inventions such as the steam engine, perfected by James Watt 
(1736–1819) helped drive this Industrial Revolution, especially in England. 
By the 1850s, England’s national economy was dominated by manufactur-
ing, and its power structure shifted from landowners to industrialists. As 
people began filling cities to work in factories, their purchasing power 
grew. Products offered to them kept pace, as did advertising. Newspapers, 
magazines, and posters thrived. 
For European inventors, England was an outlet. Nicholas Robert 
(1761–1828) of France devised his first machine for making paper by the 
roll in 1799, leading to patents and further development in England by the 
Fourdrinier Brothers. Steam-powered printing soon followed, brought to 
the Times of London in 1814 by a German, Friedrich Koenig (1774–1833) 
(Figure 2.4). Paper manufacturing and press speed reduced the cost of 
printed promotions, making them more available to the public. As a 
result, the design of advertisements and fliers became a specialized activ-
ity, which was considered a separate task from printing and production. 
Commercial and artistic possibilities developed as the technology avail-
able to designers advanced.
The first permanent photograph was made in 1826 by the French 
inventor Joseph Nicéphore Niépce (1765–1833). Niépce’s partner Louis-
Jacques-Mandé Daguerre (1787–1851) refined the invention further by 
speeding up the developing process from eight hours to thirty minutes 
and by inventing a way to fix the image on the exposed silvered plate. 
In 1839, the invention of daguerreotype, the term for this type of early 
2.3 Page with self-portrait 
of the nun Guda. Book of 
Homilies. Early 12th century.

INDUSTRIAL EXPANSION 
37
photograph, was formally announced, and a New York magazine, The 
Knickerbocker, wrote: “Their exquisite perfection almost transcends the 
bounds of sober belief.” Photographs seemed at first unreal to a general 
public more comfortable with handmade illustrations of products and 
events. Soon, however, newspaper companies and advertisers began to 
rely on published photographs to sell their newspapers and products. 
Consumers not only could see actual images of the corsets, hats, and car-
riages that were being sold but also could view them in an indisputable 
and immediate way.
Another early developer of the photographic process, English sci-
entist William Henry Fox Talbot (1800–1877), created a negative image 
from which an unlimited number of paper prints (called calotypes) could 
be made. A brilliant scientist, writer, and photographer, Talbot was also a 
graphic designer. His publication The Pencil of Nature was the first pho-
tographically illustrated book, and Plate 6, called The Open Door, is an 
example of meaningful communication created through this new medium 
(Figure 2.5). Composed much like a sixteenth-century Dutch genre paint-
ing (popular in England at the time), everyday objects are loaded with 
symbolism and meaning: a handmade broom, as a 
metaphor of the old agrarian world (drawing and 
painting), leans outside of an aging cottage. The 
broom aligns with the opened door’s shadow—they 
both point to the darkened interior. At the back of the 
cottage, light comes through a window. Talbot tried 
to portray a world beyond the frame and a future for 
the new, mechanically based medium of photography.
Typesetting was changing, too. Until the nine-
teenth century, printing was primarily limited to 
books. The Industrial Revolution brought a demand 
for printed brochures, product ads, and advertising 
posters. A variety of wooden display typefaces came 
into existence along with type-specimen catalogs. Up 
to that point, handbills looked similar to title pages 
2.5 WILLIAM HENRY FOX TALBOT. 
The Open Door. 1843. Science 
Museum, London. Fox Talbot 
Collection. 
2.4 The first steam-powered 
cylinder press. 1814.
EXCERPT: The Pencil of Nature, 1844, by Fox Talbot
It frequently happens, moreover—and this is one of the charms of pho-
tography—that the operator himself discovers on examination, perhaps 
long afterwards, that he has depicted many things that he had no notion 
of at the time. Sometimes inscriptions and dates are found upon the 
buildings, or printed placards most irrelevant, are discovered upon their 
walls: sometimes a distant dial-plate is seen, and upon it—unconsciously 
recorded—the hour of the day at which the view was taken.

38
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
of books, the book types merely enlarged (Figure 2.6). Two eighteenth-
century English founders of typefaces include William Caslon (1692–
1766), whose typeface of 1724 was so distinct and legible it was used to 
set the Declaration of Independence, and the printer John Baskerville 
(1706–1775), whose typefaces were adopted by the U.S. government for 
its publishing.
In advertising, new display typefaces were being introduced. Slab 
Serif types from Britain were designed to help information stand out 
noticeably. These typefaces were used on pamphlets, posters, and any-
thing that had short lengths of text. British type designer Robert Thorne 
(d. 1820) coined the term Egyptian serifs to describe these thick Slab 
Serifs because the letterforms resembled the weight and bluntness of 
hieroglyphs. In 1803, Thorne developed what he called Fat Face typefaces, 
which had an even bolder look and weight than the Egyptians. Fat Faces 
appealed to advertisers because of the impact they created on the page 
(Figure 2.7). Many variations of the Fat Faces soon followed, including 
forward and backward sloping italics, inline, shadow, and three-dimen-
sional relief letters.
Book typesetting also kept pace with the growing demand as lit-
eracy increased, and in 1886, the German inventor Ottmar Mergenthaler 
(1854–1899; Figure 2.8) perfected what he called his “Linotype machine” 
(Figure 2.9). The mechanical process of composing type transformed the 
industry. The slow hand-setting of type, letter by letter, was replaced with 
type composed from a keyboard and transmitted to a series of matrices 
that held brass letterforms, which cast slugs of raised lead lines of type 
(“line o’ type”).
2.6 BENJAMIN FRANKLIN. Title 
page using Caslon type. 1744.
2.7 Woodtype poster using 
Fat Face types. 1844.
2.9 The Model 5 Linotype 
machine. Courtesy of the 
Mergenthaler Linotype 
Company, Melville, NY.
2.8 Ottmar Mergenthaler.

 A TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY RESPONSE TO INDUSTRIALIZATION
39
 A Turn-of-the-Century Response to Industrialization 
As the Industrial Revolution advanced, artists, writers, and social crit-
ics began to object to the dehumanizing effects of mechanization. The 
most vocal critic, the British writer and painter John Ruskin (1819–1896), 
believed that the handcrafted Gothic style of the late Middle Ages, with 
all its imperfections, was worth reviving as a way to offset the mechani-
cal ordinary nature of modern mass production. Ruskin’s chapter, “the 
Nature of Gothic,” in The Stones of Venice, Vol. II (1851–1853) explains 
that we should find a kind of pleasure in an object that was made with 
pleasure. 
Ruskin’s writings inspired a Gothic revival in England and across 
the Atlantic to America. The Gothic style (which in architecture included 
the pointed arch, the ribbed vault, and the flying buttress) permeated 
art and design. The Brooklyn Bridge (1883), designed by German immi-
grant John Augustus Roebling (1806–1869), is a grand example of the 
Gothic style, its pointed arches contrasting with the steel-wire suspen-
sion system, the first of its kind and the leading construction technology 
of its day (Figure 2.10). 
Industry without art is brutality.
—John Ruskin, 1870
2.10 JOHN AUGUSTUS ROEBLING. 
Brooklyn Bridge, New York 
City. 1867–1883.

What is the value of learning and 
understanding graphic design history?
What’s the value of learning about any field? 
Some say then we’re not doomed to repeat the 
mistakes. That’s one way of looking at history. 
Another is as a primer for current practice. 
Graphic design has not changed all that much 
from the early days of commercial advertising—
the late nineteenth century. Styles have come 
and gone and returned, but the basic formal 
issues and practical concerns are the same. So 
history puts this into perspective. We can still 
invent things, but we don’t have to reinvent 
things. Now that the web has become a design 
venue, new paradigms are being created, but 
even in this new digital world many of the 
old conventions are relevant. Studying design 
history places these conventions in context, but 
also reveals how new ideas (and ideals) were 
introduced. Historic graphic design also serves 
as a primer for current practice. History is not 
some musty notion but rather a living link to 
many traditions.
What role does design history play in 
“everyday” problem solving?
The most practical use of history in problem-
solving is the practice of borrowing. Pastiche 
[imitation of older styles] is a large component 
of graphic design, and where else does one 
acquire the raw material other than from 
history lessons? Aside from this, history offers a 
blueprint for problem-solving. Can you tell me 
that a designer can compartmentalize historical 
knowledge from contemporary practice? No. 
Since little has changed, other than technology, 
from the “good-old-days” to today one is still 
able to use historical lessons as textbook 
examples of how to make design, if not overtly, 
then subconsciously.
To what degree do outside influences such 
as technology, politics, and pop culture 
affect graphic design?
If you don’t practice design by rote—if it has 
more meaning than sweeping a floor—then 
outside influences will affect the way graphic 
design is created. Technology often determines 
how design will look (and be made); politics is 
often the theme of design. And pop culture? 
Well, graphic design is pop culture, as well as 
influenced by it (music, art, film, video, and so 
on, all have been tapped for graphic designs). 
To be a well-rounded designer means to have 
knowledge about all these things. To be a hack, 
means to ignore them.
Steven Heller is cochair of the MFA The Designer as Author + Entrepreneur program at the School 
of Visual Arts, New York. He is also cofounder of the following programs: MFA Products of Design, 
MFA in Design Criticism, MFA in Interaction Design, and MPS in Branding. His websites include 
imprint.printmag.com/daily-heller and hellerbooks.com. He is a columnist for The New York 
Times Book Review, New York Times T-Style, The Atlantic, and he writes regularly for PRINT, 
EYE, Baseline, and other magazines. He is the author or editor of more than 140 books, including 
Graphic: Sketchbooks of Designers and Illustrators (with coauthor Lita Talarico) and I Heart 
Design and Scripts: Elegant Lettering from Design’s Golden Age (with coauthor Louise Fili). He is 
the recipient of the 1996 Special Educators Award, The New York Art Director’s Club Hall of Fame; 
1999 AIGA Medal for Lifetime Achievement; 2000 Pratt Institute Hershel Levit Award; 2000 Walter 
Hortens Award/Graphic Artists Guild; 2006 Gangel Award, Society of Illustrators; 2008 School of 
Visual Arts Masters Series Award; and 2011 Smithsonian National Design “Design Mind” Award.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  T H E  VA LU E  O F  L E A R N I N G  G R A P H I C  D E S I G N  H I S T O R Y,  W I T H   STEVEN HELLER
40
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Opposite page: Exhibition of 
Steven Heller books at the 
School of Visual Arts in NYC. 

DESIGNER VIGNETTE: STEVEN HELLER 
41
© School of Visual Arts

42
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Arts and Crafts Movement (1880–1910)
The first full-scale art movement, or focus on a particular approach to art, 
that surfaced from Ruskin’s theories was the Arts and Crafts movement. 
William Morris (1834–1896) led the way, prolifically devoting himself to a 
philosophy of art that advocated looking back to the Middle Ages and, in 
particular, to the natural forms that were embraced in that era. “The past 
is not dead, it is living in us, and will be alive in the future which we are 
now helping to make.” 
Morris’s trademark for his Kelmscott Press is a beautifully crafted 
example of a commitment to recapturing the handcrafted art forms of the 
past (Figure 2.11). Some of the greatest examples of the art of the printed 
book came out of the Kelmscott Press. In the page design for The Canter-
bury Tales, Morris also designed the three typefaces used (Golden, Troy, 
and Chaucer), each modeled on fifteenth-century type styles (Figure 2.12). 
The philosophy of the Arts and Crafts movement was that handcrafted 
forms brought physical and spiritual pleasure to one’s work. Morris led 
by example, with a repertoire that included furniture and cabinet making, 
wallpaper, ceramics, as well as textile and stained glass design—an entire 
man-made, yet organic, environment.
Aestheticism (1870–1914)
The Aesthetic movement took the issue of the purpose of art further than 
the Arts and Crafts movement, advocating a complete separation of art 
from morality and utility. Aestheticism began as early as 1818 when the 
French philosopher Victor Cousin (1792–1867) coined the phrase “art for 
art’s sake.” Based on a search for ideal beauty, the Aesthetic movement’s 
ideology wanted to remove art completely from commerce and industry 
and form a more direct relationship between art and life. Two of its great-
est proponents were the writer Oscar Wilde (1854–1900) and the illus-
trator Aubrey Beardsley (1872–1898). In fact, Beardsley won widespread 
notoriety in 1894 with his illustrations for Oscar Wilde’s play Salomé
(Figure 2.13). By blending the curvilinear style of Art Nouveau with con-
trasting forms found in Japanese woodblock prints, he created drawings 
that were new, elegant, and sensual.
Art Nouveau (1890–1910)
The Arts and Crafts and Aestheticism movements directly inspired Art 
Nouveau, which quickly became the most encompassing of the turn-
of-the-century art movements. In addition, Japan began trading with 
the West after 1853, and Japanese woodblock prints and ornamentation 
2.11 WILLIAM MORRIS. Kelmscott 
Press trademark. 1892.
2.12 WILLIAM MORRIS. Page from 
The Canterbury Tales. 1896.
2.13 AUBREY BEARDSLEY.
Salomé. 1892.

 A TURN-OF-THE-CENTURY RESPONSE TO INDUSTRIALIZATION
43
influenced a generation of Western artists. Art Nouveau’s vocabulary of 
natural forms included birds, flowers, and vines, which were translated 
into high-contrast shapes and patterns. The impact and energy of these 
forms were appealing but also reflected the West’s break from traditional 
dependence on history and the classics for its subject matter. 
The style began with the architectural work of Belgian architect 
Victor Horta (1861–1947). The centerpiece of his work for his Tassel 
House project was a stairway (Figure 2.14). Its integration of pattern with 
space moved architecture away from the rigid box and brought an organic 
flow to both exteriors and interiors. As Art Nouveau developed, nearly 
everything painted, manufactured, or designed was affected—from tea-
pots to subway entrances. The General Electric (Figure 2.15) and Coca-
Cola trademarks designed in this period have been in continuous use ever 
since with only slight modifications. 
Art Nouveau’s most exuberant expression was in the work of French 
artist Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (1864–1901). Commercial printing was 
at a point where graphics and color could be reproduced without much 
loss of quality, and this development inspired artists like Lautrec to work 
in the medium. The inspiration from Japanese woodblocks is seen in Tou-
louse-Lautrec’s La Goulue through his use of flat color and line (Figure 
2.16). Those elements create visual impact, as does the contrast of the 
cancan dancer against the solid black crowd in the background. Her 
undergarments go completely white, the paper itself becoming part of 
the drawing. Repeating the words “Moulin 
Rouge” in the poster, Toulouse-Lautrec also 
made typographic strides as he mimicked 
the bouncing rhythm of the dance hall. 
Rather than sit as a separate title, the words 
integrate into the poster’s space.
Look closely and you will see some-
thing else not seen before in poster design—
Toulouse-Lautrec’s personal observation. 
The face of the dancer is psychologically dis-
tanced from the setting, with an almost sad 
expression. That sadness, contrasted against 
the joyous setting, was a personal nod to the 
budding feminist movement that was gain-
ing acceptance in Europe. Toulouse-Lautrec 
was dedicated to depicting the social life in 
Parisian cafés, theaters, dance halls, and 
brothels, and his inclusion of this subtle sug-
gestion of unhappiness shown in the work, 
signaled new and expressive possibilities for 
graphic design. A very public medium sud-
denly had room for a personal voice.
2.16 HENRI DE TOULOUSE-LAUTREC.
La Goulue (with enlarged 
detail). 1891.
2.14 VICTOR HORTA. Stairway, 
Tassel House, Brussels. 1892.
View a Closer Look for La Goulue on myartslab.com
2.15 Trademark for General 
Electric. ca. 1890 (top) and 
current mark (bottom).

44
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Moving Toward a Modern Sensibility
As the twentieth century began, the everyday lives of people became 
much more complex. Innovations in all fields of human study were begin-
ning to be driven by concepts that could be expressed only abstractly. 
Albert Einstein’s (1879–1955) special theory of relativity (published in 
1905) changed our understanding of space and time, just as Karl Marx’s 
(1818–1983) writings changed our understanding of politics and govern-
ment. In the arts, photography offered realistic visual representation of 
our world, prompting painters to shift to other modes of gesture and 
expression. Artists increasingly focused on the intrinsic qualities of their 
media—line, form, and color. The process of distilling information down 
to basic elements or qualities became known as abstraction. Under its 
banner, artists and designers were free to shed the limitations of literal 
representation. Architects could abandon past styles in favor of a form of 
architecture based on essential functional concerns. All of the visual arts 
were significantly transformed by these revolutionary changes. 
Henri van de Velde (1863–1957) brought a modern sensibility, a 
heightened awareness and responsiveness, to graphic design. Trained as 
a painter in Belgium, van de Velde was strongly influential in the birth of 
Art Nouveau in that country. A disciple of William Morris and the Arts 
and Crafts movement, he believed in the concept of total design—a union 
between the fine and applied arts. In contrast to Morris, van de Velde 
adopted a contemporary attitude in his work by looking toward the future 
rather than the past. A poster for Tropon food concentrate illustrates the 
modern idea he was striving for (Figure 2.17). It has the look of Art Nou-
veau, but the form of the poster is not simply decorative. Tropon’s manu-
facturing process becomes part of the poster’s content—the fluid center 
shapes are abstracted interpretations of eggs being separated from yolks. 
The intricate spiral designs are directly determined by the shapes of the 
letters in the word “Tropon.” In this sense, the poster was a precursor to 
functional Modernism—the dynamic expression of abstract form with 
practicality and purpose. In fact, van de Velde, in his later years, reor-
ganized the Kunstgewerbeschule (School of Arts and Crafts) in Weimar, 
Germany, laying the foundations for the Bauhaus to follow (see page 53).
Architecture and graphic design were beginning to share modern 
sensibilities of abstraction. Each affected the other. The work of archi-
tects Charles Rennie Mackintosh (1868–1928) and Frank Lloyd Wright 
(1867–1959) showed signs of this new geometry. The grid and linear pat-
terning of Mackintosh’s Salon de Luxe is a refined and almost eccentric 
example of geometry and abstraction (Figure 2.18). There are still hints 
of Art Nouveau in the linear patterns, but the interior charted new ter-
ritory. Wright’s living room of the Francis Little House also reflected the 
spiritual and organic feel of Art Nouveau, but the geometry and integra-
tion of the space, furniture, and windows, edges even closer toward the 
  I wish to replace the old symbolic 
elements, which have lost their 
eﬀectiveness for us today, with 
a new, imperishable beauty…in 
which ornament has no life of its 
own but depends on the forms 
and lines of the object itself, 
from which it receives its proper 
organic place.
—Henri van de Velde, 1901
2.17 HENRI VAN DE VELDE. Poster 
for Tropon food concentrate. 
1899.

MOVING TOWARD A MODERN SENSIBILITY
45
clean lines and simple forms that were more in keeping with Modernism 
(Figure 2.19). The architect Peter Behrens (1868–1940) brought this same 
thinking into graphic design.
Like many artists of his era, Behrens was influenced by the design 
ideals of the Arts and Crafts movement. In 1907 he was hired as artistic 
adviser of the world’s largest electrical manufacturing company, Allgeme-
ine Elektricitäts-Gesellschaft (AEG) in Berlin. Behrens’s job was to deter-
mine and manage AEG’s visual image, from architecture to industrial and 
graphic design. His turbine factory (1909–1910) in Berlin for AEG was 
his most successful display as an architect, but as a graphic designer, he 
set a completely new standard and modern tone for the field by unifying 
art and industry. The logotype for AEG reflects the bridge he was creat-
ing, the letters interconnected by a geometric honeycomb (Figure 2.20). 
Behrens developed an entire typeface for AEG, unifying all of its public-
ity. In a poster promotion, the entire arrangement of the page has the 
structure of the AEG logotype, with tiny circles not only set linearly to 
create the grid lines but also spaced together to create an abstract image 
of light (Figure 2.21). Behrens also designed AEG’s industrial products, 
making him the first industrial designer. He stripped all ornamentation 
out of his designs in the belief that utility had a beauty of its own. In fact, 
a new mode was being found for modern times that included proportion, 
geometry, and abstraction. His approach would help lead the architecture 
and design world fully into the twentieth century, and his staff, architects 
Walter Gropius (1883–1969), Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969), and 
Le Corbusier (1887–1965), would go on to refine this logical and system-
atic thinking well into the century to come. 
2.18 CHARLES RENNIE MACKINTOSH. 
Salon de Luxe, Willow Tearoom, 
Sauchiehall Street, Glasgow. 
1904.
2.19 FRANK LLOYD WRIGHT. 
Living room of the Francis 
W. Little House, Wayzata, 
Minnesota, designed 
1912–1914.
2.21 PETER BEHRENS. Poster for 
AEG electric lamps. 1910.
2.20 PETER BEHRENS. Trademark 
for the Allgemeine Elektricitäts-
Gesellschaft. 1908.

46
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
The Modern World
The work and writings of the artist Paul Cézanne (1839–1906) helped 
determine the direction that visual abstraction would take. His emphasis 
on basic forms—the cylinder, sphere, and cone—had a huge impact in the 
art world. Graphic designers, influenced by Cezanne, absorbed the prin-
ciples of abstraction and return to basic forms, bringing this new design 
thinking to book jackets, postage stamps, posters, packaging, trademarks, 
and signage.
The poster art of the young designer Lucian Bernhard had wide-
reaching effects on graphic design’s reductionist approach. Bernhard’s 
submission for a competition by Priester matches eliminated parts of a 
larger picture that he had created (Figure 2.22). The table, cigar, ashtray, 
tablecloth, and dancing girls were blackened out until all that was left 
was the product being advertised, matchsticks, and the name, Priester. 
The jury reviewing this design initially rejected it, but one of the jurors, a 
printer named Ernst Growald, saw the genius in the design. He convinced 
fellow jurors that it should take first prize, and thus the modern poster 
was born. An “economy of means” attitude was established, and such an 
approach would continue to flourish, impacted by political and cultural 
influences, throughout the rest of the century.
Cubism (1907–1921)
The artist Pablo Picasso (1882–1973) was greatly influenced by the work 
and words of Cezanne. Picasso combined Cezanne’s philosophy with 
his own interest in the raw, abstract qualities of traditional African art. 
Picasso’s paintings and sculpture led to the development of Cubism, one 
of the most influential art movements of the twentieth century. His mile-
stone painting Les Demoiselles d’Avignon (Figure 2.23) involved figures 
that were broken up into semi-abstracted forms. Picasso showed these fig-
ural forms from multiple points of view simultaneously, thus questioning 
established notions of viewpoint, reality, time, and space. This painting 
was completed just after Einstein’s special theory of relativity was pub-
lished, which explored completely new theories of space and time. Ger-
trude Stein (1874–1946), a close friend of Picasso’s, used the same theo-
ries of simultaneous space and time in her writing. Composer Erik Satie 
(1866–1925) also embraced similar concepts in his music, revisiting the 
same musical themes from different angles. He collaborated with Picasso 
on the ballet Parade. The visual arts, literature, music, and science were all 
evolving and influencing one another.
Another fellow artist and friend Georges Braque (1882–1963) espe-
cially appreciated how Cubism discarded all the techniques of the past 
(perspective, foreshortening, modeling, and chiaroscuro, or representa-
tion through light/dark contrasts) and helped Picasso envision an entirely 
new movement in art. Together, Braque and Picasso painted a new reality 
2.22 LUCIAN BERNHARD. Poster 
for Priester matches. 1905.
2.23 PABLO PICASSO. Les 
Demoiselles d’Avignon. 1907.

THE MODERN WORLD
47
that left the previous time-honored theories of art by the wayside. Cubism 
didn’t imitate nature. Its new approach could be applied to all the arts, both 
fine and applied, giving them the freedom to interpret form and space in a 
new way. It was a complete break from the past and offered an opportunity 
to explore creativity in a way artists had never experienced before.
Futurism (1910–1918)
Artists, graphic designers, and typographers also found new freedom in 
an art movement known as Futurism. Poet and writer Filippo Marinetti 
(1876–1944) established the movement in 1909 with a manifesto that 
claimed, “Motion and light destroy the materiality of bodies.” Marinetti’s 
visual language was based on science rather than on classical forms. In 
his 1919 poem Les mots en liberté (the words to freedom), the chaos of war, 
noise, and speed were embedded in the visual poetry of the page. Gone 
were the horizontal and vertical alignments of typography. Letters were 
used as expressive objects, the printed page as a work of art (Figure 2.24). 
The work of two graphic designers, E. McKnight Kauffer (1890–
1954) and A.M. Cassandre (1901–1968), exemplify the influence of 
Futurism on the applied arts. Kauffer, an American expatriate who was 
one of Europe’s most influential poster designers in the 1920s and 1930s, 
used the dynamics of motion to create a poster for the progressive Eng-
lish newspaper the Daily Herald (Figure 2.25). Fragmented birds, clearly 
influenced by Cubism, soar off the top of the page, filled with energy, 
especially in contrast to the large expanse of empty space in the center of 
the poster. Cassandre, an acclaimed French poster designer, integrated 
typography and image in an energized composition for L’Intransigeant, 
where telegraph wires lead straight to the ear of an abstracted face (Figure 
2.26). Again, the Futurist attributes of motion and speed are fused with 
Cubist abstraction. The result is a hybrid of styles in service to the applied 
art of promotion.
2.24 FILIPPO MARINETTI. 
Les mots en liberté. 1919.
2.25 E. MCKNIGHT KAUFFER.
Poster for the Daily Herald.
1918.
2.26 A.M. CASSANDRE. Poster 
for the French daily newspaper 
L’Intrans. 1925.
© MOURON. CASSANDRE. www.cassandre-france.com

48
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Suprematism (1915–1934)
In Russia, artist Kazimir Malevich (1878–1935) referred to the blend of 
Cubism with Futurism as Cubo-Futurism. Both fractured and energized, 
its distillation led to Malevich’s Suprematist Painting (Eight Red Rectangles) 
(Figure 2.27). Suprematism, a movement in art conceived by Malevich, 
was short for “the supremacy of pure feeling in creative art.” His move-
ment launched an art form that completely eliminated objects and repre-
sentation. Composition became a pure geometrical abstraction and 
hinted at a kind of metaphysical spirituality—a quest for a greater truth. 
Reducing everything to the basics was a way to start over in the visual arts, 
just as the Bolshevik Revolution of 1917 sought to start over by leveling 
society into a classless, stateless, social organization. Suprematism, with 
its belief in pure form and pure concept, continues to influence the visual 
arts today. 
Dada (1916–1923)
World War I (1914–1918) was fought with machine guns, tanks, airplanes, 
and poison gas. This mechanization unleashed a level of killing the world 
had never seen before. The Dada movement was a reaction by artists to 
what they perceived as a world gone mad. Alternate perspectives, includ-
ing irony, irrationality, and even anarchy, seemed better choices than 
the logic and reason that led to such unspeakable horrors. The Dadaists 
rejected all traditions and standards in art; its publications and manifes-
toes, all written by Tristan Tzara (1896–1963), claimed that whatever art 
stood for, Dada stood for the opposite. This nonsensical spirit began in a 
small cabaret in Switzerland, but spread, establishing footholds in Ger-
many, France, and America. 
In New York, Marcel Duchamp’s (1887–1968) approach to art making 
was ironic, shocking, funny, and, at the time, highly intellectual. By ele-
vating mundane, everyday objects into new gallery contexts, Duchamp 
simultaneously proved that everything could be art, and, by default, art 
was dead. His urinal, submitted in 1917 to the Society of Independent Art-
ists, of which he himself was director, was an ordinary plumbing fixture 
(Figure 2.28). Flipped upside down, titled Fountain, and signed “R. Mutt,” 
it was promptly rejected by the committee but succeeded in turning the 
understanding of art on its head. It inspired a whole school of art known 
as “readymades,” or found art, and remains one of the most famous works 
of art of the twentieth century. After Fountain, anything was possible.
In Germany, the Dadaist artist Hannah Höch (1889–1978) brought a 
feminist perspective to the work she created. She was one of the pioneers 
of photomontage, a new technique where multiple photos were joined 
together to create a seamless whole. In her photomontages, Höch ironi-
cally portrayed the culture of beauty in fashion photography by contrast-
ing images of female perfection with photos of real women. In her work 
2.27 KAZIMIR MALEVICH. 
Suprematist Painting (Eight 
Red Rectangles). 1915.
2.28 MARCEL DUCHAMP. A
flipped urinal that Duchamp 
titled Fountain.
I am interested in ideas, 
not merely in visual products. 
—Marcel Duchamp

THE MODERN WORLD 
49
Cut with the Kitchen Knife Dada through the Last Weimar Beer Belly Cul-
tural Epoch of Germany, she swapped out heads and bodies and fused 
newspaper type with newspaper images to critique the male-dominated 
culture of the Weimar Republic and to reflect the Dadaist disgust with 
German nationalism (Figure 2.29).
Höch’s colleague and photomontage artist, Helmut Herzfeld (1891–
1968), was equally critical of the Weimar Republic. As a protest against 
German militarism, he changed his name to the more English-sounding 
John Heartfield. He took special aim at the Nazi party—in everything 
from book jackets and posters to magazines and newspapers. In Have No 
Fear—He’s a Vegetarian, Heartfield depicted a butcher, his head replaced 
by Hitler’s, sharpening his knives, hungrily eyeing a rooster, the symbol of 
France (Figure 2.30). Have No Fear reflects the critical irony of Dada in a 
shocking and effective political statement.
Surrealism (1924–1955)
As the Dada movement was coming to a close, another twentieth century 
art movement came into being; Surrealism grounded its investigations 
on psychologically based images, especially ones that caused shock and 
surprise. The dream analysis work being done by Sigmund Freud (1856–
1939) fed this movement; the exploration of the uncon-
scious became new territory for artists. The work of Ameri-
can Dada artist Man Ray (1890–1976) marked a transition 
from Dada to Surrealism. 
Emmanuel Radnitzky (1890–1976) changed his name 
to Man Ray because of the prevalent anti-Semitism in the 
United States at the time. The artist’s group he cofounded 
was called “Others,” reflecting his affinity with artists flee-
ing World War I in Europe. Man Ray became acquainted 
with Marcel Duchamp, who came to New York in 1915. 
He followed Duchamp back to Paris in 1921, believing 
his creative spirit would thrive there. It did, especially in 
a camera-less photographic process he called “rayographs.” 
2.29 HANNAH HÖCH. Collage 
titled Cut with the Kitchen Knife 
Dada through the Last Weimar 
Beer Belly Cultural Epoch of 
Germany. ca. 1919.
2.30 JOHN HEARTFIELD. Have 
No Fear—He’s a Vegetarian.
Photo-montage in Regards
no. 121 (153) (Paris). 1936.

50
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
In Champs Délicieux, Man Ray expanded the possibilities of photogra-
phy as an expressive medium (Figure 2.31). Through pure inventiveness, 
he created shapes and shadows that shimmer with a three-dimensional 
appearance, an effect he achieved by moving beams of light across the 
photo paper. 
Surrealism’s impact on graphic design has been profound, both 
visually and conceptually. Man Ray’s poster for the London Under-
ground showed how the Surrealist theory could be applied to graphic 
design (Figure 2.32). Here, the analogy made between the logo and a 
planet creates an effective and humorous communication. Unfortunately, 
mass media has exploited Surrealism to the point that the manipulation 
of dreams and the use of psychology are recognized more as an adver-
tising campaign than an art movement, but for many years, Surrealism’s 
influence on the graphic arts was highly significant and opened designers’ 
minds to unbridled creative possibilities.
Designing Utopia
As World War I and the Russian Revolution came to an end, artists began 
searching for renewed purpose in their work. A sense of starting over was 
in the air. Whereas Dada sought to flip art upside down in response to the 
absurdity of a world war, other movements saw creativity in more ratio-
nalist terms. Creative centers began to emerge, and major innovations 
in the arts were changing how graphic designers understood themselves 
and their role in the society. Some would align themselves with certain 
political perspectives, leading to Constructivism and Soviet propaganda 
art. Others would stand in complete opposition to those approaches, as 
was the case with Bauhaus principles in Germany. In all cases, there was 
cross-pollination as the movements influenced one another through lec-
tures given by their proponents, exhibits, and a shared empathy between 
like-minded social activists. Artists began to see themselves as having 
a role far beyond the visual: they became spokesmen for political and 
social change.
Constructivism (1919–1934)
In Russia, Vladimir Tatlin (1885–1953) founded Constructivist art, which 
embraced Communism, rejected art for art’s sake, and proclaimed that 
art should have a social purpose. His Monument to the Third International 
was a spiraling construction of glass and steel glorifying the technological 
determinism of the Bolsheviks (Figure 2.33). Meant to exist as a propa-
ganda center, its streamlined form followed its function as an unadorned 
symbol of industry. If built at full scale, it would have dwarfed the Eiffel 
Tower. Yet merely as a model, it expressed a manifesto of sorts in support 
of the Constructivist aesthetic. Constructivism was concerned mostly 
with space, materials, and movement. Its intent was to move all the arts 
2.31 MAN RAY. Champs délicieux.
1922.
2.32 MAN RAY. Keeps London 
Going. 1932.
2.33 VLADIMIR TATLIN.
Project for Monument to 
the Third International.
1919–1920. Destroyed.

DESIGNING UTOPIA 
51
from expressions of personal style toward a collective style based on the 
machine. Writers, photographers, and designers could all follow this path. 
Alexander Rodchenko (1891–1956), El Lissitzky (1890–1941), and 
the brothers Vladimir Stenberg (1899–1982) and Georgii Stenberg (1900–
1933) helped create bold graphic designs that spoke the Constructivist 
language. In Rodchenko’s literacy poster for a Lenningrad State Publisher 
a woman yells out the words “Books In All Branches of Knowledge” 
into a megaphone-shaped space. The socialist message and its layout are 
extremely utilitarian (Figure 2.34).
Lissitzky’s layouts for The Isms of Art expressed how the functional 
and machined language of Constructivism could be used typographically 
(Figure 2.35). Because Lissitzky spoke multiple languages and collabo-
rated with many artists and designers, he was able to spread this visual, 
sans serif, Constructivist language throughout Europe. Inspired by Lis-
sitzky, designers further refined and built a complete system of typogra-
phy. Lissitzky was also able to fuse his approach with the social aspects of 
Communism, as seen in his poster for a Zurich exhibit (Figure 2.36). In 
the poster, Lissitzky used a double portrait to represent the idea of equal 
stature of male and female youth in the Soviet Union.
For the burgeoning Soviet cinema, the artists and designers Vladi-
mir Stenberg and Georgii Stenberg designed extraordinary work in the 
Constructivist mode. Working as a team, the Stenberg brothers basi-
cally invented the film poster genre, combining abstraction with visual 
narrative. The Stenberg brothers’ poster for Man with a Movie Camera
used typography, color, and perspective in ways that had never been 
seen before (Figure 2.37). The 
Bolsheviks saw the usefulness 
and value of graphic design in 
these commercial applications. 
These films, and the posters 
that promoted them, helped 
signal to the masses that a new 
social order was in place.
2.34 ALEXANDER RODCHENKO. 
Books. 1924. 
2.35 EL LISSITZKY. Title page 
and page 1 from The Isms of 
Art by Hans Arp and Lissitzky. 
1925. 
2.36 EL LISSITZKY. Russian 
Exhibition. 1929. 
2.37 STENBERG BROTHERS.
Poster for Man with a Movie 
Camera. 1929. 
Fine Art Images/Glow Images/Art © Estate of Alexander 
Rodchenko/RAO, Moscow/VAGA, New York
Everett Collection/Art © Estate of Vladimir and Georgii Stenberg/RAO, Moscow/VAGA, New York

52
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
De Stijl (1917–1931)
A Dutch abstract-art movement called De Stijl (“The Style”) was known 
for its straight lines, right angles, and primary colors. In 1920, Piet Mon-
drian (1872–1944) published De Stijl’s manifesto titled Neo-Plasticism, 
which became another name for the movement. In his manifesto, Mon-
drian rejected symmetry and favored the manipulation and arrangement 
of geometric forms and color into what he called “dynamic equilibrium.”
Gerrit Rietveld (1888–1964) brought the clean lines and dynamic 
asymmetry of De Stijl to architecture. His Schröder House was, in a way, 
the offspring of work initiated by Charles Rennie Mackintosh and Frank 
Lloyd Wright (Figure 2.3). Rietveld, however, made a complete and radi-
cal break from the past, establishing what would later be known as the 
“International Style.”
Simultaneous Composition by Theo van Doesburg (1883–1931) is an 
example of how this spiritual and universal purity was applied to painting 
(Figure 2.39). The approach was also applied to graphic design, as seen in 
van Doesburg’s many forms of promotion for De Stijl that the artist han-
dled, including posters and booklets. A typeface van Doesburg designed 
in 1919 proved how far the deletion of curves and diagonals could be 
taken (Figure 2.40). The focal point of the movement was Van Doesburg’s 
magazine De Stijl, which helped spread the movement’s theories (Figure 
2.41). The magazine’s page layouts expressed the same dynamic convic-
tion found in the movement’s paintings and architecture. Van Doesburg’s 
typographic arrangements were structurally poetic, like furniture on a 
floor plan. The typographic refinement and space created on the page 
matured into graphic design’s typographic International Style.
2.39 THEO VAN DOESBURG. 
Simultaneous Composition.
1929. 
2.38 GERRIT RIETVELD. 
Schröder House, Utrecht, 
the Netherlands. 1927.
2.40 THEO VAN DOESBURG.
An Alphabet. 1919.
2.41 THEO VAN DOESBURG. 
Cover of De Stijl (The Style).
1925.

DESIGNING UTOPIA 
53
Bauhaus (1919–1933)
No other movement influenced graphic design more directly than the 
Bauhaus (meaning “House of Construction”) (Figure 2.42). The art 
school, founded in Weimar, Germany, in 1919 by the architect Walter 
Gropius, set as its goal to eliminate the distinction between the fine and 
applied arts. In its place would be a union of arts, crafts, and industry, 
working together for the greater good. Gropius and the other members of 
the Bauhaus formulated an approach to design that became the founda-
tion for much of the thinking about art, architecture, and design in the 
twentieth century.
The Bauhaus was intensely influenced by the Expressionist theo-
ries of the artists Johannes Itten (1888–1967), Josef Albers (1888–1976), 
Lyonel Feininger (1871–1956), Paul Klee (1879–1940), and Wassily Kan-
dinsky (1866–1944), who were all associated with the Bauhaus school. 
They established a foundation of spirituality, intuition, and universality, 
which focused on the physical nature of materials. From its beginnings in 
1919 until 1922, Itten taught at the Bauhaus and developed the innovative 
preliminary course that introduced students to the basics of composition, 
color theory, and material characteristics.
As the Bauhaus program developed, other movements also had 
their influence. Theo van Doesburg promoted De Stijl’s elegant geometry 
and economy of means on visits to the school; and El Lissitzky promoted 
Constructivism’s socialist purpose. When Laszlo Moholy-Nagy (1895–
1946) replaced Itten as the preliminary course instructor in 1923, a real 
shift occurred. Moholy-Nagy arrived with a vision to fully embrace the 
machine aesthetic as a means for connecting art and design to the masses. 
His design for 14 Bauhausbücher (Fourteen Bauhaus Books) exemplifies 
the approach (Figure 2.43). A photo of handset metal type in its com-
posing stick was used for the cover image of the catalog. The metal type 
would have been used to create the cover’s title with all the proper letters 
in place, but instead was used to reveal the method of production. The 
cover also conveyed the school’s emphasis on the applied arts over the 
fine arts.
Herbert Bayer (1900–1985) pushed the influence of the applied arts 
even further, designing a banknote and using multiple color overprints, 
instead of ornamental line engravings, to prevent counterfeiting (Figure 
2.44). Bayer’s solution showed how the Bauhaus agenda of applied art 
could advance social progress rather than merely create luxury items.
In 1925, the Bauhaus relocated from Weimar to Dessau, then moved 
to Berlin in 1932 when the Nazis in Dessau cut off its funding. Nazi offi-
cials wanted art and architecture that expressed their grandiose vision 
of Germany, not the functional, cosmopolitan International Style of the 
Bauhaus, and they forced the school to close completely in 1933. Its great-
est legacy is its teachers and students who spread its methods and ideals 
2.42 WALTER GROPIUS. Bauhaus 
building, Dessau, Germany.
1925–1926.
2.43 LASZLO MOHOLY-NAGY. 
Brochure cover for Fourteen 
Bauhaus Books. 1929.
2.44 HERBERT BAYER. Banknote 
for the State Bank of Thuringia, 
Germany. 1923.

54
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
throughout the world. Bauhaus influence on furniture and textile design, 
architecture, and color theory has a lasting effect even now. Many art 
schools today base their foundation classes on similar, fundamental ele-
ments that the Bauhaus incorporated in its courses, including the theories 
on the interaction of color developed by Itten and Albers. For graphic 
design, the Bauhaus proved how the synthesis of unadorned functional-
ism, technology, and communication could bring discipline, order, and 
structure to design’s vocabulary.
Ideological Independents and the New Typography
Some designers found the philosophies of movements like Dada, 
Constructivism, and De Stijl too dogmatic or political. How-
ever, many designers were influenced by the innovations of these 
movements and made their own significant contributions to 
graphic design.
Kurt Schwitters (1887–1948) synthesized Dada, Construc-
tivism, and Surrealism into an art movement he called Merz. The 
name Merz was derived from a scavenged piece of paper with 
the word Commerzbank on it that Schwitters included in one of 
his collages, which made a social comment about the commoditization 
of art. Schwitters’s cover for Merz magazine went further, creating a self-
inflicted parody of betrayal, or selling out (Figure 2.45). Its design has the 
typographic order and toughness of Constructivism, with the nonsensi-
cal humor of Dada. In 1937 Schwitters’s work was included in the Nazi 
Degenerate Art exhibit, and he fled Germany for Norway and, later, rural 
England where he continued making creations from everyday materials.
Inspired by a Bauhaus exhibit in Weimar, Jan Tschichold (1902–
1974), a recent graduate of the Leipzig Academy for Graphic Arts and 
Book Trades, conducted typeface experiments of his own. (See Chapter 7 
for an introduction to typography.) Although the black letter, or Gothic 
script, was widely used in Germany, Tschichold looked at simplified 
typefaces to bring a modern sensibility to the country’s design output, 
which eventually led to a practice of New Typography. Two examples 
of his work help explain how drastic his type transformation was. His 
centered, hand-lettered advertisement for the Leipzig Trade Fair is char-
acteristic of the layout treatments most German designers used (Figure 
2.46). Size and direction from top to bottom are the only hierarchies. In 
contrast, his asymmetric approach for the brochure page is architectural 
in its construction (Figure 2.47). He used only sans serif type and com-
pletely removed all ornament. Most important, the page elements have an 
integrated, functional relationship with one another, using rhythm, pro-
portion, and tension. Tschichold’s writings on the subject, especially his 
2.45 KURT SCHWITTERS. Cover of 
Merz 8/9 magazine. 1924.
2.46 JAN TSCHICHOLD. 
Advertisement for the 
Leipzig Trade Fair. 1922.
2.47 JAN TSCHICHOLD. Brochure page 
for Die neue Typographie. 1928.

IDEOLOGICAL INDEPENDENTS AND THE NEW TYPOGRAPHY 
55
1928 book, Die neue Typographie (The new Typography), became 
a handbook for modern designers and helped describe Modern-
ist typography to the world. The rise of Fascism convinced him 
that Modernist design was authoritarian, and he later condemned 
the New Typography as too extreme. By 1947, when Tschichold became 
typographic designer for Penguin Books in London, he preferred classi-
cal roman typefaces and layout. 
The Dutch designer Piet Zwart (1885–1977) worked a blend of Dada 
and De Stijl together into his projects. You can see it reflected in his per-
sonal logo where the geometry of a simple black square became a visual 
pun of his last name, which in Dutch means black (Figure 2.48). For a 
printing company’s type catalog, Zwart overlaid various sizes and styles of 
type into a playful, Dada-like arrangement, yet they are somehow orderly 
and complete with the straight lines, right angles, and the primary colors 
of De Stijl (Figure 2.49). Zwart’s Dutch contemporaries Paul Schuitema 
(1897–1973) and Willem Sandberg (1897–1984) also applied modern prin-
ciples to page layout and commercial advertising, though they did not 
become members of any particular movement.
The Swiss artist Herbert Matter (1907–1984) studied with the painter 
Fernand Léger (1881–1955) in Paris and later assisted the graphic artist 
Cassandre and the architect Le Corbusier (1887–1965). By the mid-1930s, 
Matter developed an international reputation through his use of photog-
raphy as a design tool. In his cover for a typographic journal, Matter col-
laged his photos with type (Figure 2.50). The elements are visually orga-
nized, yet surreal and complex: a grid of the hockey net projects onto a 
woman’s face while the title of the magazine slides diagonally over larger 
type. Matter’s unique visual language was a blend of playful photography 
with New Typography that he could also apply diversely. Matter photo-
graphed covers for Condé Nast publications, including Vogue, designed 
corporate image programs for Knoll furniture and the New Haven Rail-
road, and later taught photography and graphic design at Yale University.
In England, however, the British sculptor and designer Eric Gill 
(1882–1940) carried on the tradition of William Morris and the belief 
in the spiritual value of work done by 
hand. In his book design for The Four 
Gospels, a modern dynamic integrates 
all the elements, but the roman type-
face and woodcuts look back to the 
humanist past rather than to the new, 
machine-oriented future (Figure 2.51). 
In this case, Gill was a dissenter to New 
Typography.
2.49 PIET ZWART. Inside page 
from a printing company’s 
type catalog. 1931.
2.51 ERIC GILL. Page from 
The Four Gospels. 1931.
2.50 HERBERT MATTER. Magazine 
Cover: Typographische 
Monatsblatter. 1933.
2.48 PIET ZWART. Personal 
logo. The black square 
represents the designer’s 
last name, which is Dutch 
for “black.” 1927.

56
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
SPEAKOUT: Cipe Pineles by Jan Uretsky, design 
instructor, Pratt Institute
 
 The designer who had the biggest impact on me was 
Cipe Pineles. A protégé of Mehemed Fehmy Agha, Cipe 
went on to art direct Glamour, Seventeen, Charm, and 
Mademoiselle magazines. Her designs were elegant 
and playfully Modernist. But it wasn’t so much Cipe’s 
exceptional work that I admired—it was that Cipe lit 
the way for women to enter and excel in our field. She 
understood the culture of her time, especially the world 
of fashion, and translated it to a graphic design format 
brilliantly.
Modernism in America
The Paris Exposition (1925) made Americans aware of Art Deco and 
its machine-inspired Modernism. Art Deco’s sleek lines and geometry 
were an exciting replacement for the floral patterns of Art Nouveau. Art 
Deco was essentially a decorative movement, however. It lacked any spe-
cific inner philosophy and was vulnerable to superficial interpretation. 
It quickly became commercialized, and its architectural achievements 
such as the Chrysler Building became more representative of opulence 
and sophistication rather than a path for design and the common good 
(Figure 2.52).
The rise of Nazism caused many creative artists from Europe to flee 
to the United States. These designers and architects were invigorated by 
the Bauhaus and its philosophical approach; design and education com-
munities, corporations, and publications embraced them. A pioneer in 
magazine design, Dr. Mehemed Fehmy Agha (1896–1978) paved the way 
for the functionalist approach. The son of Turkish parents, Agha was 
raised in the Ukraine, schooled in Paris, and worked in both Paris and 
Berlin. The publisher Condé Nast brought him to the United States in 
1929 to be the art director of its publications, and there, Agha applied his 
sans serif typography and full-bleed imagery, showing how design can 
integrate with the editorial aspect of magazines. Agha had a unique vision 
for seeing layout possibilities in magazine design, but he also recognized 
the creative talents in people. In the midst of the Great Depression Agha 
hired Cipe Pineles (1908–1991) to be his full-time design assistant at 
Condé Nast. Pineles worked alongside Agha on the design of Vogue and 
Vanity Fair before becoming the first female art director of a mass-market 
American publication, Glamour magazine, in 1942 (Figure 2.53). Pineles 
2.52 WILLIAM VAN ALEN. Chrysler 
Building, New York. 1928–1930.
2.53 CIPE PINELES. Cover for 
Vogue magazine. April 1939 
issue.
Copyright © 2012 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. Originally published in Vogue. Reprinted by permission. 

MODERNISM IN AMERICA 
57
moved to Seventeen magazine in 1947, where she was the first to hire fine 
artists to create illustration work for a magazine, and then moved on to 
Charm and Mademoiselle. Pineles also broke ground by becoming the 
first female member of the Art Director’s Club.
In 1937, Walter Paepcke, chairman of the Container Corporation, 
invited Bauhaus teacher Laszlo Moholy-Nagy to develop a similar school 
in Chicago. Dubbed “The New Bauhaus,” it taught the same principles of 
functionalism and experimentation to students in America as the original 
Bauhaus did in Europe. Unfortunately, the school lost backing after only 
a single year and closed. In 1939 Laszlo Moholy-Nagy opened the School 
of Design, which transformed later into the Institute of Design. Moholy-
Nagy’s book Vision in Motion documented the school’s curriculum, which 
had influenced generations of educators and design programs.
Herbert Matter and Herbert Bayer also brought their modern 
and functional approaches to American corporate advertising. Bayer’s 
work for the Container Corporation clarified, through clean typography 
and imagery, how the company’s efforts were supporting the war effort 
(Figure 2.54). Matter’s advertising design for companies such as Knoll 
2.54 HERBERT BAYER. 
Advertisement for the 
Container Corporation 
of America. 1943.
1840
1850
1860
1870
1880
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
1940
1950
1960
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
1826 First permanent photograph
1843 Rotary printing press invented
1851  John Ruskin publishes The Stones 
of Venice
1891 Toulouse Lautrec’s La Goulue poster
1900  Freud publishes The Interpretation 
of Dreams
1905  Einstein creates his theory 
of relativity
1914 World War I
1917 Russian revolution
1929 The Great Depression
1939 World War II
1984
Macintosh computer introduced
Victorian
Arts & Crafts
Art Nouveau
Cubism 
Futurism
Suprematism 
Constructivism
Dada
De Stijl
Surrealism
Bauhaus
Swiss International
New York School
Psychedelia
Digital Age
M O D E R N I S M
P O S T M O D E R N I S M
TIMELINE OF MAJOR MOVEMENTS AND EVENTS

58
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
furniture, which included his logo design for the company, photography, 
and page layout, were playful, smart, and elegant. His design advertising 
Eero Saarinen’s Tulip chair involved two consecutive ads (Figure 2.55). 
In the first version, you see a wrapped chair with the request to send an 
illustrated brochure. In the next version, you see an unwrapped image of 
the chair with a young woman looking very happy to be sitting in it. The 
set created a mini-narrative and visual tone that the viewer couldn’t help 
but respond to.
Ladislav Sutnar (1897–1976) was an established Czech designer 
when he came to work on Czechoslovakia’s pavilion for the 1939 World’s 
Fair in New York. Just as the fair opened, the Nazis invaded his country, 
so Sutnar stayed in New York City and established a design studio. His 
strong graphic vocabulary and discernible voice contributed to the evolu-
tion of information design. We see examples of this informational sensi-
bility in the systems he created for Bell Telephone and for Sweets building 
product catalogs. In his book Visual Design in Action Sutnar explained, 
“The term ‘information design’ should be understood as the integration of 
meaning [content] and visualization [format] into an entity that produces 
a desired action” (Figure 2.56).
Agha, Moholy-Nagy, Matter, Bayer, Sutnar, and other émigrés had 
a great deal of influence on American graphic design, but U.S. designers 
were also making their mark. One early leader was Lester Beall (1903–
1969). Born in Kansas City, this self-taught designer referenced the work 
of Dada and the Bauhaus and combined it with his own background and 
thinking. His output was a uniquely American style complete with wood-
cut types used in place of European sans serifs (Figure 2.57). In Beall’s 
2.55 HERBERT MATTER. 
A pair of advertisements
for Knoll Furniture. 1956. 
Modernism released us from 
the constraints of everything that 
had gone before with a euphoric 
sense of freedom.
—Arthur Erickson (1924–2009)

MODERNISM IN AMERICA 
59
Rural Electriﬁcation poster, the metaphor of connection and 
support is simple and direct (Figure 2.58). Reminiscent of El 
Lissitzky’s Russian Exhibition poster of two youths, Beall’s pho-
tograph brings social purpose down to earth—the future of 
these everyday young Americans depends on the success of the 
program.
Probably one of the most influential American graphic 
designers was Paul Rand (1914–1996). His writing, teaching, 
and work have inspired generations of designers. Rand, who 
lived in Brooklyn, studied illustration at Pratt Institute in the 
early 1930s and later continued his design studies at Parsons 
School of Design and the Art Students’ League. His education 
was built on a solid foundation in aesthetics, but his investiga-
tion of the Bauhaus and of the New Typography convinced him 
that illustration could be integrated within the overall design of the page. 
Rand switched his focus from illustration to graphic design. By age twenty 
three, he was art director of both Apparel Arts and Esquire magazines.
2.56 LADISLAV SUTNAR. Page 
spread from a paper sampler 
explaining controlled visual 
flow. 1943.
2.57 LESTER BEALL. Cover of the 
graphic arts journal PM using a 
Modernist-inspired composition 
with a nineteenth century 
letterform (in the lower left 
corner). 1937.
2.58 LESTER BEALL (DESIGNER/
PHOTOGRAPHER). Poster for 
the Rural Electrification 
Administration. A simple 
connection is made between 
the stripes of the American 
flag and the strips of a rural 
fence. 1937.
The Museum of Modern Art/ SCALA / Art Resource Art © Lester Beall, Jr. Trust/Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY 
Lester Beall/VAGA/RIT Graphic Design Archives, Wallace Library, Rochester Institute of 
Technology Art © Lester Beall, Jr. Trust/Licensed by VAGA, New York, NY

60
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
In 1946, at age thirty three, Rand wrote his first of four books, 
Thoughts on Design (Figure 2.59). His published work helped to explain 
design as a process that involved reason, intuition, and intelligence—and 
as a service that could enrich life. Rand sought to elevate the most mun-
dane products to a category that could be both beautiful and useful.
A book jacket for Vintage Press typifies Rand’s work, the design 
simplified to the point of becoming iconographic (Figure 2.60). Rand 
used a cutout shape of the book’s author, H. L. Mencken. One arm is 
raised upward, the gesture reflecting the author’s authoritative writing. 
The cover was one of Rand’s favorites, embodying his two greatest influ-
ences: the rough-cut edges and playful collage are directly inspired by the 
child-like play of Paul Klee and the Cubist collages of Picasso. In fact, 
Rand was considered by many to be graphic design’s version of these two 
great artists. 
You can see Paul Rand’s playful and illustrative approach also in 
his corporate identity work. He designed trademarks for giants such as 
IBM, ABC, UPS, and Westinghouse (Figure 2.61). In each case, the witty, 
humanist voice of Rand comes through. To be able to integrate this voice 
into the corporate culture was a feat in itself.
Born in Colorado, Alvin Lustig (1915–1950) studied at the Art 
Center College of Design in California and then briefly with Frank Lloyd 
Wright. Later, as a teacher at both the Art Center and Yale, he shuttled 
between Los Angeles and New York. In addition, he operated a freelance 
design business that brought in a variety of projects, including advertis-
ing, furniture, fabrics, interiors, exhibits, and even the design of a small 
helicopter. Lustig is best known for his book jackets for the publisher 
New Directions. His cover for A Season in Hell by Arthur Rimbaud is 
a beautiful example of his philosophy that painting and design should 
inform and influence each other (Figure 2.62). Here, form and content 
are integrated—the contrasting colors represent heaven and hell but share 
an overriding biomorphic language 
honed directly from the Surrealist 
paintings. 
2.59 PAUL RAND. Cover for 
Thoughts on Design. 1946.
2.60 PAUL RAND. Cover for 
H.L. Mencken, Prejudices: 
A Selection. 1958.
2.61 PAUL RAND.
Westinghouse trademark. 
1960.
2.62 ALVIN LUSTIG. Cover for 
Rimbaud’s A Season in Hell.
1944.
I make solutions that nobody wants to problems 
that don’t exist. —Alvin Lustig

MODERNISM IN AMERICA 
61
Another American designer, Bradbury 
Thompson (1911–1995), from Topeka, Kansas, 
worked for a small print shop before moving 
to New York in the late 1930s. Hired by West-
vaco paper company, Thompson worked on 
their periodical Westvaco Inspirations for Print-
ers from 1938 until 1962. Westvaco appreci-
ated Thompson’s vision and simple, modernist 
language as he replaced the old-fashioned and 
decorative designs with the simple and rational 
Modernist aesthetic (Figure 2.63). Thompson’s 
love of experimental typography and image 
manipulation made Inspirations one of the lead-
ing avant-garde publications in the field. 
Other designers of note during this early 
Modernist era include William Golden (1911–1959), who created bench-
mark identity work at CBS; Lou Dorfsman (1918–2008), who continued 
the work at CBS after Golden’s sudden death; Will Burtin (1909–1972) 
from Germany, who created groundbreaking designs and exhibits for sci-
entific and pharmaceutical companies; and George Tscherny from Berlin 
via Budapest, whose sensitive and elemental solutions educated large cor-
porate clients to the positive strategies of using graphic design for more 
than mere page decoration. West Coast designers include Louis Danziger 
(b. 1923) and Saul Bass (1920–1996). Danziger studied under Lustig and 
brought a sense of design history to his teaching and practice. Bass coher-
ently unified film logos and titles with bold simplicity, thus creating a new 
field of work for graphic designers—motion design. 
As America entered World War II, Modernism was just beginning 
to take hold. By the end of the war, a new vision for the American dream 
was in place, hand in hand with Modernism’s utopian dream. Simplicity, 
clarity, and timelessness defined the language that corporations used to 
reach a global market. 
American design programs began to train their students under the 
tenets of Modernism, and the country began to develop its own Modern-
ist personality. The lens through which American designers saw didn’t 
shift again until the 1970s, as Modernist ideals began to give way to a 
Postmodern attitude of irony and fragmentation.
The Swiss International Style
As the Modernist design sensibility became familiar in contemporary 
design consciousness, a philosophy of refined type and image use began 
to be formulated in school curriculums, especially in Switzerland. By the 
1950s, outstanding design programs in Zurich and Basel developed into a 
clean, flush left and ragged-right typography—what became known as the 
2.63 BRADBURY THOMPSON.
Spread from Westvaco 
Inspirations for Printers 
#152. 1945.
  Creativity is essentially a lonely 
art. An even lonelier struggle. 
To some a blessing. To others a curse. 
It is in reality the ability to reach 
inside yourself and drag forth 
from your very soul an idea. 
—Lou Dorfsman

62
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Swiss International Style. A poster by Josef Müller-Brockmann (1914–
1996) is a characteristic example, the musical subject expressed through 
a rhythm of colored squares (Figure 2.64). Brockmann’s arrangement of 
information achieved a visual harmony based in large part on the math-
ematical organization of the page. 
Designer and educator Armin Hofmann (b. 1920) refined the Swiss 
International Style further by unifying photography and typography into 
striking design compositions. Hofmann’s poster for a performance of 
William Tell is a perfect example (Figure 2.65). Here, a perched apple is 
cropped and distorted to the point of near abstraction, with sans serif 
typography stacked in perspective to create the perception of depth on the 
page—as if it is moving toward its target. Using only shades of black and 
2.64 JOSEF MÜLLER-BROCKMANN. 
Music Viva concert poster. 
1959.
SPEAKOUT: Hans Rudolf Bosshard by Willi Kunz, author of Typography: Macro- and 
Microaesthetics, and Typography: Formation+Transformation
 
 Graphic design today is pluralistic, divergent, and subjective. In this bewildering field every student 
needs a guiding role model that inspires not only as a designer but also through personal character 
and conduct. 
 
 My formative years as a designer were profoundly influenced by Hans Rudolf Bosshard, typography 
teacher at the Kunstgewerbeschule in Zürich, Switzerland.
 
 Mr. Bosshard’s teaching was based on the principles of twentieth century Modernism that defined 
Swiss typography in the 1950s and 1960s. However, aware of the limitations of the “Swiss” approach, 
he strongly encouraged us to explore new directions, even at the risk of failing. While he respected 
the commercial aspects of design he was against mimicking professional practice and following 
prevailing trends. For Mr. Bosshard, school was a laboratory for new ideas. This certainly is in stark 
contrast to design education today where teachers encourage students to use existing styles, follow 
trends, and imitate stars.
 
 Mr. Bosshard’s broad interest in architecture, painting, sculpture, photography, film, literature, phi-
losophy, and music made him a fascinating teacher. He often started class by reading a few pages of 
avant-garde literature or Dada poetry, followed by discussing why these topics, seemingly unrelated 
to typographic design, were important to our education. He would bring to class original construc-
tivist books and posters from the 1920s and 1930s for analysis and comments. The highlight of each 
semester was a field trip to a major museum or a modern architectural site. Each trip contributed 
to our education and opened our student eyes to the wider world outside the classroom. 
 
 Mr. Bosshard always reminded us to look beyond typographic design and to strive for a broad-
based education in the disciplines he personally was interested in. Students today would consider 
this education doctrinaire; however, it was the strong guidance I needed to find my way as a typo-
graphic designer.

MODERNISM IN AMERICA 
63
2.65 ARMIN HOFMANN. Poster for 
a Basel open-air performance 
of William Tell. 1963.
2.66 WOLFGANG WEINGART. Poster 
for an exhibition on Schreibkunst 
(penmanship). 1982.
white, the design seems more like an abstraction, yet we understand it in 
relation to the story of William Tell. The idea is conveyed with the utmost 
formal restraint.
Basel teacher Wolfgang Weingart (b. 1941) took a different approach 
to the Swiss style. A student of Emil Ruder (1914–1970) and Armin Hof-
mann, Weingart challenged the traditional system established by his 
teachers, prompted in part by the fact that typesetting was moving from 
lead hot type (created with molten lead), to cold type (created through 
photographic exposure). Weingart used this cold type process to literally 
sandwich type with photo-screened dot patterns. His poster for the Kun-
stgewerbemuseum in Zürich took advantage of the moiré patterns created 
by this method (Figure 2.66). The effect is controlled chaos—structured, 
yet rich and energized. The international students who studied under 
Ruder, Hofmann, and Weingart brought Swiss design and typography 
back to their own respective design programs throughout the world.
1960s Psychedelic Language
While Swiss typography was in full swing in America, an obscure poster 
language developed in San Francisco’s Haight Ashbury neighborhood. 
The hippies who lived there embraced past styles such as Victorian and 
lived alternative lifestyles as an act of defiance against the clean, 
corporate, and modern aesthetic. The word psychedelic means 
mind-expanding, and hippies believed that the drug LSD, or 
acid, helped expand one’s thinking and increase creativity. Hal-
lucinogenic experiences were often accompanied by electronic 
music and experimental light shows, and many poster artists 
empathized with and shared these counterculture attitudes. 
In a Fillmore Auditorium poster, Wes Wilson (b. 1937) 
used hand-rendered type instead of mechanical type for two 
reasons (Figure 2.67). First, the designer didn’t have enough 
time or money to set mechanical type, and second, hand-
drawn type could be made deliberately illegible and then 
become a coded message for a specific audience. This layer of 
counterculture rebellion clashed nicely with traditional adver-
tising messages that focused on broad readability.
Victor Moscoso (b. 1936) was one of the few formally 
trained designers creating this new work. Although he arrived 
in San Francisco with an MFA in graphic design from Yale, 
Moscoso had to unlearn many of design’s rules when he began 
making psychedelic posters. The traditional knowledge that he 
did use was the color theory he learned in his intensive study 
with Bauhaus artist Josef Albers, then chair of the Department 
of Design at Yale University. The psychedelic posters he made 
incorporated “hot” color palettes in which hues contrasted 
View a Closer Look for Schreibkunst on myartslab.com

64
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
with one another so intensely that they appeared to vibrate, a phenom-
enon that Albers taught in his color theory class. Moscoso brought this 
knowledge to his poster work (Figure 2.68).
Psychedelia entered the American dialect quickly, and soon, even 
established graphic designers were speaking the fluid language. Milton 
Glaser (b. 1929) brought a conceptual approach to his illustrative work at 
the Push Pin Studio along with his fellow classmates, including Seymour 
Chwast (b. 1931) who continues to operate the studio today. Glaser’s 
poster for Bob Dylan, which became an icon for the 1960s experience 
(Figure 2.69), brought psychedelic language to mainstream America.
Advertising Design and the New York School
A unique and humorous approach to advertising design developed during 
the 1960s around New York City’s Madison Avenue, an approach in which 
text and image harmonized in a union not seen before. This union, known 
as the New York School, depended on a working relationship between 
content and form, and Paul Rand, with his playful designs for local busi-
nesses, acted as a proving ground for the approach. Rand’s copywriting 
colleague, Bill Bernbach (1911–1982), from the Weintraub advertising 
agency where they had worked together, brought this word and image 
integration to national campaigns.
The “Think Small” campaign for Volkswagen by the advertis-
ing agency Doyle Dane Bernbach is an example of this new advertising 
approach (Figure 2.70). The ad, designed by art director Helmut Krone 
(1925–1997) has a lovable, and somewhat surreal and austere, quality. The 
layout and the supporting text work in union as a concept, asking the 
2.68 VICTOR MOSCOSO. Concert 
poster for the Chambers 
Brothers. 1967.
2.69 MILTON GLASER. Dylan.
Poster advertising Bob Dylan’s 
Greatest Hits album. 1966. 
2.67 WES WILSON. Concert 
poster for The Association. 
1966.

ADVERTISING DESIGN AND THE NEW YORK SCHOOL
65
reader to “think small.” The audience was confronted with 
a small, economy-minded car in a country that was used 
to thinking big. This cool advertising, with a witty sense of 
humor, connected with an audience ready for change. 
The art director George Lois (b. 1931) perfected this 
new blend of word and image with his work for Esquire
magazine. Lois brought advertising’s conceptual approach 
to the design of magazine covers. A 1968 cover story on 
Muhammad Ali posed the fighter in the stance of Saint 
Sebastian (condemned by the Romans for his religious 
beliefs) and symbolized conscientious objector Ali’s refusal 
to be inducted into the U.S. Army (Figure 2.71). It was a pro-
vocative image with a strong social message.
Other graphic designers also incorporated this con-
ceptual approach into their projects. Ivan Chermayeff (b. 
1932) created a strong connection between word and image 
in a poster design for Mobil Oil Corporation’s sponsored 
television program about events that happened between 
the two world wars (Figure 2.72). Chermayeff bracketed a 
diplomat’s hat between World War I and World War II mili-
tary helmets as well as the program’s title Between the Wars, 
conveying meaning through the arrangement. Its centered 
layout forces the reader to focus on interpreting the idea. In addition, the 
Mobil logo itself, which was also designed by Chermayeff’s design studio, 
is a word and image construction—the name and its circular letterforms 
suggesting mobility. 
2.70 HELMOT KRONE (ART
DIRECTOR) AND WRITER JULIAN
KOENIG (WRITER). Advertisement 
for Volkswagen. 1960.
2.71 GEORGE LOIS (ART
DIRECTOR) AND CARL FISCHER
(PHOTOGRAPHER). Esquire
cover. April 1968. 
2.72 IVAN CHERMAYEFF. Poster 
for a television series about 
American diplomatic history 
titled Between the Wars. 
1977.

66
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
During the 1960s, as the way type was created changed from solid 
lead casts to a more flexible process in which letterforms were exposed 
onto photographic paper, designers quickly adapted. Herb Lubalin (1918–
1981) showed how letterforms could be made into malleable forms to 
communicate ideas. His typograms, as he called them, had a double duty 
of both reading and creating pictures. These visual poems in miniature 
extended to page layouts, book covers, and advertisements (Figure 2.73). 
For example, his announcement for an antiwar poster contest, which 
appeared on the back cover of Avant Garde magazine, carried the image of 
type and flag and communicated the power of design and protest (Figure 
2.74). Lubalin, art director for Avant Garde magazine from 1968 to 1971, 
also designed its masthead (see the ad’s exclamation point). He developed 
the font he used for the masthead into a full typeface of the same name, a 
typeface that came to define the phototype period.
Conceptual Image Makers
Surrealist philosophy, part of an outgrowth of Dada, may have 
triggered an approach to graphic design problems that began 
to take hold in the early 1950s and gained more followers in the 
1960s and early 1970s. The method of juxtaposed images, placed 
side by side, helped solve more complex problems that designers 
were tackling. These images spoke louder and more conceptually 
in conveying ideas that went beyond single-image, narrative solu-
tions. War and protest offered an appropriate channel. 
Polish designer Tadeusz Trepkowski (1914–1956) used jux-
taposition in a powerful antiwar poster—an appropriate channel 
to voice concern in the aftermath of World War II (Figure 2.75). 
Rather than depict a bomb exploding or a city destroyed, Trep-
kowski’s poster reaches further. The silhouette of a bomb reveals a 
glimpse of a bombarded city, the horror of war expressed simply 
and directly by creating a montage of the two images. A single 
word makes the demand quite clear—“Nie!” (No!).
SPEAKOUT: Armin Hofmann, Tadanori Yokoo, and Herb Lubalin
by Peter Wong, professor of graphic design, Savannah College of Art and Design, Atlanta, Georgia
 
 College design professors were my first and foremost influence. They exposed me to the work of 
prominent designers who made a mark in design history. The first was Armin Hofmann, whose 
posters and book, Graphic Design Manual, introduced me to the workings and subtleties of Swiss 
Design. In contrast, Japanese designer Tadanori Yokoo, whose posters used complex imagery, jux-
tapositions, layering, and a multitude of colors, demonstrated how diversity and variety could be 
another approach. New York’s Herb Lubalin stands out for his ability to communicate ideas and 
meaning with letterforms. His “typographics” inspired my life-long study of typography. 
2.73 HERB LUBALIN. Typograms: 
Marriage (1965), Mother & Child 
(1965), and Families (1980).
2.74 HERB LUBALIN. Announcement 
for Avant Garde magazine’s anti-
war poster contest. 1968.

CONCEPTUAL IMAGE MAKERS 
67
Twenty-eight years later, another Polish designer, Jerzy Janisze-
wski (b. 1953), applied conceptual thinking to another protest, one for 
the Independent Self-Governing Trade Union “Solidarity” (Figure 2.76). 
Here, a crowded street protest is conveyed through an ingenious use of 
letters, its characters standing together to form a unified whole, with the 
Polish flag streaming behind.
In Japan, designer Shigeo Fukuda (1932–2009) created a body of 
work using nonverbal conceptual images. Fukuda’s designs are shocking 
yet playful communications. His Victory poster, a surreal depiction of the 
thirteenth anniversary of the end of World War II, was awarded first prize 
by the 1975 Warsaw Poster Contest, a competition whose proceeds went 
to the Peace Fund Movement (Figure 2.77). The shell heading toward 
the gun instead of out of the gun flips one’s perception. The idea is quite 
complex, loaded with paradox and irony, but Fukuda’s drawing is both 
disarming and clear. 
German designer Gunter Rambow (b. 1938) also brings a Surreal-
ist edge to photography with his work for theaters and publishers. In his 
poster for Südafrikanisches Roulette (South African Roulette), the concept 
of using the shape of Africa bleeding through a bandage powerfully sym-
bolizes the play’s theme of pain, suffering, and revolution in South Africa 
(Figure 2.78).
2.76 Jerzy Janiszewski. 
Solidarity logo. ca. 1980.
2.77 SHIGEO FUKUDA. Poster 
for Victory. 1975. 
2.78 GUNTER RAMBOW. Theater 
poster for Südafrikanisches 
(South African) Roulette.
1988.
2.75 TDEUSZ TREPKOWSKI.
Antiwar poster. 1953.

68
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
Dutch designer Anthon Beeke (b. 1940) integrates performance 
art with photography to explain his conceptual thinking. Beeke was a 
member of the 1960s neo-Dada movement called Fluxus, and its influ-
ence on his work is especially obvious in his designs for Dutch theater 
companies. In Een meeuw (The Seagull) the image is first perceived to 
be a flower with a face in its center (Figure 2.79). It has a carnival-like 
atmosphere which, on the surface, appears simple and direct. However, 
when the viewer realizes that the flower was created out of feathers, and 
the face and feathers are splattered with blood, another layer of meaning 
with a much more cryptic message is revealed.
Today, Beeke’s conceptual images are representative of work in this 
genre that relies less on stabilized ideas, ones that hit you over the head 
with their intent, and more on ideas that are open ended and complex in 
their subtlety. They do more than deliver a message; they deliver a mes-
sage filled with nuance. This approach reflects graphic design’s expansion 
into territories that were once the province of the fine arts. Juxtaposing 
meaning and gesture may prove to be the ultimate goal for the graphic 
designer as cultural image maker.
Postmodernism and the Digital Age
Fascism and Communism proved that the struggle for finding the perfect 
way, the ultimate system, could lead to frightful extremes. In response, 
there was a shift away from utopian ideals or movements that involved 
the pursuit of timelessness or perfectionism. Postmodernism was born 
after World War II and, as is clear in its name, defines itself as that which 
comes after Modernism. If Modernist “isms” such as Cubism, Futurism, 
and Surrealism shared the goal of finding an ultimate truth, then Post-
modernism suggests an end to this belief in truisms and a preference for a 
more open-ended approach that draws from various sources, an approach 
with no easy answers.
French writers were the first to present an awareness of the limi-
tations of Modernism. France’s Vichy government collaborated with the 
Nazis, which may be the reason why French citizens had to look so care-
fully at the social and cultural structures that made that situation possible. 
By the 1960s, critical writers including Jean Baudrillard (1929–2007) and 
Jacques Derrida (1930–2004) proclaimed searches for anything absolute 
(a painting style, building form, or communication structure) as impos-
sible paths to continue.
In architecture, Robert Venturi (b. 1925) taught a new generation of 
architects to appreciate the fragmented and eclectic nature of life and to 
work this untidy approach into a kind of counterrevolutionary architec-
ture that could be loaded with symbols and historic references. Venturi’s 
maxim “Less is a bore,” challenged the International Style’s “Less is more” 
functional creed that had dominated architecture since the Bauhaus. In 
his book Complexity and Contradiction in Architecture, Venturi wrote: “I 
In Modernism, reality used to 
validate media. In Postmodernism, 
the media validate reality. If you 
don’t believe this, just think how 
many times you’ve described some 
real event as being “just like 
a movie.” —Brad Holland
2.79 ANTHON BEEKE. Een Meeuw 
(The Seagull) poster for the 
play by Anton Chekhov for the 
Theatercompagnie, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. 2003.

POSTMODERNISM AND THE DIGITAL AGE 
69
am for a richness of meaning rather than clarity of meaning…. I prefer 
‘both-and’ to ‘either-or,’ black and white, and sometimes gray, to black and 
white.” Venturi and his wife and business partner, Denise Scott Brown, 
together created buildings that referenced the vernacular art languages, 
those of untrained, local styles, culminating in their book Learning from 
Las Vegas: The Forgotten Symbolism of Architectural Form.
By the 1970s, the general public was fully experiencing Postmod-
ernism in popular culture. Punk rock music most blatantly exemplified 
this new attitude and literally shocked the establishment in its reaction to 
conservative British politics and the processed muzak and disco of that 
decade. In Great Britain, most punk musicians and their fans were not 
interested in the skilled playing of their instruments. What mattered more 
was the energy and passion that Punk exuded. 
Graphic design took its cues from this questioning of established 
structures and how designers operated within them. Layouts that had 
been expected to be clean to the point of antiseptic began to reveal the 
working process. Grid lines, tape, and pencil marks were intentionally 
left in the finished designs. The introduction of the Macintosh computer 
in 1984 didn’t stop the anti-aesthetic investigation graphic designers were 
exploring. The raw and gritty bits of the new medium were textures to be 
included, not hidden.
The 1980s represented a definite rift between the residue of Mod-
ernist sensibilities and Postmodernism. And no outlet better reflected 
this rift than a magazine called Emigre (Figure 2.80). Created in 1984, 
its publisher, Rudy VanderLans (b. 1955) provided a forum for alterna-
tive design concepts and approaches. Emigre challenged established rules 
about legibility while embracing design’s emerging digital age. A like-
minded soul, designer Katherine McCoy (b. 1945), was found within the 
design department at Cranbrook Academy of Art in Michigan. Under her 
guidance, Cranbrook surfaced as a laboratory for graphic experimenta-
tion. Many graduates showcased their work through Emigre magazine. 
Perhaps no student epitomized the postmodern fusion of typeface design 
and technology better than P. Scott Makela (1960–1999). His typeface 
Dead History for the Emigre type foundry pilfered historical faces, mixed 
them together, and made them digitally ready for their recontextualized 
use (Figure 2.81).
Another Cranbrook graduate, Ed Fella (b. 1938) brought a hand-
drawn quality to the critical experiments happening there. Fella melded 
his knowledge of traditional design rules with eccentric letterforms and 
personal statements. For example, he created a series of hand-lettered 
fliers, but distributed them only after the events were over, thus causing 
the fliers to lose their function as announcements and change into what 
he calls “design/art” (Figure 2.82). This reconfiguring of design’s tools, 
materials, and function extended graphic design’s boundaries far beyond 
its basic service to the business community.
2.81 P. SCOTT MAKELA. 
Dead History typeface 
for the Emigre type 
foundry. 1990.
2.80 GLENN SUOKKO. Cover 
design for Emigre magazine 
#10. 1989.
2.82 ED FELLA. Lecture 
announcement. 1995.

70
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
A pioneer of the digital realm of design, April Greiman (b. 1948) 
originally trained in the Modernist tradition. During the 1970s, she stud-
ied in Basel, Switzerland, with Armin Hofmann and Wolfgang Weingart, 
and this experience set a solid foundation for her work that ventured into 
primitive, computer territory. When she returned to the United States, 
Greiman set up shop in Los Angeles where she began to incorporate 
spiritualism and Eastern philosophy into her design process. The result, 
stylistically labeled “California New Wave,” was initially interpreted as 
merely a departure from the neutral, grid-oriented work in which the 
design community was grounded, but Greiman’s work went further. It 
pointed to a new conceptual direction for graphic design, one driven by 
technology. Her magazine layout for Design Quarterly blended a three-
by-six foot poster into the unfolding pages and layered her own revealed 
and digitized body into what she referred to as a “landscape of commu-
nications” (Figure 2.83). Greiman saw digital technology as its own new 
language “to use these tools to imitate what we already know and think 
is a pity.”
Tibor Kalman (1949–1999), dubbed the bad boy of graphic design 
during the 1980s, challenged the status quo of graphic design with wit 
and humor. His recontextualized retro graphics looked back instead of 
forward with Postmodern irony. For Kalman, graphic design needed 
a boost because its leaning toward the corporate track was killing the 
creative spirit. An advertisement for a twenty-four-hour New York 
City diner, Restaurant Florent, exemplifies Kalman’s unique perspec-
tive (Figure 2.84). Plastic letters, stuck to a letter board, were the only 
elements he used. Simple as they are, they succinctly communicate the 
everyday quality of the diner without any undue fuss. Kalman’s uncon-
ventional approach broadened the design field in two ways. First, it chal-
lenged designers to see unexpected energy in the untrained, vernacu-
lar languages they normally avoided. Second, his approach showed that 
authenticity trumped aesthetics, especially when used in a conceptual 
context. Kalman changed design thinking with a Duchampian flair. 
His work showed a distinct sense of humor and a strong sense of social 
responsibility, exhibiting a wry criticism on the nature of consumption 
and production.
With her playful approach to typography, Paula Scher (b. 1948) 
has been highly influential in the design world. She has created corpo-
rate identities for Perry Ellis, Bloomberg, Target, Jazz at Lincoln Center, 
the Detroit Symphony Orchestra, the New York Botanical Garden, and 
others. Scher claims her work stems from the density, size, and noise of 
New York City, which pushes her to make dense, energetic, bold designs. 
For The Public Theater, Scher revitalized bold wood block type-
faces by angling their baselines (Figure 2.85). The result is an active series 
of posters whose treatment has become The Public Theater’s identity as 
much as the logo she created for them. 
2.83 APRIL GREIMAN. Poster from 
Design Quarterly, no. 133. 1987. 
2.84 TIBOR KALMAN. 
Print advertisement 
for Restaurant 
Florent. 1987.

POSTMODERNISM AND THE DIGITAL AGE 
71
David Carson’s (b. 1954) association with revitalizing magazine 
work might best reflect the evolutionary turn toward a digitally pro-
duced, fragmented, and Postmodern design. In the same way that Punk 
musicians weren’t interested as much in musicality as in energy, Carson’s 
interest in magazine design isn’t in its legibility or convention, but in its 
energy and expression. Ray Gun magazine (published from 1992 to 2000) 
was one in a series of magazines Carson art directed that was so visually 
engaging that it approached being a fetishized object (Figure 2.86). Most 
important, he was able to achieve this level of devotion on an interna-
tional scale, inspiring graphic design students throughout the world.
At the opening of an exhibition at Deitch Projects, an art gallery in 
New York, Stefan Sagmeister (b. 1962) featured a wall of 10,000 bananas. 
Green bananas created a pattern against a background of yellow bananas, 
spelling out the sentiment: “Self-confidence produces fine results” (Figure 
2.87). After a number of days, the green bananas turned yellow too and 
the words disappeared. When the yellow background bananas turned 
brown, the words (and the self-confidence) appeared again, only to go 
away when all bananas turned brown at the end of the four-week run. 
Sagmeister relates the piece to his own process of having self-confi-
dence—“to appear and disappear, just like my own self-confidence comes 
and goes.” His visualization included typography as well as time and smell 
(as the bananas ripened). The piece was provocative not 
only because it reflected Sagmeister’s personal idiosyn-
crasy but also because, despite all the technology available, 
Sagmeister chose a material that is more analog than digi-
tal. He also recognized that graphic art that is ephemeral 
and short-lived is just as valid as work that is published or 
reproduced. This notion is even reflected in the exhibit’s 
announcement. Instead of distributing 
a postcard with an image of a banana, 
the gallery used a real banana—a very 
apt and memorable announcement for 
the show. 
2.85 PAULA SCHER / PENTAGRAM. 
1995–96 season campaign 
poster for The Public Theater.
2.87 STEFAN SAGMEISTER. (ART
DIRECTION), RICHARD THE, JOE SHOULDICE
(DESIGN). Deitch Installation and 
invitation (banana). 2008.
2.86 DAVID CARSON. Spread from 
Ray Gun magazine. 1994.

SPEAKOUT: Vaughan Oliver by Tamar Cohen, graphic 
designer, New York
 
 Having graduated college with no formal graphic design educa-
tion, I found myself working as an intern at a packaging design 
studio in London. I wasn’t even sure that graphic design was the 
profession I wanted to pursue until I sat across from Vaughan 
Oliver. He made me laugh, had amazing taste in music (he 
worked for the seminal British music label 4AD), and showed me 
that design did not need to fit into a neat little package. He chal-
lenged convention, saw beauty in the most unexpected places 
and worked intuitively—more like an artist than a designer. 
72
CHAPTER 2: A BRIEF HISTORY OF GRAPHIC DESIGN
In Perspective
Though its origins can be traced back to ancient cave paintings, graphic 
design is actually a very young profession. It has a rich history that was 
influenced by the major art and design movements of the twentieth cen-
tury. Industrialization created a need for graphic designers, while the Arts 
and Crafts movement helped temper the inhumanity of the machine; Art 
Deco introduced Modernism as a design style, and the Bauhaus refined 
Modernism into a true design philosophy. 
Graphic design is affected by, and simultaneously reflects, contem-
porary events and the world community in which it exists. For example, 
the Constructivist art movement of the 1920s and the Punk music genre 
of the 1970s both changed design in profound ways: one with the concept 
of abstraction, the other in its application of a stripped-down energy. The 
dates and audiences were different, but design’s goal was the same—to 
communicate the aesthetics and sensibilities of an era. 
This integration of graphic design and the time periods in which it 
is expressed emphasizes how important it is for design students to learn 
all they can about the history not only of their field but also of the world 
in which they live. An historical understanding of graphic design will 
help ground their ideas, and an equally important understanding of con-
temporary culture will bring an educated inspiration to their work. Suc-
cessful designers must understand their work within the milieu of their 
own time.
The next chapter will focus on how to create and develop a con-
cept. Yet we can’t forget that, by looking back, we are researching how 
others created concepts in the context of their day. With this idea in mind, 
we can look to past design giants such as A.M. Cassandre or Paul Rand 
and see how they taught through their work. Each piece in the puzzle of 
design is a relevant example of how we must look back to move forward.
Abstraction (p. 44)
Aestheticism (p. 42)
Arts and Crafts movement
(p. 42)
Art Deco (p. 56)
Art movement (p. 42)
Art Nouveau (p. 42)
Bauhaus (p. 53)
Constructivism (p. 50)
Cubism (p. 46)
Dada (p. 48)
De Stijl (p. 52)
Digital age (p. 69)
Futurism (p. 47)
Gothic revival (p. 39)
Modernism (p. 44)
New Typography (p. 54)
New York School (p. 64)
Postmodernism (p. 68)
Psychedelic (p. 63)
Suprematism (p. 48)
Surrealism (p. 49)
Swiss International Style 
(p. 62)
Typogram (p. 66)
K E Y  T E R M S

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
73
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Designer Proﬁle): Write a 100-word paragraph about a 
graphic designer who worked solely in the twentieth century. You can ref-
erence published material, but bring your personal insight and thoughts 
to your writing. Pay particular attention to the designer’s approach, the 
context in which he or she worked, and how he or she managed to con-
nect with the audience during this time period.
Exercise 2 (Music with Design): Chose a music genre and match it with a 
graphic designer or a product of graphic design that has either helped in-
fluence it or has been influenced by it. Consider all kinds of music, includ-
ing classical, jazz, folk, rock, punk, and so on. Document your findings.
Project 1 (Architecture and Graphic Design): Pair three different exam-
ples of architecture with graphic designs of the same time period. Organize 
your images, include titles, diagram dates, and teach something through 
the information and the design’s arrangement. Full color. Size: 18" × 24."
Project 2 (Designer Style Poster): Create a poster on a twentieth-century 
graphic designer. Focus on one main point—something you discovered 
about that person. Consider how he or she might have used metaphor, 
humor, abstraction, structure, or the vernacular to connect with an audi-
ence. Teach us, but also entertain us. Full color. Size: 18" × 24."
Things to Consider: Let this piece be a document of your research, seen through your own eyes.
Things to Consider: Think about how the form of your own layout can reflect the theoretical 
underpinning of the time or movement you’re notating.
Project 2
SAMANTHA TUKEY. 
Visual research document/
poster on the designer, Lucian 
Bernhard—known for his 
reductionist approach to 
poster design.
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

74
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Explain the difference between an idea and a graphic 
design concept.
t 
 Give an example of how graphic designers can use basic 
storytelling conventions in their visual communication.
t 
 Describe the concept of visual metaphor, including three 
specific applications: part-to-whole representations, 
generalized associations, and montage.
t 
 Interpret how analytic concepts are applied in designs 
such as Figures 3.26–3.32.
t 
 Describe how meta concepts can be used in graphic design.
t 
 Discuss how different graphic designers layer conceptual 
approaches to enhance communication.
t
Exercises and Projects
Create three different kinds of montage; make a design based on 
pairs of words and images; design a book cover; create a visual story 
sequence; assemble data to develop an information design.
75
3
Essentially all the parts of a design project (the idea, words, images, 
sounds, formats, media, and context), need to be integrated into an effec-
tive whole—often referred to as a “graphic design concept.”
From Ideas to Concepts
An idea occurs when you use things you have discovered or already know 
well in a new way to solve a problem. This “mash-up” process involves 
creative thinking. For example, if you need to cross a small, rushing river, 
you might try to come up with an idea to help you get across safely. 
One idea might be to use a large tree branch, placed shore to shore 
over the river, to serve as a bridge—a new way to use a tree branch to solve 
the problem. The process is similar when trying to solve a design prob-
lem. In graphic design, ideas (like the tree branch in the example) become 
useful and relevant only when they are used to solve a communication 
problem.
or graphic designers, nearly every project begins with the same 
request: Create something great out of next to nothing, within a limited 
amount of space, and for an audience that has little time. 
So how do they begin? Experienced designers know that whether 
creating a page layout or a motion design clip, they will first need to 
come up with a plan.
Opposite page: MARTIN WOODTLI.
Poster (detail) for soDA Magazine 
using a clock-radio as a metaphor 
to describe the quirky and 
unexpected nature of this visual 
culture magazine from Zurich, 
Switzerland.
Graphic Design Concepts
Design as I see it is made up of 
two major aspects. One is concept 
and the other is execution. 
—George Tscherny
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
F

76
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
You can push a particular idea further by making an analogy, com-
paring two things on which the project’s subject is based. The analogy 
between a tree branch and a bridge is made because they share a certain 
attribute—providing a surface that allows one to cross over a space. A 
tree, especially when placed horizontally, can function like a bridge. In a 
comparable design example that you will see later in Figure 3.3, a televi-
sion can function like a chair when used as a place to sit rather than as 
a device for watching video broadcasts. And, in a larger sense, the whole 
problem of getting across the river is an analogy to the problem of find-
ing a design solution. The comparison of the bridge solution and a design 
solution helps to explain what an idea is more clearly. 
The form (color, line, shape, or manner) that a design takes sup-
ports and helps to communicate an intellectual idea. For example, you 
may use blue in a design because the subject matter has a connection to 
the ocean. Form that is not connected to an idea becomes empty or mean-
ingless to a design. When form and idea integrate seamlessly, your design 
will be grounded on substance.
In fact, an idea that is connected to form becomes a concept. This 
subtle but important distinction between ideas and concepts supports the 
whole process of developing more sophisticated graphic design. The ideas 
come first, sparked by an association, a mental connection, a burst of cre-
ative thought. You need to identify the reason for the idea, always asking 
yourself “why?” Why should the poster be dark and somber? Why should 
I use these classical letterforms? Why include this photo of a cat? When 
you can answer those questions, when you have sound reasons behind the 
A thought is an idea in transit.
—Pythagoras (582–497 BCE)
SPEAKOUT: A Unique Game by Doug Kisor, chair, Graphic Design Department, 
Graphic + Media Design, College for Creative Studies, Detroit, Michigan
 
 At one level, a graphic design concept is such a curious and simple thing. It relies on an idea. But 
really, it’s even more about how an idea becomes manifest. 
 
 There is a desire to embody essential qualities in a communication, provoking a tricky process 
of distillation and connotation. And yet, a concept is fully realized only when odd, and not so 
odd, connections are made. The negotiation gains substance as the interrelationship of elements is 
appraised. Through this process, meaning is synthesized into a summary vocabulary of expression. 
These choices are then measured against a frame of goals and specific objectives.
 
 And still, as I think about this beginning, what is missing? Play. I love designing because it’s fun. 
Each project is its own unique game. There are questions, patterns and connections within the 
interrelated elements we work with, and they occur in the most unlikely places. When you open 
a secret door to something unexpected (hidden in a word, an image, your head, a hairball) you 
can sense the connection. Listening and translating the familiar—and not so familiar—within this 
cyclical interplay of elements is the fun, the play, the idea.

FROM IDEAS TO CONCEPTS 
77
ideas you have chosen to pursue, then you begin to 
give them form, to make them manifest through 
line, shape, pattern, sound, composition, and so 
on. At that stage, you are beginning to develop a 
full design concept, making your ideas real. 
There are many ways to arrive at a design 
concept, many approaches to take when working 
through a design project. You will probably need 
to experiment for each design problem, particu-
larly if you don’t want your work to start looking 
stale. Always be open to experimentation and to 
taking chances. Some of the best ideas might come 
from your risks and even from your mistakes.
The architect Le Corbusier designed the 
Pilgrimage Chapel Notre-Dame-du-Haut at Ron-
champ, inspired by a simple animal (Figure 3.1). 
In The Chapel at Ronchamp, Le Corbusier wrote, 
“The shell of a crab picked up on Long Island in 
1946 is lying on my drawing board. It will become 
the roof of the chapel.” And so it did. The shape of the roof, which then 
led to the design of the rest of the building, was inspired by the structure 
of the crab’s shell, suggesting a move beyond the Cubist or machine-like 
aesthetic of some of Le Corbusier’s previous works. The shape of the roof 
also suggests praying hands or a nun’s cowl, all in keeping with the notion 
of chapel.
This example by Le Corbusier brings up an important point in idea 
development—learning to see. To best prepare for a career as a designer, 
you have to make seeing, really looking at the world around you, an essen-
tial part of your daily activity. Carry a camera with you everywhere and 
always remain alert for interesting shapes, colors, textures, and juxtaposi-
tions (particular elements or things that are side by side). Take note of 
buildings, plants, billboards, display windows, funny hats, and interesting 
people. Look in unexpected places and out-of-the-way corners. Pay atten-
tion to other media—movies, TV, books, paintings, sculptures, crafts, even 
music. Everything around you has the potential to influence your work.
The design process doesn’t just happen at your desk; being a creative 
artist is a lifestyle, a way of conducting your daily existence. You never 
know where a good idea will come from or when it will appear, but if you 
are always open and observant of the world around you, then you will be 
able to collect a storehouse of images and ideas that you can use when 
it comes time to start designing. Fascinating images can come from the 
most unexpected places. 
The time to start collecting ideas is not when first confronted with a 
new project. You may not have enough time to gather and germinate ideas 
on such quick notice. But if you have a storehouse of ideas, notes jotted 
3.1 LE CORBUSIER. Nôtre-Dame-
du-Haut, Ronchamp, France. 
1950–1955.

78
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
down, sketchbooks full of illustrations and photos, you will be 
able to refer to that collection when a new project comes your 
way. Then the act of choosing becomes part of the creative pro-
cess. Working this way means never switching off your imagina-
tion, even between jobs.
The Speakout by Doug Kisor notes the similarity between 
how a design concept relies on connections to communicate and 
how playfully finding unexpected relationships supports the 
creation process. The motion poster by Jessica Sheeran synthe-
sizes this point in a design experiment created for projection on 
an LCD screen (Figure 3.2). This digital poster transforms as the 
top images combine with the left-side patterns and typography 
to create a synthesis. As the typography refreshes, new combina-
tions are created.
Problem Solving
Whatever the project, the essence of graphic design is problem solving. 
Given a certain set of parameters, you have to come up with a solution 
that is creative and sends a clear message. It sounds so simple, yet it never 
is in practice. Sometimes, you are given the equivalent of a blank canvas, 
or a blank computer screen, and told to just go for it. Sometimes, you 
are asked to work within specific parameters. Other times, you are given 
an existing project that isn’t working well and asked to fix it. All three 
approaches involve problem solving that combines imagination and prac-
ticality. One of your challenges is to learn to balance those two aspects, 
and you will find that challenge to be different for every new design proj-
ect. 
At times, rational considerations will have to take priority, perhaps 
when redesigning a website that has poor navigation or designing a tech-
nical magazine that has few illustrations and whose readers are looking 
only for facts. You may stretch your skills and your imagination to come 
up with a viable solution, but, in the end, it simply has to work.
Other times, you will have no limitations at all on your design and 
you can let your imagination run wild. You can leave your inhibitions 
behind and try something truly radical and confrontational. This type of 
effort can be the most satisfying design work, the kind of work you dream 
of being able to do. Believe it or not, those challenges can be more difficult 
than the pragmatic ones because the measure of success is not well defined. 
Keeping Records
Keeping records may sound cumbersome when you are in the throes of 
creativity, but it can be tremendously helpful to keep a record of your 
thought processes throughout a design. If your design is reaching its 
conclusion and you realize it isn’t going as well as you had hoped, you 
3.2 JESSICA SHEERAN. Motion 
poster (student project). 
The designer’s intent was to 
consider how context alters 
our perception—an example 
of the “odd and not so odd 
connection,” “play,” and the 
process of “distillation.” 
Don’t think. Thinking is the enemy 
of creativity. It’s self-conscious, 
and anything self-conscious is 
lousy. You can’t try to do things. 
You simply must do things. 
—Ray Bradbury (1920–2012)

CONCEPTS GO FURTHER 
79
can track back through the thought process and perhaps redirect it at a 
certain point, trying a new direction. When confronted with a new prob-
lem, you may want to return to a similar problem you worked through 
once before, and having a record of that process in front of you can prove 
to be quite helpful.
Most important, when presenting your project to the client, you can 
speak intelligently about your solution if you can review the steps of your 
process. Clients will come to respect your work, and colleagues can learn 
from your successes. That final design report becomes part of the com-
pany records and is a valuable part of its history.
Concepts Go Further
Most of us begin to understand story concepts at an early age. We listen 
to the fables and fairy tales that are read to us. The narratives are linear in 
structure (beginning, middle, and end), contain a basic plot (characters 
and story), and share a social knowledge in the form of an underlying 
moral (the best route to take or the lesson to be learned). Graphic design 
concepts rely on the same basic storytelling conventions. Essentially, these 
concepts convey things such as, “This book jacket design references and 
interprets the material you will read inside” or “This logo symbolizes the 
spirit of a company.” The primary intention of a concept is to help make 
material more understandable. 
In the Literacy poster by John Bielenberg, for example, the image is 
positioned not only to be seen but also to be read, to be interpreted like 
a short story (Figure 3.3). The poster is immediately readable—a young 
child is holding a book. The compounding factor, the point that gives the 
communication a twist, is that the child is using an unplugged television 
set as a chair. The first layer of the communication is obvious—that read-
ing can begin at an early age. We see that the TV is being used as a chair, 
not in its intended use as a device for watching sitcoms and cartoons. In 
this image, the physical TV enables the process of reading. 
Minimal type on the poster emphasizes a humorous irony—that the 
images depend on being read. The image also contains a number of sym-
bols: the child, book, television, and plug. The result is a design concept 
in action.
Paula Scher’s design for a literacy poster approached the topic of 
reading from a different angle (Figure 3.4). She simply enlarged type 
from the page of a book, creating four-letter anagrams (different words 
that each use the same letters) of a, d, e, and r rearranged into dare, dear, 
and read as an appeal for literacy. The scale challenges the viewer, as does 
the playful, straightforward presentation. Through its very cleverness, it 
shows a love of language, a love of reading.
3.3 JOHN BIELENBERG. Poster 
for a literacy campaign spon-
sored by the Colorado chapter 
of the AIGA, the professional 
association for design.
3.4 PAULA SCHER. “Dare Dear, Read” 
poster as part of the AIGA Colorado 
chapter’s literacy campaign. 
View a Closer Look for the Dare poster on myartslab.com

How do you teach graphic design 
concept?
By sophomore year, when students begin 
taking design classes, they learn that they have 
to create work that communicates a specific 
message. In class critiques, the focus shifts 
from the pure aesthetics of foundation, where 
they only needed to express themselves, to an 
emphasis on moving messages. They discover 
that it’s the ultimate goal of graphic design, 
and that all the elements they use in a design, 
including ideas, forms, typography, and so 
on, all relate to a total package embracing a 
concept. A famous Pratt student and graphic 
designer, Paul Rand, wrote that a concept is 
an integrated product that needs to be both 
beautiful and useful. Without the ability to 
think conceptually, it’s impossible to solve most 
of the projects that come up in class or out in 
the field.
So where do students begin? What 
ideas stand out?
Projects that develop an understanding of 
contrast, both psychologically and physically, 
tend to produce the most outstanding pieces. 
One student created a welcome mat covered in 
barbed wire. Another used a clock with a face 
made of a stop sign. These raw and basic ideas 
carry something more with them for the viewer. 
The mat says, “Come in,” yet warns you to go 
away. The clock’s hands move, yet it signals to 
stop. The montage prods the viewer to respond 
in a kind of addition (1 + 1) so they can’t help 
but add up. The surprise is that the answer is 
more: 1 + 1 = 3. In other words, they’ve forced 
the viewer to think.
Is there a value in forcing the 
viewer to think?
When a designer can cause more than just a 
reaction and can take us to a point where there 
is a response, then a solid communication is 
made. The opposite would be to have a picture 
of a rose with the word “rose” under it. Nothing 
happens. Now imagine putting the word “crap” 
underneath and think of how someone’s brain 
would respond—the setup causes meaning to 
be created. Within the confines of a design prob-
lem, this is an effective way to get people en-
gaged and get them to remember your design.
Are there other mediums besides 
visual ones?
We can’t see, hear, touch, taste, or smell without 
visualizing mental imagery. I think of Robert 
Frost’s poem “Stopping by the Woods on a 
Snowy Evening.” That short piece of writing 
holds an album full of images. But I like to 
mix up all the senses and mediums in these 
early classes. As a variation to the montage 
assignment, I ask students to convey an idea 
by creating a physical montage (contrasting 
elements that have an associative link). 
Joseph Roberts is professor of communications design and former chair of the BFA program in 
Graphic Design, Illustration, and Advertising at Pratt Institute in Brooklyn, New York. He was also 
president of Klauber/Roberts, a graphic and exhibit design corporation in New York City, and art 
director of the Philmont Software Mill, a computer-consulting firm in Philmont, New York.
When a designer can cause more than 
just a reaction, and takes us to a point 
where there is a returned response, then 
a solid communication is made. 
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  G R A P H I C  D E S I G N  C O N C E P T S ,  W I T H   JOSEPH ROBERTS
80
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Photo by Bill Kontzias

They have to cover their project until it is 
revealed to the rest of the class, but by watching 
each face respond, you can actually see an idea 
hit their brain. Visual aesthetics matter very 
little in relation to the idea conveyed in the 
mind. But, of course, the final presentation of 
the concept must be well crafted to speed the 
communication.
How do you bring this approach to 
real design projects?
Well, we don’t think of designers creating 
concepts for radio ads, but that doesn’t mean 
they can’t. I assign a 30-second spot for New 
York’s Water Taxi, and, as research, I actually 
require the students to take the taxi. The setup 
for a contrasting montage to take place is the 
same, except that students work with sounds. 
What says “water” and what says “taxi”? 
The solution begins there—the only visuals 
are the ones created in the audience’s mind. 
It’s good training for the real world, especially 
when they find they have to communicate a 
message for a company or service that doesn’t 
have any product that can be visualized (an 
insurance company, for example). Designers will 
understand how to develop ideas into concepts 
that speak. And part of that speaking will come 
from the viewer.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: JOSEPH ROBERTS 
81
Vignette 3.1 Commemorative 
Coin for the Brooklyn Bridge 
sound and light spectacle.
Vignette 3.2 The associative 
link is sincerity.
Vignette 3.3 The associative 
links are shape and motion.

82
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Finding ideas through research and sketching are the beginning 
of the conceptual process. See Steps in the Design Process (page 83) to 
understand how ideas for a poster for William Shakespeare’s play Macbeth
might develop. 
A very unassuming concept forms the basis for the design of an 
annual report created by Pentagram for the National Audubon Society. 
The title “Birds, Wildlife, and Habitat” suggests that there might be some-
thing more to the report than simply budgets and numbers (Figures 3.5 
and 3.6). Not that a review of the year’s financials isn’t the main point of 
this piece, but the report is also a beautiful guidebook. Teeming with color 
illustrations, photographs, and other information, the piece immediately 
grabs the reader’s interest. The design makes a connection between birds 
and their environment as well as between nature and the purpose of the 
organization. Creatures sit on, crawl around, and otherwise interact with 
the type. The interplay between text and image guides the structure of 
the design. The content of the annual report is presented in a way that is 
playful and informative at the same time. The designer makes great use of 
animal imagery and the text of the report to create an imaginative, intel-
ligent publication.
Metaphoric Concepts
The Greek philosopher Aristotle (384–322 BCE) wrote, “The greatest 
thing by far is to be a master of metaphor.” A metaphor is used to explain 
one thing in terms of another seemingly unre-
lated thing or idea, creating a special type of 
analogy. A typical analogy will suggest that two 
things are similar (a book is like a doorway to 
another world); a metaphor actually uses one 
thing to substitute for another very different 
thing (a book becomes the doorway itself). The 
use of metaphor helps to explain the meaning of 
the original thing or idea. It encourages you to 
look at something in a way you have never con-
sidered before. Think of the famous line from 
the poem “The Highwayman,” by Alfred Noyes 
(1880–1958): “The moon was a ghostly galleon 
tossed upon cloudy seas.” 
3.6 WOODY PIRTLE/PENTAGRAM.
Annual report interior layout/
spread for the National 
Audubon Society.
3.5 WOODY PIRTLE/PENTAGRAM. 
Annual report cover design for 
the National Audubon Society.

METAPHORIC CONCEPTS 
83
Just as poets use verbal metaphors, graphic designers use visual 
metaphors, substituting one thing for another based on a resemblance 
of form, function, or meaning. For example, in the Speakout on Polish 
poster design, Jacek Mrowczyk shows how a tiny worm is used as a meta-
phor for consumption (Figure 3.10). 
When one image is used in place of another, the new context of 
that image creates a different interpretation of its meaning. The publisher 
Chronicle Books uses a pair of eyeglasses to identify itself (Figure 3.8). 
The eyeglasses become a metaphor for reading-related adjectives such as 
clarity and vision.
Using visual metaphors can add an element of surprise or shock as 
the viewer grasps the connection and the unexpected image sparks inter-
est in the message. Metaphorical messages are relayed in a way that can be 
more nuanced and complex than messages that are straightforward and 
3.8 DANA SHIELDS. Logotype 
for Chronicle Books. A pair of 
glasses coupled with support-
ive type form a metaphoric 
concept for this publisher.
S T E P S  I N  T H E  D E S I G N  P R O C E S S
 Design Process for a Macbeth Poster
1 
 In Shakespeare’s play Macbeth, the classic theme (the contest between good and 
evil) has been given a twist in which evil is depicted as good, while good is ren-
dered as evil. A starting point for developing a design such as the poster shown in 
Figure 3.7 is to find keywords and paraphrases that boil it down but also help visual-
ize the subject. The concept of “duality” is one such keyword.
2
Duality can be visualized through contrasting elements such as black and white, 
positive and negative, top and bottom, and a split image. Here, verbal thinking 
becomes woven with visual imagery.
3 
 Literal images help, too. An angel and a devil are sketched out, suggesting the dual-
ity of good and evil. Yet, full images seem too literal. An angel’s wing and devil’s 
tail have more graphic power; they can be read as meaningful signs rather than as 
illustrated scenes. The idea of using the devil’s tail hanging above an angel’s wing 
coordinates nicely with Shakespeare’s concept, and the imagery reads as heaven and 
hell are being flipped.
4 
 Another factor in the design of the poster is that the director set the play’s perfor-
mance for October 25th—the same date as Russia’s October Revolution (according 
to the old-style Julian calendar). A heavy use of the color red along with minimalist 
graphics will connect it to this point in time.
5 
 The choice of a soft and rounded typeface is made to create visual unity between let-
terforms and images. Its playful exploration within the composition reveals another 
idea: the flip of the title Macbeth reinforces the connection to duality and to Russian 
letterforms that also flip.
6 
 The final design is tested out on a small cross section of the poster’s audience to 
determine whether the concept (its meaning and form) is being adequately con-
veyed. Feedback will help further refinements.
3.7 WORKSIGHT. Poster for 
Shakespeare’s play Macbeth.

84
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
3.9 HENRYK TOMASZEWSKI. 
Poster for an exhibit of Henry 
Moore sculptures.
3.10 KUBA SOWIN´SKI. Poster for 
an exhibition Dealing with 
Consumption.
SPEAKOUT: Polish Poster Design: A Conceptual Approach by Jacek Mrowczyk, 
cofounder and editor of the design quarterly 2+3D, Krakow, Poland (Figures 3.9 and 3.10)
 
 Poland is very much known for its posters, and among the most influential poster designers was 
Henryk Tomaszewski (1914–2005). A poster created for Henry Moore’s exhibition in 1959 is 
especially reflective of his approach (Figure 3.9). Tomaszewski’s design was simple in form and 
he expressed himself in an unassuming way. Using only cut paper and one solid color, Tomasze-
wski was able to reflect the natural spirit of Moore’s sculptures. Tomaszewski’s many pupils, young 
designers from all parts of the world, studied under his supervision at Warsaw’s Academy of Fine 
Arts. He became known as the father of the Polish poster school. 
 
 Today, Polish posters are no longer the independent medium they once were and have become part 
of larger identity projects. A young generation of designers is finding its way within this scene. Kuba 
Sowiński (born in 1973) has incorporated an approach of combining an intellectual understanding 
of the subject with contemporary typography and form. His poster “Dealing with Consumption” is 
an excellent example, created for an exhibition of work by fellow industrial designers (Figure 3.10). 
The poster was designed to coordinate with other formats and media (catalogue, invitation, adver-
tising, website, etc.), using a worm-like larva as motif to be used in all formats. 
 
 The larva is being used primarily as a metaphor for consumption, yet can be perceived as having 
the ability to transform into a butterfly. The interplay between the two meanings suggests futile 
consumption but also the hope for a better way for industrial designers to apply their talent. The 
typeface Dead History, designed by Scott Makela, compounds the effect of either having an end or 
a beginning.
 
 Masters such as Tomaszewski upheld the 
conceptual approach to design. Sowiński 
and many other young Polish designers 
continue the tradition of including con-
ceptual metaphor and formal richness in 
their work.

METAPHORIC CONCEPTS 
85
3.12 MARTIN WOODTLI. Card 
invitation for Logicaland. The 
juicer is a good metaphor to 
explain the world’s resource 
division. The image is potent 
because it is so unexpected. 
direct. Poets have long understood the power of metaphor in language, 
and graphic designers use that same power with both words and images. 
The cover for the latest edition of The History of Western Philosophy
by Bertrand Russell (first published in 1945), was revitalized through the 
use of a metaphor (Figure 3.11). The subject matter is quite dense, and 
designing a new cover made for a difficult project. Paul Sahre could have 
opted for a safe cover, using the reproduction of a Renaissance oil paint-
ing that spoke of history, academics, and Western civilization. Instead, he 
took a somewhat more daring approach, depicting Western philosophy as 
a lonely road, with a rich yet simple result.
See the Speakout by Martin Woodtli, where another simple image, 
a juicer, is used as a metaphor for the complex economical, political, and 
social systems of the world (Figure 3.12).
3.11 PAUL SAHRE. Cover design 
for The History of Western 
Philosophy using neutral type 
reversed to white on an equal-
ly neutral photograph by 
Jason Fulford. 
SPEAKOUT: Logicaland by Martin Woodtli, designer, Zurich, Switzerland (Figure 3.12)
 
 The invitation for Logicaland (Figure 3.12) announced a collaborative project—an online study for 
visualizing our world’s complex economical, political, and social systems. Logicaland tries to engage 
people in strategies of raising human 
sensibility and responsibility within the 
global networked society. I looked for 
an image that wasn’t a typical symbol 
for resources and social problems (like 
north and south or rich and poor). The 
juicer was a good metaphor for resource 
division and exploitation—the diodes 
represent game participants. I knew the 
symbolism wasn’t so easily understand-
able, but on the other hand, the card was 
for a specialized audience so I took it as 
an opportunity to do something unusual 
and specific.

86
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Special Applications of Metaphor in 
Design Communication
One way designers can express metaphor is by 
using one specific part of something to represent 
the whole (part-as-whole metaphor). For example, 
a human hand can be used to signify the entire 
body. The value for designers is that a part may 
simply have more graphic holding power for the 
viewer than a whole thing. 
Another way designers can express meta-
phor is by substituting one thing for another based 
on some generally understood association or con-
cept (general association metaphor). An example 
of this metaphor by general association is Wall 
Street, a street in lower Manhattan that is also used 
to refer to the entire American financial industry. 
Wall Street is not actually the entire industry, but 
it has come to be strongly associated with it. It is 
important to know your audience when using gen-
eral association metaphors because not all associa-
tions will be understood in all cultures. 
Tom Geismar uses a bit of both part-as-
whole and general association metaphors in the 
peace poster shown in Figure 3.13. The photo-
graph of a young person’s hand, palm facing for-
ward and nearly filling the space, offers friendship 
and peace. In this case, the hand represents all of 
humanity (part-as-whole), but the poster quickly 
shifts to a personal level, associating caring about 
the future (peace) with the hand-scrawled type at 
the bottom (not quite visible in Figure 3.13) that 
reads “My Daughter’s Hand” (general association). The use of this simple 
image as a metaphor made the poster stand out from other posters pre-
sented at the same event, which were predominantly images of death and 
destruction—ironic for posters about peace.
3.13 TOM GEISMAR. My 
Daughter’s Hand poster 
as part of a joint exhibition 
of American and Japanese 
peace posters.
In Practice: The life line of the palm is very evident 
in this photograph (Figure 3.14), which adds another 
layer of meaning to its interpretation. Can you identify 
the kind of metaphor it is expressing?

METAPHORIC CONCEPTS 
87
3.14 JOHN ARMSTRONG.
The montage of a jawbone 
with a jellybean set in place 
of a tooth suggests a story 
of tooth decay. 
3.15 MAX PITEGOFF. Shelf 
brackets with a drape 
of fabric instead of a shelf 
is aesthetically interesting, 
but useless.
3.16 TAMAR MEIR. Cinder-
block with plastic handles 
suggests futility.
3.18 WOODY PIRTLE/PENTAGRAM. 
Logo design for Fine Line 
Features, a film production 
company that was based in 
New York.
3.17 Clapboard mashes up 
with a plaster knife. Its mean-
ing becomes clear when the 
design problem—a television 
show about fixing up old 
houses—is identified.
The Montage Process 
A metaphoric concept, or a complex expression of a metaphor, can be 
created by piecing together disparate elements into a single image called 
a montage. Artists first created the word in the 1920s to better describe 
the seamless techniques that film and photography offered. Proponents 
included the artists Man Ray and John Heartfield (see Chapter 2), who 
used jarring juxtapositions to present surreal views of the world. 
A montage may look simple, but its meaning can be loaded with a 
surprising amount of intellectual depth. Designers search for images that 
don’t seem to belong together, but that have a meaningful link. This link 
provides the glue that will generate an unexpected composite with unique 
meaning.
In a set of montage experiments, created as part of a class exercise, 
students attempted to elicit a psychological response from the viewer 
(Figures 3.14, 3.15, and 3.16). We are confronted with a jellybean set in 
place of a tooth, bookshelf brackets holding draped fabric, and weak plas-
tic handles attached to a concrete block. Students used these creative jux-
tapositions in very compelling ways through which to tell stories. 
Take a moment to consider the montage process in reverse. In fact, 
the viewer must look at montage in this way to decipher the meaning. 
Figure 3.17 combines two separate images that fit together so seamlessly, 
you almost believe they go together. The meaning is unstable until a spe-
cific problem is identified. If the image is for a television show (clapboard, 
which identifies scenes in filming) about fixing up old houses (plaster 
knife), then the meaning becomes stabilized, but the audience must be 
able to make the connection themselves. 
You can use montage to create memorable logos. Woody Pirtle’s 
design for the film studio Fine Line Features (now defunct) combined the 
image of a filmmaker’s clapboard with the initial letterform of the com-
pany into a single composition (Figure 3.18). The clapboard calls to mind 
the craft of directing; the extra bold F feels solid, strong. Fusing the two 
elements resulted in a successful visual identity for the company. 
In Practice: A montage generally 
involves no more than two images—using 
more than two images tends to confuse the 
overall idea in a visual communication. 

88
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
The design concept for the Immigrant Theater Festival poster mon-
tages two related metaphors into an effective whole (Figure 3.19). Luba 
Lukova used a tree to represent the idea of culture and a tree limb, in the 
shape of a person, grafted onto the tree trunk to represent an immigrant. 
Together with the simple green coloring, they send a message that an 
immigrant can grow in a new country and shouldn’t be regarded as alien 
and separate from that culture. The simplicity of the poster image and its 
hand-drawn typeface add to the concept by bringing a human touch. 
Two images are also combined in the cover of a brochure for 
Mohawk Fine Papers, Inc. (Figure 3.20). The title, Speaking Volumes: The 
World of the Book, uses an intriguing montage of books and a globe stand, 
making a compact combination that is itself a unique symbol. Montages 
have the capacity to be very simple, yet extremely rich in meaning. 
Successful montages are difficult to create. The designer will need 
to experiment with many combinations until the fusion of images sends a 
greater message than the parts would individually. Two separate designs 
by Adam Palmer for The New York Times use the montage technique to 
supplement editorials (Figures 3.21 and 3.22). One suggests globalization 
and interconnectivity, and the other, puzzling U.S. foreign policies. The 
combinations in each montage work well because they capture an intel-
lectual idea and trick the eye into thinking they belong together. 
The Speakout by Xu Guiying describes how design elements them-
selves—rhythmic flow and implied meaning—can be montaged to create 
3.20 MICHAEL BIERUT / PENTAGRAM.
Speaking Volumes, the third 
issue in Mohawk Fine Papers 
promotional brochure series 
“Rethinking Design.” 
3.19 LUBA LUKOVA. Poster for the 
Immigrant Theater Festival in 
which an immigrant is symbolically 
grafted onto a new culture.
3.22 ADAM PALMER. Flag/maze, 
op-ed section of The New 
York Times.
3.21 ADAM PALMER. Circuit/
globalization, op-ed section 
of The New York Times.

METAPHORIC CONCEPTS 
89
harmonious solutions. In the two examples he provides, the designs are 
meant to include the audience in the creative process, allowing them 
to complete the picture and connect the dots of the idea. For a chordo-
phone concert (harps, lyres, and zithers), the color and bleeding form 
seem to have the same soft and high-pitched reverberation as the instru-
ments themselves (Figure 3.23). And for an advertisement advocating a 
shouldering of environmental concerns with economic development, the 
phrase Live Harmoniously is expressed in the biomorphic drawing of a 
person’s face (Figure 3.24).
SPEAKOUT: Cadence and Subaudition by Xu Guiying, instructor of graphic design, 
Dahongying Vocational Technical College, Zhejiang, China (Figures 3.23 and 3.24)
 
 When I teach, I often ask my students, “Why does a design look ugly, or chaotic, or vulgar?” I 
will then explain that the most important reason involves cadence—a balanced and rhythmic flow. 
Graphic design is a kind of art, and just like all good artworks there is a common characteristic—all 
have a beautiful cadence. I encourage students to look, and to listen, to other fields within the arts 
when they are searching for ideas; they should consider how a work moves from fast to slow, from 
close to sparse, from big to small, from noisy to quiet. It is a way to both see and feel design. 
 
 Chinese designers and artists alike also use another angle to solve problems. This involves what’s 
called subaudition. With subaudition, an understanding is supplied, but not necessarily expressed. 
It is a reading between the lines, and you find it especially in traditional Chinese painting. In graphic 
design, a solution might not be so clear or concrete, but when subaudition is included as an aspect 
of the work, one is almost forced to think. To me, cadence and subaudition are a perfect comple-
ment to each other and a beautiful way to work as a graphic designer.
3.23 LIU JUNLIANG. Poster for 
a chordophone concert in 
which a blurred image of the 
musicians reverberates.
3.24 LIU JUNLIANG. Live 
Harmoniously. Advertisement 
advocating a shouldering of 
environmental concerns with 
economic development.

90
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Analytic Concepts
Just as metaphoric concepts rely on an audience recognizing 
analogies that add meaning in a design, analytic concepts 
rely on the audience recognizing how treatments and rela-
tionships affect meaning. The simple act of juxtaposing one 
thing with another (to point out similarities, dissimilarities, 
and relationships) is an analytic process that builds mean-
ing. When a designer decides to develop a concept through 
an analytic approach, he or she places a priority on the act 
of “referring to” something instead of on the creation of new 
meaning through analogy, as image-based metaphors do. 
Analytic concepts tend to convey information in a way that 
is more easily digested by an audience. They are less open-
ended and more direct than metaphoric concepts.
Form, line, color, and texture play a considerable role 
in the development of analytic concepts as do abstract prop-
erties such as structure and alignment, pacing and flow. They 
all become a part of an analytic language that an audience is 
able to perceive and interpret.
Perhaps the most direct application of an analytic 
concept is in information design. The creation of charts, 
graphs, and maps requires the analysis and structural orga-
nization of data. The newspaper chart titled In Perspective: 
America’s Conflicts represents a system of interrelationships 
between technology, cost, and casualties of war (Figure 
3.25). The visualization makes it easy to see that as tech-
nology advances, casualties and cost fall. The overlay of 
distinctive dots, lines, bars, typography, and color-coding has a very 
rational structure and makes this analytic concept especially effective. 
The information and precise visual language work hand in hand.
Analytic concepts can take many forms. As we showed with Le Cor-
busier (Figure 3.1), a shape derived from nature can be used as inspira-
tion to create a new design; an existing construction can be reused for a 
new and different context; a series of alignments can bring consistency 
and rationality to a subject. In the project titled Per Diem, by Wes Kull, 
3.26 WES KULL. Per Diem
(student project) pairing 
the collected data of 
personal living expenses 
from the summer and from 
the fall semester.
3.25 MATTHEW ERICSON, FARHANA
HOSSAIN. Chart design for The 
New York Times. 

ANALYTIC CONCEPTS 
91
the main image, a paper receipt, is used as a structural element to hold 
data (Figure 3.26). The term per diem usually refers to a daily allowance 
for living expenses while traveling. The student juxtaposed his summer 
receipts for travel, food, movie tickets, and so on with the same expenses 
for a semester at college. The shape morphs and bends while it compares 
and contrasts information. 
For a Columbia School of Architecture poster, Willi Kunz used 
an analytic concept to convey informational relationships in a promo-
tional way (Figure 3.27). The poster announces a program on architec-
ture, urban planning, and preservation that takes place in two cities, New 
York and Paris. The program itself is about comparing the two cities, so 
the poster’s comparison of two street grids is an effective and meaningful 
visual. Juxtaposing grid-like New York City streets with organically wind-
ing Parisian streets is something the students would actually study. The 
circular arrows, city names, and oceanlike shape amplify the concept. The 
typeface and alignments speak an architectural language that coordinates 
with the subject and focus. 
Analytic concepts rely on individual parts all working together 
toward the success of the whole piece. In fact, the parts are subordinate 
to the whole (see the section on gestalt in Chapter 9). Metaphoric con-
cepts have these same requirements, and in those treatments, the parts 
are subordinate to the basic idea being translated. As discussed, the cover 
of a brochure for Mohawk Fine Papers (Figure 3.21) uses the books inside 
a globe stand to express the dominant idea in the design that books are 
global. 
The logo for The New York City Alliance Against Sexual Assault, 
created by Worksight, uses a series of lines to analytically represent this 
nonprofit group (Figure 3.28). The reach of the alliance—to hospitals, 
clinics, and help centers—is translated as a solid circle with radiating lines 
that are focused and interconnected, just as the organization is. The goal, 
preventing sexual violence and limiting its destabilizing effects, is further 
visualized through collateral material like the brochure shown. The spirit 
of the alliance’s identity is reinforced by the weaving of symbol, photo, 
line, and text together into a unified composition. 
3.28 WORKSIGHT. Visual identity 
for the New York City Alliance 
Against Sexual Assault.
3.27 WILLI KUNZ. Poster for a 
two-city program of Columbia 
University’s Graduate School 
of Architecture Planning and 
Preservation.
The idea becomes a machine that makes the art.
—Sol LeWitt, from “Paragraphs on Conceptual Art,” 
Artforum (June 1967) 

92
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Websites are inclined to rely on analytic approaches because their 
nature is more navigational than interpretative. We browse through sec-
tions by clicking on links, and this action becomes a driving force. For 
NASA.gov, an analytic concept is very appropriate (Figure 3.29). The 
design’s treatment reflects the subject matter of the site: technology, 
observations, and verifiable facts. Metaphoric interpretations would have 
no place in this design. The photographs and illustrations are examples 
of the wonder of space exploration, but they are deliberately positioned 
within an orderly structure. This approach reflects the site’s personality—
organized and controlled—without being dull.
The analytic approach is also exhibited in the work of multispe-
cialists like John Maeda. A page from a promotional brochure montages 
computer programming with his artistic vision to create a fresh message 
suggesting that as design evolves, its partners will include programmers, 
poets, and fine artists (Figures 3.30 and 3.31).
Meta Concepts
When a design concept refers to itself or to an audience that works within 
the genre, we can call it a meta concept. These concepts have a kind of 
double coding to them. They are created to satisfy a design problem, but 
they have an additional layer, which has an appeal to fellow designers—or, 
3.29 NASA. Website for the 
National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration (NASA) 
that uses an analytic approach 
in its design.
3.30 & 3.31 JOHN MAEDA. 
Pages from a paper promotion 
for Gilbert Paper showing how 
the boundaries of printing can 
be pushed when using their 
uncoated paper stock.

META CONCEPTS 
93
at the very least, to specific audiences. In other words, a meta con-
cept offers a visual conversation about the communication itself.
A meta concept is the driving force behind the design of a 
poster promoting the School of Visual Arts (SVA) by James Vic-
tore (Figure 3.32). The posters are intended to be pasted onto 
subway walls, but arrive “pre-graffitied,” celebrating the public, 
and sometimes illegal, act of self-expression. Graffiti tagging is 
particularly popular in big cities, and its use in the poster targets a 
young audience, an audience of prospective SVA students. 
On another level, the poster diffuses the advertising aspect 
of promotions like these by making fun of itself. It encourages par-
ticipants to add their own graffiti. The more handwritten quotes 
and drawings added to it, the better—a wiki-poster, in effect. Any 
additional marks made on it make the case that the school encour-
ages self-expression. 
John Bielenberg, using the pseudonym Virtual Telemetrix, 
Inc. (VT), used meta concept in a project created as a series called 
Stuff (Figures 3.33 and 3.34). Here, both the practice of graphic 
design and corporate America are directly satirized. Stuff pokes 
fun at annual reports and other communication vehicles and, in 
so doing, questions the role of the designer. The meta aspect of the 
piece is the acknowledgment that graphic designers produce a lot 
of stuff, most probably unnecessary stuff. 
3.33 JOHN BIELENBERG. 
The packaging for Virtual 
Telemetrix’s Stuff.
3.34 JOHN BIELENBERG. Typo-
graphic effect when one of the 
fanned booklets in the Stuff 
series is spread open (reads 
“Think Design”).
3.32 JAMES VICTORE (DESIGNER); 
SILAS RHODES (CREATIVE DIRECTOR). 
Poster, complete with its own 
graffiti, for the School of 
Visual Arts.
View a Closer Look for the SVA poster on myartslab.com

94
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Shawn Wolfe’s Beatkit advertises a nonsense product that has no 
function and doesn’t even really exist (Figure 3.35). His Remover Installer 
does, however, do its job of slowing down the viewers long enough to 
understand that they’ve become part of the anti-branding shenanigan 
within a culture gone mad with consumerism. According to Shawn Wolfe, 
the campaign was meant “to harvest eyeballs long enough to force the 
otherwise complacent viewer to look closely and ask themselves…Is 
there anything there?” 
Just as with VT, Beatkit is a meta concept directed at the perceived 
ills of advertising and design. Both projects require the designer to hover 
above in observation mode. The goal is not to trick or berate, but to 
sharpen the senses of both the designer and general public. In the words 
of Shawn Wolfe, “a contemplative pause seems sorely lacking with many 
advertising messages. We allow them to just wash over us.”
For the cover of a catalog for Williams College Museum of Art, 
Barbara Glauber used a meta concept to present an exhibition titled Beau-
tiful Suffering (Figure 3.36). In fact, this work is a portrayal of extremely 
troubling images of pain, torture, and death. But the repeated presenta-
tion of such images in the media begins to transform them into accep-
tance and reduces their impact. The catalog’s cover pictures a newspaper 
article with one of these disturbing images being held by someone (we see 
the viewer’s thumb). What brings this cover into meta territory is that the 
thumb on the frame’s edge is in the exact position that the viewer’s thumb 
would be in while holding the catalog. The 
viewer is forced to observe his or her own 
participation in this disturbing situation.
3.36 BARBARA GLAUBER. 
Catalog cover for the exhibit 
Beautiful Suffering, adding 
a meta layer of self-awareness 
to the design by including 
a viewer’s thumb.
3.35 SHAWN WOLFE, BEATKIT. 
Advertisement parody for 
a purposeless product called 
the Remover Installer.

APPLYING CONCEPTUAL APPROACHES 
95
Applying Conceptual Approaches
For effective verbal communication, we use language, including meta-
phors and other figures of speech, but we also use hand and facial gestures 
and a varying tone of voice. Similarly, a design might use a layering of 
conceptual approaches to accomplish effective communication, especially 
when design problems require complex solutions.
Many of the design examples shown in this chapter have a multi-
layered conceptual approach. The cover design for The History of Western 
Philosophy is, on the surface, a metaphorically based concept in the way 
it is presented. Its disjointed combination of Western philosophy with 
the image of a winding road sets up a metaphor that begs for interpreta-
tion (Figure 3.11). The cover’s austere treatment—its empty road, neu-
tral type, and basic color—conveys an analytic approach. Without the 
metaphoric interpretation, the cover reads simply in a no-nonsense way. 
Both approaches operate at the same time. But what makes this layering 
so accomplished is that the two concepts support each other in a kind of 
endless, pure, but lonely way.
A cover design for Joris-Karl Huysmans’s book Against Nature orders 
the layering another way (Figure 3.37). In this case, student designer Nick 
Wilton used an analytic approach, focusing on the book’s time period (it 
was published in 1884). He centered the elements and made the axis sym-
metrical. The hand-script font is also consistent with the concept of look-
ing to the past (looks as if made with a quill pen). From a branding point 
of view, the orange petals reflect the orange band for which Penguin’s 
soft-cover book series is so well known. The only reference to a metaphor 
seems to be in the fact that the flower represents a general association 
with nature itself. 
But on closer examination, the full metaphoric concept becomes 
apparent. The flower transforms into something surreal; the ordinary 
becomes strange. The flower is created entirely out of maggots, a meta-
phor of decay. This metaphor perfectly characterizes the principal figure 
in the book, des Esseintes, an eccentric and depraved lover of beauty who 
is bored with the excesses of his Parisian lifestyle and obsessed with exotic 
flowers and perfumes.
3.37 NICK WILTON. Proposed 
book cover (student project), 
illustrated with a flower made 
entirely out of maggots.
In Practice: Using imagery too literally limits a 
design. Designers can communicate more powerfully 
through symbols and metaphors.

96
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
The overlaying and multiplying of concepts brings added richness 
and depth to posters, packages, book jackets, and logos. A heavy meta-
phoric approach might be best suited for a project that encourages inter-
pretation. An analytic approach—architectural in its construction—might 
be better suited for something that is focused on relaying data and factual 
information. And a meta concept might predominate when the designer 
feels the audience is able to hover above a solution and make meaningful 
observations. The three conceptual approaches are even more discernible 
when presented next to one another (Figure 3.38). 
Concepts also depend on the person doing the designing. The rich-
ness of personal insight and experience adds to the creative process. In 
the Speakout by Professor Saki Mafundikwa, he explains how the students 
of his school are encouraged to find inspiration by first looking inward 
rather than by mimicking international examples. We see an example of 
this approach in the poster for a Zimbabwe film festival, where cultural 
elements (hair and dress) are integral to the solution (Figure 3.39). 
3.38 A comparison of three 
conceptual directions that 
designs might take.
Metaphoric concepts rely on the reader 
understanding the significance of images, 
especially when one image is used to 
represent another, in this case, a televi-
sion set for a chair.
Metaphoric Concept
Analytic Concept
Meta Concept
Analytic concepts rely on the reader 
recognizing treatments and relationships. 
The use of form, line, color, and texture 
have a considerable role in how the 
information is translated.
Meta concepts rely on the reader under-
standing the self-mocking aspect of the 
design, as in this poster’s double coding, 
which solves the problem, but also points 
to itself and says “Look at me, I come 
pre-graffitied.”
Designers who design like machines 
will be replaced by machines. It is 
not the digital but the intuitive, 
not the measurable but the poetic, 
not the mechanical but the sensual, 
which humanize design. 
—Katherine McCoy

APPLYING CONCEPTUAL APPROACHES 
97
SPEAKOUT: Cast Down Your Buckets Where You Are by Saki Mafundikwa, 
founder/director, Zimbabwe Institute of Vigital Arts (ZIVA), Harare, Zimbabwe (Figure 3.39)
 
 Graphic design is problem solving; therefore, defining any graphic design concept is finding the 
perfect solution to the problem presented. Getting this through to my students is no easy task—I 
encourage much research and sketching—they prefer jumping on the computer and “playing 
around until something comes up.” Graphic design is a very new area of study in my country and 
most designers are more used to aping concepts from the West than coming up with solutions that 
are fresh and their own. As a result, one of the main requirements for most projects I give is that it 
be African in general and Zimbabwean in particular. “Cast your buckets where you are,” I admonish 
them, citing Booker T. Washington’s famous International Exposition speech in Atlanta of 1895.
 
 This is no easy task since there are no precedents—as is the case in the West where one can claim 
inspiration by masters like Paul Rand and Armin Hofmann or David Carson and Neville Brody. 
Instead, I encourage them to look at nature since we are so blessed with fantastic flora, fauna, and a 
breathtaking landscape, making Zimbabwe one of the most beautiful countries on the continent.
 
 It’s a double-edged sword since most parents would rather their kids become “good” designers 
(meaning their work should look as Western as possible) so that they can find work more easily, 
rather than have a portfolio full of experimen-
tal stuff. Our task is to strike a balance, thereby 
fostering a thirst for experimentation in our 
students. We are further handicapped by the 
fact that ours is only a two-year program, which 
doesn’t give the students the time needed to 
implement the theory learned into practice, but 
we do the best we can.
3.39 TATENDA GOMO (2ND AND
FINAL YEAR, ZIMBABWE INSTITUTE OF
VIGITAL ARTS, HARARE, ZIMBABWE, 
AFRIKA) CLASS: GRAPHIC DESIGN 2. 
Film festival poster designed 
at the request of the annual 
International Images Film 
Festival for Women, a local 
initiative by Zimbabwean 
women film makers.

98
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
SPEAKOUT: Translating Concepts into Forms by Inyoung Choi, Ph.D., Department of 
Graphic and Package Design, Hanyang University, South Korea (Figures 3.40 and 3.41)
 
 During my teaching experience in the United States and Korea, I have found that the greatest chal-
lenge for me as an instructor is to teach design students not only how to get ideas and develop 
concepts, but also how to translate them into forms. I believe this is a common challenge for 
students and instructors from all over the world. 
  
 A unique concept, based on an everyday pool of ideas, can be the most effective action to work 
from. My teaching method is very simple. First, understand the client, their target audience, the 
society and culture they are part of, and their ethics. Second, develop an analytical strategy based 
on extensive research and approach it with a quantitative methodology. Third, translate the infor-
mation into visual form with the understanding that design styles of the past might affect how the 
content is perceived. 
  
 In a way, everyone is a designer because we all have been taught to understand visual communica-
tions. But trained graphic designers can help people to understand even better, and this is what 
makes our field so important. 
3.41 PROFESSOR INYOUNG CHOI. 
Poster for the 250th Anniver-
sary Mozart Concert in Seoul, 
Korea. The paired profiles 
of Mozart and conductor 
Nikolaus Harnoncourt reflect 
a similar pairing of Western 
and Korean typefaces. 
3.40 SANGHOON PARK, YOUNG
SUP SHIN, HYUNG JIN KIM. Senior 
branding project for Orange-
Love, a fictitious company that 
helps shy, young adults find 
romantic relationships.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
99
In the same spirit, the Speakout by Professor Inyoung Choi explains 
how important it is for design students to understand their own society 
and culture when developing ideas. Two examples are noted: Figure 3.41 
reflects societal constraints associated with finding romantic relation-
ships. The design portrays a person fearlessly holding up a sign in public, 
announcing her own search. In Figure 3.42, Choi pairs the profile of 
Mozart with that of a conductor, while also pairing Western and Korean 
typefaces.
In Perspective
Imagine a contemporary poster design appearing in 1890. How would the 
concept be perceived? Expecting a distant audience to connect the con-
ceptual dots would be as hopeless as asking a fifteenth-century painter to 
create an abstract painting. Concepts are created and understood through 
the context of time and cultural exposure. They fold into our language 
and psyche just as everyday words do. The words “daybreak” and “rain-
bow” are two such metaphors: a day “breaks” over the horizon and rain 
“bows” into a colorful shape. These mental constructions form the basis 
for graphic designers’ concepts. 
Designers also build on one another’s work. The new metaphors and 
structures that unify into concepts are created by teachers, students, and 
professionals alike. Paul Sahre’s road metaphor (Figure 3.11), Luba Luko-
va’s immigrant montage (Figure 3.19), Willi Kunz’s grid analogy (Figure 
3.27), and James Victore’s pre-graffitied meta concept (Figure 3.32) are 
all examples of how designers have found a way to speak elegantly and 
emphatically.
It is no small thing for a designer to keep up with all the necessary 
computer and technical skills, especially in the rapidly changing fields of 
Web design and video. However, a designer who has those skills, but who 
can also think and create, is valuable beyond measure.
The next chapter explains how to research a project. Research 
defines your audience and, as a result, answers the question of whether to 
use a metaphoric, analytic, or meta concept. The design process is made 
easier when you know who to talk to, what to say, and where to go with 
your work.
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (The Montage Process): Make two lists of random objects. 
Think first with images in mind and then with a kind of free association 
that ranges from residential to industrial, local to global. When you have 
reached twenty items for each list, begin pairing one image from each list 
together in Surrealistic fashion. Choose five of the most interesting mon-
tages and present them to the class.
Color: black and white. Size: centered on an 8.5" × 11" page.
Analogy (p. 76)
Analytic concept (p. 90)
Form (p. 76)
Graphic design concept
(p. 75)
Idea (p. 75)
Meta concept (p. 92)
Metaphor (p. 82)
Metaphoric concept (p. 87)
Montage (p. 87)
K E Y  T E R M S
  Creativity—like human life 
itself—begins in darkness.
—Julia Cameron
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

100
CHAPTER 3: GRAPHIC DESIGN CONCEPTS
Exercise 2 (Editorial Montaging): Create an image-based montage on 
one of the following editorial subjects: The Other Black Gold (making 
synthetic fuels from American coal); Mission Creep (using soldiers to 
perform traditional Peace Corp functions); Doctors as Guinea Pigs (self-
experimentation with new drugs by doctors); Swimming without a Suit; 
Speed Shrinking (psychologists who offer three-minute sessions); Dial-a-
Driver (service that delivers inebriated people and their cars home). Visu-
alize the issue, but also allow the irony and/or humor to come through.
If assigned to work during class time, break into groups of three. 
Color: black and white. Size: centered on an 8.5" × 11" page.
Project 1 (Three-Dimensional Montage): Physically assemble two three-
dimensional objects into one montaged creation. The objects should share 
an associative link, yet contrast with each other in a kind of conflict. Create 
something that evokes a response from the viewer. Find combinations 
and blends that initiate a psychological response rather than a perceptual 
one. Color, shape, or any other aesthetic characteristic should factor into 
the solution only if they help elicit a conceptual response.
No restriction on size. Time frame: one week. Finish neatly presented (on 
a base if necessary).
Project 2 (Word and Image): Find five words that have multiple defini-
tions. For example, the word match can mean a sporting contest, the unit-
ing of a couple, or a stick of sulfur (researching these words in the library 
or on the Internet will help). Choose one word from your list and find ten 
to fifteen visuals that exemplify or support the various definitions. Now 
combine and pair images into eight sets. The objective is to form new 
associations that comment on or alter the most common meaning of the 
word. This formula works best when imagery is allowed to dominate over 
type, so make sure the typography is fairly neutral. 
PHASE 1: Full-scale ideas in black and white (no pencil sketches). All 
imagery and type must be represented as close to final art as possible. 
Please bring your original word list, your ten to fifteen research examples, 
and your eight sets to class.
PHASE 2: Three final examples (8" × 10"), full color, mounted on board, 
flush on all edges (no border).
—Provided by Anita Merk, professor, Pratt Institute
Things to Consider: A good way to approach this problem is to consider a social cause. 
Your two objects can be shocking and surreal, but they must also connect in the viewer’s mind 
and add up to some kind of solution. 
Things to Consider: Finding a juicy word with many interpretations will help immeasurably. 
Be sure your final montaged visualizations are beautiful. They can be thought of as mini signs, 
yet have the ability to suggest complex narratives. 
Project 1 (TOP) CARLO
FERNANDINI. Montage sculp-
ture that protests Peru’s 
Shining Path terrorist group 
by raising awareness of 
the 30,000 civilians killed 
during the 1990s.
(BOTTOM) KAREN SAWICKI. 
Montage project through 
which the artist makes 
a montage statement 
about caffeine.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
101
Project 3 (Sequencing a Story): Within a series of eight frames, tell a 
story that has meaning for you. Include at least two scenes, and by the last 
frame, give your story an ending or resolve it in some way. Consider time 
and sequence in building the story. 
Full color. Size: make your presentation large enough to be readable (4" × 
6" horizontal snapshots). 
PHASE 1: Rough sketches
PHASE 2: Finished presentation
Project 4 (Book Cover Design): Choose a book you have read whose 
cover does not represent it very well. What did you love or find interest-
ing about the book? Redesign the cover using the most significant meta-
phor that represents the content. Consider the metaphor in conjunction 
with the title, subtitle (if any), and author’s (or authors’) name(s). Do not 
include miscellaneous information you may find on the cover, for exam-
ple, review quotes or marketing information. 
Full color. Size: same as preexisting jacket
Project 5 (Information Design): Assemble and present data on one of 
your activities. You can choose from among significant activities or from 
those that are more routine. Cross-reference the information using loca-
tion, frequency, and so on. Color, symbols, and type should be the only 
elements in this information-oriented piece: no photographs unless used 
as a graphic background. Keep in mind that the way you organize your 
data should add to the information being conveyed in some insightful way. 
Full color. Size: designer’s choice.
Things to Consider: Researching silent films will help you to understand the techniques they 
used to counter the absence of sound.
Things to Consider: Consider how even the most ordinary information can be presented 
in exciting and inventive ways that help draw viewers in and keep them there.
Things to Consider: A book cover is a mini poster. It needs to make a strong visual 
statement. Consider how an image will create dominance within the composition, 
especially on a shelf next to other books.
Project 4 CRAIG TITUS. 
Sketches and final design 
for this self-initiated student 
project to create a cover 
design for the book 1984.
Project 5 ALICE LEE. Poster detailing 
recipe for dreaming good dreams. 
Reading from bottom to top, the 
piece mimics how brain activity 
transitions from a conscious to an 
unconscious state.
Review additional Exercises and Projects on myartslab.com

102
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Describe how a graphic designer gathers the necessary 
information about a project and what information might 
appear in a client’s design brief.
t 
 Differentiate between types of virtual and actual research 
that contribute to a successful design project.
t 
 Discuss the strategies graphic designers use to define 
the problem to be solved in a project.
t 
 Give an example of each of the techniques used to record 
research in visual formats.
t 
 Outline the steps of the research process that lead to 
creating a graphic design.
t
Exercises and Projects
Gather information about a client and put it in a presentation 
format; research the Swiss International Style and select a company 
it could be used with; map a day in your life; chart information 
based on a survey.
103
Researching a Graphic 
Design Project
As you ask just the right questions or explore the right avenues, you reach 
a point where your creativity and experience can shine. As you gain more 
experience, your research skills will develop in the same way as your tech-
nical and creative skills do. 
Imagine designing without any research at all. You have just 
been assigned a project, and the design is, of course, due yesterday. The 
only information you have right now is the name of the client, the kind 
of material the client wishes to produce, and whatever you already know 
about the subject (perhaps close to nothing). Chances are good you are 
totally lost, missing vital information while trying to assemble a design 
that you soon realize has no sense of direction and looks bland and cliché. 
If you have developed your research skills, you will be more 
prepared to handle such last-minute projects. You won’t find yourself 
designing “blind” with no resources and background information. As you 
develop your design skills, you will quickly come to realize that strong 
Opposite page: SEAN DANA.
Page spread (detail) from 
Lost Berlin (full image, 
see Figure 4.7).
4
The idea of language, and story-
telling, and the expression of 
culture was something that always 
fascinated me. —Somi Kim
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
esearch is a crucial and potentially engaging step in the design 
process. Inexperienced designers envision themselves sitting among piles 
of reference books, frantically flipping pages in a painful waste of time 
when all they really want to do is to start designing. 
The irony is that we are designing when we research. The wheels in 
our brain start turning the minute we begin questioning and collecting.
R

104
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
research has a significant impact on all phases of the design process, from 
creating confident sketches to developing a full concept to making sophis-
ticated revisions to presenting final designs.
Gathering Information 
You have just been handed a design assignment, and you know very little 
about its subject. Going online or peeking into a dictionary may jumpstart 
your research process. However, as you find ways to push your research 
further, you begin to realize that the more you know, the more prepared 
you are to create sketches and solve the design problem. This learning 
curve for each new project makes graphic design an interesting field and 
makes you a more knowledgeable person. 
The Client, Subject, and Audience
Becoming familiar with a client, the project’s subject, and the target audi-
ence should be considered the front-end work of a design project. This 
background information also includes the company’s marketing strategy 
and overall mission, the product or service they want to promote, and 
the competition they have (competing products, services, and strate-
gies). Much like an actor studies a character’s behaviors and experiences, 
a designer needs to investigate the client, subject, and audience. In effect, 
designers portray their clients. Their work is seen by the audience as 
something the client created. Convincing the audience that the message 
comes directly from the client is part of the designer’s job.
This responsibility leaves you with a challenge of speaking in the 
voice of each client. Therefore, you need to understand your client as well 
as possible, and researching the client’s history is a good place to start. You 
will want to ask questions that unearth your client’s intrinsic qualities, for 
example, “What are your most important goals?” and “How do you want 
to be perceived by your target audience?” It’s possible that the principals 
of the company have never seriously considered these questions, but get-
ting the answers is an essential part of the designer’s job. Think of yourself 
as a detective, figuring out just what questions to ask to find the answer to 
the mystery. Working closely with the client to uncover the answers will 
tell you as much about the client as the answers do. And it will help the 
client to guide the direction of the project, to rethink what is really needed 
from your design. If this first step is done well, it greatly improves the suc-
cess of the relationship and the final product.
Conducting this research with a new client is particularly impor-
tant. Offered a project to design a poster for a Jewish Film Festival, Lucille 
Tenazas had to begin by doing significant research because she was unfa-
miliar with both her client, the Smith Rafael Film Center, and the sub-
ject matter, Jewish film. Through attending meetings, trolling bookstores 
and the library, asking friends for articles about Jewish culture, and find-
4.1 Fuller Brush Man envelope 
opener leave-behind—another 
way the Fuller Brush salesmen 
left an impression.
  Research is to see what everybody 
else has seen, and to think what 
nobody else has thought. 
—Albert Szent-Györgyi
EXCERPT: From Contempt 
of Consumer: It’s a Real 
Crime by Seth Godin
The Fuller Brush Man knew what 
he was doing. In the old days, 
Fuller’s door-to-door salesmen 
learned a basic rule: After you ring 
the bell, take a step or two back-
ward. That way, the woman of the 
house won’t feel intimidated open-
ing the door for a stranger.
It wasn’t just a tactic, though. 
It was a strategy—one designed to 
help the company grow by treating 
people with respect, in contrast 
to rival salesmen who were taught 
to jam a foot in the door. (Figure 
4.1 shows another strategy the 
company used.)

GATHERING INFORMATION
105
ing visual references on the subject, she developed a basic knowledge of 
Jewish culture and the way it has been portrayed through film historically.
This project required a new design in honor of the film center’s 
twenty-fifth anniversary. As Tenazas explained, “The client pulled previ-
ous posters from their archive, mostly clichéd images of film reels and the 
like—not very unique to the center. The archive was a valuable resource, 
but only because we could agree that the previous posters didn’t do a very 
good job in advertising ground-breaking films. Many used generic meta-
phors that didn’t match the sophistication of the films they were adver-
tising.” Tenazas decided to use black and white film stills suggesting the 
historical nature of the event, unconventional typography to give new 
energy, and a distinctive color to capture the spirit of the event (Figure 
4.2). When the series continued the following year, the client repositioned 
the poster’s direction to appeal to a younger audience. The integration of 
youthful images, color, and a more playful layout became the focus of the 
design (Figure 4.3). Each successive poster was equally powerful, with the 
intention, knowledge, and creativity behind them and with the blessings 
of the client.
Reviewing the previous design work of a new client will clarify 
where they’ve been and where they might go in the next stage of their 
communications. This type of research is equally valuable when done also 
on the client’s competition. Questions might include “What advantages 
do you have over your competition? What designs have your competi-
tors used that you like? What are the biggest challenges presented by your 
competition and how do you hope to confront those challenges?” Such 
questions help target goals, identify untapped directions, and help you to 
understand your client better. You need to know their business nearly as 
well as they do.
Asking the Right Questions
There are times when you will need to gather basic information yourself, 
for example, when a client has no prewritten brief to submit to you. Espe-
cially at these times, asking the right questions becomes an essential part 
of the design process. The classic “five w” questions (who, what, when, 
where, and why) help start the process:
t 
 Who is the company you’re creating the design for?
t 
 What does your client do better than anyone else?
t 
 When is the project due?
t 
 Where is the design appearing (newspaper, website, billboard)?
t 
 Why is the message being conveyed to an audience? 
Keeping a journal is a great method to record the answers to 
these questions and to note other useful information (see the Speakout 
by Michele Washington on page 107). You can add thumbnail sketches 
4.2 (above) and 4.3 (below)
LUCILLE TENAZAS. San Francisco 
Jewish Film Festival posters for 
the California Film Institute’s 
Smith Rafael Film Center. 

106
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
alongside your notes, which help to jumpstart the form your ideas will 
eventually take. You can easily add notes and ideas to your journal as they 
occur to you. A journal also becomes a very good record of your thought 
process, which you can use as reference for later projects.
In the research for the Hell’s Kitchen restaurant logo, designers 
Alexander Gelman and David Hearty spent time in the local library hunt-
ing for historical material on this Manhattan neighborhood and found 
information that proved vital to their project. They decided to embrace 
the restaurant’s location in a neighborhood with a troubled history and 
significant criminal element. The only problem, however, was that the 
words “Hell’s Kitchen” seemed a bit too off-putting, especially for a res-
taurant so close to the theater and tourist districts.
Gelman and Hearty found an idea in the image of tally marks—the 
kind that referenced the marks that incarcerated people often make to 
track their time served. Within that context, they constructed the let-
ters “HK” (Figures 4.4 and 4.5). The design resolved the naming issue, 
“HK” sounding more palatable than “Hell’s Kitchen,” and it also created 
a memorable and creative mark, something that would lend itself well to 
the restaurant’s menus and even the interior furnishings.
Preparing the Design Brief
For larger projects, the client usually supplies a design brief, detailing the 
project’s most important data. The brief helps to establish trust between 
the client and designer by confirming the project and enumerating all the 
relevant details. A design brief includes the following information: 
t 
 Company Profile—A synopsis of the company’s history, including 
what the organization does, for how long, with how many employ-
ees, and the specific segment of a market they dominate.
t 
 Design Objectives—Details about the design’s objectives such as 
to generate sales, increase subscribers, gain visibility, or encourage 
participation. Clear and simple written objectives help the designer 
achieve the desired results.
t 
 Target Audience—A list of first-, second-, and third-level audiences 
that also indicates whether the company wants to shore up their 
existing customer base or appeal to a new base. Demographics such 
as figures on age, sex, income, occupation, and location can help.
t 
 Main Competitors—A description comparing the strengths and 
weaknesses of the product or service with any relevant competition 
the client identifies.
t 
 Product or Service Details—A list detailing the competitive advan-
tages of the product or service. For example, for an event, the list 
might include the easy access or the minimal ticket cost; for packag-
ing, it might mention how easy the item is to open.
4.4 ALEXANDER GELMAN AND
DAVID HEARTY. Logo identity for 
Hell’s Kitchen restaurant (HK), 
applied to the business’s  
outdoor awning.
4.5 ALEXANDER GELMAN AND
DAVID HEARTY. The HK logo in 
animated form.

GATHERING INFORMATION
107
t 
 Market or Legal Requirements—Details about size or proportion, 
printing processes, packaging specifications, or website formats. For 
example, food packaging might be required to display information 
on quantity, weight, calorie calculations, and nutritional benefits.
t 
 Media—An explanation of considerations related to media. For 
example, a design’s proportions and content hierarchy may be 
affected by media considerations, and knowing whether a package 
will be showcased on television, in an advertisement, or used in a 
special display will affect how legible the main logo must be. For a 
poster, the issues might be how the piece will be distributed—folded 
or mailed in a tube. Standard paper sizes might be an important 
consideration.
t 
 Scope of Work—A description of the extent of the work and how 
it will be organized. Typically, a project is broken into phases. For 
example, Phase 1 might include research and analysis, followed by 
concept development of the design problem; Phase 2 might involve 
cover review and refinements; and Phase 3 might be implementa-
tion of the design. For an advertisement, Phase 3 could involve pre-
paring the file for a magazine; for a signage project, it may entail 
installation of the signage; for a website, it might include the final 
programming and uploading.
t 
 Budget and Timetable—A description of the costs and schedule. 
Cost might include the pay rate and the amount of time the designer 
can spend on the project as well as how large a staff is needed. The 
timetable would also determine deadlines. For example, two weeks 
may be allotted for idea development, two weeks for refinements, 
and one week for final comprehensives.
t 
 Design Examples—Samples of historic and recent designs, which 
can help a designer visualize what is expected. These samples func-
tion like clues, offering a starting point, but not limiting creativity or 
driving a design in any particular direction. The designer can begin 
to understand the client and the project’s direction through seeing 
the personality and attitude found in previous writing, photogra-
phy, and elements of form such as color, texture, and font.
SPEAKOUT: The Value of Writing by Michele Washington
 
 When I teach, I ask students to consider a process that I go through when working on a design—to 
notate their thoughts in a journal. These words, doodles, drawings, and swipes get the juices flow-
ing. In addition, I require them to write formal design briefs and statements about their projects. It’s 
challenging for some, but notating and writing are crucial when formulating ideas, especially when 
students want to communicate not just ideas, but a voice within their work.
“These words doodles, 
drawings, and swipes get 
the juices flowing.”

The term research, like design itself, 
has many different meanings and 
applications. What’s your approach 
to it?
To some it might connote book learning, 
quantifiable data, or consumer focus groups, 
but for me there’s much more. Here’s how 
I break down research in my own creative 
process, though not necessarily in this order:
1
Understand the client. This includes key 
objectives, the nature of their business, 
vision, or mission, decision-making criteria, 
and budgetary limitations for project 
production.
2
Understand the audience/end user. 
This includes cultural context.
3
Understand the marketplace, including 
the client’s competitors.
4
Understand the content of the 
communication and the delivery 
mechanism (whether online, printed, 
environmental, etc.).
5
Draw upon my own experiences and 
observations, both primary (direct) and 
secondary (other sources).
6
 Identify new ways of telling the story—
through nonverbal means such as icons, 
color palettes, composition, and 
photographic style. 
You mentioned the value of understanding 
cultural context. How does that factor 
into research?
Communication is at the heart of humanness 
but clients often discuss their products and 
services using “insider” language that the 
public doesn’t relate to. On the other hand, 
graphic designers have an affinity for cultural 
understanding. We’re readers of culture and 
cultural artifacts. Therefore we are able to 
translate content and organize information in 
tangible and compelling ways, incorporating 
aspects of popular culture, corporate culture, 
ethnic or political perspectives, and global 
or local trends. 
Understanding an audience outside of one’s 
own culture is very challenging. If you’re work-
ing on an international design project or even 
something geared to a particular subculture—
such as librarians or skateboarders or diabetic 
teens—then knowing a few key aspects of that 
culture will increase the effectiveness of your 
communication. An example would be the sim-
ple act of reading. Starting from the upper left 
across to the right and then down to the second 
line is a Western construction that other cultures 
may not subscribe to. Also, color, photographic 
content, and copy have the potential to trans-
late into cultural faux pas. If some consideration 
is given, the chance that the design will succeed, 
and even be appreciated, is greatly enhanced.
Somi Kim is global creative director of Johnson & Johnson Family of Consumer Companies. She 
has had a distinguished career as a creative thinker, driving design and brand strategy initiatives for 
such clients as MTV, IBM, and Motorola. Through global consumer discovery projects she 
unearthed insights that were developed into campaigns by Sony Electronics and Hewlett-
Packard. t Somi graduated from Harvard University and the California Institute of the Arts and 
is a visiting lecturer at numerous educational institutions. Before joining Johnson & Johnson, 
she ran Ogilvy’s Brand Integration Group in Los Angeles and was a founding principal of ReVerb, 
a multifaceted and highly inﬂuential Los Angeles design ﬁrm that won the Chrysler Design 
Award in 1995.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  O N R E S E A R C H I N G  A  G R A P H I C  D E S I G N  P R O J E C T,  W I T H   SOMI KIM
108
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT

What additional research can complement 
the objective research that a marketing 
team might conduct?
I strongly believe in the value of a designer’s 
point-of-view in processing and filtering data, 
and arriving at insights. When designers connect 
dots from whatever material they’ve found or 
that’s been supplied to them, they always enrich 
the deliverable, dialogue, or solution.
All in all, does research stifle your 
creative work or empower it?
Research is not just a stack of paper full of statis-
tics or definitions. I feel energized and inspired 
by the entry points or unexpectedly powerful 
juxtapositions that are identified through the 
hunting and gathering 
that I call research. Too 
often these days people 
think that research means 
using an online search 
engine. While the Internet 
is a valuable tool, I prefer 
a combination of research 
methods, especially 
firsthand experiences and 
conversations with end 
users and experts in 
other fields.
Vignette 4.2 Consumer poll 
results from “What Is Retail?” 
How we shop and where we do it continue to evolve. Yet online 
auction sites such as eBay still retain certain communal aspects of 
older marketplaces, bazaars or auction houses. Whether it’s 
a yard sale or an international trade show, there are social aspects 
to shopping that are common to venues or transaction zones that 
seem at first glance to be very different. Successful retailers such as 
Whole Foods remade their categories by learning from older, 
more intimate ways of shopping. This chart [“What Is Retail?”; 
Vignettes 4.1–4.3] brings attention to the links between the many 
different places where retail happens. Unexpected connections 
highlight human aspects of the retail experience as a thought-
starter for the client’s retail ventures. —Somi Kim
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: SOMI KIM 
109
Vignette 4.3 Retail landscape 
chart for “What Is Retail?”
Vignette 4.1 Cover for the 
report “What Is Retail?” a trend 
report written, compiled, 
designed and produced by 
BIG LA for Motorola to inform 
their retail strategy.

110
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
Conducting Virtual World and Actual World Research
Online computer stations at a library next to shelves of actual books create 
one effective research combination. Browse the Internet, but also browse 
the aisles of a library; click through a site, but also thumb through pages 
of a book; allow yourself to embrace both worlds.
There are some differences between the virtual and the actual that 
can’t be ignored. For example, the classic book A Dictionary of Symbols by 
J. E. Cirlot can certainly be viewed online, but having the physical book 
in your hand can more profoundly influence your understanding of the 
cultural definitions of objects, shapes, and colors. Also, though there are a 
vast number of photos now available online, you will probably find 
that taking your own photograph whenever possible works better 
for capturing your own ideas. 
Thoroughness is the ultimate goal, whether you use physical 
books or online sources, your own interviews or published ones, 
hard copies of images (your own and those of others) or downloads. 
The point to remember is that convenience should never replace 
value when doing serious research. You wouldn’t ever say to your 
client, “Oh, I didn’t have time to look that up.”
In a self-initiated book design project about the city of Berlin, 
the designer Sean Dana compiled research beforehand on the geog-
raphy, hot spots such as clubs and cafés, exhibitions, and the lan-
guage (Figures 4.6–4.8). But, as the designer expressed it, “When I 
landed in Berlin I switched to relying solely on my instincts, gather-
ing everything I could—from pamphlets to tickets and maps—in 
order to see the city from an alternate angle. I got lost for the sake of 
being somewhere else and finding my way back.” The book’s design 
goes off the beaten path, too. Its spontaneous approach becomes a 
strategy that incorporates the idea of just getting lost in its pages. 
For a poster on the work of graphic designer Stefan Bucher, 
Echo Keaney did her homework by learning everything she could 
from books, magazine articles, and websites (Figure 4.9). Her base 
of knowledge helped formulate the next stage in her research—a 
series of questions to ask the designer himself. “The interview helped 
visualize the final poster,” she said. In fact, the questions and answers are 
included in the design, as are graphic interpretations of key points. For 
example, the image of a chicken and egg raises the question of what comes 
first for the designer—the idea or the form the idea takes. 
The result was a document of research that reflected Stefan Bucher’s 
unique way of working. Although the poster could have easily looked as 
if Stefan had designed it himself, the piece was, instead, a visualization of 
his design approach as seen through the eyes and mind of another graphic 
designer. Thorough research brought insight and interpretation rather 
than mimicry.
4.7 and 4.8 Page spreads 
from Lost Berlin.
“I got lost for the sake of 
being somewhere else and 
finding my way back.”
 —Sean Dana
4.6 SEAN DANA. Cover 
from the self-initiated 
book design project 
titled Lost Berlin.

111
In Practice: Sending an e-mail message to a client might save time, 
but meeting in person can be a much more productive experience 
for both the client and the designer.
Using Design’s Rear-View Mirror
Looking back to something done in the past—reflecting on design his-
tory—can lead to a forward-thinking idea. What you’re after is an under-
standing of how an experienced graphic designer handled a design 
problem. If you can see through the designer’s eyes, even for a moment, 
you will find that your own knowledge has grown.
Numerous publications cover graphic design history. For exam-
ple, an issue of the journal Below the Fold: by the Winterhouse Institute 
(Figures 4.10 and 4.11) documents the extraordinary achievements of 
Imre Reiner (1900–1987) as a graphic designer, writer, calligrapher, and 
typographer. The issue is a visual narrative and academic thesis. Its simple 
design, proportioned as a broadsheet, offers readers a comfortable view-
ing format and is something that they might want to keep to look at again 
and again.
4.9 ECHO KEANEY. Design 
history research project on 
graphic designer, Stefan 
Bucher. 
4.10 and 4.11 WINTERHOUSE
(WILLIAM DRENTTEL AND JESSICA
HELFAND). Cover and inside 
pages from Below the Fold:,
a Winterhouse Institute 
publication.
View a Closer Look for Below the Fold: on myartslab.com

112
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
Going to art galleries and museums, conducting online research, 
reading books and magazines, collecting graphic design examples, and 
gathering information from interviews or your own observations will 
help you generate your own design ideas. This information can be for-
gotten or hard to locate later, so keep it in a way that allows you to refer 
to it in the future. In particular, hang on to well-designed brochures and 
keep track of creative websites because they can be great inspiration for 
future works. These “keepers” help us know where we are coming from 
and where we might go. 
In Practice: Keep a bookmarked list of websites that archive the inspiring work 
of historic and current graphic designers. Here are a few:
Doing Individual Research 
We tend to turn first to roommates, friends, teachers, and fellow class-
mates when communicating ideas. They become our audience to whom 
we first present our sketches and mock-ups. We test out our designs to 
find out whether they make sense to someone other than ourselves. If 
they do, then we feel a bit more confident that the ideas and visualizations 
might make sense to the audience for whom we’re creating the work. This 
strategy is a good place to start, but audience research must go much fur-
ther and be done more systematically.
Researching a specific audience involves looking for clues that help 
you to communicate better. Race, ethnicity, religion, age, gender, and 
income can all become important here—not in terms of stereotyping 
or typecasting, but in terms of understanding those people in the actual 
audience who will be seeing your work. This information will help deter-
mine how someone might think and feel about a topic, what background 
or experience they might bring to your work, and ultimately, how they 
will construct meaning from your design. The excerpt from Gary Larson’s 
The Far Side is a humorous example of not speaking the right language. 
Here’s a test case: Imagine designing an announcement for a classical 
music performance. You come to the project without any prior knowledge 
of the audience who usually attends these performances, which makes 
your design job much more challenging. The client hasn’t given you any 
budget or time for interviews or in-depth research, but luckily the client 
does, in fact, know its audience quite well. And all you need to do is ask 
a few questions:
t 
 What is the age range—people in their mid-thirties or mid-sixties?
EXCERPT: From The Far 
Side® by Gary Larson
What We Say to Dogs: “Okay, 
Ginger! I’ve had it! You stay out of 
the garbage! Understand, Ginger? 
Stay out of the garbage, or else!” 
What They Hear: “blah blah 
GINGER blah blah blah blah blah 
blah blah blah GINGER blah 
blah blah blah blah….”
aisleone.net
alvinlustig.com
designersandbooks.com
designarchives.aiga.org
designmuseum.org/design
designobserver.com 
internationalposter.com
grainedit.com
paul-rand.com
posterpage.ch
sutnar.cz
typographica.org
www.
The Far Side® by Gary Larson © 1983 FarWorks, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
The Far Side® and the Larson® signature are registered trademarks of 
FarWorks, Inc. Used with permission. This work may not be copied, 
reproduced, or distributed without the express permission of FarWorks, 
Inc. (Release date: 10/25/83).

GATHERING INFORMATION
113
t  
 Does the audience have a background in music 
or are they novices who simply enjoy listening 
to it?
t  
 What media will we use? Are the announce-
ments going to be mailed out directly or dis-
tributed in the neighborhood?
t  
 What designs were used in the past? What 
have attendees responded to before? Were the 
designs edgy or traditional?
As you learn the basic profile of the audience, you will be able to 
engage in a more focused design exploration going forward. 
Design student Robert Bolesta shows how his own college experi-
ence and a background in beer and the brewing process might speak to, 
and connect with, the product’s audience (Figure 4.12). In the designer’s 
own words: “My dad brews beer as a hobby. He’s a perfectionist in the 
extreme and his beer is very good. We talked about what it might be like 
if microbreweries were inspired by academia, even naming varieties after 
different stages in a college career (midterms, finals, senior, alumni, etc.). 
The discussion led me to design along the lines of term-papers, textbooks, 
course numbers, and all the stuff that I’d been exposed to in school. The 
raw cardboard carrier pack with a rectangular sticker on the side seemed 
to symbolize college to me—living out of boxes and moving from one 
apartment to another.” 
In a repackaging project for a soymilk beverage, a problem with the 
existing label design immediately became obvious: the label information’s 
hierarchy was wrong and downplayed the actual product (Figure 4.13). 
An update was overdue. The designer solved the problem by first asking 
basic, pertinent packaging questions (see Jeff Zack’s Worklist on Package 
Design Research, page 114). The result is dramatic. The brand was com-
pletely rejuvenated into a refreshed identity (Figure 4.14).
4.12 ROBERT BOLESTA. Student 
project for a supposed College 
Brewing Co. 
4.14 JEFF ZACK. ZACK GROUP LLC. 
Westsoy Plus label redesign that 
reorganizes the information and 
enhances the product shot.
4.13 Original identity for 
Westsoy beverages.

114
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
When a product, brochure, or website has to connect to an audience 
in stylish ways, a contemporary look would be important. However, such 
a look won’t work with every audience and in every situation. You have 
to know the culture for which you are designing, as you will see in the 
Speakout by Katherine McCoy. A style that was considered to be a clear 
means of communication at the time failed because the target audience 
could not understand it.
Observational Research and Focus Groups
When budgets allow for a marketing research firm or department to 
become involved in a design project, the results and direction can become 
very specific. Market researchers have made a science of determining 
what consumers will like and dislike and their discoveries can prove very 
beneficial to a designer. Two of their most important methods of data 
collection are observational research and focus groups. Observational 
research is conducted in actual environments. Researchers observe the 
choices people make at stores or events in real time and in natural set-
tings. In the Speakout on Design Intervention, Tina Park describes obser-
vational research targeted at baby boomers, the generation born between 
1946 and 1964. 
W O R K L I S T
Package Design Research by Jeff Zack, zackgroup.com
t  
 Does the package design stand out among competitive products 
on the store shelf? (shelf impact)
t  
 Is the brand name prominent enough to hold presence? 
t  
 Does the package clearly communicate the identity and the 
function of the product? (functional attributes)
t  
 Does the brand image and design style target the right age group 
and create the right personality? (emotive attribute)
t  
 Has the hierarchy of communications been addressed for easy 
shopping? (brand, product visual, descriptor)
t  
 If there are many similar products, is it easy to differentiate 
among them?
t  
 Does the structure of package work well to contain, display, 
or protect the product?
t  
 Is the brand name or logo usable in places other than on the 
package, such as online, print advertisement, or signage?
  Avant-garde music is sort of research music. You’re glad someone’s done it but you don’t necessarily 
want to listen to it. —Brian Eno (British musician, record producer, and visual artist)

GATHERING INFORMATION
115
SPEAKOUT: The Chrysler Corporation Cleaning Manual by Katherine McCoy 
 
 In 1969 I really tried very hard to make the Chrysler Corporation Cleaning Manual a good applica-
tion of information design and functionalist Swiss (Figures 4.15 and 4.16). I think I succeeded in a 
formal sense. The content described detailed procedures and sequences for cleaning that involved 
numerous dangerous chemicals, so the text is very organized and the hierarchy is well structured. 
My Chrysler client was pleased with the design, and the manual was printed and distributed. But 
about three months later, I was told that no one was reading the manual. The staff was still making 
many mistakes, which endangered themselves and damaged the facilities.
 
 Some possibilities for what went wrong: My criteria for legibility, and hence comprehensibility, 
were Modernist. I assumed that all audiences received and decoded information in the same way, 
and that a “universal” design language would work equally well for everyone everywhere. The type 
was 9/10 point Univers Condensed—small, dense, and very “textbook” and “scientific” in appear-
ance. This media type—an instructional manual—was probably unfamiliar and unpleasant for this 
specific audience. The manual’s design looked like the textbooks that this interpretive community, 
or audience subculture, had probably found intimidating and dull during the short time that they 
were able attend school. I failed to ask what media this audience was comfortable with and what 
their literacy levels might be. Looking back, I realize that many of the Chrysler Corporation office 
maintenance staff (unskilled inner city hourly workers) were probably uncomfortable reading even 
a daily newspaper; it was likely that a percentage were unable to read at all. Furthermore, the man-
ual’s abstracted diagrams of proper office cleaning patterns were probably difficult for this audience 
to comprehend. Had I conducted any research into this audience’s visual and verbal literacy and 
preferred media types, the design solution would have taken a much different form.
4.15 KATHERINE MCCOY.
Cover of a Chrysler Corporation 
office cleaning manual. 1969.
4.16 KATHERINE MCCOY.
Interior spread of a Chrysler 
Corporation office cleaning 
manual using typography and 
graphic illustrations inspired 
by Swiss functionalist 
design. 1969.

116
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
When a more controlled environment is required, a sampling of the 
client’s target audience is brought together in what is known as a focus 
group. These groups typically comprise eight to twelve people and are led 
by a trained moderator. For a large project, many focus groups might be 
conducted. The moderator’s job is to discuss what motivates each person 
in making specific decisions pertaining to the product or service. All the 
responses are carefully recorded and tracked for later analysis.
Designers can learn a great deal from the feedback and reports 
generated from observational research and focus groups. They must be 
cautious not to edit or make preconceived decisions about the results 
to support a predetermined direction or design. Also, designers must 
understand that both types of research use a limited number of subjects, 
so designers must not assume that the research proves universal truths. 
These studies are only guidelines and should be considered as such. 
SPEAKOUT: Design Intervention by Tina Park
Designers often confuse research with school papers, bibliographies, and footnotes. And when 
studying design, our research shifts to a visual process, searching through design catalogs for inspi-
ration or a solution we can mimic. But design research can be much more, and even quite exciting 
and fulfilling. For example, I worked on a design intervention that looked to engage the baby-
boomer generation and to create an open forum that could be visualized and exhibited in various 
venues. We began conducting interviews with the goal of understanding the social concerns baby-
boomers had and several personas were created to represent their voice (Figures 4.17 and 4.18). 
Issues ranged from the environment to the future of social security to the current state of educa-
tion. Through our qualitative research we began to empathize with our audience—creating an 
unexpected and integral emotional connection. We could see the world through their eyes, which 
informed the final outcome of the design.
4.17 and 4.18 TINA PARK.
Exhibit and interviews as part 
of a student research project 
involving the social concerns of 
the baby-boomer generation.

DEFINING THE PROBLEM 
117
Defining the Problem
Once designers have finished gathering research material, they need to 
identify the problem more clearly. If the problem has not been well iden-
tified originally, then asking the most obvious questions is a start. Ques-
tions such as “What is the real problem?” or “What is the project really 
about?” can potentially help to uncover the essence of the design problem. 
The answers those questions reveal will help to clarify the possible direc-
tions a solution can take (see the Speakout by Anna Gerber on page 118). 
The focus of the research may shift at this point toward asking more imag-
inative questions pertaining to the basic problem. The effort you make to 
research affects very strongly how productive you can be in creating your 
actual designs.
The Domestic Workers United (DWU) had outgrown their one-
page website (Figure 4.19). DWU is an organization in New York of typi-
cally Caribbean, Latina, and African nannies, housekeepers, and caregiv-
ers to the elderly, asking for fair labor standards. Their site was a simple 
downloadable PDF with basic information about the organization. They 
knew it no longer served their needs. The design studio partners met with 
DWU and asked basic questions to identify the problems with the site. 
When asked “What is it that you want to communicate?” DWU 
explained that they needed to be taken more seriously as an organization, 
particularly since they had such strong female leaders behind it. A pro-
posal for a new site design demonstrated both 
their serious goals and the professionalism of 
the group (Figure 4.20). Active images, search-
able text, clear navigation, and a proposed 
logotype to bring a visual identity to the site, 
helped make the DWU organization more vital 
and “real” to the general public. As the organi-
zation grows and its needs change, the design-
ers can explore further possibilities for the site, 
but for the moment, it serves the needs of its 
members and those of the general public who 
might come to the site for information. 
4.19 Original Domestic Workers 
United website.
4.20 CHAKARAS JOHNSON (1973–2010).
Updated Domestic Workers United 
website (mock-up).

118
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
Using Deconstruction to Define a Problem
In his writings from the 1960s, the French philosopher Jacques Derrida 
coined the term deconstruction, describing it as a strategic device in our 
way of thinking—a way to critically consider what literature, power struc-
tures, and cultural values are telling us. Deconstruction involves pull-
ing something apart to understand it better. The process can be a com-
plex one, yet extremely useful for designers to adopt when researching a 
design project.
Take, for example, the promotion of a public service such as a city 
offering free flu shots. Part of the designer’s research would be to consider 
how to present, or to frame, the very idea of getting a flu shot within a 
specific context. In other words, how could it be promoted in a way that 
acknowledges that there might be some fear attached to being immunized 
or even to being stuck with a needle? Would high-income neighborhoods 
have the same concerns as low-income neighborhoods? And how would 
neighborhoods with a high proportion of immigrants respond to the idea? 
Thinking in this deconstructionist mode offers the chance to approach 
the problem from a social, cultural, and even political point of view. 
Deconstruction has become a factor in designing packaging. Con-
sider how products were presented up until the late 1970s. Brands were 
generally differentiated by their unique selling proposition. If you 
looked on any grocery store shelf, for example, one laundry detergent was 
presented as being good at eliminating tough stains, another as making 
SPEAKOUT: Getting There by Anna Gerber, coauthor, Inﬂuences: A Lexicon 
of Contemporary Graphic Design
 
 In order for graphic design to continue to progress, evolve, become richer and deeper as a practice, 
it is important for us to think more about what goes into or what drives any given graphic design 
project. We need to turn our gaze away from the “pretty pictures,” or put another way, to remove 
ourselves from the outcome or the result. Instead, we need to embrace the research, the stories, the 
process of getting there rather than just being there.
 
 When we focus on the idea of being there, we lose sight of all that came before and we end up down-
playing the long, involved thinking and research process that lies at the root of graphic design. When 
we talk about research, we can think of a considered, meticulous research, the kind of research we 
expect to carry out in a dark, stuffy library with rows of leather chairs and green lamps. But we can 
also think of the research process as being something completely unpredictable, where the unex-
pected or the unknown brings us to an altogether new place. 
 
 We research all the time, drawing from politics, literature, cooking, travel, construction, history, or 
even walking down the street. Whether the research process is planned or entirely unexpected, it con-
tinues to be a vital part of our working and thinking practice. And it is this process that we need to be 
thinking about, looking at, and reveling in. Graphic design is so much more than just pretty pictures.
  Research is formalized curiosity. 
It is poking and prying with 
a purpose. 
—Zora Neale Hurston (American 
folklorist and writer, 1903–1960)

DEFINING THE PROBLEM 
119
clothes smell nice. In this way, a brand could claim a particular character-
istic as giving it a competitive advantage over another brand.
But by the end of the 1970s, research proved that a brand needed 
to connect more to social, psychological, and aesthetic concerns of the 
consumer. A unique selling proposition wasn’t enough; deconstruction 
was required. For example, consider Starbucks coffee shops, whose main 
product is roasted coffee. Forty years ago, the brand’s unique selling prop-
osition might have claimed that their coffee had a superior aroma. But 
today, Starbucks’s main brand identity describes less about the coffee and 
more about the consistently safe and pleasant environment they create for 
people in cities around the world. 
In the Worklist by Kareem Collie, a set of analytic questions pushes 
designers to deconstruct their particular approach to a project, and in 
doing so, learn a great deal. Researching a project is likened to finding 
a story to tell, but in Collie’s questions we see that research can also help 
decide what kind of story to tell.
Researching a Project by Kareem Collie, dimitrious.info
Determining the Story
t  
 What is the story that I want to tell? 
What research have I done?
t  
 What is the purpose of the story to be 
told? Is it a poster design, logo, website, 
employment application, product label? 
t  
 Is the story complex or is it direct? 
Direct does not mean without 
dimension or depth.
Determining the Audience
t  
 Who is my audience? Do I know my 
audience—have I researched them?
t  
 What is the mood that I want to capture? 
What emotion do I want the audience 
to feel or understand?
t  
 What questions would I like to ask the 
audience? Do I want to ask questions?
t  
 What questions would I like the audience 
to ask? Are we asking them to participate 
and, if so, how much detail do I give them?
Determining the Elements
t  
 What are the symbols or characters that 
best describe the story I am telling?
t  
 What typeface am I using and what 
does this typeface choice communicate 
to the audience? Will it be perceived as 
funny, smart, strong, fierce, dramatic, 
elegant, and so on?
t  
 What are my image choices? Do they 
compare, contrast, or harmonize with 
other page elements?
t  
 What does my color choice convey 
aesthetically and emotionally?
t  
 What is the medium that I will be 
communicating in?
t  
 What are the tools I’ll need?
Determining the Parameters
t  
 What are some constraints or potential 
constraints of the design process? 
Is money an issue? Is time an issue? 
What are other constraints?
t  
 What are the deadlines and will I be 
able to meet them?
t  
 Have I met all of the criteria for 
the project?

120
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
Considering the Overlapping Interests of Design
In the sketch shown in Figure 4.21, architect and designer Charles Eames 
(1907–1978) illustrated the overlapping interests and concerns of the 
designer, client, and society as a whole. Eames wrote, “As client and 
designer get to know each other, they influence each other. As society’s 
needs become more apparent, both client and designer expand their own 
personal concerns to meet these needs.” Eames defined the big picture 
for design, where the designer can work with conviction and enthusiasm.
Lucille Tenazas, who designed the poster for Sublime Subversives, 
had a vested interest with her client, a museum that was hosting a series 
of design lectures (Figure 4.22). Tenazas knew the audience quite well—
fellow designers in her own community. For this reason, she took liberties 
with the design, flipping images and breaking words apart into a codelike 
typography. While she winks at how existing design rules can be so won-
derfully overthrown, the viewer is drawn in by the perception of space. 
The tone coordinated perfectly with what the design community wanted 
to see and what the museum wanted to express.
Techniques for Visualizing Research
Graphic designers are visual people. We like making forms and putting 
them up on the wall for review. Research that is converted into visual 
form helps us make sense of what we’re doing. We need the raw material 
of words, colors, and images to begin to manifest our ideas. We need 
to be able to experience them and challenge them. As the cartoon from 
Scientiﬁc American illustrates, what we make may be misinterpreted, 
but we might not know in advance exactly how (Figure 4.23). Research 
increases our chances of getting it right. 
4.22 LUCILLE TENAZAS.
Lecture series poster Sublime 
Subversives for the American 
Institute of Graphic Arts/
SFMoMA.
4.23 Originally from Scientific 
American, reprinted in The 
New Yorker, 1961.
4.21 CHARLES EAMES. An 
accompanying diagram of 
the design process drawn by 
Charles Eames, in a statement 
sent to Madame L’ Amic—for 
the catalog of the exhibition 
What Is Design?
Charles E. Martin / The New Yorker Collection / www.cartoonbank.com
©Eames Office, LLC / www.eamesoffice.com

TECHNIQUES FOR VISUALIZING RESEARCH 
121
Mood Boards
Designers use a collection of visual material, or mood boards, to help 
explain references, provide inspiration, and build consensus (Figure 4.24). 
Although these boards may remind you of collages done in grade school, 
don’t let that association undermine what this technique can help you 
achieve. Mood boards are made by physically cutting and gluing images 
and typefaces from magazines and other printed sources, and the result 
helps you better harmonize your ideas. Forget the computer at this stage; 
working with physical materials is much more effective. You can create 
the mood board yourself or invite a team of designers, and even the client, 
to participate. The collaboration will help to build consensus on which 
path your design should take.
Positioning Charts
A quick way to visualize the strategic position of a company is to create 
an x- and y-axis chart, or a positioning chart. The x- and y-coordinates 
describe the design’s personality in terms of adjectives. In this technique, 
words work better than images to help you explore your creativity.
The redesign of an ice cream package might be diagramed as shown 
in Figure 4.25. Let’s consider its current package. It has brand equity in 
that consumers recognize it on the shelf. It is familiar, but the design is 
stale, especially for a more youthful audience. Two opposite points are 
set on the chart to reflect this issue—the first is the word “staid,” and the 
other, the word “innovative.”
The logo on the current package is set in capital letters, which gives 
it an authoritative feel. This fact generates a second set of adjectives in 
which the word “authoritative” sits opposite the word “amiable.” Once 
the chart is set, each mark’s position notates a potential design direction. 
The chart can help the designer cover all the bases in a design explo-
ration: Number 
 is where the package is now (staid and authorita-
tive); Number 
 keeps its authoritative feel, but is more innovative in 
appearance; Number 
 is conservative in its design, but friendly; and 
Number 
 is the diametrical opposite of Number 1, with a design that 
is both amiable and innovative. The sketch phase of the project can now 
begin with focused and deliberate paths to take.
A positioning chart can be used for any kind of design project, from 
logos and book covers to websites and motion designs. It’s never too late 
to create one, even in the midst of a design exploration where your goal is 
to consider many design strategies. 
4.24 Mood boards create 
a visual outline for a design 
to work from.
4.25 Positioning charts quickly 
determine the paths a design 
exploration can take.

122
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
Word Techniques
Mapping of words into a diagram-based sketch is another research tech-
nique. By linking ideas, word mapping organizes information and acti-
vates your creative process (Figures 4.26 and 4.27). A thesaurus will help 
you find related words and construct an extensive word map. You can 
create the map on a simple sheet of paper or you can work with a group of 
colleagues and map out your words on a larger surface that everyone can 
see and comment on. In either case, what’s important is to jot down words 
quickly, making spontaneous associations. Any idea that comes into your 
head, no matter how ridiculous it may seem, should be included. Later 
on, as you start to evaluate the exercise, you will see the potential in some 
of the words and associations, and you can then choose those to develop 
further. This technique is a valuable one to use in exploring possibilities 
that are not obvious and those that are perhaps even more daring. 
In Practice: See visualthesaurus.com, which literally branches word 
connections oﬀ each other.
Another word technique involves the montage process. For exam-
ple, within a word map for packaging material (net, cardboard, twisted, 
bottle, window, and door), a number of pairings will immediately move 
your thoughts in new directions. The word net, combined with the word 
cardboard, might lead to research in paper packaging that can both reveal 
and contain the contents. With a montage of words such as twisted and 
bottle, you might propose using plastic technology in ways that challenge 
traditional container shapes. Each montage has potential as a springboard 
for multiple directions. Try combinations that seem unlikely; they might 
spur your imagination most.
As part of a research project for Hewlett-Packard, the design studio 
ReVerb collected, assembled, and compared cultural profiles of two 
nationalities—the Japanese and the Finnish (Figure 4.28). This visual 
and verbal map was part of a printed report and summed up insights and 
opportunities based on mobile technology adoption in Tokyo and Hel-
sinki. The map provoked thinking, questions, and debate about a number 
of critical issues concerning wireless technology. Statistics about the two 
populations were woven with psychological and sociological aspects of 
the two cultures to describe the qualities that they shared.
The heart of design research is to provoke the thought process 
in relation to an actual project. The same curious spirit can be applied 
toward the generation of personal, experimental work. In the Speakout 
“Daily Research, ” Kjell Reigstad explains how he pushed his own bound-
aries through this approach.
ignite
scorch
warmth
ﬂame
heat
ﬁre
combust
blacken
slander
melt
blaze
burst
4.26 Wordmapping 
that begins to organize 
information.
4.27 Wordmapping links 
can help you flesh out 
ideas that are embodied 
in words.
computer
hardware
input devices
mouse
keyboard
output devices
printer
monitor
…
software
applications
word processing
databases
spreadsheets
page layout
network
internet
…

TECHNIQUES FOR VISUALIZING RESEARCH 
123
SPEAKOUT: Daily Research by Kjell Reigstad
I often over-think projects and sometimes feel that my work suffers from 
a lack of spontaneity. In order to counter this, I decided to do a poster 
every day, each inspired by, and containing text from, something I’d over-
heard during that day (Figure 4.29). To keep these as a cohesive group, 
each poster would contain one design ele-
ment from the previous day’s poster. The 
elements could be as simple as a single black 
rectangle, a type treatment, or a photograph. 
I think the series is a portfolio example of 
how I’m able to listen, observe, and come up 
with designs quickly and creatively.
4.29 KJELL REIGSTAD.
A student-initiated project 
based on the daily visualization 
of an overheard comment.
4.28 Cultural comparison 
chart comparing Japan and 
Finland, from “Roaming,” 
an international research 
report produced for 
Hewlett-Packard.

124
CHAPTER 4: RESEARCHING A GRAPHIC DESIGN PROJECT
The Saturation Point
Every project’s deadline, coupled with its budget (usually limited), will 
inevitably dictate an end point in your research. In the next phase of 
design, you will get involved in the experimental editing, arranging, and 
rearranging of the information and ideas you have compiled. This next 
stage of the design process is an opportunity to investigate any possibili-
ties that you may have considered but have not yet pursued. 
While researching some projects, you may also reach a satura-
tion point, which signals the need for you to put some mental distance 
between you and the all information you have gathered. If time allows, 
give yourself a chance to let the ideas simmer while you work on some-
thing else for a while, but always keep that sketchbook handy in case you 
are hit with a brilliant idea while in the midst of another project.
Here’s how the process might work:
1  
 Collect and absorb information until reaching an end point.
2  
 Categorize, edit, and process the accumulated material.
3  
 If possible, allow some time to pass, working on other projects, 
while continuing to absorb the accumulated knowledge from 
your research.
4  
 Review and analyze the information you collected to generate 
insights and imaginative concepts that will help you to create 
the design. 
In Perspective
Research is essential for a successful design. The more effort put in to 
research, the more your design will communicate effectively. For most 
design problems, identifying the “five w’s”—who, what, when, where, 
and why—is a way to approach design research. These questions generate 
important information about the client, subject, time frame, media type, 
and audience. The research process can also involve rewarding and engag-
ing techniques that energize your work and activate your imagination.
The client usually supplies a design brief for large design projects, 
but for smaller ones, the designer must be resourceful in finding ways to 
probe and explore the problem. The Internet, libraries, friends, experts, 
and the material on the shelf next to you—the books that you know so 
well—all become ways to build knowledge about a new project. There are 
many tools to use, including mood boards, positioning charts, and word 
maps. With experience, you will figure out which of these tools works 
best for you. Each has different advantages. At the end of your research, 
you will be ready to embrace the creative process, which is described in 
the next chapter on proactive thought starters. Remember that the more 
research you do, the more skilled you will become at doing it. Research 
will no longer feel like a chore, but will become an integral part of your 
role as professional designer.
Deconstruction (p. 118)
Focus group (p. 116)
Frame (p. 118)
Mood boards (p. 121)
Observational research
(p. 114)
Positioning chart (p. 121)
Unique selling proposition
(p. 118)
Word mapping (p. 122)
K E Y  T E R M S
In Practice: Many libraries have ﬁles of picture 
collections. The images usually include photographs, 
illustrations, and engravings that can be checked 
out just as books are checked out.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
125
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Company Research): Break up into teams of two or three and 
select a potential client to research. Gather information by phoning the 
actual business, searching the Internet, and using a business library. 
Learn the history, mission statement, and advertising strategy, 
noting the following information: the product or service they provide, 
who their competition is, who their audience is, and the directions they 
might take to communicate more effectively. Compile and edit your eval-
uation into a format for presentation.
Exercise 2 (Design History Research): Research one significant designer 
connected with the Swiss International Style movement and his or her 
particular interpretation of that style. Now make a case for using that 
designer’s style with a particular company of your choice. Support your 
case using quotes and a design example from the designer as well as a 
concise description of the company you choose with clear reasons why 
the style is appropriate. 
Black and white. Size: 18" × 18"
Project 1 (Charting Information): Ask twenty people this question: 
What is one thing you did today that you wish you could do over? Record 
the results and produce a chart that notates at least three other compo-
nents, for example, gender, location, time of day the question was asked, 
and so on. 
Full color. Size: 11" × 17" horizontal.
Project 2 (Mapping Data): Map one day in your life. Notate the experi-
ences—no matter how mundane—of things you heard and saw. Decide 
on one incident or occurrence that stands out for you, and use words and 
images to document it. Full color. Size: Designer’s choice.
Things to Consider: Include photography and found objects to 
help transform a simple subject into something intriguing and revealing 
about who you are.
Things to Consider: The success of this project relies on an inventive 
use of icons and typography. Experiment with visual vocabularies that 
will help make sense of your collected material for the viewer.
Project 2 KATIE CHOW. A series of 
infographics visually documenting 
the processes involved in the making 
of one day and how the needs of 
the individual affect the macro chain 
of larger industries.
View a Closer Look for Make My Day on myartslab.com
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

126
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS

127
5
Generating Ideas
As you will see in this chapter, there are many other ways to spark that 
creative energy. As you begin to use them, the number and quality of your 
ideas may improve. 
Despite their best intentions (and even after years of practice), 
many designers harbor an underlying fear of beginning a project. As you 
learned in Chapter 4, well-done research can create fertile ground for 
ideas to germinate. In addition, engaging in techniques that activate your 
creativity will broaden design thinking and reduce the fear. Clear strate-
gies for finding ideas and unleashing creativity—thought starters—allow 
us to take an active role in our own creative process. As inhibitions to 
creativity crumble, solving design problems becomes a positive and excit-
ing experience. Anticipation for the challenge of the new project begins 
to crowd out any lingering anxiety about what to do. After all, feeling the 
excitement of creativity is why we choose to become designers in the first 
place, isn’t it?
Opposite page: LAURIE DEMARTINO. 
Poster (detail) for The Hurricane 
Poster Project (full image, see 
Figure 5.15).
I think you come up with ideas 
when you deeply care about what 
you do. —Luba Lukova
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Explain the importance of making your own work 
environment.
t 
 Put into practice specific techniques for actively generating 
ideas, giving primary consideration to the message you 
want to emphasize.
t 
 Demonstrate how the technique of montage can quickly 
embody a complex thought.
t 
 Explain how playful accidents can aid in generating ideas.
t 
 Discuss why taking a break can improve your ideas, and list 
five strategies for temporarily detaching from your work.
t
Exercises and Projects
Perform warm-up sketching exercises; practice the random 
word technique; create word lists and montage them into thumbnail 
sketches; engage in the high-speed 100 Arrows exercise; montage 
images of tools; create a logo.
aiting patiently for an idea to simply arrive in your head is generally 
quite futile, especially in a high-pressure deadline situation. And in 
graphic design, deadlines are always looming, which can be both a curse 
and a blessing. Although deadlines can add inhibiting pressure and stress, 
they can also start an adrenaline rush that prompts ideas. Adrenaline, 
however, is not the preferred tool for generating ideas.
W

128
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
Making a Creative Work Environment
Look around your workspace. There’s a good chance that 
you have surrounded yourself with meaningful images 
and objects. These things aren’t simply decorative. They 
are photos and mementos of the people in your life, the 
trips you’ve taken, and the life experiences you’ve had, all 
there to remind you of the fullness of your life. The setting 
in which you work also helps set a creative tone. There’s 
no doubt that an environment that is physically and psy-
chologically comfortable will foster your creativity. You 
might work best in a space that is obsessively clean, or you 
might feel more comfortable in a space that is cluttered 
and messy. There’s no correct way to create a space. What 
is important is to figure out what works best for you and 
then shape your space in ways that inspire you. Figure 5.1 shows vari-
ous designers’ workspaces, each creating a different mood and displaying 
meaningful objects, from framed designs to pop culture statues. 
A bookshelf can have a similar stimulating effect (Figure 5.2). The 
lineup of books creates a mix of subjects that live together. In the midst 
of a design exploration, you can examine the titles and perhaps trigger a 
memory that adds some unexpectedness to your thought process. You 
may find inspiration just from scanning the spines and being reminded 
of your favorite books, and you will certainly want to pull them off the 
shelves and refer to them often when contemplating a new project. Some-
times just grabbing a book randomly and skimming the pages can evoke 
all sorts of ideas. These chance encounters help germinate ideas; designers 
don’t operate in a vacuum.
Actively Generating Ideas 
Part of being human is our unique ability to think creatively. We exer-
cise our creative mental skills to navigate around a traffic jam or make an 
appetizing sandwich from leftovers. But when it comes to a design prob-
lem, many of us have a tendency to wait for that magical burst of ideas. 
In fact, problem solving, whether for simple everyday situations or for 
graphic design, shares the same techniques and skill set. Artists, scien-
tists, engineers, and just about everyone else you can think of all engage 
in similar processes that trigger, evaluate, and connect creative sparks for 
the purpose of generating ideas and solving problems. 
The main consideration when developing ideas is to decide what 
message to emphasize. Research will point you in certain directions, but 
in the end, you will have to make decisions on what avenue to follow. 
Asking questions that help you evaluate can be useful. For example, if 
you’re creating publicity materials for an event, you might want to ask 
yourself “Will this idea help fill the auditorium?” 
5.1 TOP (L+R): WORKSIGHT; BOTTOM
(L–R): JAN URETSKY AND NICKI WRAGG.
Atmosphere and meaningful 
images spur thoughts that can 
add to a design project.
5.2 Mixtures of books on the 
subject of design, reference 
material relating to design, 
and books outside the realm 
of design are important to 
have on the shelf.
  I’ve never thought of myself as 
getting an idea. I always discover it. 
—George Lois

ACTIVELY GENERATING IDEAS
129
Don’t be satisfied with your first idea; instead, keep pushing your-
self to search further. Designers too often want go with their first viable 
solution and move quickly to the production phase of the project—to 
actually start making the website, poster, or logo. But the time spent 
thinking through ideas, moving past the first idea to explore others, will 
lead to a much richer result. You may end up deciding that your first 
idea was best, but you won’t know that unless you go through the pro-
cess of coming up with other options. Exploring multiple ideas is similar 
to making throws at the dart board (Figure 5.3). With each throw, you 
increase your chance of hitting the bull’s-eye, just as you increase your 
chance of finding the most creative solution when exploring many ideas. 
As you become skilled at generating ideas, you will be able to aim your 
“throws” with more confidence. 
Brainstorming
Brainstorming is an activity best done in groups. It is a technique for 
solving problems that involves spontaneous contributions and rapid 
responses from all the participants. Brainstorming is a great way to work 
through many ideas very quickly, allowing one to flow into and build on 
the next, without concern for viability or practical issues. It works best 
when done with unrestrained, free associations. Brainstorming is a pro-
cess that creates chaos and then allows you to make order from that chaos. 
One person in the group should volunteer to take notes, so ideas don’t get 
lost in the session. At the end, the group can go over the notes, identify 
ideas that seem to have merit, and pursue them to see whether they might 
lead to a sound solution to the design problem at hand. 
If you don’t have a group to work with, you can also brainstorm with 
just one other person, or even by yourself. With practice, you can develop 
individual brainstorming techniques that work well for you and that will 
get you through many a tough spot in your creative work.
You can use this technique at any point in the design process. At the 
beginning of a project, it can help you generate many possible directions 
to take. But it can also be a great tool to use as the project proceeds; any-
time you feel stuck or when it seems that all the elements are not coming 
together as they should, you can take a break and brainstorm to come up 
with possible solutions. Setting a time limit on the session before it starts 
will prevent it from disintegrating into meaningless banter. 
Thinking beyond the Obvious
It is difficult to adjust our mindset to explore in completely new ways. We 
tend to use techniques that we already know, approaching the problem-
solving process the same way every time, with a preconceived notion of 
possible solutions. Our tried-and-true approaches help dissipate some of 
the fear of starting something new because we’re familiar with our estab-
5.3 Multiple ideas increase 
the likelihood that one will hit 
its mark (or be perfect for your 
design project).
  Make it happen and let it happen. 
—George Tscherny

130
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
W O R K L I S T
lished processes, but sticking to only what we know also puts severe limits 
on our creativity and usually results in rather mundane, obvious designs. 
The way to open a new territory of possible solutions depends on 
thinking beyond the conventional or obvious. Your objective should be to 
explore new associations—to see how they work within familiar param-
eters. Figure 5.4 illustrates this idea. The purpose of the puzzle is to con-
nect all nine dots with four straight lines without lifting your pencil off 
the page. This task seems to be impossible only if we limit our usual way 
of thinking—of connecting the dots as if they were in a box (Figure 5.5). 
The solution is to connect the dots by drawing lines that reach outside of 
the box (Figure 5.6). 
The design of the multiprocessor inside the computer you work on 
is another example of thinking outside the box (Figure 5.7). A comput-
er’s processing time was cut in half when engineers used two processors 
instead of one. The idea of multiples might have come from observing the 
holes in a colander or the pistons in a car engine.
5.6 Going past the limits 
of the box allows for a 
full connection.
5.5 The standard way of 
thinking might result in 
this failed attempt.
1
2
3
4
5.4 A puzzle in which 
you must connect all nine 
dots with four straight 
lines (without lifting 
your pencil).
5.7 In 1974, the idea for a 
multiprocessor with access 
to the same memory sped 
up processing time.
Helpful Questions to Expand Design Thinking
Ask the following questions when beginning a project.
t
Wouldn’t it be funny if…? This question sets up the potential for a 
humorous solution by getting the reader to laugh along with you.
t
Isn’t it odd that on the one hand it’s…and on the other it’s…? By 
asking this question, you are on the path to finding a double mean-
ing or an ironic twist in your subject that you can share.
t
Can I use this image as a sign (to represent an idea) rather than as 
an illustration (to represent a particular place, thing, or action)? 
Signs can communicate ideas more powerfully than scenes. 
t
Will this design attract attention? More specifically, will my poster 
reach out from the wall with appeal? Will my book cover speak 
intelligently about the contents inside? 
t
How can I bring a unique quality to the project? How can I make 
something ordinary become extraordinary? 

ACTIVELY GENERATING IDEAS
131
Creating Thumbnail Sketches
Thumbnail sketches might just be your handiest tool; they will never 
become technologically outdated and they don’t need an electrical charge 
to function. You can use a roughly drawn rectangle to read as the outer 
shape of a page. Smaller boxes inside are placeholders for photos, their 
inner shapes suggesting actual content. Squiggly, repeating, horizontal 
lines indicate the density and position of lines of type. The heavier the 
weight of the line, the bolder the typeface it represents. But beyond these 
basic notations, you can use thumbnails to indicate conceptual directions 
for your design. They can lean toward the analytic, where the empha-
sis is on structure, typography, and alignment. Or they can lean toward 
the metaphoric, where images create meaning through their combination 
and juxtaposition. 
Thumbnails should be small—about the size of a business card or 
an index card. This small size works well because you can generate them 
quickly and easily fill a page with them, learning something about your 
thinking process as they progress from one to the next. Keep them simple, 
using gestural lines for people, solid forms for basic geometric shapes, and 
horizontal lines to represent type. The idea is not to create perfect little 
drawings; what is important is the thinking process and rapid recording 
of ideas. 
Using the proverbial cocktail napkin or the back of an envelope 
can prevent you from forgetting ideas, especially when they come to you 
while you’re away from your studio, but carrying a small sketchbook is 
a better solution. Sketchbooks are a more permanent and portable place 
to record thoughts in chronological order as the project develops. You 
can also paste photos, color swatches, and bits of text into a sketchbook. 
Furthermore, you can save them for future reference when working on 
similar projects later.
If pencil and paper seem too out of date to you, try using the same 
approach with your desktop computer or handheld electronic device. The 
point is to flesh out ideas as quickly as they come so you will have them 
handy when you’re ready to start your actual design. You can focus solely 
on the ideas rather the execution of those ideas by deliberately keeping 
thumbnails rough and sketchy. Don’t worry about the form these ideas 
might take until later. Include even ideas that seem far-fetched or silly, 
and try to avoid making judgments at this stage. Just draw.
A brochure design that Worksight created for a 100-year-old paper 
mill began with the simplest of sketches (Figure 5.8). These sketches 
developed an idea around an object found on the floor of the mill—a 
heavy, metal hook. The hook inspired words and drawings that focused 
on its authentic quality (it was used to transport paper rolls) and its simple 
functional beauty (industrial, yet elegant). The mill itself had a similar 
sense of function and utilitarian beauty. The connection triggered an idea 
  The greatest freedom comes 
from the greatest strictness. 
—Paul Valéry
5.8 WORKSIGHT. Thumbnail 
sketches, photos, and word lists 
mapping phase of a project 
to design a brochure promoting 
a paper mill (below).
5.9 WORKSIGHT. Honest Beauty 
Gilbert Paper. Promotional 
brochure showcasing Gilbert 
Paper’s mill and the process 
of making paper.

132
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
to present the mill in a way that didn’t hide its tough 
and gritty textures but, instead, celebrated them as a 
real working factory.
Trial sketches of the hook on the cover of the 
brochure clearly suggested that this object would be 
the perfect graphic “hook” to bring the viewer into 
the piece. In these sketches, the hook also began to 
resemble the silhouette of a duck, which led to another 
unexpected connection to the famous Hans Christian 
Anderson story: was the mill an ugly duckling or a 
beautiful swan? A real duck pond in front of the mill’s 
main office might have triggered that connection and 
did seem to pull all the parts together. On the final 
cover solution, made using paper produced at the mill, 
is the image of paper pulp stuck to the lid of a grinding 
machine, a photo of the duck pond, and the hook shown both in its func-
tional position and flipped upside down as a beautiful ducklike object 
(Figure 5.9).
Thumbnail sketches can literally become the design, as they did in a 
flier announcing designer Ed Fella’s own lecture (Figure 5.10). The “shiny 
boot” image on the back cover is self-referential, representing the highly 
crafted and professionally slick work of Fella’s early career. The flier design 
is an example of a meta concept (see Chapter 3), with sketches supporting 
the idea of keeping one’s self a little off-center during the design process. 
Fella, well known for his move toward hand-drawn designs, exemplified 
this concept of keeping off center by actually doing it, using sketches as the 
final artwork. In keeping the design crowded and busy, he avoided choos-
ing which images to delete and which to save; consequently, his design 
becomes a statement about making choices—often one of the greatest dif-
ficulties in moving forward (see the excerpt A Psychological Tip).
EXCERPT: A Psychological Tip by Piet Hein 
(1905–1996): Danish mathematician, inventor, 
author, and poet.
Whenever you’re called on to make up your mind,
and you’re hampered by not having any,
the best way to solve the dilemma you’ll find,
is simply by spinning a penny.
No—not so that chance shall decide the affair
while you’re passively standing there moping,
but the moment the penny is up in the air, 
you suddenly know what you’re hoping.
5.10 ED FELLA. Design for the front 
and back of an announcement for 
a lecture by the designer. Sketches 
during the exploration served as 
art for the back side of the flier. 
(Detail below)
In Practice: A way to engage design 
thinking immediately is to begin sketches 
during project meetings.
View a Closer Look for the Ed Fella flier on myartslab.com

ACTIVELY GENERATING IDEAS
133
The thumbnails for a Columbia University 
architecture poster by Willi Kunz show how his 
final design uses structure to create meaning 
(Figure 5.11). The poster’s subject, a symposium 
on the transformation of traditional public space 
into cyberspace (and its deterioration into hyper-
ghettos, where hood culture is celebrated) is 
quite abstract, and the poster’s graphic elements 
are equally abstract, in keeping with the subject 
matter. Yet they do express a hyperactive, multi-
layered quality that relates to the urban environ-
ment, as will be discussed by the diverse set of 
panelists at the event the poster is promoting. 
The roughing in of type, lines, and shapes are just 
quick sketches, but they convey the visual depth 
the designer intended. Through a series of refine-
ments, he transformed the simple thumbnails 
into a spirited poster that portrays both the con-
tent and spirit of the conference (Figure 5.12). 
Some designers use thumbnails as inspira-
tion for projects that require a more deliberate 
interpretation through metaphoric concepts. They 
sketch a mix of readable images that work to-
gether to create meaningful communication. In 
the thumbnails Luba Lukova drew for a poster 
that was part of a series on social justice, her 
thought process is clear. Each sketch is a step in 
her investigation to interpret the impact of a 
large income gap in society (Figure 5.13). In this case, the fork and slice of 
cake or pie are used as symbols to make a metaphoric connection to the 
subject—a smaller proportion of the population gets a much larger pro-
portion of its bounty. After completing a number of thumbnail sketches, 
Lukova tries to determine which one works best to not only convey her 
message but also to grab her viewers’ attention. 
5.12 WILLI KUNZ. Cyberspace.
Poster announcing a symposium 
about the transformation of 
traditional public space into 
cyberspace and its deterioration 
into hyper-ghettos.
5.11 WILLI KUNZ. Thumbnail 
pencil sketches for the poster 
Cyberspace (below).

How do your ideas take form?
I have to be really moved and interested in the 
project to put my brain to work. Everything 
begins with shapeless, almost chaotic, pictures 
that come to my mind. Then I learn as much as 
I can about the subject matter by reading and 
researching. And then I try to forget about all 
those facts I have absorbed and let my intuition 
lead me. I usually start making very loose 
drawings until a line or a shape suggests a more 
defined idea (Vignette 5.1). I guess the process 
is similar to a sniffing dog following his nose. I
think with experience we need less time to do 
preliminary drawings. Sometimes the idea just 
comes right from the very first time I sketch it.
Where did you get the idea for the 
Sudan poster?
The idea came after watching a television 
documentary about that impoverished country. 
At the end of the film there was a commercial 
promoting low-calorie food. The contrast was 
so striking that while watching the ad I had 
the idea for the image in my head. In one hour 
I completed it without actually having been 
given an assignment for it (Vignette 5.2).
Where was it published?
I contacted The New York Times op-ed page art 
director who had encouraged me to propose 
images for the publication. Unfortunately, 
at that time the editor thought that “Sudan
was not in the news” so the collaged drawing 
was not published in the paper. Another year 
passed before I received a phone call from a 
young graduate at Columbia Law School. She
and a couple of her colleagues had started an 
organization called Anti-Poverty Law Center 
and needed a visual identity. While working 
with them, I showed my rejected Sudan image 
and we decided to use it as a poster for the 
organization. Sudan has won numerous design 
awards including ICOGRADA Excellence Award 
and gold medal at the International Poster 
Biennial in Mexico.
When a client comes to you with 
something specific, where do you start?
I start by immersing myself in the client’s 
project. After I accept the job it becomes my 
own project. I begin to care about the problems 
that the client wants to address, as if they were 
my own problems. Only then am I able to put 
myself in that state where I feel inspired to 
work and I am able to come up with ideas. I
think this is what people need from us: to feel 
sympathy for their issues and use our skills to 
resolve them. I usually present several ideas 
to my clients. But there are exceptions where 
I feel so strongly about a concept that I don’t 
want to show anything else but this piece. This 
works well with people who trust me and know 
that I put a lot of effort into seemingly simple 
solutions (Vignettes 5.3 and 5.4).
Luba Lukova is a renowned artist and designer working in New York City. Her distinctive work uses 
metaphors, juxtaposition of symbols, and economy of line and text to succinctly capture humanity’s 
elemental themes. She has held solo exhibitions at UNESCO in Paris, DDD Gallery in Osaka, La 
MaMa in New York, and the Art Institute of Boston. Her many awards include the Grand Prix 
Savignac at the International Poster Salon in Paris, the Gold Pencil from The One Club in New 
York, and Honor Laureate at the International Poster Exhibition in Fort Collins, Colorado. Her 
work is represented in the collections of the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Library of 
Congress, and Bibliotheque Nationale de France. Lukova is the creator of the critically acclaimed 
Social Justice 2008 poster portfolio containing visual reactions to many of the pressing issues of 
our time. The portfolio has been exhibited around the world, including the prestigious exhibit at 
the inauguration of President Barack Obama. The Social Justice 2008 poster portfolio was recently 
added to the permanent art collection of the World Bank.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  B R I N G I N G  I D E A S  T O  F O R M ,  W I T H   LUBA LUKOVA
134
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS

Vignette 5.2 Sudan. Poster for 
the International Anti-Poverty 
Law Center.
Vignette 5.3 Say It Loud! Poster/
logo for Say It Loud!, an Orlando, 
Florida advertising agency.
Vignette 5.1 Cover sketch for 
War Resisters League 2010 Peace 
Calendar.
Vignette 5.4 Water. Poster 
for the Union Theological 
Seminary. 
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: LUBA LUKOVA 
135
View a Closer Look for the Sudan poster on myartslab.com

136
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
In the final poster, the image of the pie speaks with an 
immediacy much more powerful than words (Figure 5.14). Her 
distinctive style, simple forms, and sensitive use of color work 
together to distill the issue into a powerful image. The large fork 
dominates the image, while the smaller forks compete over a 
much smaller piece of the pie. It’s a simple yet dramatic image 
that carries the message of economic inequality quite poetically 
and emphatically.
“i tao pi pu tao:”
 If the idea is there, the brush can spare 
itself the work. 
—Ancient rule of Chinese painting
Associating Words with Ideas
An effective (and fun) way to generate new ideas is to apply the random 
word technique to your design process. First, simply choose a word and 
find its definition (or definitions) in the dictionary. Then distill one of 
those definitions to some keywords or ideas, and apply those keywords or 
ideas to the subject of your project (see Steps in the Design Process: The 
Random Word Technique). Bringing an idea down to a keyword helps 
you to get to an essential part of that idea. Think of the process as a kind of 
structured stream of consciousness in which you associate key ideas from 
a random word with the design topic at hand.
Let’s imagine you are working on a website design for a hardware 
store. You randomly choose a word such as telephone. A telephone has 
nothing to do with a hardware store, but that doesn’t matter for this tech-
nique. What does matter is that you consider its meaning. In this case, the 
two roots of the word—tele, which refers to transmitting over a distance, 
and phone, which refers to sound and language—clarify the meaning tele-
phone, which is a device to transmit a human voice over a distance. 
Thinking about this definition leads us to the following chain of 
key ideas: transmitted voice > distance > making connections. That chain 
begins to evoke ideas for the hardware store’s website: if we bring the idea 
of making connections to hardware, then we can imagine objects being 
paired, for example, a hammer to a nail, paint to a brush. You can worry 
later about how you might make this concept visually concrete (perhaps 
in a language diagram or a montage). But for now, just concern yourself 
with making the associations. Try choosing another random word and see 
where its meaning and key ideas lead you in terms of that website for the 
hardware store. You might discover something completely unexpected 
and stimulating.
Using random words forces you to explore new ideas. The entire 
world is fair game for random words and associations. The words shoe,
5.13 LUBA LUKOVA. Thumbnail 
sketches for the Social Justice 
poster campaign: Income 
Gap (below).
5.14 LUBA LUKOVA. Final poster 
for the Social Justice poster 
campaign: Income Gap.

ACTIVELY GENERATING IDEAS
137
5.15 LAURIE DEMARTINO. The 
Hurricane Poster Project—a
design community initiative 
responding to flooded 
New Orleans.
soda, or magazine all have the potential to evoke ideas. Even verbs such as 
dance and adjectives such as beautiful can produce surprising results. Be 
creative and open to embracing true randomness.
The words people use to tell stories, express their feelings and 
experiences, or make an appeal can also lead to associations that pro-
duce meaningful ideas. The poster by designer Laura DeMartino was 
inspired by a Hurricane Katrina survivor, Hardy Jackson, who recalled 
his last moments with his wife as she was swept away by the floodwaters. 
“I tried to pull her up, but was too weak. She looked into my eyes and 
said, ‘Hardy, let go. Take care of the kids.’ If I could have done 
anything in my heart or my power to save her, I would have. 
I’m lost, that’s all I had” (Figure 5.15). Hardy’s words trig-
gered ideas for DeMartino that led her to create a poster with 
a single human portrait. In this work, one person’s silhouette 
represents many people, just as one tear becomes a symbol to 
represent the many tears triggered by this tragedy. She created 
a visual analogy between tears and flood waters that resonates 
because of the irony of New Orleans being known as a port 
city. The emphasis created by the solid silhouette makes the 
poster’s composition work quite well. The viewer is drawn in 
by the contrast between the smaller water drops and the single 
tear, causing an emotional response. The hurricane survivor’s 
words triggered ideas that DeMartino translated into visual 
form. The Worklist on Poster Design identifies some of these 
points, and In the Speakout “On Visualizing Ideas,” Charles 
Goslin suggests some strategies that help in this process.
In Practice: Note how a repeating pattern of drops has been 
used here to create meanings. Laura DeMartino used drops to 
represent many tears shed, whereas Charles Goslin used repeating 
drops to represent many people giving at a blood drive. Both are 
symbols, though of a very different sort. Symbols can be very 
powerful in a design, so use them wisely.
S T E P S  I N  T H E 
D E S I G N  P R O C E S S
The Random Word Technique
1  
 Randomly choose a word (noun, verb, 
adjective) from a novel, newspaper, 
or magazine, or instead, simply point to 
an object or an activity.
2  
 Look up the word’s definition in a dictionary 
to determine its basic meaning (or mean-
ings). Paying attention to the root, or origin, 
of the word is especially useful. 
3 
 Summarize into as few words as possible the 
principle meaning (or a particular meaning) 
of the word. 
4 
 Use your summary words from Step 3 to 
prompt associations and connections with 
elements of your project. (See the example 
in the text under “Associating Key Words 
with Ideas.”)

138
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
W O R K L I S T
Poster Design
Before you begin to come up with ideas for a 
poster, become aware of important considerations 
that apply to almost all posters. The purpose is 
not to allow these parameters to inhibit your 
ideas but, instead, to allow these parameters to 
work unconsciously in the background while 
you explore ideas.
t  
 Have you identified the target audience?
t  
 Is a clear message being conveyed through 
a solid and memorable concept?
t  
 Is the poster visible from a distance?
t  
 Does the poster’s design stand out both on 
its own and adjacent to other posters? 
t  
 Is there a dominant image that creates 
a visual entry point for the viewer? 
t  
 What is the second element you want the 
viewer to see?
t  
 Are there any visuals codes connecting the 
poster to the specific subject, product, or 
service? For example, is the subject serious, 
humorous, academic, architectural, 
organized, or fluid?
t  
 Have you conveyed any emotional cues?
t  
 What makes the poster memorable: its form, 
its meaning, or both?
t  
 Should the installation or handling and 
shipping of the poster factor into its 
design?
5.16 ELI KINCE. Dining hall 
poster making a request (left), 
and a second poster (right) 
that was posted (as a replace-
ment) one week later.
A poster design is especially depen-
dent on a solid concept to reach out and 
grab the viewer’s attention with (see the 
Worklist on creating a poster design). 
For a dining hall where students needed 
to be reminded not to remove food, Eli 
Kince went a bit further to explore how 
the same words could be transformed to 
function in different ways over time. In 
the first poster, all of the letters “o” were 
replaced with images of food, a simple 
change that might make one notice and 
smile. In a second poster, hung a week 
later, the food images were missing, as 
well as the letters, and the poster sud-
denly became quite funny with its big 
blank spaces that implied missing food 
(Figure 5.16). The designer used humor to deliver the message quite effec-
tively. He knew his audience would respond better if they could laugh 
along with the poster. He gained their attention with the first poster and 
gained their empathy with the second.

ACTIVELY GENERATING IDEAS
139
SPEAKOUT: On Visualizing Ideas
by Charles Goslin (1932–2007)
Charles Goslin used to tell his students that an idea was the hat 
rack to hang everything on. In other words, an idea is the nec-
essary element to support all the other details. The sketches and 
final symbol exemplify this search for ideas in his poster for a 
blood drive (Figures 5.17 and 5.18). His design used many small 
drops of blood and one large drop as a metaphor to symbolize 
the group effort required for a blood drive. The following tips 
explain how one might expedite the idea-generating process.
Goslin: Visualizing ideas is the most important thing we do as 
graphic designers. Without an idea, you’ve said nothing. But it’s 
not only expressing an idea, it’s also about making it a graceful 
and beautiful idea. Here are a few suggestions I make to stu-
dents when working on a design problem:
5.18 CHARLES GOSLIN. The 
final symbol after a series of 
submissions and refinements. 
5.17 CHARLES GOSLIN.
Thumbnail sketch exploration 
(partial) toward developing 
a symbol for Merck & Co. 
blood drive. 
1 
 Apply the seat of your pants to a chair in 
a very quiet room. 
2 
 Focus with undivided attention. There 
shouldn’t be any distractions, especially no 
music blasting through earphones.
3 
 Conceptualize, conceptualize, conceptual-
ize. Students often say they made a design 
because they felt like it. They too rarely say 
they did it because they thought it through 
and wanted to use THIS concept.
4 
 Sketch out thumbnails with a thick black 
marker—a pencil or pen will make your 
drawings too fussy. Fussy is good when 
refining an idea, but you can’t refine 
“nothing.” 
5 
 Ask yourself questions to help define the 
problem—you are your own best resource.
6 
 Push yourself to explore something new. 
There are wonderful things inside you, and 
if you don’t try things you’ve never done 
before, you will never find them. Keeping 
yourself off balance will help.
7 
 Enlarge some of your thumbnail sketches. 
There are times when a wonderful little 
fragment of a drawing is there, but you 
don’t know it or see it when it’s too small. 
Do it mechanically—on a copier or 
scanner. The tools are there, so use them.
8 
 Don’t be afraid to put stupid things down 
as ideas. The point is to keep moving 
forward—you can weed out bad ideas later.
9 
 Use symbols. Don’t make pictures of 
whatever happened—there is rarely an 
idea in that approach. BUT, don’t take the 
search for a symbol too literally by 
making a trademark. 
10  Be your most severe critic. The only person 
you ought to be competing with is yourself. 
Push yourself in your sketch phase. 
Think of it as climbing a hill with a rock 
on your back—it seems like you are never 
going to get anywhere, but what you’re 
actually doing is investing—in the project 
and in yourself.

140
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
Generating Montaged Ideas
Montage is a workhorse technique in graphic design. Designers use this 
valuable tool to encapsulate a thought quickly, making it especially useful 
when creating thumbnail sketches. Montage is often confused with col-
lage because both involve pasting things together onto a single surface. 
But whereas collage is an additive process, montage is reductive. With 
montage, you choose images to express the essence of an idea. The tech-
nique generally works best when you combine only two images at a time. 
Combining more than two images can make deciphering the meaning 
more difficult. 
The concept of pairing objects and ideas is quite old, possibly first 
tried by the ancient Greeks. The Greek word synectikos means to bring 
diverse elements together into a unified connection. Aesop (620–560 
BCE), a Greek slave and storyteller, brought this idea to children’s fables. 
In his popular fables, including The Tortoise and the Hare, animals per-
sonified both problems and their solutions to teach morals and life lessons. 
One of Aesop’s fables was used as the design idea for a Soviet pro-
paganda poster during World War II. In The Danger in Disguise, a wolf, 
identified clearly with a swastika, is revealed under sheep’s clothing 
(Figure 5.19). This same montaging technique can be used to solve com-
plex design problems. You can use it to promote or explain any event, 
service, or product by using odd combinations and conveying ideas in 
surprising ways. 
Chinese characters also involve a simple montage technique that 
creates complex meaning. Writers take single words, made of signs and 
shapes, and combine them to create a word that holds yet another mean-
ing. For example, in Figure 5.20, characters for grain and fire combine to 
create the word for autumn. 
Another good example of montage is seen in the final design 
by Alexander Gelman (Figure 5.21) to accompany an op-ed, a 
commentary printed on the page opposite the editorial page in a 
newspaper. The subject involved a Russian hostage crisis in 2002 
in which Moscow authorities pumped a gas typically used for 
anesthesia into the theater to neutralize Chechen militants, but in 
doing so killed 129 hostages, many of whom were children. The 
design uses two forms that symbolize the theater (happy = comedy 
and sad = drama), but the addition of a third mask, a gas mask drawn in 
the same style as the other two, redirects the meaning toward something 
completely different.
We can see here how a thumbnail sketch might have translated 
directly from sketchpad to final design. When we create thumbnail 
sketches, we are searching to visualize the same reductive, yet meaningful 
thinking. Thumbnail ideas stand out as tiny triggers that make connec-
tions to the subject. Using a similar style and scale, the designer made 
a close connection among the three masks, creating a kind of horrible 
5.20 Chinese characters 
montage into a compound 
idea. 
5.21 ALEXANDER GELMAN.
Graphic image to accom-
pany an article of a terrorist 
attack in a Russian theater. 
The montage is revealed in 
a step-by-step process.
5.19 “The danger in Disguise.” 
World War II Soviet propaganda 
poster using the “Sheep’s Clothing” 
fable to allude to Nazi Germany’s 
treachery in their invasion of the 
Soviet Union. The poster captions 
say: “The enemy is insidious, 
so be alert!”

GENERATING MONTAGED IDEAS
141
EXCERPT: Lewis Carroll, Through the Looking-Glass, Chapter 5
 
 …Alice laughed. “There’s no use trying,” she said: “one can’t believe impossible things.” 
“I daresay you haven’t had much practice,” said the Queen. “When I was your age, I always 
did it for half an hour a day. Why sometimes I’ve believed as many as six impossible 
things before breakfast.”
5.22 CHANG-SOO CHOI. Thumb-
nail sketch toward a proposed 
book cover for M Butterfly. The 
mash-up of images lead to a 
more complex thought about 
the play and its characters.
5.23 CHANG-SOO CHOI.
Finalized design for the 
cover of M Butterfly.
irony—a sequence of events from theater to death. The design spoke as 
clearly as the published article.
When creating thumbnail sketches, the designer has to determine 
whether the image will “read” (convey a special meaning) in the culture 
in which it will be seen. The happy and sad mask images are a standard 
symbol for theater, but if only those two images were used, they would 
have not expressed the full depth of the idea behind the op-ed piece. In 
this instance, their use helps a large segment of the audience begin to 
understand the subject, but the addition of the gas mask, drawn in the 
same icon-like style, brings new meaning. However, in a culture that 
doesn’t recognize the original masks as symbols of the theater, the entire 
message would have been lost. The designer must know the cultural back-
ground of the intended audience when using such symbols.
The thumbnail for a book cover for M Butterfly by Chang-Soo Choi 
uses montage as a technique, where pins that usually hold butterflies now 
hold the letterforms in place (Figure 5.22). This simple switch underlies 
the storyline of distorted relations between a French diplomat (Bernard 
Boursicot) who falls in love with a male Peking opera singer (Shi Pei 
Pu) and the disastrous outcome of their affair. When brought to a final, 
refined design, the addition of a hand, transparent veil, type position, and 
an overall dark atmosphere, help portray this dark fantasy (Figure 5.23). 
In Practice: Graphic designers are 
experts at communicating through signs 
and symbols. Signs and symbols “read,” 
and they do so with the kind of graphic 
power necessary to hold attention.

142
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
A graphic illustration by Adva Meirovitch for an op-ed article 
describes the search for a super gasoline that offers improved mileage, yet 
doesn’t pollute (Figure 5.24). In the montage, she has combined a classic 
gasoline pump with a photograph of Superman. The images are reduced 
to black and white (posterized), so they function more as signs that are to 
be read, rather than as photographs that offer particular details and 
include shades of gray or shades of the color spectrum. The montage sup-
ports the article, but also adds to it by questioning whether this search for 
a miracle product is similar to waiting for Superman to come and save us. 
(See Steps in the Design Process: Creating a Graphic Montage. It explains 
the steps the designer took to solve the editorial project using sets of key-
words, a process that can be useful for any designer who needs to inter-
pret information to relay a message.) 
Benefitting from Playful Accidents
When developing design ideas, it is always useful to keep an eye out for the 
playful accidents in your sketches. Instead of being undesirable or unfor-
tunate, these accidents can reveal ideas that might have been otherwise 
discarded or overlooked. It may seem strange that an error might possibly 
lead to a great design direction, but famous inventions are studded with 
examples. Charles Goodyear (1800–1860) spent years of research trying 
5.24 ADVA MEIROVITCH. Student 
op-ed project on the subject 
of the world needing a kind 
of “Supergas.”
In Practice: Posterizing the gasoline 
pump and Superman images—and thus 
eliminating the photographic (grayscale) 
quality—allow the graphics to integrate 
more easily with each other. 

BENEFITTING FROM PLAYFUL ACCIDENTS
143
S T E P S  I N  T H E  D E S I G N  P R O C E S S
Creating a Graphic Montage
1 
 Research the subject: Find material that will build knowledge for a full exploration, and 
summarize the content into keywords. What is the subject really about? Flesh out the 
main points. In the case of the article referred to here, the premise is that America needs 
a super gasoline for both economic and environmental reasons.
2  
 Decide on at least three sets of keywords that embody the basic aspects of your content. 
For the article, one keyword set might be “America” and “gasoline,” another could be 
“America” and “pollution;” and a third word set is “super” and “gasoline.” Think of each 
set as a conceptual path. For example, the conceptual path of the keywords “America” 
+ “gasoline” leans toward patriotic; “America”+“pollution” is environmentally minded; 
“super”+“gasoline” is perhaps the most direct but might leave out some important mes-
sages. Comparing multiple concepts offers the chance to challenge one against the other. 
3  
 Choose one set to begin. List as many images as you can for each keyword (Figure 5.25). 
The words should be image-based nouns, not adjectives or complex ideas. For example, 
don’t use the word angry because it can’t be portrayed as a single image. Instead, use a 
word like “frown,” which can be visualized.
4  
 Cross-reference list A with list B, thumbnailing images of each possible pair as mon-
tages, for example, “muscle” with “engine,” then “burst” with “engine,” and so on. Each 
pair holds the possibility of an idea. Continue down the list, remembering that with 
thumbnails, it doesn’t matter how well the images are drawn. Their purpose is only to 
record ideas. 
5  
 After making many thumbnails, review them all to see which ideas stand out from the 
rest. Choose two or three to mock-up, bringing each idea to a more resolved form. Get 
feedback from fellow students or coworkers to determine the best solution.
5.25 Keyword list that 
breaks down main points 
of the article to make a 
distilled summary.
A) Super
muscles 
burst
cape
superman
(super) glue
(super) bowl
(super) sized
Nintendo
…
B) Gasoline
engine
gas cap
car
gas can
gas pump
flame
nozzle
oil
…

144
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
to find ways of giving rubber strength and elasticity, but only when he 
accidently spilled sulfur into rubber that was heating on his stove did he 
discover a viable solution—vulcanization. 
Inventor Arthur Fry (b. 1931) found that a glue deemed “not sticky 
enough” by his company, 3M, worked well as a coating on a hymnal 
bookmark. After being inundated with requests from coworkers for more 
of “that sticky notepaper,” Fry turned a mistake into a significant office 
supply, Post-it® notes, now as common as the paper clip.
You can generate a playful accident by embracing the creative pro-
cess—a process that can be messy and chaotic or clean and organized. The 
various techniques described in this chapter will help the process along, 
as will looking outside the window, daydreaming, or throwing an image 
or bit of type into a composition, among a host of other approaches. The 
associations you make will open new conceptual territories, and main-
taining an open mind toward whatever happens will allow you to recog-
nize the playful accidents that will inevitably occur.
For example, imagine using the same set of familiar hues for 
everything you design. By mistake, you drop a new color into the mix. 
What’s normally blue and beige now has bright green next to it. Your first 
response might be one of dismay, but on second look you might say, “I 
never would have chosen that color, but I like how it works there.”
Playful accidents are, by nature, imperfect, which creates a nice con-
trast to the technically flawless designs one can create with a computer. 
We see digital “grit” being deliberately added as texture to help loosen 
up the page and increase the emotional response in a communication. 
We see designers using computer techniques to make images look hand 
drawn or worn. Weathered rawness, glitches, and mistakes add a human 
element to what might be an otherwise impersonal communication.
The design by Giorgio Baravalle for the book Forgotten War has 
many raw elements (Figure 5.26). Its front and back covers are made of 
rough corrugated cardboard, and its spine is made of a thick rubber 
band, holding all the pages together. The idea is meant to set a 
tone for the book’s subject—a photographic journal docu-
menting the work of the organization Doctors With-
out Borders. In keeping with the organization’s own 
finances, the book was produced with limited means. 
Even the cover graphic, a continuous torn texture, 
silkscreened in white ink, coordinates with the raw 
and immediate story of emergency aid. A high-
gloss, fussy jacket wouldn’t have conveyed the story 
or the organization as sensitively or expressively. 
The value of imperfection isn’t a new concept. 
According to type designer Oswald Cooper (1879–
1940), “sleek perfection palls on the imperfect persons 
who buy and use type.” His typographic design from 1916 
5.26 GIORGIO BARAVALLE, DE.MO. 
Cover and book design for
Forgotten War.

BENEFITTING FROM PLAYFUL ACCIDENTS
145
made the statement tangible (Figure 5.27). There is an imperfect quality 
in the typeface he designed and used here, but in addition, the sentences 
themselves are playful and imperfect. Words such as “Mercy!,” “Imag-
ine!,” and “Well, forevermore!” imply that Cooper was simply thinking out 
loud—the humorous design resonates with us even now.
In a much more contemporary environmental signage design, we 
see similar ideas that incorporate imperfect, playful accidents (Figure 
5.28). The horizontal bars of the Bloomberg LP sign shift left and right, 
with parts of numbers missing, and yet this uneven presentation is exactly 
what makes the sign so noticeable. Its fragmentation creates an energy 
that fits perfectly in the environment for which it was made, an office 
building for a major news and media corporation.
Positive things can happen if you build a design process where acci-
dents are welcome (see the Speakout by Stephen Banham). Bring your 
own visual language to the process as a start. Always asking the question 
“What if…?” allows you to see an alternate view in solving a design prob-
lem. Ask what other angle there is, make an unusual comparison, reverse 
the order of something, bring asymmetry to something normally sym-
metrical, use type to solve something you would normally solve with an 
image. Be aware of your reactions during this process, and capture some 
of the inventive directions in your sketches. 
5.27 OSWALD COOPER. This 
typographic flier from 1916 
announced a new telephone 
number with imperfect 
type quality and deprecating 
humor (Mercy!, Imagine! 
Well, forevermore!, and 
How time flies!). 
5.28 DYNAMIC DISPLAYS: 
LISA STRAUSFELD/PENTAGRAM; 
ENVIRONMENTAL GRAPHICS: 
PAULA SCHER/PENTAGRAM. 
Environmental graphics and 
dynamic media displays for 
Bloomberg L.P. corporate 
headquarters, New York.

146
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
  Imagination is more important 
than knowledge. —Albert Einstein
5.29 Detail of printed ant. 
Refreshing Your Vision 
The previous chapter recommended temporarily separating yourself 
from the research you gather, which allows you to absorb the material. 
The same is true for your own thumbnail sketches. Returning to your 
work after a break allows you to see it with fresh eyes, with a new per-
spective, and designers need as many perspectives as possible to fully 
explore the possibilities of a design. Your refreshed vision sharpens and 
broadens your insight.
SPEAKOUT:The Character of Accidents by Stephen Banham, Letterbox, Australia 
 
 During the printing of a popular Melbourne, Australia, street map, a solitary ant wandered unno-
ticed onto the black printing plate of a first-page detail of the central city. Literally embedded into 
the plate, its image was printed on 20,000 copies of the first edition, creating a surreal image of a 
giant mutant insect menacing what is now Southern Cross Railway Station (Figure 5.29). What 
is so appealing about this story is how the ant brings a welcome organic element to an otherwise 
abstracted depiction of geography. 
 
 Everyone knew of the “special edition” that year and the ant gained an almost folkloric status. This 
offered a way for the public to find an immediate and accessible entry point to a broader design 
discussion—one that celebrates the role of the accident. In effect, no matter how we may deceive 
ourselves in trying to attain technical perfection, we must always acknowledge the existence of the 
chaotically playful world that we operate within.
5.29 Detail of printed ant 
on a popular Melbourne, 
Australia, street map. 

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
147
When vacationing from your design process (by simply doing 
something else for a short time), carry a notebook wherever you go so 
you can record every idea, however insignificant, that comes to you. 
Remember that you are sidetracking, not derailing; synthesizing rather 
than coasting. Creative distractions might include a visit to a museum, 
seeing a film, browsing through a library, reading a design article, taking a 
walk around the neighborhood, going to an actual bookstore, looking for 
odd gadgets at a hardware store, drawing or doodling, attending a concert 
or performance, sitting in the middle of a mall for an hour to just watch 
and listen, or observing kids in a playground. Learn to notice everything 
around you, and note how it sparks your imagination and brings a new 
level of sophistication to your work. The value of this exercise is based on 
the will to continue throwing dart ideas at the targeted design problem to 
increase the likelihood that you will score a bull’s-eye. Your process will 
continue as you begin to evaluate your ideas, but you need to do all the 
prerequisite imaginative work first.
In Perspective
Creativity is a complicated and mysterious process. There are times when 
ideas simply pop into your head and other times when coming up with 
ideas becomes a grueling process requiring an extraordinary amount of 
work. As this chapter makes clear, you can be proactive in developing 
powerful ideas or you can settle for less-than-inspiring solutions. Which 
kind of designer do you want to be?
Establishing a comfortable work environment allows you to focus 
on creating and not on settings that distract or inhibit. The objects you 
choose to surround yourself with symbolize experiences and hold memo-
ries that have an influence on the designs you make. Brainstorming can 
help you generate a wide variety of ideas, and becoming competent at 
thumbnailing allows you to generate equally wide varieties of visual ideas. 
Other techniques that can get your thoughts churning include making 
random word connections, creating visual montages, and even embracing 
accidents, all of which broaden the possibility of unexpected solutions. 
The goal is to get to the point where you have enough ideas to begin the 
process of identifying, weighing, and categorizing which of those ideas 
are worthy of more refined form.
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Sketching Warm-Up Exercises): 
Primary shapes: Begin drawing primary shapes—circle, square, and equi-
lateral triangle. Transform these shapes through distortion into ellipses, 
rectangles, and other triangles. Extend or rotate combinations of these 
primary shapes to generate volumes—spheres, cylinders, cubes, cones, 
and pyramids.
K E Y  T E R M S
Brainstorming (p. 129)
Keyword (p. 136)
Mock-up (p. 143)
Posterized (p. 142)
Random word technique
(p. 136)
Thought starter (p. 127)
  Do something, do something to that, 
and then do something to that. 
—Jasper Johns
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

148
CHAPTER 5: GENERATING IDEAS
Things to Consider: Combine two objects in an unexpected way, in a way not normally 
thought of as going together. 
Gesture drawing: Using a wide-tip marker, create quick sketches of 
objects—a crumpled piece of paper, a pencil, your watch, cell phone, shoe, 
or anything near you that sparks your interest.
Tonal drawing: Choose an object and draw it using only tonal values; 
imagine that there are no lines around this object. Use only the side of 
your lead pencil, not the tip.
Negative-space drawing: Instead of drawing the positive space occupied 
by an object, draw the negative space that exists around it. Consider how 
the space creates an abstraction, one step removed from the reality of your 
object’s context.
Composition thumbnails: Using simple thumbnail sketches, produce a 
compositional layout idea that redesigns the opening spread of a maga-
zine article.
Image thumbnails: Sketch ideas for the phrase “time flies.” Consider key-
words for each word of the phrase and then create metaphoric montages 
in thumbnail form.
Exercise 2 (Random Word Technique): Look up the principal mean-
ing for each of the following words: telephone, rope, apple, quotation, and 
zipper. Use the results to create sketches for a logo design for an architec-
tural firm called Formation.
Exercise 3 (Word List): Create three keyword sets for the design of a 
newsletter masthead titled The Art of Cooking. List images under each 
keyword of the set, and then montage them into thumbnail ideas. 
Exercise 4 (100 Arrows): The client will be here in 10 minutes to review 
your design of “100 different arrow shapes.” Start now. 
—Provided by Geoffry Fried, chair, Design Department, The Art Institute of 
Boston at Lesley University
Project 1 (Montaging): Montage images of two tools together to invent 
a single, but nonfunctional, fantasy tool. Optional thought-starter com-
binations to consider: cell phone, coffee cup, computer mouse, dice, eye-
glasses, frame, megaphone, pencil, plug, wheel, or wrench. Present your 
final design with an explanation as to why it might be useful. 
Full color. Size: centered on 11" × 17" vertical or horizontal.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
149
Project 2 (Logo Design): Develop a visual identity for the Used Book 
Café. Use the random word technique and montages from word lists to 
develop a logo that resonates with the viewer. Think beyond your normal 
parameters and pull new associations into what this visual identity could 
be. The final design must include the name, if only in a supportive role, 
to the mark. Use no more than two colors. Present your final logo cen-
tered on 11" × 17" vertical in two sizes (large version above approximately 
6" diameter, and small 1.5" below).
Project 3 (Project Design): Clotheslines are being banned in commu-
nities around the country. This trend has inspired a local exhibition in 
which artists from all media have been asked to create a piece reflecting on 
the subject. Your job is to design an 18" × 24" vertical poster announcing 
the exhibition titled FREE TO DRY. Research the subject (see laundrylist.
org) and generate at least ten thumbnail ideas. From those thumbnails, 
develop three distinct poster comps. Include the title, but all other infor-
mation is up to you, including the date of its run, the place (a local gallery 
of your choice), and any additional information that you feel is necessary. 
Note that while advocates for drying laundry outdoors feel that it is the 
right of the homeowner, others argue that it brings down the aesthetic 
appeal of a community. Bring your own bias to this subject (pro or con).
Present each comp at half size of the final size, and center it with a 
thin border on an 11" × 17" page. Include copies of your ten thumbnails 
and an explanation for why you chose the three ideas for your comps.
Things to Consider: Think about how the name integrates with your mark—adjacent to it 
or as an integral part of the symbol itself. 
Things to Consider: Find ideas that visualize this controversial subject in 
inventive ways. Also note that if the gallery likes your idea, they will want to 
extend the design to an invitation, website, and catalog.
Project 2 MARY DEAN (TOP) AND 
SHIRLEY FRIEDLANDER (BOTTOM). 
Two visual identity designs 
created by students for the 
Used Book Café.

150
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM

151
The Elements and 
Principles of Form
In graphic design, visual gestures work in much the same way. To convey 
a feeling of awkwardness, an artist could use an image of a crooked smile 
or could intensify that awkwardness by adding an unnatural color (such 
as green lips). A word (such as pause) can separate the dialog of two para-
graphs, or a thin line can serve the same function. A tough, no-nonsense 
personality could be conveyed through a caption that says “Don’t mess 
with me,” which could be made stronger with a bold, sans-serif typeface. 
Color, line, and shape can also be used to capture such expressions. This 
chapter will explain some of the principles that guide the use of these ele-
ments for making clear and expressive communication.
Physical form can engage the reader’s eyes, but, as this chapter 
explains, form can also engage the mind, pulling it into a particular com-
munication to decode the meaning. An intelligent idea, coupled with 
skillfully used form, makes the language of graphic design not only speak 
but also sing. In other words, form, when well crafted, enriches meaning.
Opposite page: WAX , CALGARY AB, 
CANADA. Poster (detail) for the 
Victoria Symphony (full image, 
see Figure 6.8).
I don’t think you grow up dream-
ing to be a graphic designer. 
I think you find it at some point, 
and things click, and you start 
doing something that you love. 
—Paul Sahre
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Discuss how form and function work together to convey 
meaning in a graphic design.
t 
 List the six compositional elements of design and give  
 
examples of ways they can be used to convey meaning.
t
 Explain how artists use the seven compositional principles 
of design to organize compositional elements and 
communicate meaning.
t
Exercises and Projects
  
 Find existing designs that exemplify each of the 
principles of composition; change the meaning 
behind a photograph by cropping; create a 
design from a piece of litter; create an abstraction 
from a photograph; describe a specific location 
with one adjective and a color palette; design four 
compositions based on themes. 
hen we speak, we use tone, emphasis, facial gestures, and body 
language to add meaning to our words. Usually these are subconscious 
additions, but they do have an impact: they clarify our words and 
thoughts, adding subtleties of meaning. Nuances of facial expression and 
gesture are components of the whole package of verbal communication, 
as much a part of a specific culture as its language or regional accent.
W
6

152
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Form and Function
Just as with architecture, form has an important function in the field of 
communications. Something colorful, expressive, or perfectly ordered is 
probably going to grab the viewer’s attention. However, overindulgent 
form can get in the way of content, especially when there is no clear con-
nection between the form and the subject. In other words, if something 
looks pretty, or tough, or expressive for its own sake, there is most likely 
going to be a disconnect from the content. The principle for architecture 
also holds true for graphic design—the form must follow the function. 
The form a design takes will convey meaning whether the designer 
intends it or not. Even an attempt to escape direct meaning communicates 
something substantial. Whatever vehicle for a design is used, an idea is 
going to be conveyed. The designer’s job is to control that idea. The inter-
pretation of that meaning will be influenced by the viewer’s own experi-
ence, knowledge, and culture, and designers must take that influence into 
account while maintaining as much control as possible.
To achieve the most effective communication, 
you need to find the best point of intersection between 
what you are able to convey through form and con-
tent and what the viewer will perceive. All the ele-
ments of your design should be deliberate and care-
fully chosen. Step back from your first drafts and ask 
yourself why the design looks the way it does. Can 
you find a reason for every aspect of the design? Did 
you make the best choices? Questioning is a good 
strategy to get to the core of the junction of form and 
content. (See a further discussion of this critical-
thinking process in Chapter 10, Visual Coding: Load-
ing Form with Meaning.)
For a poster announcing a lecture by the Dutch 
designer Gert Dunbar, viewers might initially be 
attracted by the bright color and gesture marks 
(Figure 6.1). It’s true, the design is filled with energy, 
but not in the superficial way we might think. The 
poster’s primary function is as an announcement, 
and graphic designer Wes Kull provided all the perti-
nent information about the event, but there’s more to 
what you see here. 
The premise begins with the notion that Dutch 
design is sometimes perceived as pure eye candy. On 
closer inspection, the dense black mass in the center 
changes from an abstract blob to something literal 
and meaningful. It is, in fact, candy. This salty black 
licorice, called salmiakdrop, is found throughout the 
6.1 WES KULL. Proposed 
poster for a lecture by Dutch 
designer Gert Dumbar.
In Practice: Visual depth is a dominant element 
in this poster’s composition. The stepladder is layered 
behind the black licorice shape. It is also further 
“echoed” in incomplete copied images that create 
a sense of further depth. In addition, the diagonal 
lines, especially reaching to the 4, add to the 
dimension of the piece.

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
153
Netherlands. Kull uses it here as a visual substitute for Gert Dunbar, him-
self an icon of Dutch design.
If you read the poster more closely, you will find that the image 
and content meet and that other supportive elements enter the picture. 
The playful yet ordered typography directly suggests Dunbar’s work, and 
the layered imagery (such as the stepladder in the background) suggests 
a sense of reaching further, beyond the easily accessible, as Dunbar is 
known to do.
Compositional Elements 
Compositional elements are the building blocks of principles. For exam-
ple, the principle of contrast becomes tangible only when elements such 
as color or texture create the contrast. The principle of direction is made 
real by bringing the elements of line or depth to the page. A graphic design 
project might focus on a principle to solve an intellectual idea, but the ele-
ments themselves make it concrete. Line, shape, pattern, texture, space, 
depth, and color are the most important elements to consider.
Line
Line is one dimensional, having length, but no height or depth. It is the 
basic element used to describe a shape and can be actual or implied, verti-
cal or horizontal, diagonal, or contoured. Line has the power to activate 
its surrounding area. A thick, bold line conveys a feeling of strength. A 
diagonal line that changes from thick to thin creates the illusion of spa-
tial perspective. Line can define form, divide space, create the illusion of 
depth, suggest movement or energy, or anything else the artist needs for it 
to do. Figure 6.2 shows line as a quickly sketched doodle, and Figure 6.3 
shows it as a hard-edged graphic. Its capacity is endless.
Designers can also use line to convey meaning or ideas. Lines used 
in this way are often a learned response based on cultural norms, and 
their use in a design becomes an important element not only in a compo-
sition but also in terms of meaning. For example, a group of thin lines that 
encounter a bold vertical one can suggest the idea of struggle. A jagged 
line might indicate stress or energy. A curved line can convey playfulness 
because it seems to have a free-flowing life of its own. This free-flowing 
quality is evident in signatures, where the expressive force of a personal 
characteristic is effortlessly created. That same quality is used more inten-
tionally when designers use hand-drawn lines in their work. The use of 
expressive line is quite evident in the familiar Time Warner Cable logo 
(Figure 6.4). The original mark by Steff Geisbuhler uses curvilinear lines 
formed into the shape of an eye and an ear, implying the act of both hear-
ing and seeing, which presumably occurs while watching your Time 
Warner-supported cable TV service. The mark’s line and color were later 
revised to integrate with the company’s name. 
  It is the pervading law of all things 
organic and inorganic,…That form 
ever follows function. This is the law. 
—Louis Henry Sullivan (1856–1924)
  Form follows function—that has 
been misunderstood. Form and 
function should be one, joined 
in a spiritual union. 
—Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959)
6.3 Line as a hard-
edged graphic.
6.2
LOWELL SANTORO. 
Line as a sketchy, hand-
made doodle.
6.4
THE BRAND UNION, 
WALLY KRANTZ AND SAM BECKER. 
Time Warner Cable logo (based 
on an original mark by Steff 
Geissbuhler).

154
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Designer Caroline Woolard used line quite inventively in her bird’s 
head logo for an exterminator (Figure 6.5). In the design, Woolard used 
a different strategy, making the bird’s head a continuation of the line 
that inscribed the company name. But instead of sending a message to 
chemically exterminate bugs, Woolard has changed the logo to one for 
environmental policy. Her bird is eating a bug, suggesting a more natural 
approach to pest control.
For a CD cover, Max Franosch made a quick scribble into the art-
work for a modern jazz album, Meditations on Coltrane (Figure 6.6). A 
quick stroke of chalk on a sidewalk would have had a much different look 
and meaning, as would a broad brushstroke. But the designer found that 
the rhythmic strokes of ink on paper, reversed and colorized, then held 
together with a floating, torn strip, connected the two subjects—medita-
tion and jazz—in a way that is both gestural and controlled, just as the 
music of jazz is both gestural and controlled.
Wilson Bonilla used a very expressive line to create the impression 
of kinetic motion for a poster profiling the graphic designer Paul Rand 
(Figure 6.7). The line creates a visual sort of “sound” that is amplified by 
its contrast to the clean and cool image of Paul Rand. The lines and shapes 
tease, poke, pounce, push, and pull, with what Rand himself referred to 
as the “play instinct.” The vigor of form enhances the message, the expres-
sion of energetic ideas emanating from Rand’s mind. 
Shape
Shape is a two-dimensional space, created by joining the two ends of a 
line. Shape can be a predominant element in a design, from a random ink 
blob to a geometric circle, triangle, or square. But shape can also be cre-
ated from other elements such as color and texture. 
The poster series by Wax, and illustrated by Heads of State, uses 
color and texture to create gritty, tactile shapes that have a dominant pres-
ence (Figure 6.8). We can’t help but try to interpret their subtle ideas. The 
montage of a tree with a violin, a skyline with piano keys, and a butterfly 
with a clarinet speak to the organic nature of live music. The result is a 
communication that resonates with its audience. 
  Most people make the mistake of thinking design is what it 
looks like. People think it’s this veneer—that the designers 
are handed this box and told, “Make it look good!” That’s not 
what we think design is. It’s not just what it looks like and 
feels like. Design is how it works. —Steve Jobs (1955–2011)
6.6 MAX FRANOSCH. CD cover 
design for Meditations on 
Coltrane. 
6.5 CAROLINE WOOLARD. 
Proposed logo for Bugoff 
Exterminators. 
6.7 Wilson Bonilla. Poster 
profiling the graphic designer, 
Paul Rand.

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
155
Shape can also be brought to three-dimensional package designs. 
Christine Mau converted a conventional box for facial tissues into a pyra-
mid shape and added photorealistic illustrations to make the boxes look 
like pieces of fruit (Figure 6.9). The assignment was to create a product 
that screams summer, and the result is a set of colorful boxes that are 
functional, clever, and most definitely evocative of summertime.
Pattern and Texture
Visual pattern is repeat of an element whose total effect is more than the 
individual parts. The repetition of lines or shapes of a pattern can bring 
visual energy and motion to a composition. Pattern can be used to create 
texture, a two- or three-dimensional tactile quality, either real or per-
ceived, that causes an emotion or sensation in the viewer. Designers are 
always hoping for such a response to their work. 
In a proposed logo for the Used Book Café, Terrence McCarthy used 
a slice of pie (with filling made of book pages), enhanced by the addition 
of texture (Figure 6.10). The rough, worn finish of a used book on top of a 
cherry-red color is the final touch. The gritty feel adds another dimension 
of emotional information to the logo image.
The texture created by the materials and processes used to produce 
a design can also be part of meaningful form. In the design of a cover 
for Geek Love, Richard Yoo used a woodcut illustration with an antique, 
handbill quality, in keeping with something the story’s cult-like family 
6.8 WAX , CALGARY AB, CANADA. 
Illustration by Heads of State. 
Each poster (as part of a series 
for the Victoria Symphony) 
uses montage along with color 
and texture to create shapes 
that resonate with meaning.
6.9 CHRISTINE MAU, 
KIMBERLY-CLARK WORLDWIDE. 
Tissue packaging titled 
Slice of Summer.
6.10 TERRENCE MCCARTHY. 
Proposed visual identity for 
Used Book Café—with and 
without a textured effect.
  The first question I ask myself when something doesn’t 
seem to be beautiful is why do I think it’s not beautiful. 
And very shortly you discover that there is no reason.
—John Cage (1912–1992)

What is your approach to form in 
relation to content?
There is no separation between form and 
content. Form is content. Typography, 
illustration, images, axonometric drawings, a 
swash of color—they all are separate objects 
that I orchestrate in space. I try to define, 
articulate, and create a visual hierarchy with 
these objects. The goal is to be more the tour 
guide who can take a viewer on a visual/spatial 
journey, with each object playing a part in an 
overall communication and field of the space. 
People might access a plethora of objects upon 
first glance, but I also want them to go beyond 
the initial reading and understand some of the 
ideas I’ve built in, some that are deeper and 
perhaps more subtle, even if the understanding 
occurs later. I want to allow access to complex 
readings and yet try to achieve that without 
making it complicated. There’s a huge 
difference to me between the complex and the 
complicated. HUGE.
You use color fearlessly. Do you have 
a philosophy about its use?
Color is space; space is color. Color evokes an 
emotional response. The more vibrant the color, 
the quicker someone might get drawn in. For 
example, a tiny object that sits on the page 
might project forward and have dominance 
because of its color. Conversely, a neutral or 
muted color, regardless of size, can also play 
dramatically in the environment that contains 
it. A white space can contain other objects 
and provide a scaffolding for text, images, and 
so forth, big or small. It can provide so much 
contrast that the size of the object is irrelevant 
or super-prioritized. In some cases, I might 
rely on a specific reading of a color I’m using, 
but in others I might treat color as a purely 
optical component. Color should have an equal 
exchange and importance with other objects 
in space, but be free from the hold of them. 
It’s a way to get color to dance, play, and hold 
its own.
Why does the desert have such a 
presence in your work?
The desert is design in real time. It offers peace 
of mind for me, through vastness of space.
The desert is its own educational vehicle. While 
many natural processes occur at an invisible 
or microscopic level, the desert reveals its 
evolution in its very existence. You see layers 
of minerals on mountain walls, an enormous 
stretch of dry land that was once a lake bed, 
and the budding, blooming, dormant, or dying 
plants in their natural cycles—all revealed as 
information to observe in real time.
April Greiman studied graphic design at Kansas City Art Institute and later at the Allgemeine 
Kuntsgewerbeschule in Basel, Switzerland. She moved to Los Angeles in 1976 where she established 
a design practice [design using multiple platforms and formats]. She is recognized as being one 
of the first graphic designers to embrace computer technology as a design tool. From 1984 on she 
pioneered digital design, becoming renowned for her unique experiments with the Apple Macintosh. 
She is a recipient of the AIGA Medal and the Chrysler Award and is a member of the Alliance 
Graphique Internationale. Her ideas and work have appeared in broadcasts such as the PBS TV 
series Smithsonian World: From Information to Wisdom as well as in articles, interviews, and 
reviews in Time Magazine, The New York Times, USA Today, and on CNN. Her books include 
Something from Nothing; April Greiman: Floating Ideas into Time and Space, It’snotwhatAp
rilyouthinkitGreimanis; Hybrid Imagery: The Fusion of Technology and Graphic Design; and 
Seven Graphic Designers. April has honorary doctorates from the Kansas City Art Institute (2001), 
Boston College of Art, Lesley University (2002), and the Academy of Art University in San Francisco 
(2003). Her work has been exhibited internationally.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  F O R M  I S  C O N T E N T,  W I T H   APRIL GREIMAN
156
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM

From the very first visit, my eyes were opened 
wide to growth, evolution, and change. I aspire 
to extend that clarity into what I make and 
do as a visual communicator—that same spatial, 
time-based, and spiritual quality is reflected 
and translated.
Vignette 6.5 Mixed use 
project with the MTA of 
a hand holding a bowl of 
rice/video image wall mural 
in downtown Los Angeles 
at Wilshire/Vermont.
Vignette 6.3 Commemora-
tive poster for an exhibition 
celebrating the works of 
Frida Kahlo and Diego 
Rivera.
Vignette 6.2 Visual identity 
and letterhead design for RoTo 
Architects.
Vignette 6.4 Poster for the Selby 
Gallery, Objects in Space exhibit.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: APRIL GREIMAN 
157
Vignette 6.1 19th Amendment 
commemorative stamp design 
for the U.S. Postal Service.
Women's Suffrage Stamp © 1995 United States Postal 
Service. All Rights Reserved. Used with Permission.

158
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
of circus performers might have used to promote their act (Figure 
6.11). Even the irregular frame image has texture. The illusion of the 
yellow and dented surface becomes an active, textured space, hint-
ing at the bizarre environment in which the story takes place. This 
design is a good example of how layers of thinking can be built into 
a design concept. See the Worklist on Compositional Exploration 
for some suggestions that may help you push your designs further.
Space
The area between elements on the page is called either white space
(although it is not necessarily white in color) or negative space. It 
is formed by the space between and around shapes and in the back-
ground of the page. White space activates a composition by creating 
contrast and tension. It can also improve a design’s legibility, giving 
the eyes resting points that allow the mind to comprehend the ideas 
being presented. It gives a design a chance to breathe. 
Negative space exists inside letterforms, too. The capital G 
shows us a counter shape, the space held within the letterform 
(Figure 6.12). The form of the counter shape isn’t noticed as much 
as its positive letterform, but it exists and affects our perception of 
the character of a letter, for example, making it bold, graceful, or 
authoritative. Looking at a full page of type, you can see that white space 
also exists between each letter, between each word, and between each 
typeset line of text, known as the leading (see a more detailed discussion 
about leading in Chapter 7). White space in typesetting affects the visual 
W O R K L I S T
Compositional Exploration
t
Change the scale, direction, or movement 
of a main element in your design 
(see Chapter 6). 
t
Create a grid that will guide the structure 
of your information (see Chapter 9). 
t
Consider using only typography and no 
images to solve your design problem 
(see Chapter 7).
t
Use the negative space in your design 
as actively as the positive space 
(see Chapter 6).
t
Allow past experiments to influence your 
current design project (see Chapter 2).
t
Associate a feeling with the product or 
service associated with your design, based 
on the specific audience you are addressing 
(see Chapter 4).
t
Bring texture, pattern, or a color you 
wouldn’t normally use into your design 
(see Chapter 6).
t
Reference designs from earlier decades 
to see how they can be rejuvenated 
(see Chapter 2).
t
Make a comparison of two unrelated things 
(see Chapter 5).
t
Control the visual code of your design 
by considering adjectives, for example: 
academic, scientific, tough, or cute 
(see Chapter 10).
6.11 RICHARD YOO. Proposed 
cover design for the book 
Geek Love.

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
159
6.12 Positive shapes and 
negative counter shapes are 
inherent in letterforms.
weight of a paragraph on the page and of the body of text in contrast to 
the margins. All in all, white space is a significant compositional element 
in any design that uses text on a page.
White space should also be a consideration in the design of web-
sites. The balance created between navigational elements, the information 
presented, and the images allows the viewer to discern how to navigate 
the page, what to read, and where to go next. For a website designed for 
photographer Andrew McCaul, the type and images rely on the empty 
areas of the page to create contrast, tension, and flow (Figure 6.13). Sites 
that are too busy, that don’t have enough negative space, give the viewer’s 
eye no place to rest. White space is necessary for both print and exhibit 
design work. Motion design, on the web or in video, also uses white space 
by providing a pause or a bit of quiet in the midst of information being 
delivered. Viewers need a chance to absorb what they’ve seen or learned.
You can see white space used to varying degrees in many kinds 
of graphics. In a 1950s brochure about flight transportation, graphic 
designer Ladislav Sutnar used aerial perspective to create the effect of 
floating above an airport (Figure 6.14). White space is incorporated with 
many other compositional principles and elements to bring organization 
and drama to the design. The result is a design that translates information 
in a cohesive way that keeps the viewer interested.
6.13 WORKSIGHT. Design for a 
photographer’s website. Space 
left empty (white space) helps 
bring attention to images on 
the page. 
6.14 LADISLAV SUTNAR. Page 
layout as part of a promotional 
brochure for the Canterbury 
Printing company. The piece 
titled Transport—Next Half 
Century is as graphic and 
dramatic as the subject it 
explains. 1950.
line: The stroke thickness 
allows for overprinting as well 
as knocking out to white.
color: A neutral blue complements 
the dominance and immediacy of 
red and black.
contrast/emphasis: A dominant image grabs 
the viewer’s attention through contrast of 
scale and color next to other page items.
repetition: Dynamic 
angles animate an 
otherwise static 
image.
positive/negative: 
The areas in between 
the lines energize the 
overall shape.
shape: A unique 
form that has visual 
holding power.
white space: Left 
deliberately empty, 
this area gives the 
viewer a chance to 
visually breathe.
spatial depth: A change in scale between 
aircraft gives the viewer the perception of 
depth on the page. The effect is enhanced by 
the shape appearing to sit under the type.
direction: Vertical red type guides 
the eye. It establishes a hierarchy for 
the text and activates the space.
rhythm: Linear consistency of type 
lines helps organize the textual 
information.

160
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Depth
Visual perspective is an effective way of creating the illusion of depth—
giving the viewer the perception of physical space. Developed during the 
time of the Renaissance, the theory of vanishing points changed the way 
we perceive three-dimensional space on a two-dimensional plane. Figure 
6.15 demonstrates one-point perspective using two lines (on two axes) 
that reach toward one vanishing point. Two-point perspective is a little 
more complex visually. It uses two vanishing points instead of one, creat-
ing an image that is a little closer to the way we actually perceive distance 
on the curved earth (Figure 6.16). 
The Cannes Festival poster by Philippe Apeloig is a good example 
of how type itself can be used with one-point perspective (Figure 6.17). 
The line tracks reach into the far distance, with the words getting smaller 
as they move into space. The design serves as an announcement for the 
festival, inviting viewers to experience the projected light in a film theater 
setting. In this image, content and form meet beautifully in an almost 
poetic way, with all the components working together harmoniously.
The iconic representation of books, created by Lorenzo Romero, 
serves as a compelling logo for Shepherd’s School (Figure 6.18). Romero 
used two stacked books to create a three-dimensional effect of spatial 
depth. Two-point perspective gives the covers an added sense of dimen-
sion—the layering and perspective angles trick the eye into believing it is 
seeing physical depth. But what makes this image especially clever is the 
resulting letter S (for “Shepherd”). Of course, objects can be stacked front 
to back, as well as top to bottom, to create an illusion of space. 
Even when three-dimensional space is a part of a design problem, 
depth and perspective can be manipulated to make that space more active, 
as you can see in the exhibit graphics for Designing Experiences created by 
Henry Brimmer (Figure 6.19). Here Brimmer played with the junction of 
two walls to humorously engage the audience. The experience of interact-
ing with the lettering as it bends around the corner further illustrates the 
6.15 Two lines seem to reach 
toward one vanishing point 
(one-point perspective).
6.16 The sides of the cube 
converge toward two outer
vanishing points (two-point 
perspective).
6.17 PHILIPPE APELOIG. Cannes 
Festival poster. Projected type 
creates the illusion of depth and 
an appealing dramatic effect.
6.19 HENRY BRIMMER. 
Exhibit graphics for an 
alumni exhibition titled 
Design Experiences. 
6.18 LORENZO ROMERO. 
Rome & Gold Creative. 
Logo for Shepherd’s 
School. 

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
161
SPEAKOUT: About Rudolf Arnheim by Gusty Lange, professor, Graduate 
Communications Design, Pratt Institute
 
 In 1954 Rudolf Arnheim published the groundbreaking book Art and Visual Perception. Today, it 
is the basis for visual thinkers to understand how form and space work together. All fields of visual 
expression have benefitted because Arnheim gave us tools for critically understanding visual think-
ing, making our work certainly more valid to our audience. 
 
 Form is the result of visual expression. Rudolf Arnheim succinctly addresses this idea using a 
simple but profound quote by the painter, Ben Shahn: “Form is the visible shape of content.” This 
set the stage for Arnheim’s theory that the essence of form is found in the unseen, and more in how 
we perceive it to be. For example, the illusion of depth on a two-dimensional surface is made by 
using the tools of overlapping, foreshortening, perspective, and more. Arnheim goes even further, 
suggesting that three-dimensional illusion is interpreted by the perceiver through past experiences, 
cultural roots, inner emotions, and the senses. So we can say that visual perception involves the 
essence of the whole (the gestalt).
 
 Form is what takes shape when we design. But when we understand form beyond what literally 
meets the eye, we can move past the boundaries of physical shape and toward the symbolic and 
metaphorical edges of the unconscious. Only then does form become a powerful tool in defining 
our work as visual communicators.
6.20 MARK ROTHKO. No. 14 
(Brown over Dark). 1963. 
experiential point of the show. It is an ironic twist and an inventive use of 
typography in the third dimension. 
In addition, scale (the relative size, extent, or degree of elements 
within a design composition) can also generate a sense of depth. The 
airplanes presented in varying scales in Figure 6.14 give viewers an idea 
of spatial depth. The Speakout “About Rudolf Arnheim” by Gusty Lange 
offers further understanding on the visual perception of depth. 
Color
The artist Mark Rothko (1903–1970) said that the colors he used in his 
paintings were performers. In the work No. 14 (Brown over Dark) you 
can begin to see what he meant (Figure 6.20). Using color as the primary 
element of his work, Rothko allows color to define the painting, creating 
a sense of space, mood, dimension, form, and content. Rothko’s portals, 
as he called them, are formal and aesthetic problems solved beautifully 
through paint and color. 
Colours are the deeds of light, its deeds and sufferings. 
—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Theory of Colour (1810)

162
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
In the design by Anita Merk for the poster of the International Fes-
tival of Arts & Ideas (Figure 6.21), the elements include words, images, 
and shapes, all within a specific color palette (Figure 6.22). Their elegant 
fusion tells a story and creates a formal unity, allowing the information 
to peek through, hinting and teasing the viewer about the event’s perfor-
mances and panel discussions. 
In a fund-raising kit for the National Institute for Play, Jason Schulte 
used colorful objects to capture the attention of potential donors (Figure 
6.23). The design piques interest through its use of bright colors, sleek 
transparent boxes, and fun items that show how life can be made more 
energized and pleasurable through the benefit of play. 
Color is a most active visual component in design. Yellow expands 
outward and forward toward us, while blue recedes, drawing us in. Artist 
Wassily Kandinsky (1866–1944) described it well when he wrote “Keen 
lemon-yellow hurts the eye in time as a prolonged and shrill trumpet-
note in the ear, and the gazer turns away to seek relief in blue or green.” 
Color, alone or in combination with other colors or other principles and 
elements, can bring contrast and unity. Colors can vibrate and move, 
create unity and discord. Artists can manipulate color with the rationality 
of a scientist or with irrationality based on emotion. Arbitrary use of color 
can destroy an otherwise fine design, while truly brilliant use of color can 
make a design soar.
6.22 The palette of colors 
shown here were used in 
Figure 6.21. Similar color 
values (brightness) coordinate 
as a system to help bring 
unity to the design.
6.23 OFFICE, JASON SCHULTE
DESIGN. Views of the fund-raising 
kit for the National Institute 
for Play.
6.21 ANITA MERK, FLYLEAF CREATIVE. 
Art & Ideas banner design.

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
163
Nobody cares what your favorite color is. Color isn’t about 
preference; strategic use of color is part instinct, part skill, and 
a great deal of science. Take, for example, a design by Andy 
Mathurin, Everything Ties (Figure 6.24). The piece describes 
how the artist’s past experience (of working at a flea market) 
affects how he sells himself as a graphic designer today. There 
is a limited amount of color, which he used with clear intent: 
the shoe he used is old and worn, but bright enough to set itself 
off from the solid black background; white hand-drawn type 
reverses out, not only to give the design a personal feel but also 
to create the shape of a white tie; and the blue stenciled type (the 
first three letters of the designer’s last name) integrates with the 
shoe by having the same level of brightness.
Color should be part of the original design concept, not 
something added at the end of the process. A good example of 
this approach is seen in a proposed advertising campaign by 
Tatianna Holiday-Nowden for an arts organization devoted to 
raising America’s social consciousness (Figure 6.25). A set of col-
ored triangles create the Art + Consciousness (AC) monogram. 
The triangles then take on a life of their own as they form into 
shapes and wrap around iconic photographs of media, money, 
and authority. Each triangle of color interacts with adjacent 
colors to form a unique spectrum. 
In Practice: When making your choices, remember that color doesn’t exist 
as an absolute; it always interacts with the adjacent colors.
6.24 ANDY MATHURIN. Design 
titled Everything Ties explaining 
how a past experience (working 
at a flea market) affects how 
he sells himself as a graphic 
designer today.
6.25 TATIANNA HOLIDAY-NOWDEN. 
Proposed advertising campaign 
for an arts organization devoted 
to raising America’s social 
consciousness.
View a Closer Look for Everything Ties on myartslab.com

164
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Color Systems
An explanation of color systems begins with the 
prism—a triangular piece of glass. White light 
enters the prism and produces a spectrum of colors 
based on long and short wavelengths (Figure 6.26). 
Red has the longest wavelength, violet the shortest. 
The colors blend into each other, with red, orange, 
yellow, green, blue, and violet as the most distinguishable bands. Color is 
defined in terms of three attributes: hue (for example, red, orange, yellow, 
green, blue, or purple), value (light versus dark, or white versus black; see 
the value scale, Figure 6.27), and saturation (intense versus dull). 
The color wheel bends the color spectrum into a circle, placing the 
colors in a specific, standard arrangement or relationship (Figure 6.28). 
Colors that sit adjacent to one another on the color wheel are called 
analogous colors, and colors that sit opposite on the wheel are called
complementary colors. When placed next to one another, complemen-
tary colors of the same value will appear either to vibrate or to blend. In 
theory, equal parts of complementary colors mixed together will produce 
gray. A good designer can use all these properties to great advantage.
There are big differences in the way color functions as pigment 
(such as paint), as light (such as on a monitor), and as ink (such as in 
printing). Primary colors (red, blue, and yellow) are—identified as such 
because they cannot be obtained by mixing any other colors when using 
pigments such as paint. When two primary colors of pigment are mixed, 
they produce secondary colors (purple, orange, and green). 
The color we see on computer monitors and television screens, how-
ever, functions differently from pigments because those screens are back-
lit with light. In contrast to pigments, red, green, and blue are the three 
main hues that produce all the other colors on the screen (Figure 6.29). 
Combinations of these colors produce resulting hues that are different 
from those of pigments. For example, when green is added to red using 
light, it produces yellow. All electronic devices use the RGB (red, green, 
blue) system to produce color images.
In contrast, printed color, or process color, usually uses four main 
colors: cyan, magenta, yellow, and black, referred to as CMYK (Figure 
6.30). Because there is no backlighting on a piece of paper, the inks must 
be transparent, allowing their hues to show through layers and blend. 
Using this method, colors are created by overlapping screened dots, 
known as halftones, in what is referred to as four-color process. Effects 
of combining hues can produce results similar to those using pigments. 
For example, if a cyan dot overlaps yellow, it produces green; magenta and 
yellow together produce red, and so on (Figure 6.31). 
Halftones are predominately printed using the offset printing
method, a lithographic process in which an inked image is transferred 
6.27 A value chart from white 
to black. A 50 percent strip 
appears to change from darker 
to lighter depending on which 
gray value it is next to.
6.28 The color wheel bends 
the spectrum into a circular 
relationship of opposite, or 
complementary colors. 
6.29 RGB (red, green, blue) 
is an additive process of color 
where an electronic source 
adds each to an otherwise 
black screen.
6.26 A prism refracts light, 
which appears to be white, into 
a spectrum of colors based on 
long and short wavelengths.

COMPOSITIONAL ELEMENTS 
165
from a metal or silicon plate to a rubber blanket and then to the printing 
surface, usually paper. This method creates specific colors perceptually. 
The size of each dot, and each dot’s relationship to another dot, increases 
the possibilities for color variation; the combinations of CMYK complete 
the full-color printed image. You can see the dots clearly if you enlarge the 
printed image. 
An alternate method to achieve a spectrum of printed colors is to 
individually premix and print specific hues, called spot colors. Pantone, 
Inc., has developed a scientific matching system of these colors for pro-
fessional printing. Their guidebooks are used to specify exact colors, and 
printers work from recipes for precise color reproduction (Figure 6.32). 
No designer’s toolbox is complete without a Pantone Formula Guide. 
In addition to the attribute of hue, color can also be considered in 
terms of saturation, or intensity. Pure primary colors are the most sat-
urated. Add a bit of another color and they become less saturated, less 
intense. Colors that are more intense tend to move forward on the picture 
plane and those that are less intense tend to recede. This characteristic can 
be quite useful when creating the illusion of space on a two-dimensional 
plane or when trying to give emphasis to specific parts of your design. 
Through color, you can create the illusion of depth and space, which 
allows you to mold objects into three dimensions and establish fore-
ground and background. 
In Practice: Both process color systems—as cyan, magenta, yellow, and black 
(CMYK)—and spot color systems are used as specifications for offset printing. But 
generally only spot colors are specified for silkscreen, engraving, and stamping.
Color Temperature
Color can also be categorized in terms of warm and cool temperatures. 
Color temperature is actually the visible light in a spectrum that is mea-
sured in Kelvin (K) units. Temperatures measured above 5,000 K have a 
cool bluish-white tone; temperatures between 2,700 and 3,000 K have a 
warmer yellowish-red tone. But translating temperature to actual, printed 
color can be difficult to specify. 
The two gray squares shown in Figure 6.33 are of equal value (bright-
ness) but have different temperatures. The square on the left has more red 
in it; the one on the right has more blue. When placed next to each other, 
the warm and cool differences are most apparent. Becoming sensitive to 
these subtleties can enhance your power as a designer. For example, the 
scene outside becomes more vibrant and multifaceted when warm and 
cool shades are used. Imagine a tree with warm, green leaves, hovering 
above a cold, blue street, with the bright, warm yellow yield sign. Warm 
colors tend to move forward on a picture plane, while cool colors recede. 
When mixing warm and cool colors, you can learn to control those rela-
tionships very precisely. 
6.33 An example of a warm 
and a cool gray.
6.31 The combinations of 
CMYK complete a full-color 
printed image.
6.32 Pantone® Color Selector 
guide indicating solid match 
colors printed on coated 
papers.
6.30 CMYK (cyan, magenta, 
yellow, black) is a subtractive 
process of color where each 
printed ink reduces the light 
that would be reflected from 
white paper. The overlay of 
CMY makes black, but the 
addition of K (black) is needed 
to bring density to the printed 
page. Black is considered 
the key plate.

166
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Psychological Effects of Color
Some people give a lot of weight to the psychological effects and associa-
tions of color, while others prefer to use color based solely on the visual 
impact. The psychological implications of color can be very complex and 
subtle. They also vary from culture to culture, so you should try to learn 
something about your audience when making color choices. However, 
there are some basic associations with colors to take into account when 
designing. You can manipulate these associations by slightly altering hue, 
saturation, and value. 
The warm colors—red, orange, and yellow—have associations rang-
ing from anger, agitation, and excitement to warmth, security, and new 
growth. Red is often associated with passion and with aggression. Yellow 
has strong associations with sunlight, warmth, and growth and, at the 
same time, can be considered cowardly or sickly. The cool colors of blue, 
green, and purple are generally thought to be calming and peaceful and 
are associated with stability, but they can also evoke sadness and despair. 
Blue often connotes authority and stability, but can serve equally well to 
invoke the sky and dreamlike, soothing states. Green has taken on a whole 
new range of associations with the interest in environmental issues. Black 
connotes stability, power, authority, and death and is often considered sin-
ister or evil. White is usually associated with purity and light. However, 
many of these associations are different in other cultures. For instance, in 
some cultures purple, rather than black, is used in mourning. In India, 
white has negative associations and well as positive; in Japan, white is con-
nected with death. In all cases, you need to consider your audience and 
do some research before making assumptions about color associations. 
You will want to be particularly aware of certain color combina-
tions commonly used in our society and make conscious decisions about 
how to use them. For example, green and red will always mean Christ-
mas in the United States (and in many countries). Orange 
and turquoise remind especially older Americans of Howard 
Johnsons restaurants. Orange and black are used for Hallow-
een. These associations don’t necessarily restrict you from 
using those color combinations; just be aware of the poten-
tial underlying messages. Use of colors also changes just like fashion. Pay 
attention to the “fashionable” colors of the season, not with pressure to 
use them, but to be aware of what they are when making choices. For 
example, if you’re designing a building’s signage system, then you might 
not want to use a color that will be trendy.
Also keep in mind that approximately 8 percent of men and .5 per-
cent of women are colorblind. If your message is dependent entirely on 
the use of color, you may be losing part of your audience. Try to make 
sure that, even if color is a major design component, it is still possible for 
a viewer to understand the information if they see only shades of gray.
  Orange is the happiest color. 
—Frank Sinatra (1915–1998)
  When I paint green, it doesn’t 
mean grass; when I paint blue, 
it doesn’t mean sky. 
—Henri Matisse (1869–1954)
In Practice: So-called “white” paper actually 
contains subtle color, giving it either a warm or 
cool tone. Your choice of white paper can have an 
impact on the formal qualities of the design as 
well as on the message it relays.
  Any colour—so long as it’s black. 
—Henry Ford (1863–1947)

COMPOSITIONAL PRINCIPLES 
167
Compositional Principles 
Compositional principles are broad aesthetic strokes that organize ele-
ments into pleasing visuals. Studying each principle starts by examining 
how it is formed in a particular situation. For example, if you place a large 
single word on a page, then there are three compositional principles at 
work, some standing out more than others. The first is the principle of 
direction, created by the word reading from left to right; the second is the 
principle of dominance, created by the word’s ability to attract attention, 
either through its meaning or its visual qualities; and the third is the prin-
ciple of proportion, created by the word’s size in relation to the page itself. 
In most cases, these principles are embodied by elements such as color, 
texture, size, scale, and shape. All the elements must work together in the 
complex process of making compelling graphic design. Among the many 
principles that underlie good design, seven stand out: balance, contrast, 
direction, dominance, proportion, rhythm, and unity.
Balance
Balance is the distribution of items in a composition to achieve equality 
either symmetrically or asymmetrically. For example, both of the circle 
compositions shown in Figure 6.34 achieve a sense of balance. On the 
left, the two equally sized circles are centered; on the right, a large circle is 
positioned on one side of the page, which is countered by a much smaller 
circle. The space is balanced by their relationship. One of the advance-
ments explored in twentieth-century design is the premise that a design 
could be freed by moving type and imagery away from a centered axis 
to one that is not centered. It may seem so obvious to us now, but it was 
considered quite daring at one time.
The identity design for Chaqwa (a brand of coffees, teas, and cocoas) 
uses symmetry together with just a hint of asymmetry to create a harmo-
nious relationship (Figure 6.35). The mark, a 
series of patterned circles, is centered above a 
cup of coffee. The symmetry suggests a pleas-
ant environment for the café—balanced and 
uncomplicated. It also suggests the pleasant 
warmth and aroma of the steam coming from 
the coffee. The only hint of asymmetry is the 
logotype, Chaqwa, which hangs off the center 
line, but even that is balanced by the line of 
steam from the cup that expands into the large, 
circular logo. 
6.34 Balance and contrast 
are created by differences in 
scale in relationship to each 
other and to the proportion 
of the page.
6.35 OFFICE, JASON SCHULTE
DESIGN. Visual identity for a 
brand of premium brewed 
coffees, teas, and cocoas.

168
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
All the compositional principles are at work, but the principle of 
balance sets the main tone of the design. The white circles hold a domi-
nant position against the black background. There is contrast in the size 
of the logotype relative to the circles as one mark and in the slightly off-
centered position of both in relation to the cup. Rhythm is set by the pat-
tern of circles themselves, with their movement and direction drawing the 
eye toward the center of the circle pattern. The proportion of the graphics 
to the size and shape of the page helps the image to stand out visually. All 
the elements work together as a whole, creating a unity of composition 
and message.
Balance can surprise you, however. Something that appears to break 
all the rules might actually achieve a delicate balance both visually and 
through content. Take a look at the page spread by Alvin Eisenman for 
a book on Eero Saarinen (Figure 6.36). At first glance, all the weight of 
the image is on the left, throwing the balance off completely. But the text, 
daringly crossing the boundary of the spine break, is so carefully placed 
and so integral to the overall design that it restores the balance. When 
thinking about balance, consider additional principles such as contrast, 
rhythm, direction, and the compositional elements that help create those 
principles such as color and texture. All should work in harmony with the 
actual content to create an impact.
6.36 ALVIN EISENMAN. Book 
design for Eero Saarinen on 
His Work.
  Art is an idea that has found its 
perfect form. —Paul Rand

COMPOSITIONAL PRINCIPLES 
169
Contrast
Contrast occurs when juxtaposed forms, treatments, and ideas create 
visual or intellectual tension. The result is an enhanced perception of dif-
ferences between paired or grouped elements. This dual function makes it 
a most useful and challenging design tool.
Tension, visual strain based on imbalanced relationship of contrast-
ing elements, creates energy which, in turn, can create power and impact 
on the page as well as in the mind. The elements we use to create contrast 
and tension are quite simple—shape (straight and curved), size (big and 
small), and value (black and white). Figure 6.36 demonstrates the poten-
tial of this energy using geometric shapes.
Designers use contrast and unexpected juxtaposition to amplify the 
message they are conveying. For example, by juxtaposing a fork and a 
chain (two objects that normally don’t go together), the resulting image 
will stand out because of the oddness of the pairing. In bringing these two 
objects together, the image sends an idea that is much more complex than 
the two objects alone might convey—the challenge of eating with restraint. 
The message can be enhanced by heightening the visual contrast. For 
example, by using an ornately decorative fork against the blunt weight of a 
heavy construction chain, you can create a higher contrast and thus relay a 
stronger message. As a designer, you have to decide whether 
boldness or subtlety makes your message more compelling. 
In the examples shown in Figure 6.37, the circles, lines, 
and shapes work against one other, and yet seem to belong 
together; they are all in the same family of black and white geo-
metric forms. In contrast, the book cover for Adultery, designed 
by Paul Sahre, is an example of how principles and elements can 
work together to create contrast and meaning that is specific 
to the subject (Figure 6.38). The premise of the book involves 
a coming-to-terms with marriage and fantasies about adultery. 
The image of crumpled notepaper is indicative of the frustra-
tion. The scribbled word “Adultery” is repeated down the page, 
contrasting the loose arrangement against the orderly horizon-
tal blue lines of the notepaper. The author’s nervous ruminations 
and uncertainty are portrayed by her repetition of the word, her 
inability to stick to the lines of the paper, and by her erasures 
and cross-outs. Is she trying to come to an understanding of the 
term, her feelings, or her actions? 
The crumpled sheet of paper itself uses a contrast of imag-
ery. It is clearly a standard note paper, but the crumpled texture 
also suggests wrinkled bed sheets. The printed blue lines of 
the paper are straight, contrasting with the fabric-like curves 
of the wrinkles. The effect adds tension and angst to the book 
cover in both an aesthetic and intellectually meaningful way.
6.37 Complex compositions 
need elements that work off 
one another in order to create 
pleasing visual contrasts.
6.38 PAUL SAHRE. Book cover 
design for Adultery. Beacon 
Press.

170
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
In a two-color flier, student Caroline Woolard makes a social com-
ment in response to a campaign by the Metropolitan Transportation 
Authority (MTA) of New York City (Figure 6.39). The tagline of the 
MTA campaign “If You See Something, Say Something” reminds bus and 
subway riders of the need to stay aware and to report any suspicious activ-
ity. The designer’s idea was to flip the intended message by using the mon-
tage of a pistol and gas station pump. By changing the visuals, the artist 
changed the meaning completely, telling viewers instead that Americans 
might help the energy crisis by voicing their concern over wasteful energy 
consumption. 
In the first design, the centered layout lacks the energy needed to 
convey such an urgent call to action. In the revised design, however, the 
audience is confronted much more forcefully (Figure 6.40). The image 
now fills the page. The increased scale of the graphics creates a more pow-
erful contrast of shape. Even the negative spaces, the white areas between 
the black shapes, activate the composition. A restrained use of color adds 
to the tension. The words are no longer resting in a passive horizontal 
position but have been upended at a dynamic angle. And even a subtle 
grammatical change adds a longer pause to the sentence and thus adds 
meaning—the comma has been replaced with an ellipsis. What was once 
fuel dripping from the nozzle is now colored red, suggesting blood. 
The revised design creates a stronger relationship between the mes-
sage and its form. But how did the designer get there? First, she thought 
that the design needed more impact. The original may have felt weak or 
flat to her. By further considering the message and exploring the com-
position by pushing all the elements of its form, she ultimately devised a 
solid refinement of the poster. In the Speakout “Make without Knowing,” 
Matthias Brendler contends that the mere act of assembling can kick the 
creative wheels into gear. 
Direction
When we refer to the compositional principle of direction, we’re really 
describing the orientation of elements within a design. When we consider 
direction, we’re thinking about how to give a design vigor and life. A com-
position’s elements seem to move because the eye moves to follow them 
(Figure 6.41). Without direction, a design can seem static or dull. 
In Figure 6.42 the text from the back of a Brillo® soap pad package 
has been arranged according to hierarchy of information. The name is at 
the top-left side of the image, with the remaining information reading left 
to right and top to bottom—a very logical arrangement. But in a second 
piece within the experiment, gestural marks made with an actual steel 
wool pad replaced the printed type to reveal the dense areas of words 
as well as the flow and direction of the text (Figure 6.43). Flow creates 
a stream of connections which, in turn, helps direct the eye to specific 
6.40 CAROLINE WOOLARD. Revised 
version of If You See Something, 
Say Something.
6.39 CAROLINE WOOLARD. First 
effort of a flier as social comment 
for the MTA campaign If You See 
Something, Say Something. 

COMPOSITIONAL PRINCIPLES 
171
focal points. This type of exercise is a good one to do on top 
of any body of text because it enables you to see a layout in a 
whole new way. After doing this simple exercise, you might 
want to move the text around, create new areas of blank space, 
or change font size.
Direction has a diagrammatic aspect to it because some-
thing is placed in conjunction with something else. In a public 
signage project by Altyn Chiang, arrows and dotted lines 
change size, shape, and color as they direct us through a mini-
narrative notating the process of finding love (Figure 6.44). 
The first sign in the figure intermingles verbal jargon. That 
sign is paired with another that intermingles graphic icons. 
The diagrammatic expression causes occasional bursts of 
visual energy. The clusters and breathing points create unex-
pected surprises—valuable when the need is to hold some-
one’s interest.
SPEAKOUT: Make without Knowing by Matthias Brendler
 
 Sometimes the harder we look for a solution, the less we are able to see one. “Make without know-
ing” is the way I describe an essential phase in my design process and a tool I use to help students 
with this conundrum. It is an informed act of improvisation, wherein making is the process of dis-
covery. By creating without an intended outcome, anything is possible—the very act of making can 
reveal what we hadn’t even known to look for. 
 
 Think of it as hands-on dreaming—freely putting together visual assemblages for later assessment. 
Since opportunity favors the prepared mind, it all begins with preloading your brain with relevant 
project information, parameters, and content. This is your raw material for discovery. Now erase 
it from view, let your rational, analytical, left brain take a nap, and start making “things.” Anything 
will do, and the faster you work and the more you make, the higher your imagination will fly. It’s 
like jazz. So with your design tools as the instrument, start to jam and the music will simply flow. 
As Miles Davis said, “I’ll play it first and tell you what it is later.”
6.44 MS. ALTYN CHIANG. Paired 
public signs using the principle 
of direction to help notate the 
process of love.
6.41 (top left) The most 
basic shape can lead the eye 
through a composition.
6.42 (bottom left) Text 
from the back of a package 
reorganized within the 
grid structure.
6.43 (bottom right) Notation 
created with a steel wool 
pad of the directional flow 
of text.

172
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
The principle of direction is used nicely in an 
advertisement for a nonprofit organization (Figure 
6.45). In the ad, a red sign (at top left) and the words 
“Donate Your Car” begin the flow, moving the eye 
from top left, across, and down. The images used 
along this route sit in the background, giving the piece 
the perception of physical space or visual depth—in 
other words, the direction can also move front to back 
or vice versa. The images simultaneously translate 
the organization’s objective—to encourage people to 
donate used cars as funding for educational outreach 
centers. The page is visually activated and simultane-
ously loaded with information.
Dominance
Unlike a painter or sculptor showing work in a gal-
lery, a graphic designer rarely has the luxury of an 
attentive audience. Usually a design needs to stand 
out, arouse interest, reach from the page or the wall, 
and pull the viewer into the scene. So think of domi-
nance as the hierarchy of a composition in terms of 
what is emphasized first—the core activity of design. 
Our page, space, screen, or package needs to grab the 
viewer’s eye. If it doesn’t, it fails.
Notice in the diagram (Figure 6.46) how a single dominant element 
grabs the eye’s attention. Once you’ve gotten your viewer’s attention, you 
can lead his or her eyes to other details within the composition. In this 
example, the dominance of the large shape usurps the traditional hierar-
chy of top to bottom and left to right. 
Dominance may help explain the reductivist, or minimalist, nature 
of many design solutions. One main point has to get across to the viewer, 
but just as with a short story or short film, there is a limited space or time 
for an idea to be conveyed. In the same way that a book cover must reveal 
the gist of the entire book and a film title must embody the spirit of a 
complete movie, a design must reduce the elements to their essentials. A 
concrete and succinct word, image, or shape will be more powerful and 
effective than one that is vague or too general. It is a mechanism that the 
public understands.
For a student project to design a poster on a famous graphic 
designer, Thomas Gnahm, a student from East Germany, used a banana 
as a metaphor for graphic designer Milton Glaser (Figure 6.47). His 
reasoning for this somewhat odd choice was actually political. Gnahm 
saw the banana as an unofficial symbol of German unity and liberty 
because West Germany had bananas while East Germany did not. Gnahm 
6.45 JANET LEE. Proposed 
advertising design for the 
nonprofit organization 
Outreach Center. 
6.46 The dominant element 
draws the viewer into the 
composition.

COMPOSITIONAL PRINCIPLES 
173
compared this situation to the creative sense of humor and freedom 
he saw in Glaser’s work. The banana is presented large; it visually 
dominates the page, causing the eye to be pulled in before it swoops 
to various points within the composition. But all the text must be read 
for the message to be deciphered. Typography leads viewers to the 
wording. Type layers over the dominant image to create visual depth 
on the page, and changes in type size and hierarchy give the reader 
digestible bits of information. 
In another example, a solid black silhouette creates the dom-
inant image for a proposed cover design by John Lui for The Birds 
(Figure 6.48). Lui has montaged the image of a bird with a crown in 
this silhouette. He carefully refined the contours and position of the 
bird’s beak and chest so it became symbolic of royalty. The image hints 
at the political satire and comedy that is present throughout the play 
by Aristophanes. Smaller birds, also silhouetted in black on the points 
of the crown create a sharp contrast of size, compounded against a 
rich blue sky. The placement of one lone white silhouette of a bird 
flying just above the only empty point on the crown draws the eye up 
to the title and author of the play. Lui managed to create a rich visual 
impact through strong form but with a minimum of color. 
For a logotype, John Lui again used a dominant image to create 
impact (Figure 6.49). Using another montage process, he combined an 
ant with a bomb to create a bizarre contrast. The images both relate to 
the exterminating business, but the humor defuses the deadly aspect. 
In replacing the letter “O,” the bomb creates a 
second layer of contrast. Together, the principles 
and elements make for a logo that is visually 
intriguing and resonates with meaning. 
In Practice: When you use only two colors for a 
book cover, you can keep printing costs to a minimum. 
To give the cover a customized appearance and save 
even more money, you can choose a specific spot color, 
for example, a color specified using the Pantone 
Formula Guide. Spot colors are inks in the actual 
color and do not have to be created through the 
CMYK process. They can include varnishes as well 
as metallic and fluorescent colors.
6.48 JOHN LUI. Proposed 
book cover for The Birds.
6.49 JOHN LUI. Proposed logo 
for Bug Off exterminators.
6.47 THOMAS GNAHM. Student 
project to design a poster about 
a famous graphic designer. 
View a Closer Look for the banana poster on myartslab.com

174 
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
Lui also used a process known as cropping, 
or reframing, to refine the dominant graphics in 
his book cover and logo. Pushing and pulling an 
image—left and right or in and out—changes the 
area of focus. The designer can zoom in on the 
desired image, framing it in relationship to the other 
elements. In Figure 6.50, the image has been cropped three different ways 
to show some options. In the first photo, the boy and the fallen tricycle 
have equal dominance. In the second, the image is cropped to allow the 
boy to dominate the frame. In the third, the background has been almost 
completely eliminated, and the boy’s expression now dominates the photo. 
Each version tells a slightly different story. Cropping also affected 
other principles and elements such as balance, tension, and direction. But 
besides affecting the formal elements, it is important to see that by alter-
ing the parts, the designer has changed the entire meaning of the photo. It 
went from being a whole story about a young boy who has fallen from his 
overturned tricycle to a sensitive portrait of a distraught and pensive child. 
This gestalt aspect will be further explained in Chapter 10 Visual Coding.
Proportion
Proportion is defined by relationships of size and number to the whole, 
and just about every design project begins with this principle in mind. 
Whether a page, a computer screen, a package, or an environment, design 
involves a relationship of elements. The diagram in Figure 6.51 demon-
strates this dynamic: the circles sit in relationship to one another, to each 
group, and to the page, centered left and right.
To see a more complex use of proportion, take a look at Johanna 
Tysk’s chart analyzing transportation alternatives between Atlanta and 
Wilmington (Figure 6.52). The design is positioned on the vertical page 
and uses that same verticality, emphasized by the lavender stripes, to pres-
ent hours, transportation modes, and so on. You can see how she cre-
ated movement in this simple chart through the vertical proportion from 
which it stems. Its color, typeface, and clean treatment all contribute to 
the ease of communicating the information. 
In Wes Kull’s book cover design for Chronicle of a Death Foretold, 
horizontal and vertical divisions signify meaning (Figure 6.53). In this 
classic book, twin brothers use pig-slaughtering knives to kill and gut the 
main character. The design offers an interpretation of this horror, splitting 
the image of the pig into two parts, positioning it as if it wraps around 
the lower proportion of the book. The vertical proportion also adds to 
the design’s meaning by splitting the cover into thirds. The emptiness of 
the top space and the cold gray metal wall reflect the eerie context the 
main character finds himself in, running through a town that feels empty, 
where no one is willing to help him.
6.50 One photo, cropped three 
different ways, can change how 
the image is read in terms of 
content and emotion.
6.51 The elements (dots) are 
in proportion to one another 
and to the page.
6.52 JOHANNA TYSK. Student 
project: transportation options 
between two American cities. 

COMPOSITIONAL PRINCIPLES 
175
Rhythm
In graphic design, rhythm is basically a pattern that relies on repetition—
the recurrence of a shape, word, or thing—to create unity and energy in 
a visual design. In the diagram in Figure 6.54, repeating black dots move 
rhythmically across the composition as the pattern appears to vibrate. 
In Chapter 2, the words Moulin Rouge repeat rhythmically in Toulouse-
Lautrec’s poster (Figure 2.16).
Rhythm is at work in the identity for Chaqwa coffee that was dis-
cussed earlier, tying the design together through the circular motif used 
throughout the interior set (Figure 6.55). The simplicity of the multitude 
of circles carries a vibration that extends into many related components, 
including the company’s advertising, furniture, and interior design. The 
Chaqwa design transcends the actual text and maintains its strong iden-
tity no matter what the language (Figure 6.56). 
The general public approaches a design with the expectation of 
harmony, of principles and elements working together, in whatever form 
it takes. The audience can appreciate this harmony when they see how a 
unified design is crafted, even if done in unconventional ways. Just as with 
other team efforts, the emphasis is on the success of the whole. However, 
sometimes that sense of unity isn’t so clear cut. You might have to work a 
bit to discern the unifying features and spend some time looking at a par-
ticular design before the full impact takes effect. Just because its message 
6.53 WES KULL. Proposed 
book cover for Chronicle of 
a Death Foretold.
6.54 The rhythm of three dots 
repeats left and right within 
the composition.
  I shall define beauty to be a harmony of all the parts, in 
whatever subject it appears, fitted together with such proportion 
and connection, that nothing could be added, diminished, or 
altered, but for the worse. —Leone Battista Alberti (1404–1472), 
Ten Books on Architecture (1452)
6.55 OFFICE, JASON SCHULTE
DESIGN. Visual identity for a 
brand of premium brewed 
coffees, teas, and cocoas.
6.56 The logo maintains 
its strong visual identity 
regardless of the language 
that appears under its 
main graphic.

176
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
isn’t immediate doesn’t mean the design is lacking, however. Complexity 
has its place in the world and can be quite effective for a message that has 
depth of meaning. Consider, for example, a poster by Katherine McCoy for 
the graduate design program at Cranbrook Academy of Art (Figure 6.57).
There’s a lot going on here. It takes a while even to figure out just 
what the poster is about. The words and images blend into one, in keep-
ing with McCoy’s communications theory that words are both read and 
seen, and images are both seen and read. In this sense, McCoy is teaching 
through the piece. The poster has rhythm and unity; it is complicated and 
multifaceted; and just as with the graduate program being promoted, the 
eye and brain are required to work together simultaneously.
Unity
Any given graphic design project might include words, images, colors, 
and shapes to tell a complete story. The unity of the whole—the ability 
to work as one thing or idea—offers a greater impact than the individual 
parts. The diagram in Figure 6.58 is an abstract example. The single circle 
contrasts with the group of circles, yet their consistent size, shape, and 
color as well as the underlying grid that the circles are spaced within unify 
the composition. Unity is generally important for a website, where each 
navigable section needs to operate as if it is part of one system, and for a 
book design, where each chapter becomes part of a larger whole, using a 
consistent typeface and page format.
Color is a dominant element in creating unity for the series of ice 
tea bottles shown in Figure 6.59, created by the design studio The Gooder. 
The simple bottle shape, the unified font on the label, and the distinct logo 
also help create a sense of unity and a strong message. In a display setting, 
an individual vertical bottle stands within the layered horizontal bands, 
making the entire group appear interconnected, not just repeated. 
Stationary systems (business cards, letterhead, envelopes, mailing 
labels, etc.) need to relay a similar sense of unity. The design elements, 
including the logo and address position, typeface, hierarchy of informa-
tion, and color palette, should be consistent across all the components 
6.57 KATHERINE MCCOY. Words integrate 
with a photographic collage of student 
work to help diagram McCoy’s communi-
cations theory of seeing/reading.
6.58 The consistent size, 
shape, and color of the circles 
as well as the underlying grid 
that the circles are spaced 
within unify the design.
6.59 Gooder Companies. 
Teas’ Tea package design 
system.

IN PERSPECTIVE 
177
because they serve as immediate identifiers for the individual or com-
pany. Since most companies have significantly reduced their use of paper 
and postage, they now apply these same design elements to websites and 
e-mail messages. 
In a logo design for Carpet World, Wilson Bonilla created a very 
simple spiral shape to signify several ideas at once. The logo is a rolled 
carpet, a global circumference, and a suggestion of the letter C for “carpet” 
(Figure 6.60). The simple shape unifies the entire system, from business 
cards to the sides of a delivery truck.
In Perspective
This chapter’s focus can be boiled down to one main point: aesthetic 
presentation can cause an idea to resonate with its audience. Knowing 
the principles and elements of form shouldn’t interfere with the pure joy 
of visual expression. Your desire to simply make something, to design 
something, has value. The crayoned pictures we all made as children 
are testament to the aesthetic freedom of which we are capable. The fear 
of making something “the right way” shouldn’t ever get in the way of a 
designer’s creativity. 
Keep in mind that what has been discussed here are elements and 
principles, not rules. They are guidelines to help you in your work. Read 
them carefully, learn them well, and use them assiduously. And when you 
are comfortable enough with all their parameters, begin to defy them and 
break the rules. At that point, your years of experience will prove most 
valuable, and your designs will begin to break new ground. You will have 
developed your craft into a real art and can start to take risks. That is the 
point when your designs will soar.
Expressing intellectual ideas through supportive form defines 
graphic design. In the next chapter, you will see how you can use type in 
conjunction with the principles and elements discussed in this chapter to 
push your designs even further.
Analogous colors (p. 164)
Balance (p. 167)
CMYK (p. 164)
Color (p. 164)
Complementary colors 
(p. 164)
Contrast (p. 164)
Cropping (p. 174)
Depth (p. 160)
Direction (p. 170)
Dominance (p. 172)
Flow (p. 170)
Four-color process (p. 164)
Halftones (p. 164)
Hue (p. 164)
Line (p. 153)
Negative space (p. 158)
Offset printing (p. 165)
One-point perspective 
(p. 160)
Pattern (p. 155)
Primary colors (p. 164)
Repetition (p. 175)
RGB (p. 164)
Rhythm (p. 175)
Saturation (p. 164)
Scale (p. 161)
Secondary colors (p. 164)
Shape (p. 154)
Spot colors (p. 165)
K E Y  T E R M S
continued on next page
6.60 WILSON BONILLA.
Proposed visual identity and 
application for Carpet World. 

178
CHAPTER 6: THE ELEMENTS AND PRINCIPLES OF FORM
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Principles and Elements): Find one existing design exam-
ple in which each of the following principles is the defining element in 
its composition: balance, contrast, direction, dominance, proportion, 
rhythm, and unity. Consider how the principles are accomplished through 
elements such as color, line, and texture. 
Exercise 2 (Photo Cropping): Choose a photograph and scan it digitally. 
Then crop the image three different ways, using one rectangular propor-
tion. The goal is to shift the image’s meaning in each version. Present your 
set as a horizontal arrangement on a tabloid sheet of paper (11" × 17"). 
Exercise 3 (Abstract Composition): Pick up a piece of paper litter from 
the outdoors. It can be a ticket stub, a candy wrapper, a flier on a tele-
phone pole, a note someone wrote and drew on—something that has both 
text and image. Bring it back to class and use whatever is on it as the 
raw material to create a 17" × 17" abstraction. Experiment with it freely, 
taking into consideration all the compositional elements including scale, 
contrast, unity, positive and negative shapes, depth, and repetition. For 
inspiration, look to Russian Constructivism and Bauhaus compositions 
(see Chapter 2). 
Exercise 4 (Point/Line/Plane): The purpose of this exercise is to create 
abstractions of the elements of point, line, and plane from something 
visually familiar such as a photograph. You will isolate these elements 
through simplification and use of organic and geometric forms. To begin, 
choose a magazine photo of a landscape, cityscape, building, or interior 
(avoid portraits for this exercise). Look for an interesting composition; 
you will be abstracting elements from the photo, retaining its relative size 
and position. Converting the photo to a black and white may help you see 
the elements better. Study several photos for contrast of shape, size, tex-
ture, position, direction, and negative/positive space before making your 
final selection. Translate only the most important elements of the photo 
and crop it into a square format (4" × 4" or 6" × 6") to make a strong com-
position. Mount your photo on an 8"× 8" illustration board. 
Using tracing paper overlays and a fine-line black marker, inter-
pret the photo as follows: (1) Contour drawing (show major shapes and 
objects); (2) Isolated points; (3) Isolated lines; (4) Isolated planes; (5) Geo-
metric interpretation of points; (6) Geometric interpretation of lines; (7) 
Geometric interpretation of planes; (8) Planes interpreted as texture; and 
(9) Positive and negative of Number 4 reversed. Note: Tissue exercises 
1–9 should show three–four drawing variations. When complete, then 
overlap tracings and start finding new combinations, including point and 
line, line and plane, point and plane, and finally point, line, and plane.
Tension (p. 169)
Texture (p. 155)
Two-point perspective 
(p. 160)
Unity (p. 176)
Value (p. 165)
White space (p. 158)
K E Y  T E R M S
continued from previous page
  A designer is a planner 
with an aesthetic sense.
—Bruno Munari (1907–1998)
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
179
Experiment with combining organic and geometric elements, 
omitting unimportant areas and varying the weight and size of points 
and lines. You don’t need to follow your tracings exactly, but make them 
neat, using templates and a straight edge where necessary. Choose the 
best composition from your sketches and do a finished composition, 
using marker on tracing paper and refining where necessary. Use this 
comp as a tissue overlay, affixed to your mounted photograph. Flap and 
trim three sides. Using a grid for enlargement, increase your final solu-
tion to an 8" × 8" square. Render this final solution on hot press illustra-
tion board cut to 12" × 13", leaving a 2" margin on the top and sides and 
a 3" margin on the bottom. Outline your shapes with a ruling pen; then 
fill in with black ink or gouache. Use templates and other technical tools 
for professional results. 
Materials: Photograph, tracing paper, fine-line marker, broad-nib 
marker, illustration board, ink or gouache, brushes and tray, rubber 
cement, X-Acto knife, ruler, t-square, triangle, and templates. —Provided 
by Paul Sahre, professor, School of Visual Arts
Project 1 (Color Palettes): Visit a specific location and describe it with 
one adjective: for example, a cemetery as serene, a dump as gritty, a 
parking lot as bright, a gym as tough, an alleyway as mysterious, and so 
on. Photograph the site and create a palette of colors that describe the 
site. Choose nine colors that harmonize based on a consistency of value 
(brightness) and temperature (warm or cool). Find each color’s closest 
match using the Pantone color system, and present the group adjacent 
to your photograph: photo on the left, color grid on the right, as 2" × 2" 
squares with ⅛" between, stacked three across and three down. Present 
the adjective you chose above the color palette. 
Project 2 (Four-Part Theme Composition): Choose one set of the fol-
lowing themes: good/evil, black/white, spring/fall, or right/wrong. Then 
design four separate compositions based on the theme you choose. Each 
of your compositions should show dominance in one of the following cat-
egories: (a) image, (b) cropping, (c) typography, and (d) open (your 
choice). Do not repeat categories. All images and text should relate 
directly to your chosen theme. Your solution should have four unique and 
compelling compositions that work individually as well as in combination 
as one larger composition. Single compositions: 10" × 10", flush-mounted 
onto foam core board. Final size of the four together: 20" × 20". Color: 
Black and white. —Provided by Paul Sahre, professor, School of Visual Arts
Things to Consider: Pay attention to the emotional effect of the colors and how they relate 
to the adjective you choose.
Things to Consider: The most valuable part of this project is in finding a shared theme in the relation-
ships—an approach, motif, or compositional principle—to link all four parts together.
shuttered
Project 1 SCOTT W. SANTORO.
Shuttered, one adjective 
and color palette describing 
a photographed scene.
Project 2 MAY PARSEY. Four-part 
theme composition.

180
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY

181
7
Type and Typography
Designers use type in almost all of their work. They might use large 
amounts of type, flowing it across multiple pages, as in a book, newsletter, 
or website; they might use small amounts of type in harmonious integra-
tion with imagery, for example, as part of a brochure cover or logotype. 
The designer’s job in using type effectively is to make the most of its dual 
purposes—to read as legible text and to convey meaning. 
Speaking with Type 
If you say the word rose very softly, it implies something delicate. Shout-
ing the same word gives it a whole different meaning, adding an unex-
pected harshness and thorniness. Designers can convey similar nuances 
of meaning through type, using elements of type to express mood and 
suggest tones of voice. 
Any typeface—a single design of type comprising the full alpha-
bet and all corresponding fonts (variations such as regular, italic, bold, 
Opposite page: CHASE HILL.
Typographic promotion (detail) 
documenting the designer’s 
transplantation from his home 
to his school (full image, see 
Figure 7.24).
If you work on a nice scratchy 
paper you can get an antique 
look. The sound made is a clue to 
how you’re actually making 
things so you should listen to it. 
—Paul Shaw
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Explain how meaning can be conveyed through typefaces. 
t 
 Summarize the history of type and typefaces.
t 
 Describe the classifications of type.
t 
 Analyze the components of type anatomy.
t 
 Differentiate between typefaces and fonts.
t 
 Discuss the formal issues of analytic typography.
t
Discuss the elements that affect the readability of type.
t 
 Explain how type used with metaphor enriches meaning.
t 
 Discuss vernacular typography’s effect on design.
t 
 Apply older typefaces in new contexts.
t 
  Manipulate type in the third dimension to expand meaning.
t
Exercises and Projects 
Typeset your name; research typefaces; typeset a page layout; visually 
express a quote; use type as narrative; create type compositions; use 
extreme typography; emphasize type for a flier and coffee-table book.
raphic designers communicate using many tools, for example, elements 
such as line, shape, and texture. Computers and software applications have 
liberated the process of visual creation, and “mindware tools” such as 
visual metaphors and montage can amplify meaning. But perhaps the most 
powerful tool is type—typefaces and their typographic arrangement. 
Type not only can complete a message but also can function as the image.
G

182
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
and bold italic)—suggests these nuanced meanings. A light serif type-
face (its main strokes finished off with shorter perpendicular ones) has a 
classical connotation, and a bold sans serif typeface (without any finish-
ing strokes) conveys a more industrial feeling. Each adds meaning to the 
word it creates, just as adjectives add meaning to nouns. In the example 
shown in Figure 7.1, the serif typeface Garamond helps express the idea 
of a delicate rose; the sans serif Trade Gothic, a machined rose; the serif 
Minion in all caps, an authoritative rose; and the sans serif extremely bold 
Champion, a tough rose. The arrangement of letterforms, the typogra-
phy, adds a compositional aspect to letters and words. Principles such as 
contrast, unity, and rhythm should all be considered when designing with 
type (Figure 7.2).
The history of a typeface, why and by whom it was drawn as well 
as how it has been used by other graphic designers, is valuable informa-
tion that can strengthen how you make decisions in choosing typefaces. 
This knowledge helps you make thoughtful choices, not random selec-
tions based only on what you think looks nice. Although aesthetics are 
important, type and typography involve much, much more. 
For a design to consider the question of whether the established 
visual language of graphic design quashes the chance for other visual 
languages to exist, Designer Yannique Hall chose the typeface Helvetica 
(considered by many to be the most widespread and neutral of type-
faces) (Figure 7.3). “GRAPHIC DESIGN IS … IS GRAPHIC DESIGN” 
becomes part of the placard covering the portion of a T-shirt often used 
for political statements or expressions. The typeface and its typographic 
play, or wordplay, make a statement that “graphic design is” but also imply 
a question—“is graphic design.”
The animal shelter logo by Yevgeniya Falkova uses type in another 
way, its letters blending into an illustration of creatures, creating a friendly 
feel for the organization (Figure 7.4). Whereas the “GRAPHIC DESIGN 
IS” placard appeals in a conceptual way, the animal shelter logo appeals to 
our emotions. The animal faces stare out at us, and chances are, we smile 
back with empathy.
7.3 YANNIQUE HALL. Design 
solution in response to a 
project that asked students to 
define graphic design as if it 
were a slogan on a T-shirt.
7.1 A particular typeface 
can extend the perception of 
a word and its meaning.
7.2 Typography involves use 
of compositional principles in 
the arrangement of letters.
7.4 YEVGENIYA FALKOVA.
Proposed logo for a local 
animal shelter.
  Typographical design should 
perform optically what the speaker 
creates through voice and gesture 
of his thoughts. —El Lissitzky

HISTORICAL TYPE 
183
Historical Type
Since Johannes Gutenberg (c.1398–1468) first set type for a Bible in 
1454, standards concerning type legibility have remained fairly consis-
tent (Figure 7.5). The proper spacing of letters or the handling of column 
widths and paragraph breaks all continue, learned by each new genera-
tion. What has changed most is the technology of type. 
Hot lead casts of individually carved letters (hot type) and later type 
produced by photocomposition devices of the 1950s (cold type) were 
made by mechanical means. It wasn’t until the early 1980s that digital bits 
replaced the type previously made with wood and metal or with camera 
lenses and exposed film. Digital technology has put type much more 
directly into the hands of graphic designers, who can now manipulate 
type with a freedom and accessibility never before available.
The professional typesetter’s stand and a hand-assembled set of let-
ters are now historic icons (Figures 7.6 and 7.7). To us today, the mechani-
cal processes seem as though they would have been too bulky to have 
produced sensitive letterforms and compositions, and yet the typefaces 
and arrangements by many early designers, including Americans such as 
Frederic Goudy (1865–1947) and Bruce Rogers (1870–1957), were amaz-
ingly graceful and functional. The type specimen book designed by Rogers 
for Goudy’s typeface Italian Old Style is a beautiful example (Figure 7.8). 
Although nearly 100 years old, the piece still looks fresh and inventive. 
The appeal of the design endures to this day, just as many typefaces them-
selves have endured. See the Worklist “Typefaces from the Eighteenth, 
Nineteenth, and Early Twentieth Centuries”—all of which are still in use 
today because each of the letters possesses careful, intelligent, and lasting 
form. Type has this potential for enduring quality and appeal.
7.6 Typesetter at his compos-
ing stand of upper and lower 
case cast-metal letters.
7.7 Composing stick and 
metal letters in a type case. 
Small sections of text were set 
by placing individual letters 
in the stick and then trans-
ferring them to larger sections 
of type to create a page.
7.8 BRUCE ROGERS. Type 
specimen book designed for 
Frederic Goudy’s typeface 
Italian Old Style. 1924.
7.5 Page from Gutenberg’s 
Bible. 1454.
Photo courtesy Otis Lab Press 

184
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
Type Classifications
In the early nineteenth century, typeface was classified in an attempt to 
simplify it. The three main movements—Old Style, Transitional, and 
Modern—are effective groupings because they correlate so well with 
printing techniques of their time. 
The first classification is for type of the fifteenth and sixteenth cen-
turies. Referred to as Old Style typefaces, these early printing types had 
yet to be inspired by mechanical printing. Instead, they mimicked pen-
based letterforms, using strokes with a right-leaning inclination. 
By the mid-eighteenth century, typefaces were moving away from 
their calligraphic past and toward designs that embraced printing tech-
nology. These typefaces, called Transitional typefaces, were less con-
cerned with mimicking the pen stroke. Instead, Transitional typefaces 
were drawn with structured and consistent strokes in mind. They bridged 
the gap between the past and the next generation of more refined, styl-
ized, and modern letterforms. 
The Modern typefaces of the late eighteenth century aren’t the same 
as what we think of as twentieth-century modern. These typefaces made 
a complete break from the calligraphic past. Their classification is such 
because of the high contrast between strokes, a uniform and mechani-
cally balanced shape, and horizontal serifs. Modern typefaces opened the 
door for the relatively abstract “slab” and “grotesque” typefaces that were 
to come a few decades later.
The first letterforms created by the early Greeks are described today 
as sans serif (the French word sans meaning “without” and serif from the 
Dutch schreef meaning “line”). Letterforms were refined by the Romans 
who found that their chiseled application onto stone monuments was 
made easier by finishing the coarse ends of each stroke with a smaller, 
perpendicular stroke. Serifs gave letters visual feet to stand on. They also 
provided a horizontal alignment of those feet—or baseline—for words to 
run along (Figure 7.9).
Sans serif typefaces were reintroduced by the British as a letterform 
style in 1816, but were considered grotesque (Italian for “from the cave”) 
because they lacked the refined serifs. It wasn’t until Bauhaus embraced 
sans serifs for their boldness and simplicity of design that they gained 
their popularity. 
Slab serifs (often called Egyptian serifs) are typefaces that have 
thick rectangular finishes to their vertical strokes. They were created in 
the mid-1840s when the industrial revolution was in full swing, especially 
in Great Britain. Mass production increased the need for more advertis-
ing, which in turn created the need for bold headline displays using slab 
serifs that stood out on the page (see Chapter 2). 
There has been a strong revival of slab-serif typefaces in the past half 
century. Slab-serif typefaces generally have thick, block-like serifs that are 
W O R K L I S T
Typefaces from the 
Eighteenth, Nineteenth, and 
Early Twentieth Centuries
7.9 Versions of the capital 
letter T is sans serif (left) 
and serif (right).
Morris Fuller Benton (1894)
Morris Fuller Benton (1905)
Morris Fuller Benton (1914)
Frederic Goudy (1901)
Frederic Goudy (1911)

TYPE CLASSIFICATIONS
185
either blunted or angular. They work well for display type, but tend to look 
awkward as body text. Figure 7.10 summarizes and describes the various 
typeface categories and provides examples of typefaces that fit into them. 
In the 1950s, especially with the reworking of Clarendon Bold by 
type designer Freeman Craw for the American type foundry, slab serifs 
were used extensively on Blue Note Records album covers. In the 1960s, 
Adrian Frutiger’s Serifa was extremely popular for its challenge to the pre-
dominance of sans serifs. Designs made for the International Typeface 
Corporation (ITC) in the 1970s included two important typefaces that are 
still popular today. Lubalin Graph, designed by Herb Lubalin, has a clean 
geometric form that redefined slab serifs. American Typewriter, designed 
by Joel Kaden and Tony Stan, parodies the letterforms and the mechanical 
process of the typical typewriter (Figure 7.11). 
Attempts to classify typefaces and trends that favor some groups 
over others have continued through the decades. Technology has an 
impact, but so does pop culture—think psychedelic- or grunge-inspired 
designs. Typefaces reflect our own faces.
7.11 Examples of slab serif 
typefaces: Clarendon Bold, by 
Freeman Craw for American 
type foundry; Serifa Black, by 
Adrian Frutiger; Lubalin Graph 
Demi, by Herb Lubalin for ITC; 
and American Typewriter, by Joel 
Kaden and Tony Stan for ITC.
In Practice: Old Style and Transitional typefaces 
tend to work well set as body text because they were 
designed for legibility and ﬂow. Modern typefaces 
tend to be used for display purposes, their serifs being 
too thin for small text sizes.
7.10 A summary of typeface 
classifications.

7.12 The capital letter A 
in Adobe typefaces Stencil 
and Industria.
186
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
Typeface Anatomy
Letters have a basic structure that you rely on to identify or read them. A 
capital A has a crossbar and a top connection; a capital Z has a diagonal 
that connects the parallel top and bottom strokes. Within these struc-
tures is some flexibility for creative play; for example, a capital A can have 
a squared-off or curved top. But generally, every letter, both upper- and 
lowercased, has a basic shape (Figure 7.12). 
When you overlay a grid onto a capital (or uppercase) letter A, 
you can see more clearly the degree of angles, curves, height, and stroke 
weight (Figure 7.13). Typefaces develop and mimic these details. The goal 
is to achieve a consistent shape and feel throughout all the letters of a par-
ticular typeface. The typeface should look unified, so none of the letters 
stand out from the others. However, a typeface should be distinct from 
other typefaces, displaying its own look and personality. Otherwise, it has 
no reason to exist as an independent form.
Components
In addition to a typeface’s proportions, specific features help letters 
maintain a consistency with one another (Figure 7.14). These compo-
nents can be as subtle as a spur (the stroke extending as it finishes) or 
as blatant as the extended tail of a capital Q. They also designate neg-
ative areas, or counters, as seen in the bowl of a lowercase d, or in a 
growth-like shape, or “ear,” in a lowercase letter g. These components 
help create the overall look of a typeface. A counter or spur might carry 
through onto other letters, numbers, and even punctuation. For exam-
ple, the counter in an n will be similar to the counters of the h, m, and u. 
Particular components are emphasized throughout the typeface, giving 
it personality and consistency.
Stress
Letters drawn with a brush or quill exhibit stress angles. As the brush 
stroke changes direction, the thickness of the stroke changes. The result-
ing tension between thick and thin is called stress. A calligraphic pen nib 
exaggerates the effect even further (Figure 7.15). A straight pull down-
ward creates a thick stroke because it uses the square end of the pen or the 
broadest part of the brush. On the curve, a thinner stroke results because 
the angle of the nib or brush changes. Part of the fine art of calligraphy is 
in the control and rhythm of these strokes. 
Digitally created typefaces are far removed from the pen nib, but 
the idea of building in stress remains an important design consider-
ation. Stress helps a typeface achieve personality by making a direct ref-
erence to the past, as in a revival typeface. It can also create a vertical, 
horizontal, or oblique balance as in a condensed, expanded, or italic 
font (Figure 7.16). 
7.13 An example of the geom-
etry system that might be used 
to create a letterform.
In Practice: Mid-to-late nineteenth century type-
faces had spurs ﬁnishing the strokes that mimicked 
the Victorian era’s accentuated styling, for example, 
in the curl at the end of men’s mustaches and the 
puﬀy bustles in women’s fashion. When designing a 
typeface, it’s a good idea to consider contemporary 
styles and how your typeface will reﬂect them.

TYPEFACE ANATOMY 
187
Optical Considerations
At first look, a line of letters seems to be generated mechanically, with let-
ters running along their established baseline. But on closer examination, 
you can see subtle fixes, which adjust things that might otherwise look 
awkward. For example, the crossbar in the capital letter H should be posi-
tioned slightly above center to look balanced. Similarly, the topmost tip 
of the capital A should sit slightly above the upper line of letters, as is true 
for the letters with curves. For example, the top and bottom curves of the 
7.14 Components of 
letterforms that influence 
a typeface design.
7.16 Stress angles created by 
the thick and thin segments 
of the strokes.
7.15 The pen creates thick 
and thin strokes depending 
on the tip’s direction.

188
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
letter O should extend just slightly beyond the upper and lower lines so 
the O will appear to be aligned with the rest of the letters. Curves, points, 
and strokes often need to be adjusted to visually match the rest of the let-
ters (Figure 7.17). These guidelines generally apply to all fonts.
In the visual identity for Student Organic Farm, Kevin James Medlyn 
has exaggerated the optics to convey the idea of growth (Figure 7.18). The 
logotype, an identity created predominantly with type, appears to sit on 
a single baseline—cut at the bottom as if growing out of the ground. The 
letters progressively rise, finishing with the green color that suggests the 
idea of farming. As a result, the organization’s name is more memorable.
In the Speakout on Amazon Brand Identity (Figure 7.19), you can 
see how a universally understood gesture (a smile) can be brought to a 
logotype and can transform it into a very memorable logo.
Typeface Families and Fonts
Typefaces have qualities that can be understood in terms of human per-
sonality. For example, the sure footing and historic legibility of the serif 
typeface Caslon expresses sturdy practicality in a body of text, whereas 
the high contrast between the thick and thin strokes of Bodoni suggest a 
delicate and stylized attitude wherever it is used. In the case of sans serif 
typefaces, Akzidenz Grotesk has a consistent stroke weight and a spartan 
aesthetic that reads as bold and efficient, whereas Futura, with its geom-
etry of perfect circles and squares, suggests forwardness and simplicity. 
These differentiations (both of form and history) are the distinctions 
designers have to consider when choosing a typeface. 
A typeface will not only reflect its time period but also the history 
that came before it. As you buy, use, and even design a typeface of your 
own, you will become more and more familiar with these differentiations 
that make up the amazing and multifaceted world of type. 
The collective variations of a typeface make up a typeface family.
And just as with human families, there are distinctive characteristics that 
run through all the elements. It’s possible that the connection to human 
bodies is the reason typeface components are called “legs” or “ears” (see 
Figure 7.14). Such relationships to bodies make typefaces memorable. 
7.17 Enlargements show some 
of the adjustments needed to 
visually correct a typeface’s 
curves and strokes.
7.18 KEVIN JAMES MEDLYN.
Logotype conveying the 
idea of growth.
In Practice: Whenever using text in your 
work, keep in mind how very easy it is to make 
spelling errors or typos that will ruin your 
project. Double-check all names and dates, 
and always ask someone else to proofread your 
work just to ensure that your text is correct. 
Almost every designer has horror stories of 
getting something back from the printer and 
discovering an error in the text. A simple extra 
proofreading step can prevent many mistakes.

TYPEFACE FAMILIES AND FONTS
189
SPEAKOUT: Amazon Brand Identity by Turner Duckworth
A logotype is, as the name describes, an identity made of type, and the amazon.com logo is a great 
example. Designed by Turner Duckworth, it is a widely recognized visual identity. Two consid-
erations were involved in its redesign. The first was for the redesign not to stray too far from the 
original so as not to alarm Wall Street or confuse customers. This was solved by simply flipping the 
underscoring arc into a smile-like arc (Figure 7.19). 
The second consideration was to convey the idea that the site had everything anyone would want 
to buy. Here’s where the alphabet came into play. The smile emphasized an idea inherent in the 
name—the letters a and z, as in “a–z,” signifying a full array of items. The arc actually points from 
“a” to “z” and the “z” has an added curve on its baseline to give it a bit of zip (Figure 7.20). The 
typographic elements all add up to a smart and successful branding concept, from the Amazon.com 
website to the boxes the items ship in (Figure 7.21). Jeff Bezos, CEO of Amazon.com, is quoted as 
saying, “Anyone who doesn’t like this logo doesn’t like puppies.”
7.19 TURNER DUCKWORTH, 
LONDON + SAN FRANCISCO.
The Amazon.com logo 
before its redesign (top) 
and after (bottom).
7.20 An arrow points from a 
to z, representing the range of 
items for sale on the website.
7.21 TURNER DUCKWORTH, 
LONDON + SAN FRANCISCO. 
Logo application to a 
shipping box. The smile 
shape is used as a graphic 
element to extend the 
identity.

What kind of training in typography 
did you have?
I learned calligraphy before I touched upon 
typography. My teacher in Paris at the École 
Supérieure des Arts Appliqués introduced us 
step by step to designing letters by hand. With
each shape, we observed their counter-shape—
the white spaces inside and between the letters. 
These silent, negative spaces opened a whole 
new world of typography for me. 
My school’s curriculum brought me from the 
basics to more complex ideas. Now, when I
design with or manipulate letters, I consider the 
type’s technical, historical, stylistic, and semantic 
dimensions. My exploration is really a discovery 
that has developed in many ways—through 
travel and meeting other designers, and 
through the computer. The extraordinary digital 
speed and versatility has made everything 
possible and has brought a sense of freshness 
and freedom. But even with the computer, the 
most important aspect of typographic design 
is simplicity.
Why is typography such a profound 
component of your work?
Typography is a perfect balance between 
shapes, images, and significations. I am 
fascinated by the way in which letters can 
work in unlimited combinations to create form 
and meaning. The playfulness and power of 
designing with letters, to give the reader an 
unexpected and conceptual approach to what 
he or she reads, is very important to me. 
There is a bridge between typography and 
fine art because of the complex subtleties they 
share. I still remember the very first time I saw 
the Black Square (1915) by Kazimir Malevich of 
the Suprematist Movement and Piet Mondrian’s 
paintings from the De Stijl period. They were 
great moments of enlightenment for me—I
was touched by the materiality of the paintings. 
The simple shapes organized with a mastery of 
light and geometric dynamism was something 
that I had never felt before. Typography shares 
this straightforward, conceptual, and appealing 
quality in its strict, geometric vocabulary. 
Modern typography opened up a whole world 
full of aesthetic and intellectual meanings. The 
idea, the method, and the honesty of expression 
must be central to any designer who works with 
type. By following these principles and realizing 
the goal of communication, typographic design 
can go beyond pure function and become 
something fresh and liberating.
How does typography specifically 
influence your poster designs?
Usually posters are first seen from afar—the 
experience being more communal rather than 
Philippe Apeloig studied at École Supérieure des Arts Appliqués and the École Nationale Supérieure 
des Arts Décoratifs in Paris from 1982 to 1985. Apeloig worked as a designer at the Musée d’Orsay 
in Paris from 1985 to 1987 and as design consultant and art director at the Louvre since 2007. 
In 1989, Apeloig established his own design studio in Paris. His projects include posters, logos, 
typefaces, and communication materials for cultural events, publishers, and institutions. Apeloig 
has produced award-winning poster designs for museums and for cultural events, such as Chicago
for the ﬁrst exhibition at the Musée d’Orsay (1987), Bateaux sur l’eau, an exhibition of ancient 
models of boats and barges in Rouen (2003), and the recent exhibition Bewegte Schrift at the 
Museum für Gestaltung in Zurich. He has designed experimental typefaces and has also designed 
logos for the Museum of Jewish Art and History in Paris (1998), the IUAV (Instituto Universitario di 
Architectura di Venezia) (2002), the “musées de France” (2005), and “Châtelet,” the musical theater 
of the city of Paris (2006). Apeloig taught typography and graphic design at the École Nationale 
Supérieure des Arts Décoratifs in Paris from 1992 to 1999 and at the Cooper Union School of Art in 
New York City from 1999 to 2002. He is a member of the Alliance Graphique Internationale, and 
his work is in the collections of the Bibliothèque nationale de France in Paris and the Museum of 
Modern Art in New York.
Photo by Catherine Rebois
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  T H E  I M P O R TA N C E  O F  T Y P O G R A P H Y,  W I T H   PHILIPPE APELOIG
190
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY

personal (the way books are). They speak and 
interact with their audience to both attract 
and communicate. Therefore, a poster’s 
typography is central to its design. It must be 
lively, readable, expressive, visually arresting, 
bold, and striking—never neutral or merely 
decorative.
Vignette 7.3 Poster; October 
Makes the Season Dance.
Vignette 7.4 Poster; Boats 
On the Water, Rivers and 
Canals, exhibition.
Vignette 7.5 Poster; 
Type Directors Club (TDC). 
Typography 54 call for 
entries.
Vignette 7.2 Poster; Wim 
Crouwel—A graphic odyssey.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: PHILIPPE APELOIG 
191
Vignette 7.1 Logo for 
Contemporary Africa. 

192 
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
Typeface Fonts
Certain sets of variations within a typeface family are referred to as fonts. 
Specific font names such as Helvetica Bold Condensed describe the type, 
the weight, and the stress, in this case bold and vertically oriented, with 
the letters taller than they are wide. There are similar descriptors for regu-
lar, light, italic, bold, black, and expanded. All these variations give the 
designer more options when using type to express an idea. Within most 
projects, you probably won’t need to use multiple type families, for exam-
ple, Helvetica with Akzidenz Grotesk and Caslon. The benefit of working 
within one typeface family is the consistent look it brings (Figure 7.22). 
Keep in mind that although some typeface families have many variations, 
others are more limited. You will need to see what options exist when 
making your choice of typeface.
Type Size
A typeface’s size is based on a measurement system of points and picas 
(Figure 7.23). There are 12 points in a pica and approximately 6 picas in 
an inch, or 25 mm. Small point sizes, between 6- and 8-point type, are 
appropriate for captions and footnotes. For reading text, a size between 
9 and 14 points is the standard. For subheads it’s 14 to 24 points, and for 
display headlines, 24 points or greater is practical.
Type size can become the tool for directing the eye around the page, 
as we see in the playful student piece by Chase Hill (Figure 7.24). In addi-
tion to size, the angle, geometry, color and variation in typeface design 
create a liveliness that energizes the composition. The few images help  
in decorating an other-
wise typographic design. 
The piece documents the 
student’s design training 
in a way that a simple 
typed résumé of informa-
tion could never match.
7.22 A partial list of the fonts 
within the typeface Myriad Pro, 
designed by Robert Slimbach 
and Carol Twombly for Adobe 
Systems.
7.23 Point size is based on 
the overall height of a letter’s 
body plus a slight amount of 
clearance above and below.
7.24 CHASE HILL. Typographic 
promotion documenting the 
designer’s transplantation from 
his home in New Jersey to his 
school’s campus in Brooklyn.
Myriad Pro Regular
Myriad Pro Italic
Myriad Pro Semibold
Myriad Pro Semibold Italic
Myriad Pro Bold
Myriad Pro Bold Italic
Myriad Pro SemiCondensed
Myriad Pro SemiCondensed Italic
Myriad Pro Condensed
Myriad Pro Bold Condensed

ANALYTIC TYPOGRAPHY 
193
Analytic Typography
Alphabets are some of the world’s greatest inventions. The most complex 
thoughts can be conveyed by an alphabet’s individual letters, combined 
into words and sentences. Typography can be used to augment this system. 
Its vibrant form creates additional meaning. But what sort of meaning? 
You learned about two kinds of meaning—analytic and meta-
phoric—in Chapter 3, Graphic Design Concepts. Typographic solutions 
can be thought of in the same way. There are analytic and metaphoric uses 
of type, and these type-based approaches also overlap each other.
Analytic typography involves arranging text methodically, without 
the use of direct metaphors. Formal issues such as shape, density, order, 
and spacing weigh heavily in solving the problem. If there is an interpreta-
tion of the subject, it will lean toward the abstraction of the type as a visual 
image. For example, one can convey an idea through distressed or partic-
ularly curvilinear letterforms. This analytic treatment of type should meet 
standard expectations for readability and legibility—just as metaphoric 
treatments should, especially in terms of the images they bring to mind.
In her typographic exploration, Ambica Prakash fuses roman-style 
letters with the Devanagari script of the Hindi language, creating a syn-
thesis of the Hindi and English—what the designer refers to as Hinglish 
(Figure 7.25). Although the idea of overlap and convergence could be 
explained by composing a lengthy text description, the all-type composi-
tion conveys a deeper visual meaning that is understood in a more holistic 
way using only type to symbolize and inform. This piece is a clear example 
of analytic type; it uses position, structure, depth, and color without the 
use of metaphoric interpretation. See the Speakout on Typographic Nar-
rative as an example of how the treatment of type can be handled in a way 
to mimic sounds, shapes, and processes.
In another example, a poster by Louis Lim uses the idea of com-
parison to visualize the issue of literacy in America (Figure 7.26). On 
the left side sits the word literacy, presented as a coded message. The 
letters are hidden, canceled, and denied. On the right side is the number 
30,000,000—the statistic cited by the National Assessment of Adult Liter-
acy in 2003 for the number of Americans who performed below the basic 
literacy level for such things as signing a form or adding the numbers on 
a bank deposit slip. In between is the statement (at a very small font size): 
“Literacy is the ability to use printed and written information to function 
in society….” The analytic concept here surmises that literacy has more to 
do with penetrating a communication system than with simply reading. 
The single-color, sans serif type, and dashed line all help convey the divi-
sion between those who can and those who can’t. 
7.25 AMBICA PRAKASH.
Typographic exploration 
that synthesizes Hindi with 
English; Indic scripts with 
Western letterforms. 
7.26 LOUIS LIM. Literacy poster 
that makes an analogy between 
a coded word (literacy) and the 
30,000,000 Americans who 
can’t read it.

194
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
SPEAKOUT: Typographic Narrative by Joshua Ray Stephens
Many ancients were intuitively skeptical of written language. Perceived as something potentially 
dangerous for individuals to possess, writing was initially confined to the realm of mercantilism, for 
keeping records such as stored and traded foods. But its implicit potential to enable handing down 
ideas and stories from generation to generation was just too powerful to resist.
I suppose I have a bit of the ancients in me. I feel a deep responsibility, as a designer and artist, to 
treat the written language with piety, but also as a wondrous gift. So when words come alive at the 
hands of a gifted design student, it truly electrifies my soul.
Typography is an alchemical paradox that can breathe life into a single letter, effectively turning 
thought into gold. Wonji Park’s student work is an example of this alchemical power (Figure 7.27). 
Her playful creations use letters, images, and shapes to transform abstract glyphs into concrete 
expressions of fearless spirit.
  Only that which narrates can 
make us understand. 
—Susan Sontag, On Photography 
(New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 1977)
7.27 WONJI PARK.
Typographic experiments 
that use single letters to 
initiate narratives.

READABLE TEXTURE 
195
Readable Texture
Notice the block of text you are reading right now. Just look at its form 
instead of reading it. Is there a tactile quality on the page? The gray value 
of the block of text against the white background should suddenly become 
more noticeable. Look at it in relation to the other elements on the page—
the figures, the page numbers, the footer, the margins, and so forth. Do all 
the parts work together harmoniously to deliver a clear message?
Drawing the reader in with aesthetics is integral to readability. Every 
individual letter, the space between letters—microcosms within the larger 
formation of type—combine in ways that give a visual weight to areas of 
text. The typeface Garamond is different from Times, which is different 
from Futura, which is different from Helvetica. Each will create a differ-
ent sense of weight and texture that will emphasize its particular typeface 
“personality.” Letter spacing, leading, and alignment are specific elements 
of readable texture that influence how any particular typeface will read.
Letter Spacing
Adjusting the space between letters and 
words is done through a process called 
kerning. The more space there is between 
the elements, the lighter the feel; the less 
space, the heavier the feel. A typeface 
designer predetermines this space, but a 
graphic designer can make further adjust-
ments to the individual pairs of letters, 
fine tuning the spacing between them to 
work perfectly within the set space of the page. A process called tracking
is used to create consistent spacing within a group of letters. Generally, 
kerning and tracking adjustments are made to display-sized headline set-
tings, especially in the case of capital letters, where inconsistencies are 
more apparent. In Figure 7.28, the kerning issues between the letters t 
and y are quite clear. Inconsistent kerning and tracking can make a design 
look amateur or clumsy. 
In addition, type uses two units of measure within its point system 
called em spacing and en spacing. Em spacing is proportioned to the 
width of a capital M and en spacing (generally proportioned to the width 
of an N) equals one-half of an em space. The em is further divided into 
units used to calculate precise adjustments. Kerning and tracking changes 
are measured in thousandths of an em space. The em and en spacing is 
also used to create two kinds of dashes that are commonly used in text 
(Figure 7.29). 
Letter spacing also applies to hand-drawn letters. In the Speakout 
on Casual or Spontaneous Writing, Paul Shaw explains how letters cre-
ated by hand can be refined by letter spacing. 
7.28 Creating an even and 
consistent visual rhythm 
within a word is based on the 
counters between letters. 
In Practice: Be careful to use regular 
apostrophes (’) and quotation marks (“ ”) 
where appropriate. Often, software will 
transpose these marks in to vertical marks 
that are really symbols to show measure-
ments for inches (") and feet (').
7.29  There is a distinction 
made between hyphens and 
dashes based on how they 
are used.
-
Hyphen: joins words and separates 
syllables in a word
–
En dash: the width of a font’s capital N 
(represents the concept of “to,” as 
in 19–20)
—
Em dash: the width of a font’s capital 
M (used to separate thoughts within a 
sentence—you see what I mean?)
“ ”
In Practice: Be careful to use
apostrophes (’) and quotation m
where appropriate. Often, softw
transpose these marks in to vert

196
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
7.31 PAUL SHAW/LETTER DESIGN.
Ten renditions of the word 
design created with ten 
different tools. 
7.30 PAUL SHAW. Calligraphic 
examples created on the same 
paper—Arches MBM. The 
ink used was Higgins Eternal. 
Individual letters were cut 
out and reassembled to produce 
a rendition that is rhythmic 
and lively.

READABLE TEXTURE 
197
SPEAKOUT: Casual or Spontaneous Writing by Paul Shaw/Letter Design
Casual or spontaneous writing at its best is often neither casual nor spontaneous but laborious and 
carefully contrived. It is an illusion. It can be accomplished with mechanical tools (3M Magic tape, 
whiteout, razor blades, and felt-tip markers) or digital ones (scanners and illustration programs) 
or both. But it must start with the basics: writing tools, liquids, and papers. The first step is to write 
out the text over and over again. But do not expect to achieve a single perfect rendition. Instead, 
work on the overall rhythm and focus on difficult letter combinations. Then mark the portions of 
each version of the text that are the best. Next, cut out each one and reassemble the text, all the 
while maintaining a pleasing rhythm (Figure 7.30). Horizontal rhythm is the result of balancing 
the space inside the letters and between the letters. Do not expect a consistency of type. Sometimes 
the rhythm needs to be livelier than a two-step or a waltz; a Lindy Hop, Charleston, or something 
exotic such as a tango is more in order. Vertical rhythm is also important. It is achieved by adjusting 
the baseline as well as monitoring the length of ascenders and descenders. Do not leave letters as 
they emerge from your writing instrument. Be willing to lightly retouch them to delete an errant 
stroke, smooth out a curve, or balance negative space. The only thing that matters is that the final 
result looks spontaneous.
The writing tools available today include dip pens (with both broad and pointed nibs), brushes 
(pointed, flat, stencil), ballpoint pens, felt-tip pens, gel pens, China markers, oil crayons, pastels, 
charcoal, colored pencils, spray paints, and so on (Figure 7.31). There are also other tools and 
ordinary objects that can be used for writing: ruling pens, tongue depressors, Q-tips, eye droppers, 
toothbrushes, lipstick, fingers, and more—even credit cards!
Writing requires not only tools but also liquids and surfaces. A variety of inks and paints can be 
used with dip pens, brushes, and ruling pens. Each has different properties of flow, absorbency, 
and opacity. For all tools the writing surface is crucial. Papers can be smooth (even slick), rough, 
corrugated, or absorbent. Non-paper surfaces such as Styrofoam, cloth, plastic, and even glass can 
be used to write on. The different surfaces affect gestural movement and speed which in turn influ-
ences the rhythm of writing.
In the end, successful casual writing is the result of experience combined with a willingness to 
experiment.
Casual or spontaneous writing at its best is 
often neither casual nor spontaneous but 
laborious and carefully contrived.
Papers can be smooth (even slick), rough, 
corrugated, or absorbent. Non-paper surfaces 
such as Styrofoam, cloth, plastic, and even 
glass can be used to write on.

198
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
Leading
The third variable of readability is distance from one baseline of 
text to the next. This spacing is called leading because, during 
the age of hot type, a strip of metal was actually inserted between 
lines of lead type to increase vertical spacing. Most computer 
layout applications automatically add a space between the lines, 
but designers can make their own decisions about the size of that 
space and can adjust it manually. 
The same sizing system of points is used for leading. A few 
points of leading are added between the lines of body text. For 
example, 9 point or 10 point Myriad Pro type, with the addition of 
2 points of leading—expressed as 9pt/11pt or 10pt/12pt—makes 
for a comfortable read. Adding more leading lightens the text 
block visually. Tracking will also lighten a text block, but when 
either leading or tracking are pushed too far, they begin to diffuse 
the type, causing legibility problems (Figure 7.32). 
In Practice: Running body text is usually set without adding extra 
tracking. A typeface already has kerning built into each pair of letters, but 
a graphic designer can make minor adjustments to spacing. An example 
is a word set in capital letters where a consistent rhythm is desired beyond 
the default of the typeface; for example, in the word SPACING, the +80 
word tracking evens out the letter spaces. 
Paragraph Spacing
There are many different ways to separate blocks of text into para-
graphs. Traditional ways to break two paragraphs apart are to 
insert a full line break (a space equal to the height of a line of text); 
to insert a half line break, in which the space after a paragraph is 
half the leading (for 9/12, the half line break space would be 6 pt.); 
or to indent the first line of each paragraph (Figure 7.33). More 
unconventional ways include separation with rules, small graph-
ics, or color. Each option has an impact on the overall look of the 
page and the sense of balance between the blocks of text. 
In an example of cookie packaging, Chiu Li Design used 
type, leading, and paragraph spacing to bring hierarchy and order 
to the printed information in a way that is quite Baroque (Figure 
7.34). The design choices also add to the overall message of the 
product—traditional, tasty baked goods. On the front of the pack-
age, what is normally an informational description of the contents 
shifts toward the promotional using a scripted logo, centered text, 
and colorful graphics. The same is true for the back, with heavily 
leaded text and cookie images inserted for paragraph breaks.
7.33 Paragraph spacing separating 
text blocks in three conventional ways: 
full line space (24 pt), half line space 
(18 pt), and indent space (18 pt).
10/12 Myriad Pro Regular 
At arcimpe lignis re, tem verchicia volupta 
tatur? Rate ilitaquat. Libeaquis debisquia 
plaut illibusdam, ut resersped et eat et quia 
dolum, cullabo rectempor sed et magnimil 
ilit volum solorep taectus moluptaquam 
est, si nobis quibea debis.
9/11 Myriad Pro Regular 
At arcimpe lignis re, tem verchicia volupta tatur? 
Rate ilitaquat. Libeaquis debisquia plaut illibus-
dam, ut resersped et eat et quia dolum, cullabo 
rectempor sed et magnimil ilit volum solorep 
taectus moluptaquam est, si nobis quibea debis.
At arcimpe lignis re, tem verchicia volupta tatur? 
Rate ilitaquat. Libeaquis debisquia plaut illibus 
dam, ut resersped et eat et quia.
Da porrorum quibus alit pero blam, accuptatum 
aut is enienmagnate mporpos qui con et rendan-
tur si con ne volorep ernat.
Bus alibusd aeptatur, sae volorum rae praturepro 
ilibusci sint derrore pelenda enisi odipiet quis 
delecer chiligenda cus excestis aut quia.
Invereped est molore occum il ipid milibus-
am ea verorio est, volupta quibus simendandis 
voloreptatem quidel et duciliq.
Bereperunt. Rum volores eost, consequ odig-
nimporae velluptia im eiumqui deniend ellest.
12pt
12pt
12pt
12pt
   6pt
10/14 Myriad Pro Regular, tracking +50 
At arcimpe lignis re, tem verchicia vo-
lupta tatur? Rate ilitaquat. Libeaquis 
debisquia plaut illibusdam, ut resersped 
et eat et quia dolum, cullabo rectem-
por sed et magnimil ilit volum solorep 
taectus moluptaquam est, si nobis 
quibea debis.
24pt
18pt
7.32 The setting of text blocks is 
optimized when the designer balances 
legibility with aesthetics. The words 
and leading in the 10/14 Myriad Pro 
Regular with +50 tracking is too loose 
a setting for reading comfort here.
18pt

READABLE TEXTURE 
199
7.34 CHIU LI DESIGN. Package 
design in which the text about 
the product and product itself 
(cookies) intermingle.
Text Alignment
Most readers don’t realize the effect that text column alignments 
can have and may even assume they don’t matter. Yet when align-
ment is combined appropriately with typeface choice, leading, and 
paragraph spacing, the result is text that is readable and has per-
sonality. Two basic aligning concepts apply: ﬂush (aligned evenly 
with the margin) and rag (unaligned so words can flow more 
naturally).
The four examples in Figure 7.35 show how legibility can 
be balanced with aesthetics to create a tone. In the top example, 
the column is justiﬁed (flush with left and right margins). The 
feeling is clean and precise. The second example is a flush left, rag 
right text column. The rag on the right feels a bit freer and brings 
some airy white space to the page. It also has a built-in contrast—
aligned versus unaligned. 
The rag can also be switched to rag left, flush right, as in the 
third example, although a rag left alignment decreases legibility, 
making it difficult to find one’s place when reading line to line. Yet 
being set rag left can work quite successfully if its usefulness in a 
layout supersedes legibility. It suggests a sense of rebellion against 
convention.
A similar legibility issue can be true for a centered column 
(fourth example). Ease of finding the next line in a sentence is 
somewhat compromised, but symmetry can add a poetic feeling, 
especially in short amounts of text such as a poem or announce-
ment. In the left side of the fourth example, justified centered col-
umns also present issues with the spacing between letters, espe-
cially if your text includes long words. Your computer will use 
programmed algorithms to determine spacing that keep the lines 
9/11 Myriad Pro Regular, Flush Left, Rag Right Column 
Itatis nullor alibusc iusapicae venes pratin con pa sum 
as eos int verum eostionsed qui atiat eaquid molores 
elisqui sant este porepra quam hari aturent as dolorum 
alitia ipsapienis autem ratem qui doluptibus, que vit 
alique voluptae volupit aquodis minti consed excesciet 
eicimet vellibeat qui vel ipsam quae con et, cum, unt
9/11 Myriad Pro Regular, Flush Right, Rag Left Column 
Itatis nullor alibusc iusapicae venes pratin con pa sum 
as eos int verum eostionsed qui atiat eaquid molores 
elisqui sant este porepra quam hari aturent as dolorum 
alitia ipsapienis autem ratem qui doluptibus, que vit 
alique voluptae volupit aquodis minti consed excesciet 
eicimet vellibeat qui vel ipsam quae con et, cum, unt
9/11 Myriad Pro Regular, Centered Column 
Itatis nullor alibusc iusapicae venes pratin con pa 
sum as eos int verum eostionsed qui atiat eaquid molores 
elisqui sant este porepra quam hari aturent as 
dolorum alitia ipsapienis autem ratem qui doluptibus, 
que vit alique voluptae volupit aquodis minti consed 
excesciet eicimet vellibeat qui vel ipsam 
7.35 Legibility is balanced with 
aesthetics when typesetting. 
Alignment possibilities (above) 
use 9/11 Myriad Pro Regular.
9/11 Myriad Pro Regular, Justified Column 
Itatis nullor alibusc iusapicae venes pratin con pa sum as 
eos int verum eostionsed qui atiat eaquid molores elis-
qui sant este porepra quam hari aturent as dolorum ali-
tia ipsapienis autem ratem qui doluptibus, que vit alique 
voluptae volupit aquodis minti consed excesciet eicimet 
vellibeat qui vel ipsam quae con et, cum, unt et ut ipsum et

200
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
justified on both sides, but those algorithms might leave uneven gaps in 
your text, as the red arrows in the figure indicate. You have to go back 
through the text and adjust spacing and line breaks to even out the white 
space. Centered columns, flush left, rag right (bottom right example) tend 
to produce more readable text with fewer spacing issues.
Every individual letter, every word, and every block of text has all 
the elements discussed in Chapter 6—line, shape, negative space, balance, 
rhythm, and direction. Designers must train their eyes to look at text not 
just as word information but also in terms of design elements. 
In Practice: Typically at least seven words per line are required for a justiﬁed 
column to avoid word spacing problems, or for a rag left or rag right column not to 
have too many hyphenations.
The proposed book cover design by Armando Diaz uses alignment 
as part of a typographic idea to communicate the book’s premise (Figure 
7.36). The reader must decode the words that are formed from high-
lighted text to understand the title and the idea simultaneously. The left 
and right alignments are the edges of the book, so the type bleeds (runs 
off the page), further engaging readers by forcing them to interact with 
it. Typography alone becomes the cover design, independent of images. 
Image-only designs are usually less successful because images usually 
need type to help convey the message. 
For the book The Art of Light and Space, the subject of artists using 
light and space as media became the inspiration for the cover and the 
layout (Figure 7.37). The designers at Worksight used a single justified 
text column wrapped around photos and sidebars—the seeming random-
ness of the layout was a reflection of methods that the artists themselves 
used to create their art.
7.36 ARMANDO DIAZ.
Proposed book cover design 
for The Da Vinci Code.
7.37 WORKSIGHT. Cover and 
book interior design for The 
Art of Light and Space. 

METAPHORIC TYPOGRAPHY 
201
For a florist shop called Botanica, John Lepak used a single letter b 
to identify the business (Figure 7.38). The monogram reverses to white 
from an overlay of abstract flower-like petals. The connection to a real 
flower is just enough to make it identifiable. The biomorphic shape is con-
temporary in its approach; it distances itself from traditional plant and 
flower shops that typically use script typefaces. In addition, it doesn’t use 
the clichéd image of flower bouquets. The designer found a way to give a 
special identity to this particular shop, so customers perceive it as being a 
bit more contemporary in its aesthetics, with a bias toward science rather 
than romance.
Humor can also become a part of analytic concepts that include 
both text alignment and directional flow to convey an idea. Eli Kince’s 
poster instructing pedestrians not to use construction sites as shortcuts 
runs a set of messy footprints around flush-left text to illustrate the prob-
lem (Figure 7.39). The poster is authoritative and succinct, but also funny.
In Practice: Humor is a way to both engage the viewer and soften 
the imperative command.
Metaphoric Typography
Metaphor and typography can combine into a singular force that speaks. 
The literacy poster by Mariana Silva is an example (Figure 7.40). A per-
son’s hands have been bound together, and above them the word READ 
is shown with scissors that replace the letter A. Together they suggest the 
means of escape from bondage. We immediately understand that reading 
can free one to do more, but the 
designer has added some depth 
to the piece by making it appar-
ent that it would take quite a bit 
of work with the scissors to cut 
the cord, suggesting that reading 
takes effort. The poster is loaded 
with elements used as meaning-
ful symbols, begging for action.
7.38 JOHN LEPAK. Proposed 
logo for Botanica florist shop.
7.39 ELI KINCE. Poster that 
instructs the public not to 
use hazardous shortcuts.
7.40 MARIANA SILVA. Poster 
promoting literacy as a kind 
of personal freedom. The 
word READ is typographically 
montaged with a pair of 
scissors to solidify the idea.

202
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
The double-duty of reading and meaning becomes especially appar-
ent with metaphoric typography. In the proposed logotype for a handy-
man, created by Jason Lee, the type morphs into a symbolic tool—a 
hammer as metaphor for the handyman business (Figure 7.41). Analytic 
hierarchy is created through position and color, the name Dave having 
first priority as a red hammer head, The Handyman having second prior-
ity as handle in sturdy black. Overall, the letters have the distressed look 
of a well-worn tool.
In another use of metaphoric typography, this time to interpret an 
abstract idea, design student Changsoo Choi conveys his approach to 
design. The construction of frozen letters symbolizes the goal of stabilizing 
the meaning in a communication (Figure 7.42). The design uses brackets, 
color bars, and register marks to emphasize the thought. Choi has taken 
liberties with a text column positioned below—the flush-left line sits tight 
against its edge, further suggesting his role as an experimenter.
7.42 CHANGSOO CHOI. Visual 
statement exploring the student’s 
design process.
7.41 JASON LEE. Proposed 
logotype for Dave the 
Handyman.

VERNACULAR INSPIRATION 
203
Vernacular Inspiration
Imagine exploring your downtown neighborhood in a search for hand-
drawn typography. What would you find? Most likely, you would see 
inventive uses of the available tools and materials—chalk, tape, plastic let-
ters, spray paint. And the signs and banners would also reveal something 
else—the particular cultures of the people who made them. This unortho-
dox, local language is what designers refer to as the “vernacular.” They 
are seen as experiments that don’t fit the rules because, in fact, the people 
who make this vernacular typography haven’t been taught the rules (and 
probably don’t care about them either). 
Yet the pieces are quite experimental and creative in their own 
way—for example, letters and numbers spray-painted, cut out of wood, or 
reconstituted from preexisting signs. The designs are based on the purely 
practical, the need to communicate some necessary information, and at 
the same time, they are filled with character. In the example in Figure 
7.43, black tape was used to create a numbered street address. The solu-
tion is simple, the numbers are spontaneously constructed, and yet, this 
“tape type” maintains a consistency similar to that of a carefully designed 
typeface! The same is true for the template used to create the number 13 
on the wall of the parking garage (Figure 7.44). Was it the result of a lack 
of white paint or mere indifference to the number covered over? In either 
case, the resulting typography varies substantially from what we might 
normally expect to see.
7.43 Black tape is used to create 
door numbers. This tape type, when 
seen as an experiment, triggers ideas 
for designers that break self-imposed 
constraints of proper typography.
7.44 One number is canceled 
out by another painted over it. 
The cancellation is humorous 
because we see how the need 
for white paint was avoided.
  Often typography is the main or only 
graphic element in a design. This is 
a common solution when the subject 
matter is too broad or complex…. 
Letterforms are inherently more 
abstract than pictures, consequently 
more useful for this kind of problem. 
—Milton Glaser

204
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
The vernacular is, in fact, an abundant well of experimentation seen 
in every city, neighborhood, and street, offering something unfamiliar or, 
perhaps, even peculiar. The typeface Template Gothic, designed by Barry 
Deck in 1990 after graduating from CalArts, was inspired by a stenciled 
Chinese Laundromat sign (Figure 7.45). Encouraged by his teacher, the 
well-known designer Ed Fella, Barry created an entirely new typeface by 
filling in the stencil spaces. In Barry’s words, the typeface “reflects more 
truly the imperfect language of an imperfect world, inhabited by imper-
fect beings.” In use, we see how Template Gothic, and other typefaces in 
this genre, offered designers like Rudy VanderLans an edgy alternative to 
conventional typefaces (Figure 7.46).
But the vernacular can also inspire processes not normally associated 
with design and letter making. The typeface Tailor, designed by Terrence 
McCarthy while a student at Pratt Institute, derived its form from sewing 
machine stitches (Figure 7.47). Interconnected and consistent, it’s hard to 
believe that the letters weren’t actually made with a sewing machine. But it 
was, in fact, the designer who found the way to make each form consistent 
and to make it all work cohesively as an evocative new typeface.
7.45 BARRY DECK. A type sample 
sheet for the designer’s typeface 
Template Gothic.
7.46 RUDY VANDERLANS. Emigre 
Recording Artists promotional poster 
for the band Every Good Boy, using 
Template Gothic typeface 
7.47 TERRENCE MCCARTHY. 
The typeface Tailor that 
mimics a sewing machine’s 
stitches.
View a Closer Look for Template Gothic on myartslab.com
View a Closer Look for Tailor on myartslab.com

RECONTEXTUALIZING TYPE 
205
Recontextualizing Type
Recontextualization is an inherent process in graphic design through 
which elements, signs, and meaning are introduced into a new context. 
For example, a 300-year-old typeface originally created for use in books 
might now find itself as part of an advertisement or cell phone screen—
a context never dreamt of by its original designer. Unexpected pairings 
work well in design solutions. The montage technique discussed in Chap-
ter 3 (for example, the jellybean montaged with a jawbone) is just as useful 
in merging typefaces (for example, a serif with san serif). In two separate 
projects, type is montaged with an image into a somewhat surreal context. 
Both designs share the idea that the typeface Helvetica can be recontex-
tualized from its neutral state into a more dreamlike one. The first experi-
ment by Changsoo Choi pairs Helvetica with a strange bedfellow, human 
hair (Figure 7.48), drawing the viewer in through its intriguing contrast 
of straight-edge letters and curvilinear hair. 
The same contrast occurs in the hand-drawn blend of biomorphic 
growth with Helvetica (Figure 7.49). Inva Cota created a dynamic fusion 
of plant and letter forms. Like a sturdy gate covered with ivy, this usually 
structural typeface has become more inviting and personal in a way we 
might not have imagined it could.
In the Speakout “Designing a Typeface,” Jonathan Hoefler explains 
type design as having its own montage in which the microscopic and 
macroscopic converge, the result of which is a distinctive but unified set 
of letters.
7.48 CHANGSOO CHOI. Helvetica poster 
pairing hair with Helvetica to explore 
how a neutral typeface can be used 
expressively. 
7.49 INVA COTA. Biomorphic growth 
covers Helvetica’s letterforms in this 
typographic exploration. 

206
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
SPEAKOUT: Designing a Typeface by Jonathan Hoefler (Hoefler & Frere-Jones) 
Robert Bringhurst famously observed that type design is an art in which the microscopic and mac-
roscopic constantly converge. That’s very true for the way in which typefaces are developed: at every 
stage, it’s not merely letterforms that are being examined, but the ways in which they work together 
(Figures 7.50, 7.51, and 7.52).
We usually start a typeface by drawing a handful of characters that suggest the general direction 
that the design will follow. A capital H and O embody the basic distinction between flat and round 
letters, and the lowercase letters nopha will describe the overall dimensions of a font—its flat and 
round shapes, its width (and the degree to which its character widths will differ from one another), 
the height of its lowercase letters, and the lengths of its projecting strokes (for example, a descender 
in the p, and an ascender in the h). The lowercase a is often a telltale character since it can be 
constructed in any number of ways; most fundamentally, it can be a single-story “ball-and-stick” 
design or the more traditional two-story shape. The size of its enclosed aperture will inform the 
proportions of other characters such as e and g, and the way in which its topmost stroke terminates 
will become a theme for other related characters: a “ball terminal” [see Figure 7.14] here will recur 
in the letters fgry, and perhaps later in the numbers. Taken together, its topmost and bottommost 
strokes will suggest the kinds of gestures that the font will make—whether they’re introverted or 
extroverted and how fussy their details will be. It often takes several more characters to establish 
concretely that the design is following the right path: some designs start out with a beautiful a, but 
can’t seem to accommodate a sympathetic g.
Once these characters are drawn, they’re proofed on paper at a range of sizes and in every pos-
sible context. At this point we’re trying to establish some generalities about the design, both visual 
and emotional: as important as its color and fit, we’re curious about the sorts of feelings the font 
conveys. Also at this point, we’ll be looking at every possible combination of characters, to spot 
inconsistencies in the design or problems that should be addressed at a more fundamental level.
Once we’re happy with the result, the rest of the project is essentially a matter of continuing to 
expand the character set in small steps and repeating the process of reviewing the results to see 
how these new characters change the big picture. There are about 600 characters in the average 
font these days, so it’s a series of slow and steady steps. It’s not uncommon for a single character 
to bring the whole underlying structure crash-
ing down—think about the “8”-shaped grid on 
a digital watch, for example, and consider the 
difficulties with which it could display a letter 
M. Even in its most advanced stages, typeface 
design is always a matter of constantly broker-
ing agreements between individual characters 
and the font as a whole, and it’s not until the 
entire design is finished that you ever really 
know what it’s going to look like.
7.50  Gotham Condensed designed by 
H&FJ; Typeface ©2000, artwork ©2002 
Hoefler & Frere-Jones, Inc.

RECONTEXTUALIZING TYPE 
207
Even in its most advanced stages, typeface 
design is always a matter of constantly brokering 
agreements between individual characters and 
the font as a whole….
7.52 Whitney typeface 
designed by H&FJ; typeface 
© 1999, artwork © 2004 
Hoefler & Frere-Jones, Inc.
7.51  Archer Typeface designed 
by H&FJ; Typeface ©2001, artwork 
©2008 Hoefler & Frere-Jones, Inc.

208
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
© Woodruff/Brown Architectural Photography

TYPE IN THE THIRD DIMENSION 
209
Type in the Third Dimension
We tend to think of type as being flat—as vinyl letters stuck onto a pane of 
glass or as a thin layer of ink offset-printed onto the surface of a sheet—
glyphs without dimension. Yet this form isn’t always the case. Even ancient 
letters had a sculptural aspect, chiseled into Roman columns and buildings.
Today, type can be cut, spliced, splattered, and animated easily with 
the help of computer software. Bringing a third dimension to the equation 
seems a bit more difficult to do, and yet, when we do it, type feels fresh, 
tangible, and new. 
The design of a relief sculpture for the University of Connecticut by 
Randall Hoyt and Mark Zurolo looks back to these early forms of public 
typography. The result is something refreshingly surprising. The idea 
stems from the twelve common letters in the school’s name “U-V-R-S-Y-
O-F-C-N-E-I-T,” depicted in the UCONN insignia they designed (Figure 
7.53). The twelve letterforms are then composed in three dimensions with 
human figures, which symbolize the intellectual journey students take 
(Figure 7.54). The design idea then extends to the inside of the building 
where the twelve letters are recombined into positive words such as curi-
osity, future, and strive.
The third dimension can also include shredded typography. In the 
student newspaper design by Inva Cota and Monica Nelson, the broad-
sheet format unfolds to force an interaction with its student audience 
(Figure 7.55). As Nelson explained, “We wanted the initial issue to both 
make a statement and have an extended life as a poster. The idea was that 
students would hang it in their studios or dorm rooms.” 
The poster side is one giant statement reading “The Prattler Loves 
You.” Although printed in two dimensions, its form appears to be three 
dimensional. Shredded letters create an emotional effect; they seem to ask 
for reaction and discourse from the students. Type has an uncanny abil-
ity to offer unusual solutions such as designs that read and mean—that 
go beyond the ordinary. For this reason, it is important to devote serious 
effort to developing a working knowledge of not only how to use type leg-
ibly but also how to take it to new heights.
7.53 RANDALL HOYT AND MARK ZUROLO
(ASSOCIATE PROFESSORS OF COMMUNICATION
DESIGN, UNIVERSITY OF CONNECTICUT).
School insignia shown complete and 
with twelve common letters called out.
7.54 Facade typography/relief 
sculpture for the Neag School of 
Education. 
7.55 INVA COTA AND MONICA NELSON.
Two sides of a student newspaper 
as broadsheet.
© Woodruff/Brown Architectural Photography

210
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
Jessica Rivera used scans of printed letters and book pages to create a 
design for the Drama Book Shop (Figure 7.56). She began the project with 
the idea of using pages as leaves on the stem of a rose (the rose suggesting 
both passion and drama). She could have gone in a number of different 
directions with the montage idea, but Rivera chose a three-dimensional 
approach that added a kinetic effect of movement to her solution. 
Andrew DeRosa created words as sculpture, offering an unexpected 
dynamic with his letters (Figure 7.57). Viewed head on, the words line up 
evenly to create the proper letter forms, but as soon as the viewer moves 
to either side, thus viewing the letters at an angle, the dynamic letter forms 
are revealed, forms stretching into abstract and visually playful three-
dimensional shapes.
Manipulating type can be a very hands-on, mechanical process, but 
in an experiment created by designer Geoff Kaplan, the virtual world can 
also be brought into typographic play (Figure 7.58). Driven by the com-
puter’s mathematical calculations, both the uppercase and lowercase of 
individual letters, as well as their supposed internal and external perspec-
tives, are created according to the logic of perspective drawing. The logic 
of two-dimensional type is shredded as the uppercase and lowercase of 
each letter are blended. So are the relationships of internal shape. As the 
designer puts it, “The result is a new form—an object as much as a letter. 
It can exist on the screen with the perception of infinite perspective, or a 
flat and sobering form printed on the page—letters that are two-and-a-
half dimensional.”
7.57 ANDREW DEROSA.
Typographic experiment on 
the perception of letters as 
flat forms that quickly change 
when seen from a three-
quarter view.
7.56 JESSICA RIVERA. Proposed 
logo for the Drama Book Shop.
7.58 GEOFF KAPLAN/GENERAL 
WORKING GROUP. The side and 
front views of the letters 
A and Y from the typeface 
Transgression.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
211
In Perspective
Page layout software makes it easy to set type. The kerning, tracking, and 
leading of a block of type have automatic settings assigned. Don’t use 
them. The manual adjustments you make to the typeface, the size, and 
even the way a sentence breaks to the next line will all help create some-
thing more readable and engaging. The text will certainly flow better 
visually if you make the effort to adjust the type. Your eye and good judg-
ment will render much more beautiful results than the software’s math-
ematically generated algorithms can. Everything in this chapter stresses 
the need for designers to develop a sense for type and typography, which 
you can do only by grappling with it. Push it around and make mistakes 
with it until, like osmosis, it sinks in and starts to become natural to you. 
You will know you are developing a feel for type when the exces-
sive kerning in a sign (such as “ass ociates”) seems funny to you or when 
a movie scene using a 1950s typeface for a turn-of-the-century period 
scene is annoying. Just noticing these problems means that you’re learn-
ing. We are all perpetual students of type and its use. As you will see in 
the next chapter, grids and alignments can further organize and enhance 
type and typography. Because of its technical nature, type can be quite 
challenging, but also the most rewarding. When it works well, when the 
typeface, the layout, and the imagery all function together in perfect har-
mony, you know you’ve created a successful design.
Baseline (p. 184)
Bleed (p. 200)
Cold type (p. 183)
Egyptian serifs (p. 184)
Em (p. 195)
En (p. 195)
Flush (p. 199)
Font (p. 192)
Hot type (p. 183)
Justiﬁed (p. 199)
Kerning (p. 195)
Leading (p. 198)
Logotype (p. 188)
Modern typefaces (p. 184)
Old Style typefaces (p. 184)
Pica (p. 192)
Point (p. 192)
Rag (p. 199)
Recontextualization (p. 205)
Sans serif (p. 182)
Serif (p. 182)
Slab serif (p. 184)
Tracking (p. 195)
Transitional typefaces (p.184)
Typeface (p. 181)
Typeface family (p. 188)
Typography (p. 182)
Vernacular (p. 203)
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Type Styles): Typeset your first and last name fifteen times, 
each in a different typeface, using roman fonts only (upright, not italic). 
Variations should include at least one serif, sans serif, Old Style, Transi-
tional, and Modern. Notice the personality that each typeface carries. Be 
prepared to discuss your choices and why they do or don’t make sense.
Exercise 2 (Typeface Research): Research an Old Style serif typeface and 
write 100 words about it. Include the designer, historical facts about its 
use, and any revivals of the typeface that have occurred. Next, find a sans 
serif typeface and do the same. For each typeface, print out the capital H 
and O, as well as the lowercase g and t at 72 pt. On a sketch pad, recreate 
the letterforms at 400% of the 72 pt size by first pencil-ruling parallel lines 
for baseline, cap height, and x-heights for each typeface (see Figure 7.14).
Project 1 (Typesetting) PART 1: Select a block of text containing at least 
750 words and paste it into a page layout application (not a drawing or 
image manipulation program). Use the following specifications: page size: 
8.5" × 11" with margins set at 4 picas top, 5 picas bottom, 6 picas left, 4 
picas plus 2 pts right. Within the margins, set two text columns, each 20 
K E Y  T E R M S
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

212
CHAPTER 7: TYPE AND TYPOGRAPHY
picas wide, with 1 pica of gutter space between (the space between col-
umns or the blocks of type). Type color should be black, and size with 
leading should be 10 pt/13 pt, flush left, rag right, with a half line space 
between paragraphs (6.5 pts). Choose a typeface and experiment with font 
variations, including roman (regular), italic, bold, condensed, all caps, 
caps with small caps. Reconsider bad rags (line breaks that split a word 
awkwardly. Adjust the height of your text columns from the bottom, and 
avoid orphans (the first line of a paragraph on the last line of a column) 
and widows (the last line of a paragraph on the first line of column).
PART 2: Using the same text, write and add at least eight subheads, and 
explore ways you might include them. Consider weight or case, font, color, 
tracking, indent or flush, spacing (before and after each paragraph), rules, 
graphics, and reversals (white type) to bring personality to the design.
Project 2 (Mechanical and Hand-Drawn Expression): Visually illustrate 
a quotation using both a typeface (your choice) and your own hand-
drawn forms. Both must be included. Make your point as expressive and 
clear as possible. Full color. Size: 10" × 10".
Project 3 (Visual Narration): Visually narrate the first few pages from 
a published children’s book using only type. Retain the existing page 
proportions, but bring typography, color, and energized composition to 
create a fun and graphically dramatic design. Full color. 
Project 4 (Type Treatment): Create ten visually compelling composi-
tions, each of which uses only one different letterform from the Univers 
typeface family. For each, use a different mix of one design principle and 
one contrast set from the lists below. Strip away the literal meaning of 
each letter and focus on the form and structure. Avoid patterns, and 
work toward the goal of creating something dynamic. Your final set 
should be ten completely different compositions. Black and white only. 
Format: 7" × 7" on an 8.5" × 11") vertical page. Design principles: balance, 
contrast, direction, dominance, proportion, rhythm, unity. Contrast sets 
Things to Consider: When designing the typography of these pages, take into 
consideration the flow of the type. It will help create a stream of connections, which, in turn, 
will help the eye move from one focal point to the next.
Things to Consider: Consider traditional mediums such as ink and brush, pencil, 
or charcoal as well as nontraditional ones, including crayons, sandpaper, steel wool, 
ketchup, and so on.
Things to Consider: Be obsessive in following the instructions to get the typesetting exact.
Project 2 ANDY MATHURIN.
A phrase turned into a logo 
for a pest control company. 
Logo design (above) drove 
the creation of the advertise-
ment (below).
Project 4 RACHEL CAIRES. Two 
treatments using letterforms 
from the Univers family.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
213
are as follows: figure/ground, large/small, texture/mass, stable/unstable, 
bold/light, thick/thin, static/moving, rectilinear/curvilinear, hard/soft. 
—Provided by Paul Sahre, professor, School of Visual Arts
Project 5 (Type and Packaging): Typeset all the words from a food pack-
age and reapply them using more extreme typography that pushes the 
boundaries, yet still explains the product and its benefit. Bring something 
inspirational into the project: consider art movements (Futurism, Dada, 
Surrealism, Abstract Expressionism) or music categories (rock, punk, 
grunge). Full color.
Project 6 (Typographic Flier): Find a flier (on the street or online) for a 
lost pet and redesign it. You can include an image of the missing pet, but 
place emphasis on the typography so the flier provides a colorful descrip-
tion and relays the information. Black and white only. Present the rede-
signed and original versions. Size: 8.5" × 11" vertical.
Project 7 (Book Typography): Redesign a chapter opener for a coffee-
table style book of your choosing. Your design should include a full-bleed 
image on the left (verso) side of the introductory spread. On the right 
(recto) side, create your typographic redesign. Include the chapter title 
and chapter number, page number (folio), and three short paragraphs of 
text. Treat each element graphically to create compositional poetry and 
personality on the page. Follow up with an additional set of spreads (four 
pages) showing how other pages in the book fill out in terms of images 
and a full body of text. Full color and at least 9" in width and height.
Things to Consider: Consider the subject, the chapter’s title, the image that sits opposite, 
how to begin the text, and the system you are inventing that will apply to the other 
chapters in the book.
Things to Consider: It might be fun to include some of the vernacular elements of the existing flier 
in your design, but don’t “stray” too far from a reductivist-oriented typographic language.
Things to Consider: Consider how the design will help the package stand out from other 
products on the shelf (contrast, dominance, rhythm). 
Things to Consider: Use design elements (texture, scale, repetition, etc.) as treatments to achieve 
your design principles (see Chapter 6). Be playful and experimental—take chances.
Project 5 HYOCHIN KIM. 
Typographic design for a milk 
carton using the De Stijl art 
movement founded in the 
Netherlands as an inspirational 
aesthetic.
Project 6 MAY PARSEY. 
A flier announcing 
a lost pet (top) and 
Parsey’s redesign of 
the flier (bottom).

214
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS

CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Identify grids in existing designs.
t 
 Develop a modular grid, determining its structure 
and elements.
t 
 Illustrate how modular patterns can be used to convey ideas.
t 
 Demonstrate the basics of using typographic grids for 
organizing type on a page or website.
t 
 Explain how use of freestyle alignments differs from 
use of grids.
t 
 Describe examples of ways that designers have exploited 
the grid structure to push information unconventionally.
t 
 Define the golden ratio and summarize how it is used 
to achieve visual harmony.
t 
 Identify standard paper sizes and formats in the 
United States and Europe.
t 
  Describe basic paper folds and their uses.
t 
 Define the rule of thirds and explain its application in design.
215
8
Books, business cards, posters, website pages, packages, and video screens 
are all predominantly rectangular. The elements that flow within those 
rectangles naturally find vertical and horizontal alignments. For this 
reason, grids are effective to use for alignments. As you read through this 
chapter, you will come to understand how the basic structure of grids and 
alignments help to create a rationality and sense of proportion in a design. 
These tools will enable you not only to be more proficient in organizing 
information but also to create visual poetry on the page. Using a grid as 
a basic structure may seem restrictive at first, but it actually provides the 
framework within which to be inventive and experimental. Ironically, the 
underlying structure of the grid can help you unleash your imagination.
Opposite page: ALLEN HORI.
Lecture series poster (detail) 
for the Princeton University 
School of Architecture (full 
image, see Figure 8.28).
There’s a conceptual strategy 
I have that works in tandem with 
the grid and the type choices 
I make. —Barbara Glauber
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
Proportion Systems: 
Grids and Alignments
hen a composition works—when your intuition tells you there’s 
something right about it—chances are good there’s a structural harmony 
behind it. Music works this way. It’s generally easy to hear whether 
harmonies are in tune or whether the rhythms are synchronized. With 
graphic design, the arrangement of visual elements needs to work in 
coordination, just as musical elements need to work in harmony.
W
t
Exercises and Projects
Find examples of and manipulate existing grids; construct five 
compositions using type in grid structures; redesign a published 
article using a five-column grid.

216
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Defining a Grid
A grid is a framework of horizontal and vertical lines that cross each other 
at regular intervals. When you look for them, they start to become appar-
ent everywhere. Consider, for example, the facade of a building (Figure 
8.1). Its system of windows and columns translate easily as horizontal and 
vertical lines. The abstraction of underlying horizontal and perpendicular 
coordinates, or a grid system, can be used to inspire other kinds of proj-
ects. For example, the system might inspire an interior designer’s floor 
plan, or a graphic designer might use it as inspiration for the layout of a 
page. Many constructed objects have this structure; an old window grate 
or a gate sitting in front of a wall both have lines that layer from top to 
bottom, left to right, and back to front (Figure 8.2). The lines create a 
visual pattern and a structural integrity.
This same grid structure applies to a page of text. Simply placing 
a block of text on a rectangular page begins the process of establishing 
the grid and its proportions. The text block’s position, its size, and the 
margins around it, are all ingredients of a proportional formula (Figure 
8.3). The column width and the size of type in Figure 8.3 seem familiar 
and comfortable on the page for a number of reasons. Five equal mod-
ules, or repeating shapes, determine the beginning and end of the text’s 
width, thereby determining a system for the page. The same measure-
ment is used for its height. Slight adjustments have been made so the dis-
tance from the top of the page to the top of the first capital letter in the 
paragraph is one module. Modules for elements such as a headline, page 
number, and image all correspond and guide their placement. Your eye 
notices a rhythm that has been determined mathematically.
The use of proportions, modules, grids, and alignments is even more 
essential for projects that involve multiple pages or similar sections, for 
example, books, magazines, websites, or wall panels in an exhibition. The 
uniform underlying skeletal structure unifies all the pages or other sec-
tions of the design. And, as you will see in this chapter, breaking the grid 
and creating playful variations gives the design its vitality and expression.
8.1 A grid is always present in the 
facade of high rise buildings.
8.3 A simple block of text 
placed within an established 
proportion. The red lines 
notate the grid system.
8.2 When we look for them, 
grids begin to surface in every-
day objects.

DEVELOPING MODULAR GRIDS
217
Developing Modular Grids
The empty space of a page can be as small as a business card or as large 
as a billboard. As a designer, your goal is to create a striking design in a 
controlled space. One way to achieve that goal is to use a modular grid, a 
system or plan with a structural pattern of repeating shapes or lines that 
helps you guide the organization of typography or images.
Designing a page is not much different from placing furniture in 
a room. Your eye enters the page much as you might physically enter a 
room. In both cases, you interact with the individual elements. In a room, 
the doorways are the points of entry; you walk in and encounter the fur-
niture and personal objects, all working together to create an inviting, 
functional living environment. On the page, your eyes tend to look to the 
top left first because we read top to bottom, left to right, and then your 
eye will take in the general layout of the page with all its images and visual 
elements. (Of course, the point of entry will be different for people whose 
languages run right to left.) 
You can determine what elements will dominate the page, just as a 
big, red couch might dominate the room. Other text and visual elements 
create contrast and give a sense energy in their relationship to the domi-
nate elements, much like a coffee table and lamp might relate to a couch. 
The placement and relationship of all these parts is determined by the 
overriding grid structure.
Take a look at Figures 8.4–8.6 to see how a modular plan is used in 
the layout of a few words. A square has been repeated to create a modular 
structural system. A module can be any shape, of course, but the simple 
symmetry of a square module gives it a flexible and neutral quality. It 
allows you to change the text direction from horizontal to vertical without 
altering the grid.
The first example shows some possibilities for presenting a very 
small amount of information (Figure 8.4). The title sits on the top left, and 
all visual effects are restrained. The space is handled very simply, with the 
position and direction of the text as the only variables.
In the second example, the designer has added word spacing and 
dramatic scale changes (Figure 8.5). Contrast and scale create a strong 
visual impact on the page. The negative spaces between the text elements 
serve to intensify the user’s perception and experience. Again, it reminds 
you of a room, with large and small furniture carefully placed within the 
confines of the space.
For the third example, the designer has added some new elements, 
including shapes, tints, letter reversal (white against black), typeface addi-
tions (the script letterform inside the circle), and font changes (light, reg-
ular, and bold). All of these elements activate the composition, making it 
more lively and inviting (Figure 8.6), and suggest something about what 
the course might have to offer.
8.5 Word spacing and scale 
are introduced for impact.
8.6 Shapes, values, reversals, 
and additional typefaces are 
introduced to the composition.
8.4 Position and direction are 
the only variables.

218
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
A modular approach underlies a three-ring binder cover design for 
a textile company (Figure 8.7). In this case, the project called for a pre-
dominance of colorful imagery rather than type and typography because 
the cover needed to illustrate the range of fabrics the company sold. Vari-
ous photographs and colors were loaded into the underlying modular 
grid, but some modules were left empty to allow room to play. Here, type 
and logo integrate into the space. The lines of type are heavily leaded to 
fill the space within a module, and the logo hangs off of a horizontal grid 
line, but breaks the vertical grid, centered between two coordinates. This 
small move brings an active spirit to the design. It respects the grid, but 
plays within the rules.
In Figure 8.8, you can see the possibilities in multiple arrangements. 
These variations could be used as options in your presentation, used for 
other covers within the collection, or used for interior binder pages. The 
gray boxes in the design shift like sliding tile puzzles, allowing for many 
variations.
In Practice: Modular grid systems don’t need to be squares. Any repeating 
shape or proportion (horizontal or vertical) within the format will work. The main 
goal is to use the composition to convey information logically.
8.7 WORKSIGHT. A modular 
grid system was used to design 
a textile manufacturer’s three-
ring binder cover.
8.8 Possible arrangements 
using a modular system. 
The far left grid was used 
for Figure 8.7.
  I still reserve the right, at any time, 
to doubt the solutions furnished 
by the Modular, keeping intact my 
freedom, which must depend on my 
feelings rather than my reason. 
—Josef Müller-Brockmann

DEVELOPING MODULAR PATTERNS
219
Developing Modular Patterns
You can find modular patterns in nature, in constructed objects, and in 
environments. Any repeating shape can be used to create a system to 
organize information. The art is to recognize a beautiful repetitive pattern 
and abstract it into something you can use for your project. For example, 
you can translate the stem of a leaf or a honeycomb into pure line and 
form and use it as an underlying structure in your design (Figure 8.9). 
The more you look for modular patterns, the more you will find intrigu-
ing patterns that you can alter and use for organizing the elements of your 
design—and the more your creativity and imagination can really come 
into play.
The poster by Willi Kunz shows how to use a modular pattern to 
convey an idea—in this case, how to explain the integration of architec-
ture and urban design (Figure 8.10). Kunz literally layers one pattern over 
another to suggest the duality, with lines and edges perfectly coordinating 
with one another. Together, the modular patterns order the hierarchy of 
information, but also create the perception of depth, all of which are in 
keeping with the complexity of the program that the poster is advertising. 
Figure 8.11 shows the freedom a modular pattern can provide and still 
maintain its structure.
In Practice: Posters need to grab the viewer’s attention because most people 
won’t stand in front of one for very long. One way to attract your viewer and hold 
them for more than a moment is through the illusion of depth perception.
8.9 Both natural and man-
made patterns can inspire 
a grid system.
8.10 WILLI KUNZ. Poster announcing 
a graduate program at Columbia 
University in architecture and 
urban design.
8.11 Modular arrangements 
as thought starters for organiz-
ing a poster’s information.

220 
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Typographic Grids
The layout of a 320-page book would not be particularly feasible if a 
designer had to make decisions anew for each page, which is why design-
ing an efficient grid system is especially important with multiple pages. 
In effect, you are devising a formula that will help guide the arrangement 
of text-based information. Creating a template based on a grid eliminates 
the need to repeatedly decide where to place headlines, page numbers, 
captions, headers, and footers for each page. The result is a weave of align-
ments that unify the design. Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) serve a simi-
lar function for designing on the web, establishing templates to be used 
across the site. The biggest advantage of CSS is that you can make a change 
on the primary style sheet and the change cascades across all the second-
ary pages. 
A typographic grid is based on a column rather than on a module. 
These columns have a predominantly vertical flow since type lines read 
top to bottom (Figure 8.12). A small distance between each column called 
a gutter width is built into a typographic grid. It controls each text column 
space so the type will not run into or touch the type in the column next 
to it. As a page fills out with elements, the grid remains a mechanism for 
organizing the composition and always bringing the text back into proper 
alignment after the interruption of a figure or other element (Figure 8.13).
8.12 A seven-column  
typographic grid system.
8.13 The components of  
a typographic grid.
Individual grid module
Flow line from which to hang body text and imagery
Introductory quote stretching across three column modules
Text column stretching across two grid modules
Flow line to guide placement of images and captions
Column gutter
Flow line to guide placement of images and captions
Captions align on grid, numbers hang in gutter
Page number position

TYPOGRAPHIC GRIDS 
221
For a two-page spread, the grid system continues, taking into con-
sideration how the reader will view left and right pages (Figure 8.14). A 
grid’s horizontal guides, called ﬂow lines, create continuity between pages. 
Top and bottom text columns, captions, and image placement all corre-
spond, no matter how far apart they are—page to next page. The designer 
brings variety by creatively shifting and adjusting elements within the 
grid, making decisions about altering column length and photo size. 
The layout of this textbook is designed to create clarity not only for 
the reading of the text but also for the images to which the text refers. The 
wide single text column accommodates images that might intrude into it, 
or sit under or above it, which creates a playful dynamic, while the heavy 
leading of the typeface reduces the chance of one line visually bleeding 
into the next. A second narrower column holds the bulk of the images and 
captions. This simple grid sets a compositional tone for each two-page 
spread in which text blocks, artwork, page numbers, rules, and graphic 
shapes are treated as equal elements in creating contrast, direction, and 
unity. Some elements overlay one another or ghost back to create visual 
depth, while other elements are scaled up to create dominance. The goal is 
for each page spread to have an aesthetic that works cohesively in convey-
ing the information as well as visual intrigue and balance.
8.14 A typographic grid 
applied to a two-page 
spread.
 In Practice: Constructing a set of grid lines 
as its own layer in a page layout application will 
allow you to turn it on and oﬀ as needed 
throughout the process.

Why should a designer understand how to 
use grids and alignments? 
By using a grid, the designer starts working 
with a basic structure as opposed to facing a 
blank page without any visual cues. Working 
with grids and alignments leads to well-
organized information that looks more inviting 
and is easier to read than a casual, haphazard 
visual arrangement. As an organizational device, 
the grid helps establish a visual hierarchy and 
creates unity between text, pictures, and 
other graphic elements. 
In creating a large publication, adhering to a 
grid provides continuity from page to page 
and helps coordinate the creative efforts of 
members of the design team. 
Does it matter if the reader notices? 
A grid is primarily developed and applied as a 
guide for structuring typographic information. 
It is not important for the reader to notice the 
grid. In fact, an elegant design solution does 
not easily reveal the grid; the grid structure 
remains hidden behind the information. 
Readers, however, will always—consciously or 
subconsciously—recognize the organizational 
rigor and design integrity a grid provides and 
will appreciate the designer’s care in making the 
information readable. Lack of structure 
and visual hierarchy makes information 
daunting and irritating. 
Can structural proportions express 
emotions and convey ideas? 
All graphic or typographic information has 
a certain fundamental structure that can be 
increased or manipulated to express emotions 
and convey conceptual ideas. The designer, 
however, must carefully decide when to use 
structure to convey an idea. On an architectural 
poster, for instance, the strong structure of a 
grid may express the content of the events it 
announces and attract the intended audience; 
on a concert poster, an overly structured 
approach may be inappropriate or misleading 
and may require an improvised visual structure 
where graphic elements are arranged 
optically.
Willi Kunz was born and educated in Switzerland. He apprenticed as a typographer and earned 
his postgraduate degree in typographic design from Kunstgewerbeschule Zürich. In 1970, he moved 
to the United States. t Currently, he is the principal of Willi Kunz Studio, New York, a design ﬁrm 
specializing in print communications, visual identity, and architectural graphics. He has taught 
typographic design at the Ohio State University and the School of Design, Basel, Switzerland. t He 
has authored Typography: Macro- and Microaesthetics (Niggli, 1998), plus a revised and expanded 
edition, 2000 and a third edition, 2002, with editions also in German, Chinese, and Spanish. t In 
addition, he has authored Typography: Formation and Transformation (Niggli, 2003). t Willi Kunz 
has won numerous national and international awards; his work is exhibited and published widely 
in the United States, Europe, and Japan. t His works are included in the collections of the Museum 
of Modern Art, New York; the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, New York; the Cooper 
Union Lubalin Center for Typography, New York; the RIT Graphic Design Archive, Rochester; the 
Getty Museum, Los Angeles; the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art; the Denver Art Museum; 
Museum für Gestaltung, Zürich, Switzerland; Kunstsammlungen Cottbus, Germany; Bibliothèque 
Nationale de France, Paris, and important private collections worldwide. t Willi Kunz is a member 
of Alliance Graphique Internationale (AGI).
Vignette 8.1 Merit gasoline 
stations, symbol.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  U N D E R S TA N D I N G  G R I D S  A N D  A L I G N M E N T S ,  W I T H   WILLI KUNZ
222
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS

Vignette 8.2 Poster 
announcing nine lectures 
and eight exhibitions 
held over a three-month 
period.
Vignette 8.3 Poster 
announcing ten lectures 
and four exhibitions held 
over a three-month period.
Vignette 8.4 Willi Kunz 
Studio logotype.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: WILLI KUNZ 
223
Vignette 8.5 Typografische 
Monatsblätter magazine cover.
Vignette 8.6 Univers type 
specimen book, back cover.
View a Closer Look for the Columbia poster on myartslab.com

224 
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
In the page spreads for a real estate company by the design studio 
Object, a two-column grid is the principle component that drives a very 
centered and symmetrical layout (Figure 8.15). But note how tiny shifts 
of additional elements such as numbers and captions give the design an 
asymmetric edge. The result is a design that is in keeping with a con-
temporary building constructed within a nineteenth-century traditional 
setting.
In the chapter opener by Object for a book about skateboarders, 
a number of contrasting elements create exciting visual energy within a 
two-column grid (Figure 8.16). First you see bold, sans serif headlines set 
against serif body text, creating a high contrast in style. Then you notice 
the extreme change in scale of the type. The designer broke the grid by 
shifting baselines of sub-headlines and running captions in and around 
the main body text. The energized page reflects the frenetic energy of its 
skateboarding subject matter.
Grid System Research
Understanding how someone will access the information presented in 
your design is perhaps the most valuable component in researching grids. 
As the previous examples show, simply considering the subject and the 
audience is a good start (Figures 8.15 and 8.16). These reflections will help 
you determine whether a design should be entertaining or serious, restful 
or energized; whether it might be read in a living room, on a train, or in 
an office; and so on. 
If the subject is entertaining, then playful graphics and typography 
working within a flexible grid might be a good approach. If serious, for 
example, a legal document, then an efficient and consistent design would 
8.15 WESTON BINGHAM, WARREN 
CORBITT, OBJECT. Real estate 
brochure describing a specific 
property.
8.16 WARREN CORBITT.  
Chapter opener for the  
book Scarred for Life.

TYPOGRAPHIC GRIDS
225
be more appropriate. These considerations translate into the visual codes 
that carry your message. Such subtle codes are built into the grid so they 
convey meaning, just as the text and images do. (You can read much more 
about visual codes in Chapter 10.) 
Take, for example, the Legalize LA’s Immigration Fact Sheet designed 
by Benno Russell (Figure 8.17). Here, the grid works quite well in display-
ing a large amount of information in a way that is both clear and visually 
active. Available at the entrances of retail stores and coffee shops, the fact 
sheet is targeted at readers who are socially minded but have only a lim-
ited amount of time. The fact sheet encourages them to learn more about 
this important subject. The large headlines, short clips of paragraphs, 
quotes, charts, and images are all essential in conveying meaning. The 
design creates a visual language that attracts attention but is also clear, 
succinct, and urgent in its message. If the same subject were presented as 
an oversized coffee-table book, it would have a completely different look 
and grid structure. It might have wider columns and longer lengths of text 
for a more leisurely read. It would probably include more photographs—
and more negative space to allow for ease of absorbing information. But 
most printed brochures don’t have the luxury of space that a coffee-table 
book offers.
Pages and Spreads
In a book, various pages and page spreads have repeating visual and text 
elements. The research you do before determining the grid structure is 
essential and includes getting a count of the total words, chapters, pho-
tographs, illustrations, caption lengths, and pages. These totals will affect 
your choices of font size, font weight, margins, column widths, and image 
sizes. All this information is equally important when working on any 
project with multiples—books, magazines, websites, and catalogs. The 
intended audience and the tone of the content will also affect your choices. 
As an example, consider a soft-cover book. For starters, its interior 
page proportion might be 6" × 9", perfect bound (pages held together 
with an adhesive binding), 144 pages, 12,000 words, with 30 small 
photographs. A grid that adapts to a functional type size, perhaps 10 pt, 
and a medium column width becomes important for a publication with 
far more words than images. If the book comprised more images than 
text, then designing the grid to adapt to the size and proportion of the 
images would take priority. A young audience might benefit from slightly 
larger type. The tone of the content may also affect the grid structure.
Your next step in designing this book would be to determine the size 
and weight of chapter titles, headlines, subheads, and captions. Review 
all the material to get a rough count of these elements in each chapter. 
The length of headlines, number of subheads, and caption lengths are 
key issues to consider in terms of the grid’s design; in particular, column 
8.17 BENNO RUSSELL.
Legalize LA Immigration 
Fact Sheet for American 
Apparel.

226
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
widths should accommodate these elements. As you make design deci-
sions, keep in mind that the text itself has meaning. The editors might 
have something to say about words that can’t be hyphenated or elements 
that should be emphasized over others. Be sure to consult with the publi-
cation’s editorial staff before making final decisions on the design.
As you develop a familiarity with the material, you will get a better 
feel for how all the parts work together. You will develop a sense of leg-
ibility and flow as you see how pages, and the underlying grid, serve as 
a device to support the content. Elements such as margins, page num-
bers, headers and footers (which state the title, chapter name, and page 
number on each page at the top or the bottom) as well as supplementary 
elements such as rule bars and symbols will need special consideration 
because they occur throughout. Finally, don’t forget to think about the 
negative space on the page. It takes up real estate within the grid, but 
often serves an important function in giving the eye a place to rest. Every 
change in one of these elements impacts all the others. Making subtle (or 
not so subtle) changes becomes a careful balancing act. Try looking at 
your design up close and from a distance to grasp the overall effect, and 
don’t be satisfied until all of the elements work together harmoniously. 
Text Columns
Columns are designed to control text placement, determining the length 
of words per line and the alignment of graphics and images. The seven-
column layout shown in Figure 8.18 includes a large numeral positioned 
in the first column. The next column comfortably holds caption material, 
and the third and fourth align an image (shown as a gray tinted box).
  The composition is the structured 
whole of the internal functions or 
expressions of each part of the 
picture. —Wassily Kandinsky
8.18 Three type arrangements 
using a consistent 10 pt gutter 
width inside a seven-column 
grid system.

TYPOGRAPHIC GRIDS
227
In this grid, the single column is too narrow to hold body text, which 
is sized larger than caption text. A wider column is necessary because 
fewer than seven words in a line of text will result in excessive hyphen-
ation. In the example shown, a combined span of two or more columns 
allows the text to span a width that is more readable.
If a column block is too wide, however, readers will lose their place 
when moving from line to line, especially if the leading between each line 
is tight. Nevertheless, drawing readers into a piece is as much an issue 
of aesthetics as legibility. Aesthetics do have a purpose in design. If, for 
whatever reason, a wide column makes sense, then you need to strike a 
balance between legibility and aesthetics. For example, you might be able 
to improve readability over a wide column by adjusting leading or para-
graph indentation. The goal is balance and harmony.
For an architecture book, the design studio Worksight used a wide 
text column to solve a unique problem (Figures 8.19 and 8.20). The edi-
tor’s introduction and the start of the chapter text begin on the same 
page. It could have been confusing, but a single, 
shifting text column solved the problem. A gray 
tinted area set behind the introduction distin-
guishes it from the main body of the text. Both 
use a wide column, and any possible loss in leg-
ibility is more than made up for in the unifying 
simplicity of each page.
8.20 WORKSIGHT. Two-page 
spread from printed book 
Modern Architecture and 
Other Essays.
8.19 WORKSIGHT. Two-page 
spread (layout for Modern 
Architecture and Other 
Essays.
  A design should have some 
tension and some expression in 
itself. I like to compare it with 
the lines on a football ﬁeld. 
It is a strict grid. In this grid you 
play a game and these can be 
nice games or very boring 
games. —Wim Crouwel

228
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Smart use of a grid can help create beautiful compositions, espe-
cially those that are complex. For the magazine View, Janet Odgis and 
Banu Berker created a simple three-column grid, coupled with horizon-
tal flow lines (Figure 8.21). It sets up a system that works quite well in 
handling the most complex information. There can be up to three text 
columns across each page. But in addition, a center grid line splits the 
middle column, actually making six modules. This extra module is useful 
when the article includes charts and lists that might occupy space outside 
of standard text and images.
An even closer inspection reveals how the article openers bleed to 
the outermost edge of the grid, with the remainder of pages within the 
story aligning to the inner grid margin. These subtleties cue the reader to 
priorities in the text by adding a hierarchy to the information (only the 
8.21 JANET ODGIS AND BANU
BERKER. ODGIS + COMPANY. Grid 
structure and layouts for the 
magazine View.

TYPOGRAPHIC GRIDS
229
start of an article bleeds to the outer coordinate) and by accentuating a 
layout whose sophistication makes the information itself more convincing.
The physical binding of the pages can also affect a grid’s design and 
viewable area of a page. For example, a stitched (stapled) binding opens 
flatter than one that is perfect bound (with a flat, glued edge) or bound 
with side grommets. Similarly, a sewn binding (used for some books) lays 
flatter than a glued binding, which tends to close. The grid can compen-
sate by giving extra space as necessary to the inside gutter (Figure 8.22).
Website Column Grids
Legibility of type on a screen is an important issue with websites. If type 
is too small, anti-aliasing processes (which minimize jagged distortion in 
curved and diagonal lines) can make type appear to blend together. If type 
is too large, it uses up valuable screen space. Also, not all fonts created for 
print will translate into digital fonts. In such cases, the software will sub-
stitute a different font, and your layout may not look at all like what you 
had intended. So for online text, be sure either to choose a digital font or 
to save your text as a PDF and embed it on the web page. 
Designing a column grid to compensate for minimum and maxi-
mum type sizes is essential because there are only so many words you can 
fit across the web page. Height issues on the web page are less of a problem 
than on a physical piece of paper. A page or column can scroll down as 
long as necessary. Most publications, however, set a limit on the length of 
a scroll, and when that limit is reached, they create a new page to continue 
the content (as the New York Times does).
The grid for the navigation menu of a site is somewhat different. The 
navigational tools are an essential part of the grid structure. Menus gen-
erally need to include keywords such as Home, About, and Contact, but 
most websites need a more complex navigation bar. The site designer must 
accommodate this need, making the navigation bar fixed on the page, but 
modifiable in its content. However, anchoring the navigation bar at the 
top or either side of the page will have a significant impact on the rest of 
the site design. Another challenge is to create a design that will function 
well across all monitors because, depending on monitor size, embedded 
images and other elements may not sit exactly where you placed them. 
Similarly, some browsers may distort your designs more than others. It is 
always wise to check your designs inside every web browser option and 
every screen size before you consider them finished. 
The website for the Yale Alumni Magazine by Randall Hoyt is an 
example of a tight structural grid that offers complete flexibility (Figure 
8.23). Its front-page grid is designed to offer immediate accessibility to 
navigation and content throughout the site. It is readable and contains the 
most important features at the top of the scroll, viewable on an average-
sized monitor. 
8.22 The inside gutter of a 
multi-page printed document 
is designed to be wide enough 
to compensate for the curl 
that occurs in between spreads.
8.23 RANDALL HOYT AND MARK 
ZUROLO. Website design for Yale 
Alumni Magazine.

230 
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Freestyle Alignments
Modules and grids rely on alignments, but the use of alignments alone 
also can lead to the creation of organized and expressive designs. Design-
ers can take advantage of a more freestyle approach by using alignments 
without the formal structure of a grid or predetermined modules. For 
example, information in the business card and website for a real estate 
developer, Orange Management, is not held to any overrid-
ing grid system (Figure 8.24). Instead, the business card’s 
alignments are primarily based on how the logotype posi-
tions itself. The distance to the left of the logo is segmented 
by a notch, creating an alignment for the person’s name and 
e-mail address. The remaining information is flush left to a 
second notch, comfortably distanced from the left trim of 
the card. 
In similar fashion, the company’s website bases its 
coordinates on a clearly distinguished logotype. The images 
that sit to the right of the text scroll left, as if a drawer were 
pulled open, literally covering over the text information to display the 
images of the property the company manages.
For a proposed brochure design documenting the New York Public 
Library’s picture collection, Max Pitegoff began with a simple idea: explain 
the library’s picture service by using historic imagery of the library itself 
(Figure 8.25). The freestyle layout runs single words along horizontal 
rules that simulate file cabinet pockets, suggesting the same file cabinets 
the library uses to classify and contain images within the collection. The 
information is treated precisely in describing the subject. In this sense, the 
text’s fragmentation becomes as much a part of the content of the piece 
as the text itself. 
8.24 WESTON BINGHAM, WARREN 
CORBITT, ALLEN HORI, OBJECT. 
Business card and website 
design where the freestyle 
alignment of information 
becomes part of the visual 
identity of the company.

FREESTYLE ALIGNMENTS
231
8.25 MAX PITEGOFF. A self-
initiated project researching 
and documenting the NYC 
Public Library’s picture 
collection service.
SPEAKOUT: On Constraints by Khoi Vinh, 
subtraction.com 
 
 The central challenge of any design problem is defining the 
constraints—the rules, frameworks, limitations, and so on 
that are so often the spark that ignites an ingenious solution. 
A grid system is more than just a set of rules to follow, but 
also a set of rules to play off of, and even to break. Given the 
right grid—the right system of constraints—very good design-
ers can create something that is both orderly and unexpected. 
When this happens, a grid is more than just a style tool, but 
also a tool for advanced creativity. 
Freestyle alignments and typography are used figuratively as a wall-
sized graphic by Stephen Cassidy to introduce an art exhibit. Titled Free 
to Dry, the theme challenges the issue of clotheslines being increasingly 
prohibited in residential communities (Figure 8.26). The perspective is 
that of looking up at multiple clotheslines, with typography that seems to 
hang. Text clusters and flaps as if blowing in the wind, and fonts, leading, 
tint, and alignments shift and break through one another’s territory. All 
provide meaning ingeniously and without actual images of clothespins 
or fabric. 
8.26 STEPHEN CASSIDY.
Proposed wall design for an 
exhibit titled Free to Dry.

232
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Exploiting the Grid
Designers can challenge the conventions of the grid in two ways: analyti-
cally, where mechanically ordered information is pushed to its visual limit, 
and metaphorically, where an emotional connection is made with the 
viewer. Both approaches can exploit what we normally think of as a grid 
construction. 
In the page spreads for the essay Out of Order, Weston Bingham cre-
ated a grid and series of alignments that are loosely organized to present 
and express the subject (Figure 8.27). The essay, which is about interlock-
ing plots of land within the grid of Los Angeles, is illustrated with pictures 
of a church located in a grocery store parking lot. Text boundaries morph 
into shapes, and columns intrude on territories, so the orderly flow of 
information is interrupted. The unusual shapes of the text body keep the 
reader engaged and intrigued as the images, text, colors, and structure 
together tell the story. 
The idea for a poster announcing the spring lecture series for Princ-
eton’s architecture department begins with the metaphor of a flower 
(Figure 8.28). Allen Hori used a tulip’s natural shape and bright color to 
contrast with the warm grey type that lists the events in a stair-step logi-
cal sequence. Still, the system is exploited by the infusion of an additional 
element—colorful purple shapes that seem to embed themselves into 
the type, raining down on it like a springtime thunderstorm. In fact, the 
angles, at 30 and 60 degrees, are the single-axis style used by architects 
to create multisided perspective drawings, called axonometric projec-
tions. The geometry brings the purple thunderstorm back to the subject 
of architecture.
For these two projects, the essay page spreads and the poster, the 
designers have pushed the skeletal structure of each informational system 
while adding expressive power specific to the information being con-
veyed. Such thinking applies to all sorts of design projects. For example, 
the logotype for Saks Fifth Avenue by Pentagram used the overlay of a 
grid to reveal beautiful juxtapositions of the familiar Saks Fifth Avenue 
script (Figure 8.29). The language of graphic design itself advances when 
new associations are made, in this case between grids and logos. 
8.28 ALLEN HORI. Poster 
for the Princeton University 
School of Architecture.
8.27 WESTON BINGHAM.
Three spreads from issue 6 
of the SCI-Arc publication 
Offramp, a student journal 
of architecture. 
View a Closer Look for the Princeton poster on myartslab.com

THE GOLDEN RATIO
233
The Golden Ratio
Ancient architecture such as the Egyptian pyramids and the Greek Par-
thenon used what is considered a divine proportion, the golden ratio of 
geometry, to create a harmonious relationship within buildings. In this 
ratio, if you lay line a next to line b and then lay a line equal to a plus b
next to a, the two pairs of lines would have the same proportion. This ratio 
is expressed as an irrational number (1.6180339887) and is also known 
as the golden section or golden mean. The mathematical relationship is 
found in many aspects of nature, including the human body, as demon-
strated in Vitruvian Man by Leonardo da Vinci (1451–1519) (Figure 8.30).
Similarly, if a rectangle has a ratio of length to width that is the 
golden ratio, it is called a golden rectangle. To create a golden rectangle, 
begin with a perfect square and draw a line from the midpoint of one side 
of the square to an opposite corner. Then use that diagonal line as the 
radius to create an arc that defines the long dimension of the rectangle 
(Figure 8.31). Once created, each square added to its longest dimension 
produces another golden rectangle (Figure 8.32). 
This unique mathematic ratio has had a significant presence in archi-
tecture, in the scale and chords of classical music, in painting and sculp-
ture, and in the book arts, where the system was used to create harmonious 
page layouts beginning in the Renaissance and continuing through today. 
Figure 8.33 shows this relationship in a medical book printed in 1545. The 
500-year-old page can still inspire a contemporary layout because the ele-
ments that make it so beautiful haven’t changed. For example, designing 
a functional margin—on the bottom for 
ease in reading and on the right for turn-
ing pages—also creates compositional 
tension on the page.
8.29 MICHAEL BIERUT/PENTAGRAM.
Saks logo redesign subdividing 
the square into a 64 component 
grid system.
8.30 LEONARDO DA VINCI.
Vitruvian Man. c. 1490.
8.31 The golden rectangle 
is constructed by creating an 
arc from a square. 
8.32 The square (magenta), 
when added to an existing 
golden rectangle (cyan), 
produces another golden 
rectangle.
8.33 C. ESTIENNE & RIVERIUS.
De Dissectione Corporis 
Hunani. S. de Colines. 1545.

234
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
Paper Formats
The common-sized letterhead paper used in the United States is 8.5" × 11" 
(216 mm × 279 mm). One explanation for the 11" length is that the paper 
maker could pull four uncut sheets from the vat—a full arm’s length. A 
common alternate size in the United States is ledger paper, 8.5" × 14". In 
Europe, and in most countries outside of the United States, a standard-
ized paper format was developed to save on cost and resources by creat-
ing a coherent system of metric measurements for the printing indus-
try (Figure 8.34). The letterhead size, called an A4, 8.3"×11.7" (210 mm 
× 297 mm), is narrower and longer than letterhead in the United States 
(210 mm × 297 mm). A4 is part of the A Series of paper sizes, as you can 
see in the diagram. There is also a B Series of alternate sizes, and a C Series 
for envelopes. 
The paper was designed so two pages placed side by side result in the 
next larger size in the system, referred to as the silver ratio (Figure 8.35). 
The smaller side to the longer side equals the ratio of half the longer side 
to the smaller side, and the height-to-width ratio is the square root of 2. 
Starting with the largest size of A0, every time the paper number gets 
smaller, the paper size is halved.
Paper-Fold Formats
The paper folds shown in Figure 8.36 are all possible within a commer-
cial printing paper’s maximum size, generally either 25"× 38" or 28"×40" 
(U.S.-based) for text and cover weights. Some folds are typical, some atyp-
ical, and choosing a format depends on how you want the information to 
literally unfold. 
As marked, F1 is a simple four-page fold. Its proportion can grow 
in width or height to compensate for letter-sized pages of information, or 
shrink to hold the information of a small invitation. F2 is called a gate fold,
which acts as a cover that, when opened, reveals a second panel under-
neath. When completely opened, it presents a full, three-panel spread. The 
only hidden panel is the back. F3 is a variation, a double-gate fold. Once 
opened, a double-gate reveals two inside panels. Unfolded once more, 
it creates a full, four-panel spread. F4 is an accordion fold, which has a 
zigzag appearance. Accordion folds can contain as many panels as a given 
commercial sheet allows. The only concern is that when unfolded, half the 
panels are in the back. F5 is a double fold of four panels, with three panels 
in accordion, and the fourth folds over them. F6 is an accordion variation. 
F7 is called the French fold and is created with center folds on the hori-
zontal and vertical axis. The crossover creates a weightier piece, but also 
allows the possibility of printing on only one side of the paper. The fold-
over hides the unprinted side. However, printing a full, poster-like image 
on the hidden side creates a nice surprise for the reader to discover. The 
same is true for F8 as a gate French fold. F9 is an accordion French fold.
8.36 Typical and atypical 
paper folds for commercial 
printing and binding.
8.35 Two A4 pages put 
together create an A3 size.
A4
A4
A3
8.34 International standard 
paper system (ISO 216) chart-
ing the A Series of sizes.
A6
A7
A5
A4
A3
A2
A1

THE RULE OF THIRDS 
235
Creating the dual function of folded pages and full poster is also 
possible in a more complicated series of cross folds (Figure 8.37). In this 
case, a mailed piece with a wafer seal first attracts the recipient’s atten-
tion. The mailer unfolds vertically into a two-panel spread with its overall 
message taking form. Unfolded again, the piece reveals four panels; all 
panels up to this point are on one side of the form. Unfolding one last 
time reveals the inside, unseen, set of panels, which could present a full 
poster covering eight panels.
The Rule of Thirds 
Chapter 6 briefly discussed the useful cropping tool that can bring tension 
or contrast to the framed image. This cropping approach is most effec-
tively carried out through a system known as the rule of thirds, dividing 
an image into nine equal parts using two horizontal and vertical lines, 
with important elements placed along the lines or their intersections. The 
idea is to avoid centering an image within a frame. The overlapping lines 
create points of interest. In the sample shown here, the child’s face is in the 
top-left intersect rather than in the static center (Figure 8.38). If the face 
were centered, the rest of the photograph wouldn’t be visually activated. 
The off-center quality creates tension and energy.
If we used an ocean image, then the horizon line might sit out of 
center, with more sky above or below that center. A seagull would offer 
another layer of contrast in the picture. Rather than show it floating in 
the center, the bird might be placed in one of the overlapping areas of the 
grid to activate the entire composition. The rule of thirds should become 
an automatic guide for you when photographing and cropping images. 
With it, you can add energy and interest through asymmetry and contrast 
in your composition. With experience, you 
will come to understand all its advantages 
and possibilities, and you will also learn that 
you can break the rules and do something 
completely unexpected.
In the opening spread for the maga-
zine Pastoral, Glenn Suokko used the rule 
of thirds to find an alignment structure for 
a comfortable balance of text, image, and 
white space (Figure 8.39). Through the hori-
zontal placement, he has evoked a landscape 
image, as the publication’s title suggests. The 
typographic line is also seen as a field’s hori-
zon for the foreground of idyllic images, set 
in place like a row of houses.
8.37 Format for a possible 
mailer that doubles as a full 
poster (on the back side).
8.38 A grid showing how  
the rule of thirds can help 
frame an image.
8.39 GLENN SUOKKO. Opening 
spread of pages from the 
magazine Pastoral. 

236
CHAPTER 8: PROPORTION SYSTEMS: GRIDS AND ALIGNMENTS
In Perspective
Once you become familiar with grids, modules, and alignments, the mys-
tery of proportion systems quickly dissipates. Even compositions that 
contain only a few words can be arranged within a structure that gives 
them logic and intention. All these tools are inspired by what you see and 
experience in the everyday world.
The building, window, or gate that you walk by are all made of pat-
terns that you can use when designing a layout. Try to find a rationale 
or connection between the structure and your subject. For example, a 
repeating modular pattern from a building façade might inspire an idea 
for organizing a series of photographs on a web page. The concrete wall 
with a small window could inspire a design that has one solid block of 
text in the center of a page with wide surrounding margins. Once you get 
used to it, you will begin to see grids and modules everywhere, and their 
inspiration for your work will be limitless.
Typographic columns are the most obvious examples of the grid 
because type and grids work so well together. For a small block of type, 
the grid gives the designer something to push against—rules that the 
designer can establish and then break. For large quantities of type, the 
same playful freedom can add interest and create visual and conceptual 
connections between pages. 
Finally, this chapter explores a grid as something that can be ex-
ploited. Don’t let the grid confine you or set limits on your creativity. See 
it as a foundation for you to take advantage of and to challenge. In this 
spirit, being influenced by something peculiar or personally idiosyncratic 
can be as valid as any divine proportions used through the ages. The 
magical golden ratio is a valuable way to structure information, but it is 
certainly not the only way. Use it if it works well for your concept, but feel 
free to overcome the mathematics and try something completely differ-
ent. What works best should be determined by your viewer’s intellectual 
and emotional reactions. It is quite valuable to learn the traditional means 
of creating proportions, but equally valuable to then question and exploit 
them. Your overriding concept will drive you to think creatively and to 
discover new directions for your work. 
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Grids in the Everyday World): Find examples of existing 
grids, including objects, buildings, spaces, nature, geometries, and pat-
terns. Record them (using digital scans or photos), and then notate each 
system found in the image by simplifying it into line and shape. Position 
each on the left page of two 11" × 17" sheets. Repeat the image on the right 
sheet, but reduce the density to 30 percent. Over the ghosted image, draw 
eight vertical or horizontal 1 pt rules in solid cyan to break the image into 
a series of lines and shapes.
K E Y  T E R M S
Anti-aliasing (p. 229)
Cascading Style Sheets
(p. 220)
Flow lines (p. 221)
Footers (p. 226)
French fold (p. 234)
Gate fold (p. 234)
Golden ratio (p. 233)
Golden rectangle (p. 233)
Grid (p. 216)
Grid system (p. 216)
Gutter width (p. 220)
Headers (p. 226)
Modular grid (p. 217)
Module (p. 216)
Rule of thirds (p. 235)
Silver ratio (p. 234)
Typographic grid (p. 220)
Exercise 1 SCHUYLER HIGGINS.
Personal photograph with 
notational grid overlay.
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
237
Things to Consider: Play with scale, contrast, and emphasis to create tension and energy.
Exercise 2 (Grid Systems in Graphic Design): Repeat the instructions 
from Exercise 1, but instead of finding objects or buildings, find a single, 
complex page design that uses both text and one or more images. Mark 
the predominant grid system or modular structure, as well as patterns or 
alignments in the design. 
Project 1 (Compositional Construction): Create an 8" × 8" page with 
a 1-pica perimeter margin. Use guidelines within the margin to create 
25 modules, each with a 1 pica gutter space. Enter the words “Graphic 
Design 1, Steuben Hall, Room 418, Course Number x36.9011.1101.” Use 
the grid as your guide to construct five compositions, one for each of the 
following specifications (export with guides both on and off):
1)  Typeset the text in 20 pt Helvetica Regular, using black type. Dynami-
cally arrange the words using only direction and position, aligning 
with the grid. Include hierarchy in your decisions.
2)  Now use type scale in a new design. You may bleed the letters, change 
their scale, and edit the text.
3)   In addition to all the previous elements, in this composition, make font 
changes (light, regular, bold, black), as well as lines or rules, tints, and 
reversals of type.
4)  Add semantic interpretation of the subject to the specs already in this 
composition. Consider effects, line-art graphics, and geometric shapes.
5)   Use all the previous elements, but also include an additional color and 
a monotone photograph. The image should have something to do with 
the subject.
Project 2 (Text Columns): Find an online article of at least 300 words, one 
headline, two subheadlines, and one color image. Create a vertical 8.5" × 
11" page with a 3-pica perimeter margin. Set five text columns (flush left, 
rag right) inside the margin and pull horizontal guides to establish the 
location of text and images.
Choose the typeface (based on the material you find), fonts, type 
size, leading, and hierarchy to move the eye through the layout. Include 
additional elements (rules, arrows, bullets, etc.) to add interest to the 
page, but keep it clean and uncluttered. Reference Chapter 1 and the Bib-
liography to find past studies for reference and inspiration. Your objective 
is to prove visually how the composition can be improved by starting with 
a grid structure. 
Alternative: Take the same text and redesign it for an online publication.
Project 1 MAY PARSEY (LEFT) 
AND RACHEL SALIERNO (RIGHT).
Steps in the compositional 
construction project.
STEP 4
STEP 4
STEP 2
STEP 1
STEP 1 (GUIDES ON)
STEP 1 (GUIDES OFF)
Things to Consider: Think of the page as a room and the elements within it as furniture. 
Your arrangement can tell a story using surprise, energy, emphasis, unity, depth, and motion 
to lead the eye through the space and create poetry on the page.

238
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION

239
9
Concepts in Action
Opposite page: COMA AMSTERDAM/
NEW YORK. Back cover (detail) 
from the Vitra catalog Workspirit 
10: Nest ‘n’ Nest (full image, see 
Figure 9.14).
One big piece of advice that I 
have for a young designer is to 
go out on a limb…and to be 
prepared to do the things that 
you feel strongly about that 
maybe other people don’t. 
—Hillman Curtis
In this hands-on process, each idea they developed sparked the next idea. 
The final result of all their experimentation was flight.
Whether designing a plane or a logo, you need to start with an idea. 
The Wright brothers were mechanics, but their innovative thinking turned 
them into engineers. Every designer presented in this chapter is a graphic 
designer and, in a sense, an engineer. They all resolved their client’s design 
problems, but they did it by transforming their ideas to a physical state. 
When learning how to confront design problems, look to these 
designers to understand how they approached theirs. In each of these 
essays, you will find they have a focused, yet flexible spirit; are committed 
to testing and refining their work along the way; make an effort to access 
historical facts and explore the location or situation; and bring their own 
personal experience to every problem. They push a little harder and make 
their designs go further—enough to fly. In every sense, they have used 
action to make their concepts a reality.
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Identify and explain the major concepts presented 
in the essays.
t 
 Discuss how the major concepts presented in this text 
were used in the case studies.
t 
  Compare the processes among the designers and 
describe how they vary.
t
Exercises and Projects
Research the work of a contemporary graphic designer; develop a 
concept for a graphic design around a public service announcement; 
invent a project and package it; create a visual identity for a place.
he bicycle mechanics Orville and Wilbur Wright wanted to solve 
a most innovative problem: they wanted to build and fly the world’s first 
self-propelled airplane. They brought what they knew to the equation, 
using bicycle chains to drive the propeller and the idea of balance for 
controlling the plane. They tested more than 200 designs in a wind tunnel 
and, most important, they built their own prototype.
T

Does any project stand out for you in 
terms of developing a design concept?
A good example is a project my team did for 
Saks Fifth Avenue. They approached us about 
designing a new identity for their stores, seeking 
a graphic program that would encompass 
signage, advertising, direct mail, online 
presence, and, most importantly, packaging. 
(See the previous discussion of this project in 
Chapter 8).
We understood quickly that this was more 
than a logo design project. The current Saks 
logo had been in use since the mid 1990s, 
but had done little to create a profile for the 
brand, particularly as part of a gray-on-gray 
packaging program that was recessive, to say 
the least. Saks wanted something that could 
be immediately identifiable when glimpsed 
across a busy street. The store had used literally 
dozens of logos since its founding, but no 
signature color or pattern, just variations on the 
same theme: cursive writing, sometimes casual, 
sometimes Spencerian (Vignette 9.1).
Of these, one stood out—the logo drawn in 
1973 by Tom Carnese, adapted from a signature 
introduced almost twenty years before. In many 
people’s minds, this still was the Saks logo. 
But simply reinstating a thirty-year-old logo 
wouldn’t be enough—Saks wanted to signal 
that it was looking to the future.
What was the working process? 
In our early creative sessions at Saks, we’d 
gathered a lot of visual inspiration. The team 
kept coming back to the boldness of artists like 
Franz Kline and Barnett Newman. Was there 
a way to get that kind of dramatic scale and 
energy into the program?
We were excited when we finally hit on the 
solution. We took the cursive logo, redrew it 
with the help of font designer Joe Finocchiaro, 
and placed it in a black square (Vignette 9.2). 
Then we subdivided that square into a grid of 
sixty-four smaller squares (Vignette 9.3). 
The sixty-four tiles can then be shuffled and 
rotated to form an almost infinite number of 
variations (Vignette 9.4). Most of the individual 
logo tiles are quite lovely in their own right, 
and within the system can be used in various 
combinations to form still more abstract 
compositions. Each of these suggests, within its 
details, the graphic character of the new logo. 
Enlarged, they have a kind of energy and drama 
that contrasts nicely with the original mark 
from which they were derived.
Was the application difficult, especially 
when having only one color to use? 
The advantage of the program, deployed in 
black and white, is that it creates recognizable 
consistency without sameness. The logo 
Michael Bierut is a partner in the New York oﬃce of Pentagram, an international design consultancy. 
He is a recipient of the AIGA Medal and a Senior Critic at the Yale School of Art. His most recent 
book is Seventy-Nine Short Essays on Design (Princeton Architectural Press, 2007).
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  T H E  P R O C E S S  O F  D E V E LO P I N G  A  C O N C E P T,  W I T H   MICHAEL BIERUT
P E N T A G R A M
240
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
The advantage of the program, 
deployed in black and white, is that 
it creates recognizable consistency 
without sameness.

elements will be used in signage, direct mail, 
and advertising. There are more than forty 
different packages in the program, from jewelry 
boxes to hat boxes, and four sizes of shopping 
bags, and no two of these will be alike, yet will 
all go together (Vignette 9.5). Our hope is that 
they will all become associated in the minds 
of shoppers with the style and élan of Saks 
Fifth Avenue.
Vignette 9.1 Historic cursive 
logotype identities.
Vignette 9.2 Saks Fifth Avenue 
logo redesign by Pentagram.
Vignette 9.3 Logo subdivided 
into a sixty-four-square grid 
system.
Vignette 9.4 Variations on 
the grid system.
1940
1946
1955
1955
1973
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: MICHAEL BIERUT 
241
1997 (Previous logo in use.)
Vignette 9.5 Application 
of the logo reconfiguration to 
shopping bags (above) and 
specialty boxes (below).

242
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
CONCEPTS INSPIRED BY A SUBJECT’S LOCATION
Poster for Monadnock Paper by George Tscherny, 
George Tscherny, Inc.
Rarely do I recall the Eureka moment when the birth of an idea appeared 
full blown. It is more likely that I would recall the process or steps taken 
to arrive at a final design solution. 
A case in point: when photographing New York architecture for a paper 
promotion, I shot, among other sites, the World Trade Center in down-
town New York. After circling the towers, and exhausting the usual 
(cliché) views, I made a wider circle coming upon the little church located 
a block south of the towers—a study in architectural contrasts. It is inter-
esting how, by means of composition, cropping, light and shadow, a small 
and architecturally insignificant building can visually dominate a vastly 
larger structure. This led to the notion of isolating the church by folding 
the poster so that the first impression is that of an adobe church in New 
Mexico. When the poster is unfolded, the viewer gets the full impact of 
this incongruous and surreal scene in Manhattan (Figure 9.1).
Needless to say, neither building survived the events of 9/11.
In Practice: The graphic design created an archive of a site that once was. 
Here, the designer charted his approach in photographing the towers and found 
the church along the way. The idea of using compositional principles and 
elements such as dominance and shape, along with a folding technique, resulted 
in a design concept that endures.
9.1 GEORGE TSCHERNY (DESIGN
AND PHOTOGRAPHY). N.Y.; Poster; 
1975; unfolded (top) and folded 
(bottom), for Monadnock Paper 
Inc., with a view showing the 
context of the church within 
the setting.

CONCEPTS INSPIRED BY A SUBJECT’S LOCATION 
243
CONCEPTS INSPIRED BY A SUBJECT’S LOCATION
Times Square Alliance Identity by Alan Dye
In the spring of 2002, the Brand Integration Group at Ogilvy was asked 
to design a logo for the Times Square Alliance. Like any other project, we 
began by doing our research. We looked into the history of Times Square, 
walked its streets, explored its subway stations, smelled its smells, ate its 
food, fought its crowds, and tried our best to soak it all in. It wasn’t an 
easy task—Times Square is a dizzying blur of energy. Our initial ideas 
focused on trying to break through the visual clutter of the frenetic place. 
We tried simple bold marks, a signature color, and a number of logos that 
were based on an “x” (since the streets that make up the square create an 
x … and triple x’s have a history in Times Square as well—we couldn’t help 
ourselves). All of our efforts fell short. 
In the end, rather than trying to fight it, we embraced the chaos. The final 
mark hopes to capture the energy of the area, referencing its flashing neon 
lights and bright color. I have always been a fan of Victor Vasarely (I wrote 
a report on him in eighth grade), so I was eager to reference op-art. This 
was a rare opportunity to create a mark where I could push the boundaries 
of legibility. The repeating lines and vivid magenta color evoke the feeling 
of what it is like to be in the midst of the Square. Also, we drew a signature 
typeface for Times Square based on vernacular New York typography, 
most specifically, elevator typography. In the end, we were quite pleased 
with the results, as the mark captured the spirit of Times Square perfectly: 
bright, bold, colorful, and full of energy (Figure 9.2).
In Practice: Going to the location for onsite research helped this concept 
immeasurably. The sights and sounds may trigger a connection to other creative 
works that can be used for further inspiration.. In this case, Victor Vasarely 
and the op-art movement inspired the designer to broaden the range of possible 
forms the logo could take.
9.2 ALAN DYE, OGILVY BRAND 
INTEGRATION GROUP. Visual identity 
for the Times Square Alliance NYC 
(above), and applied to business 
card and signage for the organi-
zation (below).

244
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
CONCEPTS INSPIRED BY A SUBJECT’S LOCATION
Bond No. 9 New York by Laurice Rahmé, founder and CEO 
of Bond No. 9
In Paris, where I was born, perfumers have been making neighborhood 
scents for centuries—but no one had done it here. I decided Bond No. 9 
would be the perfect combination of the art of French perfumery with the 
dynamics of New York City. After all, everyone wants a piece of New York! 
The idea was to develop scents that convey the particular vibrancy and 
sensibility of each neighborhood, the people who live and spend time 
there, and the people who want to live and spend time there. There had 
to be a quintessential New York element to every aspect of the Bond No. 
9 “package.” I adopted (and trademarked) the NYC subway token, which 
has been modified as our logo. It’s on every bottle and every box, and it 
even covers the “Bond mobile,” our vintage English taxicab. 
For the stores, I relied on my own style, which has been formed by growing 
up in Europe, living in the Middle East, and then here in New York (Figure 
9.3). It’s an eclectic mix of color and design—and there is nothing more 
“New York” than a fusion of globally oriented elements! I approach the 
music I play in the stores with the same global-New York point of view (with 
a downtown edge). Everything—from the music to the welcoming attitude 
of the sales staff—is a critical part of Bond No. 9 packaging. I created places 
where people want to spend time (the “in-and-out” customers are few).
Because every single client is different, I have to incorporate elements that 
are essentially human. My bottle design shadows the human form—you 
can see the head, shoulders, waist, and legs. With every new fragrance, 
I’m also dressing it up in a complete ensemble, from the bottle design to 
the box design (Figure 9.4). And my clients create fragrance wardrobes. 
I’ve never been afraid to take the designs and the colors to the next level. 
People respond to vibrancy, and I respond to vibrancy; and this is per-
fume—it’s supposed to be fun! What maintains the element of luxury is 
never compromising on quality.
In Practice: The packaging of an entire store—from bottles to the shop’s interior 
design to music and the attitude of the sales staﬀ—reaches beyond the scope of 
most design projects. This project was all encompassing. New York City neighbor-
hoods, and even the brand logos of 
other stores (Saks Fifth Avenue, see 
Figure 9.4), are brought in as subjects. 
And yet, the Bond No. 9 brand is 
maintained, thanks to an adaptable 
logo and bottle shape that hold their 
own deﬁnable identity.
9.3 Store interior of Bond No. 9.
9.4 Classic bottle design 
as part of Bond No. 9’s 
graphic identity.
Wall Street design.
Candle packaging using 
Bond No. 9’s logo as the 
main graphic device.
Chinatown design.
Saks Fifth Avenue design using 
their new, fragmented logo.

ANALYTIC-BASED CONCEPTS 
245
ANALYTIC-BASED CONCEPTS
Creating a Framework by Andrew Blauvelt, design director and 
curator, Walker Art Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota
In 1967, the artist Sol LeWitt wrote: “The idea becomes the machine that 
makes the art.” LeWitt was describing his own artistic process while also 
defining a new, more conceptually oriented realm of art making that gained 
prominence in the 1960s and 1970s. What began as a simple statement 
about one artist’s procedural approach to art became a broader indictment 
about the art world’s preoccupation with authorship and formalism. 
Nearly thirty years later, and in another context, I embraced LeWitt’s 
statement and the purpose behind it. I was interested in the search for 
ideas more than a search for new forms, just as I was eager to take the 
notion of what constituted the radical in design and shift it away from 
formalism and into conceptualism. Just as LeWitt rejected “the arbitrary, 
the capricious, and subjective,” I too sought to sublimate graphic design’s 
dependence on formalism, expressionism, and subjectivity, and embrace 
an approach that emphasized design’s intrinsic love of constraints. 
In many projects, but not all of them, I try to create a framework for 
“things to happen”—a set of rules or constraints, a sequential procedure—
a “machine that makes the design,” to paraphrase LeWitt. This generative 
approach to designing should not be confused with attempts to eliminate 
the designer from the equation—for instance, through automated com-
puting, although the computer can be a helpful tool in the creation of 
such systems. 
The emphasis on the conceptual should not be confused with a refusal 
of form, since any design must have form to exist. An early project that 
adopted this approach came in the form of a commission to design a book 
documenting an annual design competition for the now-defunct Ameri-
can Center for Design (Figure 9.5). The genre of this kind of publication 
had become ossified into a predictable image-caption, picture-book pre-
sentation. Instead of simply following this formula and submitting the 
usual essay about what trends and styles could be discerned in the win-
ning year’s work, we instead created a series of twenty-six appendices 
that would analyze the work in different ways. One analysis, taking the 
form of a map, located the geographic dispersal of the winning designers. 
Another charted the size of each winning piece, from the smallest (a busi-
ness card) to the largest (a billboard). Others classified each winning work 
by genre: posters, books, logos, and so on. Still others grouped the work 
by the juror(s) who selected it. Each analysis examined the same content, 
illuminating a different part of the whole. The concept was to reframe how 
designers look at works in a design competition using all of the available 
and objective information to point out what is, in the end, an essentially 
subjective exercise in an individual juror’s taste.
In Practice: Bringing an analytic framework to 
this project was perfectly matched with the function 
of presenting competition winners. It asked the 
viewers to look at every design from a diﬀerent angle. 
The idea drove the form of the catalog, but still let 
the individual works shine on their own merits.
9.5 ANDREW BLAUVELT
AND SANTIAGO PIEDRAFITA.
21st Annual Show of 
Excellence, American 
Center for Design.

246
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
ANALYTIC-BASED CONCEPTS
Japan Society 100 Years Website Design by Agnieszka 
Gasparska, founder, Kiss Me I’m Polish, LLC
The year 2007 marked the centennial anniversary for the Japan Society in 
New York, an organization founded to foster and strengthen the cultural 
exchange between the United States and Japan. One of the largest of its 
kind, the institution has a rich and diverse history. Our job was to design 
a website that would allow for the many voices and works of the organiza-
tion to shine.
The design process began with a review of the vast array of visual material 
compiled from the society’s archives. It quickly became apparent that one 
image, no matter how powerful, could not fully convey the life of such a 
vibrant institution. We therefore limited our selection to 100 of the great-
est hits, presenting them in what we referred to as a “democratic grid.” The 
order rearranges itself every time a user comes to that page. What’s nice is 
that, when combined, all of these little images read as one whole picture, 
bringing a distinctive character to the site.
It would have been easy to get carried away with clichéd visual elements 
in the site’s graphics. Instead, we took a path that tried to evoke the Japa-
nese sensibility of simplicity. All of the pages are built on the same clean 
layout of stacked panels and soft grays, so as not to overpower the imagery 
and information. Even the color red was used only as a hint, especially 
since the organization wanted to distance itself from layers of political and 
monarchial connotations of old Japan. The result was sparingly elegant, 
yet fresh and informative (Figure 9.6).
In Practice: Abstracting the traditional sensibilities of Japanese culture was 
a good approach to take for the design of this site. Simplicity of color, layout, and 
type eliminated the usual cultural clichés and resulted in a site that has a fresh, 
contemporary look, but still embraces the aesthetics of Japanese culture.
9.6 Web pages of the Japan 
Society 100 years website.

USING RESEARCH AS A CONCEPTUAL APPROACH 
247
USING RESEARCH AS A CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
Brown University Friedman Study Center Signage 
System by Scott Stowell, Open™
The Sciences Library at Brown University, built in 1971, is the kind of 
building you see at many colleges: big, bold, and modern, but not warm 
or comfortable, and not well loved by many people on campus (Figure 
9.7). In 2006, Brown decided to convert the first three levels of the build-
ing into the Susan P. and Richard A. Friedman Study Center. The center, 
which is open 24 hours a day, offers a variety of spaces where students 
can work, gather, and collaborate. Architecture Research Office designed 
the center and we at Open were asked to design its signage. After seeing 
that many of the original signs from 1971 (Figure 9.8) were still there 
(and looked great), we used similar forms and typography to create retro-
futuristic directional signage, incorporating new materials that conform 
to current accessibility guidelines (Figure 9.9).
But while working on the project, we discovered something surprising. 
We were thinking about a nickname for the center that could be used as 
a logo or identity system and suggested “Brown Study.” As it turns out, 
the phrase “brown study” is in the dictionary—it means a kind of absent-
mindedness that comes from being lost in thought. Inspired by this, we 
found words and images from books within the Brown library system 
and had them silkscreened directly onto the walls of the center. We also 
included their card catalog numbers so that students could look them 
up (Figure 9.10). Some are serious and some are funny, and the more 
time you spend there, the more of them you discover. And we were happy 
because through our design, we were able both to help people find their 
way around the center and to make the time they spend there a little more 
unexpected and exciting.
In Practice: The design idea for the study center at Brown University went 
beyond the directional signage system that was originally commissioned. 
The addition of silkscreened words and images on otherwise bare walls created 
a playful connection to the library’s books and celebrated the whole notion of 
studying and learning. 
9.10 Cataloged text and 
images silkscreened onto walls 
in unexpected areas through-
out the library.
9.7 Brown University’s Sciences Library 
building in Providence, Rhode Island.
9.8 Original library signs from 1971.
9.9 Retro-futuristic directional 
signage to coordinate with the 
remaining signs from 1971. 

248
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
USING RESEARCH AS A CONCEPTUAL APPROACH
Throwing Apples at the Sun by Elliot Peter Earls, artist in 
residence, 2-D Design, Cranbrook Academy of Art
On its most basic level Throwing Apples at the Sun was conceived as an 
exploration to understand narrative. Through it, I was also attempting to 
deal with wide-ranging issues, including greed, race, and sex. There wasn’t 
any traditional process that I went through in creating the work—no 
linear, step-by-step storytelling. Instead, I wanted the viewer to interact 
with thirty minutes of music and spoken word tracks, an interactive mul-
timedia composition, and four printed posters (Figures 9.11 and 9.12). 
All of the elements were orchestrated: bass beats and pop song fragments 
co-mingled with original typography, drawings, spoken-word poetry, and 
robotic musical instruments. The concept was to reveal the human condi-
tion through this rumination, but in a blended and interactive way.
In Practice: Through personal search, the designer can become his own source 
material, exploring universal questions. This personal approach to public issues 
helps graphic design break into areas such as painting and sculpture that are 
traditionally explored by the ﬁne arts. The typefaces created by Elliot Peter Earls 
are artworks unto themselves. They border on being illegible, yet the nonlinear 
sequence somehow maintains a translatable narrative. This piece challenges the 
established notions of design’s role in the world and challenges the viewer to 
understand design in a whole new way.
9.11 Logo and video stills for 
Throwing Apples at the Sun 
interactive video. 1995.
9.12 Poster as part of a set 
packaged with the CD.
View a Closer Look for the Earls poster on myartslab.com

BRINGING A BIGGER IDEA TO A CONCEPT 
249
BRINGING A BIGGER IDEA TO A CONCEPT 
Iconoclasts Title Design by Greg Hahn, Gretel
Iconoclasts was a television series for the Sundance Channel produced by 
@Radical Media. The show had a simple premise: put two great talents 
together for a couple of days, have one guest interview the other, and see 
what happens. Our job was to create a main title sequence that gave the 
viewer a sense of what it was all about.
Our plan from the outset was to play off the idea of dialogue and juxta-
position. Our initial exploration used actual transcripts from the show to 
create something completely type based. We split the frame of the screen 
and had type reading out from the center to give the feeling of a back-and-
forth conversation. The results were great, giving us an elegant execution 
with potential for animation, but something seemed to be missing. 
Because the show is so personality driven, we decided to add photogra-
phy. It brought even more life to the idea (Figure 9.13). A focus on ges-
tures, along with close crops of hands and expressive eyes and mouths, 
captured the lively discussion. And the split frame created strange, yet 
striking compositions that reflected the odd intersection of two minds 
meeting. Ultimately we tried to create something that felt at once classi-
cal and avant-garde—fitting for a 
show about people who had often 
gone against the grain to make 
their mark.
9.13 Opening title design and stills 
of the sequence for Iconoclasts
television series.
In Practice: This motion design uses the 
device of a split screen, coupled with close-ups 
of human gestures, to convey the idea of two 
guests interviewing each other. The supportive 
elements, including muted colors and classic 
typography, help push the feeling of a serious, 
intellectual show.

250
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
BRINGING A BIGGER IDEA TO A CONCEPT 
Vitra Workspirit 10: Net ‘n’ Nest by COMA Amsterdam/
New York (Cornelia Blatter, Marcel Hermans, and Billy Nolan)
For over half a century, Vitra has been a leading name in the world of 
furniture and interiors. Its mission is to develop furniture and furnishing 
systems that stimulate, inspire, and motivate. From its early patronage of 
such influential figures as Charles and Ray Eames and Jean Prouvé to its 
support of such renowned contemporary designers as Ronal and Erwan 
Bouroullec and Jasper Morrison, Vitra has always experimented with new 
ideas and is always tackling the new challenges of the field of work. The 
theme behind the most recent collection of office furniture is based on 
what Vitra calls the Net ‘n’ Nest theory: we go to the office to communi-
cate with others (net) but we also need the option of withdrawing from 
the communal environment for solitary productivity (nest).
The role of COMA in the Vitra catalog Workspirit 10: Net ‘n’ Nest extends 
beyond graphic design to encompass concept, editorial structure, and 
art direction of photo shoots. As a result, the entire book is tailored to 
reinforce the central theme—netting and nesting—right from the cover, 
which depicts a solitary individual at work while ensconced in a nest 
(Figure 9.14).
The human need to nest is expressed by smaller pages that “nest” within 
the larger pages. These inserts feature scenes in which Vitra furniture 
becomes the defining props in the nests of imaginary working individu-
als. The human aspect—both the counterpoint and complement to the 
net-driven world of work—is further emphasized in different ways. Key 
designers are introduced by their first names and speak to the reader. Old 
masters are brought to life through portraits and eulogies from today’s 
top designers. Individuals seated on Vitra chairs are pictured at work in 
archives, laboratories, and other workspaces. Leading figures in other 
fields are pictured in their favored surroundings with Vitra products. 
Chairs are even presented as a cast of characters bearing traces of users. 
Even the headers that top the pages and the titles of each chapter under-
line the human, the individual, the personal.
The alternation between complementary pairs (larger and smaller pages, 
formal and informal imagery, personal and impersonal insights) commu-
nicates the key Vitra message, that netting and nesting form a dialectical 
pair that do not simply complement each other but mutually promote 
each other. The entire book can be understood as a structure that brings 
together a host of designers and users. The Vitra catalog Workspirit 10: 
Net ‘n’ Nest, therefore, forms a device that links design and use through 
designers and users.
9.14 Front and back cover, 
and subsequent spreads from 
the Vitra catalog Workspirit 
10: Net ‘n’ Nest.
In Practice: This catalog goes beyond being 
simply about furniture. The bigger idea brought to 
it, that of nesting, makes sense in the context of 
a functional oﬃce environment. The whole notion 
of understanding that workers need both private 
and public space is intriguing. Workspirit 10 
shows this idea so clearly, and the catalog is 
visually beautiful, making the innovative concept 
even more exciting.

Schedule for the assignment:
Meeting 1:  Sketches for overall concept and 
individual icons, show reference 
materials 
Meeting 2:   Laser prints of icons, sketch of 
application
Meeting 3:   Refined icons and application 
structure
Meeting 4:   Icons complete, application to 
mock up
Meeting 5:   Presentations of final projects with 
guest critics
BRINGING A BIGGER IDEA TO A CONCEPT 
251
BRINGING A BIGGER IDEA TO A CONCEPT 
On Student Assignments, with Barbara Glauber, principal of 
Heavy Meta; faculty, Yale Graduate Graphic Design Department
What is your favorite student assignment?
There is one that I love to give in which I ask students to choose a personal 
obsession and then create six separate icons that categorize the obsession. 
The icons must appear to belong to the same family by sharing a formal 
vocabulary, but each must symbolize a different aspect of the subject 
(Figure 9.15).
Is there an ultimate objective with the project? 
The challenge for the student is in finding a way to express the depth of 
their obsession through the reductive language of icons. I want students 
to understand that a system of symbols doesn’t only have to mean the 
kind you see at an airport. The spectrum of graphic vocabularies is much 
wider than that. The language students reference when rendering their 
icons might draw on vernacular languages, pop culture, digital bit maps, 
spray painting, even the stamping on a plastic coffeemaker button. In the 
process, we discuss strategies for boiling forms down to their essence in 
order to make a successful translation, and how the nuances of each ges-
ture carry their own meaning.
In crafting these forms, students are forced to look at other icon systems 
to observe a number of things: to see how line weights and corner treat-
ments are considered in order to achieve optical uniformity; how similar 
ratios of positive and negative space can balance each icon; and how bor-
rowing from other visual languages can expand their own imagery. For 
example, a human figure can be appropriated from a conventional bath-
room icon, or the use of collage across a system can unify the set of icons. 
Drawing skills also come into play throughout the process as students 
create laser prints and work on them with felt-tip markers to discover 
possible refinements. 
The students are also asked to invent an application for their icon systems. 
It might be a book or a poster or an installation. This aspect gives them a 
context to design within and helps determine the scale at which the icons 
need to be read.
What student solutions stand out for you?
Dmitri Siegel managed to chart his entire record collection on one National 
Geographic-like atlas. Layers of information overlap—continents double 
as silhouettes of recording artists that categorize the genres of music while 
inside each region, tiny record-based icons provide his take on the album’s 
usage for being a DJ, sampling, and frequency of play (Figure 9.16).
The limitations of communication itself can be addressed through the 
project. For instance, Julie Cho created a book pairing the texts of instant-
9.15 Process students follow for the assignment.
In Practice: Reducing a complex idea, image, 
or object to its simplest form is a dynamic way 
to get to the essence of something you are trying 
to communicate. And this eﬀort can produce new 
insights about the same idea, image, or object 
each time you do it.
9.16 DMITRI SIEGEL. Student project 
charting his record collection through 
the image of a world atlas.

252 
CHAPTER 9: CONCEPTS IN ACTION
  SPEAKOUT: Conceptual Healing by Louise Sandhaus, professor, School of Art,  
California Institute of the Arts
 
 Crammed among my many graphic design books are personal scrapbooks brimming with stuff that 
I’ve torn from magazines and newspapers (and occasionally printed from the web). This hodge-
podge, which I often share with my students, has become the butt of several jokes because the pages 
seem to reflect a crazy-brained lack of collecting logic. An example of “good design” sits next to a 
bird photograph, which is next to a science fiction story, which is nestled between a comic article 
called “Abstract Thought Is a Warm Puppy” and a graph showing how the brain works. Everything 
seems miscellaneous.
 
 But for me, connecting the dots of miscellany reveals fresh insights and new possibilities. The way 
that I use my imagination to make sense of the world is what makes my work as a designer personal. 
In other words, I approach graphic design conceptually. Finding new associations is what keeps my 
work alive. And besides, it’s what’s fun about design for me.
 
 So what does it mean to approach design conceptually? I do an exercise with my students in which I 
give them a pile of small objects, say fifty or so things about the size of a spool of thread. I ask them 
to collectively categorize these things as logically as possible. Usually everything gets organized into 
color, then size, then material, then shape, and so on. In other words, all the clichéd or typical ways 
we organize our world. But once all the boring approaches are exhausted, then the creative brain 
kicks in. Objects are organized by the times of day they might be used or by their ability to float, or 
perhaps their usefulness as a tool. Imaginative connections between all the seeming randomness 
reveals how new perspectives can create fresh ideas.
message conversations she had with her father with icons that described 
the subtext of the dialogue—lonely, confused, homesick, or worried 
(Figure 9.17). Another project, by Amanda Bowers, modified the assem-
bly instructions for an Ikea Billy bookcase by including icons for her 
personal belongings that showed their quantity and exact placement on 
the shelves each time the bookcase was moved to a new location, thereby 
highlighting her peripatetic existence.
Some students choose to explore the relationship between ornamentation 
and representation. Rachel Berger documented the state of disrepair of her 
historically significant apartment building by framing images of frozen 
pipes and broken light bulbs with beautiful Arts and Crafts-style embel-
lishments, hiding the building’s defects behind decoration (Figure 9.18).
9.17 JULIE CHO. Student project pair-
ing the texts of instant-message 
conversations with icons describing 
the subtext of the dialogue.
View a Closer Look for the embellishments on myartslab.com
9.18 RACHEL BERGER. Student 
project documenting the state 
of disrepair of her historically 
significant building.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
253
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Contemporary Designer Proﬁle): Research the work of a con-
temporary graphic designer and write a short essay (approximately 300 
words) about the importance of concept in their work. Read your essay 
aloud to the class for feedback and discussion.
Exercise 2 (Design for Public Service): Develop a idea for using graphic 
design to help promote a public service dealing with community, educa-
tion, health and safety, or the environment. Identify the ideas you would 
like to explore and sketches for finished designs, focusing on a full con-
cept as a driving force.
Project 1 (Product Packaging): Invent a product and package it. Research 
any competition and target an audience you want to reach. Name the prod-
uct, design a logo, and create the package shape for the product. In other 
words, create a complete concept for it. Your presentation should include 
whatever visuals you need to present your ideas—drawing or prototype of 
the object, actual packaging, representation of research, and so forth.
Project 2 (Visual Identity): Take (or find) a photograph of a place that you 
feel ought to be visually branded. This place can be a well-known public 
site or it can be an obscure location. Create a visual identity for your place 
and apply that identity to any medium (website, poster, motion design).
Things to Consider: The product doesn’t necessarily have to work—don’t let the mechanics get 
in the way of your creativity and final solution.
Things to Consider: Use your imagination with this project by choosing a place that 
is unusual or something blatantly obvious. Be just as creative with your presentation of the final 
project, choosing whatever medium suits it best.
In Perspective
In this chapter, you’ve had the opportunity to learn about the design pro-
cess from a selection of graphic designers, each of whom has a very dif-
ferent outlook on his or her art. Every working designer has a unique 
story to tell about how he or she approaches design work. These observa-
tions are valuable lessons for students who are learning about not only 
the practical aspects of design but also design as a lifestyle that embraces 
problem solving. You will develop your own working system over time, 
but never overlook the value of learning from others, even after your own 
design practice matures. The learning process always continues, and you 
will come to see yourself as a perpetual student.
In the next chapter, you will be challenged to look deeper into the 
concept of loading your form with visual codes that carry meaning. Know-
ing and understanding these visual codes can move your work beyond the 
ordinary and into the realm of truly significant, groundbreaking design.
EXCERPT: Paragraphs on 
Conceptual Art by Sol LeWitt, 
Artforum (June 1967) 
 
 I will refer to the kind of art in which I am 
involved as conceptual art. In conceptual 
art the idea or concept is the most impor-
tant aspect of the work. When an artist 
uses a conceptual form of art, it means that 
all of the planning and decisions are made 
beforehand and the execution is a perfunc-
tory affair. The idea becomes a machine 
that makes the art.
Project 1 CHANG HOOK PARK. 
Liter-sized energy drink called 
BOOM UP.
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

254
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING

255
10
Visual Coding: Loading 
Form with Meaning
A visual code sets a tone, narrates with a particular voice, and brings a 
perspective through which the viewer can understand the work. Every 
image we use or create is imbued with nonverbal messages that come 
from the cultural context in which the image exists. These nonverbal mes-
sages function a bit like a picture frame, setting a context that adds to 
the meaning. Imagine a contemporary, minimalist painting mounted in 
an ornate Baroque picture frame—what messages are being sent by the 
unusual combination? The style and treatment of both the painting and 
the frame are imbued with visual codes that can be read by the viewer, 
assuming the viewer has even a rudimentary knowledge of art history. 
If you were to bring a Baroque style to a brochure for a contemporary 
museum, the juxtaposition would set up an odd and most probably con-
fusing perspective for the reader, which the creator would need to clarify 
in some way to explain the message.
Graphic designers need to keep these inherent messages in mind 
when choosing or creating images; it needs to be a conscious part of the 
Opposite page: YOONSEUK SHIM. 
Proposed poster (detail) for 
the International Trademark 
Association (full image, see 
Figure 10.8).
We’re really invested in how style 
communicates, not only in terms 
of form but also in terms of 
content or process. 
—Michael Greenblatt and 
Jessica Wexler
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Interpret the visual codes inherent in a design’s medium, 
format, and treatment.
t 
 Recognize the codes that are carried through typography, 
color, and context.
t
 Explain the theory of gestalt perception.
t 
 Apply the principles of gestalt perception to your work.
t 
 Describe semiotics and distinguish its three categories.
t
 Compare the differences between icon, index, and symbol.
t
 Explain the use of a logo as a visually coded identity.
t
 Discuss why it is important to create meaning with a design.
t
Exercises and Projects
Find examples of linguistic principles in existing designs; create 
compositions that have semantic meaning; visually represent the 
meaning of specific words; redesign a take-out menu; create 
an ad using visual codes.
f a graphic designer had only to organize information into pleasing 
arrangements, then the aesthetic use of form, devoid of any meaning, 
would be all that’s required of our job. Graphic design would be more 
about decorating than communicating. However, as you have already seen, 
graphic design is much more than form. In this chapter, you will see 
how visual codes help make it so.
I

The medium is the message.
—Marshall McLuhan
256
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
design process. In a sense, you are taking a step back from a design to 
really see it—to consider not only what it looks like but also what underly-
ing messages it sends. 
For example, if you were to design a booklet for a scientific research 
center, you might begin by simply organizing and studying the content 
information. Certainly the imagery and chart material are going to carry 
scientific information, but typeface, grid, colors, and other graphic ele-
ments also relay visual codes that can help the reader get fuller mean-
ing. In managing these inherent codes, you can push the communication 
further, reinforcing the messages. To understand exactly what you are 
designing, you will need to review articles and books that cover the same 
field of science. You will need to explore elemental charts and structures 
to learn commonly used mechanisms of communication in the particular 
field. This knowledge will enable you to make conscious decisions with 
a better understanding of how your design will be perceived within the 
context of similar publications. You then will have much better control of 
the design and of the visual codes that are conveyed through the design.
The research required to successfully design the scientific booklet 
points to an important requirement for the transmittal of visual codes in 
general: you need to know your audience and the context in which your 
work will be received. Every field, every culture, and every geographic 
region will recognize different infused information. A specific color, type-
face, or image may be filled with coded information for one particular 
audience, yet carry no associations at all for another. It is your responsi-
bility as a designer to understand the subject matter of your design, no 
matter how simple or complex, and to know its targeted viewers. Without 
that background, your messages may be muddled or completely misread.
Visual Codes Do Send Messages
Communication is really an assembly of parts. Each part of the whole 
is recognized, or read, as something meaningful. Generally, designers 
factor in three levels of reading as they create designs: medium, format, 
and treatment. For example, a mass-market paperback novel is typically 
considered as a print medium—industrially produced with paper and 
ink—that conveys a kind of nostalgia, a familiar comfort. The same novel 
viewed on a handheld digital reader might convey a different message—
might seem to be more modern, perhaps even unemotional inside its con-
tainer of plastic, glass, and steel. A graphic designer has to take both of 
those messages into account.
Format is the next level of reading. The physical format of a paper-
back (usually created with low cost as a defining factor), is, most often, 
interpreted visually as a novel. Viewers expect to see a cover indicating the 
book’s title and author, with the inside pages numbered and text divided 
into chapters. E-book audiences generally expect some sort of enriched 
  The medium is the message. 
—Marshall McLuhan

VISUAL CODES DO SEND MESSAGES 
257
reading experience involving an audio file of the spoken text, linked key-
words, or other search features.
Medium and format apply to most design projects and are gener-
ally determined before the project is begun. The publisher knows the 
finished product will be a book. A firm requesting a website design is 
most probably looking to relay information and provide an interactive 
experience, with its format incorporating a home page and navigation to 
second- and third-level pages. A firm requiring a design for an advertise-
ment is looking to tell a story about a product or service, with its format 
sized to include a headline, image, supporting text, and sign-off or tagline. 
Designers rely on the fact that the general public understands the basic 
purpose of these different formats, and that understanding itself becomes 
an element in the message of the design. It is also the groundwork for the 
next level of visual coding—the design’s treatment.
Treatment is the third level of visual coding. A treatment can be 
thought of as an adjective modifying a noun. For example, you don’t simply 
use a line but, instead, might use a soft line or a jagged line. The same goes 
for a clean letterform or a flexible grid. Treatments bring another level of 
complexity to your design, pushing your thinking further when using a 
compositional element, a bit of typography, or a proportional system. 
For example, suppose you’ve been asked to design a poster for a 
hotel that wants to promote its proximity to a popular art museum. You 
begin by recognizing the poster as a medium, produced in multiples, that 
is meant to announce something publicly. Its format includes its size, 
which is probably determined by standard paper stock available. A smart 
treatment will bring meaning to its form, increasing the chances that it 
gets hung, that people will stop to look at it, and that it will send a message 
that resonates with those people.
The first step in beginning the design might be to choose adjectives 
that describe the poster. Is the museum’s collection historic, modern, or 
contemporary? What about the hotel? Is it a chain or independent? Is it’s 
architecture modern or traditional? And what sort of adjectives might 
both the museum and the hotel evoke—traditional, controversial, aca-
demic, family-friendly, or sophisticated? The designer’s job, in conjunc-
tion with the hotel as the client, is to choose adjectives on which to base 
the direction of the design. Using just one adjective might be too simplis-
tic, but using too many adjectives might lead to an inconsistent final result.
Your next step would be to determine visual elements to help the 
poster connect the hotel to the museum. These visual devices can make 
direct and recognizable connections for the reader, for example, a canvas 
texture, an image of people looking at art, or a reproduction of artwork 
from the museum’s collection combined in some way with key aspects 
of the hotel. When combining medium, format, and descriptive visual 
adjectives in this way, your end result should be a design that is deliberate 
in its form and effective in its communication.
In Practice: The book design for Forgotten 
War (discussed in Chapter 5, Figure 5.26) is a 
good example of how the format of the book 
can be visually coded to connect to the subject, 
which in this case is the organization Doctors 
Without Borders. It is bound with cardboard and 
a rubber band, reﬂecting the raw and makeshift 
conditions in which the doctors operate. It feels 
serious, yet adventurous; bold, yet fragile.

258 
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
Tools for Visual Coding 
An important consideration in the design process is what your design 
looks like through the eyes of your audience. One way to locate the visual 
codes you will use might begin by stopping for a moment and actually 
pulling back from a work. Does your design read clearly? Is it saying 
something you didn’t intend or that will confuse or repel your audience? 
How could it read better? You should ask yourself these questions at all 
stages of the design process—from the early exploratory stages to the fin-
ished product. 
The proposed redesign of New York Metropolitan Transit Authority 
(MTA) evacuation instructions is an example in which the designer felt 
the need to reenergize the existing design, especially in aftermath of the 
attack on the World Trade Center (Figure 10.2). The existing design uses 
a frame-by-frame sequence explaining how to exit a subway car. It has the 
visual code of authority and instructions, but its familiarity in the context 
of subway cars meant it was generally ignored. The designer, Chakaras 
Johnson, wanted to create an alternative design—in fact, he designed two 
versions, each connecting with its rider audience in a different way. 
The first uses a visual code that imitates the instructions that went 
before, but more as a parody, a satirical imitation of something serious 
(Figure 10.3). The disassembled form requires visual reassembly, as if it 
were a puzzle. The second design uses a solid blue background typical of 
police departments to add weight to the design (Figure 10.4). Badge-like 
shapes and typography are visually coded elements that push the design 
even more heavily toward the message of authority. 
Both redesigns use visual codes that are energized and fun. Most of 
all, they’re noticeable in the context of what came before. The train and 
need for rules have not changed, but the treatment of the information has 
changed the way subway riders read the message—as someone speaking 
with them instead of speaking at them.
10.2 MTA evacuation 
instructions in New York 
City subway cars.
10.3 + 10.4 CHAKARAS JOHNSON. 
Proposed subway train evacuation 
instructions, vertical format (left) 
and horizontal format (right).
View a Closer Look for the evacuation instructions on myartslab.com

TOOLS FOR VISUAL CODING 
259
Typographic Coding
If the text that you’re reading now was set in a novelty typeface such 
as Hobo (
), it would produce an Art 
Nouveau-inspired nostalgia or might remind one of a 1960s television 
comedy. Knowing that the typeface was designed in 1910 and revived 
in the psychedelic 1960s helps to ground its associations. (Psyche-
delic poster artists claim that the popular floral and plant motifs were 
often inspired by drug-induced hallucinations.) But could Hobo ever 
be appropriate to use as book text? Possibly—it depends on whether 
the typeface coordinated with the main message of the book. For 
example, if the subject were about 1960s advertising design, then the 
Hobo typeface might convey a more appropriate feeling than any 
other typeface could. Its use would be taken seriously, not ironically. 
But would the reader understand the association? The questions, and 
the coding decisions, must all start with the designer. 
Ed Fella’s poster for a dance ensemble (Figure 10.5) shows a 
creative use of typography and visual coding. The poster has a light 
and airy feel about it, and much of the text rests at the bottom of the 
page, leaving more air at the top. In doing so, it reflects the act of free-
ing oneself momentarily, but ultimately being gravity bound. The 
most inventive aspect of this poster is the kinetic quality of its let-
terforms. Where the typical dance poster might animate words and 
letters leaping off the page, something more unusual is happening 
here. Fella made the letters hold steady to the baseline, but he used 
great freedom in spacing those letters, shifting them irregularly to the left 
and right, and thus conveying the idea of movement, of dancing and shuf-
fling feet. Two levels of coding are taking place here—the general public 
sees the letters moving like dancers; the graphic design community sees 
how the poster pushes the possibilities of kerning.
Color Coding
Color is a useful way to convey emotion or simply help information stand 
out. The color red may imply passion or anger, but red also helps a word 
stand out from the rest of the page—an optical effect (see the Worklist 
on Meaningful Color, page 260). In addition, blue might convey the cold 
of winter or signify technology because of the association with IBM’s 
three blue letters. Designers rely on these cultural associations of color to 
convey meaning without being explicit.
It’s also true that colors mean different things to different people. 
Cultures hold very different associations with colors; therefore, unless 
the designer can specifically identify the audience, he or she should not 
depend on color to convey too much. Color can be an underlying sug-
gestion, but it should not be the message itself (see more on the cultural 
association of color in Chapter 6). 
10.5 ED FELLA. CalArts Dance 
Ensemble 10th Anniversary. 
Irregular letter spacing creates 
visual movement.
View a Closer Look for the CalArts dance poster on myartslab.com

260
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
W O R K L I S T
Meaningful Color
Color can be psychologically contradictory. For example, just imagine 
hearing someone say, “I hate the bright purple shirt that you love so much.” 
In this case, color is eliciting a subjective and personal response. But there 
are some general agreements: cool colors (blue, green, and purple) tend to 
be considered calming; warm colors (red, yellow, and orange) are consid-
ered exciting. The following breakdowns get a bit more specific (note that 
all examples given here are from an American perspective):
t
Black—mysterious, authoritative, powerful, and elegant—
associated with religion (priests), with death, with rogues (Darth 
Vader), and with fashion (designers, artists, sophisticates)
t
White—innocence and purity, positive and spiritual, clean—
associated with brides, nuns, doctors, and nurses
t
Gray—neutral, conservative, sophisticated, smart, and old—
associated with serenity, boredom, being hard and cold, expertise, 
wisdom, elderly beings, worn-out items 
t
Red—intense and emotional—represents love, but also energy, 
anger, power, danger, and blood 
t
Blue—tranquil and peaceful—symbolizes loyalty and wisdom, 
but can also connote coldness or sadness 
t
Yellow—active and cheerful, spontaneous and childlike, 
dangerous—softer shades can symbolize hope; stronger shades 
can indicate joy, but also cowardice or caution 
t
Purple—royal and luxurious, spiritual and romantic—considered 
artificial because of its rarity in nature
t
Green—nature and growth, ambition and greed, Earth friendly—
used by hospitals as it is easy on the eye and relaxes the psyche
t
Orange—fun and energetic, provocative and challenging—
connotes citrus and harvest, youth and sports
10.6 PAUL SAHRE, design; 
JOHN GALL, photography; 
GROVE/ATLANTIC, publisher. 
Cover design for Stripper 
Lessons.
10.7 Identical composition as 
above (Figure 10.6), but with 
colors changed to shades of 
green, which dilute the charged 
visual code that the color red 
conveys.
The book cover (Figure 10.6), designed by Paul Sahre, uses color 
to convey images of night life and neon signs. The cover’s actual die-cut 
hole reinforces the idea of peaking from a dark room, with the black 
background suggesting mystery. The second version of the cover, using 
yellow and green, has less impact because those colors don’t convey the 
same sense of passion, taboo, and excitement that yellow and red do 
(Figure 10.7).
  All perceiving is also thinking, all reasoning is also intuition, 
all observation is also invention. —Rudolf Arnheim 

TOOLS FOR VISUAL CODING 
261
Codes and Contexts
The MTA evacuation instructions mentioned earlier were designed in 
relation to where the poster would be installed—on the interior wall of a 
subway car (Figures 10.3–10.4). Context can also be used within the con-
fines of a design itself, as seen in a promotion for the International Trade-
mark Association by Yoonseuk Shim (Figure 10.8). Shim used barbed 
wire as a visual metaphor for securing and protecting trademark usage for 
its membership. In the context of a brightly lit page, viewed from above, 
with the “No Trespassing” sign at the bottom, it sends a clear message to 
stay away from trademark infraction. 
However, if the photograph of barbed wire were made with a dark-
ened background (as if shot at night) and from a bird’s eye view, the inher-
ent message might have taken on a more dangerous and sinister code that 
would have taken the meaning beyond the parameters of what the orga-
nization, or the average viewer, would find acceptable. The context of the 
photograph sets the tone. 
James Victore’s poster protesting the “Disneyfication” of New York 
City’s Times Square uses context both inside and outside the work (Figure 
10.9). The idea begins with a decapitated mouse head, clearly a reference 
to Disney’s Mickey Mouse. The gritty texture of the lines adds a code or 
message to the image—reading as intense, spontaneous, and angry. The 
tongue sticking out of its head suggests the decapitated mouse is either 
dead or gagging, not the usual message to come from cheerful Mickey 
Mouse. The printed words “Just Say No,” (from a popular antidrug cam-
paign in the United States) are powerful here: “Just say no to Disney and 
all it represents.” But perhaps the locations where it was posted made an 
even more powerful statement—in the shadows of the Times Square tour-
ist neighborhood. 
Context can also be abstracted for use, as in the chart design accom-
panying a GOOD Magazine article (Figure 10.10). The design documents 
the no-smoking policy for each of the 
fifty states in the United States. The 
treatment of the data is clean and suc-
cinct, with each state represented by 
a cigarette, its size determined by the 
state’s population and percentage of 
smokers. Overall, however, it sends 
a more profound message because its 
general appearance is that of a ciga-
rette warning label. The piece takes on 
a dual function: it informs with clear 
data, but it also carries a coded mes-
sage, making the connection to the 
deadly consequences of smoking.
10.8 YOONSEUK SHIM. Proposed 
poster for the International 
Trademark Association.
10.9 JAMES VICTORE. Just Say 
No poster protesting the 
“Disneyfication” of New York 
City’s Times Square.
10.10 CASEY CAPLOWE, creative 
director; MATT OWENS, VOLUMEONE
LLC, design. Chart for the social 
activist publication GOOD 
Magazine.

What is the value of learning about visual 
codes and perception techniques? 
People have emotional and often highly 
personal reactions to visual stimuli. I am always 
amused at how a design’s success can hinge on 
whether we’ve used one of the client’s favorite 
colors. Studying perception helps designers 
understand how people respond to what they 
see, so they choose colors, typefaces, and 
imagery that are appropriate to the message, 
not to their personal tastes. Breaking down a 
design into its parts also gives designers a visual 
vocabulary to explain why something works or 
doesn’t work. “I like it” isn’t enough.
In the example (Vignette 10.1), a student 
redesigned the cover for Albert Camus’s classic 
novel The Stranger. The choice of black and 
white fits perfectly with the existentialist 
themes in the book. The disappearing lines 
on top of the bent-over figure convey both a 
lightness and heaviness—an apt expression for 
the main character in the story. The design is as 
simple as it needs to be to capture the mood. 
All the elements on the page work together to 
build the whole. 
Can these codes and techniques be a 
starting point for generating design ideas? 
Definitely. All designs should begin with 
the question, “What is my design trying to 
accomplish?” Clearly defining the design’s end 
goal will fuel your approach. One question I 
like to ask myself, and my clients, is “If your 
company/product/service were a car, what kind 
of car would it be? A BMW or a VW? How about 
a celebrity? Are you Tom Hanks, Tom Cruise, or 
Tom Selleck?” Writing down a list of adjectives 
that describes the desired look and feel is a 
good way to spark ideas. Then, throughout your 
design process, ask yourself if each decision is 
supporting the message. 
How do you apply them in your work 
environment? 
In a large corporation, the marketing needs vary 
widely. Yet everything we produce has to speak 
with one overall voice and brand. A challeng-
ing project we do each year is the firm’s holiday 
card. We have offices in forty-two countries, so 
the card needs to reflect the diversity of our 
employees and our clients. This year we part-
nered with a worldwide children’s charity. The 
message we wanted to convey was “feel good,” 
without being too cute or too cliché, which 
meant no kids’ drawings. The card also needed 
to be sensitive to cultural, religious, and envi-
ronmental concerns, so red and green combina-
tions and flashy printing techniques were off the 
table. Many concepts fit part of the equation, 
either communicating the right message or the 
right tone of voice, but not the total gestalt.
One solution (Vignette 10.2) solved the problem 
nicely. Reminiscent of children’s paper dolls 
Kim Kiser teaches Psychology of Visual Perception in the graduate Communications/Packaging 
Design department at Pratt Institute, where she earned a masters degree. She holds a bachelor of 
journalism degree from the University of Texas at Austin and has worked as both a copywriter and 
art director for advertising and design studios. Kim is also vice president, global creative director 
for Morgan Stanley, where she oversees creative design, strategy, brand consistency, and brand 
governance for print, web, and multimedia. She lives and works in New York City. t  Based on the 
writings and teaching of Rudolf Arnheim, art theorist and perceptual psychologist, Kim’s classes 
explore physiology, symbolism, and the visual and verbal tools needed for creative problem solving.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  T H E  VA LU E  O F  V I S U A L  C O D E S ,  W I T H   KIM KISER
262
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING

and the universal symbols for man and woman, 
the multicolored figures join hands to form 
a snowflake and star in one. The idea and 
execution were elegant and understated, but, 
most importantly, it felt like us. 
Vignette 10.1 CHRISTINE AHN.
Student project to redesign 
the cover of The Stranger.
Vignette 10.2 Proposed 
holiday card design for 
Morgan Stanley.
One question I like to ask myself, and my clients, 
is “If your company/product/service were a car, what 
kind of car would it be? A BMW or a VW? How about 
a celebrity? Are you Tom Hanks, Tom Cruise, 
or Tom Selleck?”
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: KIM KISER 
263

264
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
Coded Treatments in Advertising 
In the late 1970s, Bill Bernbach noticed a shift in the way his agency, Doyle 
Dane Bernbach, was handling a particular advertising campaign for the 
Porsche car manufacturer. Instead of a traditional concept based on a 
headline, the ad relied on a clean typographic grid and precise handling of 
information to sell the product. In fact, the campaign’s art director, Helmut 
Krone, used the visual code of scientific data to create a treatment that 
read to the audience as “technologically cutting edge.” As Krone put it, 
“It’s the styling, the presentational concept, that’s important.” 
Each design in the campaign included an image of the car itself in 
rugged terrain, but there was also a high-tech schematic of the car’s anat-
omy (Figure 10.11). What Bernbach noticed was, in fact, the ad’s overall 
visual coding. The language it spoke was the underpinning of what the 
manufacturer wanted to convey—that the car was built to perfection 
using the latest technology.
Gestalt Perception
Gestalt is a school of psychology founded in the 1920s that deals with the 
mind’s self-organizing tendencies. The basic premise of gestalt is that an 
assembly of elements is perceived as more than the sum of its parts. An 
overall pattern takes precedence over the individual elements that make 
up that pattern. The primary principles of Gestalt psychology were far 
reaching—from the way psychologists observed patients to techniques 
used for military camouflage to use of design elements.
When you see individual halftone dots together, your eyes form 
them into a complete picture (Figure 10.12). This phenomenon would be 
considered a visual form of gestalt, seeing a whole that is made of individ-
ual parts. On a broader level, a design is built of many layers—idea, form, 
image, and context—but with a total graphic design concept in mind. The 
gestalt, the goal, unifies the parts, forming a complete and unified message.
You can see an example of this packaging of elements in an event 
poster by Rocco Piscatello for the Fashion Institute of Technology (Figure 
10.13). Bars of type create a pattern of stripes. They call out for atten-
tion, vibrating against their black background. They impart the necessary 
information in a simple and elegant way. The names and dates manage 
to fit effortlessly into the white stripes, creating an energetic pattern and 
rhythm across the page. 
And yet there is another visual element happening here—a gestalt—
for the viewer. The stripes can also be seen as tiers of amphitheater seats. 
What at first appears to be negative space in the top half of the page—in 
contrast to the type below—seems to have a more significant role. It repre-
sents the back wall and high ceiling of the amphitheater as seen from the 
stage. The viewer just has to stand back a bit from the poster to visualize 
the unified whole.
10.11 HELMUT KRONE, DOYLE
DANE BERNBACH. Print advertise-
ment for Porsche where the 
treatment is the concept. 1979.
10.13 ROCCO PISCATELLO. 
Poster for the Visiting Artist 
Program at the Fashion 
Institute of Technology.
10.12 Halftone dot screen 
(enlarged). As the viewer 
pulls back from the image, 
the total picture comes into 
sharper view. The forming 
of dots into a face is the 
Gestalt effect—visual rec-
ognition from something 
that might be otherwise 
completely abstract. 

GESTALT PERCEPTION 
265
The Speakout by Kim Kiser gives a summary of the gestalt percep-
tion, explaining it as a simple human response to abstract the process into 
pure shapes (Figures 10.16–10.19). The reductive process causes the mind 
to discern groups and patterns more easily.
Design Using Gestalt Perception
You will find an interesting application of gestalt in a special range of 
Royal Mail stamps celebrating the anniversary of the British airplane, the 
Spitfire (Figure 10.14). The camouflaging technique that the plane uses is 
built into the stamp design itself. The objective of the design brief was to 
show famous British aircraft and its designers. According to Bruce Duck-
worth of Turner Duckworth, the designers came up with a solution purely 
by accident. “At regular intervals, we’d receive faxes of archive pictures of 
one of the plane’s designers. Late one evening, 
a heavily distorted fax of R.J. Mitchell tumbled 
out of the machine. Barely distinguishable, it 
resembled a cloud formation. I knew it was 
the answer.” The closer you look, the more you 
can see the designer there, in the background, 
composed of the clouds themselves.
The Canadian design firm Wax used 
another method of camouflaging for a poster 
series for the Calgary Farmers’ Market (Figure 
10.15). In each poster, the skin on a piece of 
fruit is cut away. What’s left is meant to resem-
ble an accessory worn during the summer 
months when the fruit is eaten. The peel is so 
expertly done that, for a moment, the eye is tricked into believing the fruit 
have on real overalls, bathing suits, or sunglasses. The foreground color 
and simple text enhance the impact of each image. This kind of advertis-
ing design uses humor, craft, the context of summer, and an ingenious 
gestalt effect to create an effective concept. 
10.14 TURNER DUCKWORTH, 
LONDON + SAN FRANCISCO.
Royal mail stamps celebrating 
British airplane designers.
10.15 WAX, CALGARY, AB, 
CANADA. Farmers’ Market 
summer posters.

266
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
SPEAKOUT: A Summary of Gestalt Concepts by Kim Kiser 
Gestalt psychology’s premise is that the whole is greater than its parts. We apply this premise to 
visual perception when looking at graphic design or any visual medium. The question we ask is, 
“Does it work?” There is an immediate, intuitive “yes” or “no” reaction to this from everyone. But 
not everyone can evaluate why. As designers, our job is to break down the parts (shape, line, color, 
texture, weight, direction) to evaluate what role each plays in the success of the whole, and, of 
course, to do the reverse and build a design part by part so that the whole works.
With perception, the mind is trying to solve a puzzle—to interpret what the arrangements of shapes 
and colors mean. This interpretation depends on many factors, from the viewer’s memories, cul-
ture, and mood to the design’s context, form, and style. A designer must, therefore, carefully con-
sider every element he chooses, so the viewer can translate the design’s code properly. 
For example, in looking for patterns, the brain will naturally group together objects of a similar 
size, shape, color, or location. If the designer did not create these pairings deliberately to clue in 
the viewer to what the design is saying, the form and function are at odds. Author and perceptual 
psychologist Rudolf Arnheim calls this the Law of Grouping by Similarity, one of four laws of orga-
nization that shape our visual perception (Figure 10.16). 
A second law, the Law of Simplicity, describes how the simplest conclusion will prevail when inter-
preting visual media (Figure 10.17). To that end, a designer should not go beyond what is needed 
for his purpose. For instance, when a composition is cluttered or unbalanced, we feel the urge to 
eliminate extraneous details and move tense objects away from one another. Arbitrary elements in 
a design only serve to confuse and distract people from the overall message.
Tied in with simplicity is the Law of Constancy. This law allows us to recognize representations of 
three-dimensional objects on a two-dimensional page from any number of projections or angles, 
because we see objects as being of a constant size and shape (Figure 10.18). We see past the distor-
tions of perspective and foreshortening and perceive the object as it is physically. Simplicity plays 
a part, as we’ll see a parallelogram as a square tilted in space, because a square is a simpler shape. 
Lastly, the Law of Closure describes our tendency to complete incomplete shapes when they are 
missing information, cut off or covered up by another form (Figure 10.19). This allows us to recog-
nize objects easily despite gaps or partial contour lines. The phenomenon is also useful for seeing 
depth. For instance, it is simpler to see an overlap as one figure in front of another than as one 
deformed figure on a flat plane.
10.16 Law of Grouping by 
Similarity. These dots are asso-
ciated because they share a 
common characteristic in the 
form of a line, which becomes 
an associative link.
10.17 Law of Simplicity. 
The process of elimination 
or reduction. The one block 
is simpler than the many, 
but in that perception, the 
functionality of the many 
is also removed.
10.18 Law of Constancy. 
Because the square is a 
simpler shape, the viewer 
will still read the distorted 
perspective as a square.
10.19 Law of Closure. 
The eye tends to complete 
a contour and ignore 
gaps. The triangle can 
be perceived here, even 
though there are large 
gaps in its contour.

SEMIOTICS 
267
 Gestalt can also unify a logo design into 
an ingenious mark. The Federal Express logo 
is perhaps one of the best (and well-known) 
examples (Figure 10.20). The letters bleed into 
one another and form a bold, memorable image, 
but the white arrow formed by the negative 
space within the counters of the E and x letterforms is surprising in its 
cleverness and simplicity. It subtly reinforces the idea of movement and 
speed of the company’s delivery service. The flip of letter and arrow is so 
perfectly natural that you like it simply because its presence tricked you. 
In Practice: During the design process, stand back and try to discern any 
gestalt-based eﬀects. Any visual pairings, groupings, reductions, or distortions 
that you can get the viewer to participate in or complete will make your 
design more memorable.
Semiotics
One could argue that graphic designers actually create signs, not pictures. 
Semiotics is the study of signs and how these signs are used in everyday 
communication, taking shape as logos, book covers, packages, exhibits, 
web pages, and motion designs. Knowing the terminology is important 
because it differentiates the kinds of signs with which designers work.
Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) studied and dis-
cussed semiology, a theory based on the notion that a sign is a represen-
tation of something not present. American philosopher Charles Sanders 
Peirce (1839–1914) furthered the study, coining the term “semiotics,” and 
breaking the subject down into three components: (1) the sign itself, (2) 
the thing the sign refers to, and (3) the interpreter of the sign. Later, the 
philosopher Charles Morris (1901–1979), in his monograph Foundations 
of the Theory of Signs (1938), proposed another division of semiotics, cre-
ating three distinct categories—syntactics, 
semantics, and pragmatics—each a subcat-
egory with its own independence. The syn-
thesis of all three forms the basis of how an 
audience perceives a sign (Figure 10.21). 
Syntactics
Syntactics is a way to understand formal 
parts of a sign. For example, the syntactic 
study of a gray sky doesn’t concern itself 
with what it means. Instead, the image is 
understood in terms of its structure, line, 
color, hierarchy, and so on—its actual 
form. An analytic-based concept will tend 
to begin by understanding the syntax of the 
content before any meaning is assigned.
  What a picture means to the viewer 
is strongly dependent on past 
experience and knowledge. In this 
respect the visual image is not a 
mere representation of “reality” 
but a symbolic system. 
—E. H. Gombrich, Art and Illusion
10.20 LANDOR ASSOCIATES.
FedEx logotype. 
FedEx servicemark used by permission.
the science of signs
semiotics
syntax
semantics
symbol
icon
index
pragmatics
language hardware
grammar
structure
a representation
photographs
realistic statues
maps, floorplans, diagrams
audience understands by 
resemblance
a code
languages
numbers, alphabets
abstract trademarks
audience must learn the 
associations
an indicator
hand gestures
symptoms
clues
audience can figure out cause 
and effect relationships
language software
associative meaning
signs, signifiers
function and context of use
audience-centered design
10.21 KATHERINE MCCOY.
High Ground seminar 
and workshop. Semiotics 
chart—the science 
of signs.

268 
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
 
Semantics
Semantics considers the associative meaning behind a sign. Here, a 
gray sky suggests a rainy day or sadness. Metaphoric concepts tend 
to begin with the semantic meaning of signs being used. For exam-
ple, a montage of two images results in not only the interpretation 
of each of the two images used but also a third interpretation—
that of the message created by the blend. Just as syntactics can be 
visually layered and complex, semantics can also be layered with 
meaning. As the chart by Katherine McCoy explains, the activities 
of seeing and reading—of both images and text—are unavoidably 
interconnected (Figure 10.22). 
Pragmatics
Pragmatics determines how a sign is actually understood by the user, 
and context plays an important role. If we think of the gray sky pragmati-
cally, we will consider how others will interpret it as a sign whose mean-
ing shifts dramatically based on the particular audience and their beliefs, 
the place, time, or situation. For example, how will a child see gray skies 
during a birthday party; how will a farmer confronting a field of dry crops 
see those same gray skies?
These pragmatic considerations incorporate feedback. As Figure 
10.23 shows, a sign is going to have a sender, a message, and a receiver. The 
receiver responds to the message, but that information is also sent back to 
the sender for possible readjustment and further refinement. The visual 
identity for the city of Prague in the Czech Republic (Figure 10.24) is an 
example of how syntactics and pragmatics operate. A red square is verti-
cally bisected by a white line splitting the name Prague, which appears in 
four languages. The structural approach creates an understandable and 
memorable logo. 
Semiotics may seem complex and academic, but its basic principle 
is to provide the vocabulary for understanding purposeful mark-making. 
Every communication carries some kind of meaning; even when something 
is deliberately void of any meaning, it takes on the code of voided meaning.
Icon, Index, and Symbol
Within the subcategory of semantics, three terms define how a sign is 
literally visualized—as an icon, index, or symbol. Take, for example, 
the semantic interpretation of a file folder. A folder is used to hold and 
organize papers, but in the virtual world, it holds computer files. Figures 
10.25–10.27 show how a folder would be categorized semantically.
10.22 KATHERINE MCCOY. High Ground seminar and 
workshop. See, read, text, image: chart describing 
some of the visual and verbal tools and strategies. 
From High Ground’s seminar workshops.
10.23 KATHERINE MCCOY. Graphic explaining 
the universal communication system originally 
proposed by Claude E. Shannon (1916–2001) in 
his influential 1948 paper The Mathematical 
Theory of Communication. Shannon is known as 
the father of information theory. His mathematical 
formulas—to reduce communication processes 
for Bell Telephone Laboratories—led to his 
digitizing of information known as bits, short  
for binary digits.
I just wondered how things were put 
together. —Claude E. Shannon
verbal
learned
linear
sequential
intellectual
left brain
semiotics
visual
intuitive
holistic
simultaneous
experiential
right brain
gestalt
10.24 STUDIO NAJBRT. Visual identity and 
application for the city of Prague.

VISUALLY CODED IDENTITIES 
269
Icon
An icon is a sign that has a direct resemblance to the thing it represents. 
For example, the image of a folder on a computer’s desktop is considered 
an icon because it actually looks like a real file folder (Figure 10.25). Even 
if it were a photograph, it would still be called an icon because of its direct 
relationship to the thing it represents. 
Index
An index is a sign that refers to its object, either through physical location 
or strong clues. An index signifying the idea of a folder might be an arrow 
pointing to the list of files held within the folder or to a file cabinet (Figure 
10.26). There isn’t any resemblance to the actual object—the folder. The 
index is simply an indication.
Symbol
A symbol is a sign that functions more abstractly: the object being 
referred to is represented by an association to a general idea. In this 
case, the symbol for folder might be a rectangular shape with the letter 
F reversed out of it (Figure 10.27). With symbols, the image can look far 
different from the actual object so long as the user still understands the 
association. Under this condition, Christianity is symbolized with a cross, 
the United States with a particular flag that has thirteen stripes and fifty 
stars, and a heart shape symbolizes love. If the connection being made is 
vague, then repetition will reinforce the association until it is clear and 
automatic in the reader’s mind.
Visually Coded Identities
Logos have a language all their own and are a good example of visual 
coding. A logo is first perceived as an identifier of something more com-
plex. It must be able to be read easily at a half-inch size and at a size scaled 
for the side of a truck. To be effective in this range of sizes, it must have 
great impact and be self-contained, unique, and spirited. 
With these criteria in mind, take a look at 
the proposed logo for the Canadian Museum for 
Human Rights designed by Matthew McNerney 
(Figure 10.28). First, it plays with the idea of syn-
tactics, breaking the order in which one would typically read it. The words 
“HUMAN RIGHTS” come first—the shift made more apparent with an 
emphatic color change from stately black to urgent red. The logo also uses 
a sturdy typeface that reads as strength; namely, it is willing to stand up 
for something important. These treatments lead to a gestalt perception 
of power in the face of crisis. The design is both unique and memorable 
because the viewer takes part in assembling the communication.
10.25 The folder as an icon, 
literally mimicking the shape.
10.27 The folder as a symbol 
using the capital letter F inside 
of a rectangle as an abstract 
association.
10.26 The folder as an index, 
referring to the physical 
location of it.
10.28 MATTHEW MCNERNEY.
Proposed logotype for 
The Canadian Museum 
for Human Rights.

270
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
SPEAKOUT: CARE Logo by Michael Thibodeau, managing partner, Verse Group 
One of the most useful skills a graphic designer can acquire is the mastery of language. In the 
broadest sense, our design language includes everything that is seen, heard, felt, smelled, and tasted. 
This is because anything that engages the senses can have associative and symbolic meaning. 
Design relies on the interplay of language to engage, inform, and motivate. In order to convey more 
than what is simply written, we use not only words, but pictures, forms, textures, scents, sounds, 
and movement. They all indicate things as subtle as status, purpose, character, and value. 
Take, for example, a handwritten sign promoting “homemade pies.” Besides what it says, the hand-
writing suggests spontaneity, freshness, a personal touch, even uniqueness. This is because the asso-
ciations people have with handwriting evoke an image that is enticing and appropriate for a person 
selling homemade pies. Now imagine a handwritten sign for an oral surgeon down the street. The 
idea of a spontaneous oral surgeon might be enough to repel even the most brave-hearted patient.
Sometimes design language is local, and other times, universal. A lion’s roar typically evokes the 
quality of courage. A circle typically evokes a sense of completeness. But the meaning behind the 
color red changes from culture to culture. In China, red is associated with strength, in the United 
States it is associated with passion, and in South Africa it is associated with mourning. 
When creating the logo for Care International (a global relief organization dedicated to the elimina-
tion of poverty through the creation of sustainable communities), it was imperative that the identity 
spoke a universal language (Figure 10.29). During the exploration phase of the project, the design-
ers only considered imagery, color, and form that were truly global. The circle of hands reinforced 
the idea of a healthy community. Its bright, earthen tones implied optimism and honesty. They did 
research to ensure that these colors did not reflect that of any one nation or religion. Furthermore, the 
lowercase typography suggested the approachable, humble nature of the organization. Through this 
interplay of appropriate language, the Care International logo could tell a rich and compelling story.
10.29 MICHAEL THIBODEAU, 
MARCO ACEVEDO, AND
MARINA BINNS. Logo for 
Care International and 
the exploration made 
toward the final design 
(small/right).

VISUALLY CODED IDENTITIES 
271
In another logo example, this one for the “we” campaign, a part of 
The Alliance for Climate Protection, Brian Collins used a syntactic assem-
bly process to engage the reader (Figure 10.30). We see the letter m flipped 
to change the word me to we, a simple switch that embodies the notion of 
changing one’s mindset from self-centered to globally oriented. The green 
circle framing the word helps stabilize its connection to the earth and its 
climate crisis.
The visual code for this word play draws from two adjectives—
friendly and simple, which work well together for an organization whose 
job is to motivate the public. There is also a consistent application as 
shown in a print advertisement and tote bag design. This unified system 
of designed parts is, in fact, a gestalt that creates the perception of an orga-
nized whole—a branded image for the organization.
Logo Application
Logos have a long tradition. Early monograms for royalty were designs 
that went beyond their single-letter composition toward signifying 
authority; heraldic shields and coats of arms became symbols that signi-
fied social identity; stonemason and printer’s marks became a source of 
pride; and branding irons showed ownership for domesticated animals, 
literally burnt into the flesh of the animal. In each case, a logo carried 
the code that declared, in essence, “I am this,” “I made this,” or “I belong 
to this.” 
Today, logos are part of brand images that are burnt into the mind of 
the general public (Figure 10.31). To help create a memorable image, you 
should ask yourself a number of pointed questions during your research 
and sketching phase (see the Worklist on Visual Identity on page 272). 
10.31 The range of logos can 
be charted along a scale, from 
words to pictures and abstrac-
tions. Shown from left to right: 
Saks Fifth Avenue (MICHAEL
BEIRUT, design) see Chapter 8; 
Dave the Handyman (DESIGN: 
JASON LEE) see Chapter 7; HK
Restaurant (DESIGN: ALEXANDER
GELMAN AND DAVID HEARTY) see 
Chapter 4; Tall Tales Restaurant 
(DESIGN: DUFFY & PARTNERS)
see Chapter 1; Poetry Slam, 
Inc. (DESIGN: TRAVIS OLSON, 
CARMICHAEL LYNCH THORBURN)
see Chapter 1; NYC Alliance
(DESIGN: WORKSIGHT) see 
Chapter 3.
10.30 BRIAN COLLINS. Logotype 
and its application for we, a 
nonprofit, nonpartisan effort 
founded by Nobel laureate and 
former Vice President Al Gore.
Abstract Mark 
Includes signs, symbols, 
and icons as part of an 
agreed on meaning 
by a specific audience. 
A lockup with a name 
is required.
Pictorial Mark 
An idea represented 
through a picture that 
makes conceptual 
sense when used 
with the name of a 
business’ name.
Wordmark 
Typographic in its 
composition but with 
the added help of 
an image to signify 
meaning.
Logotype
Word-based and 
literal, logotypes 
create a simple 
and direct visual 
identity.
R
A
T
I
O
N
A
L
E
M
O
T
I
O
N
A
L

272
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
The Psychedelic Language
Psychedelic, meaning mind-expanding, is an excellent example of a visu-
ally coded style that became a cultural movement in the 1960s and early 
1970s. Psychedelic’s main form was the poster, which announced the per-
formances of the folk-and-blues rock bands. The posters borrowed heav-
ily from other movements and time periods, especially Art Nouveau, but 
their main determinate was the economy of funds and time. The poster 
designers relied on hand-drawn letterforms rather than costly typeset-
ting, and the finished designs were silkscreened within a day or two as 
small runs because of the last-minute schedules of local bands. 
These circumstances set the creative tone for a visual language to 
develop. In fact, the posters were nearly illegible to anyone outside of its 
core audience. Yet this feature was consistent with the counterculture atti-
tude the posters represented, contrasting the clear, clever advertising of 
the day. The idea was that anyone over the age of thirty wouldn’t bother 
with the camouflaged announcement (Figure 10.32). The form and the 
information are indistinguishable from each other. The posters read like 
W O R K L I S T
Visual Identity
Ask the following questions when beginning a project:
t  
 Is the spirit of the company or service being conveyed?
t  
 Is there an emotional component to the message of the design 
or to the anticipated response from viewers?
t  
 What words would you use to express the personality of the logo 
(for example, fun, active, friendly, serious, elegant)? 
t  
 Are there formal categories that could be used to create the logo: 
typographic word marks (for example, Fedex), pictorial images 
(Shell Oil), abstract symbols (Nike)?
t  
 Can you montage or combine two elements to create 
a unique symbol?
t  
 Does the logo incorporate some element (treatment or shape) 
that can be extended into a complete design package 
(stationary, brochure, website)?
t  
 Is there a unique quality about the logo that will make it 
stand out from its competition?
10.32 VICTOR MOSCOSO. Flower 
Pot. Music poster for the band 
Blue Cheer, at the Avalon 
Ballroom. 1967.
  A trademark is a symbol 
of a corporation. It is not a 
sign of quality…. It is a sign 
of the quality. —Paul Rand

WHY CREATE MEANING IN A DESIGN 
273
signs—visually coded to amplify their meaning to their intended audi-
ence. They became symbols of their time and culture as well as of the sense 
of mind expansion and experimentation that was essential to that culture.
As an experiment, the information on the poster was reorganized 
into a clean and bold layout (Figure 10.33). The same information is pre-
sented, but without the psychedelic underpinnings. The poster now uses 
another code to connect, perhaps a neutral Swiss International Style code, 
or a distanced punk rock message. In any event, the visual code now con-
veys something completely different—becoming part of the content of the 
communication itself.
Why Create Meaning in a Design
There are practical reasons why designers bother to create meaning in 
their work. Meaning completes the sentence, solves the puzzle, brings 
order to the mind, and, quite simply, resonates with the viewer. Without 
meaning, a message is not memorable.
For the audience to realize meaning, the designer must make a con-
sidered effort. You must push your idea, and the form it takes, a bit further 
than you might want—until all the parts support each other. When this 
approach really works, your design will convey its message with confi-
dence; it declares to the viewer that it is sure of itself. 
The advertising design for an environmental orga-
nization is a good example of meaning built into a design 
with the help of visual coding (Figure 10.34). The goal 
of the poster is to get people to support nature and to 
see it flourish in the city. The poster expresses confi-
dence by using the most simple and obvious elements 
to their best advantage—signs. The designer, Terrence 
McCarthy, chose a leaf as an icon for nature. He used 
loosely scrawled type to suggest a grass-roots organiza-
tion. There is a painterly aspect to this work; the rough, 
hand-drawn typography and leaf shapes seem as if they 
were created with playfulness and passion.
The rough texture also has a unifying aspect: the 
elements integrate under a photographic collage of leaves 
and trees. The result is a poster with visual integrity. An 
intellectual idea is still the core of the piece, but the idea 
wouldn’t work as well without supportive form and treat-
ments. McCarthy’s poster uses visual coding to provide a 
clear, consistent message.
10.33 A presentation of the 
same information used in Flower 
Pot (Figure 10.32), but with a 
very different visual code.
10.34 TERRENCE MCCARTHY.
Proposed logo and advertise-
ment for Natural City, a nonprofit 
organization that promotes 
nature in urban settings.

274
CHAPTER 10: VISUAL CODING: LOADING FORM WITH MEANING
In Perspective
Visual coding provides a means for designers to build visual integrity into 
their work by enabling them to determine deliberate reasons for the way a 
design looks and reads. In fact, when readers respond to a design, they are 
unconsciously decoding the visual language designers have embedded. 
The cohesive links that exist between what is being stated (content), how 
it’s being stated (form and treatment), and where it’s being stated (con-
text), unify a design into something beyond the sum of its parts. A printed 
train schedule can be much more enjoyable when it is not just organized 
but also fun; a party invitation becomes more interesting when it is both 
inviting and smart. With the intelligent use of visual codes, your designs 
will embody a complexity that offers a strong message to the audience.
K E Y  T E R M S
Gestalt (p. 264)
Icon (p. 269)
Index (p. 269)
Parody (p. 258)
Pragmatics (p. 268)
Psychedelic (p. 272)
Semantics (p. 268)
Semiotics (p. 267)
Symbol (p. 269)
Syntactics (p. 267)
Visual code (p. 255)
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (The Study of Signs): Find one example used in an existing 
design for each of the following linguistic principles: syntactics, seman-
tics, pragmatics, icon, symbol, and index. Look for these examples in 
magazines, books, design catalogs, and websites.
Exercise 2 (Gestalt Language): Within a 10" × 10" format, create five 
compositions, each of which uses five geometric elements (same or dif-
ferent) to describe a different adjective: tender, strong, funny, expert, and 
distanced. The main point is to transform otherwise abstract shapes into 
compositions that have semantic meaning.
Exercise 3 (Typographic Semantics): Work with a partner and choose 
two words from the list below. Visually represent the meaning of each of 
the two words using only the letters and some effect. Size, cropping, color 
are permitted, but no images should be included in the solutions. Words 
to choose from: anger, blast, cheer, chilly, crash, dance, dry, echo, erase, 
flake, float, giant, hot, juicy, laughter, magnify, mix, nest, pinch, sleep, 
skip, point, cloudy, fluffy, rain, sharp, sunny, quake, feather, scratch, snip, 
sparkle, spring, swim, tears, trap, wish, yell, zoom. 
Project 1 (Visually Coded Menu Design): Take all of the information 
from what you think is the worst take-out menu you can find and rede-
sign it into a 7" × 10" vertical page. Your new menu can include photo-
graphs and illustrations, but it must be driven by one of the following 
nouns to use as a visual code: science, dictionary, street, pop, classical, 
nostalgia, or diagrammatic.
Things to Consider: Keep in mind the cuisine and the audience for your menu. 
Find some relevance in the visual code you use.
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
275
Project 2 (Merging Visual Codes): PART 1: Find a Yellow Pages ad for a 
specific subject and use a visual code that represents the subject in a rede-
sign. For example, for a flower shop ad, use all the visual codes you know 
that read as “flower shop”—vase shapes, tissue paper, floral forms—or for 
a gym ad, use codes that read as “gym”—the weights and measurements, 
horizontal bars, treadmills, or other exercise equipment. 
PART 2: Create a second ad, but use an unrelated visual code. For exam-
ple, keep the subject and content for a flower shop, but change the visual 
code by using something unrelated such as boxing (tough, simple posters 
with woodblock type) or science (elemental chart, academic typeface), or 
keep the subject and content for a gym’s ad, but using the visual code of 
something unrelated such as a construction company (building materials, 
tools, instructions).
Things to Consider: Look for contrast in the montage of visual codes—the more 
outlandish, the more noticeable.
Project 2 (Part 2) NICOLE
RODRIQUEZ-LEWIS. Yellow Pages 
advertisement for a construction 
supplies company redesigned 
with a child-like visual code 
using popsicle sticks and glue. 

276
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN

277
11
Interaction and Motion 
Design
Interaction design and motion design need the same amount of design 
consideration as traditional print projects. Whether the medium is print 
or digital, the job for a designer is the same—to convey ideas with bold 
gestures, deliberate form, and a clear message.
This chapter discusses interaction design and motion design together 
because they are very closely integrated. Most websites now include some 
form of motion, and it is rare to see a motion design broadcast that isn’t 
supported by an online presence. Both are capable of creating an intense 
user experience in a virtual space. The designer’s goal is to create a virtual 
space that someone wants to enter. 
Opposite page: LAB AT ROCKWELL
GROUP. Public projection (detail) 
of Plug-in-Play (full image, see 
Figure 11.33).
Design is all around us but 
everything that is designed is an 
answer to a question or a prob-
lem or some sort of a puzzle that 
is being solved.
—Agnieszka Gasparska
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
he boundaries of graphic design are broader than ever before, 
with new categories including interaction design and motion design. 
Both fall under the larger umbrella of graphic design, and for 
good reason. Designing a website that merely functions and holds 
information simply isn’t enough. Animating type around the screen 
isn’t enough either.
T
t
Exercises and Projects
Critically examine websites; redesign a six-sided package as a web-
site; design a website for a nonprofit organization; evaluate motion 
designs; create motion designs; brand yourself with sound or music; 
change a sound track for a film; do an environmental inspection of 
a retail environment; illustrate an audio with type and imagery.
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Summarize the ways that interaction and motion 
design blend time and sound with typography and 
composition.
t 
 Explain the thinking behind interaction and motion 
design, particularly how they can be considered in analytic 
and metaphoric terms.
t
 Explain the logic and intricacies of website structure 
and navigation.
t 
 Build a narrative structure for the creation of an interaction 
or motion design, using storyboarding as a method of 
design layout.
t 
 Discuss how to use sound as another layer of 
graphic communication.
t
 Describe new technologies and trends 
in the field of graphic design.

278
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Designing for a Virtual Space 
Interaction and motion designs incorporate time and sound into the mix 
of typography and composition. The user becomes part of a virtual space, 
whether that space is a website, a kiosk as part of a museum exhibit, or 
handheld apparatus with a screen no wider than an inch. In all cases, 
users will click and search, follow paths, and watch stories, all of which 
have been created by the designer.
Interaction Design
Interaction design is a category of graphic design that prioritizes the 
user’s interaction with the information that is accessed. And yet, if creat-
ing links and navigation was the entire task of the interaction designer, 
it could be more easily left to a programmer. Interaction design is much, 
much more than simply creating links. 
Designing navigable links is an important part of the process, but 
providing context, personality, and message is equally important. Context 
adds comfort, accessibility, and memorability to an otherwise cold site. 
The medium is completely different from print, and yet the intellectual 
and emotional connections that designers create hold true with the Web 
just as they do for print, and require the same interpretive skill set (see the 
Speakout: Website Principles by Justin Bakse).
The site design for Built® is an example of how design concepts are 
developing within the interactive dialect (Figure 11.1). The site promotes 
a product—protective neoprene totes—and presents information in a way 
SPEAKOUT: Website Principles by Justin Bakse, principal, 
The Studio for Interactive Media
Website design combines both graphic and interaction design. The 
traditional elements of graphic design—composition, typography, 
color, and form—must be addressed, and if a design wouldn’t work 
well in print, it probably won’t work online either. Not everything 
that would work in print will work on a website, however; online 
and print media exist in fundamentally different contexts and tech-
nical considerations can make some designs impractical.
Interaction design also informs us when we use a website, play a 
game, or experience any interactive media. The choices that we are 
given (or that are withheld from us), the decisions we make, and 
the way the media reacts all contribute to our understanding and 
contextualization of content much in the same way that graphic 
design does. Interaction demands an investment from the viewer 
and creates a more personal relationship between the viewer and 
the content, even allowing the viewer to contribute to and shape it.
11.1 BUILT® AND THE STUDIO FOR
INTERACTIVE MEDIA. Website design 
for Built. The strong functionality 
of the site ties to the product itself.

DESIGNING FOR A VIRTUAL SPACE 
279
that reinforces the spirit of the company. Like the product, the site has 
a strong sense of functionality. Those who visit the site in the first place 
would be most interested in finding items that solve utilitarian problems. 
Driven by a custom content management system, the staff is able to create 
content quickly for uploading. The result is a marriage of form, content, 
and technology. 
The use of new materials on which Built bases its product is reflected 
in the site, too. The photographs and rollover navigation have an unex-
pected quality about them. When clicked, they surprise the user, linking 
him or her to an online game, a company manifesto, and even X-rays of 
the product with objects inside.
The website for BlackPublicMedia.org shows how important motion 
has become in interaction design (Figure 11.2). The site defines itself as 
“a destination for free video streaming and distribution of new media 
related to the global black experience.” The site’s home page reflects this 
mission by providing the visual code associated with a theater. The visitor 
is presented with front-row seats to documentary clips. 
Each clip is a mini-documentary, and each has a short title sequence 
to introduce the piece, for example, the introductory title sequence for a 
campaign called the Masculinity Project. As the user moves deeper into 
the site, more video clips are offered, along with interactive blogs. Yet one 
thing remains consistent—the visual language that has the visual code of 
a public forum.
Motion Design
Motion design is a category of graphic design that can be traced back to 
mid-twentieth-century film titles and broadcast animations. At that time, 
typography and graphics were limited by technology. Today, any planned 
movement of elements is possible.
For a typographic animation presenting the 2009 host country for 
European Union (EU) council affairs, abbreviations for each of the EU 
countries swirl and flow as if they were pulled directly from conception in 
the designer’s mind (Figure 11.3). Through the thirty-second television 
spot, created by Alan Zaruba, letter pairs vie for position until a sugar cube 
(a Czech invention) appears, revealing the Czech Republic (CZ) as the 
selected country. The abbreviations settle into their proper locations within 
the map of Europe and finally string 
together in unison to create a web 
address linking to more extensive 
information. And for the website, 
the map and letters are used as a 
graphic motif, creating a visual con-
nection between the two mediums 
(Figure 11.4).
11.2 CHACON JOHNSON AND
CHAKARAS JOHNSON, HELEN MARIE
CREATIVE PARTNERS. Website 
design for BlackPublicMedia.org.
11.4 TOMAS PAKOSTA, design;
ALAN ZARUBA, art direction. 
Website design for the European 
Union using type as a graphic 
motif to create a connection 
between media.
11.3 MICHAELA PAVLATOVÁ, motion;
TOMAS PAKOSTA, design; ALAN ZARUBA,
art direction. Interaction design 
for the European Union presenting 
the Czech Republic as the year’s 
council host.
View a Closer Look for BlackPublicMedia on myartslab.com

280
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
The more you look around, the more you will see the most amazing 
motion designs—on the screen of a mobile phone or a child’s electronic 
toy. These creations are works that couldn’t have been either imagined 
thirty years ago or even technologically possible. The medium has evolved 
quickly to the point where our entire bodies are involved—as anyone 
who’s played a Nintendo Wii or an Xbox virtual game can attest. 
A project for Nike, by agency:collective, bridges motion design and 
the body in an abstract and engaging way (Figure 11.5). The idea behind 
the piece is to create a one-minute journey for users who must run on a 
Shox platform to activate the display in front of them. The motions of the 
body are mimicked as an alternate self is created in the form of abstract 
graphics. The piece also bridges the gap between motion and interaction 
design by including a set of navigational instructions that users must 
follow. The result is a flowing rhythm that is beautiful to look at, listen to, 
and engage with—a total experience for the user.
The Overlap of Electronic Media
Interaction and motion are just two of the many categories of graphic 
design that overlap as technology develops. Even paper is now being 
designed to hold an electric charge, with each printed ink dot containing 
an RGB ratio. It seems that every year a designer must acquire more and 
more knowledge because understanding the integration of technology 
and creativity has become crucial to the field of graphic design. Consider 
the possibility that in the near future a grocery store might have package 
labels that change or move the moment they’re touched. To create these 
labels, a designer must have a general understanding of interaction and 
motion as well as their relationship to time—in addition to the knowledge 
of typography and composition. And, of course, all this knowledge is used 
with the essential knowledge of how to develop creative ideas. 
Figure 11.6 is an example of how student Ryan Meis solved an 
assigned project that blends packaging with web interaction. The project 
brief requested students to rework each side of a product’s packaging to 
create an interactive web page. In this case, the student transcribed six 
sides of information from a roach bait station package and transformed 
a mundane set of instructions into a warlike editorialization that is also a 
navigable set of linked pages. Typography, structure, textures, and images 
all helped dramatize this deadly product, with the design becoming an 
experimental testing ground for how old and new media can meet.
11.5 AGENCY:COLLECTIVE.
Interaction display for Nike 
(Shox running shoes) bridging 
motion design and the body.
  As technology advances, it reverses the characteristics 
of every situation again and again. The age of automation 
is going to be the age of “do it yourself.” 
—Marshall McLuhan

DESIGNING FOR A VIRTUAL SPACE 
281
The spirit of experimentation is also seen in a set of motion designs. 
In Figure 11.7, Megan McGlynn animated a set of everyday items (pins, 
paper clips, and thread) to create a rhythmic flow involving time, motion, 
and sound. They playfully move and interact in an engaging, if not surreal, 
motion clip. In another of her pieces, a sequence of transforming images, 
from branch to spider’s web to dripping blood, finish with the word sus-
pect (Figure 11.8). According to McGlynn, both projects required compli-
cated software, but she managed to get past the fear of the software and 
just play with it to make her engaging designs. 
The fear of technology melts away when you can think of software 
applications simply as playful tools. That mindset leaves you to focus on 
the essential task of engaging and informing an audience. Your goals 
remain the same no matter what tools or vehicles the technology pro-
vides. The tools that designers use have changed dramatically in the past 
ten years or so, but the need for solid design thinking is a constant. If you 
know how to think creatively, you will be successful; you can always learn 
the new technologies as you need them.
11.6 RYAN MEIS with instructor
JEFF BLEITZ, RINGLING COLLEGE
OF ART. Student assignment 
to rework each side of a retail 
package into a series of 
website pages.
11.7 MEGAN MCGLYNN. Student 
motion design project using 
pins, paper clips, and thread.
11.8 MEGAN MCGLYNN. Student 
motion design project translat-
ing the word suspect.

282
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Interaction and Motion Concepts
Both interaction and motion design projects can be thought of in ana-
lytic or metaphoric terms. Ideas are still required to drive directions. For 
example, an interactive kiosk as part of a science exhibit will be filled 
with data-driven facts that might need an analytic approach more than 
a metaphoric one—in other words, an approach without any interpretive 
expression. 
Yet if the kiosk is designed for young children, a metaphoric approach 
(one that interprets with imagery) might be necessary to help make sense 
of the information. You need to know your audience to make such deter-
minations about your approach.
The process of sketching, testing, and revising for both interaction 
and motion design projects is especially valuable because of the intricate 
(and potentially expensive) production levels of the two mediums. Design 
problems that can be worked out at the front end will eliminate costly 
changes in later stages of the process. In the excerpt from Charles Eames’s 
Norton Lectures (page 286), the idea of getting something wrong when 
modeling a design should not be something to worry about; experiment-
ing and “feeling out” a design are part of the process.
Interaction Concepts
The website by Agnieszka Gasparska for a Jazz Hall of Fame is an example 
of an analytic concept (Figure 11.9). Serving as a section within a larger 
jazz site, the Hall of Fame creates a system that accommodates an expan-
sive list of jazz artists. The site is crisp, functional, and informative, with 
immediate access to recordings, biography, and time line for more than 
thirty inductees. In addition, there are animated graphic shapes that 
slowly grow within each page, each specific to the artist’s style, subject, or 
time period: for Billie Holiday’s page, they are flower petals; for Charlie 
Parker, a Jackson Pollock-like paint drip. The audience can understand 
the organizational system and visual language without the use of heavy 
metaphors that might have seemed intrusive. 
In contrast, for the band They Might Be Giants, Mathew Richmond 
used an overall metaphoric approach when creating their website (Figure 
11.10). The visitor is confronted with moving targets which, when clicked, 
activate sounds and pop up new pages. The site is like a carnival’s shoot-
ing gallery, a perfect metaphor for the band’s absurdly funny and ironic 
music. 
The design studio, choppingblock.com, which created the site for 
They Might Be Giants, also used a metaphor to define their working 
process on their own website (Figure 11.11). The image of a heavy-duty 
worktable, coupled with the tag line “100% graphic design, not from 
concentrate,” emphasizes their approach to hard work, pure form, and 
nothing unessential.
11.9 AGNIESZKA GASPARSKA, 
KISS ME I’M POLISH, LLC. Website 
design for Jazz at Lincoln 
Center (Hall of Fame).
11.10 MATTHEW RICHMOND, 
CHOPPINGBLOCK.COM. Website 
design for the musical group 
They Might Be Giants.
11.11 MATTHEW RICHMOND, 
CHOPPINGBLOCK.COM. Website 
home page for the designer’s 
own studio.

INTERACTION AND MOTION CONCEPTS 
283
Motion Design Concepts
An analytic concept is created in the motion sequence announcing the 
Tribeca Film Festival by Thornberg and Forester (Figure 11.12). It begins 
with the idea that the logo’s extended capital I, moving through each of 
the words in the title, is reminiscent of the verticality of the Manhattan 
skyline. The sequence dramatizes this comparison by transforming the 
skyline into the logo itself. The implied meaning is that the festival is a 
vital part of the culture of the city. The typography and treatment convey 
the design’s meaning without a heavy use of an interpretive metaphor.
For the title sequence for the television series Mad Men, the studio 
Imaginary Forces used metaphor in a way that is quite compelling, con-
veying the idea of someone’s world collapsing around him (Figure 11.13). 
The title begins with a silhouetted character walking into an office set-
ting and setting his briefcase on the floor. This action initiates the process 
of everything in the room falling straight down as if the walls and floor 
turned into a cloud. In this dreamlike scene, the character falls past clas-
sic 1960s ads that are enlarged to the size of billboards. The scale creates 
a powerful contrast against a now tiny image of the man. The sequence 
finishes with that same character sitting on a sofa, his arm outstretched 
as if nothing happened. The scene is compelling because one is forced 
to reconsider the beginning and middle again, and to wonder about this 
character’s adventures in life.
11.12 THORNBERG AND FORESTER. 
JUSTIN MEREDITH, creative director;
KELLI MILLER, art director; ELIZABETH
KIEHNER, exec. producer; KIMBERLY 
ABELS, producer. Motion design 
sequence for the Tribeca Film 
Festival.
11.13 IMAGINARY FORCES. 
Motion design title sequence 
for the broadcast television 
series Mad Men. 
Aesthetics are your problem and mine. Nobody else’s. The fact of the matter is I want everything 
we do, that I do personally, that our oﬃce does, to be beautiful. I don’t give a damn whether the 
client understands that that’s worth anything or the client thinks it’s worth anything or whether 
it is worth anything. It’s worth it to me. It’s the way I want to live my life. —Saul Bass
Lions Gate

In what ways do interaction and motion 
design converge?
Even the simplest Flash or JavaScript rollover 
is motion. And all motion has the potential to 
communicate a theme or emotion. It is part 
and parcel with the job of engaging the viewer 
through technological mediums, but how you 
use motion is tricky. For a website, motion can 
butt heads with interactivity. In other words, 
just because you can doesn’t mean you should. 
The idea is to be thoughtful as well as mindful of 
it. For Nike, spinning text might be perfectly in 
line with the brand. But for a bank that wants to 
promote a brand image of stability and security, 
any motion would need to settle down quickly. 
And for a retail site, motion could actually get 
in the way of people placing orders. That said, 
motion is evocative and its power can’t be 
denied in any setting. It simply ought to blend 
well with design. My rule of thumb is to ask 
why something should move before it is made 
to move. Once you’ve answered that question 
you’re pretty much good to go.
Are interaction and motion design 
predominantly about function and 
technology or is there a level of 
self-expression that designers can 
call their own? 
It’s difficult to maintain your vision with 
complex projects that involve interaction and 
motion. What I’ve found is that if you keep 
focused on the purpose and function of what 
you want to achieve, and balance it with 
the concept that you want to communicate, 
then all the other creative decisions such as 
structure, type, color, and motion will express 
the you in your design. These projects have 
many limitations—in bandwidth, screen size, 
or plain-old budget—but they can enable you 
to focus your vision more tightly, to the point 
where seeming limitations actually become a 
blessing. You are forced to find opportunities in 
the limitations—it’s what I find especially cool 
about design. 
Will the designers always have to follow 
the technology as it develops, or can 
the designers lead the way?
For large and complex projects the first deci-
sions tend to be based on technologies that 
exist—server structure, content management, 
databases, and so on. If you want something 
more, the tech’s answer is usually “You can’t 
do that.” The way around this is to learn the 
technology—not the nitty-gritty—just the 
basics so that you have an idea of what—and 
how—to ask. I can’t code any of the stuff, but 
I understand the logic just enough to ask in 
specific ways. For example, the phrase “object-
oriented coding” shouldn’t sound scary—it’s 
not overly complex logic to grasp. When we’re 
informed, the knowledge allows us to interact 
with developers better. Innovations become 
Hillman Curtis (1961–2012) was a designer, ﬁlmmaker, and author whose company, hillmancurtis, 
inc., designed sites for Yahoo, Adobe, the Metropolitan Opera, Aquent, the American Institute of 
Design, Paramount, and Fox Searchlight Pictures, among others. His ﬁlm work includes the popular 
documentary Artist Series, as well as award-winning short ﬁlms. His commercial ﬁlm work includes 
spots for Rolling Stone, Adobe, Sprint, Blackberry, and BMW. His three books on design and ﬁlm 
have sold close to 150,000 copies and have been translated into fourteen languages. Hillman’s work 
has been featured in design publications worldwide and has been honored with the One Show, 
Gold, Silver, and Bronze; The Webby; Communication Arts Award of Excellence; and the South by 
Southwest Best of Show. Hillman lectured extensively on design and ﬁlm throughout Europe, Asia, 
and the United States.
DESIGNER VIGNET TE: THE CONVERGENCE OF INTERAC TION AND MOTION DESIGN, WITH  HILLMAN CURTIS
284
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN

standards—blogs are a good example. Push 
what you want, but do so with knowledge of the 
technology, and you will begin to see openings 
and possibilities.
Vignette 11.1 Website design 
for The Metropolitan Opera, 
America’s largest classical 
music organization, annually 
presenting some 220 opera 
performances.
Vignette 11.2 Website 
design for PlayIndies, a 
community site for indie 
musicians and filmmakers 
where artists can connect, 
post, and promote their 
creative works.
Vignette 11.3 Cityscape.
Animation design project 
for Adobe demonstrating 
Flash as a communication 
tool. Created just after 
the 9/11 attacks, a central 
character travels through 
the city confused in a world 
turned upside down.
...learn the technology—
not the nitty-gritty—just 
the basics so that you have 
an idea of what—and 
how—to ask. 
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: HILLMAN CURTIS 
285

286
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Interactive Architecture: Website Anatomy
One way to envision a website as an interactive entity is to think of it as a 
house. You go to a virtual web address and arrive at the front of the house, 
the home page—the entry point, a site’s first-level page, where you get a 
sense of what you will find inside. 
As you enter through the doorway of a site, the home page, you are 
given choices on which direction to take. The home page is where you 
see the primary design features of the website, just as you would get an 
inkling of the ambience of a house when in the entryway. The site map of 
pages explains how all the links connect (Figure 11.14). The links placed 
on every page are like the main rooms of the house from which you have 
the choice to head up the stairs, go down the hall to other rooms, enter the 
kitchen and dining room, or go down the stairs to the basement. 
Website Navigation
Navigation, the linked access to all the pages within a site, is a significant 
design element because it is used consistently throughout an entire web-
site. Navigation works well when it remains in the same location on every 
page, just as a keyhole and handle are usually in the same place on every 
door. A door handle on the upper-left corner of a door might be not only 
disconcerting but also difficult to use. There is an intuitive quality to a 
link’s location and function—one shouldn’t have to hunt for it, jiggle it, or 
turn it an opposite way than the rest of the links. The goal is to help users 
find their way to other pages with ease. No matter how far your user has 
traveled into a site, it should always be easy for him or her to find the way 
back to the home page or to any other page. A rule of thumb for naviga-
tion is that no page should ever be more than three or four clicks away 
from any other page. 
Sometimes people create links that open whole new sites with a dif-
ferent web address. There can be good reasons for creating these links, but 
make sure those links are needed because after using them, it is more dif-
ficult to return to the home page on the original site. Think of it as leaving 
the house to go to the hardware store for a tool. If you can find what you 
need in the house, you don’t have to leave. And if you are collecting data 
on page hits and click-throughs for your site, you will have just lost some 
hits when your user moves on to a different site.
First-Level—Home Page
Websites must have a high degree of utility and function. Audiences 
depend on specific visual codes to understand a website’s purpose. For 
example, information-based sites take on a clean and informational aes-
thetic whereas entertainment-based sites may be more playful and active. 
The Webby Awards competition lists nearly seventy website catego-
ries, including Art, Community, Education, Humor, Nonprofits, Radio, 
  The Internet is not just one thing, 
it’s a collection of things—of 
numerous communications networks 
that all speak the same digital 
language. —Jim Clark
EXCERPT: “Models” by Charles 
Eames, Norton Lectures at Harvard 
University, No. 6, April 26, 1971
The thing about models, about using 
them, is that a model doesn’t have 
to be a golden thread that sort of leads 
you through a labyrinth. A model, a 
true model, in the experimental and 
feel-your-way sense, can just be a 
kind of a tentative walk through the 
experience by which you can then 
retreat, consolidate yourself, re-group, 
and…and take a try again.

INTERACTIVE ARCHITECTURE: WEBSITE ANATOMY 
287
Restaurants, Religion, Sports, Tourism, and Youth; related categories 
include Interaction Advertising, Online Film & Video, and Mobile Web. 
The home page is the starting point, or first level, as you can see in 
the many creative examples by Rowland Holmes pictured in Figure 11.15. 
His approaches range from graphic to illustrative to editorial. Some are 
quite simple, others visually complex and active, yet all reflect important 
aspects of the businesses they represent.
The navigational links are the driving, expressive force of these 
many examples. Some buttons are static, others move into position on the 
page, and still others grow organically into a full set of links. But within 
each is a navigational structure that is based on content and matched 
with visual codes and images to build personality and help the user gain a 
better understanding of the site.
 
about us
clients
contact us
login
site map 
search
homepage
team
history
directions
bios
archive
updates
events
product b
product c
product a
case-study
listings
what’s new
products
S E C O N D - L E V E L
F I R S T- L E V E L
T H I R D - L E V E L
F O U R T H - L E V E L
11.14 A site map visualizes the 
breadth of page and links.
11.15 ROWLAND HOLMES, web developer.  
RivertoRiverNYC.com, Jeff Scher Gallery, and 
CindyChupack.com web design by NUMBER17.COM; 
ChocolateBarNYC.com web design by AGNIESZKA 
GASPARSKA, KISSMEIMPOLISH.COM; Carpenternyc.com 
web design by CARPENTER GROUP; PaulaHayes.com 
web design by JOHN GRAY; Las Venus web design 
by ARTURAN; ChildrensShakespeare.org web 
design by BRIGHTGREENDESIGN.COM.

288
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Second- and Third-Level Web Pages
Second-level web pages are where a site’s main content is located. Typical 
categories include about us, what’s new, products, clients, and contact us.
These second-level pages then lead to third-level pages. For example, a 
clients page might be the full list of clients with individual links to third-
level pages that contain individual case studies. Third-level web pages are 
intended to provide very specific content. You may even need a fourth-
level set of pages, but it isn’t wise to go beyond that.
A website designed by Miles Donovan and Spencer Wilson for a 
U.K.-based collective of illustrators uses an ironic twist of technologies 
to showcase work (Figure 11.16). Its first-, second-, and third-level pages 
each use visual elements from a 35 mm slide projector to create a virtual 
environment. Each corresponding slide is a navigable link. It creates an 
interesting historical connection to use an anachronistic technology as 
the basis for the design of a contemporary website.
You can plan in advance how the site’s navigation will work by creat-
ing a map of all the pages and levels. Simply surfing the web is probably 
your most valuable research tool here. Each site you explore can inspire 
how your own pages and levels could be structured and how a consistent 
visual message might flow throughout. Look at the sites of designers and 
businesses you respect. You will find an amazing level of creativity and 
unbridled imagination in a website’s structure. 
Wireframing a Website
Sketching out ideas for the structure of a site is called wireframing.
Whereas a site map determines the structure for a complete website, a 
wireframe establishes the layout of the individual pages. A wireframe is 
meant to be easily modifiable; only simple lines are used to create the 
structure. It is good practice to begin by wireframing the home page first. 
That effort allows you to establish framed areas that indicate the promi-
nence of navigational elements and categorized sections. Second- and 
third-level pages follow the home page’s lead.
The advantage of treating a site’s design so abstractly is that it helps 
keep the study focused on how the content should be organized rather 
than what the site should feel like or look like. Engaging in a discussion 
concerning the wireframe with clients and fellow programmers will help 
make the rest of the design process much smoother. For example, a web-
site for a nonprofit will need key elements such as a donate button, mail-
ing list sign-up, news feed, featured story, and so forth. You should get 
a full consensus from all the parties involved in the organization when 
creating this initial wireframe. They all should have a say in how the site 
will be constructed. 
After developing the wireframe, you can begin working on the aes-
thetics of the site. This stage of the process will begin a continual balanc-
11.16 MILES DONOVAN and
SPENCER WILSON /MATT RICE and
HEGE AABY for SENNEP.COM. Web 
design for the portfolio site 
peepshow.org.uk.

INTERACTIVE ARCHITECTURE: WEBSITE ANATOMY
289
ing between structure and visuals as you modify each to maintain the 
overall integrity of the site. You will probably find that you have to make 
adjustments to type size, images, and placement to fit everything comfort-
ably in the screen and have it function as you wish. You have to take into 
account the viewer’s patience in looking at a screen and the amount of 
information you need to display. There are different theories about how 
far a user should be able to scroll down before moving on to a new page. 
All these decisions will influence the structure and aesthetics of the site.
As the examples in Figure 11.17 show, Sam Nelson created an ini-
tial wireframe for chinacare.org to establish the position of all the neces-
sary elements—the navigation bar, logo, events listing, and so on. But for 
the final implementation of the design, he changed many of the frame 
proportions. For example, he reduced the height of the navigation area 
because the typography didn’t need the amount of space allotted. He 
changed some straight lines to curves to separate sections because the 
imagery, color, and the content seemed to call for a gentler handling. The 
end result is a website with a clean structural hierarchy and a personality 
that reflects the nature of the nonprofit organization (see the Worklist on 
Creating a Website).
11.17 CLEVER NAME HERE, INC.
Wireframe and final home page 
design for Chinacare.org.
In Practice: A good thing to keep in mind when 
designing the main navigation for a site is to leave 
space for links to additional second-level pages 
as the site grows and develops. As the example in 
Figure 11.17 shows, the top, ﬂush-right navigation 
has been given enough room for more sections to 
be added if needed.

290
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
W O R K L I S T
Digital Storytelling
Storytelling can educate and entertain simultaneously. The traditional 
narrative construction has a beginning, middle, and end. This structure 
exists in most stories, no matter if they are ten seconds or ten hours long. 
A story is meant to engage an audience on an emotional or intellectual 
level, offering the reader a chance to see through someone else’s eyes. 
Because of the linear quality of a story, you should first set the prem-
ise. The beginning of a narrative can present the cast of characters and 
location; it tells the audience who, what, when, and where. The middle is 
where the plot unfolds, often revealing a conflict. In the end, that conflict 
is resolved and all the details are wrapped up. 
Endings usually have a why component built in, which relates in 
some way why the story was told. The ending enables the audience to 
understand the point, after which the path back to the beginning of the 
story is made clear. The whole experience has to hold together as a unified 
narrative. Jokes are a condensed version of this mechanism. A subject is 
introduced, and as we are led along on a seemingly uncharted path, we are 
quickly brought to a conclusion with the punch line. 
For a motion design assignment asking students to recount the act 
of getting to their class, student Jeremy Cox created a narrative that runs 
its course in thirty-nine seconds (Figure 11.18). The plot depicts Cox as a 
generic character making his way to the classroom. The patterned diago-
nal lines around him become a leitmotif, a dominant recurring theme, 
Creating a Website
t  
 Is the site’s design appealing to the target audience?
t  
 Does the home page establish a personality and visual code 
for the rest of the site?
t  
 Is there enough contrast between text and background?
t  
 Do all hyperlinks and Javascripts function properly?
t  
 Have you established an underlying grid structure (or 
wireframe) to be used as a template for all of the secondary 
and tertiary pages? And does it reflect the home page?
t  
 Does the navigation help to convey the spirit of the site?
t  
 Is the text as succinct as possible for ease of reading?
t  
 Have you considered formal elements such as contrast, 
emphasis, balance, and white space?
t  
 Have you created a means for obtaining feedback from 
the site’s users?
t  
 Do you want users to be able to add content of their 
own to the site?
11.18 JEREMY COX with instructor
MATTHEW NORMAND. Here Is Here
motion design sequence.
In Practice: Keep in mind that not 
all monitors are the same dimensions. 
What balances perfectly on your 
machine may look completely diﬀerent 
on another machine. Check out all 
the possibilities on diﬀerent monitor 
sizes and diﬀerent web browsers before 
considering your design ﬁnished.

DIGITAL STORYTELLING 
291
threading the frames together. The piece has clean and crisp personality, 
as if it were seen through the eyes of a graphic designer, where every-
thing looks like signage. Images move toward the viewer, creating depth 
within the frame. Other compositional elements such as unity (in the line 
weight), and contrast (in the black and white forms) all add to the overall 
unity of the story. By the end, the plot is complete: the character finds his 
classroom and his teacher, each composed of the same graphic lines as he 
is, reinforcing the notion that he will fit in well in the classroom.
The narrative structure is also applied to a three-minute branding 
video for Underwriters Laboratories that was shown to the company’s 
6,000 employees worldwide (Figure 11.19). The piece is interesting to 
watch because it accomplishes three goals. First, it presents the company’s 
history, complete with time line and archived images. Second, the logo—
as a kind of stamp of approval—is used as a device to pinpoint not only 
testing facilities but also electrical appliances that benefit from the service. 
And third, it carries a dramatic, almost epic, tone in the narration. It is 
informative, entertaining, and effective.
Even a series of five-second movies, one created each day for three 
weeks, can contain the ingredients for a narrative, as you can see with the 
string of clips by Jason Jones (Figure 11.20). The sequence becomes a fast-
paced bombardment of tiny stories or the beginnings of larger ones. As 
the designer says, they are “mixed in a soup.” But they are also inspiration 
for his future motion designs that montage and integrate text and image.
Storyboarding a Motion Design
Designers rely on structural maps to plan the flow of links for interface-
based interaction designs such as those for websites, but they use a 
storyboard when planning a motion design. Storyboards are a refined 
version of thumbnail sketches, except they are roughed into actual frames 
11.19 G2 BRANDING AND DESIGN. 
Motion sequence for Under-
writers Laboratories (UL).
11.20 JASON JONES, 
LIFELONG FRIENDSHIP SOCIETY.
A series of five-second clips 
as part of a self-initiated 
motion sequence. 

292
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
(usually eight to twelve) and placed in a certain order to fully visualize a 
motion-based idea. Elements such as sequence, rhythm, and timing are 
more fully grasped through storyboarding, allowing the designer to focus 
on how the parts flow together.
In storyboarding, a keyframe marks the beginning or end of a sig-
nificant plot point or action, particularly of an animated movement. The 
process or period of time that smoothly connects these points of action 
is called a transition. A transition can include dissolves, cuts, and wipes, 
and this element becomes extremely important when creating a fluid, 
consistent, time-based design.
Storyboards can be drawn by hand or created on a computer. The 
purpose is to work in a format that can be easily changed and refined until 
the idea of a sequence is captured. You can observe how an idea begins to 
take form in sketches for the title design of the short film Delicate Balance 
by Jeremy Cox (Figure 11.21). Bits of type, combined with electric cords 
and switches, present the titles and simultaneously describe the film’s situ-
ation in which the main character acquires super abilities when acciden-
tally receiving an electric shock. 
When the sketches are moved to a storyboard, it is easy to visualize 
the transition from keyframe to keyframe (Figure 11.22). In this form, the 
concept is ready for presentation. When continuing the project, Cox will 
fill in the frames with animated motion and sound (see the Speakout by 
Kelli Miller on storyboarding pointers). 
In Practice: A motion sequence has the power to distort our perception 
of time and space, treating them as malleable elements. One scene, for example, 
can be recorded from three angles at the same time, melded together like a 
Cubist painting.
Type in Motion
When motion is brought to type, the viewer becomes an instantaneous 
reader. It’s almost impossible to look away when presented with some-
thing beautiful, readable, and animated. With motion-based typography, 
it is possible to design keyframes that are beautiful in their own right. 
They would be great posters if they were static images. When animated, 
the viewer is set up for a narrative to take place—a physiological reaction 
of the eyes and mind. 
In a student project for the Peace Corps, Jarratt Moody’s idea 
revolves around the metaphor of the organization being a “helping hand” 
for others (Figure 11.23). Through the sequence, a hand stacks individual 
11.21 JEREMY COX. Working 
sketches and art for Delicate 
Balance (below).
11.22 JEREMY COX. Delicate 
Balance story board for 
title sequence.
  Storytelling reveals meaning without 
committing the error of deﬁning it. 
—Hannah Arendt (1906–1975)
View a Closer Look for Delicate Balance on myartslab.com

DIGITAL STORYTELLING 
293
blocks of words together into a paragraph. Alongside are 
images of far-off places that grow and change. 
Semantic puns help the viewer along, too. For exam-
ple, the hand keeps a word from falling over or spins 
another around. The story’s message is conveyed when the 
organization behind it is revealed. Then the meaning of the 
helping hand becomes clear and the story is complete.
SPEAKOUT: Storyboarding Pointers by Kelli Miller
Important Moments in Time: Concentrate on key movements and plot points in the narrative. 
How will you show the big explosion scene? Not how will the bomb get onto the screen when the 
guy is walking across the parking lot. That is not as important.
Transitions: An important element that will come back to haunt you when you’re animating transi-
tions. How do you get from one scene to the next? It’s a good practice to figure this out when you’re 
storyboarding. Will it cut? Will there be some sweet graphic transition? Don’t ask how something 
will move. Instead, storyboard it to get the point across.
Form! Form! Form! This is the time in the process to really work out your formal idea. How is 
this thing going to look, literally! All the standard design criteria stand. The frames should be well 
composed and have a hierarchy; the shapes should be well drawn; the type should be beautiful. 
Remember all those fundamental design challenges and keep practicing them.
Write Treatments: It can be hard to illustrate how something will move. How do you make a shape 
look “fast” in a jpeg? Well, you can apply a motion blur or you can simply write, “This shape will be 
fast.” Or both. Treatments help describe the actual movement in the frame and story. They are an 
important element in communicating how your piece will behave once it’s animated.
Don’t Worry about Technicalities, Yet: Try not to get caught up in the technicalities, like “How 
will I do this?!” This will trip you up, frustrate you, and strangle your ideation process. Those ques-
tions will be easier to answer when you start animating. This is a time to generate IDEAS and 
FORM. Don’t worry about how to do it yet. Figure that out later.
11.23 JARRATT MOODY. 
Proposed motion design 
for the Peace Corps. 
  Design must seduce, shape, and perhaps 
more importantly, evoke an emotional 
response. —April Greiman

294
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
In another project, a typographic animation pref-
aces the website girleffect.org (Figure 11.24). The artists 
combined interaction and motion along with color, scale, 
and sound not only to engage but also to educate. The 
piece begins with the statement “The World Is a Mess. 
Agree or Disagree.” If you click on “Agree,” you are taken 
through a video narrative that prepares you for entry to 
the main site. You can’t help but read along. In fact, the 
graphic interpretation of the words help educate you to 
the mission of the foundation: that with access to a healthy 
environment, education, and financial power, among 
other things, adolescent girls in the developing world can 
have a positive impact and can make their country and 
the world a better place. If you click on “Disagree,” you get 
a story about the terrible lives of girls who have grown up 
in poverty and what the alternatives can be. With either 
click, a story is told with words and images. The piece is 
effective, functional, and beautiful. It is an example of 
motion and interaction working together to send a pow-
erful message.
Words also create a strong and emotive response 
in an opening title sequence for a conference called Pop-
Tech (Figure 11.25). In the piece, created by Trollbäck + 
Company, the dynamic qualities of flowing ink and mag-
netized fluids (ferrofluids) morph with typography to 
create a rhythmic interplay. The piece is a complex pro-
duction, with many people involved in its making. Yet the 
idea itself is quite simple: a visual interpretation of two very controversial 
words, scarcity and abundance, especially when set in opposition to each 
other. The sequence literally pops off the screen as the symbiotic state 
changes from light and delicate to dense and explosive.
It sets a controversial tone for the conference and establishes a 
dichotomy that speaks to PopTech’s diverse group of attendees—visionary 
thinkers in the sciences, technology, business, design, the arts, education, 
government, and culture.
The Design of Sound
In the visually oriented field of graphic design, it can be difficult to under-
stand the significant role that sound can play; however, used effectively, 
sound can bring a richness to communication projects. Think of it as just 
another of layer of graphic communication. 
For a brand identity, sound can be crucial. For example, the chime of 
three tonal bars for the National Broadcast Company (NBC) is perhaps the 
most recognized little melody. It was the first audio trademark and serves to 
11.24 THE GIRL EFFECT: NIKE
FOUNDATION. Typographic motion 
design sequence for Girleffect.org, 
a nonprofit organization empow-
ering adolescent girls in the 
developing world.
In Practice: A radio commercial promoting the 
New York Water Taxi visualized two images in the 
minds of its listeners. One was the sound of beeping 
horns (chaotic traﬃc jam) and the other, the caw 
of seagulls (relaxation at the water’s edge). The 
montage of the two created the message that an 
annoying situation could be averted. 

THE DESIGN OF SOUND 
295
define NBC without the use of color, typeface, or motion. Even 
if heard from another room, you know what channel is on.
Sound can also be a malleable tool with which you can 
create meaning, just as you do with words and images. For 
example, if you were to turn off the volume of a sports event 
and substitute opera or ballet music, it would shift the viewer’s 
perception of the event toward something cultural and artis-
tic. Using any sound in an unconventional manner—montag-
ing one type of sound with the image of something seemingly 
unrelated—adds a metaphoric dimension not normally asso-
ciated with traditional design projects. 
For sound-branding expert Audrey Arbeeny (partner at 
audiobrain.com), sound becomes a property that is described 
in three-dimensional terms. The company created an audio 
signature for Xbox 360 that finishes with an inhaled breath. As 
Audrey explains, “The metaphor of a breath expressed human 
energy and a sense of wonderment and surprise for this global 
brand.” Here, sound enriched the communication by reflect-
ing the brand attribute of a living entertainment system. 
Three aspects of sound will help your interactive or 
motion design piece come alive. As discussed below, the use 
of sound effects, music, and voice-over narration will engage the user and 
activate what might otherwise be a flat communication.
Sound Effects
Sound effects are extremely useful for interactive projects such 
as a website. A simple rollover link with sound reinforces that 
the link is active. For a motion design, a sound effect might be 
something dubbed into a sequence to bump up the personal-
ity of a scene. Sound technicians, or Foley artists, study the 
craft of sound effects, for example, emphasizing the sound of 
footsteps or imitating the sound of a cricket by clicking teeth 
of a plastic comb. The sounds you think you hear are actually 
something else, but the source doesn’t matter if the sound gen-
erates a positive response from its audience.
Sound effects are a major component for a motion design 
spot by Thornberg and Forester promoting the Planet Green 
channel. The piece begins with the company’s trademark, a 
green globe, used as the head of a person (Figure 11.26). As the 
scenes progress, the green globe sits atop a horse, on a bicycle, 
and inside of a car, all examples of evolutionary modes of travel. Individ-
ual sound effects (a horse galloping, a car’s engine, etc.) are emphasized, 
helping to tell the story. As the sequence concludes, the globe sits next to 
the trademark’s type, thus completing the story.
11.26 THORNBERG AND FORESTER. JUSTIN MEREDITH, 
creative director/designer; SCOTT MATZ, creative 
director; ELIZABETH KIEHNER, exec. producer;
JOE RUSS, art director/senior animator; GUILLAUME
ALIX, designer; KIMBERLY ABELS, producer.
Planet Green television channel promotion.
11.25 TROLLBÄCK+COMPANY. JAKOB
TROLLBÄCK, creative director; CHRISTINA
RÜEGG, senior designer; STINA CARLBERG, 
designer; LEARAN KAHANOV, director 
of photography; WHITNEY GREEN, pro-
ducer; MARISA FIECHTER, exec. producer.
Opening title sequence for PopTech.

296
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Music
Many graphic designers listen to music during the layout phase of a proj-
ect. There’s an easy connection between the layout composition of the 
page and the abstract flow of sound. Some designers find inspiration in 
the music they listen to while working through their ideas. As part of their 
work, graphic designers often visualize music in the form of covers, post-
ers, and other promotional materials for the music industry. The power 
that music has on our field also works in reverse. Whether vocal, instru-
mental, or a blend of both, music has the power to draw an audience into 
a communication, and its use has become almost a necessity for contem-
porary motion design projects.
In a motion design experiment by volumeone.com, synthesized 
music and sound effects add to the dreamlike assemblage of pieces in a 
design reminiscent of the artist Joseph Cornell and his shadowbox con-
structions (Figure 11.27). Designer Matt Owens explains, “The idea was 
to create a piece that talked about time and space and finding your way; 
hence the use of the lighthouse, pyramids, flags, and other items. I made 
stickers and a booklet to go with the piece as well—to translate the idea 
from motion to print.” In the excerpt from Silence: Lectures and Writings,
John Cage takes this process one step further, to control sounds as musi-
cal instruments.
Integrating music into an interaction design, however, can be more 
challenging, especially if there isn’t a solid connection to the site’s subject. 
In this case, designers should refrain from simply playing music in the 
background unless there is a real connection. For example, if a company’s 
brand uses music, as in a television or radio campaign, the site might do 
the same. A type of music for a specific audience is another way to make 
a meaningful connection. For the most part, music as part of a site is not 
yet being fully realized.
In Practice: Performing a web search for “music+sound design” will 
result in a long list of sites loaded with interesting examples of sound design, 
for example: spankmusic.com, humit.com, and epicsound.com.
11.27 MATT OWENS. Meridians motion 
design as part of a Volumeone.com 
series of self-initiated projects.
EXCERPT: Silence: Lectures and Writings, “The Future 
of Music: Credo,” by John Cage, Wesleyan University Press, 1961 
Wherever we are, what we hear is mostly noise. When we ignore it, 
it disturbs us. When we listen to it, we find it fascinating. The sound 
of a truck at fifty miles per hour. Static between the stations. Rain. 
We want to capture and control these sounds, to use them not as sound 
effects but as musical instruments.

THE EXPANDING REALM OF GRAPHIC DESIGN 
297
Voice-Over Narration
The third aspect of sound design is voice-
over narration, which usually takes the 
form of someone actually explaining a 
product, service, or company to the viewer. 
And a voice-over doesn’t necessarily have 
to be introduced as a particular person. The 
sound of a human voice itself is effective as 
a means of connecting on a more personal 
level—either with a real person guiding 
you through a communication or telling 
you how he or she feels. When you have a 
minute or two to make a connection, as is 
often the case in motion design, the sound of a human voice can work 
very effectively. 
An interaction design with a specific message to convey might 
include a voice-over introduction. For example, a kiosk or website for a 
medical facility might include voice-over testimonials about the quality of 
care. The voice carries an authenticity that can’t be captured in a block of 
text, and it engages the audience on a more personal level.
Motion designs have a linear progression. Just like stories, they usu-
ally have a beginning, middle, and end. In this sense, a motion design 
can easily incorporate a voice-over narration through the entire sequence. 
With the help of narration, a motion design can exist as a stand-alone 
piece, for example, as a broadcast-ready commercial that you might see 
on television or as part of an interactive website.
The motion design campaign by agency:collective for the Pulse 
Smartpen is a good example of this narrative use of voice-over (Figure 
11.28). Intended to function mainly as a clip on the company’s website, 
it also serves as a short commercial at trade shows. A voice-over takes 
us through the pen’s functions, with sound effects emphasizing key fea-
tures and background music holding it all together. In fact, the piece was 
written, directed, animated, and produced by one design studio, which 
is rather unusual in the business. You notice the coordination—the pen 
functions with all the elements working together in a dramatic and graphic 
way. Clean icons pinpoint key features of this high-tech object, and the 
very clever tagline completes the message: the pen “Never misses a word.”
The Expanding Realm of Graphic Design
Every so often, you see a work of design that makes you realize there is 
so much more to this field than you have experienced thus far. The pos-
sibilities are always expanding, especially with advancements in technol-
ogy. Bright Nights is a case in point (Figure 11.29). Sponsored by Target 
department stores, the piece combined physical interaction with virtual 
11.29 STUDIO TORD BOONTJE
FOR TARGET. Bright Nights
responsive footpath project 
at Union Square Park.
11.28 AGENCY:COLLECTIVE. 
Livescribe’s Pulse Smartpen
motion design spot portraying 
the pen’s ability to record, 
store, and share notes.
There is a new version of the Livescribe Smartpen called Echo, check it out.

298
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
simulation for an unexpected outdoor experience. 
The project was actually created by Tord Boontje 
for the Christmas holiday season in New York 
City’s Union Square Park. It created a stir in the 
design community because it was so well executed 
and so public. Along the footpath of the park were 
eight stations that each projected sets of snowflakes, 
stars, and forest creatures in the shape of Target’s 
bull’s-eye logo. 
As visitors walked through these radiating 
puddles of light, the clustered images responded to 
their movements. Using infrared lights controlled by a sophisticated com-
puter program, the designers created images that would burst apart like 
ripples of water. The graphic images were kicked around by children and 
adults alike, causing the surfaces in the park to dazzle with projected color 
and movement. Visitors chased, and were chased by, these moving light 
forms. The entire experience was fluid, natural, and seamless—a design 
that truly took advantage of interactive technology in an imaginative way 
and, furthermore, bridged the gap between graphic design and fine art.
The channel identification for the Digital Entertainment Network 
(DEN) by Geoff Kaplan is another peek into the future, this time using 
one of graphic design’s favorite elements—the letterform (Figure 11.30). 
The notion of type as a flat and printed item is fairly well set in our heads, 
which may explain why we are so entertained when we see letters ani-
mated in space. The DEN animation completely flips this notion. Letters 
are transformed into motion sequences, free from the constraints of two-
dimensionality. 
In another typographic experiment by Geoff Kaplan, letterforms 
literally flip inside themselves (Figure 11.31). The letters (in the typeface 
Akzidenz Grotesk) unfold into the third dimension through a process 
called splining, in which computer-generated mathematical formulas help 
to automatically present a two- or three-dimensional object in proportion 
as it is repositioned or rotated. Kaplan’s process splines each letter with a 
circle and then rotates it on a vertical axis. The motion transforms other-
wise static letters into something completely new and filled with energy.
In a student assignment to visualize an invisible process—one that 
occurs outside the visual field—student Joel Stillman took an everyday 
roll of white masking tape and made it appear strange and unfamiliar 
as it moved through virtual space (Figure 11.32). Stillman describes his 
thought process:“Technically, I arranged moving planar surfaces from 
multiple time-signatures to allow a spilling into, and splitting apart, within 
the same clip.”
The assignment and its description reveal something significant 
about the field of graphic design—that the technology itself will eventually 
become invisible. As clunky monitors and hard drives become obsolete, as 
11.32 JOEL STILLMAN. A motion 
design assignment to document 
an invisible event using every-
day white masking tape.
11.30 GEOFF KAPLAN/GENERAL
WORKING GROUP. Channel 
identification for the Digital 
Entertainment Network (DEN).
11.31 GEOFF KAPLAN/GENERAL
WORKING GROUP. Typographic 
experiment on perspectival 
drawings based on the 
typeface Akzidenz Grotesk.

THE EXPANDING REALM OF GRAPHIC DESIGN 
299
people move toward mobile devices and 
cloud computing where data is stored vir-
tually and is accessible from a variety of 
places, and as motion sequences become 
effortlessly seamless, the main focus will 
return to the designer’s ideas and con-
cepts, used to solve complex problems 
with intelligence and imagination.
The line between the physical and 
the virtual continues to blur in a project 
titled Plug-in-Play (Figure 11.33). Graphic 
designers, architects, as well as software 
and hardware engineers at LAB (a digi-
tal interaction design team at Rockwell 
Group architecture firm) came together 
to create a public installation, designed by 
Richard Meier, at the San Jose City Hall 
building and the surrounding plaza. The project was based on the notion 
that individuals can provide creative solutions for public engagement. It 
was intended to be a celebration of city life and activity.
LAB connected a number of outdoor objects, some 
existing and some staged, onto the building facade using 
oversized theatrical plugs. Visitors jumped on a hop-
scotch court, shouted into a megaphone, and used digital 
services such as Twitter or Flickr to create new content 
(Figure 11.34). Each of these interactions registered as a 
projection of an abstracted urban landscape onto the City 
Hall facade. It suggested a new type of environment where 
the vitality and complexity with which people engage with 
their urban environments was reflected dynamically in 
an ever-changing display. This installation revisited that 
futuristic, urban infrastructure concept in seeking to 
demonstrate the interconnectedness of the people and 
things through play, social media, and human interaction.
The possibilities for what graphic design can be are 
changing constantly. Graphic designers who embrace 
technology find that their field is growing dynamically. The opportuni-
ties to engage with the public are becoming more and more intriguing 
as designers create projects based on wiki applications, where partici-
pants contribute to the content of the piece. Furthermore, with the use 
of the web, the community of one’s audience has broadened to include 
the whole world. All of these changes add to the potential of design to 
have an impact on the world and, thus, adds to the responsibility of the 
designer to send a strong and significant message. It is an exciting time 
to be a graphic designer.
11.34 COURTESY OF LAB AT
ROCKWELL GROUP. Diagram of 
how the user connected to 
the projection. 
11.33 COURTESY OF LAB AT
ROCKWELL GROUP. Plug-in-Play
public projection. 

300
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
 In Perspective
The old proverb “The more things change, the more they stay the same” 
applies perfectly to interaction and motion design. The tools people use 
to tell stories keep changing and developing, but the goal is the same—to 
make connection to another human being on an intellectual and emo-
tional level. 
The projects presented in this chapter fall under the banner of 
graphic design. They require a unique and concrete relationship with 
technology, yet share similar principles and elements that graphic design-
ers have always put to use. Whereas traditional print projects have pre-
press concerns of resolution, color, and line screen, a motion or inter-
action project will shift its concerns to browser compatibility, download 
time, hyperlinks, and screen sizes. For a motion design, the principles of 
contrast and unity can be created through time or sound just as potently 
as they might be through color or texture. 
Sound may be the most nontraditional element for designers to 
use, yet the more you pay attention to audio clips, the more familiar you 
will become with how ideas can be expressed through sound. Graphic 
designers have a heritage of incorporating each breakthrough technology 
into their own design language as they try to communicate better, even 
as technology moves ahead at warp speed. As cutting-edge designers, it is 
our job to keep up with the advancements.
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Interaction Exercise 1 (Best and Worst): Choose three examples each of 
the best and the worst websites you can find and print out their home pages. 
Explain the reasons behind your choices, keeping in mind three elements 
of design: functionality, intellectual value, and emotional experience. 
Interaction Project 1 (Package as Website): Select any six-sided package 
and use the text from each side to create a corresponding set of interactive 
Portable Document Format (PDF) pages (one page for each side). 
The Rules: (1) Each page must be directly accessible from every 
other page; (2) Navigation must remain in the same location on every 
page UNLESS you have a good reason to move it; (3) No text may be 
added or removed; (4) All package text must be present in the site. 
Process/Considerations: You may choose to use the existing color 
scheme, typefaces, photographic, and graphic elements, but you also 
have the freedom to apply your own. You may want to remain true to the 
spirit of “the brand” for the product in the box, or you may create a visual 
system that readdresses or parodies the intention of the original package. 
Format: Your design should be prepared as a multipage Adobe 
InDesign file (six single pages), with navigational hyperlinks to the other 
pages in the document (in the top menu items, see Window > Interactive 
K E Y  T E R M S
Foley artist (p. 295)
Home page (p. 286)
Interaction design (p. 278)
Keyframe (p. 292)
Motion design (p. 279)
Navigation (p. 286)
Second-level web page (p. 288)
Splining (p. 298)
Storyboard (p. 292)
Third-level web page (p. 288)
Transition (p. 292)
Voice-over (p. 297)
Wireframing (p. 288)
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
301
Things to Consider: Find a package whose subject matter you can expand into a bigger idea. 
When designing your pages, use proportion, structure, modular systems, and grids, to help 
organize your material (see thegridsystem.org).
Things to Consider: Choose an organization that you care about. Consider ways to approach 
the information from both a functional and emotional point of view.
Things to Consider: Whether you choose to draw images by hand or create them on a computer, 
you should make images that unfold some type of narrative. Consider the pacing, transitions, and 
how the overall rhythmic structure can help unify the design.
> Hyperlinks). Images should be at a minimum resolution of 300 dpi, 
with page size set at a 4:3 standard ratio (for example, 10" × 7.5"); viewable 
as a full-screen projection, but also printable for a comfortable portfolio 
size. Export your multipage PDF at press quality, with an sRGB destina-
tion profile and with hyperlinks turned on.
Time frame: Two weeks. Week 1—rough mockups; week 2—finish 
for individual LCD projection. —Based on a project provided by Jeﬀ Bleitz, 
instructor, Ringling College of Art and Design
Interaction Project 2 (Design a Website for a Nonproﬁt Organization):
Choose an existing website for a nonprofit organization and learn every-
thing you can about its subject, specific audience, and competition. Create 
a web map that visualizes how pages link to one another; create a wire-
frame for your ideas on structure and hierarchy; and consider the use 
of interpretive metaphor and/or analytic structure as your main concept. 
Design a new home page with navigation, one second-level page, and one 
third-level page to illustrate how the complete site would work.
Motion Design Exercise 1 (Best and Worst): Locate and print out eight 
frames each of the best and the worst motion design you can find. Explain 
the reasons behind your choices, keeping in mind three elements of 
design: functionality, intellectual value, and emotional experience. 
Motion Design Project 1 (Digital Flipbook): Choose one type of trans-
formative movement from the following options: metamorphosis (chang-
ing from one form into another); degeneration/decay (reverting to a sim-
pler form or falling apart); growth/progression (developing or maturing); 
or position (moving from one point to another). Create a five-second ani-
mation (120 frames) with sound. 
Begin by brainstorming for creative ideas. Write a brief paragraph 
describing three of your best ideas in terms of the sequence of events. 
Format 360 × 216 pixels, exported from Photoshop as a Quicktime movie. 
Import into GarageBand for adding sound. —Provided by Kelli Miller
Motion Design Project 2 (Kinetic Type): Select a quotation, a song lyric, 
an excerpt from a conversation, dialogue from a movie, or any source of 
verbalized word, and visually illustrate the segment with motion. Enhance 
Motion Design Project 1
ESTHER LI. Transformation of a 
signature to a skyline, shown 
top to bottom, left to right.
Interaction Project 2
Wireframe.

302
CHAPTER 11: INTERACTION AND MOTION DESIGN
Things to Consider: Ask how the decisions you make about imagery will inform your 
narrative by adding meaning or helping to transition movement. How will ambient noise, 
sound effects, a song, or soundtrack create a sense of setting?
Things to Consider: Create a storyboard first, locating the key moments. Use compositional 
elements such as scale, rotation, transparency, and repetition to help animate your words. 
Pay close attention to intonation and attitude.
the meaning and capture the viewer’s attention by making your piece 
expressive, interpretive, and emotive. The final sequence animation should 
be twenty seconds long.
Motion Design Project 3 (News Narrative/Spatial Movement): Pick a 
headline from a newspaper to become the inspiration for a short nar-
rative. The headline is the jumping-off point, not a literal translation or 
recounting of the actual story. Your narrative can be fantastical, surreal, 
lyrical, poetic, or other style. Write three to five sentences that will guide 
a storyboard of eight keyframes in the sequence. Make notes for each 
frame, describing the movement and sound ideas. Incorporate at least 
three types of image in your piece (photograph, digital, drawing, found, 
texture, or pattern). —Provided by Kelli Miller
Motion Design Project 4 (Document an Invisible Event): Shoot and 
edit a movie that documents an invisible event—one that occurs outside 
the visual field. Visually represent the invisible. Shoot a digital video of 
commonplace objects set up in the studio; then bring the footage onto the 
computer where you can manipulate the appearance and time lapse (what 
is the “lived time” of the event?) to create an imagined event.
Suggested readings that relate to this project: The Third Policeman
by Flann O’Brien; Jay’s Journal of Anomalies by Ricky Jay; On Longing: 
Narratives of the Miniature, the Gigantic, the Souvenir, the Collection by 
Susan Stewart; Dust: A History of the Small and the Invisible by Joseph 
Amato; online articles on nanotechnology. —Provided by Geoﬀ Kaplan
Motion Design Project 5 (Five-Second Movie): The idea for this proj-
ect is quite simple. Think about something, anything. It can be a funny 
thing you saw today, a line from a book that was inspirational, a song that 
reminds you of your childhood, a plate of eggs that look like the inside 
of a cloud—anything that may lend itself well to animation. You can also 
animate a design that you already made—it’s all very open. Get into the 
application and start tooling around. Good things can happen when you 
explore with an open mind.
Create three five-second animations using any illustration, photo-
graph, texture, sound, and so on that fits with your idea. Keep the execu-
tion minimal. Render using these specifications: low-resolution previews 
Things to Consider: Solutions to this project are wide open. Any process, whether biological or 
conceptual, can be abstracted and presented. Start by making, interpret as you go along.
Motion Design Project 4
CLAIRE KWON. Stills from 
Geoff Kaplan’s Invisible Event 
project visualizing a type of 
micro-organism known to 
inhabit drinking fountains.

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
303
Things to Consider: Think of the music track in terms of what it brings to mind 
and how it will contrast with what one expects.
for Web: 400 × 300, H.264; low-resolution previews for critique: 720 × 
540, photo jpeg; full-resolution files: 720 × 540 animation compression.
—Provided by Jason Jones, lifelongfriendshipsociety.com
Sound Design Exercise 1 (From Print to Web): What do you sound like? 
Brand yourself! Select three songs, music, or sounds that reflect your per-
sonality. Consider how the music inspired you to do something, reflects 
your personality, or made an impact on your life. Explain how this music 
or sound supports and articulates your personality. 
—Provided by Audrey Arbeeny
Sound Design Project 1 (Changing Perception with Sound): Record or 
capture a scene from a movie or television show and discuss its emotional 
impact. Now select a music track that is quite different from the original 
and assess how it alters the interpretation of the visuals and action simply 
by changing the sound. Share the before and after versions with others 
and have them write down what they think is happening in the scene. 
—Provided by Audrey Arbeeny
Sound Design Project 2 (Sound Touch Points): Carry out an environ-
mental inspection of a retail department. Observe and listen. How do the 
voices of the salespeople, the music being played, the on-hold music of the 
customer service center, and the sounds coming in from other locations 
affect the environment? Compile your findings and present them with 
both audio and visual recordings. —Provided by Audrey Arbeeny
Sound Design Project 3 (Audio Illustration): Capture a ten-second 
audio and illustrate it with type and imagery in motion. The sound can be 
a literal conversation or an abstract set of notes—generated organically 
by an animal or as the result of an industrial tool. The sequence can use 
still images, recorded footage, or typography. Synchronize your visual with 
your audio.
Things to Consider: Familiarize yourself with Adobe After Effects and build your improvisational 
skills. Try conceptualizing while you are executing, making, and thinking simultaneously.
Things to Consider: Sound is a reflection of a brand image just as visuals are. 
Consider how sound might communicate something about a brand’s personality, especially 
when heard continually in a specific setting.
Things to Consider: Consider the use of contrast, rhythm, repetition, 
metaphor, and interpretation.

304
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER

12
305
Becoming a Designer 
Now is the time to take all that you’ve learned thus far and use it to begin 
building your career.
For many graphic designers, the art of designing is not simply a way 
to make a living; it is a calling. Whether you work on staff at a company or 
are self-employed, people will depend on you to be creative and expres-
sive. So few occupations ask that of you. You have chosen a very exciting 
field; now you have to figure out how to make it work for you.
As you start to speak from your own individual point of view, you 
will begin to clarify what design means to you. You will need to develop 
your own voice, a learning process that will continue throughout your 
career. Part of that process will involve regularly reading design maga-
zines and newspapers. You need to know what’s happening in the world 
and understand how you fit into it. The broader your knowledge of both 
the design culture and the general culture, the more fluent your design 
interpretation and expression will be. Your awareness of current events, 
other cultures, and the world will make you a better designer.
Opposite page: RICK VALICENTI.
Portrait (detail) for See Thru Me
(full image, see Vignette 12.7).
If you have the boring stuff 
figured out then you have the 
space to do the fun stuff.
—Scott Stowell
Watch the Video on myartslab.com
CHAPTER OBJECTIVES
 
 
AFTER READING THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO:
t 
 Apply the essential steps for starting a career in graphic design.
t 
 Build a personal website and write a blog as a means 
of self-promotion.
t 
 Summarize guidelines for effective job interviewing.
t 
  Discuss the primary issues of running a graphic design business.
t 
 Summarize how to make your graphic design work 
a reflection of who you are.
t 
 Explain why graphic designers will always need to be 
on the cutting edge of technology.
t 
 Discuss how the relationship between graphic design and the 
fine arts has implications for your own work.
t
Exercises and Projects
Evaluate an existing logo; create signage for a museum; rework a 
bad advertisement; create a poster that reflects how your past work 
experiences relate to graphic design.
he preceding chapters have explained how to speak the language 
of design and how to think like a designer. This final chapter focuses 
on going out into the world as a practicing design professional. 
Your general life experiences will continue to contribute to your 
growth and development, but there are many practical considerations 
in finding a job or setting up your own studio practice.
T

306
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
Actively searching for new perspectives will also help you to develop 
as a designer. First, look inward for inspiration from your own experi-
ences. Second, look through the eyes of fellow designers to understand 
new approaches and solutions. And third, look outward to find inspira-
tion from related fields. Keep these three points of view in mind as you’re 
working on new projects and as you make your way through the world. 
If you follow these three practices, your design education will continue 
throughout your entire career.
Getting a Job in Graphic Design
Your first design job is important. It may not be a high-profile position 
or offer much money, but it will be valuable because you will be learning 
the ropes, particularly in terms of process and presentation—a large part 
of being a professional graphic designer. You will also learn good work 
habits that will support your design work for your whole career.
Search for studios and agencies whose work you admire. Good stu-
dios regularly look for promising designers. Learning is the criteria by 
which you measure progress at first. Fulfill your responsibilities, but also 
push yourself to learn. When you stop learning at one job, move on. Your 
search for your next position will be much easier because you will know 
better what you want or don’t want, and you will have some experience.
Cover Letter and Résumé
A cover letter is a strong and succinct way to introduce yourself to a 
potential client or employer. It also helps convince employers to review 
your résumé by focusing attention on specific résumé information, for 
example, credentials, skills, or specific projects in your portfolio of design 
work. The letter should be concise and well written, with no grammar or 
spelling mistakes. The cover letter is your first point of contact, so craft 
one that makes an excellent impression.
A résumé, which summarizes your training and experience, is 
absolutely necessary when searching for a job, especially because employ-
ers will usually want to review all résumés and portfolios before seeing 
any applicants. Employers often have to sort through large numbers of 
résumés, so make yours informative, easy to read, and concise. It should 
list your education, experience, and skills but should never exceed two 
pages. As a designer, think of a résumé as an informational project, an 
opportunity to show how you can bring a typographic treatment to pure 
information (see the example by Milo Kowalski, Figure 12.1). The goal is 
to make your résumé stand out from the rest in a professional way.
A résumé can be printed on paper or presented in virtual form on 
a website or as a PDF. If it is digital, it should be designed so it can be 
printed for distributing during an interview or incorporated as part of 
your portfolio.
In Practice: Your cover letter should 
never explain how the job you are after will 
help you grow or learn. Instead, explain how 
you can contribute to the ﬁrm where you 
want to get hired.
  Always do what you are afraid to do.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

GETTING A JOB IN GRAPHIC DESIGN
307
Try to follow some general best practices when creating your résumé. 
For example, don’t mention reasons for leaving a previous job; the focus 
should be on strengths and skills. Don’t list salaries—neither what you are 
earning now nor what you hope to earn. Discussing money before being 
hired is considered bad form, and it limits your negotiations later. Don’t 
include a personal photograph; it gives only a superficial impression of 
you, and it can cause others to make judgments before ever meeting you.
Do include a list of schools you attended, degrees you obtained, 
internships in which you got experience in design, paid design jobs, and 
related volunteer experiences. Also include concise information about 
responsibilities you have had and skills you have acquired—what abilities 
you can bring to the company. Include specific (yet brief) information 
that not only summarizes who you are professionally but also presents 
you as qualified for the advertised position. Just as you have learned to do 
research for a design client, plan to research potential employers so you 
can decide what to emphasize in your résumé and cover letter. Also, plan 
to customize your résumé and cover letter for each position to present 
yourself in the strongest way.
Creating a Graphic Design Portfolio
Your design portfolio is a visual autobiography. The work it contains 
reflects who you are, what you are interested in, and what you can do 
creatively and technically as a graphic designer. Once you enter the pro-
fessional field, your portfolio will be much more important to a potential 
employer or client than the schools you have attended or degrees you have 
received. It’s a good idea to keep your portfolio updated with your latest 
work so you can respond to opportunities quickly.
A good portfolio is a design project itself. The crafting of the pages 
in your portfolio case, the pacing, and overall quality of the presentation 
will influence the reviewer’s perception of your attention to detail and will 
reveal your skills and creativity in a very concrete way (see the example in 
Figures 12.2 and 12.3).
Each piece inside your portfolio is significant to your presentation, 
and when all are considered together, they should prove your range and 
ability as a designer. To exemplify the full reach of your design thinking, 
your portfolio should include analytic and metaphoric concepts in pieces 
ranging from print-based solutions to interactive and motion designs. 
The selection of the projects you present should represent just who you 
are and what you are capable of achieving, so make your selections wisely. 
Don’t include every project you did in school.
Ideally, at least one project should cross over from one media to 
another. For example, to demonstrate a complete visual identity, you 
can show a crafted logo design plus its application to a printed item (a 
business card, brochure, or advertisement), a three-dimensional object 
12.1 MILO KOWALSKI. Résumé 
design using a smart and simple 
layout of information. 
12.2 Portfolio of bound 
acetate pages, each with an 
opening at the top for designs 
to be slipped in and out, or 
their order rearranged.

308
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
W O R K L I S T
Graphic Design Portfolio Presentation
All of the work in your portfolio should be your best effort. Each piece, 
typically about fifteen, should represent a successful design solution. 
Here are a few things to remember:
t  
 Small books or portfolio cases are more easily transported 
and handled than large ones.
t  
 Begin with a few of your best designs.
t  
 Finish with what you consider to be your very best work.
t  
 Keep booklets and fold-outs in a side pocket.
t  
 If your designs are on boards, have just two sizes for easier 
handling—one for smaller pieces, one for larger pieces. Both sizes 
should share one dimension for consistency.
t  
 Don’t turn pages for reviewers; let reviewers look through the 
portfolio at their own pace. 
t  
 Don’t defend your pieces. Allow them to stand on their own merits.
t  
 After your interview, send an e-mail message or short note to the 
reviewer, thanking the person for his or her time. Include an image 
of your best piece to serve as a reminder of who you are.
(a package, truck, or piece of clothing), and a digital solution (a web page 
or motion design). 
If there are gaps in your portfolio, fill them. Invent projects if nec-
essary. Create a new logo, rework an existing website, or develop a new 
interactive element. The process of observing, identifying, and solving 
problems out in the world helps to validate your qualifications to an 
employer or client (see the Worklist on Graphic Design Portfolio Projects 
for categories that might serve as departure points for individual pieces). 
If you are just finishing school, a potential employer will not assume 
that you have a vast amount of work experience, but he or she might be 
impressed by your initiative to pursue design projects on your own.
When economic times are difficult, you may have trouble finding a 
job anywhere, but don’t get discouraged. It is important at such times to 
just keep on working, so continue to come up with self-initiated projects 
or volunteer to do design work for a nonprofit organization. Keeping the 
creative side of your brain active and keeping up with the latest computer 
technology will serve you well when the economic climate eases. You will 
be even more qualified to pursue work when it becomes available.
While still a student, Calla Henkel designed the introductory wall 
of a gallery exhibit with a project titled Free to Dry, which questioned the 
wisdom of suburban communities banning outdoor clothes drying—a 
policy that would only add to the problem of global climate change. Calla 
clipped clothing and a block of type onto the clothesline and created a 
12.3 ABBY HIRSH. Wire-O® bound 
portfolio of pages.

GETTING A JOB IN GRAPHIC DESIGN
309
unified and powerful composition. The piece not only served 
to make viewers aware of an unusual issue, it also expanded 
the breadth of the student’s meaningful work (Figure 12.4).
As you discovered in Chapter 6, form can commu-
nicate inner meaning, at times in a deeper way than words 
can express. Shifting and adjusting elements in a design to 
the point where you can sense that the composition is right 
reflects that you cared about something enough to give it 
attention. The projects you choose reveal something about 
your interests and concerns. See, for example, the typographic illustration 
by John Lepak illustrating a quote by the writer William Faulkner, “Time 
is dead as long as it is being clicked off by little wheels; only when the 
clock stops does time come to life” (Figure 12.5). 
Lepak hung letterforms on the empty limbs of a tree and photo-
graphed them a day later to show the effect time had on the hand-cut 
letters. In this public installation, the tree seemed as if it had been brought 
back to life. As a piece in his portfolio, it shows how the designer is able to 
think beyond the usual computer-driven solutions to a project made by 
hand that included three-dimensional physicality. 
Something as innocuous as a coffee spill can become a portfolio 
project, too. Max Pitegoff created an informational design that charted 
how many coffee spills occurred within one day, he being a self-pro-
claimed spiller (Figure 12.6). The treatment also adds to the information: 
the coffee-colored splash against a black circle creates a vigorous contrast 
that grabs attention, and the shape has a sense of urgency about it in the 
way it spills outward. The information is innocuous, but it shows how 
much further a design can be taken—in this case, beyond the typical pie 
charts—where the form itself becomes part of the information.
Creating a graphic design portfolio requires careful effort in both 
its content and presentation, but in the end, it is your best opportunity 
12.5 JOHN LEPAK. Illustrated quote poster. 
“Time is dead as long as it is being clicked off 
by little wheels; only when the clock stops 
does time come to life.” —William Faulkner
12.4 CALLA HENKEL. Design for 
a wall graphic introducing a 
gallery exhibit titled Free to Dry 
that questions the banning of 
outdoor clothes lines.
O N E  W E E K
L A T E R
12.6 MAX PITEGOFF. Chart 
illustrating the amount of 
coffee spills made over the 
course of eight days.

310
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
to showcase your skills and professional qualities. The Worklist on the 
Graphic Design Portfolio Presentation (page 308), which includes point-
ers on personal etiquette, project sizing, and pacing, will help you to put 
finishing touches on the design of your own portfolio.
Personal Website and Design Blog
Graphic designers today really need to have their own website and design 
blog. A website serves as an online portfolio, with each navigable section 
offering a categorized view of your work. For example, there might be a 
section for visual identities, print, motion, web design, and so on. If your 
W O R K L I S T
Graphic Design Portfolio Projects
Advertising design: Consumer (food, 
clothing, transportation), institutional (health, 
foundations, political, religious, professional 
associations); billboards, print (ad campaigns), 
radio (spots), television (storyboards)
Cover design: Annual reports, paperback 
or hardcover book jackets, magazine covers, 
music CDs, video DVDs
Display design: Institutional (banks, hospitals, 
museums, libraries), retail (stores, sales offices); 
banners, point-of-purchase, shop windows 
Environmental design: Construction 
(barricades, sidewalk shelters), corporate 
(factories, offices, hotels, terminals), 
institutional (churches, hospitals, libraries, 
museums, schools, zoos), residential 
(apartment buildings, houses); kiosks, 
maps, signage (architectural, events, fairs, 
transportation), wall murals
Information design: Editorial, institutional; 
charts, forms, maps (indexing, directional signs)
Interaction design: Corporate, entertainment, 
informational, or institutional; websites, 
kiosks, mobile devices
Motion design: Film and television broadcasts; 
film title sequences; station identifications; 
web page banners
Packaging systems: Consumer food and 
products, industrial, pharmaceutical; containers 
(boxes, bottles, bags, jars, tubes), labels
Posters: Corporate (conventions, products, 
services); institutional (museums, botanical 
gardens, hospitals); partisan (political, religious), 
entertainment (film, theater, circuses, fairs)
Publication design: Annual reports (two-year 
summary, president’s letter, public relations, 
financials); catalogs; book interiors (full titles, 
table of contents, chapter openers, main text, 
index/credits); magazines, (mastheads/covers, 
contents pages, article openings, subsequent 
spreads); newsletters
Typographic design: Typefaces; type manuals 
and alphabet books
Visual identities: Packaging (shopping bags, 
menus), signage (storefronts, windows, 
vehicles), stationery (business cards, envelopes, 
letterhead), style manuals; corporate entities 
(products, services), institutional entities 
(museums, foundations, nonprofits), events 
(fairs, film festivals); product lines (food, 
software); small businesses (restaurants, 
florists, bookstores)
Miscellaneous pieces: Calendars, invitations, 
menus, self-promotions, shopping bags, stamp 
series, T-shirts, wrapping paper

INTERVIEWING
311
physical portfolio is not available for someone, your website will always 
be accessible. 
Maintaining a current website indicates that you are serious about 
what you do. Many of the projects you will work on involve an online 
component, and your personal website is the perfect place to demon-
strate your skills as a web designer. Keep it current with your latest proj-
ects, and make sure the functionality is flawless. You might lose a job 
opportunity if a client discovers that one of your links is broken or a page 
doesn’t load properly.
Writing a design blog can be a very handy tool for promoting your-
self. It keeps your clients and colleagues informed about what you’re work-
ing on, and it can increase traffic to your site. It’s a great way to establish 
yourself as an active member of the community of graphic designers. A 
design blog forces you to practice structuring your thoughts about design 
into clearly written text. The blog example “Mélange: A Miscellaneous 
Medley” is a depository of weird and interesting images and links (Figure 
12.7). You will find yourself following the blogs of designers you respect, 
and hopefully those same designers will follow your blog. The secret to 
keeping your audience is to write well, be creative, and write regularly. If 
you drop off for two months, people will forget your blog and stop fol-
lowing you at all. Graphic designers are, of course, known to be primar-
ily visual people, but writing is another way to let your voice be heard. 
You can have an impact on the field and market as a designer who thinks 
clearly and manages information in an organized fashion. And, best of all, 
it will simply remind people that you exist. When they need a designer, 
they might think of you first. 
Interviewing 
The main goal of an interview is to obtain the job you want; however, you 
can learn a lot from interviews, even if you’re not sure the job is right for 
you. Interviews enable you to make contacts, learn about a firm, and see 
how other designers work. Even the interview questions can reveal how a 
firm functions and what its priorities are. Be sure to ask your own ques-
tions, too; they can help you decide whether the job is the right fit (while 
also showing that you know enough to ask about relevant things). You 
can ask better questions if you research the firm beforehand. With each 
interview, evaluate how you think you did, and your skills will improve.
The interview is a prime opportunity for you to market yourself. 
To present yourself well, identify what you do best, and emphasize those 
strengths to the interviewer with specific examples that support your 
claims. Also, show that you have an open mind—that you can debate and 
question appropriately while working cooperatively as part of a team. By 
engaging in a lively and positive conversation during the interview, you 
will demonstrate that you can add vitality to the organization. Tell the 
12.7 CAITLIN FOLCHMAN-WAGNER.
Personal design blog. 
  You can’t depend on your eyes when 
your imagination is out of focus.
—Mark Twain (1835–1910)
To present yourself well, 
identify what you do best, 
and emphasize those 
strengths to the interviewer 
with specific examples that 
support your claims. 

312
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
interviewer what you can contribute to the organization, not what you 
hope the organization will do for you—a subtle, but very important dif-
ference. 
As you consider jobs, keep an open mind about what sort of studio 
would be your ideal workplace. You may have expectations that are unre-
alistic. After all, every work environment is different. Don’t make any rash 
judgments about a work situation until you have had a chance to get to 
know what it’s all about.
The strongest impressions are made within the first thirty seconds, 
and are usually based on manners, dress, and etiquette, which an inter-
viewer interprets as signs of respect. Always be on time—even early—
for your interviews, but never late. No matter how employees dress, you 
should dress professionally and neatly for your interview. Interviews are 
not the time for exotic appearances. Never discuss previous employers 
or colleagues in a derogatory way or divulge confidential information 
about other people or firms. If you do, you show that you might do the 
same anywhere you work. Your interviewer might also have a relation-
ship with someone you mention, so discuss everyone with the utmost 
respect. Some people think that the rules are different for artists, that 
they can present themselves in eccentric ways because they are creative 
people. That idea simply is not true during an interview. Be professional 
and mature at all times.
When going to an interview, always bring a sample of your work 
that you can leave behind. It will remind the interviewer of you and your 
capabilities; he or she might also want to show the work to others who 
were not at the interview. This sample can be printed reproductions of 
several key pieces of your work, reduced in size and neatly packaged with 
a business card attached, or it can consist of digital samples and contact 
information on a CD or DVD. Keep it short and sweet—just a summary 
of highlights (see Figure 12.8).
You can also use this work sample to try to get an interview. It can 
serve as an introduction or miniature portfolio. The point is to give a taste 
of your entire portfolio, show your talents and creativity, and get your 
contact information into the hands of a possible employer or client.
Some firms discuss salaries during an interview, but most leave that 
discussion until making an actual offer. You shouldn’t be the one to bring 
it up. If your interviewer discusses salary, be flexible, especially if the offer 
is less than expected, but don’t commit to anything right away. You will 
make better decisions when you are not in such a high-pressure situa-
tion. It’s perfectly appropriate to say you would like time to consider the 
information. Later, you might try to negotiate before deciding anything, 
particularly if you have other interviews around the same time. Make sure 
you get details about the offer, including hours, salary, benefits, and vaca-
tion, so you know exactly what you are accepting or rejecting. If you are 
interviewing at a firm that you think fits your sense of design and career 
EXCERPT: The Cheese 
Monkeys, A Novel in Two 
Semesters (P.S.), by Chip Kidd, 
Simon and Schuster, 2001 
“The Cookie Cutters can’t think about 
anything beyond selling cookies, so 
they would have you believe this 
class is the Introduction to Com-
mercial Art. It is not. Should that 
give you cause to leave this room, do 
so now—without the threat of being 
scorned, or having to think.” 
Nobody did. Leave, I mean.
“But I’ve been put in charge of 
the store here, and I say it’s Introduc-
tion to Graphic Design. The differ-
ence is as crucial as it is enormous—
as important as the difference 
between pre- and postwar America. 
Uncle Sam … is Commercial Art. 
The American Flag is Graphic 
Design. Commercial Art tries to 
make you buy things. Graphic 
Design gives you ideas. One natters 
on and on, the other actually has 
something to say. They use the same 
tools—words, pictures, colors. The 
difference, as you’ll be seeing, and as 
you’ll be showing me, is how.”

THE BUSINESS OF DESIGN
313
12.8 WORKSIGHT. Mini portfolio 
sampler with tiny tools attached 
to create a gift-like feeling.
goals, seriously consider accepting an offer that might be below 
your ideal. The learning experience alone could be worth the 
low salary, and you might be surprised at how quickly you are 
given more responsibilities and compensation.
Always, always follow up with a thank-you note, either 
by e-mail or regular post. Thank the interviewer for his or her 
time, and summarize your qualifications as well as what you 
could bring to the company. A thank-you note may seem old 
fashioned, but it shows you are a mature, respectful individual 
who would be a responsible and reliable employee. It also keeps 
you in the employer’s mind. Send a note even to a company that 
rejected you at the interview or a company where you don’t 
think you want to work. Someone might come back to you with a better 
offer or remember you when another job becomes available. A thank-you 
note is a small courtesy that can reap huge benefits.
The Business of Design 
There is a practicality to graphic design: ads must sell, books must be 
readable, and websites must function smoothly. In addition, design proj-
ects will need to be completed in a limited amount of time or within a 
limited budget, will most likely need to be approved by someone besides 
you, and will require revisions that can drive one mad. These practicalities 
reflect the business side of design. It is less glamorous than pure aesthetic 
expression, but just as important in the process of completing work.
SPEAKOUT: Trust Your Instincts by Connie Birdsall, creative director and senior 
partner, Lippincott
Before you apply for employment at a particular firm, you’ll want to do your homework. Make sure 
the firm has people you admire and can learn from and opportunities for growth. Understand what 
a day in the life is like. Know who its clients are.
After you’ve drawn up your list of pros and cons, how do you decide? Think about the work envi-
ronment. Is this the kind of place where you’ll be able to grow creatively? When you interviewed, 
did you see yourself fitting in and thriving there? A common theme I’ve heard from candidates 
about their previous jobs is that they didn’t thrive in the work environment. And the truth is, not 
every studio will be a right fit for you. 
Once you feel good about a workplace, then you need to tune in to your gut. This is the time to listen 
to that voice in your head and not censor it. Did you have a visceral reaction to your potential boss 
or coworker? How did you feel after the interview, when you were on the street walking away? What 
was the first thing that came into your mind? Remember, great designers have great creative and 
intuitive instinct. Use yours and cultivate it when you interview. The ability to trust your instincts 
and know yourself is a skill that will benefit you on interview day and throughout your career.
  Create your own visual style….
Let it be unique for yourself 
and yet identiﬁable for others.
—Orson Welles (1915–1985)

Is your design approach influenced by 
personal experiences?
I’m not so crazy about chaos. I’ve never been 
interested in drama or unnecessary conflict. I’m 
not interested in being oblique or cryptic. Since 
founding AdamsMorioka, we’ve maintained a 
philosophy of speaking in plain and pragmatic 
terms with our clients. I’ve seen too many 
abused clients who have been beaten into 
submission by a tyrannical designer to continue 
the cycle of abuse. I treat our clients with the 
respect I would expect to be given. This may be 
a product of relentless etiquette training as a 
child, but it probably has more to do with just 
good common courtesy.
How do you maintain your point of view 
in a large-scale project?
This attitude of clarity is at the core of every 
project. The concept of courtesy and respect 
transfers, not just to the client, but to the 
audience also. We’ve been accused of doing 
work that is too accessible, but why shouldn’t 
it be? Making work that is purposefully oblique 
not only tends to sink under the weight of 
its own importance, it has a clear subtext of 
exclusionary elitism. “The client needed to be 
educated” is a phrase that drives me to drink. 
Respect and true collaboration is critical to 
maintain a personal vision on any project, large 
or small. Like the saying, “Don’t worry about 
people liking you, just try liking them,” if I treat 
my client with respect and as an equal, 90 
percent of the time, the same is returned to me.
What advice do you have for someone 
interested in making design their 
occupation?
When making a career choice, follow the three 
Q’s: quality, quality, and quality. Do the best work 
possible. Work with the best people you can find. 
In my experience, good work gets you more good 
work. Bad work will always attract more bad 
work. The best people know other good people. 
In the end, your future will be determined by the 
quality of your design work. Money may be 
tempting, but the work is your future.
Sean Adams is a partner at AdamsMorioka. He has been recognized by every major competition 
and publication, including, Step, Communication Arts, Graphis, AIGA, the Type Directors 
Club, the British Art Director’s Club, and the New York Art Director’s Club. A solo exhibition on 
AdamsMorioka was held at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and Adams has been cited 
as one of the forty most important people shaping design internationally in the ID40. He has served 
as the national president and national board member of the AIGA and as president of AIGA Los 
Angeles. He is a fellow of the Aspen Design Conference and an AIGA fellow. He teaches at Art Center 
College of Design and is a frequent lecturer and international competition judge. Adams is the 
coauthor of Logo Design Workbook, Color Design Workbook, and author of Masters of Design: 
Logos & Identity: A Collection of the Most Inspiring Logo Designers in the World and Masters 
of Design: Corporate Brochures: A Collection of the Most Inspiring Corporate Communications 
Designers in the World. AdamsMorioka’s clients include ABC, Adobe, Gap, Frank Gehry Partners, 
Nickelodeon, Sundance, Target, USC, and The Walt Disney Company.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  P O I N T  O F  V I E W,  W I T H   SEAN ADAMS
A D A M S M O R I O K A
314
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER

Vignette 12.4
Sundance Film Festival 
book jacket design.
Vignette 12.5 Adobe 
Creative Suite package 
design.
Vignette 12.1 (above)
University of California 
poster announcing a series 
of week-long seminars on 
the issue of censorship. 
Vignette 12.2 (opposite) 
Poster design for the 
University of California 
announcing the start of its 
winter quarter classes.
Vignette 12.3 (right) 
Logotype for Oh! Oxygen 
cable television network.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: SEAN ADAMS
315

316
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
Design also requires an ability to express abstract data concretely, to 
make strange information more familiar so the viewer will feel comfortable 
with it (for example, complex numbers simplified into a pie chart). At other 
times, familiar information needs to be made a bit strange to create interest 
(for example, an event poster announcing dates that need to stand out). 
None of these business circumstances diminish the potential for a 
design to express and enlighten. This double duty that design performs 
helps define it as unique profession, one with an objective to commu-
nicate ideas. Furthermore, graphic design opportunities can be realized 
through studios established by others or through your own enterprise. 
Either way, design work involves personal and professional ethics as well 
as the maintenance of a sustainable environment.
Starting Your Own Practice
Graphic design programs don’t offer many courses on the business aspect 
of design. The assumption is that you will learn the ropes while working 
for a firm, for example, how to correspond with clients, how to take a 
project from start to finish, and how to use good phone etiquette such as 
stating the name of the studio when answering a call. 
Whether you are just entering the professional field or have worked 
for years in a studio, starting your own practice means pushing aside the 
fear you may have about actually doing it, and there will be many reasons 
to hesitate, including the financial insecurity of not having a full-time 
job or the potential loneliness of working by yourself. Your survival will 
rely on finding work and keeping clients, including getting work from 
larger studios and agencies. There are four basic working relationships 
you should establish:
t  
 An accountant to help you with bookkeeping practices and govern-
ment tax requirements. An accountant will be able to recommend 
whether you should start your business as a sole proprietorship
(a business owned by one person), as a partnership (each partner 
being liable to the other), or as a corporation (the business as a 
separate entity from the individuals who compose it). 
t  
 A lawyer whom you can turn to for legal advice on leases, overdue 
invoices, and the basics on liability. A lawyer’s hourly fee will be 
much higher than yours, but it will be worth it. 
t  
 A bank specialist to help you create a business checking account and 
suggest ways to handle day-to-day transactions. 
t  
 A professional printer or programmer who can guide you through 
production processes such as file preparation and ﬁnishing tech-
niques (trimming, folding, binding, or programming languages). 
Nurture loyal relationships with your collaborators who will be 
there for you as you grow your business. 
  A lot can be used. —Rick Vermeulen

THE BUSINESS OF DESIGN
317
Design Ethics
Over the years, graphic design has honed its own set of ethics on profes-
sional behavior, including policies toward plagiarism; speculative work; 
contracts; and the property rights of software, typefaces, and images. The 
fields of contract law and intellectual property rights have become quite 
complex, but you will need some basic understanding of them to run a 
professional design business.
The field of graphic design includes the creation of ethically minded 
design projects, ones with a sense of social responsibility, or what we 
might understand as design for the greater good of society. Lester Beall’s 
Rural Electrification poster from 1937 is an early example (see Chapter 2, 
Figure 2.58). Beall’s powerful reductivist approach helped Americans 
understand why bringing electricity to people living in rural areas was a 
moral obligation. Beall used design as a means to create positive change. 
Just four years after Beall’s project, Nazis in Germany began to use design 
as a propaganda tool, creating messages promoting the Nazi dictatorship 
that used graphic design for a very different purpose. 
Design ethics can operate at both a personal and public level. Per-
sonal ethics can help designers create a better profession for themselves. 
For example, refusing a project or client that you know is misleading will 
add to your own integrity and to the overall positive perception of your 
profession, but agreeing to do such work can damage your reputation and 
hurt your design career. In choosing to do only work that you think will 
positively affect the world, you will help the general public make better, 
more informed decisions about their own lives.
This approach to a more humanist concern took shape in 1964 with 
the publishing of the paper “First Things First,” by British graphic designer 
Ken Garland. Backed by more than 400 graphic designers, the manifesto 
challenged the profession’s growing consumerist culture and presented an 
appeal for the pursuit of “more useful and more lasting forms of commu-
nication.” Designers began to realize that they were on the front lines in 
handling information with ethics and integrity. Thirty-six years later (in 
2000), Adbusters magazine updated the manifesto, proposing “a reversal of 
priorities in favor of more useful, lasting, and democratic forms of commu-
nication—a mind shift away from product marketing and toward the explo-
ration and production of a new kind of meaning” (Figures 12.9 and 12.10).
The Internet has increased the speed at which ethical issues arise as 
the profession evolves. For example, design projects are now posted with 
a call for submissions from worldwide participants, with only one design 
to be chosen. This form of crowd sourcing, requesting designed work that 
is specially created (usually without compensation) and submitted from 
many competing finalists, is open to ethical debate because of the harm 
it does to the profession when unchosen designs are then used for other 
purposes. As the profession evolves, it will continue to nurture values that 
affect the society in which it operates and to whom it communicates.
12.10 Adbusters magazine cover 
design (the philosophy issue).
12.9 “First Things First Manifesto 
2000,” was simultaneously published 
in Adbusters (Canada), Emigre and 
the AIGA Journal of Graphic Design
(United States), Eye magazine and 
Blueprint (Britain), and Items 
(Netherlands).
In Practice: The AIGA website oﬀers a 
thorough set of documents concerning the design 
business and its ethics. The AIGA has its own 
Standards of Professional Practice available at 
aiga.org/standards-professional-practice.
View a Closer Look for the manifesto on myartslab.com
Image courtesy of Adbusters.org
Image courtesy of Adbusters.org

318
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
Environmental Sustainability
Environmental sustainability refers to the responsible maintenance 
of the environment, and the design community has become especially 
conscious of its role in how energy and resources are used in producing 
printed materials and in its use of energy resources. Concerned design-
ers have influenced the printing and paper industry which, in turn, has 
responded quite admirably. Today, most printers use nontoxic inks and 
varnishes in their process. Paper companies are finding better ways 
to recycle paper fiber and have become part of stewardships that offer 
responsible management and protection of forests, which prevent dam-
ages from logging such as habitat destruction, water pollution, and dis-
placement of indigenous peoples.
The job of educating others to the value of a healthy, sustainable 
environment continues today with the understanding that sustainability’s 
goal is not to eliminate paper, but to use it in sensible ways. The Worklist 
on Sustainability by Noble Cumming helps designers to realize this vision 
by providing questions every one of them should ask themselves with 
each new project.
The You in Your Work
When other people recognize your work, it is a great compliment. They 
may recognize your humorous attitude coming through the work or see 
a visual treatment that you have brought to many of your solutions in 
the past. These distinguishing characteristics reflect your style, which can 
come through you unconsciously. In fact, your style is you.
W O R K L I S T
Sustainability by Noble Cumming
t
Consider the materials you are using. 
t
Are the inks the printer uses 
environmentally friendly? 
t
How much ink are you using for your 
piece? Can you use less in areas? 
t
Are you using standard paper sizes? 
If not, can your press sheet hold more 
pages by a slight adjustment in 
proportion? Can multiple jobs be run 
on the same sheet? 
t
Is the printer using green energy? 
t
How much electricity are you using while 
designing? Do you shut down your 
computer at night? Is your studio energy 
efficient? 
t
Is an actual proof required from the 
printer or is a PDF acceptable for 
approval to run the job? 
t
How far away is the printer? Will a local 
printer cut down on the cost of travel for 
the finished product?
t
Can the finished product be reused—is 
there a way for the design to expand the 
life span of the piece?
  What works good is better 
than what looks good, because 
what works good lasts. 
—Ray Eames (1912–1988)
In Practice: There’s a diﬀerence between personal 
style and general style. A general style usually begins 
as the style of one person. Once adopted by an 
increasingly larger group, it can eventually be labeled 
as trendy or stylish. The problem with adopting a 
trendy style in your own work is that trends usually 
peak and then subside. The originators of those trends 
progress onward, but the designers who simply copied 
the trend are left with work that looks dated.

THE YOU IN YOUR WORK
319
The places we’ve been and things 
we’ve seen, felt, or heard all broaden 
our vision as designers. They also define 
us. For example, a trip to Vermont to 
see the foliage could add to your color 
pallet; an unfortunate visit to a hospi-
tal’s emergency room could shock you 
into realizing how efficient people can 
be under pressure. In either case, both 
experiences will be internalized: you 
will realize that a recent design has a 
color you never thought about using before, or it has an energized imme-
diacy about it. These influences can come from everywhere. Can you trace 
them back? 
The fact that some place or thing might feed your work is, in effect, 
acknowledging connections with your larger culture, community, and 
environment. A good example of this dynamic is a visual series on the 
impact of the Iraq war by Maria Uroos (Figure 12.11). She grew up in the 
Middle East and felt a need to create a visual dialogue about the changes 
in life, culture, and religion that she saw there. Her tools include text and 
image, metaphors and analogies, elements and principles. All convey 
thoughts about the region where she lived, fleshed out into a form that is 
meant to extend conversations. Each piece begins with her.
In a design experiment by Janet Lee, whose family is in retail fash-
ion, two activities are merged into one composition (Figure 12.12). She 
created a montage of typography with a dress form, color chips with fabric 
swatches, and single-edge cutting blades with scissors. The art historian 
E. H. Gombrich (1909–2001) wrote, “Anyone who can handle a needle 
convincingly can make us see a thread which is not there.” The connec-
tion this designer makes to retail fashion isn’t necessarily there either, but 
is more a myth that forges a connection to something more personal and 
perhaps more meaningful to her. She uses that same ability to tell stories 
and making connections when creating works for her clients. 
In another piece, Rick Valicenti examines his own future role as a 
graphic designer (Figure 12.13). The poster’s purpose is to announce a 
design lecture in Vancouver, Canada, and the character pictured—a jester 
that is full of remorse—is a portrait of Valicenti himself. Hanging off his 
hat is a flickering sign that reads “HUGE.” The ghostlike, wispy image 
of an old man beside his own face hints at his later life. Together, the 
images make a social comment about whether this effort is all there is 
in Valicenti’s future, and for that matter, in the profession as a whole. In 
other words, designers can be practical problem-solvers (such as find-
ing a way to announce an event), but also passionate artists whose work 
also matters in terms of making a positive difference in the world. See the 
Designer Vignette with Rick Valicenti on pages 322–323.
12.12 JANET LEE. Personal 
myth project. 
12.11 MARIA UROOS. Series on the positive 
and negative effects of the Iraq war. 
12.13 RICK VALICENTI, THIRST.
Vancouver Lecture Poster.

320
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
Designing within a Group Environment
Pablo Picasso is quoted as saying, “Bad artists copy. Great artists steal.” In 
other words, whereas bad artists can only copy what they see, great artists 
understand the whole concept behind a work, and they steal the whole 
work—ideas, visuals, and all. They then can take that work, develop it 
further, and make it their own. Design works the same way, especially in 
a group environment. Design teams are created to effectively complete 
large projects, especially ones with many components. Instead of being 
solely responsible for an idea and its execution, you are just one of a group 
of designers. You may think this arrangement would stifle your creativ-
ity, but many designers find that they work better within a group. The 
exchange of ideas and collaborative effort can foster creativity in ways you 
may have never considered. You learn to build off of one another, and the 
results can be quite amazing. 
Expressing your own voice may be difficult when you are part of a 
team, but it is a skill you can learn. Social skills are important to main-
tain in these group environments. Getting along, being a good listener, 
contributing to the discussion, and staying focused through a meeting 
and project can result in a positive work experience. Pay attention to the 
main ideas that your client and fellow designers want to get across. Ask 
your own questions to determine design directions to take from those 
ideas, which is the best way to figure out just what your role will be in the 
project.
When you take the time to understand the points being made and 
ask questions specific to those points, you effectively contribute to the 
research process. Your team will want you to be the creative individual 
you normally are as you collaborate and become inspired by the efforts of 
your colleagues. Your particular approach in developing ideas will add to 
the successful output of the whole group.
Your Voice in Advertising Design
The groundbreaking work of art directors such as Bill Bernbach, Helmut 
Krone, and George Lois established a strong relationship between what 
an ad says and how it looks (see Chapter 2). They formed the basis for 
advertising design—the form brought to words and images to help convey 
a message. Advertising is a very competitive environment. Ads need to 
sell products or services, and their daily barrage on the public makes 
traditional design projects seem relatively tame. Book covers, logos, and 
websites are competitive, too, but not at the level that advertisements are. 
Breaking rules creatively is a most valuable asset in an advertising 
agency. Before an ad can have the chance to resonate, it must first get 
noticed. The designer must create graphic excitement that is backed up 
with an idea. Think of a memorable ad. What made it memorable? Was 
it funny, smart, or compositionally pleasing? Usually it’s all of these, with 
SPEAKOUTS
Personal Style 
by Chakaras Johnson, helen-marie.com
It took me a while to realize that when 
my energy was focused on solving the 
problem at hand, my own personal 
style came out of me naturally. It was a 
real time saver because I didn’t have to 
worry about trying to create something 
“trendy” or “expected.”
Workﬂow
by Alex Zolotarev, justuscreativ.com 
The pace of workflow is one important 
revelation. The fast pace that projects 
came and went made it very difficult 
to create good work. We get paid to be 
creative, but don’t get enough time to 
spend with the ideas. Also, I learned 
how important it is not to disappoint 
clients. Whether you like them or not, 
clients are like a chain—you can’t have 
weak links. Satisfying one at a time is 
the best form of networking and 
business expansion.
The Design Language
by Kareem Collie, Dimitrious II Inc.
When I began working I realized that 
my knowledge of graphic design was a 
bit like knowing Latin—it’s embedded 
in many other languages. Artists, 
writers, architects, and designers all 
seem to understand each other. It makes 
collaboration easy.
An Information Gap
by Monica Maccaux
At the large design company where 
I work, I seem to play the game 
“telephone” a lot. The many levels of 
management cause an information gap, 
and by the time a client’s comments 
get back to me, they lose their design 
context and don’t quite make sense. 
Designers and account liaisons need to 
coordinate with each other better.
Survival Techniques
by Matthew McNerney, Polemic Design
I learned two survival techniques on 
the job. The first is “design jujitsu”: 
CONTINUED ON NEXT PAGE

DESIGN AND TECHNOLOGY
321
the designer’s voice completing the human connection and perhaps pro-
viding an unexpected twist.
Design and Technology
We may, in fact, be transitioning out of our incunabular period of the 
digital realm. The word, from the Latin word cuna (cradle), refers to the 
first stages of something and is typically used in reference to books cre-
ated before 1501—during the infancy of printing. Our digital incunabula 
applies to graphic design from 1984 to the current time. As we enter our 
digital “toddler” phase, we are seeing the mouse and hard drive disappear, 
monitors are becoming invisibly thin, separate design applications now 
blend into one, and our bodies integrate into the design process. 
This toddler phase is foreshadowed in the Web’s increasingly inter-
active nature through which consumers build their own content. As tech-
nology evolves—as the machines and software get better and better—our 
ability to focus on pure ideas will grow. The resurgence of letterpress 
printing and bookbinding techniques increasingly value the craft and care 
given to information you can hold as being older art forms. 
taking what a client says, transforming 
it, and giving it back to them in a way 
that’s exciting, creative, and even magi-
cal—yet, in their eyes, still a product of 
their imagination. 
The second is an “air comp,” sponta-
neously creating a new concept, but only 
through word and gesture after a client 
looks unimpressed at a presentation. 
This usually wins back their faith and 
buys you enough time to get some sleep 
and present a new design.
Design Collaboration 
by Rick Griffith, Matter; instructor, 
University of Denver
The future of graphic design will rely on 
its collaboration with people who don’t 
fit its current definition. By encouraging 
interests outside its border, design will 
breathe new life into areas of commu-
nication that haven’t been considered 
before (Figure 12.14).
12.14 RICK GRIFFITH. Chart 
design notating the theory 
and practice of critical visual 
communication.
CONTINUED FROM PREVIOUS PAGE

Your personal style doesn’t just sweat 
out of you, it bleeds. How do you convince 
clients that their communications 
aren’t going to be overwhelmed by your 
finished design?
Let’s just say that I’m a curious fellow who gets 
very excited about the subject matter I work 
with. I simply translate my raw expression about 
those subjects onto paper or in digital bits on 
the screen. For example, what I found amazing 
about Gary Fisher Mountain Bikes was a product 
that could get you to fly on wheels. As for the 
Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT), it was being 
literally shocked at how much energy transpires 
on the trading floor. Clients like these are more 
like patrons; they understand my approach and 
know they can take it to market.
Is there an impractical side to your 
experimentation? 
All the impractical experiments feed directly 
into my practice. Creativity seems to live more 
freely in that part of my brain—the messy, 
subconscious, unrecognizable part that lets 
loose. There might be some tempered and 
honed practicality once it hits my consciousness, 
but not too practical. It’s better when the two 
are on equal footing, just like a designer and a 
client. Design happens in conversation, a kind 
of meeting of the minds. Common ground has 
to be found to avoid a lot of time spent second 
guessing and disagreeing. Only then can you 
“get away with it,” if you know what I mean. 
But the honest truth is that fresh, innovative 
work develops early in the process, where 
everyone is personally as well as emotionally 
engaged. The moment that stops happening, 
you start to see formulaic design being applied 
to design problems.
Do you have any advice for design 
students entering the field? 
Invest in yourself by working outside the safe 
profession you might find yourself in someday. 
Alongside the highly produced and well-crafted 
work should be designs that you never thought 
you’d create—stuff that shocks you because 
you actually did it. Feel that chill you get—that’s 
passion that you can’t fake. Believe in it, and it 
will become real.
Rick Valicenti has a BFA from Bowling Green State University, and an MA and MFA in photography 
from the University of Iowa. He has lectured extensively on six continents, exhibited his work 
internationally, and juried countless design awards, including the Presidential Design Awards/
National Endowment for the Arts. He received the 2011 National Design Award for Communication 
Design from The Cooper-Hewitt, National Design Museum, the AIGA Medal for his sustained 
contribution to design excellence and development of the profession, and the AIGA Chicago Fellow 
for his steadfast commitment to the education of design’s future generations. Valicenti has been a 
member of the Alliance Graphique Internationale (AGI) since 1999 and has served as president 
of the Society of Typographic Arts. His work has garnered awards from the Type Directors Club, 
Tokyo Art Directors Club, AIGA, ACD100, Graphis and ID Magazine, among others, and has been 
included in the permanent collections of the Smithsonian Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum, 
the Art Institute of Chicago, and Library of The Museum of Modern Art.
D E S I G N E R  V I G N E T T E :  P E R S O N A L  S T Y L E ,  W I T H   RICK VALICENTI
T H I R S T
Vignette 12.6 Chicago Board of 
Trade annual report spread using 
semi-transparent paper.
322
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER

Vignette 12.8 Chicago Board 
of Trade annual report cover 
and page spreads.
Vignette 12.9 Gary Fisher 
Bicycle Corporation page 
spread from the brochure 
titled Change is Good.
Vignette 12.7 Portrait, 
See Thru Me. Gilbert Paper 
promotion.
DESIGNER VIGNETTE: RICK VALICENTI
323

324
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
Design and the Fine Arts
The debate as to whether design is considered an art seems to have become 
irrelevant as the two fields have converged in so many ways. Yet the issue is 
worth contemplating as our culture morphs and changes because design-
ers keep pushing the boundaries of what defines their field.
Presumably, for a fine artist, a client doesn’t exist. Even commis-
sioned work allows for a certain amount of freedom to create original 
work without burdensome limitations. Designers aren’t so lucky. Their 
work must reach out from the wall and grab the audience’s attention. 
Ideas and meaning are constructed mostly from content provided by the 
client and in response to a client’s request. 
If this challenge weren’t difficult enough, designers also have had to 
live under the mantra “form follows function” for decades. Form is not 
subservient to information; it is information itself, but the mantra trans-
lated for many into a kind of neutralized, “authorless” design approach. 
The result was a commercial art that was ever more relegated to the 
bottom rung in the hierarchy of artistic expression.
In many ways, Andy Warhol (1928–1987) changed that mindset 
(Figure 12.15). Originally a working graphic designer and illustrator him-
self, Warhol became a painter and printmaker, creating prints in multiple 
quantities. Through his artwork, he continually examined the commer-
cialization of the fine arts, using pop culture icons that included images 
of movie stars and packaging found on store shelves. His groundbreak-
ing work seriously questioned the distinction between the fine arts and 
advertising.
Other artists such as Ed Ruscha and Barbara Kruger have expanded 
the idea of incorporating the commercial world into their work. Ruscha 
  I just say I’m an artist who 
works with pictures and words. 
—Barbara Kruger
12.15 ANDY WARHOL. Campbell’s 
Soup Cans. Installation of 32 
canvases at the The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York. 1962.
W O R K L I S T
Advertising Design Parameters
t  
 What is the background of the project 
or service (its history, competition, 
future prospects)?
t  
 How does it compare to a similar 
product or service?
t  
 What makes the product or service 
different?
t  
  Is it an often misunderstood product 
or service?
t  
 What are the negative aspects of its use?
t  
 Are the points you’re making about the 
benefits believable?
t  
 What is most honest in the communication 
you’re creating?
t  
 Does the ad’s composition have stopping 
power (ability to grab attention)?
t  
 Does the design have a distinctive feeling, 
personality, attitude, and so on?
t  
 Can readers see themselves in the picture?
t  
 What is the payoff for the audience? Does 
the ad appeal both to the head (intellect) 
by which they learn something and to the 
gut (emotions) by which they are moved 
or entertained?

treats corporate brands as cultural 
symbols and creates paintings of these 
brands (Figure 12.16). He is particu-
larly well known for his paintings of 
signs and billboards. Barbara Kruger 
blends stock photography with con-
frontational writing, creating very 
bold graphic statements about our 
culture (Figure 12.17). 
Designers can learn much from 
this work that crosses boundaries into 
territories previously unexplored by 
the design community. For example, 
in the exhibition Thoughts on Democracy, sixty leading contemporary art-
ists and designers were invited to create works inspired by American illus-
trator Norman Rockwell’s Four Freedoms paintings of 1943. In a piece for 
the show titled Liberty Weeps (Figure 12.18), designer Elliott Earls cross-
references yet another artist’s work from 1830, Liberty Leading the People
by Eugène Delacroix (1798–1863). Rather than show a grown woman 
leading the charge, as Delacroix portrayed, Earls’s allegory, or symbolical 
narrative, depicts a young child who seems to beg us to take responsibility 
for our actions as an equally young nation. 
Earls’s poster also signifies graphic design’s evolution. The facial 
expression of Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec’s dancer (La Goulue, Chapter 2) 
quietly reflected the miserable social conditions in which the dancer lived. 
Over one hundred years later, Earls’s Liberty Weeps presents an unabash-
edly prominent expression of sadness. Whereas Lautrec’s sad smile was 
subtle, Earls’s is not. The role of design as a means to comment on our 
society has evolved to become part of a larger cultural conversation.
DESIGN AND THE FINE ARTS 
325
12.16 ED RUSCHA. Standard 
Station. Screenprint. 1966.
12.17 BARBARA KRUGER. You 
Are a Captive Audience. 1983. 
12.18 ELLIOTT EARLS. Liberty Weeps,
as part of the Wolfsonian-Florida 
International University’s exhibit 
Thoughts on Democracy.
EXCERPT: Never Give Up. Never Give In by Charles Goslin (1932–2007), design professor, 
Pratt Institute and the School of Visual Arts (SVA)
That small child with the scissors and colored paper, sitting in the middle of the parental 
living room rug, making shapes out of beautiful colors, for his or her own joy, not for 
money, not for critical acclaim, that child is you. You have the opportunity to create what 
never was. Forget about revolutionizing the world. Work for the joy of working, and 
without intending to, you will help to change your corner of the world.
©Barbara Krugar. Courtesy Mary Boone Gallery, NY

326
CHAPTER 12: BECOMING A DESIGNER
In Perspective
This chapter has covered three main points that will guide you in your 
future career. The first point is that you must be willing to put yourself 
out there, to be assertive both personally and through your work. Graphic 
design is a field for extroverts, not introverts. Just as designs have to reach 
out to the viewer, designers also have to reach out.
The second point is that in promoting yourself, you should handle 
it just as you would a design project, considering you and your work as a 
total package. Creating a cover letter and résumé, professional portfolio, 
blog, and website translate as meaningful acts that indicate you care about 
design and that you have a distinctive point of view. Make them look as 
professional and creative as you would any design project. They are the 
tools you use to present yourself to the world.
The third point is to remember that, although your design work 
speaks for your client, it also speaks for you. In other words, define your-
self through the designs you make. Design can be as deep and expressive 
as you want it to be. You can include a full spectrum of design projects in 
your portfolio, but also make sure to include projects that use type and 
image to break boundaries into more personal, cultural, and social areas. 
Certainly you have to make work that pleases your clients, but it has to 
be your work—designs that say something about who you are and what 
is important to you.
EXERCISES AND PROJECTS
Exercise 1 (Real World Practicalities): Find an existing logo that you 
think is very poorly designed. Make a copy of it and construct a worklist 
of points to consider if you were to redesign it. Base your decisions on the 
perceived audience, what you believe their response should be to such a 
mark, and whether the final design should be typographic, pictorial, or 
abstract.
Exercise 2 (Working in Groups): Break into groups of three and find a 
website for an unusual museum (for example, toiletmuseum.com). Think 
about a directional signage system for this museum. You will be design-
ing three signs (elevators, bathroom, and parking). Your design can be 
iconographic, photographic, or typographic, and the directions can be 
humorous or serious, but your design must integrate with the subject of 
the museum itself. Full color. Format/Material: Open.
Project 1 (Rework an Existing Design): Find what you consider to be a 
really bad advertisement and rethink it, reframe it, bring new meaning to 
it—completely redesign it. Your design should integrate the existing text 
from the ad, but if you need to edit it, do so. Your job will be to bring craft 
K E Y  T E R M S
Corporation (p. 316)
Cover letter (p. 306)
Environmental sustainability 
(p. 318)
Finishing techniques (p. 316)
Internship (p. 307)
Partnership (p. 316)
Portfolio (p. 307)
Résumé (p. 306)
Sole proprietorship (p. 316)
  Everything needs redesigning 
today, from the laws we live by 
to the institutions we believe in.
In addition to a degree in graphic 
design, get a degree also in
another ﬁeld so you can extend 
your reach and transform the 
human condition. —Barry Deck
Review additional Exercises and Projects 
on myartslab.com

EXERCISES AND PROJECTS 
327
and thinking to the form and content of the design. Create new imagery 
using either a photo or illustration. Try to engage the viewer’s mind and 
please the eye. 
Project 2 (Personal Myth): Compile a list of professions or activities that 
you know well and have participated in. The list can include, for exam-
ple, your family’s business, your first job, another subject you studied, or 
a sport at which you have excelled. Choose one and write a paragraph 
on the basic tenets of the profession or activity and how it is similar to 
graphic design. Explain it in terms of how it relates formally, psychologi-
cally, physically, socially, etc. Don’t be afraid to abstract it to make a con-
nection. Examples: (1) If you studied linguistics, you might consider the 
similarity between your understanding of language structures and what 
you know about structures in design; (2) If you have been a part of a 
swimming team, discuss how pacing and breathing relate to aspects of 
sequence and page layout in design. Begin with a subject you know well 
and see where it takes you in terms of branding and identity, form-mak-
ing, storytelling, structural metaphors, and conceptualization. 
Review your research and consider how it might guide the structure 
of your graphic design work. If you’re having trouble coming up with a 
field that relates, just make one up. Create a poster as a document of your 
research. Full color. Size: 18" × 24".
Things to Consider: Ads tend to show scenes. Make your scene more like a meaningful sign.
Things to Consider: The value of this assignment is to learn that by pairing two seemingly 
unrelated things, each becomes better defined. Graphic design tends to be so oriented toward 
the public; when comparing it with a more personal activity, you are exercising your 
skill of finding analogies between subjects.
Project 2 TOP TO BOTTOM, LEFT TO 
RIGHT: GENELLE SALAZAR, NICOLE
RODRIQUEZ-LEWIS, MIKE CARLSTON, 
ANNE CHIANG, GERALDINE TRY, 
SUNGHYUN PARK, DAVID CIMOROSI, 
AND JAMES MOFFITT.
View a Closer Look for the myth project on myartslab.com

Abstraction 
The process of distilling an image 
or information down to its basic 
elements or qualities while mov-
ing away from pictorial represen-
tation. (p. 44)
Aestheticism 
A late nineteenth-century liter-
ary-based art movement whose 
goal focused on a search for ideal 
beauty. (p. 42)
Analogous colors
Colors that sit next to one another 
on the color wheel. (p. 164)
Analogy 
A comparison between two 
things as a way to increase mean-
ing. (p. 76)
Analytic concept
A concept that relies primarily on 
the audience recognizing treat-
ments and relationships where 
the use of form, line, color, and 
texture have a considerable role. 
(p. 90)
Anti-aliasing
A method of fooling the eye into 
believing that a jagged edge is 
actually smooth, used in digital 
type to make curved letterforms. 
(p. 229)
Art Deco
An art and design movement ini-
tiated as a decorative style during 
the 1925 Paris Exposition. Its sleek 
lines and geometry offered an 
exciting alternative to the floral 
patterns of Art Nouveau. (p. 56)
Art movement
The manifestation of visual 
concepts in the art world, also 
expressed in the graphic design 
of historical periods. (p. 42)
Art Nouveau
Late nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century art and design 
movement inspired by both the 
Arts and Crafts and Aestheticism 
movements. Its high contrast 
shapes, patterns, and plant mo-
tifs broke away from traditional 
dependence on history and the 
classics for its subject matter. 
(p. 42)
Arts and Crafts movement
A late nineteenth- and early 
twentieth-century art movement, 
based on the theories of John 
Ruskin and William Morris, that 
advocated traditional craftsman-
ship using simple forms and that 
looked to medieval decorations 
as inspiration. (p. 42)
Balance 
The distribution of items in a 
composition that achieves visual 
equality symmetrically or asym-
metrically. (p. 167) 
Baseline
Horizontal base alignment of the 
feet of capital letters and bottoms 
of nondescending lowercase 
letters. (p. 184)
Bauhaus
An early twentieth-century 
school of design established in 
Weimar, Germany, that promoted 
a blending of the applied arts 
with technology and functionally 
based aesthetics. (p. 53)
Bleed
Type, image, or color that extends 
beyond the trimmed edge of a 
page. (p. 200)
Brainstorming
A problem-solving session where 
creative thoughts are allowed to 
flow freely and spontaneously. 
(p. 129)
Brand
An identity for a product or ser-
vice to show ownership, especial-
ly as it pertains to the personality 
projected to the public. (p. 13)
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS)
A style sheet language used to 
create the layout, colors, and 
fonts of a web page that then 
cascades onto subsequent web 
pages, allowing them to share the 
same formatting. (p. 220)
CMYK
An abbreviation for the four 
process colors—cyan (C), ma-
genta (M), yellow (Y), and black 
(K). (p. 164)
Cold type
The setting of type using a photo-
graphic exposure process. (p. 183)
Color
The appearance of light reflected 
by an object, defined in terms 
of hue, value, and saturation. 
(p. 164)
Complementary colors
Pairs of colors that sit opposite 
each other on the color wheel. 
(p. 164)
Comprehensives (comps)
The polished and finished ver-
sions of roughs. (p. 30)
Constructivism
An art movement that existed 
from 1919 until the beginning of 
World War II. Inspired by the early 
politics of Soviet Russia, it favored 
art as a practice for social reform 
and was concerned primarily with 
machines, space, materials, and 
motion. (p. 50)
Contrast
The juxtaposition of forms, treat-
ments, or ideas to create visual or 
intellectual tension, resulting in 
an enhanced perception of dif-
ferences between the elements. 
(p. 169)
Copywriting
The art of writing headlines and 
body text for advertisements, 
brochures, websites, and other 
published material. (p. 14)
Corporation
A business that is a separate 
entity from the individuals who 
own it. (p. 316)
Cover letter
A letter that serves as an intro-
duction to one’s resume or port-
folio, used to present one’s work 
to a potential client or employer. 
(p. 306)
Critique 
An evaluation or review of work, 
usually done in a group setting. 
(p. 29)
Cropping
Removing the area outside of 
what is determined to be the 
desired image or frame. (p. 174)
Cubism
Early twentieth-century art move-
ment that made use of abstract 
form and space, creating a frag-
mented perspective both visually 
and conceptually. It made a com-
plete break from the past in terms 
of image and concept. (p. 46)
Dada
Twentieth-century art movement 
that rejected all traditions and 
standards in art. Its nonsensical 
spirit established footholds in 
America, Germany, France, and 
The Netherlands. (p. 48)
De Stijl
Meaning “The Style,” a Dutch 
abstract-art movement of the 
early twentieth century that was 
known for its straight lines, right 
angles, and primary colors. (p. 52)
Deconstruction
A philosophical movement 
that began in the 1960s when 
the term was coined by French 
philosopher Jacques Derrida. It 
critically scrutinized literature, 
power structures, and cultural 
values, while making extensive 
use of irony, puns, and word play, 
with the goal of destabilizing 
defined meaning and eliminating 
assumptions. (p. 118)
Depth
The perception of physical space. 
Also the complexity of meaning 
within a design. (p. 160)
Design brief
A written document establishing 
a project’s parameters, including 
what needs to be achieved, by 
whom, when, and why. (p. 29)
Digital age 
Also called the computer age or 
information age, identified by the 
ability to access, manipulate, and 
distribute information freely and 
quickly using a computer. (p. 69)
Direction
The orientation of elements with-
in a design composition. (p. 170)
Dominance
A compositional principle based 
on how the emphasis of an ele-
ment on the page creates visual 
hierarchy, determining what is 
seen first, second, and so on. 
(p. 172)
Egyptian serifs
Also known as slab serifs, type-
faces that have thick rectangular 
finishes to their vertical strokes. 
(p. 184)
Em 
A unit of measurement used in 
letter spacing, which is propor-
tioned to the width of a capital 
M. (p. 195)
En 
A unit of measurement used in 
letter spacing (generally propor-
tioned to the width of a capital N) 
that is one-half the width of an 
em. (p. 195) 
Environmental sustainability
Responsible maintenance of the 
environment so it can endure and 
thrive. (p. 318)
Finishing techniques
Trimming, folding, binding, and 
other post-production processes 
of printing. (p. 316)
Flow
A stream of connections that help 
move the eye to specific focal 
points. (p. 170)
Flow lines
A grid’s horizontal lines. (p. 221)
Flush
Alignment of text or other ele-
ments on the margin. (p.199)
Focus group
Field or primary research that 
involves group meetings in per-
son or online and that makes use 
of phone surveys. Participants 
are selected based on how they 
might typify a consumer and 
are observed for their attitudes, 
reactions, and choices toward a 
product or service. (p. 116)
Foley artist
Sound technician, replicating 
everyday sounds and background 
noises for filmmaking. (p. 295)
Font
The complete set of characters, 
figures, punctuation marks, and 
symbols within the specific style 
of a typeface family, for example, 
Helvetica Bold. (p. 192)
Footer
Text, usually containing the title 
or author of the publication, that 
runs along the lower portion of a 
page type, beyond the field of the 
regular body of text, that repeats 
on every page (see also Header). 
(p. 226)
Form
Color, line, shape, or manner. (p. 76)
 Key Terms
328
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Guide to Graphic Design

KEY TERMS
329
Four-color process
The reproduction of text or imag-
es in four colors (CMYK), made up 
of cyan (c), magenta (m), yellow 
(y), and black (k). (p. 164)
Frame
A structural format that puts the 
meaning of something into a 
specific context. (p. 118)
French fold
Paper with center folds on the 
horizontal and vertical axes, re-
sulting in a weightier object that 
limits printing to only one side of 
the paper. (p. 234)
Futurism
An art movement originating in 
Italy in 1910 that tried to convey 
the experiences of speed, tech-
nology, time, light, and emotion. 
(p. 47)
Gate fold
A fold in paper in which a 
panel acts as a cover that, when 
opened, reveals a second panel 
underneath. (p. 234)
Gestalt
A perception of the whole as 
being greater than the sum of its 
parts. (p. 264)
Golden ratio
Expressed as an irrational 
number (1.6180339887), the 
Golden Ratio is also known as the 
Golden Section or Golden Mean. 
The mathematical relationship 
is thought of as the divine 
proportion and is found in many 
aspects of nature, including the 
human body, taking form in 
Leonardo DaVinci’s Vitruvian Man 
(ca. 1487). In this ratio, if you lay 
line a next to line b and then lay 
a line equal to a + b next to a, the 
two pairs of lines would have the 
same proportion. (p. 233)
Golden rectangle
A rectangle that has a ratio of 
length to width that is the golden 
ratio. (p. 233)
Gothic revival
A style in the late-nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries based 
on the Gothic style of the Middle 
Ages, which included the pointed 
arch, the ribbed vault, and the 
flying buttress. The revival of this 
handcrafted style was a response 
attempting to offset the me-
chanical banality of modern mass 
production. (p. 39)
Graphic design 
An umbrella term to describe 
the process of bringing form to 
intellectual ideas with the goal of 
organizing information into com-
municable messages. (p. 6)
Graphic design concept
Intellectual and formal ideas 
integrated into the overall
framework of a design to form a 
complete assertion. (p. 75)
Grid
A framework of horizontal and 
vertical lines that cross each other 
at regular intervals. (p. 216)
Grid system
An underlying system of horizon-
tal and perpendicular coordinates 
to aid in the alignment of text and 
image as part of a layout. (p. 216)
Gutter width
A small distance between each 
column of text, built into a typo-
graphic grid. (p. 220)
Halftones 
A technique that simulates con-
tinuous tone imagery (color or 
black and white) through the use 
of various-sized dots. (p. 164)
Header
Text, usually containing the title 
or author of the publication, that 
runs along the upper portion of a 
page type, beyond the field of the 
regular body of text, that repeats 
on every page (see also Footer). 
(p. 226)
Home page
A website’s opening page that 
introduces the site’s subject mat-
ter and provides navigation to the 
next level of web pages. (p. 286)
Hot type
Type created by molten hot lead 
injected into a mold to create a 
cast of letters. (p. 183)
Hue
Attributes of color that allow it to 
be classed as red, yellow, blue, or 
any combination of those. (p. 164)
Icon
A sign that has a direct resem-
blance to the thing it represents. 
(p. 269)
Idea
A creative spark, often the result 
of bringing together two separate 
thoughts in an attempt to solve a 
problem. (p.75)
Illustration
The blend of intellectual ideas 
and stylistic techniques (includ-
ing but not limited to drawing, 
painting, and digital mediums) 
to create pictorial interpretations 
for use in print, interaction, and 
motion design. (p. 14)
Index
A sign that refers to its object, 
either through physical location 
or strong clues. (p. 269)
Interaction design
A category of graphic design that 
allows the user to interact with 
the design to access information 
from computer-driven formats, 
including websites, exhibit kiosks, 
and handheld devices. (p. 278)
Internship
Beginner-level practical experi-
ence in a specific field, sometimes 
unpaid. (p. 307)
Justified 
Simultaneous left and right align-
ment of type, resulting in a rect-
angular block of text. (p. 199)
Kerning
The manual adjustment of space 
between pairs of letters. (p. 195)
Keyframe
A significant plot point or action 
within a motion design. (p. 292)
Keyword
A word that represents an essen-
tial part of an idea. (p. 136)
Leading
The vertical measurement of 
distance from the baseline of one 
letterform or line of type to the 
next. (p. 198)
Line
A narrow, elongated mark, as in a 
drawn line; a horizontal or verti-
cal row of characters or type; a 
boundary. (p. 153)
Logo
A graphic representation or sym-
bol for a company. (p. 13)
Logotype
A graphic representation of a 
company made predominantly 
with type. (p. 188)
Meta concept
A concept that relies on the 
reader’s understanding of the 
self-referential and/or parodying 
aspect of the design. (p. 92)
Metaphor 
An visual or verbal image used 
to explain one thing in terms of 
another, creating an analogy be-
tween two seemingly unrelated 
things or ideas. (p. 82)
Metaphoric concept
A concept that relies on the use of 
metaphor to interpret a design’s 
subject. The integration of form 
and typography complete a 
metaphoric concept. (p. 87)
Mockup
A draft version of a design. 
(p. 143)
Modern typefaces
Late eighteenth-century type-
faces with high contrast between 
strokes, a uniform and mechani-
cally balanced shape, and rela-
tively abstract, horizontal serifs. 
(p. 184)
Modernism
A cultural movement from the 
mid-nineteenth to mid-twentieth 
centuries, in which a conscious 
break was made with the aesthet-
ics and sensibilities of the past. Its 
main tenet was a revolt against 
realism as well as cumulative 
progress in literature, philosophy, 
art, and architecture. (p. 44)
Modular grid
A structural pattern of repeating 
shapes or lines that helps guide 
the organization of typography or 
images. (p. 217)
Module
A repeating shape used to create 
a structure or system. (p. 216)
Montage
The technique of creating one im-
age from two or more images, or 
parts of images, resulting in the 
illusion that the new composition 
is naturally whole. (p. 87)
Mood boards
A collection of visual material 
used to help explain references, 
provide inspiration, and build 
consensus. (p. 121)
Motion design
Any planned movement generally 
displayed on electronic media 
that incorporates animated 
graphics (imagery and/or ty-
pography), often combined with 
sound. (p. 279)
Navigation
The linked access to other pages 
within a website. Usually de-
signed in the form of a horizontal 
or vertical bar, navigation is a key 
design element because it is used 
on every page of a site. (p. 286)
Negative space
Also known as white space, the 
space around an object, and 
between more than one object, 
including the background of a 
page. (p. 158)
New Typography
An asymmetric approach to 
typography and layout based 
on Die Neue Typographie by Jan 
Tschichold. (p. 54)
New York School
An advertising design method 
that integrates text and image in 
a harmonious and humorous way, 
with its epicenter being New York 
City’s Madison Avenue. (p. 64)
Observational research
Research conducted in the actual 
context of the thing being stud-
ied—in the home, on the street, 
in nature—including surveys and 
observations. (p. 114)
Offset printing
A commercial printing technique 
in which ink on lithograph plates 
transfer to a rubber blanket, 
which then transfers the image 
onto paper. (p. 165)
Old Style typefaces
Pen-based mechanical letter-
forms whose strokes have a right-
leaning inclination. (p. 184)
One-point perspective
A view typically in a drawing or 
painting in which one vanishing 
point exists for two axes—for ex-
ample, as in a railroad track going 
off into the distance. (p. 160)
Parody
Satirical imitation of something 
serious. (p. 258)
Partnership
A business in which each partner 
is liable to the others. (p. 316)
Pattern
An element that repeats in a 
predictable and decorative man-
ner. (p. 155)
Pica
A typographic measurement 
system for print design. There 
are approximately six picas in an 
inch. (p. 192)
Point
The measurement system for 
type characters (abbreviated as 
pt.), based on the distance from 
the top of the highest point in a 
letter (ascender), to the bottom of 
the lowest point in a letter (de-
scender). There are 12 points in a 
pica, and approximately 72 points 
in an inch. (p. 192)
Portfolio
A collection of work that show-
cases one’s talent and creativity. 
Portfolios can exist in both print 
and digital formats, the goal 
being to show a breadth of work 
that favors quality over quantity. 
(p. 307)
Positioning Chart
A visualizing research technique 
in which adjectives or other 
descriptors are entered along x 
and y axes to describe the person-
ality of a product, service, and so 
forth. (p. 121)
Posterized
An effect in which the grayscale 
quality of a photograph is re-
moved or replaced by a limited 
number of tones. (p. 142)
Postmodernism
A wide-ranging term describing 
a condition that exists after Mod-
ernism (1945–present) and ap-
plied to literature, philosophy, art, 
and architecture. Postmodernism 
generally rejects the pursuit of 
perfectionism and timelessness 
as notions based on sociocultural 
constructs. (p. 68)
Pragmatics
The study of how a sign is under-
stood by the user. (p. 268) 
Presentation
The stage in which the finished 
comp is accompanied by words 
and thoughts about the project 
as a full concept. (p. 30)
Primary colors
In pigment, the primary colors are 
red, blue, and yellow, defined as 

such because no two colors can 
be combined to produce them. In 
light, the primary colors are red, 
green, and blue. (p. 164)
Production
The creation of a design for print-
ing, uploading, or broadcasting. 
(p. 30)
Psychedelic
A genre based on the 1960s coun-
terculture, making use of vibrant 
colors and patterns, experimental 
electronic music, and hallucino-
genic drugs. (p. 63)
Rag
Unaligned vertical margin in a 
typeset column of text. (p. 199)
Random word technique
A technique in which a word is 
chosen randomly and its principle 
meaning is then applied to a 
design problem as a way to gen-
erate new ideas. (p. 136)
Recontextualization
Elements, signs, and meaning 
introduced within a new context. 
(p. 205)
Repetition
A design element using recurring 
lines or forms that brings visual 
energy and motion to a composi-
tion. (p. 175)
Research
Building a body of knowledge 
about a client-assigned project, 
including the company’s history, 
target audience, and competitors. 
(p. 29)
Resume
A summary of one’s training and 
experience. (p. 306)
RGB
Abbreviation for red, green, blue. 
(p. 164)
Rhythm
A pattern effect that relies on the 
repeat of a line, shape, or thing to 
create unity and energy in a visual 
design. (p. 175)
Roughs
Quick compositions that give a 
full-sized but raw visualization of 
ideas as they pertain to layouts. 
(p. 29)
Rule of thirds
The compositional division of 
an image into nine equal parts 
(made from two horizontal and 
two vertical lines), with important 
elements placed along the lines 
or their intersections. (p. 235)
Sans serif
Typeface where the main stroke 
of a letter is not finished off with 
a much shorter perpendicular 
stroke. (p. 182)
Saturation
Level of intensity in a color. (p. 
164)
Scale
The distinctive relative size, ex-
tent, or degree of elements within 
a design composition. (p. 161)
Secondary colors
Purple, orange, and green; each 
made by mixing two primary 
colors. (p. 164)
Second-level web pages
Area on a website where a site’s 
main content is located. (p. 288)
Semantics
The meaning behind a sign and 
behind that to which it refers. 
(p. 268)
Semiotics
The study of signs and how they 
are used in everyday communica-
tion. Three specific categories of 
semiotics are syntactics, seman-
tics, and pragmatics. (p. 267)
Serif 
Typeface where the main stroke 
of a letter is finished off with 
a much shorter perpendicular 
stroke. (p. 182)
Shape
A two-dimensional space, created 
by joining the two ends of a line. 
(p. 154)
Signage
The design of navigational infor-
mation as it pertains to direction 
and identification, for interior 
and exterior architectural spaces. 
(p. 12)
Silver ratio
Proportion of paper sizes used 
in Europe in which two pages 
together result in the next largest 
size of paper. (p. 234)
Slab serif
Also known as Egyptian serifs, 
typefaces that have thick rect-
angular finishes to their vertical 
strokes. (p. 184)
Sole proprietorship
A business owned by one person. 
(p. 316)
Splining
A process in which computer-
generated mathematical formulas 
help to automatically present a 
two- or three-dimensional object 
in proportion as it is repositioned 
or rotated. (p. 298)
Storyboard
A refined version of thumbnail 
sketches that are roughed into 
actual frames (eight to twelve) 
to visualize a motion-based idea. 
(p. 292)
Suprematism
Russian-based art movement 
founded in 1915 that completely 
eliminated objects and represen-
tation and reduced elements to 
geometric forms. (p. 48)
Surrealism
An early twentieth-century 
art movement, developed out 
of Dadaism, that grounded its 
investigations on unexpected 
juxtapositions and non sequi-
turs, with psychologically based 
images that caused shock and 
surprise. (p. 49)
Swiss International Style
A mid twentieth-century interna-
tional movement that reflected 
a philosophy of refined type and 
image use. The approach was 
largely initiated in Swiss design 
schools and was based in large 
part on the mathematical organi-
zation of the page. (p. 62)
Symbol
A sign that operates abstractly, 
where the object being referred 
to is made by association into 
a broader general idea, for ex-
ample, the cross used as a symbol 
of Christianity. (p. 269)
Syntactics
The relationship of form between 
signs without regard to specific 
meaning. (p. 267)
Tension
The visual strain based on an im-
balanced relationship of contrast-
ing elements—big/small, rough/
smooth, clean/messy—that 
create energy within a composi-
tion. (p. 169)
Texture
The two- or three-dimensional 
tactile quality of a surface, either 
real or perceived, that has the 
potential to cause an emotion 
or sensation from the viewer. 
(p. 155)
Third-level web pages
Area of a website that is intended 
to provide very specific content, 
typically that expands on infor-
mation in the second-level web 
pages. (p. 288)
Thought starter
Any method or technique that 
helps to activate one’s creative 
process. (p. 127)
Thumbnails
Small preliminary sketches, gen-
erally no bigger than a business 
card, that quickly capture the 
essence of an idea. (p. 29)
Tracking
Creation of consistent spacing to 
a group of letters within a word, 
paragraph, or entire column of 
type. (p. 195)
Transition
The process or interval of time 
smoothly connecting two differ-
ent elements in a motion design. 
(p. 292)
Transitional typefaces
Typefaces that bridged the gap 
between Old Style and Modern, 
with less right-leaning inclina-
tion than Old Style and medium 
contrast between thick and thin 
strokes. (p. 184)
Two-point perspective
A way to create the illusion of 
depth by using two vanishing 
points instead of one, creating an 
image that is a little closer to the 
way we actually perceive distance 
on the curved earth. (p. 160)
Typeface
A design of a particular set of 
letterforms, numerals, and signs 
that share consistent characteris-
tics. (p. 181)
Typeface family
A single typeface design, for ex-
ample Helvetica, comprising the 
full alphabet, numerals, and signs 
as well as all the corresponding 
font weights such as regular, 
italic, bold, and bold italic. (p. 191)
Typogram
A miniature visual poem, made 
of letterforms, that can be un-
derstood both as text and image. 
(p. 66)
Typographic grid
A column-based system used to 
organize text. (p. 220)
Typography
The arranging of type (including 
typeface, font, size, and leading) 
to create a deliberate appearance, 
hierarchy of reading, or structure. 
(p. 182)
Unique selling proposition
A way to differentiate product 
brands by proposing specific 
benefits consumers would get 
if they used the item being sold. 
(p. 118)
Unity
A design principle in which ele-
ments work together in harmony. 
(p. 176)
Value
The brightness of a color based 
on shades of light and dark, rang-
ing from white to black. (p. 165)
Vernacular
Unorthodox, local language. 
(p. 203)
Visual code
A nonverbal message that sets 
a tone, narrates with a particular 
voice, and brings a perspective 
through which the viewer 
can understand a graphic design 
communication. For example, 
a boxing poster has a visual 
code that reads as “tough.” 
(p. 255)
Voice-over 
An audio narration as part of a 
motion design. (p. 297)
White space
The area between elements on a 
page, including the background; 
also known as negative space. 
(p. 158)
Wireframing
The sketching of ideas for the 
structure of a website using line-
framed areas to notate navigation 
and content sections. (p. 288)
Word mapping
The mapping of words into a 
diagram-based sketch as part of 
a research technique for linking 
ideas. (p. 122)
330
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN

aphy
Bibliogra
Ades, Dawn. The 20th-Century Poster.
New York: Abbeville Press, 1984.
——— . Arnheim, Rudolf. Art and Visual 
Perception. Berkeley: University 
of California Press, 1954.
Visual Thinking. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1969.
Arnston, Amy. Graphic Design Basics.
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth 
Thomson Learning, 2003.
Berger, John. Ways of Seeing. London: 
British Broadcasting System and 
Penguin Books, 1972.
Blackwell, Lewis. 20th-Century Type 
Remix. Corte Madera, CA: 
Gingko Press, 1998.
Booth-Clibborn, Edward. The Language 
of Graphics. New York: Abrams, 
1980.
Bruno, Michael, ed. Pocket Pal.
New York: International Paper 
Company, 1986. 
Carter, Rob, Ben Day, and Phillip Meggs. 
Typographic Design. New York: 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1985.
Challis, Clive. Helmut Krone. The Book.
Cambridge: The Cambridge 
Enchorial Press, 2005.
Constantine, Mildred, and M. Alan Fern. 
Word and Image. New York: The 
Museum of Modern Art, 1968.
Darton, Mike. Art Deco. London: Tiger 
Books International, 1990.
Davies, Penelope J. E., Walter B. Denny, 
Frima Fox Hofrichter, Joseph 
Jacobs, Ann M. Roberts, and 
David L. Simon. Janson’s History 
of Art. Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2007.
de Bono, Edward. Lateral Thinking. New 
York: Harper & Row, 1970. 
Foster, Jack. How to Get Ideas. San 
Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 1996.
Gombrich, E. H. Art and Illusion.
Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1960.
Heller, Steven. Paul Rand. London: 
Phaidon Press, 1999.
Hochul, Jost, and Robin Kinross. 
Designing Books. London: 
Hyphen Press, 1996.
Hurlburt, Allen. Layout. New York: 
Watson Guptill Publications, 
1977.
——— . The Design Concept. New York: 
Watson Guptill Publications, 
1981.
Jacobs, Marvin. Graphic Design Concepts 
… Plus! North Olmsted, OH: 
Words and Pictures, 2007.
Jefferson, Michael. Breaking into Graphic 
Design. New York: Allworth 
Press, 2005.
Kince, Eli. Visual Puns in Design.
New York: Watson Guptill 
Publications, 1982.
Kunz, Willi. Typography: Macro 
+ Microaesthetics. Sulgen, 
Switzerland: Verlag Niggli AG, 
2000.
Landa, Robin. Graphic Design Solutions.
Albany, NY: Delmar, 2001.
Lauer, David A., and Stephen Pentak. 
Design Basics. Belmont, CA: 
Wadsworth Thomson Learning, 
2003.
Leborg, Christian. Visual Grammar. New 
York: Princeton Architectural 
Press, 2006.
Lupton, Ellen. Thinking with Type. New 
York: Princeton Architectural 
Press, 2004.
Meggs, Philip B., and Alston W. Purvis. 
Meggs History of Graphic Design.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2006.
Moggridge, Bill. Designing Interactions.
Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 
2007.
Mollerup, Per. Marks of Excellence.
London: Phaidon Press, 1997.
Müller-Brockmann, Josef. Grid Systems 
in Graphic Design. Niederteufen, 
Switzerland: Arthur Niggli, 1981.
Noble, Ian, and Russell Bestley. Visual 
Research. Lausanne, Switzerland: 
AVA Publishing, 2005.
Ocvirk, Otto G., Robert E. Stinson, 
Philip R. Wigg, Robert O. 
Bone, and David L. Cayton. 
Art Fundamentals. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1998.
Oldach, Mark. Creativity for Graphic 
Designers. Cincinnati, OH: North 
Light Books, 1995.
Poyner, Rick. No More Rules. New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 2003.
Rand, Paul. Thoughts on Design. New 
York: Wittenborn, 1947.
Remington, R. Roger. American 
Modernism. London: Laurence 
King Publishing, 2003.
Resnick, Elizabeth. Design for 
Communication. Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley, 2003.
Rosentswieg, Gerry, ed. The New 
American Logo. New York: 
Madison Square Press, 1994.
Roukes, Nicholas. Design Synectics.
Worcester, MA: Davis 
Publications, 1988.
Samara, Timothy. Typography Workbook.
Gloucester, MA: Rockport 
Publishers, 2004.
Shaughnessy, Adrian. How to Be a 
Graphic Designer, without Losing 
Your Soul. New York: Princeton 
Architectural Press, 2005.
Stewart, Mary. Launching the 
Imagination. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2002.
Stokstad, Marilyn. Art History. Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall, 2005.
Sutnar, Ladislav. Visual Design in Action.
New York: Hastings House, 1961.
——— . Catalog Design Progress. New 
York: F. W. Dodge, 1950.
Wheeler, Alina. Designing Brand Identity.
Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2003.
White, Alex. The Elements of Graphic 
Design. New York: Allworth 
Press, 2002.
Wilde, Judith, and Richard Wilde. Visual 
Literacy. New York: Watson-
Guptill Publications, 2000.
Young, Doyald; The Art of the Letter.
Hamilton, OH: SMART Papers, 
2003.
Zeldman, Jeffrey. Taking Your Talent 
to the Web. Indianapolis: New 
Riders Publishing, 2001.
331

Index
332
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Abels, Kimberly, 283, 295
Abstraction, 44
influence of, 24
Accidents, playful, benefiting from, 
142–145
Stephen Banham on, 146
Acevedo, Marco, CARE logo, 270
Ackley, Jason, Morningstar 
newsletters design, 14
ADP (Automatic Data Processing), 
materials designed for, 13
Adams, Sean, 314
designer vignette, 315
Adbusters magazine, “First Things 
First Manifesto 2000,” 317
Adultery book cover design (Sahre), 
169
Advertising
coded treatments in, 264
design parameters, 324
display typefaces, eighteenth 
century, 38
Advertising design, 15
New York School, 64
your voice in, 320
Aesthetics, 4
in graphic design solutions, 28
Aestheticism (1870–1914), 42
Against Nature (Huysmans), cover 
for book, 95 
Agency: collective
Livescribe’s Pulse Smartpen 
motion design, 297
Nike project, 280
Agha, Mehemed Fehmy, 56
Albers, Josef, 53, 63
Alberti, Leone Battista, 175
Ali, Muhammad, 65
Alignment, text, 199–201
Alignments. See also Grids and 
alignments
freestyle, 230
Allgemeine Elektricitäts-
Gesellschaft (AEG) poster 
(Behrens), 45
Alliance for Climate Protection, 
“we” campaign, 271
Amazon brand identity 
(Duckworth), 189
American Center for Design, 
Annual Show of Excellence, 245
American Typewriter typeface, 185
Analogous colors, 164
Analogy, 76
Analytic concepts, 90–92, 96, 245
creating a framework, by 
Andrew Blauvelt, 245
Analytic typography, 193–201
Animation, 9
Anti-aliasing, 229
Apeloig, Philippe
Cannes Festival poster, 160
designer vignette, 191
on typography, 190
Arbeeny, Audrey, 295
Archer typeface, 207
Architecture
influence of, 24
Modernist trend toward 
abstraction, 44
Architecture Symbol and 
Interpretation exhibition poster 
(McCoy and Libeskind), 21
Arendt, Hannah, 292
Armstrong, John, montage, 87
Arnheim, Rudolf, 161
Art Deco, 56
Art Chantry, poster for music band 
Gang of Four, 25
Art and Illusion (Gombrich), 267
The Art of Light and Space book 
cover design (Worksight), 200
Art movements, 42
Art Nouveau, 42, 56
Artforum, Sol LeWitt on conceptual 
art, 253
Arts and Crafts movement 
(1880–1910), 42, 44
Arts & Ideas poster (Merk), 162
Association, general association 
metaphor, 86
Audience, 104, 106
determining, 119
researching, 112–116
Audio/visual media, 9
Automatic Data Processing (ADP), 
materials designed for, 13
Avant Garde magazine, 66
Bakse, Justin, on website design 
principles, 278
Balance, 167
Banham, Stephen, on character of 
accidents, 146
Banknote design (Bayer), 53
Baravalle, Giorgio, design for 
Forgotten War, 144
Baseline, 184
Baskerville, John, 38
Bass, Saul, 61, 283
Baudrillard, Jean, 68
Bauhaus, 53, 56, 68
The New Bauhaus, 57
Bayer, Herbert, 19
advertising for Container 
Corporation, 57
banknote for State Bank of 
Thuringia, 53
Beall, Lester, 58
Rural Electrification poster, 59, 317
PM graphic arts journal cover, 59
Beardsley, Aubrey, 42
Beatkit advertisement parody 
(Wolfe), 94
Beautiful Suffering catalog cover, 
Williams College Museum of Art 
exhibition (Glauber), 94
Becoming a designer, 304–327
advertising design parameters, 
324
business of design, 313
design ethics, 317
design and fine arts, 324
design and technology, 321
getting a job in graphic design, 
306–313
interview with Sean Adams, 314
starting your own practice, 316
you in your work, 318–321
Beeke, Anthon, 68
Behrens, Peter, 45
Bell Telephone user’s guide 
(Sutnar), 59
Below the Fold (journal), 111
Berger, Rachel, 252
Berker, Banu, View magazine grid 
structure and layouts, 228
Bernard, Pierre, 4
Bernbach, Bill, 64
Bernhard, Lucian, 46, 72
Between the Wars television series 
poster (Chermayeff), 65
Bielenberg, John
Literacy poster, 79
Stuff series, 93
Bierut, Michael
on design concepts, 240
designer vignette, 241
Speaking Volumes poster, 88
Bingham, Weston, 224
freestyle alignments on business 
card and website, 230
page spreads for Offramp, 232
Binns, Marina, CARE logo, 270
The Birds book cover (Lui), 173
Birdsall, Connie, on trusting your 
instincts, 313
BlackPublicMedia.org, 279
Blauvelt, Andrew, on creating a 
framework, 245
Bleed, 200, 228
Bleitz, Jeff, retail package as 
website, 281
Blogs, personal design blog, 311
Bloomberg LP, dynamic displays 
for headquarters, 145
Bolesta, Robert, 113
Bond No. 9, New York, graphic 
identity, 244
Bonilla, Wilson, poster on Paul 
Rand, 154
Book design, 11
Book jacket design, 12
Books poster (Rodchenko), 51
Books, typesetting, nineteenth 
century developments, 38
Bosshard, Hans Rudolf, 62
Botanica florist shop logo (Lepak), 
201
Bradbury, Ray, 78
Brainstorming, 129
Braley, Michael, map in printed 
brochure, 30
Brand and identity design, 13
Braque, Georges, 46
Brendler, Matthias, on making 
without knowing, 171
Bright Nights responsive footpath 
project, 297
Brimmer, Henry, exhibit graphics 
for Design Experiences, 160
Brooklyn Bridge, 39
Brown, Denise Scott, 69
Brown University Friedman Study 
Center, signage system, 247
Bucher, Stefan, 110, 111
Budget and timetable, 107
The Bug, book jacket design, 12
Bugoff Exterminators logo, 155, 
173
Built, website design for, 278
Burnett, Leo, 15
Burtin, Will, 61
Cadence and subaudition, 89
Cage, John, 155, 296
CalArts Dance Ensemble poster 
(Fella), 259
Calgary AB, Canada, poster for the 
Victoria Symphony, 150
California New Wave, 70
Calligraphic examples (Shaw), 196
Calotypes, 37
Cameron, Julia, 99
Campbell’s Soup Cans (Warhol), 325
Canadian Museum for Human 
Rights logotype (McNerney), 269
Cannes Festival poster (Apeloig), 
160
The Canterbury Tales, Kelmscott 
Press edition, 42
CARE logo, Michael Thibodeau 
on, 270
Carlowe, Casey, GOOD Magazine
chart, 261
Carlston, Mike, 327
Carroll, Lewis, 141
Carson, David, 71
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), 220
Caslon, William, 38
Cassandre, A. M., 47, 55
Cassidy, Stephen, art exhibit 
graphic, freestyle alignments, 
231
Castro, Ricky, and Mackay, Brooke, 
Vancouver Culture Guide, 24
Categories of graphic design, 8–15
advertising design, 15
book design, 11

INDEX
333
book jacket design, 12
brand and identity design, 13
collateral design, 14
corporate design, 8
environmental design, 9
information design, 14
interaction design, 10
motion design, 9
package design, 13
publication design, 11
self-publishing, 15
signage design, 12
type design, 10
Cave canem (beware of the dog) 
mosaic, Pompeii, Italy, 6 
Cave paintings, 6
Centre Pompidou, 4
Cézanne, Paul, 46
Champion typeface, 182
Champs Délicieux (Man Ray), 50
Chang, Ann, 327
Change Is Good brochure spread, 
Gary Fisher Bicycle Corp., 323
Chaqwa identity design (Schulte), 
167, 175
The Cheese Monkeys, A Novel in Two 
Semesters (P.S.), 312
Chekhov, Anton, 68
Chermayeff, Ivan, 65
Chiang, Altyn, public signs 
notating process of love, 171
Chicago Board of Trade annual 
report (Valicenti), 322, 323
Chinacare.org, wireframe and web 
page design for, 289
Chinese characters montage, 140
Chinese woodblock printing, 35
Chiu Li Design, cookies package 
design, 199
Cho, Julie, 252
Choi, Chang-Soo
Helvetica poster, expressive use 
of neutral typeface, 205
M. Butterfly book cover, 141
visual statement exploring 
design process, 202
Choi, Inyoung, 98
Choppingblock.com design studio, 
282
Chow, Katie, Making My Day, 125 
Chronicle Books logotype, 83
Chronicle of a Death Foretold book 
cover (Kull), 174, 175
Chrysler Building (Van Alen), 56
Chrysler Corporation Cleaning 
Manual, 115 
Chwast, Seymour, 64
Cimorosi, David, 327
Cirlot, J. E., 110
Clark, Jim, 286
Clever Name Here, Inc., web design 
for Chinacare.org, 289
Client, researching, 104
CMYK (cyan, magenta, yellow, 
black) color system, 164
Coca-Cola
“Between” campaign, 15
trademark, 43
Cohen, Tamar, 72
Cold type, 181
Collaboration in design, 321
Collateral design, 14
Collie, Kareem, 22, 23
on design language, 320
detail from Man behind the 
Curtain, 2
researching a project, worklist, 119
Collins, Brian, “we” campaign, 
Alliance for Climate Protection, 
271
color, 159, 161–163
color coding, 259
color systems, 164
color temperature, 165
meaningful color worklist, 260
psychological effects of, 166
Columbia School of Architecture 
posters (Kunz), 91, 133, 219
Columns, text, 226–228
COMA, Vitra Workspirit 10: Net ‘n’ 
Nest catalog, 238, 250
Community, contributing to, 16
Company profile, 106
Competitors, 106
Complementary colors, 164
Complexity and Contradiction in 
Architecture (Venturi), 68
Components of letterforms 
influencing typeface design, 186
Composition with Yellow, Red, and 
Blue (Mondrian), 52
Compositional elements, 153–166
color, 161–166
depth, 160
line, 153
pattern and texture, 155
shape, 154
space, 158
Compositional exploration, 158
Compositional principles, 159, 
167–176
balance, 167
contrast, 169
direction, 170
dominance, 172–174
proportion, 174
rhythm, 175
unity, 176
Comprehensives (comps), 30
Concepts. See Graphic design 
concepts
Conceptual image makers, 66–68
Condé Nast magazines, 56
Constructivism, 50
Container Corporation, 57
Content in graphic design 
solutions, 28
Contra-Composition of Dissonances, 
XVI (Van Doesberg), 24
Contrast, 159, 169
Cooper, Oswald, 144
typographic flier, 145
Corbitt, Warren
freestyle alignments on business 
card and website, 230
real estate brochure, 224
Scarred for Life chapter opener, 
224
Le Corbusier, 45, 55
Notre-Dame-du-Haut, 77
Cornell, Joseph, 296
Corporate design, 8
Contexts, codes and, 261
Corporation, 316
Copywriting, 14
Cota, Inva
Helvetica poster, typographic 
exploration, 205
student newspaper broadsheet, 
209
Cousin, Victor, 42
Cover letter and resume, 306
Cox, Jeremy
Delicate Balance storyboard for 
title sequence, 292
Here Is Here motion design 
sequence, 290
Cranbrook Academy of Art, 69, 248
Cranbrook Metalsmithing poster, 21
Critique, 29
how to be critiqued, 31
Cropping, 174
Crouwel, Wim, 227
CSS (Cascading Style Sheets), 220
Cubism, 46
Cultural comparison of Japan and 
Finland, 123
Cumming, Noble, on sustainability, 
318
Curtis, Hillman, 239
designer vignette, 285
on interaction and motion 
design, 284
Cut with the Kitchen Knife Dada 
through the Last Weimar Beer 
Belly Cultural Epoch of Germany
(Höch), 49
The Da Vinci Code book cover 
design (Diaz), 200
Da Vinci, Leonardo, 233
Dada (1916–1923), 48
Daguerre, Louis-Jacques-Mandé, 36
Daguerrotypes, 36
Dana, Sean, Lost Berlin, 102, 110
Danziger, Louis, 61
Daily Herald poster (Kauffer), 47
Dare, dear, read poster (Scher), 79
Dashes, types of, 195
De Chirico, Giorgio, 21
De Stijl (The Style), 52
Dead History typeface (Makela), 69
Dean, Mary, Used Book Café visual 
identity, 149
Deck, Barry 
on motion design, 10 
Template Gothic typeface, 204
Deconstruction, 118
Deitch Projects installation and 
invitation, 71
Delacroix, Eugène, 325
Delicate Balance storyboard for 
title sequence (Cox), 292
DeMartino, Laura, Hurricane Poster 
Project, 126, 137
Les Demoiselles d/Avignon
(Picasso), 46
Depth, 160
in Ladislav Sutnar brochure 
design, 159
DeRosa, Andrew, words as 
sculpture, 210
Derrida, Jacques, 68
Design brief, 29
preparing, 106
Design collaboration, 321
Design examples, 107
Design Experiences exhibit graphics 
(Brimmer), 160
Design language, Kareem Collie 
on, 320
Design objective, 107
Design Quarterly poster 
(Greiman), 70
Design solution, successful, 
components of, 28
Diaz, Armando, book cover design 
for The Da Vinci Code, 200
A Dictionary of Symbols (Cirlot), 110
Digital age, 69–71
Digital Entertainment Network 
(DEN), channel identification, 
298
Digital storytelling, 290–294
Direction, 159, 170
Distinction in graphic design 
solutions, 28
Doesburg, Theo Van, 24
Domestic Workers United (DWU)
website, 117
Dominance, 172–174
Donovan, Miles, web design for 
portfolio site, 288
Dorfsman, Lou, 61
Drama Book Shop logo (Rivera), 210
Drenttel, William, Below the Fold, 
cover and pages, 111
Drozdz, Maya, 22
Duchamp, Marcel, 48, 49
Duckworth, Turner
Amazon brand identity, 189
Royal Mail stamp, 265
Duffy & Partners, logo for Tall Tales 
Restaurant, 13
Dumbar, Gert, lecture poster 
for, 152
Dutch design, 152
Dwiggins, W. A., 6
Dye, Alan, Times Square Alliance 
identity, 243
Dylan, Bob, poster by Glaser, 64
Eames, Charles
diagram of design process, 120
“Models,” Norton Lectures at 
Harvard University, 286
Eames, Ray, 318
Earls, Elliot
digitally interactive 
performance, 15
Liberty Weeps, 325
Throwing Apples at the Sun
interactive video, 248
The Education of a Graphic Designer
(Lehrer), 26
Eero Saarinen on His Work book 
design, (Eisenman), 168
Egyptian hieroglyphs, 35
Egyptian serifs, 38, 184
Een meeuw (The Seagull) poster 
(Beeke), 68
Einstein, Albert, 28, 44, 146
Eisenman, Alvin, 12
book design for Eero Saarinen 
on His Work, 168
Electronic media, overlap of, 6, 
280–281
Em spacing, 195
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 306
Émigré magazine, 69
Émigre Recording Artists, Every 
Good Boy poster (Vanderlans), 
204
Emotion, 3, 4, 22, 25 
En spacing, 195
Environmental design, 9
Environmental sustainability, 318
Ericson, Matthew, In Perspective: 
America’s Conflicts chart,, 90
Erickson, Arthur, 58
Esquer, Rafael, 4
Esquire magazine cover of 
Muhammad Ali (Lois), 65
Ethics, 317
European Union (EU), interaction 
and motion design for, 279
Everything Ties (Mathurin), 163
Expressionists, 53
Eye Sling Shot (Elliot Earls), 15
Façade typography/relief sculpture 
(Hoyt and Zurolo), 209
Falkova, Yevgeniya, animal shelter 
logo, 182

334
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
The Far Side (Larson), 112
Fashion Institute of Technology 
poster (Piscatello), 264
Fat Face typefaces, 38
Faulkner, William, 309
FedEx, 8, 267
Feininger, Lyonel, 53
Fella, Andrea, 11
Fella, Ed, 18, 69, 316
lecture announcement design, 
132
typographic coding in dance 
ensemble poster, 259
Fernandini, Carlo, montage 
sculpture, 100
Film posters, 51
Filmmaking, 9
Fine arts, design and, 324
Finishing techniques, 316
Finland, cultural comparison to 
Japan, 122
“First Things First” manifesto, 317
First-level home page, 286
Flow, 170
Flow lines, 221
Flower Pot poster (Moscoso), 272
Flush, 199
Fluxus, 68
exhibit catalog cover, 21
Focus groups, 116
Folchman-Wagner, Caitlin, 
personal design blog, 311
Foley artists, 295
Footers, 226
Formica Group Neocon exhibition 
space, 9
Fonts, 10, 181, 192
Ford, Henry, 166
Forgotten War book design 
(Baraville), 144, 257
Form, 150–179
compositional elements, 
153–166
compositional principles, 
167–176
defined, 76
and function, 152
in graphic design solutions, 28
loading with meaning in visual 
coding, 254–275
translating concepts into, 98
Found art, 48
Fountain (Duchamp), 48
The Four Gospels book design 
(Gill), 55
Four-color process, 164
Framing, 118
Frances W. Little house (Wright), 45
Franklin, Benjamin, 6, 38
Franosch, Max, CD cover for 
Meditations on Coltrane, 154
French fold, 234
Freud, Sigmund, 49
Friedlander, Shirley, Used Book 
Café visual identity, 149
Froelich, Janet, cover for The New 
York Times Magazine, 19
Fry, Arthur, 144
Fukuda, Shigeo, 67
Fuller Brush Man, 104
Function in graphic design 
solutions, 28
form and function, 152
Futurism (1910–1918), 47
G2 Branding and Design, motion 
sequence for UL, 291 
Gang of Four (music band), Art 
Chantry posters for, 25
Garamond, 182
Garland, Ken, “First Things First,” 
317
Gasparska, Agnieszka, 277
on Japan Society 100 years 
website design, 246
Jazz at Lincoln Center website 
design, 282
Gate fold, 234
Geek Love cover design (Yoo), 
155, 158
Gehry, Frank, 24
Geisbuhler, Steff, Time Warner 
Cable logo, 153
Geismar, Tom, My Daughter’s 
Hand poster, 86
Gelman, Alexander
Hell’s Kitchen restaurant logo 
design, 106
images for article on Russian 
terrorist attack, 140
General association metaphor, 86
General Electric trademark, 43
Generating ideas, 126–149
associating words and ideas, 136
benefitting from playful 
accidents, 142–145, 146
brainstorming, 128
creating thumbnail sketches, 
131–133
creative work environment, 128
interview with Luba Lukova, 135
montaged ideas, 140–142, 143
poster design worklist, 138
questions to expand design 
thinking, 130
refreshing your vision, 146
thinking beyond the obvious, 
129
visualizing ideas, Charles Goslin 
on, 139
Gerber, Anna, 118
Gericke, Michael, Pentagram 
Signage, 12
Gestalt, 264
Gestalt perception, 264
designs using, 265–267
Gilbert Paper promotion, portrait, 
See Through Me, 322
Gill, Eric, 55
Girleffect.org, typographic 
animation, 294
Glamour, 56
Glaser, Milton, 64, 172, 203
Glauber, Barbara, 215
Beautiful Suffering catalog 
cover, 94
on student assignments, 251
Gnahm, Thomas, poster on Milton 
Glaser, 172–173
Godin, Seth, 104
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 161
Golden ratio, 233
Golden rectangle, 233
Golden, William, 61
Gombrich, E. H., Art and Illusion,
267
Gomo, Tatenda, International 
Images Film Festival for Women 
poster, 97
GOOD Magazine, chart on no-
smoking policies, 261
Gooder Companies, Teas’ Tea 
package design, 176
Goodyear, Charles, 142, 144
Gore, Al, 271
Goslin, Charles, 137
Never Give Up, Never Give In, 325
on visualizing ideas, 139
Gotham Condensed typeface, 206
Gothic revival, 39
Goudy, Frederic, 183
La Goulue (Toulouse-Lautrec), 
43, 325
Graffiti, 93
Graphic design
categories of, 8–15
coining of term, 6
defined, 6
expanding field of design, 7, 
297–299
heritage of, 6
history of, 34–73
graphic design concepts, 74–101, 
239–253
applying conceptual 
approaches, 95–99
analytic concepts, 90–92, 245
bringing a bigger idea to, 
249–252
conceptual healing, Louise 
Sandhaus on, 252
from ideas to concepts, 75–79
inspired by subject’s location, 
242–244
interview with Joseph Roberts, 
80
interview with Michael Bierut, 
240
meta concepts, 92–94
metamorphic concepts, 82–89
Polish poster design, conceptual 
approach, 84
using research as conceptual 
approach, 247
graphic design process, 29
for Macbeth poster, 83
graphic designer. See also
Becoming a designer
being, 16
Greenblatt, Michael, 255
Greiman, April, 70, 293
design examples, 157
Design Quarterly poster, 34, 70
interview with, 156
Grid system, 216
Grids and alignments, 215–237
defining a grid, 216
developing modular grids, 217
developing modular patterns, 
219
exploiting the grid, 232
freestyle alignments, 230
golden ratio, 233
paper formats, 234
paper-fold formats, 234
rule of thirds, 235
Saks Fifth Avenue logo, grid, 241
typographic grids, 220–229
Willi Kunz on, 222
Griffith, Rick
chart on critical visual 
communications, 321
on design collaboration, 321
Gropius, Walter, 45, 53
Group environment, designing 
within, 320
Guda (self-portrait), Book of 
Homilies, 36
Guiying, Xu, 89
Gutenberg, Johannes, 36, 183
Gutter width, 220, 229
GZ Branding and Design, motion 
sequence for Underwriters 
Laboratories, 291
H&FJ (Hoefler and Frere-Jones) 
typefaces, 206
Hahn, Greg, on Iconoclasts title 
design, 249
Halftones, 164
Hall, Yannique, 182
Hansen, Lars, photography, 13
Have No Fear—He’s a Vegetarian
(Heartfield), 49
Headers, 226
Heartfield, John, 49, 87
Hearty, David, Hell’s Kitchen 
restaurant logo design, 106
Hein, Piet, 132
Helen Marie Creative Partners, 279
Helfand, Jessica, Below the Fold, 
cover and pages, 111
Heller, Cheryl, package identity for 
LouisBoston, 17
Heller, Steven, 35, 40
exhibition of his books, School 
of Visual Arts, 41
Helvetica, 182
posters exploring expressive use 
of, 205
Henkel, Calla, wall graphic for Free 
to Dry exhibit, 309
Hewlett-Packard, research project 
for, 122
The Highwayman, 82
Hill, Chase, typographic 
promotion, 180, 192
Hirsh, Abby, 33, 308
history of graphic design, 34–73
advertising design and New York 
School, 65–66
Aestheticism (1870–1914), 42
Art Nouveau (1890–1910), 42
Arts and Crafts movement 
(1880–1910), 42
Bauhaus, 53
conceptual image makers, 
66–68
Constructivism, 50
Cubism, 46
Dada (1916–1923), 48
De Stijl, 62
designing utopia, 50
early innovations, 35
Futurism (1910–1918), 47
ideological independents and 
New Typography, 54
industrial expansion, 36–39
modern world, 46
Modernism in America, 56–61
moving toward modern 
sensibility, 44
postmodernism and the digital 
age, 68–71
psychedelic, 63
Suprematism (1915–1934), 48
Surrealism (1924–1955), 48
Swiss International Style, 61–63
timeline of major movements 
and events, 57
turn-of-century response to 
industrialization, 39
The History of Western Philosophy,
85, 95
Hobo typeface, 259
Höch, Hannah, 48
Hoefler, Jonathan, 10
on designing a typeface, 206
typefaces designed by H&FJ, 207
Hofmann, Armin, 62, 66
poster for William Tell
performance, 63
Holiday-Nowden, Tatiana, arts 
organization advertising 
campaign, 163
Holmes, Nigel, 14
Holmes, Rowland, home page 
examples, 287
Home page, 286
first-level, 286

“Honor the Workers” banner 
(Nikitas and Shelton), 18
Hori, Allen
freestyle alignments on business 
card and website, 230
lecture series poster, Princeton 
Univ. School of Architecture, 214, 
232
Horta, Victor, 43
Hossain, Farhana, In Perspective: 
America’s Conflicts chart, 90
Hot type, 181
Hoyt, Randall, 31
façade typography/relief 
sculpture, 209
Yale Alumni Magazine, website 
design, 229
Hue, 164
Hurricane Poster Project, 126, 137
Hurston, Zora Neale, 118
Huysmans, Joris-Karl, 95
Iconoclasts title design, 249
Icons, 269
Ideas. See also Generating ideas
defined, 75
from ideas to concepts, 75–79
Illustration, 14
Imaginary Forces studio, Mad Men
motion design title sequence, 
283
Immigrant Theater Festival poster 
(Lukova), 88
Index, 269
Industrial design, 45
Industrial Revolution, 36
Influences on graphic design, 24
Influences: A Lexicon of 
Contemporary Graphic Design,
118
Information design, 14, 58
analytic concepts, 90
Information gap, Monica Maccaux 
on, 320
Institute of Design, 57
Interaction design, 9, 10, 278
Interaction and motion design, 
276–303
design of sound, 294–297
designing for a virtual space, 
278–281
digital storytelling, 290–294
expanding realm of graphic 
design, 297–299
Hillman Curtis on, 281
interaction concepts, 282
interactive architecture, website 
anatomy, 286–290
motion design concepts, 283
storyboarding pointers, 293
International Festival of Arts & 
Ideas poster (Merk), 162
International Images Film Festival 
for Women poster (Gomo), 97
International Style, 52, 68
Swiss International Style, 61–63
International Trademark 
Association poster (Shim), 
254, 261
Internet browsers, 10
Internships, 307
Interviewing for graphic design 
jobs, 311–313
L’Intransigeant poster (Cassandre), 
47
Intuitive knowledge, 22
The Isms of Art (El Lissitzky), 51
Italian Old Style typeface (Goudy), 
type specimen book by Rogers, 
183
Itten, Johannes, 53
Janiszewski, Jerzy, 67
Japan, cultural comparison with 
Finland, 122
Japan Society, 100 Years website 
design, 246
Japanese woodblock prints, 42
Jewish Film Festival, poster design 
for, 104
Job in graphic design, getting, 
306–313
Jobs, Steve, 154
Johns, Jasper, 147
Johnson, Chacon, 
BlackPublicMedia.org website 
design, 279
Johnson, Chakaras
BlackPublicMedia.org website 
design, 279
DWU website, 117
evacuation instructions for 
subway train, 258
on personal style, 320
Jones, Jason, five-second clips 
by, 291
Junliang, Liu
Live Harmoniously
advertisement, 89
poster for chordaphone concert, 
89
Justified, 199
Kaden, Joel, 185
Kahlo, Frieda and Rivera, Diego, art 
exhibition poster (Greiman), 157
Kalman, Tibor, 70
Kandinsky, Wassily, 53, 162, 226
Kaplan, Geoff
channel identification, Digital 
Entertainment Network, 298
motion experiments on 
Akzidenz Grotesk typeface, 298
virtual world in typographic 
play, 210
Karlsson, Hjalti, “Move Our Money” 
charts, 17
Kauffer, E. McKnight, 47
Keaney, Echo, design history 
project on Stefan Bucher, 111
Keenan, book jacket for The Bug, 12
Keeping records of thought 
process, 78
Keeps London Going (Man Ray), 50
Kelmscott Press, 42
Kerning, 195
Keyframe, 292
Keywords, 136, 143
Kidd, Chip, 312
Kiehner, Elizabeth, 295
motion design for Tribeca Film 
Festival, 283
Kim, Hyochin, 213
Kim, Hyung Jin, 98
Kim, Somi, 103, 108
“What Is Retail?” report, 109
Kimberly-Clark tissue packaging, 
Slice of Summer (Mau), 177
Kince, Eli
dining hall poster, 138
hazardous shortcuts poster, 201
Kiser, Kim
designer vignette, 263
gestalt concepts, 266
on visual codes and perception, 
262
Kisor, Doug, 76
Klee, Paul, 53, 60
Knoll Furniture advertisement 
(Matter), 57, 58
Koenig, Friedrich, 36
Kowalski, Milo, resume design, 307
Krone, Helmut, 264
Kruger, Barbara, 324
You Are a Captive Audience, 325
Kuhlmann, Leavitt, Inc., 9
Kull, Wes
book cover design for Chronicle 
of a Death Foretold, 175
lecture poster for Gert Dumbar, 
152
Per Diem poster, 90
Kunstgewerbemuseum in Zürich, 
poster (Weingart), 63
Kunz, Willi, 62
Columbia School of Architecture 
poster, 91
Cyberspace poster, Columbia 
School of Architecture, 133
designer vignette, 223
on grids and alignments, 222
modular pattern in a poster, 219
Kwon, Claire, motion design 
project, 302
LAB at Rockwell Group, Plug-in-
Play project, 299
Lam, Loan, What Is Your Culture?
flier, 22
Landor Associates, FedEx 
logotype, 267
Lange, Gusty, on Rudolf Arnheim, 
161
Larsen, package design, 13
Larson, Gary, 112
Lascaux cave paintings, 6
Leading, 198
Learning from Las Vegas (Venturi 
and Brown), 69
Lee, Alice, poster design, 101
Lee, Janet
design for nonprofit Outreach 
Center, 172
personal myth project, 319
Lee, Jason, Dave the Handyman 
logotype, 202
Legal requirements, 107
Legalize LA’s Immigration Fact 
Sheet (Russell), 225
Léger, Fernand, 55
Lehrer, Warren, 26
Leipzig Trade Fair advertisement 
(Tschichold), 54
Lepak, John
illustrated quote poster, 309
logo for Botanica florist shop, 
201
Lester B. Pearson International 
Airport, Toronto, 12
Letter reversal, 217
Letter spacing, 195
LeWitt, Sol, 91, 245, 253
Li, Esther, motion design project, 
301
Liberty Leading the People
(Delacroix), 325
Liberty Weeps (Earls), Thoughts on 
Democracy exhibition, 325
Libeskind, Daniel, 21
Ligatures, 10
Lighting, 9
Lim, Louis, literacy poster, 193
Line, 153, 159
Linotype machine, 38
El Lissitzky, 51, 59, 182
Literacy poster (Bielenberg), 79
Literacy poster (Lim), 193
Literacy poster (Silva), 201
Literature, influence of, 24
Little, Francis W., house, 45
Livescribe’s Pulse Smartpen 
motion design, 297
Location of subject, concepts 
inspired by, 242–244
Logicaland invitation (Woodtli), 85
Logo(s), 13, 271
Poetry Slam logo design, 16
Logotype, 188
Lois, George, 65, 128
London Underground, Man Ray 
poster for, 50
Lost Berlin (Dana), 102, 110
LouisBoston, package identity 
for, 17
Lubalin Graph typeface, 185
Lubalin, Herb, 66, 185
Lui, John
book cover for The Birds, 173
Bug Off Exterminators logo, 173
Liu, Junliang, poster and 
advertisement, 89
Lukova, Luba, 127, 134–136
poster for Immigrant Theater 
Festival, 88
Lustig, Alvin, 60
M. Butterfly book cover (Choi), 141
Macbeth poster, design process 
for, 83
Maccaux, Monica, on the 
information gap, 320
Mackay, Brooke, Vancouver Culture 
Guide, 24
Mackintosh, Charles Rennie, 44, 52
Salon de Luxe tearoom, 45
Mad Men motion design title 
sequence, 283
Maeda, John, 92
Mafundikwa, Saki, 97
Magazines, 11, 56
Makela, P. Scott, 69
Making without knowing, 171
Malevich, Kazimir, 48, 191
Man behind the Curtain (Collie), 
22, 23
Man Ray, 49, 87
Man with a Movie Camera poster 
(Stenberg brothers), 51
Map of Manhattan/World Trade 
Center, 14
Marinetti, Filippo, 47
Market or legal requirements, 107
Marx, Karl, 44
The Mathematical Theory of 
Communication (Shannon), 268
Mathurin, Andy, Everything Ties,
163
Matisse, Henri, 166
Matter, Herbert, 55
advertisement for Knoll 
Furniture, 57, 58
Matthews, Mary Ellen, 9
Matz, Scott, 295
Mau, Christine, Kimberly-Clark 
tissue packaging, 177
McCarthy, Terrence, 155
environmental organization 
advertising poster, 273
INDEX
335

336
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Tailor typeface, 204
McCoy, Katherine, 20, 21, 69, 96
Chrysler Corporation Cleaning 
Manual, 115 
communications theory of 
seeing/hearing poster, 176
See, read, text, image chart, 268
Semiotics chart, 267
Shannon’s universal 
communication system, 268
McGlynn, Megan, motion design 
projects, 281
McLuhan, Marshall, 256, 280
McNerney, Matthew
Canadian Museum for Human 
Rights logotype, 269
on survival techniques, 320
Media, considerations related 
to, 107
Meditations on Coltrane CD cover 
(Franosch), 154
Medlyn, Kevin James, logotype for 
organic farm, 188
Een meeuw (The Seagull) poster 
(Beeke), 68
Meir, Tamar, montage, 87
Meirovitch, Adva, op-ed project, 
142
Meis, Ryan, retail package as 
website, 281
Mencken, H. L., 60
Meredith, Justin, 295
motion design for Tribeca Film 
Festival, 283
Mergenthaler, Ottmar, 38
Merk, Anita, International Festival 
of Arts & Ideas poster, 162
Merz, 54
Meta concepts, 92–94, 96
Metaphor, 82
Metaphoric concepts, 82–89, 95, 96
montage, 87
Polish poster design, 84
process for Macbeth poster, 83
special application of metaphor, 
86
Metaphoric typography, 201
Mies, Ryan, project blending 
packaging with web interaction, 
280
Miller, Abbott, exhibition design 
for Rolling Stones magazine, 24
Miller, Kelli
motion design for Tribeca Film 
Festival, 283 
storyboarding pointers, 293
Minion typeface, 182
Mobil logo (Chermayeff), 65
Mock-ups, 143
Modern Architecture and Other 
Essays, 227
Modern typefaces, 184
Modernism, 44, 68
in America, 56–61
Swiss International Style, 61
Modular grids, 217
Modules, 216
Moffitt, James, 327
Moholy-Nagy, László, 25, 57
brochure cover for Fourteen 
Bauhaus Books, 53
Monadnock Paper poster 
(Tscherny), 242
Mondrian, Piet, 52, 191
Mood boards, 121
Moore, Henry, sculptures exhibit, 
poster (Tomaszewski), 84
Montage, 87
generating ideas for, 140–143
using with word mapping in 
research visualization, 122
Moody, Jarratt, motion design for 
Peace Corps, 293
Morningstar newsletters, 14
Morris, William, 42, 44, 55
Moscoso, Victor, 63
concert poster for Chambers 
Brothers, 64
Flower Pot poster for Blue Cheer 
band, 272
Motion design, 9, 61, 279. See also
Interaction and motion design
Iconoclasts title design, 249
Motion poster, 78
Les mots en liberté (Marinetti), 47
“Move Our Money” charts, 17
Mozart concert in Seoul poster 
(Choi), 98
Monument to the Third International
(Tatlin), 50
Műller-Brockmann, Josef, 62, 218
Mrowczyk, Jacek, 84
Mucca Design, book design by, 11
Music
influence of, 24, 72
in motion and interaction 
design, 296
punk rock, 69
Myriad Pro typeface, 192
Myriad Pro Regular, 198, 199
“The Name Game,” 7
NASA website, analytic approach 
to design, 92
National Audubon Society, annual 
report (Pirtle), 82
National Institute for Play 
fundraising kit (Schulte), 162
Navigation, 286
Nelson, Monica, student 
newspaper broadsheet, 209
Neo-plasticism (Mondrian), 52
Die Neue Typographie brochure 
page (Tschichold), 54
The New School, visual identity 
for, 26
Negative space, 158, 159
Nelson, Sam, wireframe and final 
web page design for chinacare.
org, 289
New Typography, 54
New York City Alliance Against 
Sexual Assault logo (Worksight), 
91
New York City MTA, 170, 258
New York School, 64
The New York Times
op-ed section designs by Adam 
Palmer, 88
In Perspective: America’s Conflicts
chart, 90
The New York Times Magazine cover 
(Froelich), 19
newsletters, 11
newspapers, 11
Niépce, Joseph Nicéphore, 36
Nike, project bridging motion 
design and the body, 280
Nikitas, Kali, 18
19th Amendment commemorative 
stamp (Greiman), 157
Normand, Matthew, Here Is Here
motion design sequence, 290
Notre-Dame-du-Haut (Le 
Corbusier), 77
Noyes, Alfred, 82
No. 14 (Brown over Dark) (Rothko), 
161
Nuts and bolts of graphic design, 
28
Oberman, Emily, 9
Object design studio, 224, 230
Objects in Space exhibit, Selby 
Gallery, poster (Greiman), 157
Observational research, 114
Odgis, Janet, View magazine grid 
structure and layouts, 228
Offset printing, 164
Ogilvy Brand Integration Group, 
Times Square Alliance logo, 243
Old Style typefaces, 184
Oldenburg, Claes, 24
Oliver, Vaughan, 72
Olson, Travis and Thorburn, 
Carmichael Lynch, Poetry Slam 
logo, 16
One-point perspective, 160
The Open Door (Talbot), 37
Online publications, design for, 11
Optical considerations in typeface 
design, 187
Out of Order essay, Offramp
journal, page spreads (Bingham), 
232
Outreach Center advertising 
design (Lee), 172
Owens, Matt
Good Magazine chart, 261
Meridians motion design, 
296
Overlapping interests of design, 
120
Package design, 13, 113
package identity for 
LouisBoston, 17
researching, 114
Page spreads, 225
Pakosta, Tomas, designs for EU, 279
Palmer, Adam, designs for op-ed 
section of New York Times, 88
paper
formats, 234
invention of, 36
manufacturing of, advances in, 36
paper-fold formats, 234
Paper Magazine, 11
Paragraph spacing, 198
Parameters of design project, 
determining, 119
Paris Exposition (1925), 56
Park, Chang Hook, 253
Park, Sanghoon, 98
Park, Sunghyun, 327
Park, Tina, on design research, 116
Park, Wonji, typographic 
experiments, 194
Parody, 258
Parsey, Mary, 179, 213, 237
Part-as-whole metaphor, 86
Partnership, 316
Passion, requirement for, 20
Pastoral magazine opening spread 
(Suokko), 235
Pattern, 155
developing modular patterns, 
219
Pavlatova, Michael, motion design 
for EU, 279
Peirce, Charles Sanders, 267
Peace Corps motion design 
(Moody), 93
The Pencil of Nature (Talbot), 37
Pentagram design consultancy, 
240
Periodicals, 11
Personal and public, addressing, 33
Personal style, 320
Personal website and design 
blog, 310
Perspective, 160
In Perspective: America’s Conflicts
chart (Ericson and Hossain), 
90
Photography, beginnings of, 36
On Photography (Sontag), 194
Photomontage, 48
Picas, 192
Picasso, Pablo, 46, 60
Piedrafita, Santiago, book design 
for American Center for Design, 
Show of Excellence, 245
Pineles, Cipe, 56
Pirtle, Woody, 82
logo design for Fine Line 
Features, 87
Piscatello, Rocco, poster for Visiting 
Artist program, Fashion Institute 
of Technology, 264
Pitegoff, Max, 87
chart on coffee spills, 309
NYC Public Library picture 
collection service, 231
Planet Green channel, motion 
design spot, 295
Plug-in-Play project, LAB at 
Rockwell Group, 276, 299
Plunkert, David, posters for 
TurnAround, 8
PM graphic arts journal cover 
(Beall), 59
Poe, Edgar Allen, 21
Poetry Slam logo (Olson and 
Thorburn), 16
Points, 192
Political cartoons, 6
Political issues, graphic designers’ 
contributions to, 17
Pompeii mosaic, 8
Portfolio in graphic design, 
307–311
Positioning charts, 121
Positive/negative space, 159
Poster design
Polish, conceptual approach, 84
worklist, 138
Posterized, 142
Postmodernism, 68–71
Pragmatics, 268
Prague, visual identity (Studio 
Najbrt), 268
Prakash, Ambica, typographic 
exploration, 193
Prejudices: A Selection (Mencken), 
cover by Rand, 60
Presentation, 30
Priester matches poster (Bernhard), 
46
Primary colors, 164
Princeton University School of 
Architecture, lecture series 
poster (Hori), 214, 232
Printing, advances during 
Industrial Revolution, 36
Problem, defining in design 
research, 117
using deconstruction, 118
Problem solving, 78
Product or service details, 106
Production, 30
Proportion, 174
Proportion systems. See Grids and 
alignments
Psychedelia, 63, 259
Psychedelic language, 272
Psychological effects of color, 166
Public and personal, addressing, 22

INDEX
337
Publication design, 11
Punk rock, 69 
Pythagoras, 76
Radnitzky, Emmanuel (Man Ray), 
49
Rag (text alignment), 199
Rahmé, Laurice, Bond No. 9, 244
Rambow, Gunter, 67
Rand, Paul, 59, 64, 168, 272
cover for H. L. Mencken book, 60
poster on, by Wilson Bonilla, 154
Thoughts on Design, 60
Westinghouse trademark, 60
Random word technique, 136
Ray Gun magazine spread (Carson), 
71
READ poster (Silva), 201
Readymades, 48
Recontextualization, 205
Recontextualizing type, 205
Refreshing your vision, 146
Reigstad, Kjell, on daily research, 
123
Reiner, Imre, 111
Relief sculpture, University of 
Connecticut (Hoyt and Zurolo), 
209
Repetition, 159, 175
Research, 29, 102–125
asking right questions, 105
client, subject, and audience, 
104
considering overlapping 
interests, 120
defining the problem, 117
doing individual research, 112
looking at past designs, 111
Michele Washington on the 
value of writing, 107
observational research and focus 
groups, 114
preparing design brief, 106
saturation point, 124
using as conceptual approach, 
247
virtual world and actual world 
research, 110
visualizing, techniques for, 
120–123
worklist, by Kareem Collie, 119
Restaurant Florent advertisement 
(Kalman), 70
Resumes, 306
Reversals, 217
RGB (red, green, blue) color 
system, 164
Rhythm, 159, 175
Richmond, Matthew
home page for Chopping-block 
studio, 282
website design for They Might 
Be Giants, 282
Rietveld, Gerrit, 52
Rimbaud, Arthur, 60
Rhodes, Silas, poster for School of 
Visual Arts, 93
Rivera, Diego, art exhibition poster 
(Greiman), 157
Rivera, Jessica, Drama Book Shop 
logo, 210
Robert, Nicholas, 36
Roberts, Joseph, 80
designer vignette, 81
Rockwell Group, LAB at, Plug-in-
Play project, 276, 299
Rockwell, Norman, 325
Rodchenko, Alexander, 51
Rodriguez-Lewis, Nicole, 327
construction company ad, 275
Roebling, John Augustus, 39
Rogers, Bruce, 183
Rolling Stone magazine, “The 
30th Anniversary Covers Tour” 
exhibition design, 24
Romero, Lorenzo, Shepherd’s 
School logo, 160
Rothko, Mark, No. 14 (Brown over 
Dark), 161
Roughs, 29
Royal Mail stamp (Duckworth), 265
Ruder, Emil, 63
Rule of thirds, 235
Rural Electrification poster (Beall), 
59, 317
Ruscha, Ed, 324
Standard Station, Amarillo, Texas,
325
Ruskin, John, 39, 42
Russell, Benno, Legalize LA’s 
Immigration Fact Sheet, 225
Russell, Bertrand, 85
Russian Exhibition poster (El 
Lissitzky), 51, 59
Saarinen, Eero, 168
Sagmeister, Stefan, 71
Deitch installation and 
invitation, 71
“Move Our Money” charts, 17
Sahin, Naz, 9
Sahre, Paul, 151
cover design for Adultery, 169
cover design for The History of 
Western Philosophy, 85, 95
cover design for Stripper Lessons,
260
Saks Fifth Avenue logo redesign 
(Pentagram), 241, 244
Salazar, Genelle, 327
T-shirt design, 32
Salomé (Beardsley), 42
Salon de Luxe tearoom 
(Mackintosh), 45
Sahin, Naz, 9
Sandberg, Willem, 55
Sandhaus, Louise, on conceptual 
healing, 252
Sans serif typefaces, 182, 184
Santoro, Scott W., 3, 179
Satie, Erik, 46
Saturation, 164
Saturday Night Live, opening 
titles, 9
Saussure, Ferdinand de, 267
Le Saucier package design, 13
Sawicki, Karen, montage, 100
Scale, 161
Scarred for Life chapter opener 
(Corbitt), 224
Scher, Paula, 70, 145
dare, dear, read poster, 79
Public Theater poster, 71
School of Design, 57
School of Visual Arts poster 
(Victore), 93
Schröder House (Rietveld), 52
Schuitema, Paul, 55
Schulte, Jason 
Chaqwa identity design, 167, 175
fundraising kit for National 
Institute for Play, 162
Schwitters, Kurt, 54
SCI-Arc lecture series inflatable 
poster (Michael Worthington), 27
Scope of Work, 107
Sculpture, influence of, 24
The Seagull (Chekhov), poster by 
Beeke, 68
A Season in Hell (Rimbaud), cover 
by Lustig, 60
Secondary colors, 164
Second-level web pages, 288
See Through Me portrait, Gilbert 
Paper promotion, 322
Selby Gallery, Objects in Space
exhibit poster (Greiman), 157
Self-publishing, 15
Semantics, 268
Semiotics, 267
Serif typefaces, 182, 184
Seti I’s Campaigns, Temple of Amun 
at Karnak, Thebes, Egypt, 35
Shannon, Claude E., 268
Shape, 154, 159
Shaw, Paul, 181
calligraphic examples, 196
on casual or spontaneous 
writing, 197
letter design, 196
Sheeran, Jessica, 78
Shelton, Rich, “Honor the Workers” 
design, 18
Shepherd’s School logo (Romero), 160
Shim, Yoonseuk, International 
Trademark Association poster, 
254, 261
Siegel, Dmitri, 251
Siegel & Gale design firm, The New 
School visual identity, 26
Signage, defined, 12
Signage design, 12
Brown University Friedman 
Study Center, 247
environmental, Bloomberg LP 
headquarters, 145
Silence: Lectures and Writings
(Cage), 296
Silkscreen, 27
Silva, Mariana, READ poster, 201
Silver ratio, 234
Sinatra, Frank, 166
Site maps, 287
Slab serifs, 38, 184
examples of, 184
Slimbach, Robert, 192
Societal role of graphic design, 18
Sole proprietorship, 316
Solidarity trade union poster 
(Janiszewski), 67
Sontag, Susan, 194
Sound, design of, 294–297
Sound techniques, 9
Soviet propaganda poster using 
“Sheep’s Clothing” fable, 140
Sowiński, Kuba, Consumption
poster, 85
Space in graphic design, 159
Speaking Volumes poster (Bierut), 
88
Splining, 298
Spot colors, 165
Spreads, 225
Stan, Tony, 185
Standard Station, Amarillo, Texas
(Ruscha), 325
Starting your own practice, 316
Steam-powered printing, 36
Stein, Gertrude, 46
Stenberg, Georgil, 51
Stenberg, Vladimir, 51
Stephens, Joshua Ray, typographic 
narrative, 194
Stillman, Joel, motion design 
project, 298
The Stones of Venice, Vol. II, 39
Story concepts, 79
Storyboard, 292
Storyboarding
motion design, 291
pointers on, 293
Storytelling
determining the story, 119
digital, 290–294
Stowell, Scott, 305
Brown University Friedman 
Study Center signage system, 
247
Coca-Cola “Between” campaign, 
15
The Stranger cover design (Anh), 
262
Strausfeld, Lisa, Bloomberg LP 
environmental signage, 145
Stress, 186, 187
Stripper Lessons cover design 
(Sahre), 260
Studio for Interactive Media, 278
Structure in graphic design 
solutions, 28
Stuff series (Bielenberg), 93
subaudition, 89
Subject, researching, 105
Subject’s location, concepts 
inspired by, 242–244
Sublime Subversives lecture series 
poster (Tenazas), 120
Südafrikanisches Roulette (South 
African Roulette) poster 
(Rambow), 67
Sullivan, Louis Henry, 153
Suokko, Glenn
cover design for Emigre 
magazine, 69 
opening spread for Pastoral
magazine, 235
Suprematism (1915–1934), 48
Suprematist Painting (Eight Red 
Rectangles) (Malevich), 48
Surrealism (1924–1955), 48, 66
Survival techniques, Matthew 
McNerney, 320
Sutnar, Ladislav, 58
Bell Telephone user’s guide, 59
Transport—Next Half Century,
brochure for Canterbury Printing 
Co., 159
Swiss International Style, 61–63, 66
Symbols, 269
Syntactics, 267
Szent-Györgi, Albert, 104
Tailor typeface, 204
Talbot, William Henry Fox, 37
Tall Tales Restaurant, logo for, 13
Target audience, 104, 106
researching, 112–116
Target department stores, Bright 
Nights project, 297
Tatlin, Vladimir, 50
Teas’ Tea package design (Gooder 
Companies), 176
Technology, design and, 321
Temperature, color, 165
Template Gothic typeface, 204
Ten Books on Architecture 
(Alberti), 175
Tenazas, Lucille, 120
Jewish Film Festival poster 
design, 104
lecture series poster Sublime 
Subversives, 120
Tension, 169
Text alignment, 199–201
Text columns, 226–228

338
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
Texture, 155
They Might Be Giants website 
design (Richmond), 282
Thibodeau, Michael, CARE logo, 
270
“Think Small” campaign 
(Volkswagen), 64
Third-level web pages, 288
Thompson, Bradbury, 61
Thorburn, Carmichael Lynch, 
Poetry Slam logo, 16
Thornberg and Forrester
motion design for Tribeca Film 
Festival, 283
sound effects in motion design 
spot, 295
Thorne, Robert, 38
Thought starters, 127
Thoughts on Democracy exhibition, 
325
Thoughts on Design (Rand), 60
Through the Looking Glass, Lewis 
Carroll, 141 
Throwing Apples at the Sun
interactive video, 248
Thumbnails, 29
thumbnail sketches in design 
process, 131
Time/budget in graphic design 
solutions, 28
Time Warner Cable logo, 153
Times Square Alliance identity 
(Dye), 243
Titus, Craig, book cover design for 
1984, 101
Tomaszewski, Henryk, poster 
for Henry Moore sculptures 
exhibit, 84
Tord Boontje Studio, Bright Nights 
project, 297
Toulouse-Lautrec, Henri de, 43, 325
Tracking, 195, 198
Trade Gothic typeface, 182
Transition, 292
Transitional typefaces, 184
Transport—Next Half Century,
brochure for Canterbury Printing 
Co. (Sutnar), 159
Trepkowski, Tadeusz, 66
antiwar poster, 67
Tribeca Film Festival motion 
design, 283
Trollbäck + Company, opening title 
sequence for PopTech, 295
Tropon food concentrate, poster 
for (van de Velde), 44
Try, Geraldine, 327
Tscherny, George, 61, 75, 129
Monadnock Paper poster, 242
Tschichold, Jan, 54
Twombly, Carol, 192
Two-point perspective, 160
type design, 10
Constructivist design, 51
International Style, 52
New Typography, 54
 Oswald Cooper on, 144
Type and typography, 180–213
analytic typography, 193–201
designing a typeface, Jonathan 
Hoefler on, 206
historical type, 183
metaphoric typography, 201
Philippe Apeloig on, 190
readable texture, 195
recontextualizing type, 205
speaking with type, 181
type classifications, 184
type in motion, 292
type in the third dimension, 
209
typeface anatomy, 186–188
typeface families and fonts, 
188–192
typographic coding, 259
typographic narrative, Joshua 
Ray Stephens, 194
vernacular inspiration, 203
Typeface family, 188
Typefaces, 181
designed by William Morris, 42
early developers of, 38
from eighteenth, nineteenth, 
and early twentieth centuries, 
184
typograms, 66
Typographic grids, 220–229
grid system research, 224
pages and spreads, 225
text columns, 226–228
website column grids, 229
Typographische Monatsblatter
cover (Matter), 55
Typography. See also Type and 
typography
defined, 182
Tysk, Johanna, poster on 
transportation, 174
Tzara, Tristan, 48
Underwriters Laboratories (UL), 
motion sequence for, 291
Unique selling proposition, 118
Unity, 176
University of Connecticut, 
façade typography/relief 
sculpture, 209
“The Urban Forest Project,” 18
Uretsky, Jan, 56, 128
Uroos, Maria, series on Iraq war, 
319
usefulness in graphic design 
solutions, 28
U.S.P.S. 19th Amendment 
commemorative stamp 
(Greiman), 157
utopia, designing, 50
Valéry, Paul, 131
Valicenti, Rick, 322
designer vignette, 323
Portrait, See Thru Me, 304, 323
Thirst, Vancouver lecture poster, 
304, 319
Value, 164
Van Alen, William, Chrysler 
Building, 56
Van de Velde, Henri, 44
van der Rohe, Ludwig Mies, 45
Van Doesburg, Theo, 52
An Alphabet, 52
Contra-Composition of 
Dissonances, XVI, 24
cover of De Stijl magazine, 52
Vancouver Culture Guide (Castro 
and Mackay), 24
VanderLans, Rudy, 69
promotional poster using 
Template Gothic typeface, 204
Vanity Fair, 56
Venturi, Robert, 68
Vernacular, 203
Victore, James
Poster protesting 
“Disneyfication” of Times 
Square, 261
School of Visual Arts poster, 93
Victoria Symphony poster series, 
150, 155
Victory poster (Fukuda), 67
View magazine, grid structure and 
layouts, 228
Vinh, Khoi, on constraints, 231
Virtual Telometrix’s Stuff 
(Bielenberg), 93
Vision in Motion (Moholy-Nagy), 25
Vision, refreshing, 146
Visual code, defined, 255
Visual coding, 254–275
coded treatments in advertising, 
264
codes and contexts, 261
color coding, 259
gestalt perception, 264–267
icon, index, and symbol, 268
identities, 269–273
reasons for creating meaning in 
design, 273
semiotics, 267
sending messages with visual 
codes, 256
tools for, 258
typographic coding, 259
Visual Design in Action (Sutnar), 58
Visual effects, 9
Visualizing ideas, 139
Visualizing research, techniques 
for, 120
mood boards, 121
positioning charts, 121
word techniques, 122
Vitra Workspirit 10: Net ‘n’ Nest 
catalog, 238, 250
Vitruvian Man (da Vinci), 233
Voice and vision, 17
Voice-over narration, 297
Volkswagen, “Think Small” 
campaign, 64
Warhol, Andy, 324
Washington, Booker T., 97
Washington, Michele, 107
Watt, James, 36
Wax, Calgary AB, Canada
Farmers’ Market posters, 265
poster series for Victoria 
Symphony, 150, 155
Website design, 278
Cascading Style Sheets (CSS), 
220 
column grids, 229
freestyle alignments, 230
interactive architecture, 286–
290
Japan Society, 100 Years, 246
personal website and design 
blog, 310
white space, 159
Websites archiving graphic design 
work, 112
Weingart, Wolfgang, 63
Welles, Orson, 313
Westinghouse trademark (Rand), 
60
Westvaco Inspirations for Printers,
page spread from (Thompson) 
61 
Wexler, Jessica, 255
What Is Your Culture? flier (Lam), 22
White space, 158, 159
Whitney typeface, 207
Wilde, Oscar, 52
Williams College Museum of Art 
catalog cover (Glauber), 94
Wilson, Spencer, web design for 
portfolio site, 288
Wilson, Wes, 63
concert poster for The 
Association, 64
Wilton, Nick, cover design for 
Against Nature, 85
Winterhouse Institute, Below the 
Fold, 111
Wireframing a website, 288
Wolfe, Shawn, Beatkit
advertisement parody, 94
Wong, Peter, 66
Woodtli, Martin, 85
Woolard, Caroline 
Bugoff Exterminators logo, 155
New York City MTA design, 170
Word mapping, 122
Word techniques for visualizing 
research, 122
Work environment, creative, 128
Workflow, by Alex Zoltarev, 320
Worksight
The Art of Light and Space book 
cover design, 200
brochure and folder for ADP, 13
Gilbert Paper promotion, 131
mini portfolio sampler, 313
New York City Alliance Against 
Sexual Assault logo, 91
photographer’s website design, 
159
two-page spread, Modern 
Architecture and Other Essays,
227
Worthington, Michael, 7
SCI-Arc lecture series inflatable 
poster, 27
Wragg, Nicki, 128
Wright, Frank Lloyd, 44, 52, 153
Francis W. Little house, 45
Wright, Orville and Wilbur, 239
Yale Alumni Magazine, website 
design (Hoyt and Zurolo), 229
Yokoo, Tadanori, 66
Yoo, Richard, Geek Love cover 
design, 155, 158
You Are a Captive Audience (Kruger), 
325
You in your work, 318–321
Zack, Jeff
package design research, 114
repackaging, low-glycemic 
beverage, 113
Zadnik, Jessica, 9
Zaruba, Alan
interaction design for EU, 279
website design for EU, 279
Zoltarev, Alex, on workflow, 320
Zurolo, Mark
façade typography/relief 
sculpture, 209
Yale Alumni Magazine, website 
design, 229
Zwart, Piet, 55

TEXT CREDITS 
339
CHAPTER 1
Page 7: Excerpt from Michael Worthington, “The Name Game” AIGA Jour-
nal, Vol. 16, No. 2: Page 10: Reprinted by permission of Barry Deck, Barry 
Deck Design LLC; Page 18: Reprinted by permission of Kali Nikitas, Graph-
ic Design for Love; Page 20: Reprinted by permission of Katherine McCoy; 
Page 22: Reprinted by permission of Maya Drozdz, partner, VisuaLingual 
Limited; Page 26: Warren Lehrer, ‘Emptying the Spoon, Enlarging the 
Plate: Some Thoughts on Graphic Design Education” from The Education 
of a Graphic Designer, 2/e Copyright (c) 2005, Allworth Press. Reprinted by 
permission of Skyhorse Publishing, Inc.; Page 31: Reprinted by permission 
of Randall E. Hoyt, Mark Zurolo.
CHAPTER 2
Page 40: Reprinted by permission of Steven Heller; Page 56: Reprinted 
by permission of Jan Uretsky; Page 62: Willi Kunz, New York; Page 66: Re-
printed by permission of Peter Wong, professor of Graphic Design, Savan-
nah College of Art and Design, Atlanta Georgia; Page 72: (c) Tamar Cohen. 
Reprinted by permission of the author.
CHAPTER 3
Page 76: Reprinted by permission of Doug Kisor, department chair, 
Graphic Studies Department, College for Creative Studies; Page 80: Re-
printed by permission of Joseph Roberts, professor of Communication 
Design, Pratt Institute; Page 84: Reprinted by permission of Jacek Mrow-
czyk; Page 85: Martin Woodtli, martin@woodt.li; Page 89: Reprinted by 
permission of Xu Guiying; Page 96: Reprinted by permission of Katherine 
McCoy; Page 97: Reprinted by permission of Saki Mafundikwa, founder/
director, Zimbabwe Institute of Vigital Arts (ZIVA), Harare, Zimbabwe; 
Page 98: Reprinted by permission of Inyoung Choi, PhD, Department of 
Graphic ad Package Design, Hanyang University, South Korea; Page 100: 
Anita Merk, Flyleaf Creative, Inc.
CHAPTER 4
Page 104: Seth Godlin; Page 107: Design Strategist and Writer Michele Y. 
Washington; Page 108: Reprinted by permission of Somi Kim, senior part-
ner, creative director, Ogilvy & Mather, Los Angeles; Page 112: The Far Side 
(r) by Gary Larson; Page 114: Reprinted by permission of Jeff Zack; Page 
115: Reprinted by permission of Katherine McCoy; Page 116: Reprinted 
by permission of Tina Park; Page 117 Figures 4.19 and 4.20: Reprinted by 
permission of Helen Marie Creative Partners, LLC; Page 118: Reprinted by 
permission of Anna Gerber; Page 119: Reprinted by permission of Kareem 
Collie, Dimitrous II, Inc.; Page 120 Figure 4.21: Charles Eames; Page 123: 
Reprinted by permission of Kali Nikitas, Graphic Design for Love.
CHAPTER 5
Page 134: Reprinted by permission of Luba Lukova; Page 139: Reprinted 
by permission of Charles Goslin; Page 146: Stephen Banham and Saman-
tha Neumann; Page 148–149: Based on a presentation by Geoffry Fried, 
professor, The Art Institute of Boston, at Lesley University (see revolution-
philadelphia.aiga.org/content27c8.html?Alias=rp_presentations).
CHAPTER 6
Page 156: Reprinted by permission of April Greiman, Made in Space; Page 
158: Reprinted by permission of Andrew McCall Photography/design by 
Worksight; Page161: Reprinted by permission of Gusty Lange, professor 
Graduate Communications Design, Pratt University; Page 171: Reprinted 
by permission of Matthias Brendler, Brazil-based U.S. expat multidisci-
plinary artist, designer, researcher, writer, and educator; Page 179: Re-
printed by permission of Paul Shaw.
CHAPTER 7
Page 189: (c) Philippe Apeliog. Reprinted by permission of Philippe Ape-
liog; Page 194: Reprinted by permission of Joshua Ray Stevens; Page 197: 
Reprinted by permission of Paul Shaw; Page 206: Hoefler & Frere-Jones, 
Specimen of Types, 8th ed. Designed by Jonathan Hoefler, 2004.
CHAPTER 8
Page 222: Willi Kunz; Page 229 Figure 8.23: Reprinted by permission of Ran-
dall E. Hoyt and Mark Zurolo; Page 230 Figure 8.24: Reprinted by permission 
of Object Collective; Page 231: Reprinted by permission of Khoi Vinh.
CHAPTER 9
Page 240: Reprinted by permission of Michael Bierut; Page 242: George 
Tscherny, NY Poster. Reprinted by permission of George Tscherny; Page 
243: Reprinted by permission of Alan Dye; Page 244: Reprinted by per-
mission of Laurice Rahme; Page 245: Reprinted by permission of Andrew 
Blauvelt: Page 246: Reprinted by permission of Kiss Me I’m Polish, LLC; 
Page 247: Reprinted by permission of Elliot P. Earls; Page 248: Reprinted 
by permission of Elliot P. Earls; Page 249: Reprinted by permission of 
Greg Hahn, owner, Gretel; Page 250: Reprinted by permission of COMA 
Amsterdam/New York (Cornelia Blatter, Marcel Herman, and Billy Nolan); 
Page 251: Barbara Glauber, designer; Page 252: Reprinted by permission 
of Louise Sandhaus, professor, School of Art, California Institute of Arts.
CHAPTER 10
Page 258 Figures 10.3 and 10.4: Reprinted by permission of Helen Marie 
Creative Partners, LLC; Page 262: Reprinted by permission of Kim Kiser; 
Page 266: Reprinted by permission of Kim Kiser; Page 267 Figure 10.21: 
Reprinted by permission of Katherine McCoy; Page 268 Figures 10.22 and 
10.23: Reprinted by permission of Katherine McCoy; Page 270: Reprinted 
by permission of Michael Thibodeau.
CHAPTER 11
Page 278: Reprinted by permission of the author, Justin Bakse; Page 279 
Figure 11.2: Reprinted by permission of Helen Marie Creative Partners, 
LLC; Page 279 Figure 11.4: Reprinted by permission of Alan Zaruba; Page 
279 Figure 11.6: Reprinted by permission of Ryan Meis, instructor Jeff Ble-
itz; Page 282 Figure 11.9: Courtesy of Jazz at Lincoln Center, Nesuhi Erte-
gun Jazz Hall of Fame; Page 282 Figures 11.10 and 11.11: Reprinted by per-
mission of The Chopping Block, Inc.; Page 284: Reprinted by permission 
of David Hillman Curtis, principal/director, Hillman Curtis, Inc.; Page 286: 
Courtesy of the Eames office; Page 287 Figure 11.16: Reprinted by permis-
sion of Peepshow Collective, Ltd.; Page 288: Reprinted by permission of 
Clever Name Here, Inc.; Page 292 Figure 11.21: Reprinted by permission of 
Jeremy Cox; Page 293: Reprinted by permission of Kelli Miller; Page 296: 
John Cage, “The Future of Music: Credo” in Silence: Lectures and Writing
Copyright (c) 1961 Wesleyan University Press. Adapted by permission.
CHAPTER 12
Page 311: Reprinted by permission of Caitlin Folchman-Wagner; Page 312: 
Reprinted by permission of Scribner, a Division of Simon & Schuster, Inc., 
from The Cheese Monkeys: A Novel in Two Semesters by Chip Kidd. Copy-
right (c) 2001 by Charles Kidd. All rights reserved; Page 313: Connie Bird-
sall, senior partner, creative director, Lippincoh; Page 314: Reprinted by 
permission of Sean Adams, Partner, AdamsMorioka, Inc.; Page 318: Noble 
Cumming, design director; Page 322: Designer Rick Valicenti and Thirst; 
Page 325: Reprinted by permission of Charles Goslin.
Text Credits

340
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
FRONT MATTER
Page XII: rvlsoft/Shutterstock
CHAPTER 1
Page 6: akg-images/Newscom; Page 6: MasPix/Alamy; Page 6: Courtesy of 
Library of Congress; Page 8: TurnAround, Inc.; Page 8: FedEx service marks 
used by permission; Page 9: Broadway Video Enterprises; Page 11: Paper 
Magazine; Page 12: “Jacket Cover” copyright ©2004 by Anchor Books, a 
division of Random House, Inc., from The Bug by Ellen Ullman. Used by 
permission of Doubleday, a division of Random House, Inc.; Page 13: Tall 
Tales Restaurant; Page 13: Automatic Data Processing (ADP); Page 13: Le 
Saucier Frozen Foods; Page 14: Morningstar, Inc.; Page 16: Poetry Slam, 
Inc.; Page 17: Louis Boston; Page 20: Cranbrook Educational Community; 
Page 21: Collection of Cranbrook Art Museum, Bloomfield Hills, Michigan, 
Gift of Katherine and Michael McCoy (c) Katherine McCoy and Cranbrook 
Art Museum; Page 24: Contra-Composition of Dissonances, XVI, 1925, 
Doesburg, Theo van (1883–1931)/Haags Gemeentemuseum, The Hague, 
Netherlands/The Bridgeman Art Library.
CHAPTER 2
Page 35: mountainpix/Shutterstock; Page 36: M.S. Barth. 42, folio 110v. 
Universitätsbibliothek Johann Christian Senckenberg. Frankfurt am 
Main; Page 37: The Art Archive/Alamy; Page 37: Stapleton Historical Col-
lection/Heritage-Images; Page 38: Courtesy of Library of Congress; Page 
38: 1836 Poster from the Theatre-Royal, Norwich; Courtesy of Library of 
Congress; Page 39: Courtesy of Library of Congress; Page 40: Steven Hell-
er; Page 41: School of Visual Arts; Page 42: Fotomas/TopFoto/The Image 
Works; Page 42: The Pierpont Morgan Library/Art Resource, NY; Page 42: 
“J’ai baise ta bouche, Jokanaan (I kissed your mouth, John)”, illustration 
from ‘Salome’ by Oscar Wilde, pub. 1894 (line block print), Beardsley, Au-
brey (1872–1898)/Private Collection/The Stapleton Collection/The 
Bridgeman Art Library International; Page 43: Victor Horta/SOFAM–Bel-
gium; Page 43: General Electric; Page 43: Fine Art Images/Glow Images; 
Page 44: Velde, Henry van de (1863–1957) Tropon Poster (Plakat: Tropon) 
(plate, facing page 62) from the periodical Pan, vol. IV, no. 1 (Apr-May-Jun 
1898). Lithograph, composition (irreg.): 12 1/4 x 7 13/16" (31.1 x 19.9 cm); 
Page 44: sheet: 14 5/16 x 10 7/8" (36.4 x 27.7 cm). Publisher: Genossen-
schaft Pan GmbH, Berlin. Printer: Leutert & Schneidewind, Dresden. Edi-
tion: 1213 (artist’s edition: 38, numbered, on Imperial Japan paper; deluxe 
edition: 75, numbered, on copper-plate printing paper; general edition: 
1100 on copper-plate printing paper [this ex.]). Gift of Peter H. Deitsch. 
The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Mu-
seum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists 
Rights Society (ARS), New York/SABAM, Brussels; Page 45: TopFoto/The 
Image Works; Page 45: Wright, Frank Lloyd (1867–1959) Living room from 
the Little House, Wayzata, Minnesota. 1912–1915. H. 13 ft. 8 in. (4.17 m), L. 
46 ft. (14 m), W. 28 ft. (8 53 m). Purchase, Emily Crane Chadbourne Be-
quest, 1972 (1972.60.1); Location:The Metropolitan Museum of Art, New 
York, NY, U.S.A. Image copyright ©The Metropolitan Museum of Art/Art 
Resource, NY. ©2012 Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation, Scottsdale, AZ/Art-
ists Rights Society (ARS), NY; Page 45: Public Domain, Peter Behrens; Page 
45: bpk, Berlin/Kunstbibliothek, Staatliche Museen, Berlin, Germany/Art 
Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/SIAE, Rome; 
Page 46: Historical Picture Archive/CORBIS; Picasso, Pablo (1881–1973). 
Les Demoiselles d’Avignon. Paris, June–July 1907. Oil on canvas, 8' x 7' 8" 
(243.9 x 233.7 cm). Acquired through the Lillie P. Bliss Bequest. The Muse-
um of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of 
Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Estate of Pablo 
Picasso/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Page 47: Marinetti, Filippo 
Tommaso (1876–1944); In the Evening, Lying on Her Bed, She Reread the Let-
ter from Her Artilleryman at the Front. 1919. Letterpress, 13 3/8 x 9 1/4". Jan 
Tschichold Collection, Gift of Philip Johnson. (598.19771). The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern 
Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society 
(ARS), New York/SIAE, Rome; V&A Images, London/Art Resource, NY; Page 
48: Art Resource, NY; Page 48: The Philadelphia Museum of Art/Art Re-
source, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/ADAGP, Paris/
Succession Marcel Duchamp; bpk/Nationalgalerie, Staatliche Museen, 
Berlin, Germany/Jörg P. Anders/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights So-
ciety (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Page 49: Photo ©Oasis/Photos 
12/Alamy. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, 
Bonn; Page 50: CNAC/MNAM/Dist. Réunion des Musées Nationaux/Art 
Resource, NY. ©2012 Man Ray Trust/Artists Rights Society (ARS), NY/
ADAGP, Paris; Page 50: Man Ray (1890–1976) ©ARS, NY. Keeps London Go-
ing. 1932. Offset lithograph, 39 5/8 x 24 1/4" (100.6 x 61.6 cm). Gift of Ber-
nard Davis. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Im-
age ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA /Art Resource, 
NY. ©2012 Man Ray Trust/Artists Rights Society (ARS), NY/ADAGP, Paris; 
Page 50: Tatlin, Vladimir (1895–1956). Model of the Monument to the 
Third International. 1920; Page 51: The Museum of Modern Art, New York, 
NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCA-
LA/Art Resource, NY; Page 51: Lissitzky, El (Eleazar) (1890–1941) Die Kun-
stismen/Les ismes de l’art/The Isms of Art/Kunstismus, 1914–1924. by Jean 
(Hans) Arp, El Lissitzky. 1925. Letterpress, page: 10 1/8 x 7 11/16" (25.7 x 
19.5 cm). Publisher: Eugen Rentsch, Zurich, Munich, and Leipzig. Edition: 
unknown. Gift of The Judith Rothschild Foundation. The Museum of Mod-
ern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/
Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), 
New York; Page 51: Lissitzky, El (Eleazar) (1890–1941) USSR Russische Aus-
stellung. 1929. Gravure, 49 x 35 1/4". Jan Tschichold Collection, Gift of 
Philip Johnson. (376.1950). Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/
Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), 
New York; Page 52: Doesburg, Theo van (1883–1931). Simultaneous Com-
position. 1929. Oil on canvas. 50.2 x 50.4 cm (19 3/4 x 19 13/16"). Gift of 
Katherine S. Dreier to Collection Société Anonyme. 1948.209. Yale Univer-
sity Art Gallery, New Haven, CT, USA. Yale University Art Gallery/Art Re-
source, NY; Page 52: ©Bildarchiv Monheim GmbH/Alamy. Gerrit Rietveld. 
©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Page 52: Theo van Does-
burg; Page 52: Anonymous, 20th century. De Stijl NB 73/74. 1926. Letter-
press, 8 5/8 x 10 7/8". Jan Tschichold Collection, Gift of Philip Johnson. 
(674.1999). The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Im-
age ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY; 
Page 53: Foto Marburg/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society 
(ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Page 53: Moholy-Nagy, Laszlo 
(1895–1946) ©ARS, NY. 14 Bauhausbücher. 1928. Letterpress,  7/8 x 8 1/4" 
(14.9 x 21 cm). Jan Tschichold. Collection, Gift of Philip Johnson.The Mu-
seum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of 
Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights 
Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Page 53: Bayer, Herbert 
(1900–1985) 10 Banknotes, designed for the State Bank of Thuringia. 
Printer: State Government of Thuringia and Thuringia State Finance 
Board. 1923. Letterpress, each: 2 11/16 x 5 1/2" (6.8 x 14 cm). Gift of Man-
fred Ludewig. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital 
Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, 
NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn; 
Page 54: ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG Bild-Kunst, 
Bonn; Page 54: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (German National Library), 
Jan Tschichold; Page 54: Deutsche Nationalbibliothek (German National 
Library), Jan Tschichold; Page 55: ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New 
York/c/o Pictoright Amsterdam; Page 55: Piet Zwart (1885–1977). Een Kle-
ine Keuze Uit Onze Lettercollectie (A Small Selection of Type Face). 1932. 11 
x 7 3/4" (28.3 x 19.7 cm). Peter Stone Poster Fund. 1928. The Museum of 
Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern 
Art/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/c/o 
Pictoright Amsterdam; Page 55: Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern 
Art/Art Resource, NY/Herbert Matter Estate/Department of Special Col-
lections, Stanford University Libraries; Page 55: The William Andrews 
Clark Memorial Library, University of California, Los Angeles; Page 56: 
Nathan Benn/Alamy; Page 57: Image Courtesy of the Advertising Ar-
chives/Herbert Bayer. ©2012 Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York/VG 
Bild-Kunst, Bonn; Page 58: Image Courtesy of the Advertising Archives/
Department of Special Collections, Green Library, Stanford University; 
Page 58: Image Courtesy of the Advertising Archives/Department of Spe-
cial Collections, Green Library, Stanford University; Page 59: Digital Im-
age: Museum of Decorative Arts/Copyright The Ladislav Sutnar Family; 
Page 60: Courtesy Wittenborn Art Books. www.live-work.us; “Book Cov-
er” copyright 1958 by Vintage Books, a division of Random House, Inc., 
from Prejudices: A Selection by H.L. Mencken. Used by permission of Vin-
tage Books, a division of Random House, Inc. For online information 
about other Random House, Inc. books and authors, see the Intemet Web 
Site at www.randomhouse.com; Page 60: Paul Rand. Courtesy of West-
inghouse Yale University, Sterling Memorial Library; Image Courtesy of 
the Advertising Archives/Alvin Lustig/Elaine Lustig Cohen; Page 61: Brad-

IMAGE CREDITS 
341
bury Thompson/Copyright MeadWestvaco Corporation; Page 62: Josef 
Müller-Brockmann (b. 1914). Musica Viva. Printer: City-Druck, AG, Zürich. 
1958. Linocut and letterpress, 50 3/8 x 35 5/8" (128 x 90.5 cm). Gift of the 
designer. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image 
©The Museum of Modern Art/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Artists Rights Soci-
ety (ARS), New York/ProLitteris, Zurich; Page 63: Hofmann, Armin (b. 
1920) Wilhelm Tell. Printer: Wassermann A.G., Basel. 1963. Offset litho-
graph, 50 3/16 x 35 1/2" (127.4 x 90.2 cm). Gift of the designer. The Muse-
um of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of 
Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY; Advertising Archives; 
Page 64: Wilson, Wes (Robert Wesley Wilson) (b. 1937). The Association, 
Along Comes Mary, Quicksilver Messenger Service. 1966. Offset litho-
graph, 19 11/16 x 13 3/4" (50.0 x 43.9 cm). Purchase. The Museum of Mod-
ern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A./Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/
Licensed by SCALA /Art Resource, NY. Art ©Wes Wilson; Page 64: Mosco-
so, Victor (b. 1936). The Chambers Brothers. 1967. Offset lithograph, 20 x 
14 1/4" (50.8 x 36.8 cm). Gift of Jack Banning. The Museum of Modern Art, 
New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/Art Re-
source, NY. Art ©1967 Neon Rose, www.victormoscoso.com; Page 64: Mil-
ton Glaser; Page 65: Image courtesy of The Advertising Archives/Trade-
marks and advertisement are used with permission of Volkswagen Group 
of America, Inc.; Page 65: George Lois, Art Director. Carl Fischer, Photogra-
pher; Ivan Chermayeff/Chermayeff & Geismar; Page 66: Courtesy of the 
Herb Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography; Page 66: Courtesy 
of the Herb Lubalin Study Center of Design and Typography; Page 67: 
Trepkowzki, Tadeuz (1914–1954) Nie! 1952. Lithograph, 39 3/8 x 27 5/8". 
Gift of the Lauder Foundation, Leonard and Evelyn Lauder Fund. 
(626.1990); Location: The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A.; 
Page 67: Digital Image. The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/
Art Resource, NY; Page 67: Courtesty of Jerzy Janiszewski; Page 67: Court-
esty of Shigeo Fukuda; Page 67: Image Courtesy of the Advertising Ar-
chives/Rambow Lienemeget van de Sand 1988; Page 69: Emigre Inc. 
(American, founded 1987), Rudy VanderLans (Dutch, b. 1955) and Zuzana 
Licko (Slovakian, b. 1961). Emigre 10, Cranbrook. 1988. Lithograph, Vari-
ous dimensions. Agnes Gund Purchase Fund. ©Rudy VanderLans & Zuza-
na Licko. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image 
©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY; Emi-
gre, Inc.; Page 70: Design Quarterly #133 “Does it Make Sense?” Walker Art 
Center MIT Press.
CHAPTER 3
Page 77: Robert HM Voors/Shutterstock; Page 77: Hein Nouwens/Shut-
terstock; Page 82: National Audobon Society; Page 82: National Audobon 
Society; Page 83: Chronicle Books; Page 84: Moore. 1959. Lithograph, 27 
1/4 x 39" (69.3 x 99.1 cm). Gift of the designer. The Museum of Modern 
Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/
Licensed by SCALA/Art Resource, NY. Art Courtesy Filip Pagowski; Page 
84: Zamek Cieszyn; Page 85: Photograph by Jason Fulford; Page 85: Logi-
caland/www.logicaland.net; Page 87: Arthur S. Aubry/Getty Images; ilker 
canikligil/Shutterstock; Picturehouse; Page 88: Created for Immigrants’ 
Theatre Project’s 4th New Immigrant Theatre Festival, 1997; Page 88: Mo-
hawk Fine Papers Inc.; Page 88: New York Times; Page 88: New York Times;
Page 90: New York Times; Page 91: Columbia University, Graduate School 
of Architecture; Page 91: NYC Alliance Against Sexual Assault; Page 94: 
Ashley Gilbertson/VII /University of Chicago Press.
CHAPTER 4
Page 105: San Francisco Jewish Film Festival—www.sfjff.org; Page 105: 
San Francisco Jewish Film Festival—www.sfjff.org; Page 106: Hells Kitch-
en NYC; Page 109: Motorola; Page 113: ©2012 The Hain Celestial Group, 
Inc.; Page 113: ©2012 The Hain Celestial Group, Inc.; Page 115: Chrysler 
Corporation; Chrysler Corporation; Page 120: San Francisco Museum of 
Modern Art.
CHAPTER 5
Page 133: Columbia University, Graduate School of Architecture; Page 
135: Company: SAY IT LOUD! an advertising agency in Orlando, Florida. 
Date the logo was created: 2003 Creative Team: Julio Lima/Creative Direc-
tor/Owner of SAY IT LOUD! Luba Lukova/Illustrator/Designer; Page 140: 
Public Domain, Wikipedia; Page 144: de.MO/Giorgio Baravalle.
CHAPTER 6
Page 150: Victoria Symphony Society/Illustration ©The Heads of State; 
Page 153: Time Warner; Page 154: NattJazz; Page 155: Victoria Sym-
phony Society/Illustration ©The Heads of State; Kimberly-Clark; Page 
157: RoTo Architects; Page 159: Canterbury Printing company; Page 160: 
Cannes Film Festiv; Calvary of Albuquerque; Page 161: CNAC/MNAM/Dist. 
Réunion des Musées Nationaux/Art Resource, NY. ©2012 Kate Rothko 
Prizel & Christopher Rothko/Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Page 
162: ©Richard Haughton/International Festival of Arts & Ideas; Page 162: 
National Institute for Play;Page 165: Photo courtesy of Pantone. Pantone® 
and other Pantone trademarks are the property of Pantone, LLC. Pantone, 
LLC is a wholly owned subsidiary of X-Rite, Inc.; Page 168: Yale University 
Press; Page 169: Beacon Press; Page 170: United For Peace and Justice; 
Page 176: Teas’ Tea.
CHAPTER 7
Page 183: Otis Lab Press; akg-images/Newscom; bpk, Berlin/Staatsbiblio-
thek zu Berlin/Art Resource, NY; Page 186: DK Images; Page 186: Public 
Domain from A Source Book of Advertising Art, ©1964 Bonanza Books; 
Page 189: Courtesy of Amazon.com; Page 191: Agence Française de 
Développement; Page 200: Abbeville Press; Page 208: ©Woodruff/Brown 
Architectural Photography; Page 209: Reproduced by permission of the 
University of Connecticut.
CHAPTER 8
Page 218: Absecon Mills, Inc.; Page 219: Columbia University–Gradu-
ate School of Architecture; Page 222: Merit Energy Company; Page 223: 
copyright ©1987 Typogram; Page 224: Orange Management Inc. ESKQ/
Mike Klausmeier/NGOC MINH NGO; Page 224: Chronicle Books; Page 
225: American Apparel; Page 227: Scully, Vincent; Modern Architecture 
and Other Essays. Princeton University Press Reprinted by permission of 
Princeton University Press; Page 228: PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP; Page 
230: Orange Management Inc. /ESKQ/Mike Klausmeier/NGOC MINH NGO;
Page 232: Southern California Institute of Architecture (SCI-Arc). www.
sciarc.edu. Weston Bingham, Offramp, A student journal of architecture; 
Page 233: Saks Fifth Avenue Page 233: Google Books; Page 233: Jakub 
Krechowicz/Shutterstock. 
CHAPTER 9
Page 238: Vitra; Page 241: Saks Fifth Avenue; Page 242: Monadnock Pa-
per Mills, Inc.; Page 245: American Center for Design; Page 249: Sundance 
Channel; Page 250: Vitra. 
CHAPTER 10
Page 259: Courtesy of CalArts; Page 260: Cover artwork from Stripper Les-
sons by John O’Brien. Used by permission of Grove/Atlantic, Inc.; Page 264: 
Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG is the owner of numerous trademarks, both reg-
istered and unregistered, including without limitation the Porsche Crest®, 
Porsche® and the model numbers and distinctive shapes of Porsche au-
tomobiles States. Used with permission of Porsche Cars North America, 
Inc. and Dr. Ing. h.c.F. Porsche AG; Page 265: Calgary Farmers’ Market; 
Page 265: Royal Mail; Page 267: FedEx service marks used by permission; 
Page 269: Morgan Lane Photography/Shutterstock; Page 270: Care Inter-
national; Page 271:; Page 271:; Page 271: Hells Kitchen NYC; Page 271: Tall 
Tales Restaurant; Page 271: Poetry Slam, Inc.; Page 271: The Alliance for 
Climate Protection, WE Campaign; Page 271: NYC Alliance Against Sexual 
Assault; Page 272: Moscoso, Victor (b. 1936). Blue Cheer. 1967. Offset litho-
graph, 20 x 14" (51 x 35.6 cm). Gift of the designer. 799.1983. The Museum 
of Modern Art, New York, NY, U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Mod-
ern Art/Art Resource, NY. Art ©Family Dog 1967–©Rhino Entertainment 
2008, artist Victor Moscoso, www.victormoscoso.com/©1967 Rhino En-
tertainment Company. Used with permission. All rights reserved.
CHAPTER 11
Page 280: Nike, Inc.; Page 283: Lions Gate Films; Page 283: Tribeca Film 
Festival; Page 285: Adobe Systems Inc.; Page 291: Courtesy of Underwrit-
ers Laboratories (c) 2008; Page 294: The Nike Foundation; Page 295: Imag-
es courtesy of PopTech; Page 295: Discovery Communications, LLC; Page 
297: LiveScribe; Page 298: Digital Entertainment Network (DEN.)

342
GUIDE TO GRAPHIC DESIGN
CHAPTER 12
Page 304: Neenah Paper; Page 315: Image use courtesy of UCLA Exten-
sion and Sean Adams; Page 315: AdamsMorioka and Sundance Institute; 
Page 315: Oxygen Network; Page 315: Adobe product box shot(s) re-
printed with permission from Adobe Systems Inc.; Page 317: Courtesy of 
adbusters.org; Page 317: Courtesy of adbusters.org and of the artist Alex 
Da Corte; Page 322: With Permission, CME Group Inc., 2012; Page 323:; 
Page 323: Neenah Paper; Page 323: Trek Bicycle; Page 325: Warhol, Andy 
(1928–1987). Campbell’s Soup Cans. 1962. Synthetic polymer paint on 32 
canvases, each 20 x 16". Gift of Irving Blum; Nelson A. Rockefeller Bequest, 
gift of Mr. and Mrs. William A.M. Burden, Abby Aldrich Rockefeller Fund, 
gift of Nina and Gordon Bunshaft in honor of Henry Moore, Lillie P. Bliss 
Bequest, Philip Johnson Fund, Frances Keech Bequest, gift of Mrs. Bliss 
Parkinson, and Florence B. Wesley Bequest (all by exchange). (476.1996.1-
32). Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/Art 
Resource, NY. ©2012 The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, 
Inc./Artists Rights Society (ARS), New York; Page 325: Ruscha, Ed (1937–). 
Standard Station. 1966. Screenprint, composition: 19 5/8 x 36 15/16" (49.6 
x 93.8 cm); sheet: 25 5/8 x 39 15/16" (65.1 x 101.5 cm). Publisher: Audrey 
Sabol, Villanova, Penn. Printer: Art Krebs Screen Studio, Los Angeles. Edi-
tion: 50. John B. Turner Fund. The Museum of Modern Art, New York, NY, 
U.S.A. Digital Image ©The Museum of Modern Art/Licensed by SCALA/
Art Resource, NY. Art Copyright Ed Ruscha; Page 325: Copyright © Barbara 
Kruger. Courtesy: Mary Boone Gallery, New York; Page 325: The Wolfso-
nian–Florida International University, Miami Beach, Florida.
Whew! —S.W.S.

