Everyday Engineering 
Understanding the Marvels 
of Daily Life
Course Guidebook
Professor Stephen Ressler
United States Military Academy at West Point
Science
Topic
Engineering
Subtopic

PUBLISHED BY:
THE GREAT COURSES
Corporate Headquarters
4840 Westfields Boulevard, Suite 500
Chantilly, Virginia 20151-2299
Phone: 1-800-832-2412
Fax: 703-378-3819
www.thegreatcourses.com
Copyright © The Teaching Company, 2015
Printed in the United States of America
This book is in copyright. All rights reserved. 
Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above,
no part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in 
or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form, or by any means 
(electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise), 
without the prior written permission of
The Teaching Company.

i
Stephen Ressler, Ph.D., P.E., Dist.M.ASCE
Stephen Ressler,  
Ph.D., P.E., Dist.M.ASCE
Professor Emeritus 
United States Military Academy  
at West Point
D
r. 
Stephen 
Ressler 
is 
Professor 
Emeritus 
from 
the United States Military 
Academy 
at 
West 
Point. 
He earned a Bachelor of Science 
degree from West Point, Master’s and 
Ph.D. degrees in Civil Engineering 
from Lehigh University, and a Master 
of Strategic Studies degree from 
the U.S. Army War College. Dr. Ressler is a registered professional 
engineer in the commonwealth of Virginia. He is also an amateur artist 
and craftsman who created all of the physical models and most of the 
computer models and graphics used in this course.
Dr. Ressler served for 34 years as a commissioned officer in the U.S. 
Army Corps of Engineers and retired at the rank of brigadier general in 
2013. He served in a variety of military engineering assignments in the 
United States, Europe, and Central Asia, including 21 years as a member 
of the West Point faculty. At West Point, he taught courses in engineering 
mechanics, 
structural 
analysis, 
structural 
design, 
construction 
management, professional practice, and civil engineering history. In 
2007, he deployed to Afghanistan to develop a civil engineering program 
for the newly created National Military Academy of Afghanistan in Kabul. 
In that capacity, he designed the civil engineering curriculum, hired the 
ﬁrst cohort of Afghan faculty, and developed two laboratory facilities. 
Dr. Ressler has focused his scholarly work and professional service in the 
area of engineering education. He has written more than 80 scholarly 
papers on teaching techniques, faculty development, curriculum 
assessment, engineering outreach to primary and secondary schools, 

ii
Stephen Ressler, Ph.D., P.E., Dist.M.ASCE
engineering accreditation, and information technology. His work 
has earned nine Best Paper Awards from the American Society for 
Engineering Education (ASEE) and one from the American Society of 
Civil Engineers (ASCE). 
Dr. Ressler is the creator and director of the Engineering Encounters 
Bridge Design Contest (https://bridgecontest.org), a nationwide Internet-
based engineering competition that has engaged more than 50,000 
middle school and high school students since 2001. He is also a developer 
and principal instructor for the Excellence in Civil Engineering Education 
(ExCEEd) Teaching Workshop, a landmark faculty development program 
sponsored by ASCE. The workshop has provided rigorous teacher 
training to more than 500 civil engineering faculty members from more 
than 200 colleges and universities over the past 14 years. 
Dr. Ressler has won numerous national awards for engineering education 
and service. From ASCE, he received the President’s Medal and the 
ExCEEd Leadership Award. ASCE also named him a Distinguished 
Member in 2005. From ASEE, he received the George K. Wadlin 
Distinguished Service Award, the Distinguished Educator Award, and the 
Dow Outstanding New Faculty Award. He also received the Society of 
American Military Engineers’ Bliss Medal for Outstanding Contributions 
to Engineering Education, the American Association of Engineering 
Societies’ Norm Augustine Award for Outstanding Achievement in 
Engineering Communications, the Premier Award for Excellence in 
Engineering Education Courseware, and the EDUCOM Medal for 
application of information technology in education. 
Dr. Ressler was named one of Engineering News-Record’s Top 25 
Newsmakers Who Served Construction in 2000. Most recently, he 
received ASCE’s highest award—the Outstanding Projects and Leaders 
(OPAL) Award for 2011. The OPAL Award is presented to only ﬁve of 
ASCE’s 140,000 members each year.
Dr. Ressler’s other Great Courses are Understanding Greek and Roman 
Technology: From Catapult to the Pantheon and Understanding the World’s 
Greatest Structures: Science and Innovation from Antiquity to Modernity. ■

Disclaimer
iii
Disclaimer
T
his series of lectures is intended to increase your understanding 
of the principles of engineering. These lectures include 
demonstrations in the ﬁeld of engineering, performed by an 
experienced professional. These experiments may include 
dangerous materials and are conducted for informational purposes only, 
to enhance understanding of the material. 
WARNING: 
THE 
DEMONSTRATIONS 
PERFORMED 
IN 
THESE 
LECTURES CAN BE DANGEROUS. ANY ATTEMPT TO PERFORM  
THESE DEMONSTRATIONS ON YOUR OWN IS UNDERTAKEN AT 
YOUR OWN RISK.
The Teaching Company expressly DISCLAIMS LIABILITY for any DIRECT, 
INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES 
OR LOST PROFITS that result directly or indirectly from the use of these 
lectures. In states that do not allow some or all of the above limitations 
of liability, liability shall be limited to the greatest extent allowed by law.


Table of Contents
v
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION
Professor Biography ........................................................................................................... i
Course Scope .......................................................................................................................1
LECTURE GUIDES
LECTURE 1
Engineering and Technology in Your World ............................................................. 3
LECTURE 2
Your House as an Engineered System ....................................................................... 11
LECTURE 3
Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing ............................................................20
LECTURE 4
Platform-Framed Housing Construction ................................................................. 29
LECTURE 5
The Building Envelope ...................................................................................................37
LECTURE 6
Site Design and Storm Runoff ......................................................................................47
LECTURE 7
Dam, Reservoir, and Aqueduct Design .................................................................... 58
LECTURE 8
Water Treatment and Distribution .............................................................................66
LECTURE 9
Wastewater Disposal and Treatment .........................................................................76

vi
Table of Contents
LECTURE 10
Fossil Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas ....................................................................87
LECTURE 11
Power Generation from Coal....................................................................................... 98
LECTURE 12
Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power ......................................................................................108
LECTURE 13
Renewable Sources of Electricity ..............................................................................117
LECTURE 14
Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid ................................................................126
LECTURE 15
Electrical Power Distribution ......................................................................................137
LECTURE 16
Everyday Thermodynamics: Refrigeration ............................................................. 147
LECTURE 17
Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning ............................................................155
LECTURE 18
Home Energy Efficiency ..............................................................................................165
LECTURE 19
Passive Solar and Net-Zero-Energy Homes ..........................................................175
LECTURE 20
The Plain Old Telephone Service .............................................................................182
LECTURE 21
The Global Telecommunications Network .............................................................192

vii
Table of Contents
LECTURE 22
Cellular Phone Technology .......................................................................................202
LECTURE 23
Satellites and Satellite Communications ................................................................213
LECTURE 24
Simple Machines around the House .......................................................................222
LECTURE 25
User-Centered Design .................................................................................................231
LECTURE 26
The Internal Combustion Engine .............................................................................238
LECTURE 27
Torque, Power, and Transmission ............................................................................ 247
LECTURE 28
The Drivetrain ................................................................................................................259
LECTURE 29
Suspension, Steering, and Braking .........................................................................268
LECTURE 30
Highway Engineering ..................................................................................................276
LECTURE 31
Traffic Engineering .......................................................................................................286
LECTURE 32
Everyday Bridges..........................................................................................................296
LECTURE 33
Tunnel Engineering ......................................................................................................304

viii
Table of Contents
LECTURE 34
The Railroad ....................................................................................................................312
LECTURE 35
Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling .......................................................................320
LECTURE 36
The Future: Engineering for Sustainability............................................................328
SUPPLEMENTAL MATERIAL
Glossary...........................................................................................................................336
Bibliography ...................................................................................................................388
Image Credits ................................................................................................................392

Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
1
Everyday Engineering 
Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
W
hen we think about modern engineering and technology, 
we instinctively tend to think about sophisticated computing 
devices, jet aircraft, robots, and lasers. But in many ways, 
the products of modern engineering that have the most 
substantial inﬂuence on our lives are the ones we almost never think 
about—the everyday technologies that surround us in our homes and 
workplaces and the infrastructure systems that have been so beautifully 
integrated into the fabric of modern civilization that they are inevitably 
taken for granted.
The purpose of this course is to explore these everyday technologies 
from an engineering perspective. Consistent with this purpose, the 
scope of the course is limited to the major technological systems we are 
most likely to encounter in and around our homes and during a drive 
across town.
The course begins with a detailed examination of the typical American 
single-family residence as an engineered system consisting of eight 
distinct but interrelated subsystems: structure, foundation, building 
envelope, site, plumbing, electrical system, heating and cooling system, 
and telecommunications. Several of these subsystems are integrally 
connected to vast infrastructure networks—such as municipal water supply 
and sewage, the electrical power grid, and the public telephone network—
and the course addresses these large-scale engineered systems as well. 
We also consider a few representative examples of the thousands of 
simple machines and gadgets that surround us within our homes. 
The course then shifts gears, with an introduction to the principal 
technological systems used in our automobiles: the internal combustion 
engine and drivetrain, as well as the automotive suspension, steering, 
and braking systems. Armed with a better understanding of automotive 
engineering, we then “hit the road” for an overview of transportation 
engineering: roads, bridges, tunnels, and railroads. The course concludes 

Course Scope
2
by considering the technological challenge of solid waste disposal, as a 
lead-in to an overview of sustainable engineering design.
For each of the technologies addressed in these lectures, we attempt to 
answer three questions.
 
▷
How does it work?
 
▷
What are the key scientiﬁc principles on which its design and 
operation are based?
 
▷
Because no technology is perfect, how and why does it sometimes 
fail? 
In answering these questions, the course seeks to create informed users 
of technology, who are better equipped to understand, appreciate, and 
engage with the engineered systems that contribute so much to our 
modern quality of life. ■

3
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
1
Engineering and Technology  
in Your World
W
hen we think about modern engineering and technology, 
we instinctively tend to think about sophisticated 
computing devices and consumer electronics, jet aircraft 
and bullet trains, and robots and lasers. But in many ways, 
the products of modern engineering that have the most substantial 
inﬂuence on our lives are the ones we almost never think about—the 
everyday technologies that surround us in our homes and workplaces. 
The purpose of this course is to explore these everyday technologies 
that contribute to our quality of life in such a vital, if unobtrusive, way. 
This exploration will be conducted from an engineering perspective, 
with an emphasis on how these products and systems work and on 
the underlying science that inﬂuenced their design and that ultimately 
determines how well they work. 
What Is Engineering?
▷
Engineering is the application of math, science, technology, and 
experience to create a system, component, or process that serves our 
society. 
▷
Science provides us with explanations about how the physical world 
works. Sometimes these explanations are true representations of 
nature—but they often aren’t. 
▷
For example, Sir Isaac Newton’s laws of motion serve as a scientiﬁc 
basis for the design of most current everyday technologies, even 
though we know that these laws aren’t strictly correct representations 
of how physical bodies move in time and space. From an engineering 
perspective, Newton’s laws are much simpler to apply than Einstein’s 
theory of general relativity—and for most practical applications, their 
predictive power is entirely sufficient for their use in the design of 
engineered systems. 

LECTURE 1—Engineering and Technology in Your World 
4
▷
Indeed, from an engineering perspective, the only things that really 
matter about a scientiﬁc theory are its predictive power and its ease of 
application. 
▷
A historical case in point is the scientiﬁc theory of heat. The ﬁrst 
coherent theory describing heat as a form of energy equivalent to 
mechanical work was published by Sir Benjamin Thompson in 1798. By 
the 1850s, the principal laws of thermodynamics had been formulated 
and were proving quite useful in the design of steam engines. However, 
as late as the 1880s, scientists were still debating what heat actually 
is, with some claiming (incorrectly) that it’s a ﬂuid, which they called 
“caloric,” and others claiming (correctly) that heat is the motion of the 
particles constituting matter. But even as the scientists debated, the 
engineers had a scientiﬁc theory that could predict the power output of 
various steam engine designs with reasonable accuracy—and that was 
all that mattered.
▷
To engineers, the predictive power of a scientiﬁc theory is so important 
because every engineering design is, at the most fundamental level, a 
prediction of the future. When an engineer designs a bridge, he or she 
is predicting that the structural system will be capable of safely carrying 
the maximum load the bridge is likely to experience over its entire 
lifetime. And the basis for this is a series of scientiﬁc models used to 
predict internal forces, stresses, deformations, and material strengths. 
None of these predictions is perfectly accurate, but all are sufficiently 
accurate to produce safe designs. 
▷
All of these scientiﬁc models are expressed mathematically, because 
physical phenomena are inherently quantitative in nature. Mathematics 
is also the language of engineering, because technological systems are 
envisioned, designed, speciﬁed, and constructed quantitatively. 
▷
The relationship between engineering and technology is particularly 
fascinating because technology is both a means to an end and the end 
itself. The product of engineering is technology. Yet technology is also 
instrumental to the modern engineering design process. 

5
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Virtually all modern engineering designs use information technology, 
because the computational demands associated with our modern 
scientiﬁc models can be met far more efficiently by computers than by 
stubby pencils and mechanical calculators. But pencils and calculators 
are technologies, too, and they continue to perform an important role 
in modern engineering—as do all sorts of other technologies, such as 
materials testing equipment, measuring instruments, and the machinery 
associated with manufacturing and construction. These tools of the 
engineering process are themselves all products of engineering.
▷
This same sort of circular relationship also exists between science 
and technology. Science contributes immeasurably to the design 
of modern technology, and modern science would be impossible 
without technological tools like electron microscopes, satellites, and  
particle accelerators.
Every engineering design is, at the most fundamental level,  
a prediction of the future.

▷
Its value notwithstanding, the role of science in engineering is 
sometimes overstated. After all, many of humankind’s most important 
inventions and technological innovations have been created with little 
or no scientiﬁc basis. At best, the people who built the ﬁrst wheeled 
vehicles, waterpower, aqueducts, and cathedrals could only draw 
from a qualitative understanding of the physical world. The invention 
of the steam engine preceded—and actually inspired—the science  
of thermodynamics. 

7
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Conversely, the role of experience in engineering is often 
underappreciated. Consider the modern automobile, the invention 
of which is generally attributed to Karl Benz in 1886. In the years 
since then, the sciences of mechanics, thermodynamics, chemistry, 
and electricity have contributed mightily to the development of 
this machine. But much of its long-term development must also be 
attributed to experience—careful observation, empirical testing, trial 
and error, and meticulous reﬁnement—interspersed with occasional 
bursts of creative insight. This side of engineering has little to do with 
science and everything to do with ingenuity.
Why Study Everyday Engineering?
▷
Why is everyday engineering a subject worth studying, even if you’re 
not an engineer? The following are three reasons.
o We can all beneﬁt from being informed users of technology. For 
example, when your plumbing system breaks, you’ll beneﬁt from 
understanding what went wrong, even if your plumber will be doing 
the repair.
o Knowing something about everyday engineering can make us 
all better citizens. As an engaged citizen, you should take well-
reasoned positions on issues like deregulation of the power 
industry, public investment in transportation infrastructure, and 
the environmental impact of shale gas exploration—and you 
should consider these issues when you vote for the officials who 
inﬂuence these policies. You can’t really take a well-reasoned 
position on any of these issues without some understanding of the 
associated technologies.
o Perhaps most importantly, everyday engineering is immensely 
rewarding, and it’s fun to learn more about the world around us. 
▷
As you explore the world of everyday technology throughout this course, 
you will encounter the following recurring themes. 

LECTURE 1—Engineering and Technology in Your World 
8
o There is no such thing as an ideal technology; engineering always 
involves trade-offs. To achieve an optimum solution with respect 
to one criterion, we must inevitably compromise on one or more 
other criteria. 
o There is a collective love-hate relationship with technology. For 
example, we’re addicted to our cell phones, but we’ll vigorously 
protest the construction of a new cell tower in our neighborhood. 
This course can help reconcile these kinds of contradictory 
positions a bit. 
o Government plays a substantial role in everyday engineering. 
Throughout this course, you will learn about the impacts of 
government regulation, but you also will learn how deregulation 
has reshaped various industries and has signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced 
the services we receive from them. You will learn how government 
incentive programs have been used to spur technological 
development—sometimes for better and sometimes for worse. 
As you will learn, the impact of government involvement depends 
on the speciﬁc government action, the context, the interface with 
relevant professional communities, and the technology itself. 
o Remarkable human achievements are reﬂected in the seemingly 
mundane works of everyday engineering. Our beautifully integrated 
systems for residential construction, water puriﬁcation, electrical 
power distribution, telecommunications, and transportation are 
triumphs of human imagination, ingenuity, and persistence that 
substantially improve the quality of life for millions of people. As 
you experience these human achievements throughout this course, 
you hopefully will gain a keener appreciation for the work of the 
countless engineers who have done so much good work, largely 
behind the scenes, to make our lives better. 

9
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
TERMS
aqueduct: A conduit used to transport water from its source to its point of 
use. 
cell phone: A radio transmitter-receiver used in cellular communication. 
distribution: (1) The movement of potable water from a local reservoir or 
water treatment facility to consumers. (2) The movement of electrical power 
from a substation to consumers. 
engineering: The application of math, science, technology, and experience 
to create a system, component, or process that serves our society.
ﬂuid: A liquid or gas. 
heat: Thermal energy transferred from a region of higher temperature to a 
region of lower temperature. 
infrastructure: Large-scale technological structures and systems that 
enhance societal functions, facilitate economic development, and enhance 
quality of life. The most common infrastructure systems are electrical power, 
water supply, wastewater disposal, storm drainage, solid waste disposal, 
transportation, and telecommunications. 
internal force: A force developed within a structural element in response 
to one or more applied loads. An internal force can be either tension or 
compression. 
load: A force applied to a structure. Types of loads include dead load, live 
load, snow load, wind load, and seismic load. 
mechanics: A branch of science that deals with the effects of forces acting 
on physical bodies. 

LECTURE 1—Engineering and Technology in Your World 
10
plumbing system: A building subsystem that provides clean water to ﬁxtures 
and transmits wastewater outside the building for disposal. 
power: (1) The rate at which work is done, measured in units of force × 
distance ÷ time. (2) Voltage × current, measured in watts (or volt-amps). 
shale gas: Natural gas that is found within and extracted from shale, usually 
through the process of hydraulic fracturing. 
strength: The maximum force a structural element can carry before it fails. 
Strength can be deﬁned for both tension and compression.
stress: The intensity of internal force within a structural element, deﬁned in 
terms of force per area (e.g., pounds per square inch). 
structural system: An assemblage of structural elements—e.g., beams, 
columns, rafters, trusses, wall panels, and connections—designed to carry 
load safely. 
technology: The product of engineering.
READING
Kosky, Balmer, Keat, and Wise, Exploring Engineering.
QUESTIONS
1 
In the room where you are currently located, how many different pieces 
of everyday technology can you identify?
2 
The product of engineering is a system, component, or process that 
serves society. Can you think of a common process that was designed 
by an engineer?

11
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
2
Your House  
as an Engineered System
I
n this lecture, we’ll begin our exploration of everyday engineering 
by focusing our attention on one particularly important technological 
system that, quite literally, surrounds us in our daily lives. For the next 
four lectures, you will examine your house—ﬁrst as an engineered 
system in its own right and then in its broader technological context—
as one component of the extraordinary system of systems comprising 
our civil infrastructure. In this lecture, you also will be introduced to the 
rather unlikely hero of this story: the regulatory document that governs 
the safety, economy, constructability, and efficiency of residential 
construction throughout the United States, the building code.
Your House
▷
A well-designed, well-built, and well-maintained house provides a rather 
impressive array of technological functions. These functions are fulﬁlled 
by an integrated assemblage of eight major building subsystems, the 
design of which implies a high level of engineering sophistication.
o The structural system supports the weight of the building itself, 
the weight of snow and ice on the roof, the occasionally severe 
environmental loads caused by wind and possibly earthquakes, and 
the weight of people and their accumulated stuff. 
o The building envelope is a highly specialized set of building 
components that keeps the elements out and helps maintain an 
appropriate range of temperature and humidity inside, while also 
allowing for access, egress, and natural illumination.
o The foundation is, in one sense, a part of the structural system—
because it transmits the weight of the building and other loads 
safely down into the earth. But it also serves as a critically important 

LECTURE 2—Your House as an Engineered System 
12
sewage assembly
component of the building envelope: protecting the home from 
groundwater inﬁltration and heat loss and sometimes enclosing 
additional living or utility space.
o The heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC) system 
provides control of temperature and humidity while also supplying 
fresh air.
o The electrical system provides electrical power to outlets, light 
ﬁxtures, appliances, air-conditioning, perhaps heating, and various 
control systems (such as the thermostats that control both your 
HVAC system and your hot-water heater).
o The plumbing system delivers fresh water under pressure to various 
ﬁxtures throughout the building and removes wastewater from 
these same ﬁxtures.

13
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o The telecommunications system includes phone, cable, and 
wireless links that enable the transmission of information to and 
from the outside world. 
o Your building site, the plot of land on which your home is situated, 
provides structural support for your foundation, controls the ﬂow 
of storm water across the site, and connects your residence to the 
local road network (via your driveway) and to public utilities (via 
curbside connections).
▷
From a macro perspective, these subsystems are highly integrated 
components of a much bigger whole. These building subsystems 
are integrated within three different aspects of residential design and 
construction. 
o Those eight subsystems must be integrated with each other. They 
are highly interdependent. For example, your water supply lines, 
wastewater pipes, electrical wires, telecommunication cables, 
and air-conditioning ducts must all pass through structural wall 
framing and ﬂoor framing without adversely affecting their load-
carrying capacity. 
o The eight subsystems must work within the context of a broader 
architectural design. Typical elements of architectural design for 
a residential building include the allocation of interior space to 
various rooms and functions (deﬁning how large each room should 
be); access and circulation (deﬁning how occupants will enter, 
exit, and move around within the home); adjacencies (deﬁning 
which rooms should be close together and which should be far 
apart); fenestration (deﬁning the sizes and locations of windows); 
the locations of major appliances and ﬁxtures; and aesthetics, 
which includes the house’s overall style and form, position on 
the building site, and exterior and interior materials, ﬁnishes, 
and details. 
o The subsystems must be integrated within large-scale civil 
infrastructure systems. Unless you’re living in a log cabin in the 
wilderness, your house is embedded within a large, complex 

LECTURE 2—Your House as an Engineered System 
14
network of civil infrastructure. (The term “infrastructure” refers to 
large-scale technological structures and systems that enhance 
societal functions, facilitate economic development, and enhance 
quality of life.) The most important elements of civil infrastructure 
are transportation, electrical power, water supply, wastewater 
disposal, storm-water management, and telecommunications. 
Building Codes
▷
A building code is a set of rules specifying minimum standards for 
construction. Its principal purpose is to protect public health, safety, and 
welfare—though modern codes also promote such secondary concerns 
as economy, constructability, and sustainability. 
Architects must 
account for space 
allocation, access 
and circulation, 
adjacencies, 
fenestration, 
aesthetics, and 
building codes.

15
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Historians attribute the invention of the building code to King Hammurabi 
of ancient Babylon. Indeed, the Code of Hammurabi in the 18th century B.C. 
includes a series of provisions like this one: “If a builder builds a house for 
someone, and does not construct it properly, and the house which he built 
falls in and kills its owner, then that builder shall be put to death.” That’s 
a pretty good incentive for construction quality, but it doesn’t do much to 
inform the builder about how he or she might avoid a structural collapse. 
▷
Modern codes have adopted a signiﬁcantly more prescriptive approach, 
by adopting technical standards aimed at preventing particular types of 
failure from happening. Not surprisingly, these initiatives to expand the 
scope and technical demands of building codes typically followed large-
scale disasters, such as the Great Fire of London in 1666, the Chicago 
ﬁre of 1871, the San Francisco earthquake of 1906, and Hurricane 
Andrew in 1992. 
▷
The 20th century saw important trends in the development of building 
codes. As engineering knowledge expanded at an ever-increasing rate, 
the associated codes became ever larger, ever more complex, and 
ever more prescriptive. With each new building failure or new research 
ﬁnding, code provisions were added to address the underlying issue. 
At the same time, building codes became increasingly Balkanized, with 
wide variations in standards across regions, cities, and municipalities. 
▷
In part to address these problems, responsibility for code writing in 
the United States gradually passed from governments to nonproﬁt 
professional societies, called standards organizations, which could 
claim national or international scope while also commanding the high-
level technical expertise necessary to develop codes reﬂecting current 
best practices. 
▷
Because these standards organizations had (and still have) no legislative 
authority, they instituted the system of model codes that remains in use 
today. A model code is, in essence, the consensus recommendation 
of the professional community represented by a particular standards 
organization. 

LECTURE 2—Your House as an Engineered System 
16
▷
Although the development of model codes was beneﬁcial, U.S. building 
codes were still a mess until late in the 20th century. At that time, three 
major standards organizations were promulgating three independent 
model codes, and adoption of these codes across the country was 
haphazard at best. But that situation changed dramatically in 1994, 
when these three organizations merged to form the International Code 
Council (ICC). By 2000, the ICC was publishing the ﬁrst true national 
building codes in the United States. 
▷
The ICC is a professional society composed of technical experts, 
industry representatives, and regulators who work collaboratively to 
develop 15 interrelated and complementary model codes, including 
the International Building Code, the International Energy Conservation 
Code, and the International Residential Code. 
▷
ICC codes are developed and updated through a structured and highly 
participatory process implemented on a regular three-year cycle. 
Anyone in the world can submit a proposed code change, and hundreds 
are considered during every three-year change cycle.
▷
Over time, as model codes have become increasingly standardized, 
more governmental jurisdictions have been willing to adopt them 
through legislation. Code writing is a complicated business, requiring 
considerable time and technical expertise, so it makes sense to hand 
off this process to the professionals. Moreover, widespread adoption 
of standardized model codes is highly advantageous to builders and 
developers who work in multiple political jurisdictions. 
▷
Residential construction directly affects a huge proportion of our 
population, and there’s strong popular desire to keep housing costs as 
low as possible. As a result, over the past century, the model building 
codes have standardized and institutionalized residential construction 
methods at such a high level of detail that the codes can effectively 
serve as a substitute for an engineer’s design. 

17
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Building codes enhance public safety by ensuring that builders use 
appropriate materials and methods, reduce overall construction costs by 
eliminating the need to hire professional engineers to design standard 
buildings, provide a mechanism for managing ever-increasing complexity 
in the construction industry, and provide a means of motivating builders 
toward long-term societal goals (such as greater sustainability) that they 
might not pursue otherwise.
▷
But building codes also limit builders’ ﬂexibility, inhibit innovation, 
and create incentives for the proliferation of bland, look-alike 
homes; increase construction costs through excessively prescriptive 
requirements, many of which are unrelated to public safety; and tend to 
foster a bureaucratic emphasis on compliance, rather than reliance on 
the professional judgment of designers and builders.
▷
Building codes are a fact of life in our modern technology-intensive 
world, and in myriad ways, they determine the character of your home—
its design as an engineered system and its integration with the civil 
infrastructure that surrounds us. So, it’s in our best interest to understand 
what they are and how they work.
TERMS
adjacency: An aspect of an architectural design dealing with the proximity 
of rooms and other functional spaces to each other. 
building code: A set of rules specifying minimum standards for construction. 
Building codes are normally enacted through legislation. 
building envelope: An assemblage of building components that protect 
interior spaces from the elements and control interior temperature and 
humidity, while also allowing for access, egress, and natural illumination.
electrical system: A building subsystem that provides electrical power to 
outlets, light ﬁxtures, appliances, control systems, and other devices.

LECTURE 2—Your House as an Engineered System 
18
ﬁxture: In a plumbing system, a device that draws clean water from the water 
distribution system and discharges wastewater into the sewage system 
without allowing any ﬂow in the opposite direction.
fenestration: The sizes, locations, and types of windows in an architectural 
design. 
foundation: An assemblage of building elements that transmit loads from 
the structural system into the Earth.
groundwater: Water that percolates down through the soil and accumulates 
in an underground aquifer.
HVAC: The heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning system for a building.
model code: A set of technical standards, guidelines, or speciﬁcations 
promulgated by a professional standards organization but having no legal 
status or enforcement mechanisms. When a model code is adopted by a 
government entity through legislation, it becomes a building code.
standards organization: A nonproﬁt professional society that formulates 
one or more model codes.
thermostat: A mechanical or electronic device used to control temperature.
transmission: (1) The movement of electrical power over long distances 
from power-generating facilities to the regions in which the power will 
be consumed. A transmission line terminates at a substation. (2) In an 
automobile drivetrain, a device that keeps the engine rotating within its 
most efficient range of operation while providing adequate torque across 
the full range of vehicle speeds.
wastewater: All liquid and solid material that drains from plumbing ﬁxtures in 
a building or other facility.

19
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Hayes, Infrastructure.
International Code Council, 2015 International Residential Code.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling.
QUESTIONS
1 
In what ways are your home’s electrical system, plumbing system, and 
building envelope interdependent?
2 
Of the eight building subsystems, which ones would be easiest to 
modify or replace in an existing home? Which ones would be most 
difficult to modify or replace?

20
LECTURE 3—Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing
Lecture
3
Three Structural Systems  
for Load Bearing
F
rom an architectural perspective, a private home is a mirror, 
reﬂecting the aesthetic preferences and lifestyles of the society, 
the community, and the era in which that home was built. Given 
the diversity of individual tastes and never-ending changes in 
architectural fashion, it’s hardly surprising that residential construction 
comes in such a seemingly limitless variety of shapes and sizes. However, 
if we could peer beneath the architectural skin of various homes, we 
would ﬁnd a surprising degree of consistency in structure. In this lecture, 
you will learn about the three residential structural systems: light wood 
frame, bearing wall, and heavy timber frame. 
Structural Systems and Loads
▷
Most homes use essentially the same structural system—a conﬁguration 
called light wood frame construction. The light wood frame is one of 
only three principal types of residential structural systems that have 
been used throughout recorded history and across much of the civilized 
world. The other two—bearing wall construction and heavy timber 
frame construction—are traditional forms that have been around 
for millennia. Light wood frame construction wasn’t invented until the 
mid-19th century, but it has dominated residential construction in North 
America since then. 
▷
A structural system is an assembly of structural elements that work 
together as an integrated whole to carry such diverse loads as the 
weight of snow on your roof, a tub full of water in your bathroom, the 
china cabinet in your dining room, a crowd of people attending your 
cocktail party, a gale-force wind, and the weight of the house itself.

21
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
A load is a force—a push or a pull—that’s applied to a structure. The 
concept is simple, but the process of determining the magnitudes, 
directions, and conﬁgurations of loads for the purpose of structural 
design can be complex. Fortunately, this process is greatly facilitated 
by building codes. The International Residential Code identiﬁes ﬁve 
principal categories of load that are most relevant to our understanding 
of residential construction.
o Dead load is the weight of the building itself, including structural 
elements (such as beams and columns), nonstructural components 
(such as shingles and windows), and permanent ﬁxtures (such 
as bathtubs and kitchen cabinets). Dead loads are ﬁxed in both 
position and magnitude, and they’re usually associated with 
known quantities of physical stuff, so their magnitudes can be 
determined quite accurately without a lot of detailed guidance 
from the code. 
light wood frame construction

LECTURE 3—Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing 
22
o Live load consists of the weight of people and all of their movable 
stuff, such as furniture, books, and housewares. Live loads are 
highly variable in both magnitude and position, and they can change 
dramatically over time. Given this inherent unpredictability, we need 
to rely heavily on the institutionalized wisdom of the building code 
to help us estimate these loads. Live load is speciﬁed as a pressure, 
measured in pounds per square foot. 
o Snow load, like live load, is speciﬁed in pounds per square foot. But 
unlike live load, snow load is applied to the roof of the structure, and 
its magnitude varies according to the building’s geographic location 
and roof conﬁguration. The code provides all of the necessary 
adjustment factors to account for variations. 
o Wind load is caused by moving air striking and then moving over 
and around a building. According to ﬂuid mechanics—a branch of 
physics dealing with liquids and gases—the air pressure above and 
behind a building is lower than the pressure inside the building, 
and this pressure difference forces the roof and the downwind 
wall outward. The two net effects of these pressure loadings are a 
substantial horizontal force and a net uplift force, both of which can 
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the structural design. 
o 
Seismic load is caused by earthquakes, which cause the ground 
beneath a structure to accelerate horizontally. This motion causes 
the structure to oscillate rapidly back and forth. With each oscillation, 
the lateral acceleration of the building’s mass is mathematically 
equivalent to a large horizontal force pushing the structure sideways. 
For residential construction in all but the most earthquake-prone 
regions, the structural elements that resist horizontal wind force are 
the same ones that resist the equivalent horizontal seismic force. 
▷
Dead, live, and snow loads are often grouped together as gravity loads, 
which are called this because they’re all associated with the weight 
of something—building materials, people, furniture, snow—and thus 
are always oriented vertically downward. Wind and seismic load are 
fundamentally different, in that they’re not associated with gravity and 

23
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
are applied primarily in a horizontal direction. For this reason, wind and 
seismic loads are often called lateral loads.
How Structures Respond to Loads
▷
When external loads are applied to a structural system, they cause 
internal forces, which are transmitted through the individual elements 
comprised by that system. A structural element will respond to these 
internal forces in any of four ways, depending on the conﬁguration of the 
element within the structural system:
o If the element is stretched, it elongates and is said to be in tension. 
o If the element is squashed, it shortens and is said to be in 
compression.
o If the element is loaded transversely, it bends. Bending is a 
combination of both tension and compression. 
o If the ends of an element are rotated in opposite directions, the 
element twists and is said to be experiencing torsion.
▷
A structural element with a particular set of dimensions, made of a 
particular material, has a well-deﬁned strength with respect to each 
of these four behaviors. For example, tensile strength is the maximum 
tension force that an element can carry before it ruptures. 
▷
Tensile strength, compressive strength, bending strength, and torsional 
strength can be determined experimentally through laboratory testing; 
however, more usefully, they can be predicted with a fairly high degree 
of accuracy using a variety of different scientiﬁc and computational tools. 
These analysis tools are fundamental to the structural design process. 
▷
The principal objective of structural design is to ensure that, for all 
relevant types of loading, the predicted strength of each element 
in the structural system is adequate to carry the associated internal 
forces safely.

LECTURE 3—Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing 
24
Residential Structural Systems
▷
Primitive forms of bearing wall construction can be traced back to 
distant antiquity. Indeed, one of the world’s earliest known cities—
Çatalhüyük, located in modern-day Turkey—was composed entirely of 
domestic buildings with mud-brick bearing walls surmounted by timber 
roofs. In the United States, bearing wall buildings dominated residential 
construction throughout the colonial era and well into the 19th century. 
▷
In a bearing wall structural system, the principal vertical load-carrying 
elements are the building’s exterior walls, which are typically made of 
solid stone, solid brick, mud brick or adobe, or solid wood. The exterior 
walls are supported on a stone or concrete foundation—called a wall 
footing, because it extends along the full length of the load-bearing 
wall. Usually, interior ﬂoors and roofs are supported on joists set 
into notches. When a gravity load is applied, joists carry the load in 
bending and transmit the load out to perimeter walls, which transmit in 
compression through footings to the soil.
Çatalhüyük, in modern-day Turkey

25
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
The traditional bearing wall structural system is relatively more 
expensive than the other two types, because those solid exterior walls 
generally require a lot of material, skilled labor, and time to construct. On 
the other hand, these buildings gain efficiency from the exterior walls’ 
ability to serve simultaneously as both structure and enclosure. And the 
resulting structure is both strong and ﬁre-resistant—characteristics that 
explain why so many centuries-old bearing wall buildings have survived 
and remain in beautiful condition today. 
▷
The heavy timber frame is a structure in which stout wooden columns, 
beams, and braces form a discrete structural skeleton. Like bearing 
wall construction, the timber frame has its roots in distant antiquity. The 
earliest Greek temples were timber frame structures, and in more recent 
centuries, this system has been used in the traditional half-timbered 
houses of Europe and the classic American barn.
▷
As a structural system, the timber frame is similar to the bearing wall 
system, in that gravity loads are carried by the ﬂoor beams in ﬂexure 
and then transmitted out to the building’s perimeter. But here, unlike 
the bearing wall system, the load is concentrated in the four columns, 
which transmit it in compression down to the foundation, consisting of 
four column footings. 
▷
Both wall footings and column footings have the same purpose: to 
spread out the weight of the structure as it’s transmitted into the soil 
below. 
▷
The heavy timber frame is a very versatile structural system, and it’s 
generally less expensive to build than a traditional bearing wall building, 
particularly in regions with plentiful supplies of timber. But the all-wood 
construction of the timber frame is also less permanent, and its mortise-
and-tenon joints require highly skilled craftsmen to fabricate. 
▷
Bearing wall and timber frame structural systems have coexisted side 
by side—each with its own advantages and disadvantages—for many 
centuries. But the economic calculus of construction changed radically 
in the early 19th century. 

LECTURE 3—Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing 
26
▷
At that time, the advent of standardized mill-sawn lumber and machine-
made iron nails stimulated the development of a fundamentally new 
structural conﬁguration that rapidly superseded both the bearing 
wall and heavy timber frame systems. This new system, invented by a 
Chicagoan named George Washington Snow in the 1830s, was based 
entirely on the use of standard lightweight mill-sawn lumber held 
together with nails. 
▷
Back then, critics derisively labeled it the balloon frame, because it 
seemed so unsubstantial and fragile, but Snow’s light wood frame 
construction method proved to be surprisingly strong, while also 
providing better versatility and ease of construction at a much lower cost 
than either of its predecessors. It caught on quickly and, with only minor 
modiﬁcations, is still in use today as the dominant method of residential 
construction in the United States and Canada. 
▷
The modern adaptation of Snow’s balloon frame is called the platform 
frame. The dominance of the platform frame in modern residential 
construction does not render the other two structural systems irrelevant 
or obsolete. Both bearing wall construction and heavy timber framing 
have retained a signiﬁcant presence in residential construction—and, 
indeed, have been staging a bit of a comeback in recent years.
TERMS
balloon frame: The original light wood frame structural system, developed 
by George Washington Snow in the 1830s. By exploiting the availability of 
standardized lightweight lumber and nails, the balloon frame revolutionized 
residential construction in North America. 
beam: A structural element that carries load primarily in ﬂexure or bending.
bearing wall construction: A structural system in which the principal vertical 
load-carrying elements are the exterior walls of the building.

27
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
column: A vertically oriented structural element that carries load primarily in 
compression. 
compression: An internal force or stress that causes shortening of a 
structural element. 
concrete: A mixture of Portland cement, sand, and gravel that hardens into a 
rocklike mass when mixed with water. 
ﬂexure: Bending of a structural element characterized by compression on 
the concave face of the element and tension on the convex face.
footing: A foundation element that distributes the weight of a structure to 
the soil below. Wall footings and column footings support walls and columns, 
respectively.
force: A push or pull applied to an object. A force is deﬁned in terms of both 
magnitude and direction. 
gravity load: A load caused by weight (e.g., of snow, occupants, furnishings, 
or the structure itself).
heavy timber frame construction: A structural system in which wooden 
columns, beams, and braces form a discrete structural skeleton.
joist: One of a series of parallel beams that directly support a ﬂoor or deck.
light wood frame construction: A structural system consisting of ﬂoor 
platforms and wall panels fabricated from multiple lightweight elements 
made of standard-sized lumber and fastened with nails. 
live load: The weight of people, furniture, and other movable objects 
contained within a building.
mortise-and-tenon joint: A traditional method of joining beams and columns 
in a heavy timber framed structural system. 

LECTURE 3—Three Structural Systems for Load Bearing 
28
tension: An internal force or stress that causes elongation of a structural 
element.
torsion: The twisting of a structural element around its longitudinal axis.
READINGS
Allen, Fundamentals of Building Construction.
American Society of Civil Engineers, Minimum Design Loads. 
Salvadori, Why Buildings Stand Up.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling.
QUESTIONS
1 
Of the ﬁve principal types of load (dead, live, snow, wind, seismic), 
which one is most uncertain and variable? Which is most predictable?
2 
How are these differences in the predictability of loads accounted for in 
structural design?

29
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
4
Platform-Framed Housing 
Construction
S
o far, you have learned about two of the three principal types 
of residential structural systems: bearing wall and heavy timber 
frame construction. In this lecture, you will learn about the third—
light wood frame construction—which has dominated residential 
construction in the United States from the mid-19th century until today. 
The modern version of light wood frame construction is often called the 
platform frame. You will explore the platform-framed dwelling as a highly 
reﬁned technological system—a standardized-but-ﬂexible arrangement 
of lightweight modular ﬂoor platforms, wall panels, and roof trusses that 
carry load efficiently and are well suited for the integration of various 
building subsystems.
Platform Framing
▷
Platform-framed construction is a highly standardized system. In fact, 
seven chapters of the International Residential Code are largely devoted 
to detailed speciﬁcations governing every aspect of the platform-
framing method, and most of the remaining chapters address the 
integration of electrical, plumbing, and building envelope systems with a 
platform-framed structure. 
▷
Standardization of the method is also greatly facilitated by 
standardization of the associated materials. Throughout the United 
States, lumber is sold in standard sizes, such as 2-by-4, 2-by-6, 2-by-10, 
and so on. All commercially sold lumber also receives a standardized 
quality rating, recorded as a stamp on each piece of wood. Among 
other things, the stamp tells us the species of wood and the grade of 
the board. 

LECTURE 4—Platform-Framed Housing Construction
30
The Foundation
▷
To help you understand what platform framing is and how it works, let’s 
build a hypothetical single-family home from the ground up—much as 
your contractor would do the job. With its two stories, full basement, and 
gabled roof, this hypothetical house has all the key structural features 
necessary to illustrate the major elements of a platform-framed system. 
▷
Even though platform framing is highly standardized, variations on 
the theme are nearly limitless. For example, a foundation might be 
made of concrete block or solid concrete, and a roof structure might 
use rafters or trusses. Platform framing can even be implemented in 
steel—for enhanced strength, ﬁre resistance, and protection against 
insect damage. 
platform-framed construction

31
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
We’ll start by surveying the building site and marking the locations of 
the foundation walls with wooden stakes and string lines. Guided by 
this survey, an excavator uses its hydraulically operated arm to dig the 
foundation excavation with great precision.
▷
Next, at the bottom of the excavation, wooden formwork is constructed 
for the wall footings and two interior column footings. A bed of gravel is 
placed at the bottom of these forms, and then the concrete is cast. 
▷
Foundation walls can either be built up of concrete blocks, or they can 
be solid concrete that is cast in a single pour. We’ll use the cast-concrete 
alternative for our project. 
▷
After the footings have cured, wooden wall forms are set in place and 
very heavily braced—to withstand the substantial outward pressure that 
will be exerted by the wet concrete. A grid of steel reinforcing bars is 
then placed inside the forms. 
▷
In modern practice, particularly for the construction of housing 
developments with large numbers of similar foundations, reusable steel 
forms are often used as an alternative to wood. In either case, the forms 
are set, such that the top of the foundation wall will be at least 6 inches 
above the ﬁnal ground level—so that the wooden structure above will be 
less susceptible to rot. 
▷
The concrete foundation walls are cast, using special inserts to form 
pockets, which will eventually support a steel girder. Before the concrete 
sets, steel anchor bolts are embedded into the top surface of the walls at 
regular intervals. These will provide the structural connection between 
the foundation and the wooden frame above. 
▷
Once the concrete is cured and the forms are removed, we have a solid 
foundation wall. Then, the steel girder is placed in the pockets, and the 
steel pipe columns are prepared for installation. (The term “girder” refers 
to a main beam that supports other smaller beams or other structural 
elements.) The columns will be bolted to the footings below and to the 
beam above. 

LECTURE 4—Platform-Framed Housing Construction
32
▷
A bed of gravel is placed over the entire basement ﬂoor to provide 
a base for the concrete ﬂoor slab. Before pouring the slab, we put 
down a sheet of polyethylene plastic (a moisture barrier) and then a 
mesh of steel wire reinforcement. Finally, with the concrete ﬂoor slab 
in place, our foundation is complete and ready for construction of the  
ﬁrst-ﬂoor platform.
First- and Second-Floor Platforms
▷
We’ll now build the ﬁrst-ﬂoor platform, the structural subassembly that 
gives platform framing its name. We begin by bolting a wooden sill plate 
to the anchor bolts protruding from the top of the foundation walls. This 
is the base on which the entire platform frame will be assembled. 
▷
The ﬂoor platform is constructed of parallel beams, called joists, usually 
spaced 16 inches apart. A board, called a rim joist, caps the joists’ 
outside ends and holds them in a vertical orientation. At their inner ends, 
the joists are overlapped above the central girder. 
▷
Wherever there are large openings through the ﬂoor—for a stairwell, 
for example—elements called trimmer joists and headers are added to 
frame the opening. 
▷
Next, we can install the structural subﬂoor—made of plywood or, its 
more recent alternative, oriented strand board (OSB), which is fabricated 
from random wood ﬁbers glued together under high pressure, unlike the 
discrete laminations used in plywood. 
▷
These 4-by-8-inch sheets are nailed onto the tops of the joists and 
headers in a staggered pattern. If the carpenters have done their job 
well, the subﬂoor panels will line up perfectly with the joists, so very 
little trimming is required.
▷
Next, we can backﬁll the foundation excavation with compacted soil. We 
didn’t do it sooner because the lateral pressure of the soil might have 

33
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
tipped the foundation walls inward. Now, with the ﬁrst-ﬂoor platform 
installed, there’s no danger of this happening, so we can proceed with 
construction of the ﬁrst-story exterior walls.
▷
In a platform-framed structural system, each wall is composed of parallel 
studs, typically 2-by-4s spaced 16 inches apart, nailed together with a 
sole plate across the bottom and a pair of top plates above. At the top of 
each window and door opening is a solid wooden beam called a header. 
▷
These wall panels are usually assembled horizontally, lying on the 
subﬂoor that we just ﬁnished installing. Once a wall is fully framed, it’s 
tilted up and into position along the edge of the ﬂoor platform and held 
in place with temporary diagonal braces. After all walls are erected and 
their alignment has been carefully checked, they’re nailed permanently 
into position and then covered with sheathing made of plywood or 
oriented strand board.
▷
Most houses are too wide for ﬂoor joists to span safely from one outer 
wall to the other. Thus, one or more load-bearing partition walls are 
nearly always required in the framing plan. The load-bearing wall serves 
the same structural function as the steel girder below the ﬁrst ﬂoor, 
except the load-bearing wall supports only loads applied to the second 
ﬂoor and above.
▷
Most houses also have non-load-bearing partition walls, which 
subdivide the interior space but don’t support the ﬂoor above. These 
walls usually aren’t erected until after the next-ﬂoor platform has been 
added overhead. 
▷
We can now add the second-ﬂoor platform, walls, and ceiling structure 
using the same methods we used for the ﬁrst ﬂoor. One of the most 
important advantages of platform framing is that this process can be 
accomplished without cranes or scaffolding, because each new ﬂoor 
platform provides a solid working surface on which the builders can 
fabricate the next-higher story.

LECTURE 4—Platform-Framed Housing Construction
34
The Roof
▷
Finally, we add the roof 
structure, which consists 
of ceiling joists, a ridge 
board, and angled beams 
called 
rafters, 
covered 
with roof sheathing. Under 
gravity load, rafters bend. 
To prevent the rafters from 
breaking, building codes 
require a strong structural 
connection between the 
outer ends of the rafters 
and the ceiling joists. The 
resulting triangular structure is called a truss, and it is an efficient system 
for carrying gravity loads while also providing sloped roof surfaces that 
shed rainwater and snow.
▷
In recent years, builders have begun replacing this simple combination 
of rafters and ceiling joists with more elaborate prefabricated roof 
trusses that are custom designed, factory built of lightweight lumber, 
and held together with metal nailing plates. They create an amazingly 
strong joint, and they’re assembled with considerably less effort 
than the precision-made mortise-and-tenon joints used in the heavy 
timber frame. By code, these trusses must be designed by a licensed 
engineer, but the investment in design pays off in greatly enhanced 
structural efficiency. 
The Platform-Framed Structural System 
▷
The platform-framed structural system carries load in the following way.
o Snow load is applied to the roof sheathing and then transmitted 
through the trusses to the exterior walls, then down through the 
wall panels, foundation walls, and footings into the soil below. 
truss

35
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o 
Simultaneously, live load is applied to interior ﬂoors and then 
transmitted through the joists to both the exterior and interior walls—
with the interior load path passing through a steel girder, interior 
columns, and column footings before ﬁnally reaching terra ﬁrma.
o Wind and seismic loads are carried by the wall panels themselves.
▷
This beautifully engineered system has ﬂourished through nearly two 
centuries of reﬁnement, adaptation, optimization, and innovation for 
three reasons.
o 
It is highly economical, because it uses lightweight, standard-size 
lumber that can be worked with common tools and assembled with 
simple fasteners; it can be erected without cranes or scaffolding; 
and manufacturers have created thousands of products that have 
been purposefully designed for compatibility with it. 
o It is a highly ﬂexible system that can be applied to an incredible 
variety of architectural styles. 
o It provides a solid framework for effective integration of the 
building’s other engineered subsystems. 
TERMS
girder: A main beam to which load is transmitted from other elements of a 
structural system.
grade: (1) A standardized quality rating for commercial lumber. Higher grades 
of wood have fewer defects and, thus, higher strength. (2) Ground level (as 
in slab on grade and railroad grade crossing). (3) The slope of a surface, 
typically measured as a ratio of vertical to horizontal distance and expressed 
as a percentage. Also called a gradient.
header: A structural element used to frame an opening in a ﬂoor platform or 
wall panel. 

LECTURE 4—Platform-Framed Housing Construction
36
oriented strand board (OSB): An engineered wood panel formed by 
compressing layers of wood strands and adhesive. OSB often serves as a 
substitute for plywood in modern residential construction. 
platform-framed construction: The most common form of modern light 
wood frame construction, named for the modular ﬂoor platform that serves 
as a base for the construction of each story.
sheathing: A structural sheet—normally plywood or oriented strand board—
that covers the outside of a wall panel or roof framing in platform-framed 
construction.
subﬂoor: A structural ﬂoor panel that is normally made of plywood or 
oriented strand board and is supported on joists.
truss: A structural system composed of slender elements arranged in 
interconnected triangles. Truss elements carry load primarily in tension or 
compression.
READINGS
Allen, Fundamentals of Building Construction.
International Code Council, 2015 International Residential Code.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapters 5–7.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why is the platform-framed structural system so common in North 
America?
2 
What are some disadvantages and limitations of platform framing?

37
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
5
 
The Building Envelope
I
n this lecture, you will learn about the building envelope: a layered 
system of roof, wall, and foundation elements designed to serve as an 
integrated barrier against the movement of water, air, and heat into and 
out of the building’s interior space. If a building envelope is working 
properly, it sheds rainwater and conveys it away from the building’s 
foundation, prevents melting snow and ice from penetrating the roof 
or walls, prevents groundwater from inﬁltrating through the foundation, 
facilitates the removal of internally generated water vapor, minimizes 
the transmission of heat into the building in the summer and out of the 
building in the winter, and provides ﬁre resistance.
The Building Envelope
▷
Water can potentially damage your home in all three of its phases—
liquid, gas, and solid—as precipitation, groundwater, water vapor, snow, 
and ice. The principal mechanism by which precipitation moves is 
gravity. As rainwater strikes the roof and walls of your house and then 
follows its gravity-driven path downward to the ground, it has an amazing 
capacity to ﬁnd gaps—between shingles, between siding boards, and at 
penetrations where windows, doors, or vents pass through the building 
envelope. Each of these gaps is a potential leak. 
▷
The building envelope includes two principal lines of defense against 
such leaks. The ﬁrst is an outer protective layer, consisting of shingles 
on your roof and cladding on your walls. The shingles might be asphalt, 
ﬁberglass, wood, slate, or clay tiles, and the cladding might be brick, 
stone, stucco, or siding. Regardless of material or conﬁguration, all of 
these elements work in essentially the same way: Precipitation impinges 
on them, and as the water ﬂows downward, it’s also directed outward. 

▷
The second line of defense against leaks is an underlying water-resistant 
membrane. As helpful as that outer layer might be, it can never be fully 
effective as a water barrier. As a result, the outer protective layer always 
must be backed up by a water-resistant membrane that fully encloses 
and protects the structural system. 
▷
Furthermore, this membrane is regarded as the building’s primary water 
barrier. Shingles and cladding provide supplemental protection against 
water inﬁltration, but their more important purpose is to protect the 
water-resistant membrane from damage, which might be caused by 
wind, snow, ice, ultraviolet radiation, or critters.
tar paper

39
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
On the roof, this water-resistant membrane is usually made of a material 
called tar paper, or rooﬁng felt. In the 19th century, this material was 
heavy paper coated with tar, but today, it’s made of a much sturdier 
polyester or ﬁberglass ﬂeece that is impregnated with an asphalt sealer. 
The Roof System
▷
To assemble a roof system, we begin by installing an aluminum ﬁtting 
called a drip edge along the eaves. Then, we add the overlapping 
sheets of the membrane. Along the inclined edge—called the rake of 
the roof—we install another drip edge, which will prevent wind-driven 
rain from penetrating underneath the membrane. 
▷
Next, we simultaneously add the shingles and associated ﬂashing—
strips of sheet metal conﬁgured to prevent leaks at intersections and 
penetrations. The shingles are nailed to the roof sheathing, starting 
at the eaves and working upward, with each row overlapping the one 
below it, with each nail passing through two layers of shingles, and with 
the nail heads subsequently covered by the overlapping shingle above. 
One ﬁnal row of specially cut shingles is draped over the ridge, with no 
exposed seams pointing uphill.
▷
The ﬂashing installation must be carefully integrated with the shingles to 
ensure that there are no possible pathways for water to enter the gaps 
that the ﬂashing is intended to seal. 
▷
We now have an integrated roof system that will shed any precipitation 
falling on it, but the building envelope’s work isn’t complete until the 
water is captured, directed down to the ground, and conveyed away 
from the perimeter of the house. 
▷
This is the job of our aluminum rain gutters, which are attached to a 
vertical board, called the fascia, and sloped very gently downward 
toward downspouts at each corner of the building. With the gutters in 
place, the whole roof system works. No matter where a raindrop falls, it 
will follow a downhill path that leads to a gutter and then to the ground. 

LECTURE 5—The Building Envelope 
40
▷
To defend against leaks resulting from ice dams—a solid wall of ice 
that can form within and above the rain gutter when a roof is covered 
in snow—use a product called ice and water shield as a substitute for 
rooﬁng felt along the lower edge of the roof. Ice and water shield is a 
more robust membrane with a self-sealing rubberized asphalt coating 
and a self-adhesive backing, so it can be attached to the roof sheathing 
without nails.
The Exterior Wall System
▷
Like the roof, a well-designed exterior wall system has two lines of 
defense against water inﬁltration: an inner water-resistant membrane 
attached directly to the sheathing and an outer protective layer  
called cladding. 
▷
Water-resistant wall membranes used to be made of tar paper, just like 
the stuff on the roof. Today, the International Residential Code still allows 
the use of asphalt-impregnated felt for this purpose, but felt has largely 
rain gutter

41
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
been superseded by a new technology called housewrap, which is most 
commonly composed of ﬁne polyethylene ﬁbers bonded together by 
heat and pressure during the manufacturing process. 
▷
Housewrap is installed by nailing or stapling it to the wall sheathing in 
overlapping horizontal strips, just as rooﬁng felt is installed on the roof 
sheathing. This process is simple on a plain wall, but at windows, doors, 
and other penetrations, observing the rule that no exposed seams can 
point uphill becomes much more complicated.
▷
With the membrane in place, we can now install the cladding—an 
exterior veneer of brick, stone, stucco, or siding. If it’s siding, it might 
be wood, vinyl, aluminum, or a recently developed composite material 
called ﬁber cement. One of the more common combinations is a brick 
façade on the front wall and vinyl siding everywhere else.
▷
Before the vinyl siding can be installed, trim pieces are mounted around 
all windows and doors and at the corners of the building. These will 
cover up the edges of the siding while also allowing for expansion and 
contraction with changes of temperature. 
▷
The siding panels are installed directly over the housewrap from bottom 
to top. Each panel is nailed only at its top edge, while its lower edge is 
held in place by an overlap with the panel below. The uppermost panel is 
capped with a piece of ﬂashing that prevents water inﬁltration at the top 
of the cladding while also hiding the nails that hold the panel in place.
▷
For the portion of the wall that will be clad with brick, the brick veneer 
rests directly on the concrete foundation wall, with a one-inch airspace 
between its rear surface and the drainage plane. The veneer is 
supported laterally by galvanized steel ties, which are nailed to the wall 
studs and embedded in the mortar joints between bricks. 
▷
The metal ﬂashing is tucked beneath the housewrap at its upper end 
and extends through the full thickness of the brick at its lower end, 
where weep holes are created by leaving a gap in the vertical mortar 
joint at every third brick.

LECTURE 5—The Building Envelope 
42
▷
The brick veneer sheds most rainwater, but if any moisture does 
penetrate through cracks or gaps, it merely ﬂows down the drainage 
plane, or housewrapped surface, and is channeled by the bottom 
ﬂashing back out through the weep holes. The airspace also facilitates 
air circulation, which allows the system to dry out between storms. 
The Foundation
▷
Although we’ve successfully enclosed our roof and walls, potential 
problems with water inﬁltration can extend underground, where keeping 
the building dry can be even more challenging because, below ground, 
water doesn’t always ﬂow downhill.
▷
The two principal mechanisms for transmission of groundwater—
rainwater that percolates down into the soil—through a building 
foundation are hydrostatic pressure and capillary action. Hydrostatic 
pressure is pressure caused by the water’s own weight. At a given point, 
hydrostatic pressure acts equally in all directions, and it always acts 
perpendicular to the surface of a submerged object. 
▷
There are two principal defenses against water inﬁltration due to 
hydrostatic pressure. The ﬁrst is to prevent cracking of the foundation 
walls by using high-quality concrete with steel reinforcement, as 
speciﬁed by the building code; the second is to prevent groundwater 
from accumulating around your foundation. 
▷
The second mechanism by which groundwater may penetrate the 
building envelope is capillary action: the tendency of a liquid to be 
drawn into a ﬁne-grained or ﬁnely divided solid—including concrete. 
Even in the absence of hydrostatic pressure, groundwater can be drawn 
up into concrete footings and ﬂoor slabs, then into the foundation walls, 
and ultimately into the wooden wall cavity, where prolonged exposure 
to moisture can cause rot and promote the growth of mold. 
▷
The best defense against this malady is to use a capillary break to 
prevent water from being drawn into the foundation. Current codes 

43
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
require a polyethylene plastic sheet directly beneath the ﬂoor slab and a 
damp-proof coating or membrane applied to the exterior surface of the 
foundation walls. 
Defending against Water Vapor
▷
Surprisingly, water vapor—the gaseous form of water—can be at least 
as damaging to your house as liquid water, because it can accumulate 
inside wall cavities and promote rot and mold. Most of the water vapor 
in a home is generated by the occupants: taking showers, boiling water, 
and breathing. Most commonly, water vapor gets into wall cavities 
through air leaks. 
▷
A well-designed building envelope should include four principal 
defenses against water vapor accumulating in wall cavities.
o It should collect as much moisture as possible at its source and 
move it directly out of the building.
o Airﬂow through the building envelope should be minimized by 
caulking around windows, doors, wall penetrations, and other gaps. 
o The building envelope should include a vapor barrier to reduce the 
amount of moisture entering the walls. 
o Recognizing that some moisture will inevitably get into the walls no 
matter what, the envelope should have a permeable face on the 
opposite side of the vapor barrier to allow the walls to dry out. 
Insulation and Drywall
▷
Insulation reduces the transmission of heat from inside to outside in the 
winter and from outside to inside in the summer. For many decades, the 
standard insulating material used in U.S. residential construction has 
been ﬁberglass batting, consisting of a mat of glass ﬁbers with a craft-
paper backing. 

LECTURE 5—The Building Envelope 
44
▷
Today, ﬁberglass remains in 
common use, but greater public 
interest in energy efficiency has 
stimulated 
the 
development 
of 
new 
high-performance 
insulations, sealants, windows, 
and doors—which have taken 
energy-efficient building design 
to a new level. 
▷
We close up our interior walls 
with gypsum wallboard, also 
called drywall—a panel made 
of gypsum plaster sandwiched 
between two sheets of thick 
paper. Drywall is screwed to 
the studs and joists and then 
taped and spackled to create 
smooth interior wall and ceiling surfaces that look good, add a bit more 
insulating value, and signiﬁcantly enhance the ﬁre resistance of the 
wooden structural frame.
TERMS
capillary action: The tendency of a liquid to be drawn into a ﬁne-grained or 
ﬁnely divided solid.
cladding: The outer layer of a building envelope, typically consisting of 
brick, stone, stucco, or siding.
clay: An extremely ﬁne-grained soil formed from the weathering of silicate-
bearing rocks. Clay is highly cohesive—capable of holding its shape without 
crumbling—and impervious to water.
ÀEHUJODVVLQVXODWLRQ

45
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
drip edge: Metal ﬂashing applied to the edges of a roof to prevent water from 
inﬁltrating beneath the protective roof membrane and to direct rainwater 
into the rain gutters. 
drywall: A panel composed of gypsum sandwiched between two layers of 
cardboard that is used as a ﬁre-resistant inner layer of the building envelope.
ﬁberglass batting: A common form of thermal insulation used in residential 
construction.
ﬂashing: A strip of sheet metal or plastic conﬁgured to prevent leaks at 
intersections and penetrations in wall and roof surfaces.
housewrap: A plastic sheet used to prevent water inﬁltration through a 
building envelope.
hydrostatic pressure: Pressure caused by the weight of water. Hydrostatic 
pressure acts uniformly in all directions. Where water is in contact with a 
submerged body, hydrostatic pressure acts perpendicular to the surface of 
the body.
ice dam: An accumulation of ice at the edge of a roof. Water from melting 
snow and ice can back up behind the ice dam and cause leaks through the 
roof membrane. 
rake: The inclined edge of a peaked roof.
vapor: The gaseous phase of a substance.
weep holes: Openings at or near the bottom of a masonry wall to allow for 
drainage of any water that penetrates the cladding.

LECTURE 5—The Building Envelope 
46
READINGS
Johnston and Gibson, Green from the Ground Up, chapters 6 and 12.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapters 7–9.
QUESTIONS
1 
While viewing your home from outside, identify ﬁve speciﬁc locations 
where water leaks might occur. 
2 
At these locations, what is currently preventing leaks from happening?

47
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
6
Site Design  
and Storm Runoff
T
he site design process, typically performed by civil engineers, 
can be applied to a single building lot, but it’s most often applied 
to an entire development, consisting of multiple residential 
or commercial properties. The site design for a development 
deals with all aspects of physical layout and integration with local civil 
infrastructure systems. A site design also can be signiﬁcantly inﬂuenced 
by such considerations as environmental impact, historic preservation, 
zoning, and real estate—and, for this reason, it’s usually very tightly 
regulated by local codes. This lecture will focus primarily on the storm 
drainage design and earthwork elements of site design. 
Hydrology and Hydraulics
▷
In the world of everyday engineering, we encounter water in many 
different forms. But regardless of whether we’re talking about supplying 
puriﬁed drinking water to your home, dumping household wastewater 
into your municipal sewer system, diverting storm runoff away from 
your foundation, or pumping groundwater out of your basement, we’ll 
always deal with water by applying underlying scientiﬁc concepts from 
two specialized disciplines of engineering science called hydrology 
and hydraulics. 
▷
In the context of storm drainage design, the easiest way to distinguish 
between these two ﬁelds is that the science of hydrology helps us 
deﬁne the problems while the science of hydraulics helps us devise 
technological solutions to these problems.
▷
Hydrology is the study of the natural movement and distribution of 
water above, on, and below the surface of the Earth. This science is best 
understood in the context of the hydrologic cycle, a conceptual model 
describing the continuous circulation of water in the atmosphere, on the 
Earth’s surface, and underground. 

▷
Although water covers about 70% of the Earth’s surface, only about 
0.1% of it has any chance of directly inﬂuencing everyday engineering. 
This relatively small quantity of water originates as precipitation, which 
condenses from water vapor in the atmosphere and falls to the ground 
in the form of rain, sleet, or snow. Some of this water percolates down 
into the soil and is eventually collected in porous underground strata 
called aquifers. This water is called groundwater. 
▷
The remaining water from precipitation ﬂows over the Earth’s surface—
initially in a thin layer called sheet ﬂow, which moves downhill, across 
the surface of the ground—and then eventually concentrates in 
ditches, streams, rivers, lakes, and oceans. Along the way, some of this 
surface water evaporates, thus returning to the atmosphere, where the 
hydrologic cycle begins anew. 
precipitation
rain
snow
glacier
condensation
evaporation
transpiration
stream
ocean
river and lake
groundwater
the hydrologic cycle

49
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Storm drainage design is primarily concerned with surface water. And 
while it constitutes a tiny proportion of the Earth’s water supply, it can 
cause big problems for homeowners and developers. If precipitation 
that falls on your lot isn’t directed away from your house, some of it 
will seep into the soil around your foundation and may ﬁnd its way into 
your basement. And if your lot adjoins higher ground, storm runoff will 
generally ﬂow from that ground onto yours, exacerbating the challenge 
of conveying surface water away from your foundation.
▷
Furthermore, anytime land is developed, large areas of porous ground 
are covered over with impervious pavements and rooftops. As a result, 
signiﬁcantly less precipitation inﬁltrates down into the soil and signiﬁcantly 
more ﬂows over driveways and streets. This increased surface ﬂow can 
cause ﬂooding, inundation of municipal storm sewers, and the depletion 
of groundwater (which might be used for local water supply). 
▷
Storm runoff also can become polluted, accumulating metals from 
gutters and downspouts, hydrocarbon residue from pavements, and 
fertilizers and pesticides from lawns.
3RRUGUDLQDJHFDQOHDGWRÁRRGLQJDQGIRXQGDWLRQGDPDJH

LECTURE 6—Site Design and Storm Runoff 
50
▷
Storm drainage design must address all of these challenges, primarily 
through hydraulics, a scientiﬁc ﬁeld that’s broadly concerned with 
the mechanical properties and engineering applications of ﬂuids. 
The hydraulics concepts most relevant to everyday engineering are 
mathematical models used to characterize the ﬂow of water though 
closed pipes, such as water supply lines, and through open channels, 
such as ditches and river valleys, both natural and manmade. 
Designing a Storm Drainage System
▷
To illustrate how hydrology and hydraulics have inﬂuenced the piece of 
terrain on which your home is situated, let’s walk through the process a 
civil engineer would use to design a storm drainage system for a typical 
suburban land development project. 
▷
After obtaining a topographic map of the project site (from the U.S. 
Geologic Survey website for places in the United States), we can 
execute the ﬁrst step in the storm drainage design process: delineating 
the watershed for our proposed development project. A watershed is 
an area of land deﬁned such that a drop of rainwater falling anywhere 
within its boundaries eventually drains to the same outlet. 
▷
A watershed can be very large or very small, and the large ones can 
be subdivided into an inﬁnite number of smaller ones. A watershed also 
can be deﬁned for a speciﬁc project site—although, at this small scale, 
it’s often called a catchment. Regardless of size or terminology, the 
delineation of a watershed always derives from the point designated as 
the outlet.
▷
Next, we’ll deﬁne something called the design storm, which will serve 
as the basis for designing the entire drainage system. The design storm 
typically is deﬁned in the form of a graph called an intensity-duration-
frequency (IDF) curve. Each region in the United States has its own 
characteristic set of IDF curves, which are developed by the National 
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration from long-term statistical data 
on storms experienced within the region.

51
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Each plot shows the relationship between storm intensity (measured 
in inches of rainfall per hour) and storm duration (in minutes) for a 
representative storm with a particular recurrence interval—100 years, 
50 years, 25 years, and so on. The recurrence interval is the statistical 
average period of time between occurrences of a storm with a particular 
severity. Thus, for example, a storm with a 100-year recurrence interval 
will happen, on average, once every 100 years. 
▷
In general, a storm with a longer recurrence interval is both more severe 
and less probable than a storm with a shorter recurrence interval, and 
a storm of short duration has a higher intensity than a storm of longer 
duration. Local building codes usually specify which recurrence interval 
is to be used for storm drainage design in the associated jurisdiction. 
▷
Next, we can perform a hydrologic analysis of the catchment area using 
a standard analytical technique called the rational method. At the heart 
of the rational method is a mathematical equation, Q = CiA, which is 
used to calculate the maximum rate of storm runoff that will ﬂow through 
the outlet of the drainage system during the design storm. 
storm intensity
(inches per hour)
storm duration
(minutes)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0
8
4
2
6
100 years
50 years
25 years
10 years
5 years
1 year
IDF curves

LECTURE 6—Site Design and Storm Runoff 
52
▷
The maximum runoff, Q, is measured in cubic feet per second and is also 
called the discharge of the watershed. A is the area of the watershed 
in acres. C is called the runoff coefficient, an empirically derived 
parameter that’s based on the permeability of the ground surface within 
the watershed. Finally, i is the intensity of the design storm in inches of 
rainfall per hour.
Adding a Storm Sewer System
▷
If all the extra water brought in from a storm isn’t properly managed, it’s 
going to cause two major problems. First, during heavy storms, torrents 
of water ﬂowing over the road surfaces within the development are going 
to cause a safety hazard for drivers. The design engineer will address this 
challenge by incorporating a storm sewer system into the site design. 
▷
A storm sewer is a network of underground pipes that collect storm 
water and convey it to a nearby watercourse, lake, or ocean. The storm 
runoff enters the system through inlet structures. Above ground, the 
inlet is typically a steel grating or curb opening. Below ground is a 
precast concrete box with large holes to accommodate the incoming 
and outgoing pipes. 
▷
The pipes are often concrete, although iron, steel, and plastic are 
sometimes used, as well. They run from inlet structure to inlet structure, 
arranged in a treelike network, with small branches feeding into larger 
trunks and those feeding into even larger main lines. All pipes in the 
system are placed on a steady downhill slope, so water will ﬂow through 
the system by the force of gravity alone. 
▷
In designing this system, we would ﬁrst determine appropriate locations 
for the inlet structures. These are placed, at a minimum, at low points in 
the road network to prevent water from pooling and immediately uphill 
of intersections so that storm runoff doesn’t create a safety hazard by 
ﬂowing across the intersection. Additional inlets often are added at 
regular intervals to intercept the ﬂow so that the inlet structures at the 
low points don’t get inundated in large storms. 

concrete drainage tank

LECTURE 6—Site Design and Storm Runoff 
54
▷
With the inlets positioned, the science of hydraulics provides us with all 
of the analytical tools necessary to determine the size of each pipe, such 
that it can carry the accumulating discharge from inlets and from higher-
level pipes, and the slope of each pipe, such that the velocity of ﬂow is 
high enough to prevent sediment from accumulating in the pipe. 
Adding a Storm-Water Detention Pond
▷
Our project site has a new storm sewer system to keep water off the 
streets within the residential development, but we still need to contend 
with a second major challenge: the substantial increase in discharge at 
the outlet. 
▷
A partial solution would be to route the discharge in a catch basin 
and carry it directly to a stream through a large underground pipe. At 
the termination of this pipeline, we’d add an outfall structure that is 
designed such that any sediment being carried along by the storm water 
will be deposited into a bed of coarse stone rather than being dumped 
into the stream.
▷
But this pipeline is only a partial solution, because our development 
has increased the total discharge from this watershed by a signiﬁcant 
amount. Dumping all this additional water into the stream will only 
increase the likelihood of ﬂooding downstream. And with each new 
housing development, shopping mall, and business park, the likelihood 
of ﬂooding is only going to increase. 
▷
For this reason, today many municipal codes specify that the maximum 
postdevelopment storm discharge can’t exceed the predevelopment 
discharge. But how is this possible, given that development always 
causes runoff to increase? 
▷
The answer is to incorporate a storm-water detention pond into the 
site design. A detention pond is an earthen enclosure, typically located 
near the outlet of the development’s storm drainage system. Storm 

55
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
drains discharge into the basin at outlet structures. The basin stores the 
runoff temporarily, allowing some to inﬁltrate into the soil and some to 
evaporate. Peak runoff from large storms is released at a controlled rate, 
from an outlet structure into a local watercourse or an existing storm 
sewer line. 
▷
In recent years, there has been growing awareness of the pollution 
that storm runoff accumulates from roofs, yards, and parking lots. In 
response, many local standards for detention ponds also require  
water treatment. 
Grading the Site
▷
In addition to a storm sewer system and a detention pond, our design 
must also provide pathways for precipitation that falls on rooftops 
and unpaved areas to ﬂow overland to the storm sewer inlets without 
ﬂooding basements, creating unwanted ponds, eroding hillsides, or 
ﬂooding streets. 
▷
To a large extent, this need is fulﬁlled through earthwork, also called 
grading. In general, grading re-forms the topographic contours of the 
project site for compatibility with the intended land use. We’ll meet this 
challenge by grading the site to modify the pattern of overland ﬂow. 
▷
The grading plan works in tandem with the storm sewer, street, and 
detention pond designs, fundamentally altering the movement of 
precipitation across and underneath the project site—all for the purpose 
of moving water away from our homes. 
TERMS
aquifer: A porous stratum of soil or rock in which groundwater collects.
condense: To change from the vapor phase to the liquid phase.

LECTURE 6—Site Design and Storm Runoff 
56
design storm: A hypothetical rainstorm with characteristic, statistically 
derived intensity (measured in inches of rainfall per hour); duration (measured 
in minutes); and frequency (represented as a recurrence interval in years) 
that is used as the basis for hydrologic analysis using the rational method.
earthwork: The process of re-forming the topographic contours of a project 
site for compatibility with the intended land use. Also called grading.
grading: The process of re-forming the topographic contours of a project 
site for compatibility with the intended land use. Also called earthwork.
hydraulics: A scientiﬁc ﬁeld that is broadly concerned with the mechanical 
properties and engineering applications of ﬂuids.
hydrology: The scientiﬁc study of the natural movement and distribution of 
water above, on, and below the surface of the Earth.
mechanical properties: Characteristics of a material that describe how the 
material responds to forces. 
outlet: The point at which storm runoff departs from a watershed. 
rational method: An analysis methodology for calculating maximum rate of 
storm runoff (measured in cubic feet per second) from a watershed during a 
speciﬁed design storm.
storm drainage system: An engineered system that captures the surface 
runoff resulting from precipitation and channels it into a natural watercourse.
storm sewer: A network of underground pipes that collects storm water and 
conveys it to a nearby watercourse, lake, or ocean.
watershed: An area of land deﬁned such that a drop of rainwater falling 
anywhere within its boundaries eventually drains to the same outlet.

57
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Dewberry, ed., Land Development Handbook, chapters 1, 21, 22, and 24.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 2.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 2.
QUESTIONS
1 
From a suitable vantage point outside your home, observe the contours 
of the land surrounding your residence. Can you visualize the ﬂow of 
storm runoff across the land?
2 
Does storm runoff from the vicinity of your home ﬂow into a storm sewer 
system? If so, can you identify the storm sewer inlets? Where is this 
water discharged into a natural watercourse?

58
LECTURE 7—Dam, Reservoir, and Aqueduct Design
Lecture
7
Dam, Reservoir,  
and Aqueduct Design
P
ractically from the dawn of civilization, humans have obtained 
groundwater by tapping into underground aquifers. In the 
ancient world, groundwater sources—wells and springs—were 
generally preferred over surface water, but today, surface water 
is the principal source for most large-scale water systems. A water 
supply system for a large urban population typically includes six major 
elements: a watershed, a raw water collection point, a conduit through 
which water is transmitted from the collection point to its point of use, a 
water puriﬁcation facility, water storage facilities, and a water distribution 
network. This lecture focuses on collection and transmission. 
Watersheds
▷
A watershed is an area of land delineated such that a drop of rainwater 
falling anywhere within that area eventually drains to the same outlet. 
Thus, a watershed serves the very useful function of collecting the 
precipitation falling on a large area of land and then concentrating it 
in a single watercourse, where it can serve as the source for a water 
supply system. 
▷
A given watershed will be adequate as a water supply for a city or town if 
the quantity of water discharged from the watershed exceeds the current 
and anticipated future demands of the population being supplied. The 
demand on a municipal water supply system is typically estimated as 
about 150 gallons per person per day. Most of this water ﬂows through 
our dishwashers, washing machines, sinks, toilets, tubs, and showers. 
▷
Some cities are able to meet this huge demand by drawing water directly 
from major rivers or lakes. In most cases, however, the quantity or quality 
of a municipality’s local water supply is inadequate, and it must look to a 
watershed some distance away—often in a less-developed region with 
fewer sources of pollution. 

59
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
And even if a given source provides an adequate quantity of water 
on an annual basis, seasonal variations in rainfall (and, therefore, in 
stream ﬂow) might cause shortfalls at certain times of year. To cope with 
seasonal variations, the typical urban water supply system uses a dam 
to create a storage reservoir, which receives a variable inﬂow but holds 
enough water to provide a steady outﬂow. 
hydroelectric dam
Dams
▷
A dam is an engineered structure designed to impound water, generally 
by blocking the ﬂow of a natural watercourse. A dam creates a reservoir 
and also must control the release of water from that reservoir. Dams 
are used for water supply, irrigation, ﬂood control, and the generation 
of hydroelectric power. Many dams serve several of these purposes 
simultaneously. 

LECTURE 7—Dam, Reservoir, and Aqueduct Design 
60
▷
A dam is generally classiﬁed according to two characteristics: its 
principal construction material (concrete, masonry, soil, or rock) and its 
structural conﬁguration (arch dam or gravity dam). 
▷
When an arch is used in a bridge or a building, it’s oriented vertically, 
and loads are applied vertically, as well. The arch carries load primarily 
in compression, and it can carry a tremendous amount of load, provided 
that two conditions are satisﬁed: It must be made of a material, such 
as concrete or stone, that’s very strong in compression, and it must be 
laterally supported at its base to restrain the ends’ natural tendency to 
spread outward under load. 
▷
The other major structural conﬁguration is the gravity dam, which attains 
its structural load-carrying capacity primarily from its mass. There are 
two principal types of gravity dams, based on whether the construction 
material is concrete or masonry, or soil or rock. 
▷
Monumental concrete dams are impressive structures, but at the 
opposite end of the technological spectrum, there are gravity dams that 
are, in many ways, even more fascinating. These structures are made of 
the least sophisticated structural materials available—soil and rock—but 
involve surprisingly sophisticated engineering. They’re called the earth 
dam and the rock-ﬁll dam. 
▷
How do engineers decide which type of dam to use in a given situation? 
In general, concrete dams are preferable to earth and rock-ﬁll dams 
when the reservoir needs to be very deep—a situation that’s usually 
dictated by the topography of the valley, the required water storage 
capacity, or the need to generate hydroelectric power. 
▷
Topography also has a major inﬂuence on a dam’s structural 
conﬁguration. A deep, V-shaped valley with solid rock walls is ideal for 
an arch dam. A somewhat wider valley with high walls would favor a 
concrete or rock-ﬁll gravity dam. A broad, low valley would generally call 
for an earth dam, particularly if the valley ﬂoor were covered with a deep 
layer of alluvial soil, because earth dams don’t necessarily have to be 
constructed on bedrock, as concrete dams do. 

61
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Aqueducts
▷
An aqueduct is a conduit used to transport water from its source to its 
point of use—typically a city or town. This water channel can use any 
of four basic conﬁgurations, depending primarily on the terrain being 
traversed. We can explore all four conﬁgurations by examining a single 
real-world system: the Catskill Aqueduct, a 92-mile conduit that carries 
about 40% of New York City’s water supply from an upstate watershed 
to the city. 
▷
Built between 1907 and 1917, 
the Catskill Aqueduct draws its 
water from a 123-billion-gallon 
reservoir formed by a 4650-
foot dam across the Esopus 
Creek near Olivebridge, New 
York. Driven entirely by gravity, 
up to 600 million gallons 
of water ﬂow through this 
aqueduct every day. It crosses 
ﬁve major geological regions 
and the Hudson River, while 
surrendering less than 300 feet 
of elevation over its entire 92-
mile length.
▷
The 
conduit 
ends 
at 
the 
900-million-gallon 
Hillview 
Reservoir in Yonkers, New 
York, where its water is fed into 
the city’s equally impressive 
water 
distribution 
network. 
This receiving reservoir serves 
two functions: It provides a 
reserve of several days’ water 
supply, in case the aqueduct 
needs 
to 
be 
temporarily 
Ashokan Reservoir
Hillview Reservoir
Newburg
Peekskill
Manhattan
Kingston
Olivebridge
Poughkeepsie
Catskill Aqueduct

LECTURE 7—Dam, Reservoir, and Aqueduct Design 
62
shut down for maintenance or repair, and it also accommodates the 
continuously changing differences between the aqueduct’s relatively 
steady inﬂow and the city’s hour-by-hour variations in demand—with 
purposeful consideration of the need to supply a huge quantity of water 
quickly in the event of a large ﬁre. 
▷
There are four distinctly different channel conﬁgurations constituting the 
Catskill Aqueduct. There’s the dam and reservoir, and with the outlet 
works open, water ﬂows into the ﬁrst channel conﬁguration, called 
cut-and-cover segments, constituting 55 miles (or about 60%) of the 
aqueduct’s total length.
▷
The cut-and-cover channel in the Catskill system was built by cutting a 
shallow trench into the soil, casting a horseshoe-shaped concrete tube, 
and then covering the tube with a soil embankment. Longitudinally, 
this channel is constructed on a constant downhill slope of one foot of 
elevation for every mile of length, following the contours of the Earth as 
necessary to maintain this gradient. 
▷
Next, 15% of the Catskill Aqueduct consists of grade tunnels, which 
carry the channel through mountains of solid rock at 23 different 
locations along the route. The irregular tunnel opening was reinforced 
with a concrete liner, using essentially the same horseshoe shape in 
the cut-and-cover channel, though somewhat narrower to reduce the 
required amount of rock excavation. To keep this narrower channel 
from constricting the ﬂow, its slope was doubled to 2 feet per mile. This 
increased gradient causes the water to ﬂow faster, thus compensating 
for the reduction in channel size at the grade tunnel locations. 
▷
In the science of hydraulics, the movement of water in both cut-and-
cover conduits and grade tunnels is classiﬁed as open-channel ﬂow. 
This might seem odd, because both of these channel conﬁgurations 
are fully enclosed, but the technical deﬁnition of open-channel 
ﬂow requires only that the moving ﬂuid has a free surface. In other 
words, the conduit ﬂows only partially full, with the water surface at 
atmospheric pressure. 

63
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
To maintain its ﬂow, an open channel requires a steady downhill 
gradient—just as with the cut-and-cover and grade-tunnel segments of 
the Catskill Aqueduct. The concrete covers over these channels don’t 
have any effect on the ﬂow within; rather, they serve only to protect the 
water from evaporation and contamination. 
▷
In contrast, the remaining two conﬁgurations used in the Catskill 
Aqueduct are characterized by true pipe ﬂow, with their conduits ﬂowing 
full and under pressure—and, thus, with no requirement for the channel 
to assume a continuous downhill gradient.
▷
One of these two pipe-ﬂow segments is the inverted siphon, whose 
purpose is to transmit water across a valley with a pipeline placed at 
ground level. Water will ﬂow through an inverted siphon—even though 
a portion of its journey is uphill—as long as the upstream water level 
is higher than the downstream water level. This elevation difference 
supplies the pressure that keeps the water moving through the siphon. 
The Catskill has 19 of these structures, constituting about 7% of the 
aqueduct’s total length. 
▷
To resist their substantial internal pressure, the Catskill siphon pipes 
were constructed of huge steel cylinders riveted together, lined with 
mortar on the inside, encased in concrete on the outside, and then 
covered with a protective layer of soil. 
▷
Impressive as these structures are, they pale in comparison with 
the fourth channel conﬁguration used in the Catskill Aqueduct: the 
pressure tunnel. There are seven of these, totaling 17 miles, or 18% 
of the aqueduct’s total length. Their purpose is to carry water across 
particularly large valleys and deep rivers, locations where a surface-
level siphon wouldn’t be feasible. 
▷
A pressure tunnel works in the same way as an inverted siphon. The only 
difference between them is that the pressure tunnel is bored through 
bedrock, while the inverted siphon is placed on the ground surface of  
a valley. 

LECTURE 7—Dam, Reservoir, and Aqueduct Design 
64
TERMS
arch: A structural element that carries load primarily in compression and must 
have its outer ends laterally restrained in order to carry load successfully.
arch dam: A dam that resists hydrostatic pressure through the action of an 
arch that transmits load in compression to the walls of the valley in which it 
is constructed.
dam: An engineered structure designed to impound water, generally by 
blocking the ﬂow of a natural watercourse. A dam creates a reservoir and 
must control the release of water from that reservoir. Dams are used for water 
supply, irrigation, ﬂood control, and the generation of hydroelectric power.
earth dam: A gravity dam that uses soil as its primary ﬁll material.
grade tunnel: An aqueduct tunnel that carries the channel through a 
mountain while maintaining a constant gradient.
gradient: The slope of a surface, typically measured as a ratio of vertical to 
horizontal distance and expressed as a percentage. Also called a grade.
gravity dam: A dam that attains its structural stability from its mass, rather 
than from arch action.
hydroelectric power: Electric power produced by water ﬂowing through a 
turbine. The source of energy for hydroelectric power is the potential energy 
stored in water contained at a relatively high elevation behind a dam. 
inverted siphon: A type of aqueduct channel in which the water ﬂows 
through a pipe under pressure from a higher to a lower reservoir. In an 
inverted siphon, much of the channel is typically below the elevation of the 
lower reservoir. 
open-channel ﬂow: In hydraulics, a category of ﬂow in which the conduit is 
partially full and the upper surface of the liquid is at atmospheric pressure. 

65
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
outlet works: A conduit and associated equipment (gates, valves, etc.) that 
is used to control the release of water from a reservoir through a dam. 
pipe ﬂow: In hydraulics, a category of ﬂow in which the liquid completely ﬁlls 
the conduit and ﬂows under pressure. 
pressure tunnel: A type of aqueduct channel in which the water ﬂows 
through a deep underground channel that passes beneath an obstacle. A 
pressure tunnel is a form of inverted siphon. 
rock-ﬁll dam: A gravity dam that uses rock as its primary ﬁll material.
water distribution: The delivery of treated water to consumers.
READINGS
Dewberry, ed., Land Development Handbook, chapters 26 and 28.
Galusha, Liquid Assets.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 2.
QUESTIONS
1 
If you receive your water from a municipal water supply system, use 
your water bill to calculate your average daily water consumption. How 
does your usage compare with the standard planning ﬁgure of 150 
gallons per person per day?
2 
Why are earth dams preferable to concrete dams for most municipal 
water supply systems?

66
LECTURE 8—Water Treatment and Distribution
Lecture
8
Water Treatment  
and Distribution
R
egardless of whether water has been delivered by an aqueduct, 
pumped from a well, or drawn from a nearby lake, it is raw 
water—it isn’t ready for human consumption yet. Most raw water, 
particularly surface water, is loaded with contaminants, some of 
which can be hazardous to human health. Thus, municipal water supply 
systems require some level of treatment. In this lecture, you will learn 
about water treatment. While the primary focus will be on your local 
water treatment plant, it’s important to recognize that some aspects of 
water puriﬁcation begin before the raw water reaches this facility. 
Raw Water
▷
When water is impounded in a reservoir or lake, a number of water-
quality problems may result. The ﬁrst is the growth of algae and aquatic 
plants, which feed on fertilizers that are washed into the reservoir 
by storm runoff. Some algae and plants are toxic, but most are just a 
nuisance; they give the water an unpleasant taste and may foul pipelines 
and pumps. 
▷
The best defense against algae is to deny it food by using storm runoff 
management to keep fertilizers out of the reservoir. If this approach isn’t 
feasible, then the algae can be removed mechanically, using a device 
like an algae harvester, or they can be killed by treating the water with 
the chemical copper sulfate. 
▷
But this chemical can be toxic to ﬁsh if used in excessively high 
concentrations, and it can exacerbate another problem that’s often 
encountered in reservoir management: anoxia, the depletion of 
dissolved oxygen near the bottom of a body of water. 

67
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Anoxia can occur naturally, as a result of inadequate water circulation, 
but if copper sulfate treatments kill too much algae too quickly, the loss 
of dissolved oxygen will be greatly accelerated by the oxidation of all 
the rotting organic material. Anoxia kills ﬁsh; they suffocate for lack of 
oxygen. It also encourages the growth of anaerobic bacteria, which give 
the water a foul smell. 
▷
The cure for anoxia is aeration, which restores oxygen to the water. 
Environmental engineers use an effective technique: An air compressor 
on shore forces air through a pipe to a ﬁxture located on the bottom 
of the reservoir. This device sends a continuous stream of bubbles up 
to the surface. The bubbles add oxygen to the water in the immediate 
vicinity of the aerator, but, more importantly, the upward stream sets 
up a circulation pattern that draws the oxygen-starved water up to the 
surface, where it can be replenished naturally.
algae bloom

LECTURE 8—Water Treatment and Distribution 
68
The Water Treatment Plant
▷
The water treatment plant uses an integrated series of mechanical 
and chemical processes to perform three basic functions: clariﬁcation, 
ﬁltration, and disinfection. 
filter
chlorinator
holding 
tank
pump
reservoir
finished
water
coagulants
grating
pump
mixing
basin
flocculation
chamber
sedimentation 
basin
water treatment process
▷
As raw water is pumped from a lake, river, or receiving reservoir into the 
treatment plant, it passes through a series of progressively ﬁner gratings 
and screens to remove trash, leaves, aquatic weeds, and critters. 

69
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
The water then enters a mixing basin, where a chemical coagulant 
is added and vigorously mixed. The purpose of the coagulant is to 
neutralize the electrical charges that cause suspended particles in the 
water to repel each other. The coagulant causes these particles to cling 
together, forming progressively larger clumps of impurities, called ﬂocs. 
This process, called ﬂocculation, concludes when the ﬂocs become so 
heavy that they settle to the bottom of the basin.
▷
The accumulated sludge is periodically raked out, dried, and disposed 
of in a landﬁll. This ﬁrst phase of the water treatment process is  
called clariﬁcation.
▷
Back at the treatment plant, the clariﬁed water is pumped through 
a ﬁlter, typically composed of horizontal layers of gravel, sand, and 
anthracite coal. As the water passes through this ﬁlter, any particulate 
matter that didn’t settle out during clariﬁcation is captured in the tiny 
voids between the sand grains. The coal serves as a source of carbon, 
which is particularly effective at capturing volatile organic chemicals and 
removing them from the water. 
▷
With ﬁltration complete, the water is disinfected—usually by mixing in a 
small quantity of dissolved chlorine, which kills any bacteria or viruses 
that might have survived clariﬁcation and ﬁltration. Alternative methods 
of disinfection include exposing the water to ultraviolet light or ozone. 
Both of these methods are also effective at killing pathogens. 
▷
Finally, the puriﬁed water passes into a holding tank, which gives the 
chlorine more time for disinfection, while also providing a reservoir 
for smoothing out ﬂuctuations in demand. At this point, the water 
treatment process is complete, and the ﬁnished water enters the local 
distribution system. 
▷
Desalination is a different type of water treatment process that 
converts seawater into drinking water for roughly 300 million people 
around the globe. This process has been around for a long time, but 
it’s undergoing a major surge in popularity today, as a result of recent 
technological advances. 

LECTURE 8—Water Treatment and Distribution 
70
▷
The most important of these is a technology called reverse osmosis, 
which removes salt from seawater by forcing it through a membrane 
under pressure. These kinds of improved technologies have cut the cost 
of desalination in half over the past decade; nonetheless, desalination is 
still signiﬁcantly more energy intensive (and therefore more expensive) 
than treating surface water or groundwater. And its economic viability is 
further constrained by the fact that seawater is always obtained at a low 
elevation—a seacoast—and thus must be pumped to a higher elevation 
and transported inland for consumption.
▷
Nonetheless, there are places in the world, such as Israel, where 
desalinated seawater is practically the only reliable water source 
available to entire populations. And as the technology continues to 
improve, we can expect to see more of this trend. 
The Water Distribution Network
▷
The single most important characteristic of our local water distribution 
system—the characteristic that distinguishes it from both storm drainage 
and sanitary sewer systems—is that water distribution operates under 
pressure. Using hydraulics terminology, water distribution is based on 
pipe-ﬂow rather than open-channel-ﬂow principles. 
▷
The pressure that makes a pipe-ﬂow system work can be provided by 
gravity, but only in the rare circumstance where the water treatment 
facility is located at a higher elevation than every consumer served by 
the distribution system. In all other cases, the pressure must be supplied 
by one or more pumping stations that use one or more electric pumps to 
propel water from the treatment plant into the distribution network. 
▷
The network is composed of large pipes, called water mains; smaller 
pipes, called water service lines; connectors; valves; ﬁre hydrants; and 
an intermediate storage facility—typically a water tower, located on 
high ground, close to the population it serves—which greatly enhances 
both the efficiency and robustness of the system. 

71
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
This system is highly efficient 
because, without the water 
tower, a much larger pump—
or perhaps several larger 
pumps—would be required 
to meet the demand during 
peak times. The system is 
robust because the tower 
will continue to supply water 
even if a power failure shuts 
down the electric pumps. 
▷
Water mains are large pipes 
that are sometimes made of 
PVC plastic or steel but most 
often made of iron, which 
resists 
corrosion 
better 
than 
steel. 
These 
pipes 
are almost always located 
underground to protect them 
against freezing. 
▷
Water mains generally follow public streets, because the municipality 
already owns the right-of-way there. Storm drains and sanitary sewers 
also follow the public streets, and because all three of these systems 
have distinctly different points of origin and distinctly different 
destinations, there’s great potential for them to interfere with each other. 
▷
When such conﬂicts occur, it’s always the water main that dips beneath 
or bends around the other two systems. Storm drains and sanitary 
sewers operate under the principle of open-channel ﬂow, so their 
channels must be constructed on a steady downhill gradient—without 
exception. Conversely, the water distribution system is the only one of 
the three that operates under pressure; thus, water mains can change 
gradient and direction with no problem, even ﬂowing uphill when 
necessary to avoid a conﬂict with a storm drain or sewer. 
water tower

LECTURE 8—Water Treatment and Distribution 
72
▷
For this same reason, water mains typically don’t use the riverlike 
topology used in storm drainage systems, with many small tributaries 
ﬂowing into progressively smaller numbers of larger streams. Ideally, 
water mains are arranged in interconnected loops, which can also be 
visualized as a grid pattern. 
▷
If the water main fails at a particular location, it’s easy to isolate a 
small section of the main and make the necessary repairs, disrupting 
water supply to only a limited number of homes. Thanks to the looped 
conﬁguration, water can ﬂow through a main in either direction, and 
because the system is pressurized, the water will always ﬁnd its own 
path around a closed segment. With a branched topology, a failure in 
one location would cause many more homes to lose their water supply 
until the repair was completed. 
▷
The greatest challenge in designing a water distribution network is 
maintaining an appropriate level of pressure throughout the system. 
Most systems operate with water mains pressurized between 40 and 60 
pounds per square inch. If the region served by the water distribution 
system has large changes in elevation, the system must typically 
be divided into several pressure zones, interconnected with special 
pressure-regulating valves.
The Private Component
▷
Beneath the street in front of your house, a copper or plastic service 
line branches off from the main and conveys a stream of potable water 
into your plumbing system. At your property line is a curb valve, which 
can be used to cut off your entire water supply from outside the home. 
Beyond the curb valve, the service line enters your home through a hole 
in the foundation wall or ﬂoor slab. Just inside is your water meter and 
an interior shutoff valve. This is the one you’ll want to close to keep your 
basement from ﬂooding when a pipe bursts.

73
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
From here, a separate pipe branches off of the main service line to 
supply the hot-water heater. From this point forward, the hot and cold 
water lines run parallel to each other throughout the building, supplying 
sinks, tubs, and showers, while the cold water line also supplies toilets, 
exterior spigots, and perhaps an ice maker in your refrigerator. 
▷
Throughout this network, whenever you open a faucet, turn on a shower, 
use a washing machine, or ﬂush a toilet, water ﬂows freely because of 
the combined effects of a distant pumping station and a water tower, 
which supply the pressure that makes this system work. 
▷
But pressure is a double-edged sword. Water that’s ﬂowing through a 
pipe under pressure has considerable momentum. If the ﬂow is shut off 
suddenly (by quickly closing a faucet, for example), the resulting shock—
called water hammer—can damage pipe joints and ﬁxtures. To prevent 
water hammer, water supply lines are ﬁtted with air-ﬁlled expansion 
chambers, which effectively absorb the shock. 
TERMS
aeration: The introduction of oxygen into water, for the purpose of reducing 
anoxia.
anaerobic: Occurring in the absence of oxygen.
anoxia: The depletion of dissolved oxygen near the bottom of a body of water.
clariﬁcation: In water treatment, the process of removing suspended 
particulate matter from raw water.
coagulant: A chemical substance used for clariﬁcation in water treatment. 
The coagulant causes suspended particles to cling together, resulting in 
clumps of impurities—called ﬂocs—sinking to the bottom of the container. 

LECTURE 8—Water Treatment and Distribution 
74
coal: A black or brownish sedimentary rock, composed primarily of carbon, 
mixed with varying amounts of impurities—primarily hydrogen, sulfur, 
oxygen, and nitrogen.
compressor: A mechanical device that increases the pressure of a ﬂuid 
while reducing its volume.
copper sulfate: A chemical used to kill algae contamination in a water 
supply reservoir. 
curb valve: An exterior valve that can be used to cut off the water supply to 
an individual building.
desalination: The process of converting seawater into potable water by 
removing salt, typically through reverse osmosis.
disinfection: In water treatment, the use of chlorine, ultraviolet light, or 
ozone to kill bacteria and viruses in raw water. 
ﬁltration: In water treatment, the use of a ﬁlter composed of horizontal layers 
of gravel, sand, and anthracite coal to remove particulate matter and volatile 
organic chemicals from raw water.
ﬂocculation: In water treatment, the process by which suspended particles 
clump together under the action of a chemical coagulant. Each resulting 
clump of particulate matter is called a ﬂoc.
intermediate storage facility: A tank for temporary water storage in a water 
distribution system.
potable water: Water that is safe for drinking.
raw water: Untreated water obtained from a natural source.
reverse osmosis: The process of removing salt from seawater by forcing the 
water through a membrane under high pressure.

75
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
sanitary sewer: A municipal wastewater disposal system consisting of 
progressively larger pipes called branches, trunks, and interceptors. 
water hammer: A shock that occurs when the ﬂow of water in a pipe is shut 
off suddenly. 
water main: A large pipe that serves as a principal element of a water 
distribution system.
water service line: A pipe that branches off of a water main to supply water 
to an individual building. 
READINGS
Dewberry, ed., Land Development Handbook, chapters 26 and 28.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 2.
Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, Environmental Engineering Science, chapters 
2 and 6.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 11.
QUESTIONS
1 
Can you ﬁnd the water supply shutoff valve in your home? (You should 
know where this valve is located so that you can shut off your water 
supply in case of emergency.)
2 
Why is open-channel ﬂow never used in a municipal water distribution 
system?

76
LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment
Lecture
9
Wastewater Disposal  
and Treatment
T
his lecture is about sewage, focusing primarily on the 
centralized treatment facility but concluding with an overview 
of on-site septic systems. Your local sewage treatment plant 
takes sewage (or, more properly, wastewater)—a foul, unhealthy 
by-product of human existence—restores it to crystal clarity, and then 
returns it to nature without harming the environment. Our pungent 
exploration of wastewater disposal and treatment begins precisely 
where our exploration of water distribution left off: at a plumbing ﬁxture 
in your home. 
Wastewater Treatment Systems
▷
In general, a ﬁxture is a device that draws clean water from the 
distribution system and discharges wastewater into the sewage system 
without allowing any ﬂow in the opposite direction. The most common 
residential plumbing ﬁxtures—toilets, showers, bathtubs, sinks, and 
washing machines—all share this fundamental characteristic: a distinct 
break between clean water ﬂowing in and dirty water ﬂowing out, with 
no opportunity for the bad to contaminate the good. 
▷
The purpose of your household plumbing system is to capture the 
wastewater discharge from all of these ﬁxtures and combine it into 
a single stream for disposal. This stream is composed of more than 
99.9% water. 
▷
The remaining 0.1%—somewhat euphemistically called “suspended 
and dissolved solids”—is a complex and potentially unhealthy mixture 
that includes dissolved organic material, which originates from both 
human waste and food; suspended inorganic particles, or grit; rags, 
paper, plastic, and similar materials that somehow get ﬂushed down 
toilets; and a high concentration of enteric microorganisms, bacteria 

77
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
that originate in our intestines and may include some pathogenic, or 
disease-causing, forms. This is the stuff that all wastewater treatment 
systems are designed to remove.
▷
In the United States, about 75% of residences send their wastewater 
through a sanitary sewer network to a centralized sewage treatment 
facility, which cleans the water and discharges it into a natural 
watercourse. The remaining 25% of residences, primarily in rural and 
suburban areas, use on-site septic systems.
▷
Regardless of conﬁguration, wastewater systems operate primarily by 
gravity-driven ﬂow. Thus, with only a few exceptions, every conduit in 
the system must be placed at a carefully controlled downhill slope, or 
gradient, to ensure the steady movement of wastewater through the 
system. That’s why you’re quite likely to ﬁnd your wastewater treatment 
plant at the lowest point in town.
sewage treatment facility

LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment 
78
Your Plumbing System
▷
The central spine of your residential wastewater system is a large-
diameter vertical pipe called the soil stack, extending from above your 
roof (where it serves as a vent) straight down to your basement ﬂoor 
or ground-level slab, where it connects to a gently sloped underground 
pipe, called a lateral, that feeds into the municipal sewer system or your 
on-site septic tank. 
▷
In residential plumbing, most wastewater pipes originate at ﬁxtures and 
end at the soil stack. Building codes also allow ﬁxtures other than toilets 
to empty into a smaller vertical drain pipe called a secondary stack. 
▷
In either conﬁguration, every pipe running from a ﬁxture to a stack must 
be mounted on a gradual downhill gradient along its entire length, with 
one important exception—the U-shaped bend located directly beneath 
each drain. It’s called a trap, and it’s one of the most important features 
of your plumbing system. 
▷
Although conﬁgurations vary, there’s a trap directly beneath every drain 
in your home. Because of its shape, the trap is always ﬁlled with water, 
and this water forms a plug that prevents noxious gases from reentering 
your home from the sanitary sewer. 
▷
Every wastewater line in your plumbing system has a vertical pipe called 
a vent, and each vent either runs up through the roof or connects with 
the upper end of the soil stack, which also extends through the roof. 
The purpose of this vent is to ensure that atmospheric pressure is 
maintained on either side of a trap. Without it, wastewater rushing down 
the drainpipe can create a partial vacuum, and this vacuum can suck the 
water out of the trap, breaking its airtight seal.
▷
As wastewater ﬂows from the soil stack, it enters either a municipal 
sanitary sewer system or an on-site septic system. The sanitary sewer 
begins with a lateral, the underground pipe that runs from your soil 
stack to the street, where it connects to a larger pipe called a branch. 
Branches feed into progressively larger pipes—typically called trunks 

79
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
and interceptors—in a treelike topology very similar to the one in storm 
drainage systems. 
▷
Sanitary sewer lines usually follow public streets, and they always follow 
a steady downhill gradient, unless the topography prevents it. The slope 
of a sewer pipe is designed such that the ﬂow is fast enough to keep 
those nasty suspended solids moving, but not so fast that this gritty 
liquid erodes the inside of the pipe. 
▷
In cases where topography prevents a continuous downhill gradient, a 
sewage lift station is installed to pump the wastewater stream to a higher 
elevation, at which point it resumes its gravity-driven downhill ﬂow.
▷
Sewer pipes are often the deepest buried of all utilities. Manhole covers 
provide access to the sewer line for maintenance and repair. Manholes 
are typically located where the underlying pipe intersects with another 
sewer line, or changes direction or slope. 
The Wastewater Treatment Plant
▷
A wastewater plant has essentially the same purpose as a water 
treatment facility and actually uses many of the same types of 
equipment. But where water puriﬁcation relies primarily on mechanical 
and chemical processes, wastewater treatment is also heavily 
dependent on biological processes. 
▷
Treatment begins as the wastewater stream enters through a series of 
trash racks, which are metal grills that ﬁlter out large pieces of debris 
and foreign objects. From here, the ﬂow enters a grit chamber, which 
is designed to settle out the larger suspended particles (such as sand, 
coffee grounds, and watermelon seeds) to keep them from damaging 
pumps and other equipment at later stages of treatment.
▷
Next, the wastewater enters a sedimentation tank, also called a primary 
clariﬁer. The stream is pumped in from the center and then ﬂows very 
slowly toward the outer perimeter. Along the way, ﬂoatable contaminants 

LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment 
80
rise to the surface and form a greasy scum that’s removed by a skimmer 
mounted on a rotating platform. Simultaneously, heavier material settles 
to the bottom as sludge and is raked into a sump at the center of the 
tank and then pumped out. 
▷
After about two hours in the clariﬁer, the wastewater has shed most of 
its ﬂoatable scum and suspended solids; it’s decanted over the rim of 
the tank and collected in a trough below. At this point, the water is said 
to have undergone primary treatment.
wastewater treatment process
anaerobic
digester
disinfection
return
activated
sludge
outfall
sewer
pump
grit
chamber
wastewater
bioreactor
trash
rack
primary clarifier
secondary
clarifier
dewatering
facility
methane
sludge
disposal
filter
treated
water
waste
sludge

81
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
The fundamental challenge in secondary treatment—required by 
federal law to meet modern water quality standards—is a phenomenon 
called biochemical oxygen demand (BOD). Water naturally contains 
dissolved oxygen, which it acquires through contact with the air and 
from the photosynthesis of algae and aquatic plants. Dissolved oxygen 
is critical for the health of an aquatic ecosystem, because ﬁsh and other 
aquatic animals need it to breathe.
▷
Most water also contains some organic compounds. Aquatic bacteria 
and other microorganisms consume these organic compounds as 
food. This decomposition of organic compounds involves oxidation, a 
chemical process that consumes dissolved oxygen in the water. And 
within a body of water, the population of these microorganisms tends to 
increase in proportion to the availability of food. 
sedimentation tanks

LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment 
82
▷
Wastewater is loaded with organic material (primarily from human 
waste), even after primary treatment. Thus, we say that wastewater has 
a very high BOD—biochemical oxygen demand—because those organic 
compounds are present in abnormally high concentrations, and the 
resulting large population of hungry microorganisms severely depletes 
the quantity of dissolved oxygen in the water. 
▷
The most common technology for reducing BOD to environmentally safe 
levels is the activated sludge process. In this process, the wastewater 
stream is directed into a series of deep vats called bioreactors, where 
it’s combined with carefully managed populations of bacteria, protozoa, 
worms, and microscopic animals called rotifers. These microorganisms 
rapidly consume the organic compounds in the water and thus reduce 
its BOD, under controlled conditions. 
▷
This process requires lots of oxygen, so activated sludge reactors are 
always vigorously aerated, either by mechanical agitators or by streams 
of air pumped up from the bottom of each reactor. In either case, the 
activated sludge reactors are ﬁlled with bubbling, roiling, frothing brown 
liquid. Environmental engineers call this foul stuff mixed liquor. Despite 
its appearance, it is actually being puriﬁed by an army of bacteria and 
bugs conscripted especially for this purpose. 
▷
Having introduced all these critters into the effluent stream, we need to 
get them back out. Thus, the stream is now transmitted into a secondary 
clariﬁer tank, where the mixed liquor is stilled, the microorganisms settle 
to the bottom, and a portion of this activated sludge is returned to the 
reactor to reseed the biological treatment process. 
▷
The clariﬁed water is drawn off. It’s sometimes passed through 
a ﬁlter to remove any particulate matter that didn’t settle out in the 
clariﬁer, and then it’s disinfected with a ﬁnal dose of chlorine to kill any  
remaining bacteria. 
▷
The water is now clean and safe for discharge into the local stream, 
through a conduit called an outfall sewer. However, all of that sludge 
collected from the clariﬁers and ﬁlters still needs to be treated. This is 

83
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
accomplished 
through 
another 
biological process called anaerobic 
digestion, bacterial decomposition 
in the absence of oxygen. The 
products of anaerobic digestion 
are methane gas (which can be 
collected and burned as fuel) and 
a solid residue that can be used as 
fertilizer after dewatering. 
The On-Site Septic System
▷
The typical wastewater treatment 
plant is a major industrial facility 
that 
uses 
complex 
physical, 
chemical, and biological processes 
to treat millions of gallons of 
sewage per day. At the opposite 
end of the technological spectrum is the on-site septic system that is 
used by about a quarter of all residences in the United States. 
▷
An on-site system consists of two major components: a septic tank and a 
drain ﬁeld. The typical septic tank is a large, closed watertight concrete 
container with a capacity of 1000 to 2000 gallons, installed with its top 
just below ground level, with an inlet from your sewage lateral at one 
end and an outlet to the drain ﬁeld at the other. 
▷
The most impressive characteristic of this system is that it replicates all of 
the major processes in the wastewater treatment facility—sedimentation, 
ﬂoatation, anaerobic digestion of solids, ﬁltration, and activated sludge 
treatment—with no moving parts and with human intervention required 
only to pump the sludge out of the septic tank every few years. The 
downside is that it requires a fairly large piece of land, and it only works 
well in soils with just the right degree of permeability. These systems are 
tightly regulated by states and municipalities. 
septic system

LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment 
84
TERMS
activated sludge: A process used in the secondary treatment of sewage. 
Wastewater is combined with carefully managed populations of bacteria, 
protozoa, worms, and microscopic animals that consume the organic 
compounds in the water and thus reduce its biochemical oxygen  
demand (BOD).
anaerobic digestion: A process of bacterial decomposition in the absence of 
oxygen that is used for the treatment of sludge at a sewage treatment facility.
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The depletion of dissolved oxygen 
in water as aquatic bacteria and other microorganisms consume organic 
compounds as food. Wastewater has a high BOD, which must be reduced 
through secondary treatment.
bioreactor: A vessel in which the activated sludge process is implemented 
for secondary sewage treatment. 
drain ﬁeld: A component of an on-site septic system that receives 
wastewater from a septic tank and discharges it into the surrounding soil. 
A series of perforated pipes surrounded by a bed of crushed stone and 
covered with soil, the drain ﬁeld promotes ﬁltration and biological treatment 
of wastewater ﬂowing through the system. 
lateral: A pipe that carries wastewater from a soil stack inside a building to a 
sewer line or on-site septic system.
methane: A hydrocarbon with chemical formula CH4. Methane is the principal 
component of natural gas and is also produced by the decomposition of 
organic material.
on-site septic system: A wastewater treatment system for a single residence. 
A typical on-site septic system consists of a septic tank and a drain ﬁeld.

85
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
outfall sewer: A pipe that discharges treated wastewater into a natural 
watercourse.
primary treatment: In sewage treatment, the removal of ﬂoatable 
contaminants and sludge from wastewater in a sedimentation tank (also 
called a primary clariﬁer).
sewage lift station: A pump used to lift the ﬂow of sewage to a higher 
elevation in situations where continuous downhill ﬂow are not feasible.
secondary treatment: In sewage treatment, the reduction of biochemical 
oxygen demand (BOD) in wastewater through the use of natural biological 
processes.
septic tank: A closed, watertight container that is used to remove suspended 
solids from wastewater in an on-site septic system. 
soil stack: A large vertical pipe that collects all wastewater from a plumbing 
system and delivers it to the municipal sewage system or on-site septic 
system.
READINGS
Dewberry, ed., Land Development Handbook, chapters 25 and 27.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 2.
Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, Environmental Engineering Science, chapter 6.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 11.

LECTURE 9—Wastewater Disposal and Treatment 
86
QUESTIONS
1 
Toilets manufactured before 1982 in the United States use 5 to 7 
gallons of water per ﬂush. Today, most toilets are designed to use only 
1.6 gallons per ﬂush. What are the implications of this change for water 
supply, as well as for wastewater treatment?
2 
Estimate how much wastewater you discharge from your home  
every day. 

87
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
10
Fossil Fuels:  
Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas
F
ossil fuels—coal, oil, and natural gas—are the lifeblood of our 
industrial economy and are integral to everyday engineering. 
Their inﬂuences are observed throughout this course, from 
the use of vinyl siding and asphalt shingles in residential 
construction to electric power generation, home heating systems, the 
internal combustion engine, highways, railroads, and even landﬁlls. 
To understand these systems, you need to know something about the 
technologies used to extract fossil fuels from the Earth’s crust. In this 
lecture, you will explore these extractive technologies as fascinating 
engineered systems.
Coal
▷
A century ago, coal was used to heat homes and power trains and ships, 
the principal means of long-distance transportation. The infrastructure 
of coal distribution—coal yards, coal wagons, and coal bins—were as 
ubiquitous as the infrastructure of electrical power distribution is today. 
▷
Today, nearly all of the coal mined in the United States is shipped directly 
to power plants and heavy industries, such as steel manufacturing. So, 
we hardly ever see the stuff, even though we feel its inﬂuence every day.
▷
Coal is a black or brownish sedimentary rock, composed primarily of 
carbon, mixed with varying amounts of impurities—primarily hydrogen, 
sulfur, oxygen, and nitrogen. The coal deposits that are mined 
today originated in the distant past, when layers of dead vegetation 
accumulated on swampy ground and then were covered with layers 
of soil and subjected to progressively greater pressure and heat. As a 
result of this formation process, coal is typically found in more-or-less 
horizontal strata called coal beds or seams, with the higher-quality types 
found at greater depths.

LECTURE 10—Fossil Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas 
88
▷
Coal is extracted from deposits in the United States by two principal 
methods: underground mining and surface mining. Underground 
mining involves the excavation of tunnels and shafts to access coal beds 
deep underground. It was the world’s most common form of mining for 
millennia, until the availability of large-scale earthmoving equipment 
made surface mining more economical in most circumstances. Today, 
underground mining is used primarily for extracting coal that’s too deep 
to be reached by other means. 
▷
The raw coal extracted from a mine requires considerable processing 
before it can be shipped to customers. This is accomplished at an on-
site coal processing plant that washes the coal, crushes it into chunks of 
graded sizes, and separates unwanted soil and rock. 
coal

89
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Mine safety has improved considerably in recent years, but underground 
mining remains a very dangerous business. Safety is one reason why, 
today, most of America’s coal comes from surface mining, primarily in a 
swath of Western states from Wyoming and Montana down to Arizona 
and New Mexico. The principal method for extracting this coal is 
opencast mining, a term coined in the 1970s after its former name, strip 
mining, became virtually synonymous with environmental degradation.
▷
Along with coal’s contributions to power generation, we must also 
recognize its serious environmental impacts. The effects of coal 
mining can include destruction of wildlife habitats, altered landforms, 
dust pollution, increased erosion, decreased soil fertility, depleted 
groundwater, methane gas emissions, sinkholes, and underground ﬁres. 
▷
In the past few decades, federal and state laws have eliminated the 
worst abuses through stringent requirements for permitting, inspections, 
and reclamation of mined-out lands. Yet the adverse effects can’t be 
eliminated entirely, so they must be considered in our ongoing struggle 
to ﬁnd the right balance between environmental protection and our 
ever-increasing appetite for energy.
Oil
▷
The world consumes more than 90 million barrels of oil every day. 
And even though oil fuels only 1% of U.S. electric power generation, it 
constitutes 40% of our total energy consumption. Petroleum products 
power our automobiles and aircraft, heat our homes, cook our meals, 
and lubricate our machines. They serve as a base for countless industrial 
chemicals and plastics. 
▷
Complain as we might about oil as a nonrenewable resource, a source of 
pollution and greenhouse gases, and a source of international conﬂict, 
we depend on this stuff for our standard of living and will continue to 
depend on it for some time to come. 

LECTURE 10—Fossil Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas 
90
▷
Petroleum is a naturally occurring stew of hydrocarbons, organic 
compounds consisting entirely of hydrogen and carbon atoms. A major 
component of the unreﬁned crude oil we pump from the ground is a 
family of hydrocarbon molecules called alkanes. An alkane is a chain of 
carbon atoms, each bonded to two hydrogen atoms—except at the ends 
of the chain, where each carbon is bonded to three hydrogens. 
▷
Petroleum originated as marine microorganisms—primarily plankton 
and algae—that accumulated on the bottom of the sea 10 to 600 million 
years ago. Over time, these organisms decomposed into compounds of 
carbon and hydrogen, which were embedded within sedimentary layers 
that eventually hardened into ﬁne-grained shale, called source rock. 
▷
As the source rock experienced progressively greater heat and 
pressure, the organic material was distilled into petroleum and natural 
gas, which eventually accumulated in more porous strata of limestone 
and sandstone, called reservoir rock. Here it was retained, as geological 
movements of the Earth’s crust sandwiched the reservoir rock between 
layers of impermeable caprock, such as granite and marble.
▷
Armed with a deep understanding of this formation process, geologists 
use a variety of technologies to identify possible deposits of oil and 
natural gas deep underground. These include satellite imagery, 
seismology, gravity meters, magnetometers, and electronic sniffers.
▷
Once a deposit of oil has been identiﬁed, the process of extracting it 
begins with a drilling rig.  At its heart is the drill string, a series of hollow 
pipes connected with threaded couplers. At the bottom of the string is 
the bit, which excavates the borehole as it rotates. Immediately above 
the bit are several heavy sections of pipe called drill collars, which 
ﬁt over the drill string and provide the weight needed to drive the bit 
downward through solid rock. 
▷
The drilling process relies on a specialized lubricant called drilling 
mud, a mixture of water, bentonite clay, and a few other ingredients. 
During drilling, this substance is pumped downward through the hollow 
drill string. 

91
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Drilling continues until the bit reaches a depth just above the expected 
location of the oil deposit. Then, the drill string is withdrawn, and a steel 
pipe called the well casing is inserted into the borehole to keep it from 
collapsing inward. Once in place, the casing is supported and sealed by 
pumping cement slurry, or mortar, down through the casing, followed by 
a plug, followed by drilling mud. 
▷
After some additional drilling to reach the oil deposit, the well is 
prepared for operation. Explosive charges are lowered to the bottom 
of the borehole and detonated to create perforations in the bottom of 
the casing. A small-diameter pipe is then lowered into the casing and 
sealed into position. This pipe creates a conduit through which the oil 
can ﬂow upward.
▷
Underground oil resides within tiny pores and ﬁssures in a stratum 
of limestone, sandstone, or shale. To get this oil ﬂowing into the well, 
additional measures usually must be taken. If the stratum is sandstone, 
drilling rig

oil refinery

93
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
water mixed with a proppant (typically sand, walnut shells, or aluminum 
pellets) is pumped into the well at very high pressure. The high-pressure 
ﬂuid fractures the rock, and the proppant particles hold these cracks 
open so that the oil can ﬂow through them. This process—called hydraulic 
fracturing, or fracking—is also used in the extraction of natural gas.
▷
At this point, drilling is complete. The drilling rig is disassembled and hauled 
away, and production equipment is installed to extract oil from the well. 
▷
Much of our petroleum originates with offshore drilling. The offshore-
drilling process is fundamentally the same as for land-based drilling, 
except its execution is far more complex and much riskier. 
▷
Of course, the stuff that ﬂows from any wellhead—onshore or off—isn’t 
quite ready for your car’s gas tank. This unreﬁned crude is a mixture 
of oil, natural gas, water, and various impurities. Immediately after 
extraction, these components undergo preliminary separation at a 
processing facility, typically located right in the oil ﬁeld. Only after this 
processing does the stuff actually qualify as crude oil.
▷
Bulk crude is then transported to a reﬁnery over water by tanker ships 
and over land by pipeline. The oil reﬁnery’s principal function is to 
separate crude oil into its constituent alkane hydrocarbons, through 
a continuous process called fractionating. The typical reﬁnery 
incorporates many other processes, such as removing impurities. 
Natural Gas
▷
The natural gas we use for heating, cooking, and generating electricity 
is methane, the lightest of the alkane hydrocarbons. In the United 
States, about one-quarter of natural gas production is associated gas, 
meaning that it’s found within, and extracted from, petroleum deposits. 
In these deposits, methane is often dissolved in the oil and kept in 
solution by the very high pressure underground, but as the mixture is 
brought to atmospheric pressure at the surface, the methane comes 
out of solution naturally. 

LECTURE 10—Fossil Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas 
94
▷
Before the development of gas pipelines in the 1950s, this associated 
methane was seen as an unwanted by-product and was burned off in 
the oil ﬁeld. Today, it’s usually captured and piped to a gas plant for 
processing and sale. 
▷
The remainder of U.S. natural gas production is nonassociated gas—
found in gas ﬁelds and coal beds separate from oil deposits—but 
extracted using essentially the same drilling process that is used for oil.
▷
Even though natural gas is mostly methane, it still requires reﬁnement at 
a natural gas processing plant to remove water vapor and impurities and 
to separate and capture small amounts of other gaseous hydrocarbons. 
The ﬁnished product is then transported to customers through a network 
of pipelines, aided and controlled by compressors and gates.
▷
Since 2000, there’s been a revolution in natural gas production, resulting 
from the large-scale exploitation of shale gas, particularly in the United 
States and Canada. There are large reserves of shale gas around the 
world, but until recently, they couldn’t be exploited economically, 
because shale is too impermeable—the gas trapped within it couldn’t 
be extracted. 
▷
The recent boom has been enabled by two important technological 
developments. The ﬁrst is horizontal drilling, which is used to maximize 
the surface area of the borehole within a shale stratum. The second is 
shale stratum
gas well
horizontal drilling
hydraulic fracturing

95
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
hydraulic fracturing, or fracking, the process of injecting a mixture of 
water and chemical additives at high pressure down into the borehole to 
create fractures through which the gas can ﬂow. 
▷
Today, fracking has completely changed the economics of energy in 
the countries where it’s being used. Because fracking has increased 
our technically recoverable deposits by about 50%, natural gas is now 
the fastest-growing contributor to the U.S. energy supply. Prices have 
dropped signiﬁcantly, as has our dependence on foreign sources of 
fossil fuel. However, fracking is highly controversial, largely because 
of its adverse environmental impacts—the extent of which aren’t yet 
fully understood.
TERMS
alkane: A chemical compound consisting of a chain of carbon and hydrogen 
atoms with the general chemical formula CnH2n+2, where n is the number of 
carbon atoms. Alkanes are hydrocarbons that constitute a major component 
of unreﬁned crude oil. 
associated gas: Natural gas that is found within, and extracted from, 
underground petroleum deposits.
drill collar: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a heavy section of pipe located 
at the bottom of the drill string and immediately above the bit. Drill collars 
provide the weight needed to drive the drill bit downward through solid rock. 
drill string: A series of hollow pipes connected together with threaded 
couplers that is used to drill the borehole for an oil or natural gas well. 
drilling mud: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a mixture of water and 
bentonite clay that is used to lubricate the drilling bit and to carry the rock 
cutting back up to the surface. 
drilling rig: A mechanical system used to drill deep into the Earth’s crust to 
extract petroleum and natural gas.

LECTURE 10—Fossil Fuels: Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas 
96
fractionating: An industrial process by which crude oil is separated into its 
constituent hydrocarbons. 
hydraulic fracturing: The process of using a high-pressure ﬂuid to create 
fractures in underground rock to facilitate the extraction of oil or natural gas. 
Fracturing ﬂuid contains proppants, which hold the fractures open after the 
ﬂuid pressure has been reduced.
hydrocarbon: An organic chemical compound consisting of hydrogen and 
carbon atoms. 
nonassociated gas: Natural gas that is found in gas ﬁelds and in coal beds 
separate from petroleum deposits.
petroleum: A naturally occurring mixture of hydrocarbons, organic 
compounds consisting entirely of hydrogen and carbon atoms. 
proppant: In the process of hydraulic fracturing, a solid particulate material 
designed to keep a fracture open to facilitate the extraction of oil or  
natural gas.
reservoir rock: Porous underground strata of limestone and sandstone in 
which petroleum and natural gas accumulate. 
shale: A ﬁne-grained sedimentary rock that is formed primarily from clay 
minerals and quartz.
source rock: Fine-grained shale in which hydrocarbons form deep under the 
surface of the Earth.
underground mining: The excavation of tunnels and shafts to access 
mineral deposits deep under the surface of the Earth. 
well: A shaft excavated from the ground surface into an aquifer for the 
purpose of obtaining groundwater.

97
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
well casing: A pipe inserted into an oil or natural gas well to prevent the 
walls of the borehole from collapsing.
READING
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapters 1 and 4.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are the geopolitical implications of our heavy reliance on fossil 
fuels? What are the implications of the availability of ample coal 
reserves in the United States? What are the implications of the ongoing 
natural gas boom?
2 
How does the issue of hydraulic fracturing exemplify the beneﬁts and 
costs of technological development in our world? How does it exemplify 
the complex role of government in both promoting and controlling 
technological development?

98
LECTURE 11—Power Generation from Coal
Lecture
11
Power Generation  
from Coal
E
lectricity is so deeply embedded in the fabric of modern civilization 
that we’re seldom even aware that we’re using it constantly—for 
illumination, heating and cooling our homes, preserving and 
cooking food, heating water, keeping time, washing clothes and 
dishes, entertaining ourselves, computing, driving, etc. Electricity is also 
essential for the other infrastructure systems covered in this course: 
telecommunications, transportation, water and wastewater treatment, oil 
and natural gas extraction, mining, and solid waste disposal. In a larger 
sense, our quality of life depends on that invisible source of energy, 
which you will learn about in this lecture.
Energy and Electrical Power
▷
There are many forms of energy. 
o Gravitational potential energy is the energy associated with the 
elevation of a mass.
o Kinetic energy is the energy of motion. 
o Electrical energy is another form of potential energy that is 
associated with a difference in voltage, rather than a difference  
in elevation.
o Internal energy is associated with the microscopic motions of the 
particles that constitute matter.
o Elastic energy is associated with the deformation of a material.
o Chemical energy is associated with the bonds between the atoms 
that constitute molecules.

99
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o Nuclear energy is associated with the bonds between the particles 
that constitute the atomic nucleus.
o Radiant energy is associated with light and other forms of 
electromagnetic radiation.
▷
There are also two principal 
forms of energy transfer: 
heat and work. Heat is the 
thermal energy transferred 
from a region of higher 
temperature to a region of 
lower temperature. Work 
is the energy transferred 
through the movement of a 
force through a distance.
▷
At the most fundamental 
level, all of the different 
forms of energy are the 
same thing. As the law of 
conservation of energy tells 
us, energy can never be 
created or destroyed, but 
it can be transformed from 
one fworm into another. 
These transformations are 
vital, because they allow us 
to use energy from a given 
source in ways that wouldn’t 
otherwise be possible. Our 
ability to engineer these 
transformations has made 
it possible for us to use 
electrical power as a sort 
of common currency for our 
energy-intensive world. 
Force × Distance = Work
1 newton × 1 meter / 1 second =
1 newton-meter/second = 
1 watt
1 watt × 1 hour (3600 seconds) =
1 watt-hour
1 watt-hour × 1000 hours (3,600,000 lifts) =
1 kilowatt-hour
U.S. Energy Sources 
(2013)
renewable
12.9%
nuclear
19.5%
natural gas
27.8%
coal
39.2%
oil
0.7%

LECTURE 11—Power Generation from Coal 
100
▷
The principal reason why electricity has become the common currency 
is that every signiﬁcant natural source of energy available to us can be 
used to generate electrical power. As of 2013, about 67% of electrical 
power in the United States was generated by burning fossil fuels, about 
20% was from nuclear ﬁssion, and about 13% was from renewable 
sources. Worldwide, the average percentages are similar, but there’s 
signiﬁcant variation from country to country. 
Coal-Fired Power Plants
▷
The dominant source of electricity in the United States is coal-ﬁred 
power plants. From a macro perspective, this technological system 
consists of three self-contained but closely interwoven subsystems: one 
for burning coal to produce a stream of hot ﬂue gas, one for extracting 
heat from the ﬂue gas to produce a continuous stream of high-pressure 
steam that drives a turbine; and one for transforming the turbine’s shaft 
power into electrical power. 
▷
Power generation begins with the delivery of massive amounts of coal 
to the plant by railroad or barge. A conveyor belt provides a continuous 
ﬂow of coal from the storage yard into the plant. Inside, the coal enters 
a pulverizer, a rotating drum containing large steel balls that grind lumps 
of coal into a ﬁne powder, which is then blown into the furnace with high-
powered fans. Powdered coal burns more completely than larger pieces 
do; thus, pulverizing increases fuel efficiency while also reducing pollution. 
▷
Inside the furnace, a 3000s ﬁreball burns continuously, sending a stream 
of hot exhaust gases up into an arch-shaped ﬂue. The purpose of the 
ﬂue, and its associated equipment, is to extract every possible joule of 
heat from the exhaust gases before they’re released to the atmosphere. 
▷
This process of heat transfer begins with the boiler, consisting of tightly 
packed vertical steel tubes, called risers, integrated within the walls 
of the furnace itself. The risers are ﬁlled with water that boils and rises 
as it’s heated by radiant energy from the ﬂames. Each riser is part of a 
closed loop that allows for continuous circulation of this ﬂuid. 

101
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
At the top of the loop is a device called a steam drum, which separates 
steam from the water. The separated steam is now piped to the next 
stage of the power-generation process, as part of a larger closed loop 
that constitutes the steam-power-generation cycle. 
▷
Meanwhile, the separated water is circulated from the steam drum 
back to the bottom of the furnace, through pipes called downcomers, 
and then it’s fed back into the risers, where the generation of steam 
continues. 
▷
According to the laws of thermodynamics, the efficiency of a steam 
power cycle can be improved by increasing the temperature of the steam 
that’s fed into the turbine. That’s why the high-pressure steam emerging 
from the steam drum is now routed through a superheater, suspended 
within the hottest part of the arch-shaped ﬂue. The superheater is really 
just a heat exchanger. Intensely hot ﬂue gases ﬂow across its coils, 
raising the temperature of the steam to about 1000°F, at which point it’s 
ready for the turbine.
▷
A steam turbine is a mechanical device that converts the internal energy 
in steam into the kinetic energy of a rotating shaft. A heavy, airtight 
casing is needed to withstand the immense internal pressure the turbine 
experiences during use. Inside is a series of disks ﬁxed rigidly to a shaft. 
Each disk, called a rotor, is composed of closely spaced angled blades. 
▷
Alternating between the rotors, another set of similar disks, called 
stators, is rigidly ﬁxed to the inside of the casing. The rotors turn with 
the turbine shaft; the stators stand still. Each pairing of one stator and 
one rotor is called a stage of the turbine. 
▷
High-pressure steam enters at the narrow end of the turbine and moves 
toward the wider end, passing through successively larger stages, 
expanding as it goes. The process continues, stage by stage, until the 
steam is exhausted—at considerably lower pressure—from the far end 
of the turbine. 

LECTURE 11—Power Generation from Coal 
102
▷
Most power plants have three turbines driving the same shaft. The 
ﬁrst is a high-pressure turbine that receives steam directly from the 
superheater and then sends it back to a reheater, located just beyond 
the superheater in the ﬂue. The reheater transfers more waste heat from 
the ﬂue gases into the steam, raising its temperature close to 1000°F, 
though not increasing its pressure. 
▷
Next, the steam is piped, in succession, to an intermediate-pressure 
turbine and a low-pressure turbine, which extract even more energy and 
transmit it to the rotating shaft. The smaller high-pressure turbine does 
most of the heavy lifting. 
▷
Steam leaving the low-pressure turbine enters a condenser, which 
changes the vapor back to liquid water for eventual return to the boiler. 
As the steam condenses, its pressure decreases considerably, creating 
a partial vacuum that helps pull the waste steam out of the turbine. 
steam turbine

103
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Water collected from the bottom of the condenser will eventually be 
recirculated to the boiler to complete the so-called feedwater loop. But 
before this can happen, the feedwater is intensively puriﬁed to remove 
rust particles, dissolved minerals, dissolved oxygen, and acidity. The 
puriﬁed water is then pumped through a device called an economizer—
which extracts even more waste heat from the ﬂue gases—and then 
back into the steam drum, where it rejoins the ﬂow of water through the 
downcomers to the boiler. 
▷
A heat exchanger at the end of the ﬂue is used to preheat the stream of 
fresh air that’s mixed with pulverized coal and blown into the boiler at the 
beginning of this process. Finally, these exhaust gases are processed 
through a series of pollution-control devices and then released through 
the top of a smokestack into the atmosphere.
▷
Meanwhile, back in the power plant, the ultimate purpose of all these 
interwoven processes is ﬁnally realized: The turbine shaft turns the 
generator, which generates electrical power. The electricity produced 
by the main generator is transmitted to an adjacent switchyard, where a 
small portion is diverted back into the plant to drive pumps, conveyors, 
lighting, and such. The remainder begins a long journey that will 
eventually culminate in your home. 
The Future of the Coal-Fired Power Plant
▷
The coal-ﬁred power plant is a beautifully engineered infrastructure 
system that has served us well for more than a century. But this 
system faces an uncertain future, because of its adverse effects on  
our environment. 
▷
Even though the past few decades have seen the development of highly 
effective clean-coal technologies, the challenge of carbon emission 
remains. However, a series of new technologies hold great promise for 
preserving the viability of power generation from fossil fuels. Even so, 
power companies are shutting down many older, less-efficient coal-ﬁred 
plants in anticipation of stricter federal emission standards. 

LECTURE 11—Power Generation from Coal 
104
▷
Nonetheless, the impracticality of replacing all of our coal-based 
generating capacity in the short term and the real possibility of a 
technological solution to the carbon emission challenge suggest that 
coal will be part of our energy portfolio for many years to come.
TERMS
boil: To change from the liquid phase to the vapor phase.
chemical energy: A form of energy associated with the bonds between the 
atoms that constitute molecules.
condenser: A device that changes vapor into liquid by transferring heat from 
the ﬂuid.
downcomer: A vertical pipe that circulates hot water from the steam drum 
back to the boiler in a steam power plant.
efficiency: In thermodynamics, a dimensionless measure of the effectiveness 
of an energy-conversion process in a device that uses thermal energy—e.g., 
an engine, a boiler, a furnace, or a refrigerator. In general, thermodynamic 
efficiency is calculated as a ratio of output to input and thus is always a number 
between 0 and 1 (or between 0% and 100%). Also called thermal efficiency.
elastic energy: A form of energy associated with the deformation of a 
material. Also called strain energy.
electrical energy: A form of potential energy associated with a difference 
in voltage. 
electromagnetic radiation: A type of radiant energy emitted by current 
ﬂowing through a conductor and other electromagnetic processes.
generator: A device that converts the kinetic energy of a rotating shaft into 
electrical energy.

105
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
heat exchanger: A device for transferring heat from one ﬂuid to another, 
usually without allowing them to mix.
internal energy: A form of energy associated with the microscopic motions 
of the particles that constitute matter.
kinetic energy: The energy associated with a mass in motion.
nuclear energy: A form of energy associated with the bonds between the 
particles that constitute the atomic nucleus.
nuclear ﬁssion: A process in which an atomic nucleus splits into lighter nuclei 
and releases energy. In a ﬁssile material, ﬁssion can occur spontaneously, or 
it can occur when the nucleus absorbs a free neutron.
potential energy: The energy associated with the elevation of a mass.
radiant energy: A form of energy associated with light and other forms of 
electromagnetic radiation.
reheater: In a steam power plant, a device that transfers heat from the 
furnace exhaust gases to the steam en route from the high-pressure turbine 
to the intermediate-pressure turbine. 
riser: A vertically oriented water-ﬁlled steel tube integrated within the walls 
of the furnace in a steam power plant. A series of closely spaced risers form 
the walls of the boiler. 
rotor: (1) In a steam turbine, a set of angled blades that rotates with the 
turbine shaft. The rotor interacts with a stator to produce shaft power. One 
stator and one rotor constitute one stage of the turbine. (2) In a generator, 
a rotating element on which one or more magnets are mounted. The rotor 
produces a varying magnetic ﬁeld that induces an electrical current in the 
stator. (3) In a wind turbine, the assembly of rotating blades that drives the 
generator shaft.

LECTURE 11—Power Generation from Coal 
106
stator: (1) In a steam turbine, a set of angled blades that are ﬁxed to the 
turbine casing. The stator interacts with a rotor to produce shaft power. One 
stator and one rotor constitute one stage of the turbine. (2) In a generator, 
the stationary coil in which an electrical current is induced by the rotor. 
steam drum: A device that separates high-pressure steam from boiling 
water in a steam power plant.
steam turbine: A mechanical device that converts the internal energy in 
steam into the kinetic energy of a rotating shaft.
superheater: In a steam power plant, a device that transfers heat from 
the furnace exhaust gases to the steam en route from the steam drum to  
the turbines. 
switchyard: A facility that connects a power plant to its associated power 
transmission system. The principal function of the switchyard is to increase 
voltage for long-distance transmission.
turbine: An engine that produces continuous power by means of a  
fast-moving ﬂow of water, steam, gas, or air driving a rotor ﬁtted with vanes 
or blades.
voltage: A difference in electrical potential between two points, measured in 
volts. Voltage causes current to ﬂow through a circuit.
work: Energy transferred through the movement of a force through  
a distance.

107
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Blume, Electric Power System Basics, chapters 1 and 2.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 5.
Moran, Shapiro, Boettner, and Bailey, Fundamentals of Engineering 
Thermodynamics, chapters 1–5 and 8.
QUESTIONS
1 
Given the environmental challenges associated with burning coal, why 
is coal still our principal fuel for electric power generation?
2 
What are the two forms of interaction between electricity and 
magnetism that make power generation possible?

108
LECTURE 12—Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power
Lecture
12
Oil, Gas, 
and Nuclear Power
T
he decline in coal-ﬁred power production has been facilitated by 
dramatic developments in the energy industry. Trends in energy 
production are often both unpredictable and volatile, with 
drastic changes triggered by international conﬂicts, domestic 
political decisions, technological developments, technological failures, 
and changing societal values. Given this unpredictability, the diversity of 
our energy portfolio is one of its greatest strengths. And that’s why, in 
this lecture, you will examine the three conventional power-generation 
alternatives to coal: oil, natural gas, and nuclear ﬁssion. 
Power Generation from Oil
▷
Power generation from oil accounts for less than 1% of U.S. electrical 
power. The associated technology is similar to coal-fueled plants. 
Indeed, the only signiﬁcant difference is that the coal furnace is replaced 
by an oil furnace, fueled by oil sprayed into the combustion chamber 
through a series of nozzles. The nozzles break up the stream of oil into 
tiny droplets for more complete combustion—just as pulverized coal is 
used to achieve better combustion in coal furnaces.
▷
Beyond the furnace, the operation of an oil-ﬁred plant is essentially 
identical to that of a coal-ﬁred plant. Heat from the furnace boils water, 
which is used to drive steam turbines, which drive generators to produce 
power. And burning oil carries with it the same major disadvantages—
air pollution and carbon emissions—the inevitable by-products of the 
chemistry of combustion. 
▷
An interesting beneﬁt of oil-ﬁred power generation is its use of a fuel that 
serves no other practical purpose: the thick, corrosive waste product of 
the petroleum reﬁning process. This petrochemical sludge is a far cry 
from the light fuel oils used for home heating. It’s so thick that it must be 
heated to more than 100°F just to move it through a pipeline. As such, 

109
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
even though oil is likely to continue making only a minor contribution to 
U.S. power production, it will remain a useful means of disposing of an 
otherwise-useless waste product.
Power Generation from Natural Gas
▷
Natural gas currently fuels about 28% of U.S. power generation. The 
operation of a gas-ﬁred power plant is fundamentally different from 
that of a coal- or oil-ﬁred plant, in that it does not use the combustion 
of fossil fuel to boil water. Rather, it uses a fundamentally different type 
of turbine—called a combustion turbine—that’s driven directly by the 
combustion of natural gas. 
▷
In a typical gas-ﬁred power plant, the turbine is composed of four 
major components: a compressor, a combustion system, a turbine, and 
a driveshaft. The compressor, rotated at high velocity by the spinning 
shaft, draws air through an intake, compresses it, and feeds it into a 
ring of combustion chambers. Fuel injectors introduce a steady stream 
of natural gas into the chambers, and the resulting mixture of gas and 
natural gas
supply
compressor
air intake
combustion
chamber
generator
exhaust
switchyard
turbine

LECTURE 12—Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power 
110
compressed air is burned at a temperature of more than 2000°F and 
then fed into the turbine. 
▷
The hot, high-pressure exhaust gas expands through the turbine in 
essentially the same way that steam expands through a steam turbine—
spinning the rotors, which drive the shaft, which powers both the 
compressor and the generator. The generator sends three-phase power 
to the adjacent switchyard, just like a coal-ﬁred plant.
▷
The thermodynamic efficiency of a combustion turbine is somewhat 
less than that of a steam turbine; however, the efficiency of the power-
generation system can be improved signiﬁcantly by adding a piece of 
equipment—called a heat recovery steam generator—which captures 
waste heat from the turbine exhaust and uses it to produce steam 
that drives a conventional steam turbine. This conﬁguration is called a 
combined-cycle power plant. 
▷
Natural gas has three signiﬁcant advantages over coal as a fuel for 
power generation.
o The combustion of gas is signiﬁcantly cleaner than the combustion 
of coal. 
o A natural gas–ﬁred plant has a much smaller physical footprint 
than a coal-ﬁred plant with the same power output. For this reason, 
gas-ﬁred plants have been particularly popular in urban areas with 
limited space. 
o A combustion turbine can be started up and shut down easily and 
quickly, while starting up a coal furnace takes the better part of a 
day. As a result, coal-ﬁred plants are designed to run 24 hours per 
day and to shut down only for maintenance. 
▷
Even though gas is much cleaner than coal, burning natural gas still 
emits pollutants and relatively large amounts of carbon dioxide. In 
this sense, nuclear, hydroelectric, wind, solar, and geothermal power 
generation are all superior, because they produce no emissions at all. 
Combustion turbines are also extremely loud. And, most importantly, 

111
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
there are serious environmental concerns about fracking, the technology 
underlying the ongoing natural gas production boom.
Nuclear Power
▷
Nuclear power is the source of roughly 20% of the electrical power that 
is used in the United States and 13% worldwide. With 99 reactors at 61 
nuclear power plants nationwide, the United States is currently the world’s 
largest supplier of commercial nuclear power, in terms of raw output.
▷
A nuclear power plant is similar to a coal-ﬁred plant, in the sense that 
both use closed-loop steam cycles to spin turbines. The big difference is 
the source of energy used to produce the steam: chemical energy for a 
coal-ﬁred plant and nuclear ﬁssion for a nuclear plant. 
▷
Nuclear ﬁssion—the splitting of atomic nuclei—depends on the unique 
behavior of certain heavy elements, called ﬁssile materials, which are 
used as nuclear fuel. A ﬁssile material is one that’s capable of sustaining 
the chain reaction associated with nuclear ﬁssion. 
▷
The most common ﬁssile material is uranium 235. When the nucleus 
of a uranium 235 atom is struck by a neutron, it breaks apart, releases 
energy, and emits a few free neutrons. If a sufficient quantity of this 
material is assembled in one place, the neutrons emitted by the ﬁssion 
of one nucleus will encounter adjacent nuclei, causing them to split, 
release energy, and emit more neutrons. As this process continues, 
progressively more free neutrons cause the ﬁssion of progressively more 
nuclei. The result is a nuclear chain reaction—self-sustaining ﬁssion. 
▷
If this chain reaction is controlled, we have a very potent source of 
energy; if it’s uncontrolled, we have a nuclear explosion. But how does 
this reaction get started? Uranium 235 experiences a small amount of 
spontaneous ﬁssion, a natural form of radioactive decay that releases 
a few neutrons. We only need to assemble a critical mass of uranium 
235, and this natural emission of neutrons will set the nuclear chain 
reaction in motion. 

LECTURE 12—Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power 
112
▷
Nuclear fuel is prepared for use in a reactor by molding uranium into 
small pellets, which are then sealed inside metal tubes to create fuel 
rods. The tubes are made of zirconium alloy, which is used because of 
its corrosion resistance and low neutron absorption. The purpose of the 
tube is to contain the uranium pellets so that fragments can’t break away 
and contaminate the reactor coolant.
▷
The fuel rods are assembled into bundles of about 200 each, and 
about 150 such bundles are combined to form the reactor core. The 
holes in each bundle allow for the insertion of control rods, which are 
cylindrical bars made of boron carbide, a material that’s particularly 
effective at absorbing neutrons. When the control rods are inserted into 
a fuel bundle, they absorb enough free neutrons to prevent the ﬁssion 
reaction from sustaining itself. Thus, they keep the nuclear reaction from 
getting out of control. When they’re withdrawn, they allow the reaction 
to proceed.
▷
From a macro perspective, the advantages of nuclear power are 
considerable. Nuclear plants can operate at maximum capacity for 
extended periods of time, so they’re very effective at meeting the 
neutron
uranium 235
uranium 235
fission
fragments
neutrons
fission
fragments
neutrons
energy
energy
energy

base load. Although nuclear fuel is a nonrenewable resource, there’s 
enough of it in the Earth’s crust to last for centuries. More importantly, 
properly contained nuclear ﬁssion produces minimal air pollution and 
no carbon dioxide. 
▷
In the ﬁrst decade of the 21st century, a growing appreciation for these 
advantages—coupled with post-9/11 concerns about our dependence on 
energy sources from unstable regions of the world—led to a resurgence 
in enthusiasm for nuclear power, both in the United States and abroad. 
Many new power-plant construction projects were initiated. There was 
talk of nuclear power as a major component of a new environmentally 
friendly power-generation system. 
nuclear power plant

LECTURE 12—Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power 
114
▷
And then came the 2011 Fukushima power plant disaster, throwing the 
nuclear industry back on its heels once again. Tragically, 50 minutes 
after a magnitude-9.0 earthquake off the coast of Japan, an earthquake-
induced tsunami overtopped the plant’s protective seawall and ﬂooded 
the facility, causing the emergency generators to fail. The plant’s backup 
battery system immediately took over, but when the batteries went dead 
the following day, there was nothing to prevent all three reactor cores 
from melting down. The result was a humanitarian, environmental, and 
economic catastrophe.
▷
Beyond the potential for nuclear accidents, the long-term viability of 
nuclear power is also plagued by the still-unresolved challenge of 
nuclear waste disposal. This challenge is exacerbated by the high level 
of radioactivity in the products of nuclear ﬁssion. 
▷
These serious challenges notwithstanding, nuclear power is not going 
away anytime soon. Even in places where nuclear power has fallen out 
of favor, the immense capital investment in existing plants provides a 
strong incentive to keep them in operation for as long as possible. 
TERMS
combustion turbine: A turbine engine that is propelled directly by the 
combustion of natural gas. 
control rod: In nuclear power generation, a boron carbide rod that slows or 
stops the nuclear chain reaction by absorbing neutrons when inserted into 
the reactor core.
driveshaft: In an automobile drivetrain, a shaft that connects the 
transmission to the differential.
ﬁssile material: A material (e.g., uranium 235) that is capable of sustaining 
the chain reaction associated with nuclear ﬁssion. 

115
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
geothermal power generation: The generation of electrical power from 
naturally occurring heat below the Earth’s surface. 
nuclear chain reaction: A self-sustaining process that occurs when neutrons 
emitted by the ﬁssion of atomic nuclei encounter adjacent nuclei and cause 
them to split and emit more neutrons. 
reactor core: In nuclear power generation, the vessel in which the nuclear 
reaction takes place. The reactor core contains nuclear fuel rods and 
control rods.
steam generator: A device that transfers heat from the primary loop to the 
secondary loop in a pressurized water reactor.
thermodynamic efficiency: A dimensionless measure of the effectiveness 
of an energy-conversion process in a device that uses thermal 
energy—e.g., an engine, a boiler, a furnace, or a refrigerator. In general, 
thermodynamic efficiency is calculated as a ratio of output to input and 
thus is always a number between 0 and 1 (or between 0% and 100%). Also 
called thermal efficiency.
three-phase power: Electric power generated, transmitted, and distributed 
through three conductors, each carrying an alternating current (AC) of the 
same frequency and voltage, but each out of phase with the other two by 120°. 
uranium 235: The most commonly used ﬁssile material for nuclear power 
generation.
READINGS
Blume, Electric Power System Basics, chapter 2.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 5.
Moran, Shapiro, Boettner, and Bailey, Fundamentals of Engineering 
Thermodynamics, chapters 1–5, 8, and 9.

LECTURE 12—Oil, Gas, and Nuclear Power 
116
QUESTIONS
1 
How do the relative strengths and weaknesses of coal, natural gas, and 
nuclear power generation complement each other?
2 
What are some positive aspects of our growing reliance on natural gas 
for electric power generation? What are the dangers?

117
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
13
Renewable Sources  
of Electricity
I
n this lecture, you will learn about the three most important sources 
of renewable energy: hydropower, wind power, and solar power. The 
term “renewable energy” refers to energy produced from resources 
that are naturally replenished on a human timescale. Consistent 
with this deﬁnition, hydropower is renewable, because water ﬂowing 
through a hydroelectric-generating facility is rapidly replenished by rain 
falling on the associated watershed. Wind power is renewable because 
naturally occurring differences in atmospheric pressure produce an 
inexhaustible supply of moving air. Solar power is renewable, because 
the Sun continuously bombards the Earth with more energy than we can 
possibly use. 
Hydroelectric Power
▷
Hydroelectric power is our oldest form of renewable energy and also our 
most prevalent, representing about 7% of all electric power generated in 
the United States. 
▷
Waterpower has been used since at least the 3rd century B.C., and 
through the 19th century, it was used extensively for such applications as 
milling grain, sawing lumber, and powering textile machinery. Extensive 
as they were, these uses of hydropower were all fundamentally limited 
by a common constraint: Power had to be consumed at the same 
location where it was generated. 
▷
This constraint was eliminated with the development of hydroelectric 
power in the late 19th century, and from the early 20th century onward, 
hydropower has been used almost exclusively to generate electricity. 
By the 1930s, hydroelectricity accounted for 40% of the power used in 
the United States. And while our hydropower capacity has increased in 
absolute terms since then, the proportion of power generated from this 
source has fallen dramatically, from 40% to 7%. 

LECTURE 13—Renewable Sources of Electricity 
118
▷
U.S. hydropower generation has remained essentially constant since 
the early 1970s, in part because many of the best sites have already 
been exploited, but also because of ﬁerce environmental opposition to 
the construction of dams. Still, given the immense capital investment in 
these facilities, hydroelectricity will remain an important contributor to 
worldwide power generation for the foreseeable future. 
▷
A modern hydroelectric power plant requires a dam, capable of 
impounding a large quantity of water at a height signiﬁcantly above the 
normal level of the watercourse. The higher the water level, the greater 
the potential energy available for conversion into electricity.
▷
A carefully controlled quantity of water is drawn from one or more intake 
structures behind the dam and then is routed into large steel tubes called 
penstocks, each of which carries a stream of water at high velocity down 
to a water turbine, which turns a generator to produce electricity.
Hoover Dam

119
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Hydroelectricity has many signiﬁcant advantages over other forms of 
power generation. It’s safe and produces no emissions. Water turbines 
can be started up and shut down very rapidly; thus, hydropower can be 
very responsive to ﬂuctuations in demand. And the reservoirs created 
for hydropower generation often provide additional economic beneﬁts, 
such as irrigation, water supply, ﬂood control, navigation, and recreation. 
▷
However, the adverse environmental impacts of dams remain problematic. 
Dams inundate large areas of land, which may include important human 
cultural artifacts and wildlife habitats; interrupt ﬁsh migration patterns; 
and can kill juvenile ﬁsh that get sucked into the turbines. 
▷
This adverse impact on ﬁsh has been well understood since the late 19th 
century, and a wide range of technological solutions have been tried, at 
considerable cost, but with only mixed success. The combined impact of 
environmental damage and the limited availability of new hydropower-
compatible sites suggests that this particular form of renewable energy 
has little potential for long-term growth. 
Wind Power
▷
Like hydropower, wind power also has a long history, but the technology 
has seen dramatic leaps forward in just the past decade. The modern 
wind turbine seems the epitome of simplicity. A large three-bladed rotor 
is mounted atop a tall steel pylon. The rotor is spun by moving air, and the 
rotor shaft turns a generator located within a housing called a nacelle. 
▷
Yet behind this apparent simplicity is some highly sophisticated 
engineering. Each blade of a modern wind turbine is designed like 
an airplane wing, with an airfoil that’s capable of generating lift as air 
ﬂows across it. This lifting force pulls the blade through its circular path, 
spinning the rotor. This is efficient because lift increases with increasing 
blade velocity. 
▷
To maximize their aerodynamic efficiency, wind turbine blades must be 
long, thin, and light—yet strong enough to resist very high mechanical 

stresses. Thus, they must be fabricated of specialized materials, typically 
high-strength epoxy-based ﬁberglass, very similar to the wings of high-
performance gliders or sailplanes. To maximize aerodynamic efficiency, 
the rotor also must be oriented into the wind at all times. 
▷
The generator must meet two challenges unique to wind turbine design. 
First, most large wind turbines only rotate at about 20 revolutions per 
minute—much too slow for commercial power generation, which requires 
60 revolutions per second. Thus, the drivetrain must incorporate a 
gearbox that increases the generator’s speed of rotation. 
▷
Second, for commercial power generation, the shaft’s speed of 
rotation must be constant—quite a challenge, because the wind 
speed is constantly changing. To control the rotor speed, a sensor on 
the nacelle continuously monitors the wind velocity, and computer-
controlled motors adjust the pitch angle of the rotor blades to keep the 
velocity constant. 
▷
As an engineered system and as a generator of renewable energy, a 
wind turbine is a beautiful thing. It converts the kinetic energy of moving 
air directly into electrical power with no combustion and no emissions. 
It’s no wonder that wind power production has tripled in the past 5 years 
and now constitutes about 4% of the world’s total power output. 
wind turbines

121
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Still, wind power is not without limitations. A typical commercial wind 
turbine used in the United States today has a generating capacity of 1.5 
megawatts. A large coal-ﬁred power plant generates 1500 megawatts. 
Thus, to provide the same generating capacity as that single coal-ﬁred 
plant, we need at least 1000 of these typical wind turbines. 
▷
That’s why commercially viable power generation requires wind 
farms, consisting of tens or hundreds of turbines. These installations 
have drawn considerable opposition, because of their visual impact, 
noise, and hazard to birds. Wind farms also consume large tracts of  
land area. 
▷
Such concerns are being addressed, in part, by the development 
of larger, more powerful turbines and by increased use of offshore 
wind farms, which reduce both noise and visual impact while taking 
advantage of stronger and steadier winds. But offshore wind farms come 
with their own challenges, including signiﬁcantly higher construction 
costs, potentially greater visual impact, and interference with ﬁshing, 
recreation, and offshore oil and gas drilling. 
▷
More importantly, because wind is geographically variable, only certain 
locations are economically suitable for wind power generation. And 
because wind is variable over time, it can’t produce a predictable, steady 
level of power at any location. Because of these limitations, it’s unlikely 
that wind will account for more than 10% of U.S. power generation over 
the next few decades. 
Solar Power
▷
The form of renewable energy with the greatest potential for future 
expansion is solar power. The Sun provides the Earth’s surface with 
a steady stream of more than 800 billion megawatts of energy, nearly 
100,000 times more than current total worldwide power production.

LECTURE 13—Renewable Sources of Electricity 
122
▷
There are two general categories of solar power: solar-thermal power 
and photovoltaics. In general, solar-thermal power is produced by using 
mirrors to concentrate the Sun’s rays onto a single point, producing 
enough heat to generate electrical power. 
▷
Unlike solar-thermal power, which uses the Sun’s energy to boil water, 
drive turbines, and turn generators, photovoltaics generates electricity 
directly from solar radiation with no moving parts. 
▷
The photovoltaic effect occurs in certain types of semiconductor 
materials, such as silicon. Photons impinging on this material excite 
electrons to higher states of energy, effectively knocking them loose 
from their atoms. In a photovoltaic device, these free electrons are 
captured in an adjoining material, where they constitute an electric 
current. By its nature, the photovoltaic effect produces direct current, 
just like a battery. 
year
power generation
(billions of kilowatt-hours)
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013
U.S. Solar Power Generation

123
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Photovoltaic material is packaged in solar cells, and when more power is 
required than a single cell can deliver, multiple solar cells are assembled 
into photovoltaic modules, commonly known as solar panels. 
▷
Most of the recent growth in photovoltaics has been in small-scale 
solar panel installations like the ones that have become so common 
on residential and commercial buildings. Rooftop solar arrays are 
inherently less efficient than large-scale solar farms, because they 
can’t be rotated to follow the Sun. Nonetheless, from an economic 
perspective, consumer-installed photovoltaics have a huge advantage. 
Many homeowners can recover the up-front cost of installing a solar 
array through savings in energy cost within just a few years. 
▷
Its obvious advantages notwithstanding, solar power also has its own 
unique limitations. Most importantly, all forms of solar power rely on 
a source of energy that’s only available when the Sun shines. For the 
foreseeable future, large-scale solar power generation will probably be 
solar panels

LECTURE 13—Renewable Sources of Electricity 
124
economically feasible only in regions that experience intense sunlight 
for a large proportion of the year. While we should expect to see 
continued robust growth in solar power generation, full exploitation on 
a national scale won’t happen without signiﬁcant improvements in our 
ability to move power efficiently over long distances. 
TERMS
current: The ﬂow of electrons through a conductor when subjected to a 
voltage. Current is measured in amperes, or amps.
direct current (DC): A steady, unvarying current, as is produced by a battery.
drivetrain: An integrated series of automotive components that transmit 
mechanical power from the engine to the drive wheels. The drivetrain 
consists of the ﬂywheel, clutch, transmission, driveshaft, differential, and 
drive axles.
nacelle: A streamlined housing that encloses the generator of a wind turbine.
penstock: In hydroelectric power generation, a large tube that transmits 
water at high velocity from the reservoir to a turbine.
photovoltaic effect: An effect that occurs when photons impinging on 
a semiconductor (e.g., silicon) excite electrons to higher states of energy. 
In a photovoltaic device, these free electrons are captured in an adjoining 
material, where they constitute an electric current.
photovoltaics: Technologies that use solar cells to convert solar radiation 
directly into electricity through the photovoltaic effect. 
renewable energy: Energy produced from resources that are naturally 
replenished on a human timescale. 
solar panel: A device for generating electricity through the photovoltaic 
effect. A solar panel consists of an array of solar cells.

125
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
solar power: The conversion of solar radiation into electrical energy. The two 
principal forms of solar power are solar-thermal power and photovoltaics. 
solar-thermal power: A form of solar power generation in which mirrors are 
used to concentrate the Sun’s rays onto a single point, producing enough 
heat to generate electricity.
wind turbine: A device that converts the kinetic energy in moving air into 
electrical power.
READINGS
Blume, Electric Power System Basics, chapter 2.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 5.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are the relative advantages and disadvantages of the solar-
thermal versus photovoltaic forms of solar power generation?
2 
How does wind power illustrate the inherent ambiguity in the concept 
of “environmental friendliness”?

126
LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid
Lecture
14
Electrical Power Transmission:  
The Grid
O
ne reason why electricity has become the common currency 
of our energy-intensive world is that electrical power is 
uniquely transportable: It can be readily moved across long 
distances from its point of generation to its point of use, via 
an infrastructure system called the grid, which is a vast network of power 
plants, substations, and transmission lines serving a large geographic 
area. In this lecture, you will be introduced to this system, with a focus on 
power transmission, from the power plant to your local substation.
The Grid
▷
Power produced by a generating plant is ﬁrst transmitted to the adjacent 
switchyard, where transformers are used to boost the voltage to a very 
high level—typically in the range of 115,000 to 765,000 volts. High-
voltage power is then moved over long distances by conductors, called 
transmission feeders, which are suspended from steel towers. 
▷
Transmission feeders terminate at regional substations, located 
near the cities, towns, or industrial facilities where the power will be 
consumed. At each substation, transformers are used to step the 
voltage down to an intermediate level—typically between 35,000 and 
138,000 volts—for sub-transmission to a series of smaller substations 
located closer to consumers. 
▷
At these local substations, the voltage is lowered yet again—typically 
to 2400 to 25,000 volts—for distribution to individual commercial 
and residential users, normally by overhead lines supported on  
wooden poles. 
▷
Finally, just outside your home, the power is stepped down once 
more—to 120 volts (or 230 volts if you live in Europe)—and fed into your 
residential electrical system. 

the grid

LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid 
128
▷
This overview might suggest that power transmission is a simple, linear 
process, but in practice, it’s anything but. The grid is, by deﬁnition, a 
meshed network, with many generating facilities supplying power to many 
interconnected substations, for enhanced redundancy and ﬂexibility.
▷
The geographic extent of a regional grid is vast. The United States and 
Canada are served by just ﬁve such networks, called interconnections. 
The size and networked structure of these interconnections offer three 
powerful advantages.
o The regional grid can accommodate the widely varying operating 
characteristics of all types of power-generation systems—fossil 
fuel, nuclear, and renewable. 
o If a generating source or transmission feeder is shut down or 
damaged, power is automatically rerouted, ﬁnding alternative paths 
to maintain service at the local substations. 
coal-fired plant
coal-fired plant
gas-fired plant
gas-fired plant
nuclear plant
nuclear plant
wind farm
solar farm
hydroelectric
plant
distribution
system
distribution
system
distribution
system
distribution
system
distribution
system

129
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o The network can move power across long distances to 
accommodate local variations in both production and demand or to 
facilitate the purchase of bulk power at reduced cost from distant 
producers that are able to generate more efficiently.
Three-Phase Power
▷
A battery produces direct current (DC), an unvarying one-way ﬂow 
of electrons through the circuit. Conversely, a generator produces 
alternating current (AC), by rotating a magnet adjacent to a coil of wire 
mounted on a stationary housing called the stator. The continuously 
varying magnetic ﬁeld produces continuously varying current and 
voltage, which can be represented mathematically by a sine curve, as 
shown here. 
▷
The 
sine 
curve 
illustrates 
three 
critically 
important 
physical 
characteristics of AC power.
o The variation in voltage and current repeats itself, with one cycle for 
each full 360s rotation of the generator shaft. 
Voltage, Current
time
1 cycle = 360°

LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid 
130
o If the shaft is turning at constant speed, the voltage and current 
undergo a constant number of cycles within a speciﬁed period of 
time. This is called the frequency, and within an electrical power 
system, the frequency is always standardized. 
o The current changes direction twice per cycle. It ﬁrst ﬂows away 
from the generator, then toward it, and then away again. This is 
counterintuitive. We tend to think of electrical power ﬂowing in 
one direction from the generator through transmission lines to our 
homes. But in an AC power system, the electrons aren’t ﬂowing 
anywhere; they’re just sloshing back and forth in the conductor. 
▷
This phenomenon is essential for our understanding of three-phase 
power, a deﬁning feature of modern AC power systems. Typically, three-
phase power is produced by a generator with a speciﬁc conﬁguration. 
Three coils are equally spaced around the stator, with each coil 
connected to a separate conductor. An electromagnet, with one pair of 
north and south magnetic poles, is mounted on the rotor. 
N
S
120° phase shift
120° phase shift
phase 1
time
phase 2
phase 3
three-phase generator

131
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
To achieve the U.S.-standard frequency of 60 hertz, the turbine-driven 
rotor must spin at exactly 60 revolutions per second, and the rotating 
magnetic ﬁeld produces a sinusoidally varying voltage in each coil.
▷
This is three-phase AC power: the simultaneous generation of three 
sinusoidal voltages (called phases) on three parallel conductors. All three 
phases have the same maximum voltage and the same frequency, with 
each cycle corresponding to one full 360s rotation of the generator shaft. 
But each sine curve is shifted by one-third of a cycle. This is called a 120s 
phase shift, because each curve is shifted by one-third of the 360s cycle.
▷
Three-phase AC power is by far the most common form of power 
transmission throughout the world. It is ubiquitous because it’s so much 
more efficient than single-phase power, which always requires two 
conductors, one that supplies power to the load and one that provides a 
return path to complete the circuit. 
▷
Three-phase power doesn’t require a separate conductor to complete 
the circuit, because of an amazing mathematical property of the sine 
curve: When three sine curves have a 120s phase shift with respect to 
each other, the three curves add to zero at every point in time. 
▷
Thanks to this property, three-phase power doesn’t require any 
additional conductors to complete the circuit, because the three phase 
conductors provide return paths for each other. Current ﬂowing toward 
the load in one phase is always counterbalanced by current ﬂowing 
away from the load in one or both of the other two phases.
▷
Thus, in comparison with a single-phase transmission system requiring 
two conductors, a three-phase system delivers three times the power 
with only one additional conductor—a substantial improvement in  
cost efficiency. 
▷
Three-phase power results directly from the physical conﬁguration of 
the power-plant generator, with its three coils on the stator and single 
magnet on the rotor. But this system produces power at the standard 
60-hertz frequency only if the generator shaft can spin at exactly 60 

LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid 
132
revolutions per second. Steam turbines and combustion turbines 
achieve this speed easily, but water turbines and wind turbines can’t. 
Wind turbines typically address this problem by adding a gearbox 
between the turbine and the generator. But in a hydroelectric generator, 
additional magnetic poles are added to the rotor. 
▷
With the concept of three-phase power as background, we can now 
appreciate the two most astonishing characteristics of a modern 
electrical power grid. 
o Within each of these vast geographical interconnections, all of the 
grid-connected generators must spin in perfect synchronization—all 
at 60 revolutions per second and all in phase, as well. Basically, the 
sine curves produced by these hundreds of generators at widely 
dispersed locations must all line up perfectly, as if the generators 
were all turning on the same shaft.
o The total electrical power generated within a regional grid must 
exactly meet the total demand for power at any given time. Thus, 
when you pop a slice of bread into your toaster, the slightly 
increased demand for power slows down the generator at a faraway 
power plant, just a tad. In response, an automatic control system 
increases the ﬂow of steam into the adjoining turbine, adding just 
enough torque to the generator shaft to restore the correct 60-hertz 
frequency. This delicate balancing act is happening nonstop across 
the entire grid. 
▷
The grid isn’t perfect, as evidenced by the occasional regional blackouts 
that occur when these control systems go awry. But, in a sense, the 
rarity of such events underscores how well the system serves us on a 
day-to-day basis.
▷
Given the challenge in synchronizing AC power throughout a regional grid, 
why do we use AC power in the ﬁrst place? Why not just use DC, which 
would require no synchronization at all? One important reason is that an 
essential transmission technology—the transformer—only works with AC 
power, and without transformers, we wouldn’t be able to boost the voltage 
sufficiently to prevent unacceptable power losses during transmission. 

133
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
DC is used for two specialized purposes in our power system. The ﬁrst is 
to create connecting links between the regional AC grids so that power 
can be moved between regional grids without having to synchronize 
its frequency and phase. The second is to use high-voltage DC for 
transmitting power across very long distances, because DC is somewhat 
more efficient than AC for this purpose. 
Conductors and Transmission Towers
▷
In addition to transformers, the other major components of the 
transmission grid are conductors and transmission towers. In an earlier 
era, high-voltage conductors were made of copper because of its low 
electrical resistance. Today, they’re typically twisted strands of heavy 
aluminum wire with a steel core for added tensile strength. Aluminum 
has higher electrical resistance than copper, but it’s a lot lighter, which 
signiﬁcantly reduces the structural loads on the transmission towers. 
▷
For extremely high-voltage feeders, each phase is composed of a 
bundle of two or more individual conductors. At high voltages, using 
several smaller conductors in lieu of one larger one reduces power loss 
and enhances cooling.
▷
High-voltage conductors don’t have an insulated outer sheath; they 
are insulated by the surrounding air, which is why they need to be 
suspended far above the ground. And that’s the job of the transmission 
tower, the utilitarian steel structure that has become such an integral 
part of our modern landscape. 
▷
The structural design of the tower must account for the considerable 
weight of the transmission lines, as well as the effects of wind and 
wind-induced vibration, ice accumulation, and earthquakes. Given 
the signiﬁcant regional variations in these environmental loadings, 
it’s hardly surprising that transmission towers exhibit a wide variety of 
structural conﬁgurations. 

LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid 
134
TERMS
alternating current (AC): A current that varies continuously in a recurring 
sinusoidal cycle, typically because it is produced by a rotating generator. 
circuit: (1) An electrical conductor formed into a closed loop, thus allowing 
current to ﬂow in response to a voltage. (2) A telecommunications channel 
that is transmitted on a physical medium (e.g., copper wire, coaxial cable, or 
optical ﬁber). 
conductor: A metal wire or cable that provides a path for the ﬂow of electric 
current.
transmission tower

135
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
electromagnet: A magnet that uses the magnetic ﬁeld produced by an 
electrical current ﬂowing through a conductor.
feeder: A main electrical power supply line in either a power transmission or 
distribution system.
frequency: For any cyclic phenomenon, the number of alternating cycles 
occurring within a given period of time. Frequency is expressed in hertz or 
cycles per second and is the reciprocal of the period.
grid: A network of power plants, substations, and transmission lines serving 
a large geographic area.
interconnection: A major regional electric power grid that operates at a 
synchronized frequency.
period: For any cyclic phenomenon, the time required for one full cycle. The 
period is the reciprocal of the frequency. 
substation: A facility that serves as a node in an electrical power 
transmission or distribution network. Substations may incorporate switches 
(or circuit breakers), transformers, and a variety of other devices for power 
management. 
torque: A moment applied to a shaft, measured in units of force times 
distance.
transformer: A device that either raises or lowers electric voltage.
READINGS
Blume, Electric Power System Basics, chapters 3, 4, 5, and 7.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 5.

LECTURE 14—Electrical Power Transmission: The Grid 
136
QUESTIONS
1 
Find a high-voltage power transmission line in your neighborhood 
or region. How many three-phase feeders does it include? What is 
the conﬁguration of the towers? Is each phase a single conductor or 
a bundle of two or more conductors? What is the conﬁguration of the 
insulators? 
2 
Using Google Earth software or other online satellite imagery, locate 
a power transmission line in your neighborhood or region and trace 
it back to the nearest power plant. From the satellite image, can you 
identify what type of power plant it is?

137
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
15
 
Electrical Power Distribution
I
n the previous lecture, you followed the transmission of high-voltage 
electrical power from the generating plant to a substation in your 
town. Now, the relentless ﬂow of electrons continues as you examine 
electrical power distribution, a process that begins at the substation—
which typically serves several hundred to as many as a few thousand 
homes and businesses—and ends at the electric meter mounted on an 
exterior wall of your home. 
The Substation
▷
The substation’s largest and most important piece of equipment is the 
transformer. Transformers are used at power-plant switchyards to step 
up voltage for transmission and then at substations to step it back down 
for distribution and consumption. 
▷
A transformer consists of two coils of copper wire wrapped around an 
iron core, with the ratio of windings in the two coils determining the 
change in voltage. To change the voltage of three-phase power, each 
phase requires its own pair of coils. This can be accomplished either 
by placing all three pairs inside a single cabinet to create a three-phase 
transformer or by placing each pair in its own cabinet and then grouping 
three of these single-phase transformers together. 
▷
In either case, electrical current ﬂows into and out of the transformer 
through bushings, each composed of a solid copper conductor 
surrounded by glazed ceramic insulators. The purpose of the bushing is to 
prevent ﬂashover—which occurs when a large voltage difference between 
two closely spaced conductors causes a white-hot electrical arc to jump 
the gap between the conductors—by providing an insulated conduit 
for current to pass through the transformer’s grounded metal cabinet. 
Susceptibility to ﬂashover increases with voltage and decreases with the 
size of the gap, so a higher-voltage conductor requires a larger bushing.

LECTURE 15—Electrical Power Distribution 
138
▷
High-voltage three-phase power from one or more transmission feeders 
enters the substation, passing through a set of circuit breakers before 
entering the transformer. The purpose of a circuit breaker is to interrupt 
the current in a conductor, either for routine maintenance or to prevent 
damage to transformers, generators, and other expensive equipment 
when abnormal events, such as short circuits and lightning strikes, 
occur in the conductor. Such events are called faults. 
▷
To fulﬁll both of these functions, the circuit breaker must be capable of 
operating both manually and automatically. In the latter case, elaborate 
protective systems at the substation are constantly monitoring voltage 
and current; if either exceeds prescribed thresholds, the relays send 
signals to trip the appropriate circuit breaker, de-energizing the 
associated feeder until the fault can be ﬁxed. These control systems are 
all battery powered, so they’ll still work when the AC power system is 
out of service.
transformer

139
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
substation
distribution feeders
transmission
feeder
circuit
breakers
circuit
breakers
transformer
voltage
regulator
bus
▷
Another component of the substation’s protective system is the 
lightning arrester, which is typically placed where transmission 
feeders enter the facility and on the pathways into each major piece 
of equipment within. Lightning arresters are designed to protect 
substation equipment from voltage surges caused by lightning strikes 
occurring on the upstream transmission feeders. In effect, the arresters 
provide a second line of defense, backing up those shield wires 
mounted on the transmission towers. 
▷
A voltage regulator is connected to the low-voltage side of the 
transformer. The regulator’s purpose is to make minor adjustments in 
the distribution voltage in response to variations in load. The regulator 
is essentially a transformer that can vary the number of turns in its 
output coil, thus allowing for small adjustments to the output voltage in 
response to ﬂuctuations in demand.
▷
Beyond the regulator, there’s a grid of overhead conductors that 
distribute power to multiple distribution feeders, one of which serves 
your neighborhood. These conductors are called buses, and they’re 
typically made of ﬂexible aluminum cable or rigid aluminum tubing. In 
either case, one bus is composed of three parallel conductors—one for 
each phase—mounted on ceramic insulator posts, which are supported, 
in turn, by an extensive steel framework. 

LECTURE 15—Electrical Power Distribution 
140
▷
It’s common for a substation to incorporate at least two primary buses to 
provide redundancy. Incoming power can then be directed onto either 
bus. Transformers can draw power from either one, and as a result, 
power can always be rerouted around any device that has failed or been 
taken out of service. 
▷
To facilitate rerouting power, the bus system incorporates many 
disconnect switches (also called isolators or cutouts), which are used 
to open and close connections between conductors in order to isolate 
individual pieces of equipment in the substation. The switches are 
typically simple hinged bars, which have no protection against ﬂashover, 
so they can only be operated after the associated conductor has been 
de-energized by opening a circuit breaker. 
▷
At the far end of the substation, we ﬁnd another set of circuit breakers, 
one set for each distribution feeder. These breakers serve both to 
protect the system from faults and to manually de-energize a distribution 
feeder for maintenance or repair. 
▷
Like transmission feeders, the distribution feeders are usually composed 
of bare aluminum cable, but this is where the similarity ends, in three 
important ways.
o Distribution feeders are usually arranged radially, not in a meshed 
network like transmission feeders. Thus, if there’s a problem on 
a particular distribution line, there’s a good chance that all of the 
consumers served by that line are going to lose power. 
o 
Distribution feeders carry power at much lower voltages than 
transmission feeders; consequently, minimum conductor-spacing 
and ground-clearance requirements for distribution are considerably 
less demanding. That’s why distribution feeders can be carried on 
simple wooden poles, rather than elaborate steel towers. 
o 
Unlike transmission feeders, which use three conductors each, 
distribution feeders use four—one for each phase, plus a neutral wire.

141
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
The Power Distribution System
▷
Every power distribution system consists of two principal subdivisions, 
called primary and secondary. The primary system consists of the 
distribution feeders and associated equipment for system protection 
and control. It extends from the substation to the immediate vicinity of 
your home, where a pole-mounted transformer steps the voltage down 
to its ﬁnal level of 120 volts. From this point, the secondary distribution 
system brings power directly to your home.
▷
Integral to both primary and secondary distribution is a ubiquitous 
element of the modern American industrial landscape: the wooden 
utility pole. The principal purpose of utility poles is power distribution. 
▷
At the top are the distribution feeders, which have the highest voltage 
of anything on the pole and therefore must be farthest from the ground. 
Immediately below is the single neutral wire. The distribution feeders 
are usually arranged in groups of three conductors and are mounted 
on ceramic insulators to maintain appropriate separation from the 
supporting crossbeams. 
▷
We see insulators of many different sizes, shapes, and spacings on our 
local utility poles. In most cases, these variations reﬂect corresponding 
variations in distribution voltages. 
▷
All of the technological components we encountered at the substation 
can also be found in the primary distribution system, albeit in smaller 
and simpler form. The pole-mounted transformer receives high-voltage 
input from one primary conductor above and sends its low-voltage 
output to the secondary distribution system below. 
▷
Like its big brother at the substation, the pole-mounted transformer is 
susceptible to damage from lightning strikes, short circuits, and other 
abnormal conditions. Transformers are protected by lightning arresters 
and fuses. The lightning arrester works just like the larger ones at the 
substation. The fuse serves essentially the same protective function as 
a circuit breaker, except it can only be used once. 

120 V
120 V
0
hot wire A (120 volts)
high-voltage
distribution feeder
neutral
neutral
hot wire B (120 volts)
240 V
hot wire A
hot wire B
▷
A more technologically sophisticated protective device is a recloser, 
a type of circuit breaker that incorporates the system-protection 
equipment necessary to detect a fault, trip open in response, and then 
reclose automatically after a preprogrammed interval of time. 
▷
In North America, the typical single-phase pole-mounted transformer 
receives its high-voltage input from one of the three feeder conductors 
and from the neutral wire. Its low-voltage output consists of two 120-volt 
“hot wires,” plus a neutral wire. 
LECTURE 15—Electrical Power Distribution 
142

143
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Internally, the transformer 
produces this output by 
using two secondary coils 
connected 
together 
at 
the neutral wire. Because 
of this conﬁguration, the 
voltage in the two hot 
wires is 180s out of phase, 
so 
there’s 
a 
240-volt 
difference between them. 
That’s why the 120-volt 
power entering your home 
can be used to power 
240-volt 
appliances 
as 
well as your standard 120-
volt gadgets. 
▷
The secondary distribution 
line that emerges from the 
pole-mounted transformer 
and carries power to your 
home is called a service 
drop. Each drop serves one building, and each enters the building 
through a ﬁtting, called a weatherhead, which keeps precipitation out 
and provides a conduit down to the electric meter.
Your Electric Meter
▷
Power distribution terminates at your electric meter, which measures 
your power consumption for billing purposes. Beyond this point, the two 
hot wires and neutral wire are routed to your main service panel. The 
neutral wire is connected to a neutral bus bar, which is also grounded 
by a cable that’s connected to either a metal water pipe or a rod driven 
deep into the earth. The two incoming 120-volt wires are connected to a 
main circuit breaker, which provides system protection by tripping open 
electric meter

LECTURE 15—Electrical Power Distribution 
144
in case of a fault and can be opened manually to shut off power to the 
entire home for maintenance or repair. 
▷
From the main breaker, the two hot wires connect to these two main 
buses. And just as the buses at a substation distribute incoming 
power to multiple distribution feeders, the buses in your service panel 
distribute power to multiple circuits, each with its own circuit breaker. 
These breakers are arranged in two columns and mounted such that 
vertically adjacent breakers are on different buses. 
▷
Standard 120-volt circuits, which power your lighting ﬁxtures and most 
outlets and appliances, always consist of three wires: a hot wire, with 
black insulation, connected to one bus through a circuit breaker; a 
neutral wire, with white insulation, connected to the neutral bus; and a 
ground wire, either green or bare copper, also connected to the neutral 
bus. The three wires are bundled together inside a protective sheath.
▷
Standard 240-volt circuits, which power your clothes dryer, electric 
stove, and perhaps other heavy-duty appliances, always use four wires: 
hot, neutral, and ground (just like a 120-volt circuit), plus a second 
hot wire, with red insulation, connected to the other bus through the 
adjacent circuit breaker. Because the two hot wires are connected to 
different buses, there is a 240-volt difference between them—and, thus, 
the circuit can be used to power 240-volt appliances. 
TERMS
bus: (1) In electrical power distribution, a set of electrical conductors used 
to route power through a substation. (2) In a communications satellite, 
the equipment responsible for transporting the mission payload into orbit 
and providing electrical power, attitude control, temperature control, and 
orbital adjustments.
bushing: In electrical power transmission and distribution, an insulated 
ﬁtting that allows a high-voltage conductor to pass through a grounded 
metal case without causing a ﬂashover.

145
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
circuit breaker: A switch that interrupts electric current in a conductor, either 
for maintenance or to prevent damage to the system in the event of a short 
circuit or other abnormal event.
fault: Any abnormal electric current.
ﬂashover: An electrical phenomenon caused by a large voltage difference 
between two closely spaced conductors. If the voltage difference is large 
enough to overcome the electrical resistance of the air between the two 
conductors, current—in the form of a white-hot electrical arc—jumps the gap 
between them.
fuse: A device that interrupts electric current in a conductor to prevent 
damage to the system in the event of a short circuit or other abnormal event. 
Unlike a circuit breaker, a fuse cannot be operated manually and must be 
replaced after it has operated once.
insulator: A material or object that prevents the ﬂow of electric current.
lightning arrester: In an electrical transmission or distribution system, a 
device that protects sensitive equipment by routing the power surge caused 
by a lightning strike into the ground. 
neutral: An electrical conductor that provides a return path to complete  
a circuit.
recloser: A circuit breaker that that can automatically reclose the circuit after 
it has been opened due to a short circuit or other abnormal condition.
service drop: An electrical line that carries power into a building.
shield wire: A wire suspended above electrical power transmission lines to 
protect against lightning strikes.
short circuit: An electrical fault in which the current bypasses the  
normal load. 

LECTURE 15—Electrical Power Distribution 
146
switch: In a telecommunications network, a computer that is used to 
establish and manage connections between transmission lines. Switches 
are located at nodes in a circuit-switched network.
voltage regulator: A device that makes minor adjustments to output voltage 
at an electric substation. 
weatherhead: A ﬁtting at which an electrical service drop enters a building.
READINGS
Blume, Electric Power System Basics, chapters 5 and 7.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 5.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 12.
QUESTIONS
1 
Is power distribution to your home above ground or below ground?
2 
Can you locate the substation that serves your neighborhood?

147
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
16
Everyday Thermodynamics: 
Refrigeration
I
n this lecture, you will learn about various everyday technologies that 
consume electrical power once it has reached your home. One of the 
most important of these technologies is refrigeration, which underlies 
not only your refrigerator, but also your air conditioner, and possibly 
even your heating system. Together, refrigeration and air-conditioning—
both of which are thermodynamic processes—account for nearly 30% of 
the electrical power consumed in the average American residence. 
Thermodynamics 
▷
Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that’s concerned with the 
relationships between heat, temperature, work, and energy. In 
thermodynamics, a ﬁxed quantity of matter contained within a well-
deﬁned boundary is called a system. In classical thermodynamics, the 
state of a system is deﬁned in terms of its properties—characteristics 
that can be measured and expressed quantitatively for the system 
as a whole at a given point in time, such as mass, volume, pressure, 
temperature, and internal energy.
▷
If the properties are unchanging, the system is said to be in equilibrium. 
It will remain in this equilibrium state until energy is transferred into or 
out of the system, at which point the properties will gradually change 
until a new equilibrium state is reached. 
▷
There are only two forms of energy transfer: work and heat. Work is 
energy transfer associated with a force moving through a distance. 
Heat is energy transfer that occurs because of a temperature difference 
between two bodies or regions. Heat can move spontaneously in only 
one direction—from hot to cold—and as heat transfer occurs, the hot 
region gets cooler and the cold region gets warmer. 

LECTURE 16—Everyday Thermodynamics: Refrigeration
148
▷
When energy transfer causes a thermodynamic system to change from 
one equilibrium state to another, we say that a thermodynamic process 
has occurred. And we can visualize and understand such processes 
more clearly by using a graphical tool called the pressure-volume 
diagram. Each substance has its own characteristic pressure-volume 
diagram. In reference books, we can ﬁnd them for water, ammonia, 
propane, and many other substances that are commonly used in 
thermodynamic processes. 
▷
The pressure-volume diagram is not a standard line graph; rather, it’s 
a graphical tool that allows us to characterize a substance at every 
possible equilibrium state. The tool has two fundamental characteristics: 
Any point plotted on the diagram represents a unique equilibrium state 
for the substance, and any line plotted on the diagram represents a 
thermodynamic process.
volume
pressure
solid
liquid
vapor
solid-liquid
liquid-vapor
solid-vapor
pressure-volume diagram

149
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
A thermodynamic process is a transition from one equilibrium state to 
another, caused by a transfer of energy into or out of the system. We 
can control the direction of the thermodynamic process through various 
external mechanisms. 
▷
Within the range of pressures we’ll be dealing with in refrigeration, a 
change in phase from liquid to vapor entails a gradual transition across 
the vapor dome—from saturated liquid to saturated vapor—driven by 
energy input from outside the system. 
Refrigeration 
▷
Throughout much of human history, refrigeration has been achieved 
by harvesting naturally occurring ice and using it to cool beverages 
and preserve food. By the mid-19th century, this practice had become 
institutionalized through a wide-ranging infrastructure system that 
included industrial-scale harvesting of ice, an extensive transportation 
network, and local refrigeration provided by specially designed iceboxes 
in commercial facilities and private homes. 
▷
Refrigeration with ice is a one-way thermodynamic process. Heat can 
move in only one direction: from hot to cold. Thus, in an old-fashioned 
icebox, heat is continuously transferred from the refrigerated space 
(which always has a temperature somewhat above freezing) to the ice. 
As heat is transferred from the refrigerated space, the temperature of 
that space falls, and as this same thermal energy is transferred into the 
ice, the ice melts. At some point, the ice will have melted away and must 
be replaced to begin the one-way process anew.
▷
The great technological revolution that ultimately produced modern 
refrigeration began in the early 1800s, when a succession of inventors 
and entrepreneurs developed a way to achieve cooling—not through 
a one-way process but, rather, through a cycle. In thermodynamics, a 
cycle is deﬁned as a sequence of processes that begins and ends at the 
same state. 

LECTURE 16—Everyday Thermodynamics: Refrigeration
150
▷
The type of thermodynamic cycle used in nearly all modern refrigerators 
and air conditioners is called vapor-compression refrigeration. The 
thermodynamic system is a ﬁxed quantity of ﬂuid, called a refrigerant. 
The cold region is the refrigerated space, and the hot region is the 
external environment surrounding the refrigerator. Heat is transferred 
from the cold region into the refrigerant and then from the refrigerant 
into the hot region. The only way heat can move in this unnatural 
way—from cold to hot—is with additional energy input, in the form of 
mechanical work. 
▷
In the mid-19th century, the earliest commercially successful vapor-
compression refrigeration devices used waterpower as their source of 
mechanical energy, and because waterpower is both capital intensive 
and limited to locations along fast-moving rivers or streams, these 
early refrigeration devices were only suitable for use in large-scale 
industrial facilities, such as breweries, meat-packing houses, and ice-
manufacturing plants. 
work in
heat out
heat in
h
system
hea
h
t ou
hot region
cold region
vapor-compression refrigeration

151
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
From a practical perspective, refrigeration couldn’t enter the world of 
everyday engineering until electrical power became widely available 
in private homes during the ﬁrst decades of the 20th century. Indeed, 
it wasn’t until 1927 that General Electric sold the world’s ﬁrst mass-
market electric refrigerator—called the Monitor Top—and even then, the 
technology wasn’t quite ready for prime time, because the only available 
refrigerants were hazardous chemicals, such as ammonia, methyl 
chloride, and sulfur dioxide. 
▷
The residential refrigerator didn’t come of age until three years later, 
when Frigidaire, one of GE’s competitors, invented a new synthetic 
refrigerant, dichlorodiﬂuoromethane, which we now call Freon 12. Not 
only was this refrigerant safer than its predecessors, but it also had 
better thermodynamic qualities and thus facilitated the development of 
smaller, lighter, and cheaper refrigerators. The most important of these 
thermodynamic qualities is a boiling point somewhat below the intended 
temperature of the refrigerated space.
▷
Today, Freon 12 is recognized as a serious environmental hazard, but 
it’s important to recognize that, at the time of its development, it was a 
game-changing invention that greatly improved the lives of many people. 
▷
The key to successful implementation of vapor-compression refrigeration 
is the refrigerant itself, which must have just the right thermodynamic 
characteristics—most importantly, a boiling point somewhat below the 
intended temperature of the refrigerated space. The refrigerant also 
should be nonﬂammable, nontoxic, noncorrosive, and environmentally 
safe. 
▷
Freon 12 is classiﬁed as a chloroﬂuorocarbon (CFC), and in the 1970s, 
scientists discovered that CFCs have been accumulating in Earth’s 
upper atmosphere, where they react with and deplete the atmospheric 
ozone layer that protects us from excessive solar ultraviolet radiation. As 
a result, the use of CFCs was curtailed by an international agreement—
the Montreal Protocol of 1987—and in the United States, Freon 12 was 
banned by the Clean Air Act of 1990. 

LECTURE 16—Everyday Thermodynamics: Refrigeration
152
▷
Suitable replacements were quickly developed and incorporated 
into refrigeration and air-conditioning systems worldwide. These 
substances—such as R-134a for automotive air-conditioning systems 
and R-410a for residential systems—have thermodynamic properties 
similar to Freon 12 but no potential for ozone depletion. 
▷
Unfortunately, both R-134a and R-410a were recently found to be 
potentially signiﬁcant contributors to climate change. R-134a has already 
been banned from use in the European Union, and additional restrictions 
on both substances are likely. So, the pursuit of environmentally safe 
refrigeration, which began in the 1920s, continues today. 
Air-Conditioning
▷
Both refrigeration and air-conditioning use the same thermodynamic 
cycle and the same major components. The only substantive 
difference between an air conditioner and a refrigerator is the physical 
arrangements of the hot and cold regions on which the thermodynamic 
cycle is based. For refrigeration, the cold region is the refrigerated 
space, and the hot region is your kitchen. In air-conditioning, the cold 
region is the interior of your home, and the hot region is the outside air. 
compressor
gas
condenser
evaporator
gas
liquid
expansion valve
heat pump

153
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
One of the most interesting aspects of vapor-compression technology 
is that it can be used for heating as well as cooling. When the vapor-
compression cycle is used for heating, it’s called a heat pump. Like an 
air conditioner, the heat pump is designed to move heat from a cold 
region to a warm region, using mechanical work input to drive the cycle. 
The only difference between these two devices is their purpose.
▷
The purpose of refrigeration is to remove heat from a cold region, while 
the accompanying transfer of heat into the warm region is merely a by-
product of the thermodynamic cycle. 
▷
The purpose of a heat pump is to add heat to a warm region, while 
the removal of heat from the cold region is now the by-product. To 
accomplish this alternative purpose, the heat pump is essentially an air 
conditioner that’s been turned inside out. 
TERMS
cycle: (1) In thermodynamics, a sequence of processes that begins and 
ends at the same state. (2) In traffic engineering, the total period of time, in 
seconds, required for a signal light to repeat its programmed green-yellow-
red sequence in all directions. 
equilibrium: (1) In mechanics, the condition in which all forces acting on a body 
or system are in balance. Mathematically, for a body in equilibrium, the vector 
sum of all forces acting on the body equals zero. (2) In thermodynamics, the 
condition in which all properties of a system are unchanging.
heat pump: A device that uses the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle to 
heat an enclosed space. 
pressure-volume diagram: In thermodynamics, a graphical representation 
of equilibrium states or thermodynamic processes in terms of pressure, 
volume, and temperature.

LECTURE 16—Everyday Thermodynamics: Refrigeration
154
refrigerant: A ﬂuid used to facilitate the transfer of heat in the vapor-
compression refrigeration cycle. 
saturated liquid: The thermodynamic state at which a ﬂuid has just begun to 
boil but is still 100% liquid.
saturated vapor: The thermodynamic state at which a ﬂuid is at its boiling 
point and is 100% vapor.
system: In thermodynamics, a ﬁxed quantity of matter contained within a 
well-deﬁned boundary.
vapor-compression refrigeration: The thermodynamic cycle that serves as 
the basis for most modern refrigeration. 
vapor dome: On a pressure-volume diagram, the dome-shaped transition 
region between the liquid and vapor phases.
READINGS
Moran, Shapiro, Boettner, and Bailey, Fundamentals of Engineering 
Thermodynamics.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 17.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why is it important to keep your refrigerator’s condenser coils clean?
2 
Why does it make sense to allow a bowl of hot leftovers to cool to room 
temperature before putting it into the refrigerator?

155
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
17
Heating, Ventilating,  
and Air-Conditioning
Y
our home is an integrated assemblage of eight major 
engineered subsystems. Thus far, you have learned about six 
of these subsystems: structural, foundation, building envelope, 
site, plumbing, and electrical. In this lecture, you will examine 
the seventh: heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning (HVAC). This 
lecture will focus primarily on heating systems and on the integration of 
heating with air-conditioning technologies, leaving ventilation for next 
lecture, in conjunction with a broader discussion of energy efficiency in 
residential construction.
Residential Heating
▷
A residential heating system consists of three major components: a 
device for converting chemical or electrical energy into heat; a means 
of distributing that heat throughout the building; and a mechanism for 
controlling the system, such that the desired temperature is maintained. 
If the building is cooled as well as heated, then an air-conditioning 
system also might be integrated with the heating system.
▷
A thermostat is used to control your home’s inside temperature. This is 
a simple yet vitally important technology, not only for home heating, but 
also for temperature control in your refrigerator, oven, iron, and a host of 
other common devices, including your automobile. 
▷
Every thermostat must have an element that’s capable of sensing 
and responding to changes in temperature. In most thermostats, the 
design of this element is based on a natural phenomenon, the thermal 
expansion and contraction of materials.
▷
Heat is the spontaneous transfer of energy from a hot region to a 
cold region. Heat transfer can occur in any of three different modes: 
conduction, thermal radiation, and convection. 

LECTURE 17—Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning 
156
o Conduction is heat transfer through a substance or through physical 
contact between substances. 
o Thermal radiation is heat transfer through electromagnetic waves 
emitted by a substance. Unlike conduction, radiation doesn’t 
require an intervening medium for transmission. It can even move 
through a vacuum.
o Convection is heat transfer through the movement of a liquid or gas. 
There are two types: Natural convection is ﬂuid movement caused 
by differences in density—such as hot air rising through a chimney—
while forced convection is externally driven—for example, by a 
pump or a fan.
The Furnace
▷
There are three principal types of modern whole-house residential 
heating: the furnace, with heat distributed by forced air; the boiler, with 
heat distributed by circulating water; and the heat pump, usually with 
forced-air distribution, as well.
▷
The furnace with forced-air distribution is the most common heating 
system used in North America. The furnace can be fueled by natural 
gas, propane, or heating oil. A gas furnace has four main components: 
the burner, electric blower, heat exchanger, and control system. 
▷
When your thermostat calls for heat, the control system opens a valve, 
sending gas to the burner, where it’s ignited by a pilot light. Outside air 
is drawn by natural convection through an intake pipe to provide oxygen 
for combustion. The resulting hot combustion gases ﬂow upward 
through the heat exchanger and are then exhausted through a stack 
that extends out through the roof or a wall.

▷
Meanwhile, once the burner is going strong, the blower switches on, 
drawing air from the main return duct, through a ﬁlter, and then up 
through the heat exchanger, where it’s heated by the exhaust gases 
rising from the burner. This stream of hot air is then propelled by the 
blower into the main supply duct, called a plenum. 
▷
Two separate streams of air are moving through the furnace: combustion 
air, which originates outside the house, feeds the ﬂame, and then is 
exhausted through the stack; and circulating air, which originates from, 
and returns to, the home’s occupied spaces. The heat exchanger’s job 
is to transfer heat from one stream to the other without allowing any 
intermixing—so that those noxious combustion fumes won’t contaminate 
the air we breathe. This heat transfer occurs primarily by conduction 
through the heat exchanger’s metal walls.
forced-air distribution

▷
Two energy inputs—the combustion of fossil fuel and the electricity 
required to spin the blower—produce a steady stream of hot air, which is 
propelled by the blower through supply ducts into individual rooms. This 
is heat transfer by forced convection. 
▷
In many homes, the distribution ducts are partitioned into two or more 
zones, each with its own thermostat, so that different areas of the house 
can be maintained at different temperatures. The ﬂow of hot air into 
each zone is regulated by a damper, which is controlled by signals from 
a zone control panel.
▷
Supplying an adequate quantity of warm air to your home’s occupied 
spaces is only half of the distribution system’s job. To maintain proper 
circulation, an equal quantity of air must be pulled back to the furnace 
through a parallel set of return ducts, again propelled by the blower. At 
the point where each supply and return duct penetrates an interior wall, 
there’s an adjustable vent called a register, which allows you to control 
the ﬂow of air into and out of each heated space. 
compressor
condenser
expansion valve
evaporator
furnace
blower
f
split system

159
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
A common problem with forced-air heating systems is their susceptibility 
to air-pressure imbalances. The key to avoiding pressure imbalances is 
ensuring that the quantity of warm air supplied to each heated space is 
equal to the quantity of return air pulled from it. 
▷
Another common complaint about forced-air systems is that they 
produce excessively dry interior air. An effective remedy is to install a 
whole-house humidiﬁer, which attaches directly to your main supply 
plenum and adds moisture to the circulating air. 
▷
Forced-air heating is popular in the United States because, in these 
systems, a single system of ductwork can be used for heating, cooling, 
air ﬁltering, and humidiﬁcation, an efficiency that greatly simpliﬁes 
installation and thus saves money. 
▷
In a standard central air conditioner, called a split system, the compressor, 
condenser, and expansion valve are located in a standalone unit outside, 
while the evaporator is indoors. In an integrated system, the evaporator 
is placed inside the supply plenum, just above the furnace. Thus, when 
the air-conditioning system is operating, cool air is circulated through 
the same ducts used by the heating system and is propelled by the 
same blower. It’s a very efficient setup that accounts, in large measure, 
for the popularity of forced-air heating systems in climates that require 
both heating and air-conditioning. 
The Boiler
▷
The boiler with hot-water distribution, also called hydronic heating, 
is the type of heating system that is common in Europe and was 
common in the United States until widespread adoption of central 
air-conditioning prompted the shift to forced-air systems. Today, 
it’s staging a comeback in the United States, thanks to the growing 
popularity of radiant ﬂoor heating. 

▷
At the heart of every hydronic heating system is a boiler, fueled by 
natural gas, propane, or heating oil. The boiler works just like the 
furnace in a forced-air system—except that water, rather than air, 
circulates through the heat exchanger and the distribution system. The 
pipes of the distribution system are arranged in closed loops—one per 
zone—with water circulated by one thermostatically controlled pump for 
each loop. In the occupied spaces, radiators or baseboards are used to 
transfer heat to the surrounding air, primarily by natural convection. 
boiler
baseboards
expansion  tank
automatic valve
main water supply line
indirect water heater
heat exchanger
separate zone
domestic hot-water supply system
thermostatically
controlled
pumps
s
hydronic heating system

161
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
There are three other unique aspects of hydronic heating systems.
o Because water in the closed distribution loops expands as it heats, 
the system includes an expansion tank to accommodate the water’s 
changing volume.
o To compensate for leaks and evaporation, the system is connected 
to the home’s main water supply line, with in-ﬂow controlled by an 
automatic valve.
o Unlike forced-air heating, hydronic heating can be integrated with 
the domestic hot-water supply system.
▷
Hydronic heating has a number of advantages over forced-air heating. 
From the builder’s perspective, the small-diameter water pipes are 
much easier to route through walls than large ducts, and it’s somewhat 
easier to conﬁgure and control separate zones in a hydronic system. 
From the occupant’s perspective, hydronic systems produce more even 
distribution of heat, and they don’t cause air-pressure imbalances. 
▷
On the negative side, hydronic heating is generally less responsive 
than forced-air heating. There’s also the danger of water damage due 
to leaking pipes. And while hydronic cooling is now commonplace in 
Europe, it’s still not widely available in the United States, so separate 
ductwork is typically required for air-conditioning. 
The Heat Pump
▷
The heat pump is essentially an air conditioner that’s been turned inside 
out. In an air conditioner, the condenser, which transfers heat from the 
refrigerant into the warm region, must be oriented toward the exterior 
of the house. But in a heat pump, the condenser is oriented toward 
the interior. Similarly, the evaporator, which transfers heat from the 
cold region to the refrigerant, is oriented toward the interior in an air 
conditioner, but toward the exterior in a heat pump. Otherwise, heat 
pumps and air conditioners operate in the same way.

LECTURE 17—Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning 
162
▷
A great advantage of this technology is that one system can be used 
for both heating and cooling, an arrangement that can save both 
installation cost and space. Both the heat pump and air conditioner are 
heat exchangers. Each is just a copper coil with a fan blowing across 
it. Thus, in a combined heat pump–air conditioner, each coil can be 
used as either a condenser or an evaporator, and the only mechanical 
action required to switch between cooling and heating is to reverse the 
direction of the refrigerant ﬂow. This is accomplished with the aid of a 
few cleverly designed valves. 
▷
Heat pump systems have the added advantage of using one set of ducts 
for heating, cooling, humidiﬁcation, and air ﬁltering. Modern heat pumps 
also have very high thermodynamic efficiency. For these reasons, in 
moderate climates requiring both heating and air-conditioning, a heat 
pump can be cost effective.
▷
Like all engineered systems, the heat pump also has some signiﬁcant 
performance limitations. Most importantly, its heating performance 
drops off sharply when the outside air temperature dips below 30°F. 
When a heat pump is used in a cold climate, the system usually 
includes supplemental electrical-resistance heating, which tends to be 
very expensive.
▷
The rapidly increasing popularity of a technology called the ground-
source (or geothermal) heat pump is being driven primarily by growing 
interest in energy efficiency. This device uses the earth, rather than the 
outside air, as its heat source in the winter and its heat sink in the summer. 
This technology exploits a simple geophysical phenomenon: The 
underground temperature of the earth is lower than the air temperature 
in the summer and higher than the air temperature in the winter. 
▷
Ground-source heating and cooling is expensive to install, and its 
effectiveness is strongly inﬂuenced by the type and moisture content 
of the soil. These limitations notwithstanding, the ground-source heat 
pump is among the most economical and environmentally friendly 
options for whole-house heating currently available.

163
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
TERMS
blower: A centrifugal fan.
conduction: Heat transfer through a substance or through physical contact 
between substances. 
convection: Heat transfer through the movement of a liquid or gas. 
damper: A valve or gate that controls the ﬂow of air through a conduit.
evaporator: A device that changes a liquid to a vapor by transferring heat 
into the ﬂuid.
expansion valve: A device that reduces the pressure of a ﬂuid.
hydronic heating: A heating system that operates by circulating hot water 
from a boiler throughout the heated space.
plenum: The main air supply duct in a forced-air heating system.
radiant ﬂoor heating: A hydronic heating system in which hot water is 
circulated through the ﬂoor of a building.
register: A grill with shutters for controlling the ﬂow of air in a heating or air-
conditioning system.
thermal radiation: Heat transfer through electromagnetic waves emitted by 
a substance. 
READINGS
Johnston and Gibson, Green from the Ground Up, chapter 9.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapters 16 and 17.

LECTURE 17—Heating, Ventilating, and Air-Conditioning 
164
QUESTIONS
1 
What type of HVAC system does your home use? Based on this lecture, 
do you consider it to be an optimum choice? If not, what type of system 
would be better?
2 
Why is electrical resistance heating so expensive?

165
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
18
 
+RPH(QHUJ\(I¿FLHQF\
I
n this lecture, you will explore one of the most important trends in 
modern residential construction: the green building movement, which 
advocates the design and construction of buildings that use natural 
resources more efficiently while minimizing adverse impacts on our 
environment. Green building is a broad, holistic approach that seeks 
to minimize energy consumption, maximize the use of renewable and 
recycled materials, minimize water consumption, minimize or eliminate 
emissions, improve indoor air quality, and reduce waste. This lecture will 
focus on the most important dimension of green building: minimizing 
energy consumption. 
The Green Building Movement
▷
The trend toward increased energy efficiency has been underway 
at least since the energy crisis of the 1970s, and the green building 
movement has gained considerable momentum in the past decade 
as governments, industry groups, professional societies, and the 
public have become increasingly aware of both the environmental and 
economic beneﬁts of sustainable development. 
▷
During this period, governments at all levels have established 
incentive programs for green construction; professional organizations 
have established technical standards and certiﬁcation programs; 
successive editions of the International Residential Code have added 
progressively more stringent provisions for energy efficiency, while also 
accommodating new green building technologies; the emerging ﬁeld of 
building science has provided much-needed research to support these 
new developments; and consumers, in increasing numbers, have begun 
demanding greener homes. 

/(&785(²+RPH(QHUJ\(I¿FLHQF\
166
▷
In the United States, the residential sector accounts for 22% of total 
energy consumption and 37% of electrical power consumption. 
Thus, even modest gains in residential energy efficiency can make 
a substantial difference in our overall energy picture. And achieving 
modest gains is neither difficult nor expensive, particularly for new 
construction. 
Insulation
▷
An energy-efficient home has ﬁve minimum essential characteristics: 
a well-insulated building envelope, to minimize heat transfer; a well-
sealed building envelope, to minimize air inﬁltration; energy-efficient 
windows and doors; an energy-efficient heating, ventilating, and air-
conditioning (HVAC) system; and energy-efficient appliances. By far, 
heating and air-conditioning account for the largest share of residential 
energy consumption, and that’s why four of the ﬁve characteristics of 
energy-efficient construction are focused in this area. 
American energy consumption
heating and 
air-conditioning
48%
other 
appliances
13%
computers 1%
laundry 3%
dishwashers 1%
cooking 3%
refrigeration 5%
water heating
17%
lighting 6%
televisions 3%

167
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Insulation is a construction 
material that’s used primarily 
to 
reduce 
heat 
transfer 
by 
conduction. 
Thermal 
resistance is the extent to 
which a particular material 
resists the movement of 
heat through it, and it is 
expressed 
quantitatively 
using a number called the 
R-value. 
▷
The 
2015 
International 
Residential Code requires 
that all exterior walls have 
a minimum of R-13 in the 
southern United States and 
R-20 or higher elsewhere. 
Moreover, 
many 
green 
building advocates suggest 
that 
R-20 
is 
inadequate 
and that R-24 or even R-30 
wall insulation is necessary for optimum energy efficiency. In the years 
ahead, it’s likely that the codes will continue moving in this direction. 
▷
Today, builders are addressing this challenge in a variety of creative 
ways. One approach is simply to use higher-performing insulation, such 
as urethane foam, within the wall cavities. A more robust approach is 
adding rigid foam insulation to the outside of the wall, and other types 
of insulation can still be placed inside the cavity to further increase the 
wall’s R-value. 
▷
The most revolutionary approach to increasing the wall’s thermal 
resistance can be seen in recent initiatives to reengineer the wall 
itself. One such approach, called advanced framing, alters the most 
fundamental standard of traditional platform framing by replacing 2-by-4 
rigid foam insulation

/(&785(²+RPH(QHUJ\(I¿FLHQF\
168
studs spaced 16 inches apart with 2-by-6 studs spaced 24 inches apart, 
reducing the total required quantity of lumber by about 25%.
▷
Perhaps the most effective approach is to eliminate wall framing 
altogether by using a technology called the structural insulated panel 
(SIP), which consists of two structural boards—typically oriented strand 
board—bonded to a solid foam core, with total thickness ranging from 
4.5 to 12.25 inches, depending on the required R-value. 
▷
SIPs serve as both structure and insulation. They can be used for walls, 
roofs, and ﬂoors. Because they have so few joints, houses made of SIPs 
are considerably more airtight than their platform-framed neighbors. 
SIPs are always custom fabricated in the factory or shop, so they can 
be erected quickly on site with a small crew and a crane. And as soon 
as the structural shell is up, the builders have a fully enclosed, insulated 
space in which to continue their interior work. 
▷
Like all technologies, SIPs have their drawbacks. Their ﬁre resistance 
and sound attenuation are reported to be somewhat lower than 
conventional framing. At present, the up-front cost of building with SIPs 
can be somewhat higher than the cost of conventional framing, though 
the cost gap is narrowing as SIPs become more widely used. And when 
energy savings are taken into account, the life-cycle cost of building 
with SIPs is typically 40% lower than that of framed construction. Its 
shortcomings notwithstanding, the SIP is a very impressive technology 
that’s likely to see more widespread use in the future. 
Minimizing Air Inﬁltration
▷
No matter how well insulated your building envelope might be, its energy 
efficiency can be compromised by air inﬁltration, which can cause heat 
losses of up to 40%. The principal purpose of insulation is to resist heat 
transfer by conduction, but heat can also move by convection, and many 
insulations do little to prevent convection. 

169
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Air inﬁltration is driven by three different physical phenomena.
o Wind blowing across your house creates high pressure on the 
upwind wall and low pressure on the downwind wall. The air 
pressure inside your house lies somewhere between these two 
extremes. Because air naturally moves from high pressure to low 
pressure, the imbalance between outside and inside causes air to 
inﬁltrate from outside to inside on the upwind wall and from inside 
to outside on the downwind wall.
o Forced-air heating systems can cause similar pressure imbalances 
and similar movements of air through the building envelope.
o Within your home, hot air rises and eventually ﬁnds its way into the 
unheated attic space, and as the warm air escapes from the top 
of the building envelope, cold air seeps in somewhere below to 
replace it.
▷
Given these causes, minimizing air inﬁltration is simple in concept but 
challenging in practice. The building envelope should include a well-
deﬁned air barrier, typically consisting of exterior housewrap or rigid-foam 
insulation, interior spray-foam insulation, or well-sealed interior drywall. 
▷
The inevitable penetrations through the air barrier—for example, 
at vents and outdoor faucets, outlets, and light ﬁxtures—must be 
thoroughly sealed with caulk or sealant. Air leaks are also common 
at the intersections between different materials, and these must be 
caulked, as well. 
▷
Finding every possible leak in the building envelope would be 
impossible if it weren’t for the blower door, which identiﬁes gaps in the 
air barrier. When used on a completed house, the blower-door test can 
provide valuable information for an energy audit, but it’s even more 
valuable before the interior drywall has been installed, when leaks can 
be more easily sealed.

Windows and Doors
▷
Windows represent a special challenge, because they create 
discontinuities in both the insulation and the air barrier. As a result, 
windows are typically the largest source of heat loss in most homes. 
Modern energy-efficient windows respond to this challenge by 
purposefully addressing each possible mode of heat transfer: 
conduction, radiation, and convection.
▷
With respect to conduction, a single pane of glass has a thermal 
resistance of R-1—not quite as bad as a hole in the wall, but very close. 
And that’s why energy-efficient windows have at least two panes of 
glass, with a buffer of stagnant air in between. A double-glazed window 
achieves at least R-2, as long as the gap between panes is at least half 
of an inch. 
Windows are typically the 
largest source of heat loss 
in most homes. 

171
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
But heat can still move across that gap by convection, so the gap is 
typically ﬁlled with a heavy gas, such as argon, to reduce convective 
losses. To limit heat transfer by radiation, high-performance windows 
use low-emissive coatings, which reﬂect radiant heat back to the side of 
the glass where it originated while allowing visible light to pass. 
▷
These so-called low-e windows achieve at least R-3, but with the 
addition of a third pane of glass and multiple low-e coatings, a new 
breed of super windows is now able to achieve R-values in excess of 
10. These windows aren’t cheap, but having windows with thermal 
resistance comparable to that of a solid wall takes green building to a 
whole new level. 
▷
When you go shopping for windows, look for a label bearing the 
official certiﬁcation of the National Fenestration Rating Council. The 
most important piece of information on the label is a number called 
the U-factor, or thermal transmittance, which is just one divided by the 
R-value.
Ventilation
▷
Even though you’ve installed high-quality windows with low air leakage 
in a well-sealed building envelope, by minimizing air inﬁltration, you’ve 
almost certainly created a new problem: stale, unhealthy air. The air in 
your home can accumulate a wide variety of pollutants, such as dust 
and hazardous gases, as well as moisture, which can condense on cold 
surfaces or inside wall cavities, causing rot and mold. 
▷
For these reasons, mechanical ventilation is essential for any modern 
energy-efficient home. The American Society of Heating, Refrigerating 
and Air-Conditioning Engineers sets the standard for residential 
ventilation: 35% of your inside air should be replaced with fresh outside 
air every hour. 
▷
However, bringing large quantities of outside air into an energy-efficient 
house seems counterproductive. Why have we invested so much in 

/(&785(²+RPH(QHUJ\(I¿FLHQF\
172
sealants and insulation only to undo our own efforts by pulling cold 
outside air into the heated interior space in the winter, or vice versa in 
the summer? 
▷
The answer to this quandary is a heat recovery ventilator (HRV), a 
combination ventilation system and heat exchanger. The best HRVs can 
transfer up to 85% of the heat from the warm airstream to the cool one, 
thus achieving signiﬁcantly better energy efficiency than the alternative 
forms of ventilation—an open window or a leaky building envelope.
HVAC Equipment
▷
The most important aspect of efficiency in HVAC systems is getting the 
size right. HVAC systems can waste a lot of energy if they have too little 
capacity or too much capacity. Your HVAC professional can determine 
the required system capacity based on a calculation of the total heating 
and cooling loads for your house. 
▷
But don’t forget that the heating and cooling loads will be substantially 
reduced by improved insulation and sealing and by high-performance 
windows and doors, so it’s essential that these enhancements to the 
building envelope be planned or implemented before the capacity of 
the HVAC system is determined. If not, you’ll probably be buying more 
capacity than you really need. 
Appliances
▷
Selecting energy-efficient heating and air-conditioning systems can 
produce large residential energy savings, but choosing energy-efficient 
appliances can produce even greater savings. The challenge is that 
there is a very large number of appliances, and making smart choices for 
all of them can seem like a daunting task. 

173
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Fortunately, this task has been greatly simpliﬁed by the Energy Star 
program, a joint initiative of the U.S. Department of Energy and the 
Environmental Protection Agency. This program sets strict standards for 
energy efficiency, so Energy Star–rated appliances typically use 20% to 
30% less energy than their nonrated counterparts. 
TERMS
advanced framing: An adaptation of the traditional platform-framing method 
for residential construction. Advanced framing provides better energy 
efficiency, better sustainability, and lower cost.
attenuation: In telecommunications, the tendency of a transmitted signal to 
become weaker with increasing distance traveled.
heat recovery ventilator (HRV): A ventilation device that improves energy 
efficiency by transferring heat between the incoming and outgoing 
airstreams.
low-emissive coating: A coating applied to energy-efficient windows to limit 
heat transfer by radiation.
R-value: A quantitative measure of thermal resistance.
structural insulated panel (SIP): A recently developed technology for highly 
energy-efficient residential construction. A SIP serves as both structure and 
enclosure.
thermal resistance: The extent to which a particular material resists the 
movement of heat through it.
U-factor: Thermal transmittance. The U-factor is the mathematical reciprocal 
of the R-value.

/(&785(²+RPH(QHUJ\(I¿FLHQF\
174
READINGS
Johnston and Gibson, Green from the Ground Up.
Wing, The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling, chapter 13.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are some challenges associated with improving energy efficiency 
in existing homes?
2 
Why has ﬁberglass remained so popular for thermal insulation in 
the United States, even though so many superior products are now 
available?

175
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
19
Passive Solar  
and Net-Zero-Energy Homes
A
s effective as they might be, the basics of energy efficiency 
are really just incremental improvements over the old ways of 
reducing consumption—more insulation, better control of air 
inﬁltration, better windows, and more efficient appliances. But 
in this lecture, you’re going to break with the past as you learn about 
a fundamentally new paradigm, called passive solar design, a more 
holistic approach that considers energy efficiency in many of the most 
fundamental decisions about a home’s design.
Passive Solar Design
▷
The concept of passive solar design derives from a recognition that 
energy efficiency can be enhanced, not only by reducing consumption, 
but also by tapping into an abundant and readily available supply of free 
energy—the thermal radiation of the Sun. 
▷
In passive solar design, a building’s location, orientation, architectural 
conﬁguration, and interior features are chosen, ﬁrst and foremost, to 
maximize solar heat gain in the winter and to minimize it in the summer. This 
approach is characterized as passive because it employs no mechanical 
or electrical devices to harvest solar energy; a passive solar house merely 
uses the sunshine that falls on it in a variety of ingenious ways.
▷
We use many forms of solar energy, often without realizing it. There’s 
photovoltaic power generation, of course, but in a broader sense, most 
other forms of power generation also depend on solar energy at the most 
fundamental level. Fossil fuels originated as plants and microorganisms 
that acquired their biomass through photosynthesis; hydroelectric 
power is dependent on the hydrologic cycle, which is powered by the 
Sun; and the wind that drives wind turbines is caused by differences in 
atmospheric pressure resulting from solar heating of the Earth. Passive 
solar uses solar energy directly—and, therefore, more efficiently. 

LECTURE 19—Passive Solar and Net-Zero-Energy Homes 
176
▷
A passive solar home cuts out all the middlemen. The Sun’s thermal 
radiation enters the house through windows; it impinges directly on 
ﬂoors, walls, and furniture; and about 70% of it is reradiated back into the 
room as heat. All of this heat is free.
▷
This process is called direct solar heat gain. The single most important 
principle of passive solar design is that the house should be oriented to 
maximize direct gain. In the Northern Hemisphere, the building should 
have one wall facing as closely as possible to the south, such that it 
receives maximum-possible exposure to the Sun. The long axis of the 
building should be oriented east to west, so that the southern wall is 
longer than the eastern or western walls. And there should be no trees, 
neighboring buildings, or terrain features that prevent winter sunlight 
from reaching this southern wall. 
▷
To make the best use of direct gain, you’ve got to hold onto it—so 
the passive solar home must be extremely well insulated and airtight. 
Passive solar doesn’t reject the basic methods of achieving energy 
efficiency; in fact, it demands that these methods be implemented to a 
very high standard. 
▷
In passive solar design, no component of the building receives more 
attention than the windows. Windows are essential for achieving 
heat gain, but they’re also the greatest source of heat losses. Thus, 
determining the required window area in a passive solar home is a 
delicate balancing act. If the window area is too small, direct gain in the 
winter will be inadequate; if it’s too large, the house will overheat in the 
summer and lose too much heat in the winter. 
▷
In heating climates—that is, in colder regions, where heating demands 
exceed air-conditioning demands—south-facing windows should be 
relatively large and numerous. The north-, east-, and west-facing walls 
should have only enough window area to provide adequate natural 
lighting. To minimize heat losses, all windows should have the lowest 
possible U-factor, but to properly control direct gain, the solar heat 
gain coefficient should be high for south-facing windows and low for 
all the others. 

177
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
In cooling climates—where air-conditioning demands exceed heating 
demands—north-facing windows should be larger and should be the 
preferential source of interior lighting. South-facing windows should be 
smaller and shaded (with roof overhangs or awnings) to prevent direct 
gain in the summer. And all windows should be rated for both low solar 
heat gain and low thermal transmittance.
▷
In passive solar design, the collection and storage of solar energy is 
usually localized. It all happens in the immediate vicinity of the south-
facing windows. A signiﬁcant challenge, then, is distributing this heat 
more-or-less evenly throughout the occupied space. This can be done 
with mechanical ventilation, but fans consume electrical power that 
we’re trying to save, so it’s preferable to use natural means to the 
greatest extent possible. 
▷
To this end, the most successful passive solar homes typically use a 
relatively small footprint and an open interior plan to promote natural 
air circulation. In warm weather, natural cooling can be enhanced by 
positioning widows to achieve cross-ventilation and by using upper-
level openings to exhaust naturally rising hot air. 
▷
This latter phenomenon, called stack ventilation, is often promoted by 
incorporating a tower or split roof into the architectural design. When 
vents or windows on the highest level are open, hot air is constantly 
being ﬂushed out, and cooler air is drawn in from below—preferably 
through vents located on the shadiest side of the house, perhaps a 
porch or shaded garden.
▷
Although the focus of passive solar design is on heating and cooling, 
a variety of other energy-saving measures are often incorporated 
into passive homes. These include using solar hot-water heaters and 
solar cookers; harvesting heat from wastewater; purposefully using 
refrigerators, computers, and other electronic devices as heat sources; 
and, perhaps most importantly, maximizing natural illumination. 
▷
Electric lighting accounts for about 6% of power consumption in the 
average U.S. residence, and that 6% can be drastically reduced with 

purposeful design for natural lighting—and wherever supplemental 
artiﬁcial lighting is still needed—by switching from power-hungry 
incandescent bulbs to highly efficiency light-emitting diode (LED) bulbs. 
▷
The size, placement, and types of windows used in a passive solar 
house should be based on facilitating or preventing direct solar gain 
and on preventing heat loss. Given these constraints, it’s generally not 
going to be possible to tailor the window conﬁgurations for optimized 
natural lighting. 
▷
Rather, we need to look beyond the windows to the placement of 
individual rooms within the architectural ﬂoor plan. The concept is to 
consider the time of day when each interior space will be used most 
intensively and to position that space where the natural light will be 
optimal at that time. But there are no universal answers; the design can 
and should reﬂect the occupants’ individual lifestyle and preferences. 
▷
Passive solar design is truly holistic. No aspect of a passive solar design 
is exempt from being reinvented for the sake of improved building 
performance. When it’s implemented well, the passive solar approach 
leads to individualized designs that are uniquely suited to their location, 
climate, and occupants’ needs. 
In the vast majority of modern residential developments, there are perhaps 
four or five standard floor plans, arrayed around cul-de-sacs at every 
possible orientation, without regard for how people will actually live their 
lives within. Passive solar design rejects these sorts of standardized one-size-
fits-all solutions.

179
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
How effective is this approach at achieving its primary purpose of 
reduced energy consumption? It depends on climate. For example, 
heating climates with relatively large diurnal temperature ﬂuctuations 
are more likely to yield dramatic results than warm, humid climates. 
▷
More importantly, it depends on the extent to which passive solar 
principles are actually implemented. In a moderate climate, with 
rigorous implementation and high-quality construction, it’s possible 
for a passive solar home to require no mechanical heating or air-
conditioning at all. Even in such cases, however, a small, supplemental 
heating appliance is typically included in the design for unexpectedly 
cold weather or emergencies. 
▷
Just as the effectiveness of passive solar design depends on the extent 
and quality of implementation, so does its cost. Certainly, super windows 
and R-40 wall insulation can add signiﬁcantly to the construction cost. 
But with the possibility of heating-load reductions exceeding 75%, 
it’s only a matter of time before energy cost savings fully offset the 
additional construction costs. 
▷
It’s also important to recognize that many of the most essential 
features of passive solar design can be implemented at no additional 
cost. The house’s orientation costs nothing. Getting the ﬂoor plan right  
costs nothing. 
Net-Zero-Energy Homes
▷
Today, we’re seeing an increasing number of homeowners and builders 
taking another big step forward, with the net-zero-energy home, a 
building that requires no net input of energy over the course of a year. 
Most net-zero homes aren’t self-sufficient on a day-to-day basis; rather, 
they produce as much energy as they use on an annual basis. 
▷
To achieve this outcome, they typically combine 
aggressive 
implementation of passive solar design principles with one or more 
active in-home renewable energy sources, such as photovoltaics, a wind 

LECTURE 19—Passive Solar and Net-Zero-Energy Homes 
180
turbine, 
or 
geothermal 
power generation. These 
homes 
inevitably 
draw 
some 
electrical 
power 
from 
the 
grid—when 
demand is unusually high 
or when on-site power 
generation 
is 
low—but 
then they return an equal 
amount to the grid during 
periods 
when 
they’re 
generating more energy 
than they consume. 
▷
Net-zero 
design 
only 
makes sense if the electric 
utility offers net metering, 
the 
practice 
of 
giving 
credit (at the retail price) 
for 
consumer-generated 
power 
that’s 
supplied 
to the grid. This is currently not an issue in the United States, since 
the Energy Policy Act of 2005 required all public utilities to offer net 
metering to their customers. 
TERMS
biomass: A form of renewable energy obtained from plant material or animal 
waste. Biomass is converted into energy by burning wood, manufacturing 
ethanol-based fuel from plants, capturing methane gas from decomposing 
organic material, and a variety of other means.
direct solar heat gain: The process by which the Sun’s thermal radiation 
enters a building through windows; impinges on ﬂoors, walls, and furniture; 
and is reradiated back into the interior space as heat.
energy-efficient home

181
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
net-zero-energy home: A residential building that requires no net input of 
energy over the course of a year.
passive solar design: A holistic building design approach in which the 
location, orientation, architectural conﬁguration, and interior features of a 
building are chosen with a focus on maximizing solar heat gain in the winter 
and minimizing it in the summer. 
solar heat gain coefficient: A metric used in the window rating system of the 
National Fenestration Rating Council. This coefficient measures the fraction 
of solar radiation that is admitted through a window. 
stack ventilation: In architectural design, the practice of using upper-level 
openings to exhaust naturally rising hot air.
READINGS
Johnston and Gibson, Green from the Ground Up.
———, Toward a Zero Energy Home. 
QUESTIONS
1 
To what extent is the physical orientation of your home consistent with 
passive solar design principles?
2 
To what extent are your home’s window sizes and locations consistent 
with passive solar design principles?

182
LECTURE 20—The Plain Old Telephone Service
Lecture
20
The Plain Old 
Telephone Service
T
his lecture begins a four-lecture introduction to telecommunications 
technology, by focusing on the traditional landline telephone. 
The plain old telephone system is a technology that changed 
the world and still holds considerable merit from an engineering 
perspective. This system has many technological limitations, but the 
enduring advantage of the traditional analog system over its recent digital 
competitors is unprecedented reliability. In most places today, when you 
pick up your landline phone, you’ll get a dial tone 99.999% of the time. And 
unlike your cell phone or computer, the plain old telephone service will still 
work when the lights go out.
Telecommunications
▷
In general, any modern telecommunications system works by encoding 
information in a carrier signal and then sending it from one location 
to another through a communications channel. The carrier can be an 
electrical current, a light beam, 
or an electromagnetic wave. 
The encoding can be analog, 
meaning that the signal is 
continuously 
varying, 
or 
digital, meaning that it’s made 
up of a series of on-off pulses, 
representing ones and zeroes. 
▷
The channel is the pathway 
through 
which 
the 
stream 
of information is sent. If the 
pathway is a physical medium—
such as a copper wire, coaxial 
cable, or ﬁber-optic line—then 
we call it a circuit, though it’s 
Encoding
 analog
 digital
Channel
 wire (circuit)
 wireless (logical path)
Carrier
 light
 electrical current
 electromagnetic wave
telecommunications 
systems

183
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
important to recognize that one circuit can carry multiple channels. If the 
medium of transmission is wireless—as would be the case with radio, 
microwave, or infrared communications—then the channel is deﬁned as 
a logical path, rather than a physical one.
The Landline Telephone System
▷
The low-tech end of the telecommunications spectrum is your local 
landline telephone system, which uses analog encoding of an electrical 
carrier signal that’s transmitted on a single-channel circuit of copper 
wire. Today, in a telecommunications environment dominated by 
technologies far more sophisticated than this one, the landline phone 
system is known as the plain old telephone service (POTS).
▷
Plain old telephone service is, indeed, old. The telephone was patented 
by Alexander Graham Bell in 1876, and by the late 19th century, a 
reasonably well-developed telephone network was operating in the 
United States. 
▷
Apart from rotary dialing, which was introduced in the 1930s, and 
touch-tone dialing, introduced in 1963, the local end of this system has 
changed remarkably little since then. Conversely, virtually every aspect 
of our telecommunications system above the local level has changed 
radically in just the past 20 years. 
▷
The 
public 
switched 
telephone 
network 
(PSTN) 
is 
the 
telecommunications system within which the plain old telephone service 
resides. At the lowest level of this network are individual subscribers 
and groups of subscribers, the latter corresponding to residences in an 
apartment building or offices in a commercial establishment. 
▷
These groups are connected to a private branch exchange (PBX), a 
switching system that allows both internal communication between any 
two subscribers within the group and external communication between 
any subscriber and the outside world. For both individual subscribers 
and PBXs, the gateway to the outside world is a higher-level switching 

LECTURE 20—The Plain Old Telephone Service 
184
system called the local exchange, housed within a facility called the 
central office.
▷
Each individual subscriber is directly connected to the local exchange by 
a subscriber line—also called a local loop—while the PBX is connected 
by a local exchange trunk. In telecommunications lingo, “lines” and 
“trunks” are basically the same thing—except that a line is designed 
to support the calling load associated with one person, while a trunk is 
designed to support multiple users. 
▷
In the past, the local exchange consisted of a platoon of human 
telephone operators, who established phone connections between 
subscribers by physically plugging pairs of wires into a switchboard. 
Today, the exchange still performs this switching function, but the 
process is now fully automated. 
PBX
tandem
exchange
toll
center
international
gateway
= line
= trunk
local
exchange
local
exchange
local
exchange
local
exchange
public switched telephone network

185
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
In the United States, every local exchange is assigned a three-digit 
code, which corresponds to the 4th, 5th, and 6th digits of your 10-digit 
telephone number. Each one is unique within its assigned area code, 
which is why we need area codes. Every individual line that connects to 
a local exchange—either directly or through a PBX—is assigned its own 
four-digit code, called the subscriber number, and these are the ﬁnal 
four digits in your phone number. 
▷
If you’re placing a call to another subscriber within the same exchange, 
the call is simply routed through the local exchange to the recipient. If 
you’re calling a subscriber who’s located in the same city but connected 
to a different exchange, the call is passed up to the next level in the 
network hierarchy, a facility called a tandem exchange, sometimes 
called a tandem switch, and then routed back down through the relevant 
local exchange to the intended recipient. If you’re calling someone in a 
different area code, the transmission will be routed through a toll center 
and onward, and if the recipient is in another country, it will also pass 
through an international gateway.
telephone operators

LECTURE 20—The Plain Old Telephone Service 
186
▷
The two components of the public switched telephone network 
with which we interact directly every day are the telephone and the 
subscriber line. The subscriber line is a simple pair of thin copper wires 
running from your telephone directly to the local exchange. Often called 
the local loop, these two wires constitute a direct current electrical 
circuit that closes when you lift the telephone handset from its cradle 
and opens when you set it back down. 
▷
This circuit is powered by a large bank of batteries located at the local 
exchange; that’s why, when your electrical power fails, your landline 
phone keeps working. 
▷
The signal passing through the local loop receives no electrical 
ampliﬁcation, and because the strength of any electrical signal loses 
power, or attenuates, signiﬁcantly as it’s transmitted through a copper 
wire, the local loop is typically less than 2 miles long. 
▷
One of the marvels of the plain old telephone system is that these two 
little copper wires carry so many different kinds of information—the dial 
tone, ringtone, busy signal, dialed numbers, and incoming and outgoing 
voice signals. In recent years, we’ve also added call-waiting, caller ID, 
speed dialing, conference calling, Internet communications through 
digital subscriber line (DSL) service, and maybe even data from your 
home security system or thermostat. 
▷
All of these information streams are controlled and synchronized by your 
local exchange, which keeps everything moving in the right direction. 
Impressively, a single local exchange serves as the terminus for 
thousands of subscriber lines and must often manage many thousands 
of transactions simultaneously.
▷
A standard landline phone has the following main components.
o On the handset, it has a microphone, which converts sound waves 
into variations in an electric current, and a speaker, which converts 
these variations in electric current back into sound.

o Within the housing, there is a switch, which closes the local loop 
circuit when you lift the phone handset “off the hook”; a ringer, 
which remains permanently connected to the central switching 
office, even when the handset is “on the hook”; and some 
electronic circuitry.
Operating the Plain Old Telephone Service
▷
The largest cost associated with operating the plain old telephone 
service is in stringing, connecting, and maintaining all of the copper 
wires. Phone companies have used two interesting technologies to 
keep this cost manageable.
telephone maintenance

LECTURE 20—The Plain Old Telephone Service 
188
▷
The ﬁrst is the multi-pair cable, a single cable that bundles together as 
many as 8400 separate insulated copper wires to create 4200 local 
loops. Within the cable, pairs of wires are twisted together at different 
pitches (meaning that they’re wound together with different numbers of 
twists per foot) to minimize electromagnetic interference between wires. 
Without this feature, your conversation would bleed over into other 
subscribers’ phone lines. 
▷
The two wires constituting your home’s local loop are connected into the 
nearest multi-pair cable at a splice case. But, to make this connection, 
the telephone lineman must be able to distinguish your speciﬁc pair of 
wires from the other 4199 pairs in the cable. This is possible because of 
an ingenious color-coding system that uses only 10 colors.
▷
The efficiency of multi-pair cable notwithstanding, it’s still inherently 
inefficient to run a separate local loop from each individual subscriber all 
the way to the local exchange. This is particularly true because a given 
line is typically in use for only a small portion of each day. To address 
this issue, many local phone systems now use a device called a remote 
concentrator. The principal function of this device is multiplexing, 
the process of combining many signals into a reduced number of 
transmission circuits. 
▷
Until relatively recently, concentrators merely reduced the number of 
twisted pairs en route from subscribers to the local exchange. But today, 
the digital communications revolution has created more sophisticated 
forms of multiplexing that are also far more efficient. 
▷
Now, the remote concentrator in your neighborhood probably converts 
the analog representation of your voice into digital form and then 
interweaves it with hundreds or even thousands of other conversations 
and sends it along to the local exchange on a single wire or optical ﬁber. 
▷
For several decades, the higher levels of the public switched telephone 
network have been gradually changing from analog to digital, and today, 
the system is almost entirely digital beyond the local exchange. Many 
people have now forgone landline phones entirely, in favor of their cell 

189
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
phones or voice over Internet protocol (VoIP). And many new homes are 
being connected to their exchanges with optical ﬁber rather than copper 
wire, in anticipation of the day—sometime soon—when the entire system 
will be digital from end to end. 
TERMS
analog: In telecommunications, a continuously varying signal that is 
analogous to the sound waves it represents. 
carrier: In telecommunications, an electromagnetic signal in which 
information is encoded for transmission. 
channel: In telecommunications, the pathway through which a stream of 
information is transmitted. 
coaxial cable: A high-capacity telecommunications cable developed as 
a replacement for twisted copper wires in the interexchange trunks of the 
public switched telephone network (PSTN).
digital: In telecommunications, a signal that is made up of a series of on-off 
pulses, representing ones and zeroes.
international gateway: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
switch through which international calls are routed. 
line: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a telecommunications 
link designed to support the calling load associated with one person. 
local exchange: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
switch through which all subscribers and private branch exchanges (PBX) 
communicate with each other and with other exchanges. The local exchange 
is typically housed in a building called the central office.
local loop: In telecommunications, a pair of copper wires running from the 
subscriber’s telephone to the local exchange. Also called a subscriber line.

LECTURE 20—The Plain Old Telephone Service 
190
microphone: A device that converts sound waves into an electrical signal. 
multiplexing: In telecommunications, a process by which multiple signals 
or data streams are combined into one signal for transmission over a 
shared medium.
plain old telephone service (POTS): The traditional landline telephone 
system.
private branch exchange (PBX): In telecommunications, a switch that allows 
both internal communication between any two connected subscribers and 
external communication through the local exchange. 
public switched telephone network (PSTN): A worldwide telecommunications 
system consisting of conventional telephone lines, ﬁber-optic cables, 
microwave links, communications satellites, and undersea cables that are 
interconnected at exchanges using standardized communications protocols. 
remote concentrator: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
low-level switch in which multiple subscriber lines are multiplexed into a 
single trunk for transmission to the local exchange. At a remote concentrator, 
the signal is usually converted from analog to digital as well.
speaker: A device that converts an electrical signal into sound waves.
subscriber line: In telecommunications, a pair of copper wires running from 
the subscriber’s telephone to the local exchange. Also called the local loop.
tandem exchange: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a switch 
located immediately above the local exchange in the network hierarchy.
toll center: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a switch 
through which long-distance calls are routed. 

191
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
trunk: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a telecommunications 
link designed to support the calling load associated with multiple users. 
twisted pair: Two twisted copper wires that are used for subscriber lines in 
the public switched telephone network (PSTN).
READINGS
Goleniewski, Telecommunications Essentials, chapters 1–4.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 7.
QUESTIONS
1 
How can a telephone landline carry two phone conversations on a 
single two-wire circuit?
2 
In a world of ever-expanding mobile communications, is the 
traditional landline telephone worth preserving as an element of our 
telecommunications infrastructure?

192
LECTURE 21—The Global Telecommunications Network
Lecture
21
The Global  
Telecommunications Network
T
he public switched telephone network (PSTN) is a vast array 
of conventional phone lines, ﬁber-optic cables, microwave 
links, 
communications 
satellites, 
and 
undersea 
cables 
that are interconnected at exchanges using standardized 
communications protocols and are fully integrated with cellular networks 
and the Internet. Thanks to this vast network—and the international 
standards that ensure consistent transmission of information across it—
your phone can connect to any other telephone in the world in a matter 
of seconds. In this lecture, you will learn how the PSTN operates as a 
communications network.
Telecommunications Networks
▷
There are two basic types of telecommunications networks: circuit-
switched networks and packet-switched networks. In a circuit-switched 
network, information is transmitted through a dedicated communications 
channel from one terminal through one or more intermediate nodes to 
another end station. The connection must be fully established, end to 
end, before the transmission can begin, and then it’s released after the 
transmission is complete. 
▷
Circuit-switched communications are characterized as continuous, 
exclusive, and temporary: continuous, because once the connection 
is established, it’s maintained for the duration of the call; exclusive, 
because the channel isn’t shared with any other users during the 
transmission; and temporary, because the connection only exists for the 
duration of the call. 
▷
The quintessential example of a circuit-switched network is the public 
switched telephone network (PSTN). In the PSTN, the terminals are 
usually telephones. And the nodes are switches, located at the local, 
tandem, and toll exchanges. The switch was once a human, plugging 

193
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
wires into a switchboard manually, but today, the term “switch” refers 
to a specialized computer that’s used to establish connections between 
transmission lines. 
▷
A fundamental characteristic of the PSTN is that the switches are 
smart, so your telephone doesn’t have to be. When you dial a phone 
number, it’s the switches that ﬁgure out the optimum path through 
the network to your recipient, taking into account the current level of 
traffic and working around any trunks or switches that are currently out 
of service. It’s the switches that generate dial tones, ringtones, call-
waiting, and busy signals. And it’s the switches that establish, and later 
release, your connection. 
▷
The principal advantage of the PSTN’s circuit-switched architecture is 
quality of service. Once the connection is established, there’s minimal 
latency (delay), so the system is optimal for real-time voice traffic. The 
disadvantage is relative inefficiency, resulting from that fact that most 
= line or trunk
= temporary connection
terminals
terminals
local
exchange
nodes
local
exchange
circuit-switched network

LECTURE 21—The Global Telecommunications Network 
194
phone conversations consist of approximately 50% silence. As such, 
that dedicated communication channel is usually operating far below 
its capacity.
▷
This limitation is ingeniously addressed in the packet-switched network, 
a fundamentally different network architecture that’s the basis for the 
Internet. In a packet-switched network, a transmission (which might 
be voice or data) is broken up into many small chunks, called packets, 
which are then transmitted independently across a shared network, with 
each packet potentially following a different route. 
▷
At the network nodes are devices called routers, which receive packets 
and forward them onward through the network. Each packet incorporates 
a header containing two key pieces of information: the address of the 
packet’s destination and a sequence number, which is ultimately used to 
reassemble the packets in the correct order at their destination. 
▷
At each node, the router processes packets independently, on a ﬁrst-in–
ﬁrst-out basis—determining only the next node in each packet’s journey. 
This determination is based on a routing protocol that, typically, attempts 
to minimize the number of nodes along the remainder of the path. All 
>EVERYDAY
>EVERYDAY
EVERYDAY
>ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
EVER YDA Y
ENGIN EERI NG
N
VR
G
E
E
E
E Y
N I
E
V
G
E
E
EY
N I
E
E
V
EY Y
EN
G
IE IG
Router
D
A Y
RI
N G
Router
R
D A
NE R N
Router
Y
I G
Router
R
D A
NE R N
EN
G
I
NE
E
R
I
N
G
>ENGINEERING
ENGINEERING
E
V
E
R
Y
DA
Y
>EVERYDAY
EVERYDAY
packet-switched network

195
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
transmission lines in a packet-switched network are shared, so packets 
originating from many different sources are constantly arriving in the 
queues of the routers. During periods of heavy traffic, these queues 
can cause considerable latency, and if any queue exceeds the storage 
capacity of its associated router, the overﬂow packets are simply lost. 
▷
The major advantage of packet switching is its highly efficient use of 
network resources. In comparison with the circuit-switched model, 
packet switching also represents a decentralization of intelligence from 
the core of the network to its periphery. Internet routers don’t need 
to be as smart as PSTN switches, because processors at the source 
and destination do most of the heavy lifting, creating and addressing 
packets and then reassembling them after transmission. 
▷
This characteristic—decentralized intelligence—enhances the system’s 
redundancy and resilience while also enabling the Internet’s most 
characteristic feature: its capacity to grow and change in creative new 
ways, seemingly on a daily basis, without any centralized control. 
▷
The disadvantages of packet switching—latency and data loss—reﬂect 
the fact that the Internet was originally designed for the efficient 
transmission of so-called bursty data—that is, data sent in short spurts, 
separated by long periods of inactivity. 
▷
Today, however, we’re demanding much more from the Internet—
streaming video, voice over Internet protocol (VoIP) telephone service, 
interactive online gaming—communications that are anything but bursty. 
And the Internet is changing to accommodate these new demands.
The Public Switched Telephone Network 
▷
The PSTN was designed and optimized for transmission of the human 
voice. Voice transmissions can take either of two forms: analog or digital. 
In the modern PSTN, most voice signals start out as analog in the local 
loop, are converted to digital for transmission through the core, and then 
are converted back to analog for the “last mile” to the recipient. 

LECTURE 21—The Global Telecommunications Network 
196
▷
For analog transmission, when pressure waves propagating from your 
vocal chords encounter the microphone in your landline telephone, 
these continuous variations in volume are converted into similar 
variations in both electrical current and voltage, which then propagate 
through the subscriber line to your local exchange. Digital transmission 
is a bit more complicated, because it requires that we represent this 
irregular, continuous waveform as a series of ones and zeroes. 
▷
The transmission medium that was once used throughout the PSTN is 
a pair of twisted copper wires. Today, most of the copper in the core of 
the network has been replaced by transmission media with far greater 
capacity, but the twisted pair is still used extensively in the local loop of 
the plain old telephone service. Copper wires are both less expensive 
and easier to work with than all of the alternatives.
▷
The bandwidth and speed of copper cables pale in comparison with 
other transmission media. And beyond their limited capacity, copper 
wires suffer from severe signal attenuation, which causes the signal to 
get weaker over a very short distance, and high susceptibility to noise 
and interference, which introduce errors into the data stream.
▷
In the local loop of the PSTN, these limitations are addressed simply 
by locating local exchanges or concentrators within 2 miles of the 
subscribers they serve. But in a long-distance trunk, the only way to 
compensate for signal attenuation is to place ampliﬁers at approximately 
one-mile intervals along its length. An ampliﬁer uses externally supplied 
energy to boost the power of an input signal and then sends the 
ampliﬁed output signal down the line.
▷
Because ampliﬁers work in only one direction, the core of the PSTN was 
developed with four-wire circuits, rather than the two-wire conﬁguration 
of your local loop. When two people have a conversation over a four-
wire circuit, half of the conversation travels in one pair of wires and the 
other half goes the other direction in the other pair. 
▷
However, in modern interexchange voice transmissions, you’ll never 
have one set of wires all to yourself. Various types of multiplexing are 

197
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
used to squeeze many simultaneous calls into one circuit. The original 
type, called frequency-division multiplexing, was the principal form of 
multiplexing used in the PSTN until the system’s digital transition in the 
mid-20th century.
▷
For telephone, only 24 conversations (at most) can be multiplexed onto 
a standard four-wire copper circuit. Beyond that, the higher frequencies 
required for multiplexing cause excessive power loss. This limitation was 
overcome with the development of coaxial cable. 
▷
Although coaxial cable, or coax, can support a bandwidth of 370 times 
more than a twisted pair, the use of coax is severely constrained by 
the need for ampliﬁers spaced at roughly 1.5-mile intervals along 
transmission lines. This limitation led to a new technology—microwave 
communications—deployed into the core of the PSTN as a replacement 
for coax on long-distance trunks. 
coaxial cable

LECTURE 21—The Global Telecommunications Network 
198
▷
Microwave is a form of electromagnetic radiation, a very high-frequency 
radio wave, which can be focused into a narrow beam and used for 
point-to-point communication. Microwaves provided a substantial 
improvement over coax in terms of both capacity and ﬂexibility of 
deployment. 
▷
Today, microwave trunks in the PSTN have mostly been replaced by 
ﬁber-optic cable, but microwave remains valuable for situations where 
stringing cable can be problematic—for crossing deserts or mountainous 
regions and for connecting to remote locations. The microwave band is 
also used for satellite communications. And this technology is ﬁnding 
all kinds of new applications in private, commercial point-to-point 
communications over relatively short distances. 
From Analog to Digital
▷
In the latter half of the 20th century, the PSTN was gradually converted 
from entirely analog to mostly digital. There were two principal drivers 
for this transition: Analog signals are far more susceptible to loss of 
ﬁdelity than digital signals, and digital communications are well suited to 
a fundamentally different and more powerful type of multiplexing, called 
time-division multiplexing. 
▷
In the modern world of telecommunications, nothing is more remarkable 
than optical ﬁber. First deployed in 1979, ﬁber-optic communication 
involves the transmission of a digitally encoded light beam through a 
tiny ﬁber of glass. The digital encoding is accomplished by a computer-
controlled laser, which sends pulses of light through an optical ﬁber to 
represent ones and zeroes. 
▷
The performance of optical ﬁber as a transmission medium is simply 
mind-boggling. Not only is its rate of attenuation so low that repeaters 
are typically needed only every 500 miles, and not only is optical ﬁber 
immune to electromagnetic interference, but each of the tiny strands 
of glass can comfortably carry the equivalent of more than 600,000 

199
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
simultaneous digitally multiplexed phone conversations. With new, 
advanced multiplexing methods currently being ﬁelded, that number 
grows to about 3 million. Optical ﬁber has sparked a communications 
revolution, while fundamentally changing the PSTN.
TERMS
ampliﬁer: In telecommunications, a device that uses externally supplied 
energy to boost the power of an input signal.
bandwidth: A range of frequencies.
core
cladding
plastic coating
protective jacket
Kevlar
RSWLFDOÀEHU
cladding
coating
core

LECTURE 21—The Global Telecommunications Network 
200
bursty data: Data transmitted through a network in short spurts, separated 
by longer periods of inactivity.
circuit-switched network: A communications network in which information 
is transmitted through a dedicated communications channel from one 
terminal through one or more intermediate nodes to another terminal. The 
connection must be fully established, end to end, before the transmission 
can begin, and then it is released after the transmission is complete.
ﬁber-optic communication: Transmission of information by directing a 
digitally encoded light beam through a tiny ﬁber of glass. 
frequency-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which the 
total bandwidth available for transmission is subdivided into a series of 
nonoverlapping frequency subbands, each of which constitutes a separate 
communications channel.
latency: Delay in a telecommunications transmission.
microwave communication: Use of very high-frequency electromagnetic 
radiation for point-to-point communication. 
noise: In telecommunications, the progressive corruption of a signal as it 
moves along a transmission path.
packet-switched network: A network in which a transmission is broken 
up into many small chunks (called packets), which are then transmitted 
independently across a shared network, with each packet potentially 
following a different route.
router: A device that manages the ﬂow of information through a node in a 
packet-switched network.
time-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which multiple signals 
are transmitted over a common path by assigning a unique sequential time 
slot to each signal.

201
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Goleniewski, Telecommunications Essentials, chapters 4, 5, 8, and 11.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 7.
QUESTIONS
1 
What can we learn about the nature of technological development from 
the evolution of communications media, from twisted copper wire to 
coaxial cable to microwave to optical ﬁber?
2 
Explain the concept of multiplexing.

202
LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology
Lecture
22
Cellular Phone 
Technology
T
he cellular telephone is a major part of the ongoing 
telecommunications revolution. The ubiquity of this device has 
changed our lives in profound ways—and, for this reason alone, 
we should know something about the underlying technology. 
But cellular technology is also worth knowing about because it’s 
often more problematic than the other technologies in our lives. Why 
do you sometimes lose your connection for no apparent reason? Why 
does your battery consumption vary so wildly? In this lecture, you will 
discover that being an informed user of cellular technology can be 
beneﬁcial to your everyday life.
Cellular Communication
▷
At the most fundamental level, cellular communication involves analog 
or digital encoding of a radio carrier signal. Thus, we can’t understand 
the technology without ﬁrst understanding radio.
▷
Anytime electrons move at varying speed, they generate electromagnetic 
radiation that propagates through space at the speed of light. Because 
electromagnetic radiation oscillates as it propagates through space, it’s 
characterized as a wave phenomenon, and like any wave phenomenon, 
it can be classiﬁed according to its frequency. 
▷
At the bottom end of the electromagnetic spectrum is low-
frequency, long-wave radio. The progressively higher frequencies are 
conventional radio, including the frequency bands used for AM and 
FM radio, microwave, infrared, visible light, ultraviolet light, X-rays, and 
gamma rays. 

203
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Low-frequency radio waves are called long waves because the physical 
length of a wave is inversely proportional to its frequency. In general, 
electromagnetic waves with low frequency can travel much farther than 
those on the opposite end of the spectrum, but they have signiﬁcantly 
lower capacity for carrying information. 
▷
Electromagnetic waves with high frequency have far greater capacity, 
by virtue of their greater bandwidth, but they also attenuate more 
quickly, and their waveforms are so small that they’re highly susceptible 
to atmospheric interference.
▷
For these reasons, most wireless communications use the middle of 
the electromagnetic spectrum. Mobile phones generally operate 
primarily in the frequency band just above FM radio, from about 700 to 
2500 megahertz.
the electromagnetic spectrum
1024
1022
1020
1018
1016
1014
1012
1010
108
106
104
102
1
gamma rays
X-rays
UV
infrared
micro-
wave
FM
AM
long radio waves
radio
frequency (hertz)
visible light
wavelength
10,000
miles
100
miles
1
mile
1
foot
0.01
inch
0.0001
inch
10-14
inch

LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology 
204
▷
With radio communication, a transmitter generates an alternating 
current that’s been modulated, or electronically mixed, with a signal 
representing the information that’s being transmitted. This alternating 
current is passed through an electrical conductor called an antenna. 
Because the current is oscillating, it generates electromagnetic waves 
at the same frequency as the current, and these waves radiate off the 
antenna into space at the speed of light. As long as the frequency of 
the alternating current is in the radio frequency range, the resulting 
electromagnetic waves will be radio waves.
▷
At the other end of the transmission, the process happens in reverse. 
The electromagnetic waves impinge on the receiving antenna, inducing 
a corresponding electrical current. This signal can then be demodulated 
to retrieve the transmitted information.
▷
The cell phone is really just a radio transmitter-receiver. In this sense, 
the cell phone isn’t new technology; it’s not fundamentally different from 
walkie-talkies, with two exceptions.
o A walkie-talkie typically operates on only one radio frequency, 
so you can either transmit or receive at any given time, but not 
both. Most cell phones operate on two frequencies to facilitate 
simultaneous transmission and reception, called full-duplex 
communication.
o The original walkie-talkies were all analog devices, and while the 
ﬁrst generation of cell phones was analog as well, all modern mobile 
devices encode and transmit information digitally. 
▷
Although the cell phone is conceptually similar to a simple walkie-
talkie, what makes a cellular network so complex is the need to handle 
millions of conversations simultaneously. The electromagnetic spectrum 
is a ﬁnite resource; if we start handing out two frequencies per mobile 
phone, we’ll run out of frequencies long before we run out of mobile 
phone users. 

cell tower

LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology 
206
▷
Cellular networks handle this challenge through a concept called space-
division multiplexing. A geographic region is subdivided into a regular 
grid of smaller areas called cells. Each cell has its own antenna and 
base station. These cells are normally hexagonal to provide efficient 
coverage with minimal overlap. 
▷
Within each cell is a base station, which incorporates the radio 
transmitters, receivers, and antennas that communicate with all mobile 
devices located within the cell. The power of the radio transmitter is 
deliberately limited so that frequencies can be reused in other cells 
without causing interference between transmissions. A factor called the 
cellular reuse pattern determines which other cells to reuse. 
Commercial Cellular Technology
▷
The ﬁrst generation of commercial cellular technology was launched in 
Japan in 1979 and called “1G,” for “1st generation.” In this system, each 
cell was about 8 miles wide, and the cellular reuse pattern was 7—
meaning that each cell of this 7-cell module used a completely different 
set of frequencies. When we replicate this reuse pattern across the 
countryside, we see that it always provides a buffer of two cells between 
any pair of cells using the same frequencies. 
▷
The electromagnetic spectrum is a highly constrained resource, so it’s 
tightly controlled by government regulatory agencies, such as the U.S. 
Federal Communications Commission. In 1G networks, the FCC typically 
allocated enough radio spectrum to provide each service provider with 
832 voice channels, resulting in each of the 8-mile-diameter cells being 
able to serve 60 simultaneous conversations. 
▷
The history of cellular technology development since then has 
revolved around the need to handle an ever-increasing number 
of users, demanding evermore bandwidth for both voice and data 
communications and evermore reliable and responsive service.

207
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
One response to these challenges has been simply to use more efficient 
cellular reuse patterns. Another response has been to use smaller cells 
in areas where larger numbers of users are congregated. The capability 
to subdivide big cells into little ones was an important new feature of 
the second-generation cellular network standard, 2G, which was ﬁrst 
deployed in 1991 in Finland. 
▷
Since then, we’ve seen the establishment of microcells (each about a 
mile wide), picocells (typically 500 feet or less), and even femtocells 
(about 30 feet). Picocells and femtocells are often used to extend cell 
coverage indoors—the former for office buildings, shopping malls, 
train stations, and similar large public facilities and the latter for small 
businesses and individual homes.
▷
Beyond the improved coverage, smaller cells also have the advantage 
of requiring less power, both at the base station and in your phone. 
Today, most cell phones have variable power output, and the cellular 
base station actually controls your phone’s power level to maintain an 
adequate signal, while minimizing drain on your battery.
8
miles
first-generation (1G) commercial cellular technology

LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology 
208
▷
But this relentless subdivision of cells has some signiﬁcant downsides, 
too. One is the added cost of more antennas, more base stations, and 
more network interconnections. But a more signiﬁcant drawback of 
smaller cells is a larger number of handoffs, which occur every time a 
user moves from one cell to another. The handoff is a complex process 
requiring considerable computation and information exchange between 
your phone and the cellular network. Demanding too many handoffs in 
too short a period of time can cause problems.
▷
Often, this challenge is addressed by using macrocells—sometimes 
as large as 20 miles across—in rural areas and along highways, where 
users are most likely to be crossing from cell to cell at higher speed, 
and by using smaller cells in areas where people are likely to remain in 
one cell for relatively longer periods of time, such as shopping malls and 
office buildings. 
▷
Allowing the use of variable cell sizes contributed signiﬁcantly to 
enhanced capacity in second-generation cellular networks. But the more 
important contributor, by far, was the change from analog encoding in 
1G to digital encoding in 2G. This change allowed for the encryption of 
voice transmissions, addressing a particularly serious security concern 
with wireless communications. 
▷
And it opened the door to the transmission of data as well as voice. 
Text messaging was an integral part of the 2G standard, and it paved 
the way for the smartphones of today. But most importantly, the switch 
from analog to digital allowed for signiﬁcantly more efficient use of the 
limited electromagnetic spectrum assigned to cellular communications, 
because it incorporated multiplexing—or, to be more precise, it 
incorporated a more sophisticated form of multiple access. 
▷
In 1G networks, the simple system of allocating two frequencies to 
each user is called frequency-division multiple access. The major 
technological advance in 2G networks was a new system called time-
division multiple access, which combines the concepts of frequency-
division and time-division multiplexing. By itself, time-division multiple 

209
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
access provides an eightfold increase in capacity over the simpler 
frequency-division system used in 1G networks. 
▷
But with increased capacity comes a signiﬁcant new technological 
challenge: synchronizing transmissions by mobile devices located at 
different distances from the cellular antenna. This challenge has been 
addressed in third-generation, or 3G, wireless networks, which were 
ﬁrst deployed in 2001. 
▷
The efficiencies gained from this system arrived just in time to 
accommodate the explosion in demand for mobile connectivity that 
accompanied the introduction of the smartphone in 2007. But demand 
has only increased since then. Enhanced 3G and recently introduced 
4G systems have addressed this by incorporating advanced antennas; 
data compression; duplexing techniques, which allow a single channel 
to share both the outgoing and incoming halves of a conversation; and 
new schemes for multiple access.
▷
All of these changes require an extraordinary level of coordination 
between the research and development community, government 
regulators, standards organizations (both domestic and international), 
wireless carriers, and hardware and software developers. And this 
challenge can only ever be met temporarily, because demand is ever 
increasing, and new technological paradigms are constantly emerging. 
In fact, the 5G standard is due out in 2020. 
Communication between Phone and Network
▷
The radio communication link between your mobile device and the 
nearest cellular base station is only the tip of the iceberg. The base 
stations are just intermediate nodes in a far more extensive network of 
networks. Tens, or even hundreds, of base stations are connected to 
devices called base station controllers, which, in turn, are tied together 
by regional facilities called mobile switching centers.

LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology 
210
▷
The mobile switching center operates like a local exchange in the public 
switched telephone network, and it also provides the interface between 
the cellular network and the PSTN. The mobile switching center sets up 
and releases end-to-end calls—both mobile-to-mobile and mobile-to-
PSTN calls. 
▷
Base station controllers are also connected to the general packet 
radio service, a packet-switched network that’s overlaid on the circuit-
switched phone network and handles all Internet data packets passing 
between your mobile device and the Internet.
▷
Another important function that’s performed jointly by the base station 
controllers and mobile switching centers is the handoff of calls from cell 
to cell. Calls do occasionally get dropped during handoffs.
TERMS
antenna: An electrical conductor that generates electromagnetic waves for 
wireless transmission of information or that receives such transmissions. 
base
station
controller
mobile
switching
center
general
packet
radio
service
base
station
controller
base
station
controller
public switched 
telephone network
mobile-to-
mobile
connections
the Internet
base
stations

211
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
base station: In a cellular network, a facility that contains the transmitters, 
receivers, and antennas required for communication with mobile devices 
located within the associated cell.
base station controller: A device that connects multiple cellular base 
stations to their associated mobile switching centers.
cellular communication: A wireless communication system that uses analog 
or digital encoding of a radio carrier signal.
cellular reuse pattern: In a cellular communication system, the number of 
adjacent cells in a module that cannot use the same frequencies.
electromagnetic spectrum: The range of frequencies associated with 
electromagnetic radiation. 
frequency-division multiple access: A system for wireless communication 
in which multiple conversations are transmitted independently between 
various mobile devices and a cellular base station on different frequencies.
full-duplex communication: A form of communication that allows for 
simultaneous transmission and reception. 
general packet radio service: A packet-switched network that is overlaid on 
the circuit-switched phone network and handles all Internet data passing 
between mobile devices and the Internet.
handoff: In a cellular network, the transfer of control of a mobile device from 
one cell to another.
mobile switching center: In a cellular network, a facility that connects to 
and controls all cellular base stations within a region. The mobile switching 
center sets up and releases end-to-end calls—both mobile-to-mobile and 
mobile-to-PSTN calls.

LECTURE 22—Cellular Phone Technology 
212
space-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which a geographic 
region is subdivided into a regular grid of smaller areas called cells, each 
with its own antenna and base station. 
time-division multiple access: A system for wireless communication in 
which the available frequency spectrum is ﬁrst subdivided into channels, 
and then, within each channel, multiple communication devices are each 
assigned a speciﬁc time slot for transmission.
READINGS
Goleniewski, Telecommunications Essentials, chapters 13 and 14.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 7.
QUESTIONS
1 
What is the fundamental technological challenge that has driven the 
development of successive generations of cellular technology since 
1979?
2 
What are some possible causes of a lost cellular connection? 

213
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
23
Satellites and Satellite 
Communications
S
atellites orbit hundreds or even thousands of miles above the 
Earth’s surface, yet they directly inﬂuence our daily lives—
for example, when we check tomorrow’s weather forecast or 
use a GPS device for navigation. In this lecture, you will learn 
about the two types of satellites that have the greatest direct impact 
on our everyday lives: communications satellites, which facilitate global 
telecommunications in a wide variety of forms, and navigation satellites, 
which are used to determine locations on the Earth’s surface or in the air 
by transmitting radio signals to mobile receivers.
Orbital Mechanics
▷
Modern orbital mechanics has its roots in Kepler’s laws of planetary 
motion, ﬁrst published by Johannes Kepler in 1609, and in the more 
general laws of universal gravitation and celestial motion, published by 
Sir Isaac Newton in 1687.
▷
The following are ﬁve key concepts in orbital mechanics.
o A satellite’s orbit is elliptical, with the planet located at one focus of 
the ellipse.
o On an elliptical orbit, 
the closest point to 
the planet is called 
the 
perigee, 
and 
the farthest point is 
called the apogee.
o A line drawn from the planet to the satellite sweeps out an equal 
area in an equal period of time at any location in the orbit. Thus, 
the satellite moves faster when it’s closer to the planet and slower 
when it’s farther away.
focus
focus
apogee
perigee

LECTURE 23—Satellites and Satellite Communications
214
o Once a satellite is in orbit, the orbit’s characteristic shape and 
orbital period won’t change, unless the satellite is subjected to an 
applied force, such as thrust from a rocket engine or drag caused by 
interaction with the atmosphere.
o As the two foci of an elliptical orbit get closer together, the shape of 
the orbit becomes progressively closer to a circle. Thus, a circular 
orbit is really just a special case of an elliptical orbit—one for which 
the two foci correspond.
▷
For a circular orbit, the altitude of the satellite—that is, its distance from 
the Earth’s surface—never changes. Thus, its speed is constant. And, 
according to Kepler’s laws, both the speed and orbital period for a body 
orbiting the Earth can be calculated. The speed and period of a circular 
orbit depend only on its radius, not on the mass of the satellite.
▷
Earth orbits are generally classiﬁed in four categories.
o A low earth orbit (LEO) is a circular orbit with an altitude between 
100 and 1240 miles above the Earth’s surface. 
o The medium earth orbit is a circular orbit with an altitude between 
1240 and 22,236 miles. 
o At the precise altitude of 22,236 miles is the geostationary orbit 
(GEO). 
o 
The elliptical orbit is used to transfer a satellite from one circular 
orbit to another and for other special purposes. 
▷
The orbital period of a geostationary orbit is calculated as 23.93 hours, 
which is exactly equal to one sidereal day. A sidereal day is the time 
it takes for the Earth to complete one full rotation with respect to a 
nonrotating frame of reference. 
▷
Because a GEO satellite’s orbital period exactly matches the Earth’s 
rotational period, the satellite remains perfectly stationary at one point 
in the sky, from the perspective of an observer on the Earth’s surface. 

215
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
That’s why we can aim our satellite dishes at one point in the sky 
and never have to adjust them, and that’s why most communications 
satellites use geostationary orbits. 
▷
There is only one geostationary orbit, located 22,236 miles above 
the equator, and there are currently about 400 satellites in it. If these 
satellites were uniformly spaced around the circumference of the orbit, 
the distance between them would be more than adequate—more than 
400 miles. 
▷
However, they’re not uniformly spaced, because a communications 
satellite needs to be more-or-less centered over its coverage area to do 
its job. Thus, GEO satellites are concentrated most densely over the most 
technologically developed regions of the world. In these regions, it’s not 
unusual for GEO satellites to be separated by fewer than 5 miles. Given 
that they’re moving at almost 7000 miles per hour, this isn’t a lot of space.
▷
To minimize the possibility of collisions and electronic interference, each 
satellite is assigned an orbital station (which is really just a longitude) by 
the International Telecommunication Union. A station in a geostationary 
orbit is one of the world’s most prized pieces of real estate.
GEO Satellites
▷
Commanded by a ground-based control center, a satellite in space 
orients itself, deploys its antennas and solar arrays, senses the positions 
of the Earth and Sun, establishes communication links, and becomes 
operational.
▷
The satellite is composed of two major components: the mission payload 
and the support platform (also called the bus). The bus is responsible for 
transporting the mission payload in orbit; it provides electrical power, 
attitude (orientation in space) control, temperature control, and orbital 
adjustments.

LECTURE 23—Satellites and Satellite Communications
216
▷
The typical communications satellite has two large solar arrays, which 
serve as its sole source of electrical power in orbit. They’re also used to 
charge batteries, which supply power when the satellite passes though 
the Earth’s shadow. The arrays must rotate continuously on a speciﬁc 
axis, following the Sun as the satellite orbits the Earth. As the satellite 
orbits, its communications antennas must remain pointed at their 
designated coverage areas on the Earth’s surface, called the footprint.
▷
To control the satellite’s position and attitude, the bus uses two separate 
systems: rocket thrusters and reaction wheels. The array of rockets 
typically includes one primary orbit maneuver thruster and 12 attitude 
and orbit control thrusters, arranged such that the bus can be propelled 
or rotated in any direction with great precision. 
▷
These thrusters are used for the ﬁnal insertion into geostationary orbit, 
for the initial orientation of the satellite, and for station keeping—the 
process of adjusting the orbit to keep the satellite at its prescribed 
altitude and longitude. The bus controls the satellite’s attitude with 
reaction wheels. 
▷
The bus also includes a telemetry system that continuously transmits 
information about the satellite’s status—attitude, power production, 
propellant supply, temperature, and so on—to a command and control 
station on the ground. 
▷
The mission payload is the satellite’s communications package. The 
basic function of a communications satellite is to receive radio signals 
(called uplinks) from a ground-based transmitter, amplify these signals, 
shift their frequency, and then retransmit them as downlinks to the 
Earth’s surface. 
▷
Communication services handled by satellites include television, radio, 
Internet, telephone, and some specialized business communications. 
Satellite telephone service is generally much more expensive than the 
use of landlines, cell phones, and undersea cables (particularly with the 
advent of ﬁber optics), so satellite phones are used primarily in remote 
areas that don’t have other phone services available.

▷
Because the geostationary orbit is so high, there’s a substantial delay 
in radio transmissions to and from the satellite—about a quarter of a 
second each way—even though these transmissions travel at the speed 
of light. This delay can cause problems for two-way communications and 
certain types of data transmission, such as Internet gaming, but it poses 
no problems for one-way broadcasts, such as radio and television—
hence, the growing popularity of these services.
▷
The mission payload consists of two main elements: antennas and a 
repeater. Most communications satellites are equipped with at least two 
dish antennas. These may be used for communication on two different 
frequency bands, or they may be aimed at two different footprints on 
the ground, but each antenna is generally used for both receiving and 
transmitting. Because radio signals are so weak by the time they reach 
the altitude of a geosynchronous orbit, these antennas must be as large 
as possible.
▷
The repeater includes a radio receiver, which receives the uplink and 
feeds it to an array of parallel transponders, each corresponding to a 
particular service—television, voice, Internet, radio—and a particular 
frequency band. 
uplink
downlink
input filter
output filter
receiver
amplifier
transponder
transponder
repeater

LECTURE 23—Satellites and Satellite Communications
218
▷
Most repeaters have 24 or more transponders. Each contains an input 
ﬁlter, which separates out the particular signal that’s assigned to that 
service; an ampliﬁer, which boosts the strength of the uplink signal 
by as much as 10 million times; and an output ﬁlter, which performs 
the frequency shift required to prevent the uplink and downlink from 
interfering with each other. 
▷
This system communicates with a worldwide network of ground-
based telecommunications ports (or teleports), which exist to 
provide customers with access to satellites. Equipped with antennas, 
transmitters, receivers, and routing equipment, the teleport receives 
signals from a variety of sources—such as the public switched telephone 
network, the Internet, and cable television networks—and sends these 
signals as uplinks to the appropriate satellites. Similarly, the teleport 
receives satellite downlinks that originated elsewhere and routes them 
to the appropriate destination.
▷
Not all downlinks pass through the teleport. Over the past few decades, 
development of high-frequency, high-powered satellite transmission 
capability has stimulated the development of the direct broadcast 
satellite service, which produces broadcast signals capable of being 
received by the small dish antennas that have become so popular with 
consumers. This capability, more than any other, is driving the continued 
economic viability of satellite communications. 
LEO Satellites
▷
Geostationary satellites aren’t the only type of communications satellite. 
A relatively recent alternative is to use a constellation of LEO satellites, 
which are less expensive to launch, require less power for signal 
transmission, and are much less susceptible to the transmission delays 
associated with GEO satellites. 
▷
However, these systems require far more satellites to provide adequate 
coverage of the Earth’s surface. And because LEO satellites move at 

219
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
such high speeds, transmissions are constantly being handed off from 
one satellite to the next.
▷
In recent years, one of the greatest impacts of satellite technology on 
our everyday lives has been the advent of highly accurate satellite-
based navigation through the global positioning system (GPS), which 
uses a constellation of 32 satellites in medium earth orbit, ﬂying at an 
altitude of 12,600 miles, with a corresponding orbital period of 12 hours. 
These satellites move in multiple orbital planes, such that any point on 
the ground theoretically has a line of sight to at least six satellites at 
any time.
▷
Each GPS satellite continuously transmits messages indicating the exact 
time of transmission and exact position of the satellite at the time of 
transmission. The GPS receiver in your car detects this signal and, using 
its own internal clock, calculates the time that was required for the signal 
to travel from the satellite to the receiver. 
▷
Because electromagnetic waves propagate at the speed of light, this 
time measurement must be extremely precise. However, no matter 
how precise it might be, this measurement can never be perfectly 
accurate, because the clock in your GPS receiver can never be perfectly 
synchronized with the clock in the satellite.
TERMS
altitude: In orbital mechanics, the distance from the surface of a planet to 
an orbit. The radius of an orbit is equal to the altitude plus the radius of the 
planet.
attitude: The orientation of a satellite, spacecraft, or other orbiting body in 
three-dimensional space.
apogee: The highest point in an elliptical orbit.
downlink: A radio signal transmitted by a satellite to Earth.

LECTURE 23—Satellites and Satellite Communications
220
focus: One of two points on which the geometric construction of an ellipse 
are based. 
footprint: A satellite antenna’s designated coverage area on the Earth’s 
surface.
geostationary orbit (GEO): A circular orbit with an altitude of 22,236 miles 
above the Earth’s surface. A satellite in a GEO orbits the Earth in exactly one 
sidereal day. 
global positioning system (GPS): A satellite-based system for navigation on 
the surface of the Earth.
low earth orbit (LEO): A circular orbit with an altitude between 100 and 1240 
miles above the Earth’s surface.
mission payload: The communications package in a communications 
satellite.
orbital period: The time required for one orbit.
orbital station: The longitude to which a satellite in a geostationary orbit is 
assigned.
perigee: The lowest point in an elliptical orbit.
reaction wheel: An electric-powered wheel that is used for attitude control 
in a satellite. 
repeater: In satellite communications, a device that receives an uplink, 
boosts the strength of the signal, shifts its frequency, and retransmits it 
back to Earth as a downlink. A repeater incorporates a receiver and multiple 
transponders.
sidereal day: The time required for the Earth to complete one full rotation 
with respect to a nonrotating frame of reference. A sidereal day is 23.93 
hours long.

221
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
teleport: A ground-based communications port that provides customers 
with access to satellite communications. 
transponder: In satellite communications, a device that ﬁlters out a particular 
signal from an uplink, ampliﬁes that signal, shifts its frequency, and then 
retransmits it as a downlink. Multiple transponders are incorporated within 
the repeater of a satellite. 
uplink: A radio signal transmitted to a satellite. 
READING
Welti, Satellite Basics for Everyone.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are the key advantages and disadvantages of using the 
geostationary orbit for communications satellites?
2 
What is the importance of the elliptical orbit in placing communications 
satellites into geostationary orbit around the Earth?

222
LECTURE 24—Simple Machines around the House
Lecture
24
Simple Machines 
around the House
I
n this lecture, you will lean about the classical simple machines—a 
concept that originated with the ancient Greeks and is still useful for 
classifying and understanding mechanical devices today. Although the 
official number of simple machines has varied through the ages, most 
modern lists include the following six: the inclined plane, screw, wedge, 
lever, wheel and axle, and pulley. All of these devices have the same 
fundamental purpose: to change the magnitude or direction of a force.
The Inclined Plane
▷
The inclined plane, or ramp, allows us to lift an object using less force 
than that object’s weight. In the science of mechanics, forces are 
represented as vectors. A vector is a mathematical quantity that has 
both magnitude and direction. For the purpose of analysis, it’s often 
useful to resolve a vector into its perpendicular components. These 
20º
20º
weight
0º
20
20
2
perpendicular
component 
parallel component
parallel component
= 4 sin(20º) = 1.4 pounds
pulling
force
inclined plane

223
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
two components—horizontal and vertical—are equivalent to the original 
force. We can calculate the magnitudes of these two components using 
trigonometry, or we can estimate the magnitudes quite accurately from 
a scale diagram.
▷
This magniﬁcation of effort is called mechanical advantage. But 
mechanical advantage always comes at a cost. With an inclined plane, 
to lift something with less force, you have to pull it through a greater 
distance. All of the simple machines achieve mechanical advantage by 
trading force for distance, in much the same way. 
The Screw
▷
The screw is used as a fastener in innumerable products and devices, 
but it’s also found in other interesting places, such as a corkscrew, an 
automobile jack, and even the rotating blades of a modern snowblower. 
In all cases, the purpose of the screw is to convert rotational motion into 
linear motion, or to convert a rotational force (which is called a moment) 
into a linear force, directed along the length of the screw. 
▷
A moment is the tendency of a force to cause rotation. Its magnitude is 
the force times the distance from the force to the center of rotation. 
▷
How does a screw change a moment into a linear force? First, it always 
requires two matched sets of threads: one moving and one stationary. 
With a nut and bolt, both sets of threads are manufactured. With a 
lag bolt, the bolt cuts the second set of threads into the wood as you 
drive it in. In either case, the bolt’s angled threads translate the applied 
moment into a larger longitudinal force. This force drives the lag bolt 
into the wood and clamps the nut and the bolt head tightly against the 
connected material.
▷
In this sense, a screw works much like an inclined plane that’s been 
formed into a cylindrical shape. In fact, wrapping an inclined plane 
around a shaft creates a screw. 

LECTURE 24—Simple Machines around the House 
224
▷
Visualizing the threads of a screw as an inclined plane also helps us 
determine the mechanical advantage of the screw. If we visualize 
the screw as being rotated by a tangential force, moving around the 
circumference of the shaft, then the distance through which the force 
moves corresponds to the horizontal edge of the inclined plane. And 
the distance through which the screw moves corresponds to the vertical 
edge. Because mechanical advantage is always about trading force for 
distance, the theoretical magniﬁcation of force by the screw is equal to 
the ratio of those two lengths. 
▷
The magniﬁcation of force is “theoretical,” because the usable 
mechanical advantage of a screw is always substantially reduced by 
friction. All machines—simple and otherwise—are susceptible to this 
problem, but the screw’s performance is more dramatically affected 
by friction than most machines, because the longitudinal force on the 
shaft clamps the surfaces of the moving and stationary threads so tightly 
together. A metal screw typically loses more than 80% of its theoretical 
mechanical advantage to friction. 
▷
Yet this isn’t necessarily a bad thing. Thanks to friction, screws and bolts 
are said to be self-locking. Not all simple machines are self-locking. For 
example, levers often are not. 
The Wedge
▷
The third of our simple machines is the wedge. A simple example is a 
timber wedge, which is used for splitting wood. To understand how a 
wedge works, we’ll examine it with the device embedded in a log and 
subject to the downward force of a hammer. 
▷
Let’s isolate the wedge and identify all of the forces acting on it. The 
hammer is applying a large downward force, which augments the 
weight of the wedge. An important principle of mechanics tells us 
that this can’t possibly be the only force acting on the wedge. The 

225
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
principle of equilibrium is based on Newton’s ﬁrst law of motion, which 
says that an object at rest will remain at rest unless it’s acted on by an 
unbalanced force. 
▷
When the wedge isn’t moving, we can conclude that all of the forces 
acting on it must be in balance. Therefore, there must be other forces 
acting on the wedge to counterbalance the downward force. And the 
only places where these forces can possibly occur are at the contact 
surfaces between the wedge and the wood.
▷
Anytime two objects are in contact with each other, forces are 
developed at the point of contact. They’re called normal forces, 
because they always act perpendicular (or normal) to the contact 
surfaces. Normal forces always occur in pairs—equal in magnitude but 
opposite in direction—applied to the two objects. Thus, the normal 
forces associated with the wedge are directed upward and inward on 
the wedge and directed outward and downward on the wood. 
▷
This phenomenon is a manifestation of Newton’s third law: For every 
action, there’s an equal and opposite reaction.
▷
The two large normal forces generated by the wedge push the material 
apart and eventually cause it to split. 
The Lever
▷
Once again, let’s isolate the lever and identify all of the forces acting on 
it. Your hand applies a force on one end of the lever. On the opposite 
end, the bar is pulling upward on the nail; thus, according to Newton’s 
third law, the nail must be pulling downward on the bar. The principle of 
equilibrium says that all forces on the bar add to zero, so there must be a 
large upward force at the fulcrum, counterbalancing the two downward 
forces at the ends. 

LECTURE 24—Simple Machines around the House 
226
▷
The principle of equilibrium also tells us that all moments acting on a 
stationary object must add to zero. The clockwise moment caused by 
your hand must be equal to the counterclockwise moment caused by the 
load. The lever magniﬁes your effort; that’s the mechanical advantage. 
▷
But here, once again, is the inherent trade-off common to all simple 
machines: In order to gain that mechanical advantage in force, you need 
to move your hand a greater distance. 
▷
Levers are everywhere. A ﬁshing pole is a lever for extracting a ﬁsh from 
water. Scissors and pliers each consist of two levers connected together 
at a common fulcrum. Different types of simple machines are often 
combined into a single device for enhanced effectiveness. 
The Wheel and Axle
▷
Once you understand the lever, you effectively understand the wheel 
and axle, too. In the context of simple machines, the term “wheel and 
axle” usually doesn’t refer to a rolling wheel but, rather, to a wheel with 
a ﬁxed axle. The classic example is a device called a windlass, which 
L1
L2
equilibrium:
F2
F1
mechanical advantage
fulcrum
F1L1 = F2L2
F2 =      F1
F
L2
L1
lever

227
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
operates by converting a force applied to the wheel into a much larger 
force in the rope wrapped around the axle. The analogous modern 
household device is the reel you use to wind up your garden hose, but 
many other common devices work on the same principle. These include 
the steering wheel in your car, the knobs on appliances and faucets, and 
even the screwdriver. The wheel and axle is really nothing more than a 
rotating lever.
▷
In this system, the torque applied to the wheel is equal to the torque 
developed in the axle. But because the torque is equal to the force times 
the radius, the force at the axle must be larger than the force applied to 
the wheel—by a factor of the ratio of the wheel radius to the axle radius, 
which is the mechanical advantage. 
The Pulley
▷
The pulley is a device that, in its simplest form, only changes the 
direction of a force without magnifying it. A single pulley allows you to 
lift a certain amount of weight upward by pulling downward with the 
same amount of weight. There’s no mechanical advantage. 
equilibrium: 
F1r1 = F2r2
F2 =      F1
F
r2
r1
mechanical advantage
F2
F1
r1
r2
torque
  applied to 
    wheel
torque
  in axle
wheel and axle

LECTURE 24—Simple Machines around the House 
228
▷
But for a typical household example, such as the lifting apparatus on 
blinds, we’re more concerned with convenience than with the capacity 
to lift a heavy weight. In this application, lifting a heavy weight is the 
goal, but incorporating mechanical advantage would defeat the purpose 
of the machine.
▷
It is possible to rig a single pulley so that it does provide mechanical 
advantage. In the rigged arrangement, the pulley moves with the load 
rather than being ﬁxed, and the weight is supported by two legs of the 
lifting rope rather than just one. Therefore, the mechanical advantage 
is 2 to 1; we can lift 2 pounds with a 1-pound pull. However, as always, 
there’s a trade-off: In order to lift the weight a given distance, we need to 
pull twice the length of rope through the pulley. 
pulley

229
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
TERMS
friction: A resisting force developed at the interface between two bodies. 
The friction force is oriented parallel to the contact surface in the direction 
that opposes motion.
fulcrum: The pivot on which a lever rotates.
inclined plane: A simple machine that allows one to lift an object using less 
force than the weight of the object.
lever: A simple machine that converts an applied force to a larger force 
through rotation about a fulcrum.
mechanical advantage: Magniﬁcation of effort by a mechanical device.
moment: The tendency of a force to cause rotation, expressed in units of 
force times distance.
Newton’s ﬁrst law: An object at rest (or in motion at constant velocity) will 
remain at rest (or in motion at constant velocity) unless it is acted on by an 
unbalanced force.
Newton’s third law: For every action, there is an equal and opposite 
reaction.
normal force: A force developed at the interface between two bodies. The 
normal force is always oriented perpendicular to the contact surface.
pulley: A simple machine that changes the direction of a rope or cable.
screw: A simple machine that converts rotational motion into linear motion 
or converts a moment into a linear force directed along the length of the 
screw.

LECTURE 24—Simple Machines around the House 
230
wedge: A simple machine that converts a longitudinal force to two large 
lateral forces. 
wheel and axle: A simple machine that converts an applied force to a larger 
force through rotation.
READING
Riley, Sturges, and Morris, Statics and Mechanics of Materials.
QUESTIONS
1 
Identify the simple machines incorporated into the following common 
tools: hammer, shovel, chisel, screwdriver, wire cutter, can opener, 
clamp.
2 
Identify the simple machines incorporated into the following parts of an 
automobile: steering wheel, windshield wiper, radio knob, hand brake.

231
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
25
 
User-Centered Design
I
n this lecture, you will explore the design of everyday things—a 
subject that draws on the broader ﬁelds of human factors engineering, 
ergonomics, and engineering psychology. This lecture will extensively 
draw on the work of Dr. Don Norman, an engineer and cognitive 
psychologist who pioneered the ﬁeld of user-centered design and has 
written several well-regarded books on the subject. The focus will be 
on faucets because they provide particularly clear illustrations of basic 
design principles in a context that’s familiar to all of us.
The Water Faucet
▷
The water faucet is a very common everyday technology that allows us 
to experience good and bad design many times a day. When we use a 
faucet, we expect it to perform two speciﬁc functions: controlling the 
water temperature and controlling the rate of ﬂow. 
▷
A very common faucet design features two knobs: one for hot water and 
one for cold water. When we operate this device, it usually responds as 
we expect, as long as it’s been installed consistent with the unofficial 
worldwide convention of placing the hot-water control on the left and 
the cold-water control on the right. Unfortunately, this convention is 
sometimes ignored, and when that happens, we often operate the 
knobs incorrectly, no matter how well marked they might be. 
▷
Another common convention is that rotating a knob to control ﬂow 
should be analogous to turning a bolt. Clockwise rotation tightens a 
bolt and thus should reduce ﬂow; counterclockwise rotation loosens 
a bolt and thus should increase ﬂow. The valves in your plumbing 
system operate this way, and the convention makes sense, because 
many such devices actually do use a screw to open and close an  
internal stopper. 

▷
The problem is that some manufacturers disagree with this convention. 
They propose an alternate paradigm: that controls intended for two 
hands should reﬂect the symmetry of the human body and thus should 
operate as mirror images. When this mirror-image paradigm is applied to 
a faucet with two knobs, three distinct problems arise.
o We’re so conditioned to the traditional convention that when we 
encounter this alternative convention, we’ll invariably turn one knob 
or the other in the wrong direction on the ﬁrst attempt. 
o Even if we’re expecting the mirror-image paradigm, there’s no clear 
convention for which direction is on and which is off, so we’ll still get 
it wrong on the ﬁrst attempt about half the time.
o A design that’s optimized for two hands breaks down entirely when 
we operate it with one hand. 
▷
Applying the mirror-image paradigm to faucet knobs is unequivocally 
bad design, particularly because the inherent ﬂaws in this paradigm can 
be corrected so easily. Some faucets are able to use the mirror-image 
paradigm but with a clear mode of operation, thanks to the simple 
substitution of handles for knobs. 
mirror-image faucet

233
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
When the faucet is shut off, the handles are both pointed outward—a 
clear signal that the mirror-image paradigm is being used. It’s also clear 
that both handles must be rotated forward to turn the water on, because 
there isn’t enough clearance behind them to allow rearward rotation. 
Furthermore, the shape of the handles sends a subtle message that they 
are to be grasped and pulled, further reinforcing our intuition about how 
they should work. 
▷
Another advantage of handles is that with the water running, the position 
of the handles provides a visual indicator of the state of the system. A 
faucet handle is so effective at communicating how it’s supposed to be 
operated that it even works when it’s misused. 
▷
These examples illustrate three important points about design for 
usability.
o The differences between poor design and good design can be 
quite subtle, but the effects are often dramatic. 
o Solely by virtue of their shape, size, and placement, physical 
objects send us subtle messages about how they can be or should 
be used. These messages are called affordances, and high-quality 
design invariably takes advantage of affordances to improve the 
interactions between technological devices and people. 
o Physical limitations or constraints also can communicate how a 
device should or shouldn’t be used. 
▷
Its effectiveness notwithstanding, mirror-image handles aren’t perfect. 
The two controls on the faucet don’t directly address either of the two 
functions we expect of a faucet: control of temperature and control of 
ﬂow rate. 
▷
To achieve either function, we usually have to operate both controls 
simultaneously. Controlling the temperature is particularly problematic, 
because the only way to test whether we’ve achieved the correct 
mixture of hot and cold is to place a hand into the stream of water, even 

LECTURE 25—User-Centered Design 
234
as we need both hands to make the adjustments. Moreover, once we 
get the temperature right, increasing or decreasing the ﬂow rate without 
inadvertently changing the temperature is nearly impossible.
 
▷
Some faucets attempt to address these issues by providing a single 
handle to control both functions. The handle moves both side to side, 
for temperature control, and front to back, for ﬂow-rate control. In the 
side-to-side direction, left corresponds to hot and right corresponds to 
cold. But the ﬂow-rate control is more problematic, because it’s not clear 
which direction should correspond to greater ﬂow and which should 
correspond to less ﬂow. 
▷
With some single-handle faucets, we pull the handle toward us to turn 
the water on, and this makes sense, because downward movement of 
the handle corresponds logically to the downward ﬂow of water. But 
with other models, we lift up to turn on the water—and this makes sense, 
too, because we tend to associate “up” with “on” and “down” with “off.” 
This is a mapping problem: The association between a control and its 
associated action is ambiguous. 
▷
Effective designs address this ambiguity with affordances and 
constraints. On some faucets, the handle is nearly horizontal and 
relatively close to the spout when the water isn’t running. There isn’t 
enough room to push it downward, so it’s fairly obvious that we need to 
lift up to turn on the water. 
▷
A well-designed single-handle faucet is functionally superior to any 
faucet that uses separate controls for hot and cold water, because the 
conﬁguration aligns more closely with the functions we expect from this 
device. The single-handle design also has a much-improved feedback 
mechanism: We can operate the control with one hand and feel the 
temperature of the water with the other. 
▷
But it’s still not perfect, because the merging of two functions 
into a single control often makes it difficult to perform one function 
independently of the other. And the whole system falls apart in 

235
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
cases where the spout can rotate from side to side—and, thus, it no 
longer provides a point of reference for the middle of the handle’s  
temperature range.
▷
One way to avoid problems associated with controlling two functions 
simultaneously is to eliminate one function entirely. There are two 
categories of faucets designed to do just that. The ﬁrst, typically found in 
public restrooms, uses a ﬁxed temperature and allows only the ﬂow rate 
to be controlled. The second, common in hotel showers and recently 
in residential construction, uses a ﬁxed ﬂow rate and allows only the 
temperature to be controlled. Both systems are typically used to limit 
water consumption; they are not designed for usability.
▷
Hands-free faucets, soap dispensers, and paper-towel dispensers 
can be maddeningly user-unfriendly. The ﬁrst challenge is simply 
recognizing that the device is, indeed, hands-free. The most common 
design ﬂaw in hands-free devices is that they lack clear indicators of 
where the proximity sensor is and how we should interact with it. 
Five Principles of Design
 
▷
Don Norman has formulated ﬁve principles of design. All ﬁve rules 
reﬂect the importance of discoverability: a set of characteristics 
that communicate what actions are possible and how they’re to be 
performed. Designers achieve discoverability through thoughtful 
incorporation of affordances, signiﬁers, mapping, constraints, and 
feedback into their designs.
▷
An affordance is a message conveyed by the physical conﬁguration 
or placement of an object about how people can interact with it. An 
affordance is both a physical property and a perception by an individual 
human, so discerning affordances can be somewhat subjective and 
culture dependent. Nonetheless, many affordances are nearly universal. 
Knobs afford turning and pulling, handles afford pulling, and ﬂat plates 
and crash bars afford pushing. 

LECTURE 25—User-Centered Design 
236
▷
The word “push” on a door is a signiﬁer, which is an explicit message 
about how an object is to be used. Too often we see signiﬁers that are 
needed to compensate for the designer’s failure to use affordances 
effectively. But signiﬁers are far more effective when they’re used to 
augment or enhance natural affordances to improve understandability.
▷
Mapping is the relationship between controls and the actions 
they control. The best mappings are natural mappings, which take 
advantage of physical, spatial, or logical analogies—for example, 
moving a control upward to raise the level of illumination or moving 
a control forward to initiate forward motion. Natural mappings almost 
always lead to understanding, while poor mappings usually lead to 
frustration and error. 
▷
Constraints are physical limitations that communicate how a device 
can or can’t be used. The three-prong plug is a superb example. It’s 
physically impossible to insert it into a wall socket in any orientation 
other than the correct one. 
▷
Our interactions with technology are greatly facilitated by responsive, 
meaningful feedback. When you press an elevator call button and it 
lights up, you’re satisﬁed that an elevator is on the way. Feedback 
promotes the effective use of technology; lack of feedback often 
discourages it.
TERMS
affordance: In user-centered design, a message conveyed by the physical 
conﬁguration or placement of an object about how people can interact 
with it.
constraint: In user-centered design, a physical limitation that communicates 
how a device can or cannot be used.
discoverability: In user-centered design, a set of characteristics that 
communicates what actions are possible and how they’re to be performed. 

237
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Designers achieve discoverability through incorporation of affordances, 
signiﬁers, mapping, constraints, and feedback into their designs.
feedback: In user-centered design, responsive information indicating that 
the user’s interaction with the object or device was or was not correct.
mapping: In user-centered design, the relationship between controls and 
the actions they control.
signiﬁer: In user-centered design, an explicit message about how an object 
is to be used.
READING
Norman, The Design of Everyday Things. 
QUESTIONS
1 
Apply Norman’s principles of discoverability—affordances, signiﬁers, 
mapping, constraints, and feedback—to evaluate the basic controls 
of your automobile: steering wheel, shift lever, turn signal, windshield 
wiper and washer switches, headlight switch, overhead light switches, 
heating and air-conditioning controls, door handles, and door locks.
2 
Refrigerator-freezers typically use two separate temperature controls: 
one for the refrigerator and one for the freezer. However, in most 
cases, the system has only one thermostat, located in the freezer. The 
fresh-food area is cooled indirectly, by air circulated from the freezer 
through a controllable gate. Thus, the freezer control regulates the 
freezer temperature directly, by controlling the thermostat, and the 
second control regulates the temperature of the fresh-food area 
indirectly, by controlling the gate. Why is this design problematic from 
the perspective of user-centered design? What errors is the user likely 
to make because of this control system conﬁguration?

238
LECTURE 26—The Internal Combustion Engine
Lecture
26
The Internal  
Combustion Engine
T
he next four lectures will depart from your home’s living space 
and enter your garage to explore the major technological 
systems that constitute your automobile. In this lecture, you 
will examine the technological system that has been the 
foundation of automotive engineering since its inception: the internal 
combustion engine. In the following two lectures, you will learn about 
the automobile’s other major engineered components: the drivetrain, 
suspension, steering, and braking systems. These components are 
beautifully integrated elements of an elaborate system of systems that 
has been continuously updated and reﬁned for more than a century.
The Internal Combustion Engine
▷
The internal combustion engine is a machine that converts the chemical 
energy in a hydrocarbon fuel into the mechanical energy of a rotating 
shaft. There are two basic types: Spark-ignition engines generally run 
on gasoline, while compression-ignition engines run on diesel fuel. 
▷
At the heart of both systems is a chemical reaction involving the 
combustion of a hydrocarbon fuel. A hydrocarbon molecule is a chain 
of carbon and hydrogen atoms. Gasoline is composed of more than 100 
chemical compounds. A typical example is the hydrocarbon octane, 
which has 8 carbon and 18 hydrogen atoms. 
▷
In a spark-ignition engine, octane combines with oxygen from the air to 
produce carbon dioxide and water. This chemical reaction is exothermic, 
2C8H18 + 25O2 ĺ 16CO2 + 18H2O + energy
benzene + oxygen ĺ carbon dioxide + water + energy

239
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
meaning that it also produces 
energy, and it’s this energy that 
ultimately propels your car. 
▷
The combustion reaction takes 
place within cylindrical cavities 
that 
have 
been 
machined 
into a solid block of iron or 
aluminum, called the engine 
block. 
These 
cavities 
are 
called cylinders, which are just 
large enough to accommodate 
metal pistons sliding up and 
down within them. Near the 
top of each piston are several 
grooves, which hold metal 
rings that provide a tight seal 
between the piston and the 
cylinder walls. 
▷
Pistons are hollow and open on the bottom to facilitate their pinned 
attachment to connecting rods, which link each cylinder to the 
crankshaft. The crankshaft is mounted within the bottom of the block, 
in an enclosure is called the crankcase. When the engine is assembled, 
the crankcase is closed off on the underside by the oil pan. 
▷
The up-and-down (or reciprocating) motion of the pistons is translated 
by the connecting rods into rotational motion of the crankshaft, which 
then delivers mechanical power to the vehicle’s drivetrain. 
▷
The distance each piston moves within its cylinder is called the stroke, 
which extends between the position called the top dead center and the 
position called the bottom dead center. When the engine is running at 
normal operating speeds, the cylinders are cycling up and down many 
thousands of times per minute, and because the mass of each cylinder 
must be accelerated from a dead stop at the start of each stroke, the 
piston

LECTURE 26—The Internal Combustion Engine 
240
engine’s efficiency is enhanced by keeping the cylinders as light as 
possible. That’s why they’re hollow.
▷
Each cylinder is equipped with an intake valve, an exhaust valve, and a 
spark plug, all of which are mounted within a heavy metal lid called the 
cylinder head. The two valves are used to close off intake and exhaust 
ports, which are cast directly into the head. 
▷
The cylinder, piston, connecting rod, crankshaft, valves, ports, and spark 
plug are the components of the engine that are directly involved in the 
process of producing mechanical power. 
▷
Most automobile engines operate on a four-stroke cycle, meaning that 
each piston moves through a sequence of four different strokes, each 
with a speciﬁc purpose. This four-stroke sequence is then repeated over 
and over again, for as long as the engine is running. 
upside-down engine block

241
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
For an engine with a simple carburetor, the ﬁrst of the four strokes is 
the induction stroke, during which the piston moves downward in its 
cylinder, and the intake valve opens. A mixture of fuel and air is drawn 
from the carburetor through the intake port and into the cylinder, and 
then the valve closes. 
▷
During the compression stroke, the cylinder moves back upward. Both 
valves remain closed, so the fuel-air mixture is compressed, and its 
temperature increases simultaneously. Just before the cylinder reaches 
top dead center, a pulse of high voltage is sent to the spark plug, causing 
an electrical arc to jump the gap between the two electrodes. 
▷
Within the cylinder, this electric arc ignites the compressed fuel-air 
mixture in the cylinder, initiating the combustion reaction. The resulting 
heat causes a very rapid increase in pressure, which drives the cylinder 
back downward. This is the power stroke. 
▷
During the exhaust stroke, the exhaust valve opens, and the piston 
moves back upward, expelling the cylinder’s contents into the vehicle’s 
exhaust system. These contents include the two by-products of the 
combustion reaction—water and carbon dioxide—plus a lot of nitrogen, 
a major constituent of the air originally introduced into the cylinder. The 
exhaust also includes small amounts of pollutants, such as unburned 
fuel, carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and soot. 
▷
In the four-stroke cycle, each stroke corresponds to a half rotation of 
the crankshaft, but power is produced during only one stroke. What 
keeps the piston moving up and down during the other three strokes? 
The answer is the other pistons. This is the principal reason why most 
automobile engines have four or more cylinders. The four-stroke cycles 
of these cylinders are staggered, such that each has its power stroke at 
a different time. 
▷
The answers to the following questions are provided by the seven 
subsystems of an internal combustion system: valve train and the fuel, 
electrical, ignition, exhaust, cooling, and lubrication systems. 
o How are the valves opened and closed with such precision?

LECTURE 26—The Internal Combustion Engine 
242
o How is the correct fuel-air mixture introduced into the cylinder 
during the induction stroke?
o How does the spark plug ﬁre at just the right moment to initiate the 
power stroke?
o How are all of the combustion products removed from the 
automobile, and how are the fumes made safe enough to be 
released into the atmosphere?
o How is the heat from thousands of explosions per minute dissipated 
from the engine block?
o How is the sound from thousands of explosions per minute 
controlled?
o How are all those moving parts lubricated, to keep them working 
freely and to prevent excessive wear?
▷
Every one of these subsystems must operate in perfect synchronization, 
or the engine won’t run.
Fuel Injection
 
▷
Until the 1980s, most spark-ignition engines used a carburetor to achieve 
the correct fuel-air mixture to support combustion in the cylinders. In a 
carbureted engine, outside air is drawn through an air ﬁlter into the body 
of the carburetor, which has a narrow throat at its center. 
▷
Bernoulli’s principle tells us that when air ﬂows through this throat, called 
a venturi, its speed increases and its pressure decreases. At the point of 
lowest pressure, a small tube is connected to a fuel reservoir, called the 
ﬂoat chamber. Because of the low pressure in the venturi, a calibrated 
stream of fuel is sucked from the ﬂoat chamber into the airstream. 

243
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Below the throat is a rotating gate, called the throttle valve, which is 
mechanically connected to the driver’s accelerator pedal. When the 
pedal is depressed, the throttle valve opens, and the ﬂow of fuel and 
air to the engine is increased. The fuel-air mixture passes from the 
carburetor to an intake manifold, which divides the ﬂow equally among 
all the cylinders.
▷
Carburetors haven’t been used in automobiles since 1990, but they’re 
worth knowing about because you’re still likely to ﬁnd one on your lawn 
mower or snowblower. But for today’s automotive fuel systems, the 
name of the game is fuel injection, which provides more power, better 
fuel economy, and better emission control. 
air
fuel
air filter
choke valve
venturi
throttle valve
float chamber
jet
float
float arm
float valve
carbureted engine 

LECTURE 26—The Internal Combustion Engine 
244
 
▷
In the most common form, called multi-
port injection, fuel is supplied by devices 
called fuel injectors—one per cylinder—
which spray fuel into each intake port, just 
above the valve. The car’s fuel pump supplies 
pressurized fuel to each injector, which squirts a 
controlled quantity of fuel through a tiny nozzle 
in response to commands from the vehicle’s 
computer, the engine control unit (ECU). The ECU 
monitors the throttle position and the amount of 
oxygen in the exhaust to determine just the right 
amount of fuel to deliver at any given time. 
▷
Because multi-port injection supplies fuel upstream of the intake valve, 
the operation of the four-stroke cycle in a multi-port-injected engine 
is essentially identical to that of a carbureted engine. However, some 
high-performance gasoline engines, and most diesel engines, use 
direct injection of fuel—right into the cylinder. In these engines, the 
induction stroke draws in only air, and the fuel isn’t injected until near 
the end of the compression stroke. This allows the fuel to be injected 
at higher pressure, resulting in a ﬁner mist that greatly improves the 
combustion process.
Compression Ignition
▷
The compression-ignition (or diesel) engine works essentially the same 
way as the spark-ignition engine, except that it has no spark plugs and 
relies, instead, on spontaneous combustion of the fuel-air mixture at 
very high pressure. 
▷
Thus, in a diesel, the induction stroke draws in only air; the compression 
stroke achieves signiﬁcantly higher pressure and temperature than 
would be the case in a spark-ignition engine; fuel is injected directly 
into the cylinder near top dead center; and combustion occurs 
spontaneously, without an externally supplied spark, as soon as the fuel 
is injected.
fuel
injector

245
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
In general, diesel engines provide more power and better fuel economy 
than the equivalent spark-ignition engine. However, because they 
operate at higher pressure, they must be signiﬁcantly heavier, so they’re 
usually used for larger vehicles, such as trucks and locomotives.
TERMS
Bernoulli’s principle: When the speed of a moving ﬂuid increases, its 
pressure decreases, and vice versa.
connecting rod: In an automobile engine, a link that connects a piston to the 
crankshaft.
crankcase: In an automobile engine, an enclosure at the bottom of the 
engine block that houses the crankshaft.
crankshaft: In an automobile engine, a shaft that converts the reciprocating 
motion of a piston into rotary motion for transmission of power to the drive 
shaft.
cylinder: In an automobile engine, a cylindrical cavity in the engine block 
that contains a piston.
cylinder head: In an automobile engine, the heavy metal lid that bolts onto 
the top of the engine block and covers the cylinders.
engine block: In an automobile engine, the solid block of iron or aluminum 
that incorporates the cylinders.
four-stroke cycle: The process by which an internal combustion engine 
produces mechanical power though a series of four piston strokes: intake, 
compression, power, and exhaust.
piston: In an automobile engine, a cylindrical element is driven in 
reciprocating motion to produce mechanical power.

LECTURE 26—The Internal Combustion Engine 
246
rings: In an automobile engine, metal rings mounted near the top of a piston 
to provide a tight seal between the piston and its associated cylinder.
stroke: In an automobile engine, the distance a piston moves within its 
cylinder.
READINGS
Department of the Army, Technical Manual 9-8000.
Gillespie, Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics.
QUESTIONS
1 
In an internal combustion engine, how is the reciprocal motion of the 
pistons translated into rotary motion of the drive shaft?
2 
In the four-stroke cycle, power is produced in only one of the four piston 
strokes. What propels the piston through the intake, compression, and 
exhaust strokes?

247
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
27
Torque, Power,  
and Transmission
W
elcome back to the world of automotive engineering. The 
principal purpose for the next two lectures is to follow 
the transmission of mechanical power from the engine’s 
spinning crankshaft to the vehicle’s drive wheels. This 
function is performed by a system called the drivetrain, consisting of 
the ﬂywheel, clutch, transmission, driveshaft, differential, and two drive 
axles. In this lecture, you will trace the transmission of engine power 
from the crankshaft, through the clutch and the transmission gearbox, to 
the driveshaft. 
Torque and Power
▷
The four-stroke cycle of the internal combustion engine can be modeled 
as a thermodynamic cycle, called the Otto cycle, and plotted as a graph 
of pressure versus volume. 
▷
Internal combustion is, by nature, not a true thermodynamic cycle—
in the sense that vapor-compression refrigeration and steam power 
generation are true thermodynamic cycles. In both of the latter cases, 
there’s a working ﬂuid—either refrigerant or steam—that circulates 
continuously through a closed loop. In both cases, the ﬂuid changes 
state (between liquid and gas), but the ﬂuid itself doesn’t change in 
quantity or chemical composition. 
▷
In contrast, during the Otto cycle, the working ﬂuid—a mixture of air and 
fuel—is drawn into the cylinder in discrete batches and then expelled, 
and its chemical composition changes over the course of each cycle, 
through the combustion reaction. For this reason, the Otto cycle can 
only approximate the behavior of an actual internal combustion engine. 

LECTURE 27—Torque, Power, and Transmission 
248
▷
In modern automotive engineering practice, quantitative analyses of 
internal combustion engines are generally conducted with complex 
computer simulations; nonetheless, the Otto cycle still holds great value 
for qualitative analyses of engine performance.
▷
This fundamental difference between the internal combustion cycle and 
true thermodynamic cycles is also important because it’s the basis for 
the name of the internal combustion engine—a system characterized 
by combustion occurring within the working ﬂuid. The coal-ﬁred steam 
power plant is classiﬁed as an external combustion engine, because the 
combustion of coal to supply heat for the boiler occurs entirely external 
to the working ﬂuid.
3
1
4
2
volume
net work
pressure
the Otto cycle
 
▷
When the Otto cycle is plotted as a graph of pressure versus volume, the 
area enclosed within the cycle is mathematically equal to the cycle’s net 
mechanical work output. We can use this relationship to determine the 
engine’s most important performance characteristics: torque and power. 
▷
Knowing that the area within the Otto cycle represents the work of one 
cylinder, we can determine the total work output of the engine by simply 
multiplying the area enclosed within the Otto cycle diagram by the 

249
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
number of cylinders. The principle of conservation of energy tells us that 
the work done by the reciprocating motion of the pistons must be equal 
to the work done by the rotational motion of the crankshaft (minus any 
friction losses, of course). And work done by a rotating shaft is equal to 
its torque times the angle of rotation. 
▷
Torque is the tendency of a force to cause rotation. When you pedal 
your bicycle, your foot applies a downward force to the pedal, and that 
force applies torque to the pedal shaft in exactly the same way that a 
reciprocating piston applies torque to a crankshaft.
3
1
4
2
volume
net work
pressure
areaOtto = workcylinder
workengine = n × workcylinder
(n = number of cylinders)
workengine = workcrankshaft
= torque × angle of rotation 
= torque × 4
4
4
n × areaOtto × rotational speed
power =
power = torque × rotational speed (radians per second or revolutions per minute/RPM) 
4
4
n × workcylinder
torque =
=
4
=
4
workengine
torque =
4
4
n × areaOtto
determining torque and power from the Otto cycle

LECTURE 27—Torque, Power, and Transmission 
250
▷
The angle of rotation must be two full turns of the crankshaft (720°), 
because each four-stroke cycle rotates the shaft through two full turns. 
But for mathematical consistency, we must express this angle in terms of 
radians, not degrees. One full 360° rotation corresponds to 2π radians, 
so the angle of rotation for the cycle is 4π.
▷
With just a bit of algebra, we can express the engine’s torque as a simple 
function of the area enclosed within the Otto cycle diagram: the number 
of cylinders times the area divided by 4π. 
 
▷
Furthermore, the engine’s net power output is simply equal to torque 
times rotational speed, where rotational speed is expressed in radians 
per second—or, with an appropriate unit conversion, as revolutions per 
minute (rpm). Therefore, power, too, is a function of the area enclosed 
within the Otto cycle diagram. 
▷
If we multiply the displacement of one cylinder by the number of 
cylinders in the engine, we get the total displacement of the engine, a 
number that’s common in automotive speciﬁcations. As the Otto cycle 
graph suggests, larger displacement corresponds to larger enclosed 
area, which means more torque and more power. 
3
1
4
2
volume
net work
pressure
effect of increasing 
cylinder size

251
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
 
▷
Larger displacement can be achieved either by using more cylinders of 
a given size or by increasing the size of the cylinders. Increasing the 
cylinder size produces a theoretical increase in both torque and power 
that’s directly proportional to the increase in the volume of the cylinder. 
▷
Another way to increase torque and power is to increase the engine’s 
compression ratio. To increase the compression ratio without changing 
the cylinder size, we would increase the length of the piston stroke, such 
that the air in the cylinder is compressed into a smaller space at top 
dead center. Increasing the compression ratio causes the area enclosed 
within the Otto cycle diagram to become both wider and taller, resulting 
in increased torque and power. 
▷
Unlike the strategy of simply making the cylinders larger, increasing 
the compression ratio also improves the engine’s efficiency, meaning 
that a larger proportion of the fuel’s chemical energy is converted to 
mechanical energy. That means better gas mileage and lower emissions. 
But there’s a limit to the effectiveness of this strategy.
3
1
4
2
V2
V1
volume
net work
pressure
effect of increasing 
compression ratio

LECTURE 27—Torque, Power, and Transmission 
252
▷
Power is a function of the engine’s rotational speed, while torque is not. 
As rotational speed increases, power increases linearly, while torque 
remains constant. It’s too bad that real engines don’t conform to this 
theoretical ideal, because if they did, we could just increase power 
indeﬁnitely by simply increasing engine speed. 
 
▷
In practice, the real-world torque curve for a typical automobile engine 
remains relatively ﬂat through the middle range of engine speeds from 
about 2000 to 4000 rpm but drops off sharply at lower and higher 
speeds. On the high end, this deviation from the ideal is the inevitable 
result of mechanical friction, as well as the air resistance associated 
with the intake and exhaust ﬂows. On the low end, the loss of torque 
is caused primarily by convective heat loss through the cylinder walls 
during the compression stroke. These losses cause reduced pressure 
in the cylinder, and—as the Otto cycle diagram tells us—lower pressure 
translates into lower torque. 
torque
400
300
200
100
0
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
power
400
300
200
100
0
torque
(pound-feet)
power
(horsepower)
rotational speed
(RPM)
ideal torque and power curves

253
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
 
▷
Power = (torque) × (rotational speed), so the change in the torque curve 
from ideal to real world causes a similar change in the power curve. 
Power still increases with rotational speed, but only to a point, after 
which it drops off sharply. Beyond this point is the speed beyond which 
the engine is likely to self-destruct. At the low end, both the torque 
and power curves stop at around 800 rpm, because most internal 
combustion engines simply won’t run at speeds much lower than this. 
▷
These performance curves for a typical engine vividly illustrate the 
fundamental challenge associated with the design of the automotive 
drivetrain. When your car accelerates from a standstill to highway 
speed, its wheels accelerate through a range of speeds from zero to 
somewhat less than 1000 rpm. Through this entire range of vehicle 
performance, the engine should operate in the range from 800 to 
6000 rpm, roughly 6 times higher. To translate high engine speed to 
low wheel speed, some sort of gearing is required. This gearing is the 
responsibility of the transmission.
torque
400
300
200
100
0
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
redline
power
400
300
200
100
0
torque
(pound-feet)
power
(horsepower)
rotational speed
(RPM)
power = torque × rotational speed
real-world torque and power curves

LECTURE 27—Torque, Power, and Transmission 
254
Gears and Transmission
 
▷
Gears are rotating disks with regularly spaced teeth that allow one gear 
to turn the other without slipping. Even though the gears might be of 
different sizes, the teeth are all the same size to ensure that they mesh 
properly as the gears turn. 
▷
One purpose of gearing is to change the rotational speed of a shaft. 
Another is to change torque. At the point of contact where the gears 
mesh, each gear exerts a tangential force on the other. Based on 
Newton’s third law—for every action, there’s an equal and opposite 
reaction—we know that these forces are equal in magnitude. 
▷
Gear sets of different sizes provide mechanical advantage—just like 
simple machines—and for gears, the mechanical advantage is equal to 
the gear ratio. Just as simple machines trade force for distance, these 
gears trade torque for rotation. Larger gears produce more torque but 
rotate more slowly; smaller ones are faster but produce less torque.
▷
There is no one-size-ﬁts-all gear ratio that will provide adequate 
performance and fuel economy across a normal range of vehicle 
speeds. And that’s why all automotive transmissions provide multiple 
gear ratios—which we know as ﬁrst gear, second gear, third gear, and 
so on.
▷
The purpose of a transmission, then, is to keep the engine within its most 
efficient range of operation while providing adequate torque across the 
full range of vehicle speeds. This purpose is accomplished through a 
gearbox that provides multiple pairings of gears, each with different 
gear ratios. In ﬁrst gear, a small driving gear turns a signiﬁcantly larger 
driven gear, resulting in substantially increased torque and decreased 
speed. And successively higher gears provide for increased speed, at 
the expense of torque. 

flywheel

▷
An internal combustion engine generates power through a succession 
of discrete impulses, each associated with the explosive combustion 
of fuel and air in one of the engine’s cylinders. With each of these 
explosions, downward movement of the associated piston applies an 
impulsive torque to the crankshaft. 
 
▷
To smooth out these discrete impulses, a heavy disk called the ﬂywheel 
is ﬁxed to the crankshaft. Flywheels have gear teeth on their outer rim 
because the teeth engage with the electric starter motor, which is used 
to start the engine. 
 
▷
Affixed to the rear of the ﬂywheel is the clutch assembly, which is used 
to disconnect the engine from the transmission on demand. The clutch 
is required for two reasons.
clutch assembly

257
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o An internal combustion engine is incapable of running at 
signiﬁcantly below its idle speed, typically around 800 rpm. Thus, 
when the vehicle is standing still, the engine must be disengaged 
from the drivetrain, or it will stall. 
o Because of the tremendous forces that are being transmitted 
through the gearbox whenever it’s in gear, the transmission must be 
physically disconnected from the engine to change gears.
TERMS
clutch: A device that is used to connect and disconnect a driving shaft from 
a driven shaft while one or both shafts are turning.
compression ratio: In an automobile engine, the ratio of the cylinder 
volumes, V2 to V1, where V1 is the volume at top dead center and V2 is the 
volume at bottom dead center. 
displacement: In an automobile engine, the volume swept by the piston as it 
moves from bottom dead center to top dead center.
ﬂywheel: In an automobile drivetrain, a heavy disk that provides for steady 
rotation of the crankshaft in response to repetitive impulsive torques applied 
by the pistons. 
gear ratio: The ratio of the numbers of teeth on two meshed gears. The gear 
ratio corresponds to the mechanical advantage of the gears.
Otto cycle: A thermodynamic cycle used to model the operation of an 
internal combustion engine.
reciprocating motion: Cyclic up-and-down or back-and-forth motion that is 
characteristic of a piston in a cylinder.

LECTURE 27—Torque, Power, and Transmission 
258
READINGS
Department of the Army, Technical Manual 9-8000.
Gillespie, Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics.
QUESTIONS
1 
Based on the Otto cycle, what are three ways to increase the power of 
an internal combustion engine?
2 
What is the purpose of a transmission? What is the purpose of a clutch?

259
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Lecture
28
 
The Drivetrain
W
elcome to the third lecture in a four-lecture series on 
automotive engineering. In the previous lecture, you 
followed the transmission of mechanical power—which 
is torque multiplied by rotational speed—from the engine 
crankshaft through the ﬂywheel-and-clutch assembly to the transmission 
gearbox in a front-engine rear-wheel-drive automobile. In this lecture, 
you will continue your journey rearward: from the gearbox, through the 
driveshaft, to the differential and drive wheels, where the rubber meets 
the road.
The Drivetrain
▷
The automotive driveshaft is normally a hollow tube made of steel or 
high-strength aluminum. Tubes are highly preferable to solid bars for 
two reasons: For a given amount of material, a tube resists torsion (or 
twisting) far more effectively, and the tube is also superior to the bar in 
bending. 
 
▷
Another important characteristic of the driveshaft is its connection to the 
transmission output shaft at one end and to the differential at the other. 
The axle shafts, which extend laterally outward from the differential, are 
effectively part of the vehicle’s suspension system. 
▷
In a leaf-spring suspension, when the vehicle is moving, the leaf springs 
can ﬂex quite a bit, causing the entire differential to move vertically, 
as well. Consequently, the driveshaft must be capable of changing 
its orientation without interrupting the transmission of power at a few 
thousand rpm. 
▷
This ﬂexibility is provided by universal joints, or U-joints, at both ends 
of the shaft. At the heart of a U-joint is a cross-shaped double axle, with 
each axle attached to one shaft by a hinge. This arrangement allows 

LECTURE 28—The Drivetrain 
260
for rotation in two perpendicular directions. When one shaft rotates, 
the U-joint smoothly transmits power to the second shaft, even as the 
shaft’s angle of orientation continuously changes. 
▷
The differential is a mechanical device that performs three different 
functions simultaneously. It receives power from a single source—the 
driveshaft—divides it in half, and sends both halves to the perpendicular 
axle shafts; increases the gear ratio of the drivetrain by a factor of 
approximately 4 to 1; and allows the two drive wheels to rotate at 
different speeds when the vehicle is negotiating a turn. 
▷
How does the differential accommodate this signiﬁcant difference in 
rotational speed while continuing to deliver smooth power to both drive 
wheels?
differential

261
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
 
▷
On the end of the vehicle’s driveshaft, a small gear called a pinion 
engages with a larger crown gear. The crown gear’s axis of rotation is 
perpendicular to the driveshaft. Through this mechanism, the differential 
achieves its ﬁrst purpose of dividing input power into two perpendicular 
axle shafts. 
▷
The pinion rotates about four times faster than the crown gear. This 
pair of gears, often called the ﬁnal drive, also achieves the differential’s 
second purpose of increasing the drivetrain’s gear ratio. 
▷
The differential’s third purpose is performed by a mechanism called a 
planetary gearset. Its principal components are two sun gears, each 
ﬁxed to one of the axle shafts; two planet gears, conﬁgured such that 
they can revolve around the sun gears; and a frame called the planet 
carrier, which holds the planet gears, is ﬁxed to the crown gear of the 
ﬁnal drive, and can rotate independent of the axle shafts. 
▷
When the vehicle is driving straight ahead, the entire planetary gearset 
is basically just along for the ride. The planet gears don’t rotate, and the 
sun gears and axles are spinning at the same rotational speed as the 
crown gear. But when the vehicle turns, the two wheels rotate at different 
speeds—and, as a result, the planet gears rotate to accommodate the 
different shaft speeds.
▷
The planetary gearset causes the average rotational speed of the 
two sun gears to always be equal to the rotational speed of the crown 
gear. Thus, the total power delivered to the two axle shafts doesn’t 
change, but the allocation of power does, with the faster shaft receiving 
proportionately more power. 
▷
At the ends of the two axle shafts are the ﬁnal components of 
the automotive drivetrain: the drive wheels. They’re also integral 
components of the suspension, steering, and braking systems. 

LECTURE 28—The Drivetrain 
262
Front-Wheel Drive
▷
As opposed to the drivetrain of a front-engine, manual-transmission, 
rear-drive automobile, the two most popular alternative conﬁgurations 
are front-wheel drive and the automatic transmission.
 
▷
In the typical layout of the engine and drivetrain in a front-drive manual-
transmission car, the engine, ﬂywheel, clutch, and gearbox are all 
essentially identical to the conﬁguration of a rear-drive car, except that 
the entire unit is turned sideways. 
▷
The other major difference is that in front-wheel drive, the transmission 
and differential are integrated into a single unit, properly called a 
transaxle. And the output shaft of the gearbox drives the differential 
directly, with no driveshaft.
forward
engine
transaxle
clutch
flywheel
gearbox
helical gears
differential

263
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Front-wheel drive has several signiﬁcant advantages over rear-wheel 
drive. Elimination of the driveshaft saves weight and thus improves fuel 
efficiency. The compact, transversely mounted engine-transaxle unit 
allows for a smaller engine compartment and a correspondingly larger 
passenger compartment. Space efficiency is further improved because 
the transmission, driveshaft, and differential can’t impinge on either the 
passenger compartment or cargo compartment. Placing the engine 
directly over the drive wheels also improves traction and steering 
stability, particularly on slippery roads. 
▷
Front-wheel drive does have its disadvantages, though. Anytime a 
vehicle accelerates, its weight shifts rearward. In a rear-drive car, this 
shift increases the traction of the drive wheels, which is why racing cars 
and other high-performance vehicles almost always use rear drive. In 
a front-drive car, this weight shift reduces the drive wheels’ traction 
and can cause the tires to slip—an effect that’s exacerbated if you’re 
accelerating up a hill. 
 
▷
Perhaps the most important disadvantage of front-wheel drive is that 
integrating power transmission and steering into a single axle increases 
mechanical complexity. For example, axle shafts must be connected to 
the drive wheel hubs through very sophisticated universal joints called 
constant-velocity joints, which provide steady transmission of power, 
even as the wheels pivot and move up and down.
▷
Still, the predominance of front-wheel drive in all but performance 
cars and large vehicles today suggests that the advantages of this 
conﬁguration signiﬁcantly outweigh the disadvantages in most 
circumstances.
Automatic Transmission
▷
The automatic transmission is a system that is fundamentally different 
from its manual counterpart and quite a bit more complex, too. An 
automatic transmission consists of three major components: a torque 
converter, a gear unit, and a hydraulic control unit. 

LECTURE 28—The Drivetrain 
264
▷
The torque converter is a fascinating device that serves essentially 
the same function as the clutch in a manual transmission: It allows 
the engine to keep running when the vehicle comes to a stop, and it 
cushions abrupt changes in the relative speeds of the input and output 
shafts during gear changes. The difference, of course, is that it must 
perform these functions without human intervention. 
▷
The torque converter couples the engine to the transmission with a 
moving ﬂuid. The device is composed of three main components: the 
impeller, turbine, and stator. 
▷
At the heart of the gear unit is a planetary gearset. Similar to the gearset 
in the differential, it uses a central sun gear and two or more planet 
gears that can “revolve around the sun” on a rotating planet carrier. But 
unlike the differential gearset, this one has all gears rotating in the same 
plane, and it also includes an additional outer ring-shaped gear, called 
an annular gear. 
automatic transmission

265
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
This gearset has a fascinating characteristic that makes it quite useful 
for transmissions. The mechanism has three main components—the 
annular gear, sun gear, and planet carrier—and any two of these three 
can be used for input and output if the third one is locked or constrained. 
▷
The key feature of the planetary gearset is that all six possible 
conﬁgurations can be achieved simply by locking and unlocking 
components. Changes of conﬁguration can be made instantaneously, 
without the interruption of power input, and the gears remain in  
mesh continuously. 
▷
Taking advantage of this very powerful feature, one type of three-speed 
automatic transmission provides the four required gear ratios—three 
forward and one reverse—by linking two planetary gearsets together and 
then using a series of hydraulically operated clutches and brakes to lock 
and direct input power through different components of the two gearsets. 
▷
The other key components of this system are two clutches and two 
brake bands, all of which are hydraulically actuated. When the forward 
clutch is engaged, it connects the input shaft to the annular gear of 
the forward planetary gearset. When the drive-and-reverse clutch is 
engaged, it connects the input shaft to the common sun gear.
▷
The brake bands are steel straps that, when pulled tight by hydraulic 
actuators, lock certain components of the planetary gearsets. The 
forward band is used to lock the sun gear, and the rear one is used to 
lock the planet carrier of the reverse gearset. 
▷
The required gear ratios are achieved by using clutches and brakes to 
control which components of the planetary gearsets receive power and 
which are locked. In this regard, the modern trend has been to replace 
brake bands with clutches, because clutch engagement is generally 
faster and more precise. 
▷
In part because of the complexity of the hydraulic control unit, some state-
of-the-art transmissions have switched to electronic control systems that 
eliminate much, though certainly not all, of the hydraulic hardware. 

LECTURE 28—The Drivetrain 
266
TERMS
annular gear: A ring-shaped spur gear with teeth oriented inward, typically 
used as a component of a planetary gearset.
brake band: In an automatic transmission, a steel strap that, when pulled 
tight by hydraulic actuators, locks certain components of a planetary 
gearset.
crown gear: A large gear with teeth oriented perpendicular to the plane of 
the gear. 
differential: A mechanical device that performs three different functions: 
allocating power from the driveshaft to two perpendicular axle shafts, 
increasing the gear ratio of the drivetrain, and allowing the two drive wheels 
to rotate at different speeds when the vehicle is negotiating a turn.
ﬁnal drive: In an automotive differential, the pinion and crown gears. 
hydraulic control unit: In an automatic transmission, a ﬂuid-powered 
computer that uses pressurized transmission ﬂuid moving through a series 
of valves to determine when each shift should occur and to execute the 
changes of gears.
input shaft: In an automobile drivetrain, a shaft that connects the engine to 
the transmission.
pinion: A small gear that is typically positioned on the end of a shaft.
planet carrier: In a planetary gearset, the ﬁxture on which one or more 
planet gears are mounted.
planetary gearset: An arrangement of one or more sun gears, each of 
which rotates on a ﬁxed shaft, and planet gears, which revolve around the 
sun gears.

267
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
suspension: In an automobile, a mechanical system that supports the weight 
of the vehicle, provides road isolation, provides roadholding, and prevents 
excessive body roll.
torque converter: In an automatic transmission, a device that allows the 
engine to keep running when the vehicle comes to a stop and that cushions 
abrupt changes in the relative speeds of the input and output shafts during 
gear changes. The three main components of a torque converter are the 
impeller, turbine, and stator.
traction: The accelerating, braking, and turning forces generated at the 
interface between a vehicle tire and the surface on which it is rolling.
transaxle: An automotive transmission and differential integrated into a 
single unit.
universal joint: A mechanical connection between two shafts that allows the 
transmission of torque between shafts, even when one shaft is angled with 
respect to the other. 
READINGS
Department of the Army, Technical Manual 9-8000.
Gillespie, Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are the three principal functions of a differential?
2 
Why might a standard automotive differential not function properly on 
an icy road surface? (Hint: The limited-slip differential is a technological 
solution to this problem.)

268
LECTURE 29—Suspension, Steering, and Braking
Lecture
29
Suspension, Steering,  
and Braking
Y
ou might have 400 cubic inches under the hood of your car, 
but all the automotive power in the world is useless if you can’t 
keep the vehicle between the white lines. This lecture will 
wrap up the four-lecture series on automotive engineering by 
examining the three systems that help you stay in control: suspension, 
steering, and braking. And the lecture will begin with a technology that’s 
vital to all three systems—your tires.
Tires
▷
The pneumatic tire is a composite structure made of multiple layers 
of fabric, called plies, often reinforced with steel belts and wires, all 
embedded in rubber. The rubber binds all of these layers together, adds 
ﬂexibility, and makes the structure airtight—so that the void inside can 
be ﬁlled with air at high pressure. 
▷
The reinforcing plies are usually made of polyester cord, and their 
orientation is the principal basis for classifying tires. The plies of radial 
tires are oriented in the radial direction, perpendicular to the tread. In 
bias-ply tires, the cords are oriented in an alternating diagonal pattern. 
Today, radial tires are used almost exclusively, because of their better 
steering control, longer tread life, and lower rolling resistance. 
▷
In an automotive system, tires serve three main purposes: They support 
the vehicle’s weight, absorb minor shocks due to irregularities in the road 
surface, and provide traction—transmitting all acceleration, braking, and 
turning forces between the vehicle and the road.
 
▷
When air is contained inside a tire under pressure, the pressure acts 
perpendicular to the tire’s inner surface. When a car’s weight acts 
downward on one of its wheels, the tire ﬂattens a little on the bottom, 

269
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
where it makes contact with the 
ground, and the direction of the 
pressure remains perpendicular 
to the ﬂattened surface. The 
ﬂattened area on the tire is 
called the contact patch. 
▷
The tire pushes downward on 
the ground only at the contact 
patch. To maintain equilibrium, 
the ground pushes back with 
exactly the same pressure. This 
upward pressure acting over 
the contact area constitutes a normal force, which counterbalances the 
weight that’s being applied to the wheel. The magnitude of this normal 
force is simply the pressure times the contact area. 
▷
Contact patches do a lot more than just support the car’s weight. We 
tend to think of the engine as the driving force that moves a car forward, 
but when we look at the vehicle externally, the only thing moving it 
forward is the traction force, which is really just the friction developed at 
the contact patch of the drive wheels.
Suspension
▷
There are two basic types of suspension systems. A conventional solid-
axle system consists of a one-piece axle. In a common suspension 
conﬁguration, the solid axle is ﬁxed to a pair of steel leaf springs, though 
there’s another common conﬁguration called the trailing arm. Regardless 
of how it’s attached to the vehicle chassis, the solid axle has an inherent 
disadvantage: the dynamics of its two wheels are interdependent. When 
one wheel hits a bump, the solid axle rotates, and the other wheel must 
necessarily rotate along with it. 
weight of car

LECTURE 29—Suspension, Steering, and Braking 
270
▷
In an independent suspension system—so named because the motion 
of each wheel is completely independent of all the others—when one 
wheel hits a bump, the others are unaffected. A multi-link system is 
a particular type of independent suspension that is named for two 
linkages that are mounted to the chassis and are free to pivot vertically. 
Because the linkages are parallel, they keep the wheel essentially 
vertical through its full range of motion—a signiﬁcant advantage of this 
system. Between the two linkages is a coil spring, which performs the 
same function as the leaf spring in a solid-axle suspension. 
▷
For many years, it was common for automobiles to mix and match 
suspension systems, with an independent suspension up front and 
a solid axle in the rear. This was particularly true for rear-wheel-drive 
vehicles, because the simpler, more robust leaf-spring and trailing-arm 
systems are well suited for transmitting large traction forces from the 
drive wheels to the chassis. 
▷
But today, nearly all cars use four-wheel independent suspensions 
because of their lighter weight and better performance characteristics. 
The solid rear axle is found almost exclusively on trucks and large SUVs. 
▷
Regardless of conﬁguration, the suspension system has four principal 
purposes.
o It supports the weight of the vehicle, its occupants, and its cargo—
and distributes that weight as evenly as possible to all four wheels.
o 
As the vehicle moves across bumps and potholes, the springs absorb 
the impacts caused by these irregularities. This function, called road 
isolation, is important not only for the vehicle’s occupants, but also 
for all of the sensitive mechanical and electronic systems. 
o Not only do the springs isolate the vehicle from the bumps, but 
they also force the wheels back down onto the road surface after 
passing over each bump. This ability to follow the contours of the 
road surface is called roadholding, and it’s critical for both traction 
and control.

271
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o Anytime a vehicle accelerates, it pitches rearward; anytime it 
decelerates, it pitches forward. And anytime it makes a turn, it 
rolls toward the outside of the curve. These pitching and rolling 
motions are inevitable: They occur because the forces that cause a 
car to accelerate, decelerate, and turn are all applied down at the 
level of the roadway—at the contact patch between the tires and 
the road surface—while the vehicle’s center of mass is signiﬁcantly 
above the road surface. If these pitching and rolling motions are 
too large, they can lead to loss of control. Thus, an important 
purpose of the suspension system is to prevent these motions 
from becoming excessive.
Steering
▷
The purpose of your car’s steering system is to convert the rotation 
of your steering wheel into the rotation of your front wheels, with an 
appropriate degree of mechanical advantage. Today, most cars use a 
type of system called rack-and-pinion steering. 
▷
The steering wheel rotates the steering column, which has a pinion gear 
mounted on its end. The pinion is engaged with a toothed horizontal bar 
called the rack. As the pinion rotates, the rack shifts to the left or right, 
and this lateral motion pivots the front wheels through a mechanical 
linkage consisting of tie rods and steering arms. 
▷
The steering wheel, combined with the rack-and-pinion mechanism, 
provides considerable mechanical advantage; however, many modern 
steering systems make it even easier on us by adding a hydraulic power 
assist so that we need to apply even less force at the steering wheel.
▷
When you turn your steering wheel, your two front wheels don’t rotate 
through the same angle; your outer and inner wheels follow two different 
circular arcs when your vehicle negotiates a turn. Because the outside 
arc has a larger radius, your outside front wheel should turn a bit less 
than the inside wheel for a given turn. 

Braking
▷
The two principal types of vehicle braking systems are disk brakes 
and drum brakes. Disk brakes are generally considered to be the 
superior technology, and all modern cars use them for at least their 
front wheels. Some cars still use drum brakes on their rear wheels as 
a cost-saving measure, though four-wheel disk brakes are becoming 
increasingly common.
 
▷
In a disk brake, a metal disk is rigidly ﬁxed to the rotating axle. A caliper, 
which ﬁts around the disk, contains two hydraulically activated brake 
pads, one on each side. When you press the brake pedal, pressurized 
hydraulic ﬂuid forces the brake pads inward against the disk. The brake 
pads apply a pair of compressive normal forces to the disk, generating 
friction that slows the rotation of the disk and axle.
disk brakes

273
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Extremely large friction forces are required to bring a car to a halt 
quickly from high speed. When this happens, all that kinetic energy is 
transformed into heat at the interface between the brake pads and the 
disk. This heat must be dissipated rapidly to prevent a phenomenon 
called brake fade. 
▷
This is the primary reason why disk brakes are inherently superior to 
drum brakes—because most of the disk is exposed to the air. Thus, the 
heat dissipates more readily. This prolonged exposure to high friction 
forces also causes the brake pads to wear out eventually. 
▷
In a drum brake, a steel drum is ﬁxed to the rotating axle, and a pair 
of brake shoes inside the drum are ﬁxed to the suspension system—
so that they don’t rotate with the axle. These shoes are forced outward 
by hydraulic pressure to stop the car. The brake shoes have abrasive 
linings, which make contact with the inside of the drum to generate the 
required friction force. 
drum brakes

LECTURE 29—Suspension, Steering, and Braking 
274
▷
Drum brakes are inferior to disk brakes, because heat builds up inside 
the drums and isn’t as easily dissipated. Nonetheless, drum brakes are 
still used on the rear wheels of many vehicles, because they’re cheaper 
and because the front wheels make a signiﬁcantly greater contribution 
to stopping the car due to the forward shift in the vehicle’s weight 
distribution during deceleration.
▷
An advantage of drum brakes is that the brake shoes can be activated 
mechanically as well as hydraulically. Mechanical activation must be 
used for the car’s hand brake; thus, in a car with four-wheel disk brakes, 
a separate hand brake mechanism must be provided, at increased cost. 
▷
One of the most important enhancements to automotive safety over the 
past few decades has certainly been the advent of the antilock braking 
system (ABS), which is intended to prevent your wheels from locking 
up during hard braking. ABS uses electronic sensors to detect when a 
wheel is about to lock up and then releases and reapplies the brakes 
in short pulses many times per second, resulting in a shorter stopping 
distance and better control, particularly on slick surfaces. 
TERMS
antilock braking system (ABS): An automotive braking system that 
enhances traction and control by using electronic sensors to detect when 
a wheel is about to lock up and then releasing and reapplying the brakes in 
short pulses, many times per second. 
bias-ply tires: A vehicle tire with its internal reinforcing plies oriented in an 
alternating diagonal pattern.
brake fade: The tendency of automotive brakes to lose effectiveness due to 
the buildup of heat.
disk brake: An automotive braking system in which a pair of hydraulically 
operated brake pads are forced against a disk to reduce the speed of  
the vehicle. 

275
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
drum brake: An automotive braking system in which a pair of hydraulically 
operated brake shoes are forced against the inner surface of a drum to 
reduce the speed of the vehicle.
independent suspension system: An automotive suspension system in 
which the road-induced motion of one suspension unit does not affect the 
motion of the other suspension units. 
radial tire: A vehicle tire with its internal reinforcing plies oriented in the 
radial direction.
roadholding: The ability of an automotive suspension system to keep the 
tires in contact with the road surface as the vehicle moves.
road isolation: The ability of an automotive suspension system to absorb the 
impacts caused by irregularities in the road surface.
spring: (1) A source of water occurring where an aquifer intercepts the 
ground surface. (2) A mechanical device that provides a resisting force 
proportional to its deformation in either tension or compression.
READINGS
Department of the Army, Technical Manual 9-8000.
Gillespie, Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why are the drive wheels of a front-wheel-drive car more likely to slip 
during acceleration than the drive wheels of a rear-wheel-drive car?
2 
Why does an independent suspension system generally result in 
better control than a solid-axle system? Why does it result in a more 
comfortable ride? 

LECTURE 30— Highway Engineering
arterial
collector
local
LECTURE 30— Highway Engineering
276
LECTURE 30—Highway Engineering
Lecture
30
Highway Engineering
S
ince the dawn of civilization, transportation systems—and roads 
in particular—have been fundamental to economic development 
and human quality of life. Today, roads facilitate the movement 
of raw materials to factories; manufactured and agricultural 
products to markets; and people to the places where they live, work, 
shop, and play. In this lecture, you will examine many of the major 
considerations involved in designing a highway. As you will discover, 
many manifestations of highway design are integrated elements of an 
engineered system that has achieved a time-tested balance of speed, 
safety, and comfort. 
Roads
▷
For the purpose of engineering design, roads are classiﬁed according 
to their location—either urban or rural—and their function—arterial, 
collector, or local. 
 
ż
The function of an arterial is to provide long-distance mobility, 
facilitating movement from one region or city to another. 

277
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o At the opposite end of the spectrum, local roads provide access 
within residential areas, commercial districts, and so on. 
o In between, collectors are designed to convey traffic between the 
local roads and arterials. 
▷
These classiﬁcations are vital to the design process, because they 
dictate many of a road’s physical characteristics. Principal arterials are 
typically divided highways with relatively shallow gradients and gradual 
curves. But the price of speed is limited access; we can only enter and 
depart from these highways at specially constructed interchanges. 
▷
Major collectors are typically characterized by large numbers of 
controlled intersections. And minor roads are sometimes designed 
deliberately to discourage both through traffic and high speed. 
▷
Roads design is one facet of transportation engineering, a branch of 
civil engineering. Transportation engineering is a broad ﬁeld that also 
includes the analysis and design of airports, mass-transit systems, 
pipelines, and ports. As such, automotive transportation systems are 
typically handled by two groups of specialists: highway engineers, who 
design roads; and traffic engineers, who manage the safe and efficient 
movement of vehicles on roads through such measures as intersection 
design, signaling, lane markings, and signage. 
▷
A road is an engineered system, the design of which derives from 
three main sources: the characteristics of drivers, the characteristics of 
vehicles, and the characteristics of the roadway itself. To understand 
how these three factors come into play, we need to examine the process 
of highway design. 
▷
U.S. Route 39—a north-south arterial—was built 60 years ago, and over 
time, a major metropolitan area grew up along it. In the 1990s, U.S. 39 
was upgraded to become Interstate 31, and the new highway was routed 
around the metropolitan area to the west to avoid congestion. 

LECTURE 30—Highway Engineering 
278
▷
To accommodate increasing demand for access to I-31, the State 
Department of Transportation has decided to extend an east-west 
arterial—State Route 55—from the city to the interstate. This new highway 
will traverse 8 miles of mostly undeveloped rolling terrain and thus will be 
classiﬁed as a rural arterial. 
In addition to its two 
connections to existing 
highways, it will have one 
additional 
interchange 
on the west side of the 
metropolitan area. 
▷
Our job is to design 
this new highway. Our 
design will be based on 
an 
extensive 
regional 
traffic study, which was 
conducted to determine 
the 
anticipated 
future 
traffic volume and the 
anticipated 
proportions 
of cars and trucks that will use the new highway. This study included 
vehicle counts of traffic entering and leaving the region by all possible 
routes, as well as extensive interviews with drivers to determine the 
origins, destinations, and purposes of their trips.
▷
Based on the results of this study, we’ve determined that the new 
highway should be designed to accommodate a traffic volume of 25,000 
vehicles per day. This number—called the average daily traffic (ADT)—
can be used to determine how many traffic lanes the highway will need. 
In this case, it turns out that our highway will need four lanes to meet a 
reasonably free-ﬂow level of service.
▷
With the number of lanes determined, we’re ready to execute the actual 
highway design in six major phases. 
o 
Determining the alignment of the roadway—that is, the speciﬁc 
path it will take across the ground. 
31
39
55

279
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o Deﬁning the cross-section conﬁguration, which includes such 
factors as the widths and slopes of the traffic lanes, shoulders, and 
embankments. 
o Designing the pavement, to include the upper surface of asphalt or 
concrete and the underlying layers of compacted ﬁll. 
o Collaborating with our structural engineering colleagues to design 
any required bridges and interchanges.
o Collaborating with our water resources engineering colleagues to 
design the drainage system. 
o Planning signage and fencing to control traffic ﬂow and enhance 
safety.
The Alignment of the Roadway
▷
The process of deﬁning the alignment can be quite challenging, 
because so many factors are likely to inﬂuence this decision, including 
the topography and soil conditions along the route; the length of the 
route; the need to cross or avoid obstacles, such as population centers 
and rivers; the need to cross railroads and other roads; the need for 
interchanges at speciﬁc locations; the construction cost; acquisition of 
the right-of-way; and environmental impact.
▷
Because these criteria often conﬂict with each other, there will probably 
be several feasible alignments and no clear best choice. Thus, the 
process of determining the optimal alignment is likely to involve fully 
developing several design alternatives and then comparing their 
respective costs and beneﬁts. 
▷
There is a set of detailed guidelines for the geometric design of 
highways published by a standards organization called the American 
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO). 

LECTURE 30—Highway Engineering 
280
These guidelines include separate speciﬁcations for both the 
horizontal alignment—the route as viewed from above—and the vertical 
alignment—the highway proﬁle, viewed from the side. 
▷
In deﬁning the highway alignment, we need to make preliminary 
decisions about the interchanges at each end, because the elevation 
of the roadway at these points will be dictated, to some degree, by the 
types of interchanges we use. 
▷
In deﬁning the alignment, we must also identify any required bridges 
along its length.
▷
A highway invariably interrupts natural drainage patterns, so a given 
alignment invariably dictates a unique drainage system design. 
▷
For a large-scale highway project, we would likely generate several 
designs of viable alignment alternatives. Then, we would compare 
alternatives and select the optimum one based on factors such as 
length, construction cost, right-of-way acquisition, environmental 
impact, and so on.
▷
In regions with different topography, the design process can be 
different. In mountainous terrain, for example, alignment is usually 
controlled almost entirely by maximum gradients. In ﬂat regions, 
horizontal alignment typically controls the design, and in urban areas, 
the highway’s impact on existing development usually dominates all 
considerations of topography. 
The Cross-Section Conﬁguration
▷
A highway’s cross-section conﬁguration includes the shape and 
dimensions of the road surface, shoulders, median, drainage ditches, 
and embankments. The AASHTO standard provides detailed guidelines 
for these features. For example, the standard lane width for principal 
arterials is 12 feet, and shoulders are generally 10 to 12 feet wide. 

281
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
lane
lane
lane
lane
shoulder
shoulder
embankment
ditch
median
lane
lane
shoulder
shoulder
embankment
ditch
▷
Although two-lane roads typically have a slight crown to drain rainwater 
laterally from the road surface toward both sides, divided highways use 
a uniform cross-slope that directs all of the runoff in one direction for 
all lanes on either side of the median. The crowned shape isn’t used 
for divided highways, because it can lead to loss of control during high-
speed lane changes. 
▷
When the lanes, shoulders, median, ditches, and embankments are all 
taken into account, the typical right-of-way for a major divided highway 
is about 250 feet wide and can be much wider when topographic 
conditions dictate a wider median. Thus, a typical freeway is nearly as 
wide as a football ﬁeld is long.
four-lane divided highway
two-lane road

LECTURE 30—Highway Engineering 
282
The Pavement
▷
When you see the term “pavement,” you probably think of the hard 
surface on which your car rides. But from an engineering perspective, 
this surface is really just the icing on the cake. What’s underneath is at 
least as important.
▷
There are two principal types of pavement: ﬂexible pavement, which 
typically uses an asphalt surface, and rigid pavement, which uses 
concrete. 
▷
A typical cross-section of a ﬂexible pavement could be upward of 2 feet 
thick. At the very bottom is the subgrade, usually natural soil that has 
been compacted by a roller to improve its strength. Above the subgrade 
are two more layers of compacted ﬁll, called the subbase and base. In 
general, the subbase uses higher-quality soil than the subgrade, and the 
base uses higher-quality soil than the subbase. 
▷
There are four basic types of soil: gravel, sand, clay, and silt. Of these, 
gravel and sand are preferred for most forms of construction, because 
they are stronger, are less susceptible to long-term settlement, and 
drain well. 
▷
The optimum soil for load bearing is called a well-graded gravel, a 
mixture of granular particles ranging from relatively large chunks 
of angular stone down to small grains of sand. When this mixture is 
properly compacted, the smaller particles ﬁll the voids between the 
larger particles, and the whole assembly locks together into a structure 
that’s almost as strong as concrete. 
▷
The challenge is that, for the sake of economy, most road-construction 
projects are constrained to use locally available ﬁll, and the perfect 
well-graded gravel is seldom available in the huge quantities required 
for a highway. 

▷
Thus, the typical ﬂexible pavement uses a layered structure with the 
highest-quality ﬁll on top and relatively low-quality stuff below. The top 
layer is asphalt—a thick petroleum product mixed with gravel—which 
provides protection from the elements and resistance to the abrasive 
effects of vehicle traffic, but relatively little structural strength. That’s the 
responsibility of the compacted layers below. 
▷
Conversely, in a rigid pavement, most of the structural strength is in 
the uppermost layer—usually a thick slab of concrete—often reinforced 
with steel bars. There’s still a layer of compacted ﬁll below to serve as a 
foundation and to provide drainage, but the concrete does most of the 
heavy lifting. 
▷
A rigid pavement is somewhat more expensive than a ﬂexible pavement, 
but it has a signiﬁcantly longer useful life, requires less maintenance, 
and is less susceptible to problems associated with settlement of the 
subgrade. As such, rigid pavements are typically used for major high-
speed arterials.
base course
subbase
subgrade
asphalt
load distribution

LECTURE 30—Highway Engineering 
284
TERMS
alignment: In highway design, the path a highway takes across the ground. 
A road alignment includes both vertical and horizontal components. 
arterial: A road that provides long-distance mobility, facilitating movement 
from one region or city to another.
collector: A road that conveys traffic between the local roads and arterials.
cross-section: The geometric shape of the face created by making a 
hypothetical cut perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a structural 
element, roadway, etc. 
ﬂexible pavement: A road structure typically consisting of a layer of asphalt 
placed on a layered base of compacted ﬁll. 
interchange: In traffic engineering, an intersection at which traffic streams 
cross at two or more different levels. Also called a grade-separated 
intersection.
intersection: A traffic structure at which two or more streams of traffic cross 
each other, with drivers typically having the option to continue on their 
present route or to switch from one stream to another.
local road: A road that provides access within residential areas, commercial 
districts, etc.
rigid pavement: A road structure that typically consists of a reinforced 
concrete slab placed on a layer of compacted ﬁll.
roller: A structural support that permits rotation and horizontal movement 
but restrains vertical movement.
traffic volume: In highway design, the amount of traffic on a highway, 
measured in vehicles per day.

285
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READING
Garber and Hoel, Traffic and Highway Engineering.
QUESTIONS
1 
Explain the concept of balanced earthwork. Can you see evidence of 
design for balanced earthwork in a highway near your home?
2 
Why do major arterial highways usually use rigid pavements, rather 
than ﬂexible pavements? 

286
/(&785(²7UDI¿F(QJLQHHULQJ
Lecture
31
 
7UDI¿F(QJLQHHULQJ
T
his lecture shifts in focus from the work of the highway engineer, 
who designs the geometric conﬁguration and underlying 
structural support of major roads, to the work of the traffic 
engineer, who specializes in facilitating the safe and efficient 
movement of vehicles and pedestrians within a road system. Traffic 
engineers apply the scientiﬁc study of traffic ﬂow to the design of roads, 
intersections, and traffic control. They’re principally responsible for the 
geometric design of intersections, sidewalks, crosswalks, and bike 
paths, as well as traffic control markings, signs, and signals. They’re also 
extensively involved in conducting investigations to improve traffic safety. 
A Scientiﬁc Theory of Traffic Flow
▷
What does a scientiﬁc theory of traffic ﬂow look like? One typical 
example is a theoretical mathematical model governing traffic ﬂow, 
traffic density, and mean speed.
▷
Traffic ﬂow is the hourly rate at which vehicles pass a speciﬁc point on 
a highway, measured in vehicles per hour. Density is the number of 
vehicles traveling on a speciﬁc length of highway at a particular instant 
in time, measured in vehicles per mile. Mean speed is deﬁned as the 
average speed of all vehicles passing a point on a highway within a 
speciﬁed period of time, measured in miles per hour. 
▷
All three of these quantities are mathematically related by the following 
equation: ﬂow = density × speed. The units in this equation work out 
consistently: (vehicles/hour) = (vehicles/mile) × (miles/hour).
 
▷
To develop a usable theoretical model of traffic ﬂow, we must also 
assume a theoretical relationship between any two of these three 
quantities. One common approach, called the Greenshields model, 
assumes a linear relationship between density and mean speed. 

287
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
 
▷
The maximum speed that’s possible on a given highway can only be 
attained when the traffic density is extremely low. As density increases, 
vehicles start constraining each other’s movement, and their average 
speed decreases. Greater density continues to cause further speed 
reductions, until the traffic stream comes to a standstill. This is called the 
jam density. 
 
▷
Based on this theoretical model, we can use the equation ﬂow = density 
× speed to derive the corresponding graph of ﬂow versus density, which 
turns out to be a parabolic curve. At low density, traffic ﬂow is also low. 
As density increases, ﬂow increases—but only to a point. At a critical 
traffic density, the curve peaks and then begins to drop off. 
▷
Traffic becomes so dense that everyone slows down. Cars in the right-
hand lane stack up behind slower vehicles, but they can’t change lanes 
to pass, because the left-hand lane is already ﬁlled with vehicles. This 
is called congested ﬂow—and as even more vehicles feed into the ﬂow 
from on-ramps, increasing density drives down both speed and ﬂow, 
until everything comes to a halt at the jam density.
density (vehicles/mile)
jam density
max speed
mean speed (mph)
the Greenshields model

/(&785(²7UDI¿F(QJLQHHULQJ
288
▷
The fundamental diagram of traffic ﬂow is a beautiful example of the 
mathematical approach that underlies traffic engineering. And this 
theoretical tool has a variety of important practical applications, including 
rating highways for capacity, predicting traffic jams, and analyzing the 
adverse effects of traffic disturbances, such as lane closures.
Intersections
▷
To a large degree, the performance of our roads is dictated by 
intersections, because the volume of traffic that most intersections can 
handle is less than the capacity of the connected roadways. Most crashes 
happen at intersections, as well. For these reasons, intersections tend 
to have a dominant inﬂuence on our driving experience—for better or 
for worse.
▷
At the most fundamental level, an intersection involves two or more 
streams of traffic crossing each other, with drivers typically having the 
option to continue on their present route or switch from one stream to 
another. The combined effects of intersecting traffic streams and fallible 
human drivers making decisions create many possibilities for conﬂicts 
between vehicles.
traffic flow = density × speed
density
(vehicles/mile)
jam density
max speed
mean speed
(mph)
density
(vehicles/mile)
jam density
flow
(vehicles/hour)
fundamental diagram of traffic flow

289
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Conﬂicts are points at which two vehicles moving in different directions 
might collide with each other. Thus, every conﬂict is a potential crash. 
The principal goals of intersection design are to minimize these 
conﬂicts while also facilitating traffic ﬂow, consistent with the physical 
constraints of the site and available funds. These goals and constraints 
often conﬂict with each other, so every intersection design represents a 
unique compromise between competing criteria. 
▷
Intersections come in two types: at-grade intersections, which 
have all roads connecting at the same level; and grade-separated 
intersections, or interchanges, which have routes crossing at two or 
more different levels. Grade separation invariably eliminates many 
potential conﬂicts between vehicles; however, its most common 
purpose is to facilitate unconstrained traffic ﬂow on at least one of the 
intersecting routes. 
= conflict
= route
= conflict
= route

▷
Interchanges can be built in an amazing variety of conﬁgurations to 
accommodate different kinds of traffic requirements and constraints. 
o A diamond interchange is typically used when a freeway intersects 
with a minor road. Through traffic on the freeway is unconstrained; 
however, as a minimum, controlled intersections are required 
where the two freeway off-ramps meet the minor road. A serious 
disadvantage of this conﬁguration is the possibility of a driver 
making a wrong turn onto a ramp and entering the freeway in 
the wrong direction. Well-designed diamond interchanges use 
signs, pavement markings, and median structures to reduce the 
probability of such potentially disastrous events. 
o A cloverleaf interchange is typically used when there are two 
divided highways and allows unconstrained through traffic on both 
intersecting routes, while also permitting eight possible turning 
diamond interchange

291
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
movements without stopping. At the on-ramps, the merging of 
these vehicles into the main traffic streams is generally controlled 
only by yield signs. 
o
A trumpet interchange is a variation on the cloverleaf that works just 
like a cloverleaf but is much simpler, because there’s no through 
traffic on one of the two main highways. Thus, rather than eight 
possible turning movements, the trumpet only has four.
▷
From a traffic engineering perspective, the cloverleaf interchange 
has two signiﬁcant shortcomings. To facilitate continuous traffic ﬂow, 
the four “leaves” of the cloverleaf must have a relatively small turning 
radius—and, thus, vehicles must reduce speed signiﬁcantly to negotiate 
the curve. Lower speed means reduced ﬂow. Moreover, having just 
decelerated for the tight curve, these same vehicles must now accelerate 
rapidly for their upcoming merge into the high-speed ﬂow of through 
traffic, resulting in signiﬁcant potential for conﬂicts between vehicles.
cloverleaf interchange

/(&785(²7UDI¿F(QJLQHHULQJ
292
▷
Both of these inherent problems have been very effectively addressed 
in the directional interchange, which is now used wherever possible 
for the intersection of two freeways. The characteristic feature of all 
directional interchanges is the ﬂyover ramp, which makes a left turn by 
passing over or under the main freeways. The very large turning radius 
of these ramps allows vehicles to move from one traffic stream into the 
other with little or no reduction in speed. The directional interchange 
also eliminates the conﬂict between on- and off-ramps that occur with 
the cloverleaf. The off-ramps exiting from the freeway are upstream of 
the on-ramps feeding into the same route. 
▷
The disadvantage of the directional interchange is cost. Not only do these 
large-radius curves occupy a huge tract of land, but a large proportion of 
any directional interchange also consists of multi-span bridges.
▷
The key distinguishing characteristic of the second major category of 
intersections—the at-grade intersection—is that an area of road surface 
is shared by two or more roads. Within this area, streams of traffic are 
able to change from one route to another at the drivers’ discretion, 
greatly increasing the potential for conﬂicts. 
▷
Traffic engineers classify at-grade intersections as multi-leg, four-leg, 
and T intersections. When designing at-grade intersections, traffic 
engineers consider six major elements of intersection design.
o Horizontal alignment. Roads should intersect at as close to 90s as 
possible. Highly acute intersections can be problematic because 
of limitations on visibility, prolonged exposure of vehicles moving 
diagonally across the main traffic stream, and the difficulty in making 
a sharp turn, particularly for trucks and buses. 
o Vertical alignment. If possible, intersections should have gradients 
less than 3% in all directions. This is because vehicles approaching 
an intersection from any direction might need to stop, even when 
there’s no stop sign or light in that direction, and stopping distances 
can be signiﬁcantly increased for gradients larger than 3%. 

293
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o The radius of curves at the corners of the intersection. The rear 
wheels of a vehicle don’t follow the same track as the front wheels, 
an inevitable consequence of the front-wheel steering systems our 
automobiles use. Because of this phenomenon, the pavement of a 
well-designed intersection is always extended inside of the traveled 
lane by an amount that will accommodate the type of vehicles that 
are expected to use the intersection. 
o Channelization. Channelization is used to reduce conﬂicts by 
guiding traffic movements into well-deﬁned paths, using either 
raised islands or pavement markings. Speciﬁcally, channelization 
can be used to control the ﬂow of merging, diverging, and crossing 
traffic streams; segregate traffic movements that will receive 
different signals; provide storage lanes for turning vehicles; provide 
refuge for pedestrians; provide a place to mount traffic control 
devices; prevent prohibited turns; and restrict speed. 
o Adequate sight distance. At intersections, drivers make decisions 
about whether to stop, start, accelerate, decelerate, turn, merge, 
diverge, or just continue at constant speed. Thus, it’s incumbent 
on the designer to ensure that drivers approaching the intersection 
from all possible directions have adequate sight distance to make 
any relevant decision—and then to act on that decision without risk 
of collision. 
o Traffic control. The three principal technologies for traffic control 
are signal lights, signs, and pavement markings. Traffic control 
features are designed to ensure the orderly, predictable, and 
safe movement of vehicles by formally assigning the right-of-way 
to various routes through the intersection. Signs and markings 
assign the right-of-way permanently; signals do it temporarily, on a 
rotating cycle. In all cases, the engineer’s objective is to optimize 
the inevitable trade-off between delay and the probability 
of crashes for the conditions the intersection is expected  
to experience.

/(&785(²7UDI¿F(QJLQHHULQJ
294
TERMS
at-grade intersection: In traffic engineering, an intersection at which all 
roads connect at the same level.
channelization: In traffic engineering, the use of raised islands or pavement 
markings to reduce conﬂicts by guiding traffic movements into well-deﬁned 
paths.
grade-separated intersection: In traffic engineering, an intersection at 
which traffic streams cross at two or more different levels. Also called an 
interchange. 
mean speed: In traffic engineering, the average speed of all vehicles 
passing a point on a highway within a speciﬁed period of time, measured in 
miles per hour.
sight distance: In traffic engineering, the distance a driver must be able to 
see in order to make a decision and then act on that decision without risk 
of collision.
traffic control feature: A signal light, traffic sign, or pavement marker 
designed to ensure the orderly, predictable, and safe movement of 
vehicles by formally assigning the right-of-way to various routes through 
the intersection.
traffic density: In traffic engineering, the number of vehicles traveling on 
a speciﬁc length of highway at a particular instant in time, measured in 
vehicles per mile. 
traffic ﬂow: In traffic engineering, the hourly rate at which vehicles pass a 
speciﬁc point on a highway, measured in vehicles per hour. 

295
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Garber and Hoel, Traffic and Highway Engineering.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 8.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why is it not always desirable to install additional traffic control 
measures at an intersection?
2 
What are some considerations governing the design of exclusive left-
turn lanes at intersections?

296
LECTURE 32— Everyday Bridges
Lecture
32
 
Everyday Bridges
M
onumental structures like the Golden Gate Bridge represent 
extraordinary triumphs of human industry, ingenuity, and 
creativity. Yet, as iconic as they are, these great spans are 
unrepresentative of the bridges that have the greatest 
inﬂuence on our everyday lives. According to the Federal Highway 
Administration, there are more than 500,000 bridges in the United 
States. The vast majority of these are not graceful suspension bridges 
or towering arches but, rather, simple highway overpasses and modest 
spans across small streams. This lecture will focus on these seemingly 
mundane structures—bridges that can still inspire us, though perhaps in 
more subtle ways. 
Multi-Girder Bridges
▷
Most of the bridges we encounter in our daily lives are simple multi-
girder spans. The main structural elements in a multi-girder bridge are 
the girders. A girder is a main beam that supports other elements of the 
structural system. In your home, these “other elements” are the ﬂoor 
joists and subﬂoor. In a multi-girder bridge, they’re the components of 
the reinforced-concrete deck.
▷
A beam is a structural element that carries load in ﬂexure, or bending. 
In this normal mode of bending, the beam develops compression on 
top and tension on the bottom. There is a horizontal plane, called the 
neutral axis, running through the middle of the beam, along which there 
is neither tension nor compression.
▷
Steel is an ideal material for girders—because it has equal strength in 
both tension and compression and because it can be formed into highly 
efficient I-shaped cross-sections. The “I” is an inherently efficient shape 
for carrying loads in ﬂexure. 

297
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
The three components of an I-shaped beam are its two horizontal 
elements, called ﬂanges, and the vertical element, called the web. When 
the beam bends, the ﬂanges provide almost all of its ﬂexural strength; 
the web is really just there to hold the ﬂanges in place (and to resist 
several other types of loading). Theoretically, the farther the ﬂanges are 
from the neutral axis, the stronger the beam will be.
▷
The steel girder that’s commonly used in residential construction is 
called a hot-rolled section. It’s manufactured by heating a single block 
of steel and then forming it into shape with huge hydraulically operated 
rollers. Some smaller highway bridges use girders made of hot-rolled 
sections, but most bridge girders are custom fabricated by welding 
individual steel plates together to form the ﬂanges and web. 
▷
These structural elements—called plate girders—are generally more 
efficient than hot-rolled sections, because they can be individually tailored 
to the requirements of a given structure. Plate girders can also be made 
much larger than even the largest hot-rolled beams; thus, plate-girder 
bridges are routinely built with spans exceeding 300 feet, while hot-rolled 
beams are only suitable for spans about one-third that length. 
▷
But the quest to optimize a technology with respect to one performance 
criterion often creates problems with respect to other criteria. In the case 
of the plate girder, ﬂexural strength and stiffness is enhanced by making 
I beam
flange
web
flange

the cross-section taller and by using proportionately more material in the 
ﬂanges. But as this cross-section gets taller and the web gets thinner, all 
kinds of new problems crop up, including lateral-torsional buckling and 
web buckling. 
Bridge Failure
▷
Many older bridges use only two girders, which typically extend above 
the level of the roadway. But virtually all newer bridges use more than 
two girders. There are several reasons for this, but the most important 
one is that using a larger number of smaller girders provides improved 
safety through structural redundancy. If one girder of a two-girder 
bridge fails, the structure will almost certainly collapse. If one girder of 
an eight-girder bridge fails, the structure will almost certainly survive—
saving lives and, ultimately, allowing for repair rather than replacement. 
▷
Certainly, bridge engineers take every reasonable precaution to avoid 
failure, but the ugly truth is that a zero probability of failure is impossible 
to achieve. Sometimes, natural disasters load structures in ways that 
no engineer could anticipate, and sometimes the drivers of trucks and 
buses don’t pay attention to overhead clearance restrictions. 
A zero probability of failure is impossible to achieve.

299
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
But the most important reason for structural redundancy is fatigue: the 
progressive accumulation of damage in metals subjected to repetitive 
loading. In a steel bridge girder, fatigue begins with a microscopic defect 
or crack in a web or ﬂange—or, more likely, at a welded connection, 
where concentrations of stress tend to occur. 
▷
If this portion of the girder is repetitively loaded in tension, each cycle of 
load extends the crack by a minute amount. Over time, as this process 
continues, the extension of the crack becomes progressively larger as 
the concentration of stress at the tip of the crack becomes higher. At 
some point—typically after a few hundred thousand load cycles—the 
crack can reach a critical length, at which point a sudden, catastrophic 
fracture of the entire girder occurs. 
▷
Fatigue isn’t a signiﬁcant concern in steel-framed buildings, because 
buildings typically don’t experience enough load cycles for fatigue cracks 
to approach their critical length. But major bridges are routinely crossed 
by thousands of heavy trucks per day—perhaps a million per year—and 
each truck produces a substantial load cycle that can contribute to fatigue 
damage. Thus, fatigue is an overriding concern in steel bridge design. 
▷
Bridge engineers address this concern in three ways: by avoiding 
the speciﬁc types of welded connection details that are most prone 
to fatigue-related problems, through rigorous quality control in the 
fabrication and assembly of bridge components, and by providing 
structural redundancy. This approach is often called belt-and-suspenders 
engineering: Take every reasonable precaution to prevent failure, and 
then provide a backup system, just in case a failure happens anyway. 
The Concrete Alternative
▷
The most fundamental characteristic of concrete as a structural material 
is that it’s strong in compression but very weak in tension. And because 
beams experience comparable magnitudes of tension and compression, 
the only practical way to use concrete in ﬂexure is to reinforce the 
portion of the beam that’s in tension. 

LECTURE 32—Everyday Bridges 
300
▷
In most structures, this reinforcement takes the form of steel reinforcing 
bars, which are positioned in the concrete forms before the concrete 
is poured. After the concrete has hardened, the steel and concrete are 
locked together into a single composite structural entity. 
▷
Conventional reinforced concrete was used extensively for highway 
bridges in the early and mid-20th century, though today it’s considered to 
be obsolete and has been largely replaced by a far superior technology. 
▷
For steel to provide the necessary tension reinforcement in the bottom 
of a beam, it has to stretch. And the amount of stretch necessary to 
mobilize even a modest portion of the steel’s strength is far beyond 
the threshold at which concrete cracks. Thus, the presence of 
moderate cracking in a reinforced-concrete beam tells us that the steel 
reinforcement is doing its job. 
▷
But as normal as this might be, cracking causes two problems: It leads to 
signiﬁcantly increased deﬂection, or sagging, of the beam; and cracks 
can expose the steel reinforcement to moisture, which leads to corrosion 
and, potentially, to a catastrophic loss of tensile strength. 
▷
In building structures, where reinforced concrete is still used often today, 
these issues generally aren’t problematic, because span lengths can be 
kept relatively short (to control deﬂections) and the building envelope 
can protect the beams from exposure to moisture. But in bridges, the 
need for longer spans and for constant exposure to the elements have 
effectively rendered reinforced concrete obsolete—and stimulated the 
development of a new technology called prestressed concrete.
▷
The concept of prestressed concrete is actually more than a century old, 
but the technology didn’t really catch on for bridges until the 1950s. Since 
then, its use has grown steadily, even as improved materials and design 
methods have signiﬁcantly improved its effectiveness and efficiency. 
▷
For everyday bridges, there are two principal methods of fabricating 
prestressed concrete girders. Both occur in a controlled factory 
environment, not on the construction site. In both cases, the effect on 

301
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
the concrete beam is essentially the same: The prestressing eliminates 
both the downward deﬂection and the cracking.
▷
In prestressed concrete, the effect of prestressing is to apply 
compressive stresses in the region of the beam that normally 
experiences tensile stress. In a material—like concrete—that’s strong in 
compression and very weak in tension, this offsetting of tension greatly 
improves structural performance. 
▷
Prestressed concrete beams are I-shaped, meaning that they can achieve 
the same sort of structural efficiency as in steel girders. Yet, because of 
their more robust proportions, these girders are not susceptible to the 
lateral-torsional buckling or web buckling challenges that steel girders 
have. For these reasons, prestressed concrete has become highly 
competitive with steel for short- and medium-span bridges.
The Bridge Deck
▷
A few decades ago, a bridge deck would have been constructed by ﬁrst 
erecting temporary wooden formwork between the girders, then adding 
two layers of steel reinforcing bars, and then pouring concrete over the 
entire assembly. 
▷
Two layers of reinforcement are 
needed, because the critical loading 
for a bridge deck occurs when a 
heavy truck’s wheel loads happen 
to be centered between the girders. 
Under this loading, the deck bends in 
double curvature. Where it’s concave 
upward, tension occurs at the bottom, 
and where it’s concave downward, 
tension occurs at the top. 
tension
tension
tension
tension
tension

LECTURE 32—Everyday Bridges 
302
▷
Today, a bridge deck can be built at considerably lower cost by using 
corrugated steel decking instead of temporary formwork. The decking 
holds the wet concrete, just as formwork does, but it also provides 
tension reinforcement at the bottom of the deck—and thus replaces the 
lower layer of reinforcing bars. 
TERMS
deﬂection: The bending deformation of a beam under transverse loading.
fatigue: The progressive accumulation of damage in metals subjected to 
repetitive loading.
ﬂange: (1) One of two horizontal elements forming the top and bottom of 
an I-shaped structural element. (2) The raised edge on the inside of a steel 
railcar wheel.
hot-rolled section: A steel structural element manufactured by heating 
a block of steel and then forming it into shape with large hydraulically 
operated rollers.
lateral-torsional buckling: A structural failure mode in which the 
compression side of a beam (normally the top) buckles sideways, causing the 
beam to twist. Tall, narrow beam cross-sections are particularly vulnerable 
to lateral-torsional buckling.
plate girder: A girder fabricated by welding or riveting individual steel plates 
together, typically into an I-shaped cross-section.
prestressed concrete: A construction method in which prestretched steel 
reinforcing cables (called tendons) transfer compressive stress to a concrete 
structural element to control cracking and reduce deﬂections. The two 
methods of prestressing concrete are pretensioning and posttensioning.
web: The vertical element of an I-shaped structural shape or a railroad rail.

303
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Barker and Puckett, Design of Highway Bridges.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 10.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why are I-shaped steel girders used so commonly in highway bridges?
2 
What is the structural advantage of continuous span girders, in 
comparison with simple spans? Why might the use of continuous spans 
be more challenging from a construction perspective?

304
LECTURE 33—Tunnel Engineering
Lecture
33
 
Tunnel Engineering
W
hile a grand suspension bridge is clearly an amazing 
engineering achievement, the tunnel carrying your subway 
line beneath a maze of city streets, or carrying your car 
safely beneath a mile-wide river, represents an engineering 
achievement that’s entirely on par with a great bridge—in terms of both 
technological sophistication and grand ambition. In this lecture, you will 
explore the deep, dark world of tunnel engineering. You will learn about 
some of the major factors considered by the civil engineers who design 
tunnels, and you will be introduced to some of the highly specialized 
methods used to build them. 
Soil Mechanics
▷
Different types of soils have astonishingly different mechanical 
properties. A compacted, well-graded gravel can be nearly as strong as 
concrete, but a wet, clay-rich soil is so slippery that it seems more like a 
lubricant than a structural material. 
▷
Even within a particular soil category, there can be tremendous 
variability. All clays are not created equal. Furthermore, the structural 
behavior of soil often deﬁes simpliﬁed theoretical idealizations that 
might work ﬁne for manufactured materials, such as steel or concrete. 
▷
For all these reasons, the engineering design of structures that interact 
with soil—foundations, retaining walls, and especially tunnels—is as 
much an art as it is a science. A tunnel design can never be based on 
theory alone but, rather, must be based on a comprehensive program of 
soil testing, augmented by extensive experience in tunnel engineering 
and construction methods.

305
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Soil testing is typically accomplished by drilling many boreholes into 
the earth and extracting samples from the depth at which the tunnel 
will be constructed, and then subjecting these samples to a battery 
of laboratory tests to determine such properties as soil type, density, 
cohesion, strength, and moisture content. The results of these tests can 
substantially inﬂuence a tunneling project. 
▷
In many instances, the vertical and horizontal alignment of a tunnel are 
chosen based primarily on soil conditions. This is in sharp contrast with 
highways, which are typically located according to other criteria and then 
designed to accommodate whatever soil conditions are encountered 
along the route. 
▷
For tunneling, one of the most important soil properties is the standup 
time, the length of time that an excavation’s walls and ceiling will 
support themselves without structural augmentation. Rock and 
cohesive soils like clay typically have long standup times; sand and silt 
have quite low ones. 
▷
This is important, because most tunnels require a tunnel lining, a 
structural inner shell that resists soil and water pressure while preserving 
the stability of the excavation. But the nature of the tunneling process is 
such that, as the tunnel is driven forward, there’s always a time delay 
between excavation and construction of the lining. If the soil is able to 
stand on its own during this period, construction time and cost can be 
greatly reduced. If not, then elaborate measures to shield the tunneling 
machines and their operators from cave-ins are essential.
▷
Groundwater can have a major inﬂuence on standup time. In granular 
soils, a little bit of water can actually be helpful. But when an excessive 
quantity of water is present in the soil, the tunneling process must 
include provisions to remove it—to prevent instability of the soil. 
Typically, this is accomplished by continuous pumping, but some 
systems use a circulating refrigerant to freeze the soil in the immediate 
vicinity of the excavation.

LECTURE 33—Tunnel Engineering 
306
▷
Regardless of standup time, all tunnels—except those driven through 
solid rock—require a structural tunnel lining. From the 19th through the 
mid-20th century, most linings were made of iron. But today, tunnel linings 
are nearly always concrete, applied in one of three forms to suit the 
prevailing soil conditions: cast-in-place concrete tunnel lining, segmental 
precast concrete lining, or sprayed concrete (also called shotcrete).
Types of Tunnels
▷
To a greater extent than any other form of construction, the design of 
a tunnel is inextricably interconnected with the methods and types 
of equipment that will be used during construction. For a bridge or a 
building, it’s not unusual for an engineer to design the structure and then 
hand off the plans to a construction contractor, who is then expected to 
develop an appropriate construction plan. That simply can’t happen with 
a tunnel, where design and construction must be thoroughly integrated. 
▷
There are three principal types of tunnels, as deﬁned by their 
construction methods: cut-and-cover tunnels, bored tunnels, and 
immersed-tube tunnels. 
 
▷
The cut-and-cover method is generally used for tunnels positioned 
relatively close to the surface. In the most common approach—called 
the bottom-up method—a trench is dug to the required depth, typically 
using temporary supports to keep the walls of the excavation from 
collapsing inward. The tunnel lining is then built within the trench, the 
trench is backﬁlled, and the surface is restored.
▷
The great advantage of this method is its simplicity. Its disadvantage is 
that the ground surface above the tunnel is unusable for the duration 
of the project; thus, this technique is often problematic in congested 
urban areas. 
 
▷
The alternative method is the top-down approach, in which construction 
begins by building the walls of the future excavation from ground level, 
typically by using a technique called concrete slurry-wall construction. 

307
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
In this method, a narrow trench is dug where the future wall will be. 
During this process, the trench is kept ﬁlled with slurry, a heavy 
mixture of water and bentonite clay, which keeps the trench walls 
from collapsing inward. Once this trench is complete, cages of steel 
reinforcing bars are lowered into it, and then it’s ﬁlled with concrete. 
The concrete displaces the slurry and eventually hardens to become a 
solid reinforced-concrete wall.
▷
The roof of the future excavation is then constructed at ground level, 
spanning from slurry wall to slurry wall. And apart from access openings, 
which must be left in the roof structure, the ground surface can now 
be restored and placed back into normal use. Beneath the roof, the 
main excavation now proceeds down to the appropriate level, and the 
remainder of the tunnel can be built without interfering with land use on 
the surface.
▷
The top-down method of cut-and-cover tunneling is considerably more 
challenging to manage than the bottom-up method, but it’s often the 
only feasible alternative in congested urban areas, where land use is at 
such a premium.
▷
The second major category—the bored tunnel—is dug directly, from one 
or two access points on the surface, with little or no other disturbance to 
the ground surface above the excavation. For this reason, bored tunnels 
are particularly effective in congested urban areas and for tunneling 
beneath bodies of water.
▷
Several different technologies are used for constructing bored tunnels, 
but the most sophisticated is the tunnel-boring machine (TBM). Modern 
TBMs integrate the functions of excavation, protection from cave-ins, 
removal of excavated material, directional control, and installation of the 
tunnel lining all in one incredible machine.
 
▷
There are a numerous variations on the basic set of TBM functions, 
but regardless of conﬁguration, these are immense machines with 
astonishing capabilities. In 1988, the eleven 25-foot-diameter TBMs 
used to dig the Eurostar rail tunnel under the English Channel were 

state-of-the art systems. Today, TBMs that are more than 50 feet in 
diameter are routinely used to excavate tunnels for multilane highways. 
The up-front cost of a TBM is very high, but once in operation, it’s a fast 
and cost-effective tunneling tool.
▷
Despite the availability of a wide array of high-tech tunneling machines, 
some modern bored tunnels are still constructed the old-fashioned 
way—by repeatedly drilling holes into the face of the excavation, packing 
these holes with explosives, setting off the charges, and clearing out 
the debris. This mode of tunneling is usually carried out beneath a 
protective shield, as well.
▷
The third major type of tunnel is the immersed tube, which provides 
an effective alternative to the bored tunnel for crossing a wide body of 
water. An immersed-tube tunnel is built of many tube segments, which 
tunnel-boring machine

309
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
backfilled trench
180 feet
115 feet
harbor bottom
are prefabricated on land and then ﬂoated into position, sunk to the 
bottom of the watercourse, and connected together. Tube segments are 
typically made of cast iron, steel, or precast concrete. 
▷
In locations where the topography and riverbed conditions permit, 
immersed-tube tunnels are usually more cost effective than bored 
tunnels. They’re both faster and safer to construct; they typically have 
better seismic resistance; and their feasibility is far less dependent on 
the character of the soil through which they pass. For a given riverbed 
proﬁle, the depth of an immersed tube is always less than that of a 
tunnel bored beneath the riverbed; thus, the on-shore approaches to 
immersed-tube tunnels are typically shorter, as well.
▷
However, immersed tubes are more vulnerable to damage by waterborne 
traffic (due to anchor strikes, for example); they’re more likely to have 
adverse environmental impact on the riverbed; and their successful 
construction and long-term serviceability are far more dependent on 
waterprooﬁng and the integrity of the connections between segments. 
Fort McHenry Tunnel cross-section

LECTURE 33—Tunnel Engineering 
310
▷
Regardless of category and construction method, the engineering 
challenges of tunnel design extend far beyond simply creating an 
underground thoroughfare. The design of long vehicular tunnels, 
in particular, requires extensive provisions for ventilation and  
ﬁre protection.
TERMS
cut-and-cover method: A method of constructing aqueducts and tunnels. 
The tunnel lining is built at the bottom of a trench and then covered over 
with compacted soil. 
immersed-tube tunnel: A type of tunnel built of multiple tube segments, 
which are prefabricated on land, ﬂoated into position, sunk to the bottom of 
the watercourse, and connected together.
shotcrete: Concrete that is sprayed onto a surface.
standup time: The length of time that the walls and ceiling of an excavation 
will support themselves without structural augmentation.
tunnel lining: A structural shell that covers the inner face of a tunnel, resists 
soil and water pressure, and preserves the stability of the tunnel excavation.
READINGS
Chapman and Metje, Introduction to Tunnel Construction.
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 10.

311
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
QUESTIONS
1 
Under what circumstances would a tunnel be preferable to a bridge for 
crossing a body of water?
2 
What methods are used to minimize the disruptions associated with 
constructing tunnels beneath major metropolitan areas?

312
LECTURE 34—The Railroad
Lecture
34
 
The Railroad
W
e tend to think of the railroad as a vestige of the 19th century, 
but research shows that railroads currently carry more 
freight than any other mode of transportation in the United 
States. Thanks to the substantial growth in intermodal 
transportation and to growing recognition of trains’ energy efficiency and 
low carbon emissions, freight rail transportation is expected to continue 
growing in importance in the future. In this lecture, you will examine this 
unique engineered system—one that will be an important part of our 
technological future, even though it’s deeply rooted in the past. 
Railroad Technology
▷
At the most fundamental level, railroad technology is characterized by 
steel wheels rolling on steel rails. In comparison with pneumatic tires on 
asphalt, this steel-on-steel interface allows for much heavier loads with 
much lower rolling resistance.
▷
Railroad rails serve both as structural supports and as guideways, 
allowing long chains of rolling stock to be pulled safely by a single 
source of tractive power. The cross-section of a rail is a highly optimized 
shape, called a T rail, consisting of three parts: the head, base, and web. 
▷
The resemblance to an I-shaped beam is not coincidental. Under the 
weight of a train, a rail bends like a beam, so it makes sense that it’s 
shaped like a beam. All rails in the United States use this characteristic 
shape, though sizes vary. Taller, heavier rails are used for railroad lines 
that carry the heaviest and fastest trains. 
▷
The standard length of rail segments is 39 feet, primarily because the 
train cars used to carry them are 40 feet long. The traditional method 
of connecting rail segments together involves a bolted ﬁshplate splice 

313
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
that ties together the webs of two adjacent segments. A small gap is 
deliberately left between segments to allow for thermal expansion and 
contraction of the rail. When you hear that regular clickety-clack sound 
as a train passes by, you’re hearing the sound of regularly spaced steel 
wheels passing over this gap.
▷
At many of these splices, a small copper wire extends from one side 
of the connection to the other. This wire provides electrical continuity 
across the splice—which is necessary because the rails are used as 
electrical conductors for most railroad signaling systems. When a train 
runs across a section of track, it completes a circuit, and current ﬂows 
from one rail, through the steel wheels and axles, to the other rail—thus 
notifying the signaling system that a train is present on that particular 
stretch of track.
Freight rail 
transportation is 
expected to continue 
growing in importance 
in the future.

LECTURE 34—The Railroad 
314
▷
This traditional connection system is still widely used today; however, on 
high-speed mainline track, it has largely been replaced by continuously 
welded rails. In this system, 37 standard 39-foot segments are welded 
end to end in the shop to create a single continuous 1440-foot-long rail, 
which is then loaded onto a string of rail cars for transportation to the 
location where the new rail is to be installed. 
▷
While in transit, the rail bends elastically as the train goes around 
curves and then springs back on the straight stretches. These 1440-foot 
rails are then joined together end to end in the ﬁeld to create a single 
continuous rail many miles long. The results are a smoother ride, less 
rolling resistance, and no clickety-clack sound.
▷
For a long time, continuously welded rails were thought to be structurally 
infeasible, because of their inability to accommodate thermal expansion. 
The expectation was that in extremely hot weather, restraint of thermal 
expansion would cause enough axial compression to buckle the rails. 
Indeed, substantial compression forces do develop in continuous rails, 
but they don’t buckle because of the ties and ballast, which support the 
rails laterally—in essentially the same way that a steel bridge girder is 
laterally braced by diaphragms and the concrete deck.
▷
Steel railcar wheels have ﬂanges on their inside edges. These ﬂanges 
extend downward between the two rails, thus keeping the train from 
sliding off the tracks in either direction. 
Railroad Networks
▷
The essential technology for combining individual sets of tracks into 
railroad networks is a mechanical device for switching trains from one 
line to another. It’s often called a switch, but the proper term is a turnout. 
The key to the operation of a turnout is a pair of movable rails—called 
switch points—which have a standard T-rail cross-section at the far end 
but taper down to a point at the near end. The switch points move by 
bending sideways. 

315
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Turnouts are used to create many characteristic features of railroad 
networks. There are three common ones.
o A siding splits off of a main line, runs parallel to it for a considerable 
distance, and then rejoins it. Sidings allow a single rail line to carry 
two-way traffic, and they allow faster trains to pass slower ones 
when both are moving in the same direction on the same line.
o A lead, often misidentiﬁed as a siding, is a branch line that 
terminates at a dead end, usually a factory or warehouse. 
o A wye is formed where three lines intersect, with each line 
connecting to the other two via turnouts. At a wye, a train on any of 
the three lines can make a U-turn. 
▷
At locations where railroad lines intersect with vehicular roadways, 
special provisions are required to transmit the train safely across the 
intersection and to control automobile traffic. To convey automobiles 
across 6-inch-tall rails, the road surface must be built up to the 
level of the tops of the rails. However, the space between the rails 
can’t be ﬁlled in completely, or there won’t be a pathway for the 
ﬂanges of the train wheels. Thus, the space between the tracks is 
typically ﬁlled with wooden or metal inserts, which leave a slot for  
each ﬂange. 
▷
Many different systems are used to control automobile traffic at grade-
level crossings. These range from simple crossbuck signs to fully 
automated crossing gates with ﬂashing lights. The associated systems 
for detection and control must be quite sophisticated, because they 
need to account for differing train speeds and lengths and even 
for the possibility that a train might stop or back up while crossing  
a roadway. 
▷
From the macro perspective, freight railroad networks generally use 
a hub-and-spoke topology. The spokes are individual rail lines, which 
converge on regional hubs—fascinating facilities called freight yards. 

LECTURE 34—The Railroad 
316
Freight Trains
▷
The typical freight locomotive is powered by a huge 12- to 20-cylinder 
diesel engine, producing about 4000 horsepower. There are three 
major technological differences between a locomotive and a truck.
o A locomotive needs no steering system.
o The diesel engine in a locomotive doesn’t actually drive the wheels. 
Rather, it drives a DC generator, which produces power for electric 
motors that turn the drive wheels. 
o A locomotive requires a far more robust braking system. 
Conventional automotive-type brakes, which use friction to 
slow the rotation of the wheels, are problematic, because of 
the tremendous heat buildup that would occur while stopping 
a train. Friction brakes are used on railcars, but most modern 
freight locomotives use regenerative braking—a system in which 
the electric motors stop driving the drive wheels and, instead, 
are driven by them. In effect, the motors become generators, 
converting shaft power from the drive wheels into electrical power, 
which is then dissipated through a network of large resistors. The 
resulting heat is dispersed by large fans that blow air across the 
resistors and out through the top of the locomotive.
▷
Behind the locomotive (or maybe two or three of them) is a seemingly 
endless variety of rolling stock, each type tailored for a speciﬁc purpose. 
Some of the more common ones include boxcars for general cargo 
hauling and refrigerated boxcars for produce, various types of ﬂatcars 
for commodities ranging from lumber to truck trailers, container well cars 
for carrying shipping containers without wheels, tank cars for carrying 
liquids, gondola cars for bulk goods, open-top hopper cars for coal and 
stone, and closed-top hopper cars for goods that need to stay dry.
▷
The caboose—which provided sheltered accommodations for the crew, 
an office for the conductor, and an elevated, enclosed observation 
deck from which to keep an eye on the train—has nearly disappeared 
from the modern railroad. Today, this car has been replaced by a small 

electronic box, mounted on the rear of the ﬁnal railcar, that continuously 
monitors speed and braking system pressure and transmits these data 
by radio to the cab.
▷
Despite their seemingly inﬁnite variety, nearly all railroad cars employ a 
common underlying mechanical design. The undercarriage is supported 
on two swiveling four-wheel assemblies called bogies. Each pair of steel 
wheels is ﬁxed to a solid axle. The bogies are supported on coil springs, 
so the suspension system has some ﬂexibility.
 
▷
At each end of the undercarriage is the device that connects adjacent 
cars together: the Janney coupler, which was invented by Eli Janney 
in 1868 and is essentially unchanged since then. When two Janney 
couplers come into contact with each other, they latch together and a 
locking pin falls into position automatically, thus eliminating the need for 
a railroad worker to occupy the very dangerous position between two 
cars during coupling. Once the couplers are latched, there’s about a half 
inch of slack in the connection. This greatly enhances the locomotive’s 
ability to accelerate when pulling a long train of cars. 
Janney coupler

LECTURE 34—The Railroad 
318
 
▷
The principal alternative to diesel power is the electric locomotive, 
which is quite popular in Europe but, in the United States, is used almost 
exclusively for urban mass transit systems and Amtrak’s passenger lines 
in the Northeast Corridor. Compared with diesels, electric locomotives 
are more cost efficient, easier to maintain, and more environmentally 
friendly. They’re also more suitable for high-speed operations—and, 
thus, are particularly useful for passenger service. However, the 
extensive additional infrastructure required for electric railroads entails 
signiﬁcantly higher infrastructure costs. 
TERMS
ballast: A layer of gravel used to provide support for railroad ties.
buckling: A failure mode in which a member subjected to compression 
becomes unstable and bends laterally. Buckling failure is sudden and 
usually catastrophic.
diaphragm: (1) A thin disk that vibrates when receiving or producing sound 
waves, as in a microphone or speaker. (2) A cross-frame used to connect 
parallel beams or girders together in a structural system.
freight yard: A railroad hub at which incoming trains are broken apart and 
reorganized into outgoing trains based on the destination of their cargo.
Janney coupler: The mechanism used to connect two railcars together. 
lead: A branch railroad line that terminates at a dead end.
pin: A structural support that permits rotation but restrains both horizontal 
and vertical movement.
siding: A branch railroad line that splits off of a main line, runs parallel to it 
for a distance, and then rejoins it.
turnout: A railroad switch at which one rail line branches off from another.

319
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 9.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Freight in America.
QUESTIONS
1 
Why are 150-year-old technologies, such as the Janney coupler 
and the Westinghouse braking system, still used on modern freight 
railcars? What broader conclusions might we draw about technological 
development based on this phenomenon?
2 
Railroads have used a hub-and-spoke topology for more than a century. 
More recently, commercial airlines have adopted essentially the same 
organizational structure. Why is the hub-and-spoke organization 
economically advantageous in both cases?

320
LECTURE 35—Solid Waste Disposal  and Recycling
Lecture
35
Solid Waste Disposal  
and Recycling
I
n the United States, we generate about 4.5 pounds of solid waste per 
person per day—nearly a ton per person per year. Aggregated across 
the entire population, the numbers are staggering. For example, we 
use 80 billion aluminum cans per year, 22 billion plastic bottles per 
year, and paper and wood products amounting to 2 billion trees per year. 
In this lecture, you will examine the three principal methods of dealing 
with all of this waste: disposal in a landﬁll, incineration, and recycling. 
Landﬁlls
▷
A modern sanitary landﬁll is a technological system designed by 
environmental engineers to return solid waste to the earth in a way that 
maximizes the use of available land and minimizes harm to the environment.
▷
When organic material is placed in a landﬁll, it begins to decompose through 
the action of bacteria and other microorganisms. When rainwater percolates 
down through this material, the moisture promotes decomposition, and in 
the process, the water also becomes contaminated with dissolved organic 
matter, heavy metals, and a variety of other substances. 
▷
The resulting toxic, acidic liquid is called leachate, and the most 
important objective of a sanitary landﬁll design is to contain, collect, and 
remove the leachate to prevent contamination of the local groundwater, 
streams, and rivers.
▷
Decomposition of organic material also generates a by-product known 
as landﬁll gas, a mixture of methane, carbon dioxide, and small amounts 
of nitrogen, oxygen, and other gases. Landﬁll gas is explosive, and its 
two principal components—methane and CO2—are greenhouse gases; 
thus, a secondary objective of landﬁll design is to detect, capture, and 
dispose of dangerous accumulations of landﬁll gas.

321
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
Construction of a typical modern landﬁll begins with excavation of a 
broad, ﬂat-bottomed pit roughly 25 feet deep. The excavated soil is 
stockpiled so that it can be used for cover later. Next, the bottom and 
sides of the pit are sealed—ﬁrst with a layer of compacted clay, and then 
with a waterproof geo-membrane. Clay is used for its impermeability. A 
geo-membrane is a strong, ﬂexible, puncture-resistant, thin plastic sheet 
that also has very low permeability. The clay liner and geo-membrane 
serve as a belt-and-suspenders liner to prevent leachate from entering 
the soil beneath the landﬁll. 
▷
A thick layer of gravel is placed over the membrane, both to protect it 
and to allow for the free ﬂow of leachate. Embedded within this layer 
is the leachate collection system, a network of perforated plastic 
pipes that capture any leachate entering the gravel bed from above 
and channel it down to low points called sumps. Within each sump is 
a pump that transports any accumulated leachate out of the landﬁll  
for disposal. 
▷
This leachate collection system is essential, because no geo-membrane 
is perfectly impermeable. Without a well-functioning collection system, 
leachate would accumulate on the membrane and would eventually 
seep through it and contaminate the surrounding soil.
▷
Above the gravel layer is a durable synthetic fabric called a geotextile, 
covered by a protective layer of sand or other soil. Unlike a geo-
membrane, a geotextile is intended to be permeable. It serves a ﬁlter, 
allowing the leachate to pass through but preventing soil and other 
solid material from entering the gravel bed and clogging up the leachate 
collection system. 
 
▷
With this uppermost layer of soil in place, the facility is ready for 
operation. In the typical landﬁll, garbage trucks deposit their loads at 
the base of a sloped embankment called the working face. Bulldozers 
and rollers are then used to distribute and compact this trash along 
the slope. 

LECTURE 35—Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling 
322
▷
Each day’s deposit of trash is conﬁned to a rectangular area called a 
cell. The size of a cell can vary signiﬁcantly, depending on the amount of 
trash produced by the local municipality. In general, the goal is to keep 
the cell’s footprint as small as possible, for more efficient management 
of available landﬁll space. 
▷
By the end of each day, the compacted trash in the cell will be 4 to 8 
feet thick, and then it’ll be completely covered with 6 to 12 inches of soil 
and compacted once again. This application of soil—called daily cover—
keeps the trash contained, reduces water inﬁltration, controls odors, and 
discourages insects and scavengers from taking up residence. The next 
day, this process starts all over again with the creation of a new cell. 
▷
Once daily cells have been stacked all the way up to the original grade 
level, this section of the landﬁll is capped. The cap typically consists of a 
layer of compacted clay, then a geo-membrane sealer, a drainage layer 
of gravel or sand, and a protective layer of soil. Topsoil is added to the 
top of the cap, and then vegetation is planted to stabilize the soil and 
prevent erosion. 
bulldozer

323
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
The cap is normally crowned so that as much storm water as possible 
will run off rather than percolating down into the landﬁll. The overall 
intent of the cap is to minimize water inﬁltration and thus to minimize the 
production of leachate.
▷
With the cap in place, the conditions are ripe for the dangerous buildup 
of methane underground, so a gas-collection system is typically installed 
at this time. Indeed, in the United States, the Clean Air Act Amendments 
of 1996 require the systematic collection and control of landﬁll gas. 
▷
Until relatively recently, this requirement was usually met by piping the 
gas to a ﬂare, where it was simply burned off. But today, an increasing 
number of landﬁlls are incorporating recovery systems that put landﬁll 
gas to more productive use—by burning the gas in a nearby industrial 
boiler to produce hot water, using it to generate electricity by powering 
an on-site gas turbine or steam turbine that drives a generator, or 
processing the gas for sale to the local gas company. 
▷
When a landﬁll is completely ﬁlled, it’s fully capped and closed. And while 
the surface of the land might then be converted to other uses, what’s 
happening below the surface—the continued production of leachate 
and landﬁll gas—must typically be monitored for at least 30 years 
afterward. The reason is that well-designed landﬁlls limit decomposition 
rather than promoting it, by preventing water and air from coming into 
contact with the buried trash, to the greatest extent possible.
Incineration
▷
One of the two principal alternatives to the landﬁll is incineration. In many 
ways, the concept of incineration seems ideal. Burning waste reduces its 
weight by 80% and its volume by 95%, and the resulting heat can be 
used to generate electrical power. The by-product of incineration is a 
small quantity of inert ash that takes up a tiny fraction of the landﬁll space 
that would have been occupied by the original material. Incineration 
largely eliminates the problem of methane emissions from landﬁlls. And, 

LECTURE 35—Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling 
324
paradoxically, the use of incineration has been found to improve rates 
of recycling—primarily because metals can be separated from other 
materials more easily by burning than by mechanical disassembly. 
▷
However, despite these desirable features, less than 15% of municipal 
solid waste in the United States is incinerated today, and this percentage 
is on the decline. There are three main reasons why.
o The emissions caused by incineration are highly toxic. 
o Incineration also produces substantial carbon dioxide emissions.
o From the perspective of power production, municipal solid waste is 
a very poor-quality fuel.
▷
These challenges aren’t insurmountable. Japan and several European 
countries have been quite successful in implementing large-scale 
environmentally responsible trash-to-power projects. In the United 
States, however, this approach to solid waste disposal is evidently not a 
growth industry.
incinerator

325
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Recycling
▷
The third approach is recycling: the process of salvaging waste and 
transforming it back into usable materials. Recyclable materials include 
metals, glass, plastic, paper, textiles, and electronics. 
▷
Recycling bins at curbside have become a fact of life in modern society. 
In the United States today, roughly 30% of municipal solid waste is 
recycled—more than triple the percentage from 1980. However, the 
viability and effectiveness of recycling remains highly dependent on the 
speciﬁc materials being recycled.
▷
Recycling aluminum is amazingly efficient. The process requires only 
about 5% of the energy consumed in producing aluminum from raw 
bauxite ore, so there’s a strong economic incentive for manufacturers 
to use recycled material. And there’s no limit to the number of times 
aluminum can be melted down and reused. 
▷
Recycling steel isn’t quite as efficient. Cooking up a batch of steel 
from scrap takes about 40% as much energy as producing it from iron 
ore. But that’s still a substantial saving in an energy-intensive process 
like steel making. As a result, in the United States today, more than 
95% of structural steel is recycled, and several major producers now 
manufacture 100% of their steel from scrap. 
▷
Glass is recycled by simply crushing and remelting it, a relatively 
efficient process that consumes only about 70% of the energy 
required to make glass from scratch. But because glass retains its 
color after recycling, manufacturing bottles from recycled glass 
requires that the glass be strictly segregated by color: brown, green, 
or clear. This need for sorting imposes an additional cost on the 
recycling process, and it can also cause some supply-and-demand 
challenges. In recent years, this limitation has been eased by the 
development of new recycled-glass applications that don’t require  
segregation by color. 

LECTURE 35—Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling 
326
▷
Of all the major recycled products, plastic is most problematic—in part 
because there are so many different types of plastics, but especially 
because very few of them can be remelted back to their original pure 
polymer form. 
▷
Recyclable plastic is generally marked with a resin identiﬁcation code—
the familiar number-inside-a-triangle logo—that identiﬁes the type of 
polymer used in its manufacture. The standard resin identiﬁcation codes 
are numbered from 1 to 7, though in many U.S. municipalities, only codes 
1 and 2 are collected in curbside recycling programs. The result is a lot 
of public confusion about what can and can’t be recycled. For these 
reasons, less than 10% of our discarded plastics are recycled. 
TERMS
bulldozer: A piece of construction equipment that is used for moving soil 
over short distances.
geo-membrane: A ﬂexible, puncture-resistant, low-permeability plastic 
sheet that is used in the liner of a sanitary landﬁll.
geotextile: A durable, permeable synthetic fabric that is used as a ﬁlter in a 
sanitary landﬁll. 
landﬁll gas: A mixture of methane, carbon dioxide, and small amounts of other 
gases formed by the decomposition of organic material in a sanitary landﬁll.
leachate: A toxic, acidic liquid that accumulates within a sanitary landﬁll as a 
result of rainwater percolating down through the solid waste. 
sanitary landﬁll: A solid waste disposal facility designed to return the waste 
to the Earth in a way that maximizes the use of available land and minimizes 
harm to the environment.

327
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
READINGS
Hayes, Infrastructure, chapter 13.
Nazaroff and Alvarez-Cohen, Environmental Engineering Science.
QUESTIONS
1 
What are the environmental hazards associated with the operation of a 
sanitary landﬁll? How does the design of a landﬁll mitigate these risks? 
2 
How could the manufacturers of household products facilitate and 
promote improved rates of recycling?

328
LECTURE 36—The Future:  Engineering for Sustainability
Lecture
36
The Future: 
Engineering for Sustainability
I
n previous lectures, you’ve explored various approaches to conserving 
energy, reducing pollution, and reducing solid waste disposal through 
recycling. However, effective as these measures might be, they 
haven’t yet had the large-scale impact we need, largely because 
each addresses one particular aspect of the problem in isolation. 
What’s needed is a more holistic approach. And, indeed, just such an 
approach is currently taking hold: design for sustainability, or sustainable 
engineering. As you will learn in this lecture, sustainable engineering is 
engineering that meets the needs of the present without compromising 
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs. 
Sustainable Engineering
▷
The most fundamental premise of sustainable engineering is that we 
must look holistically at the entire life cycle of the products we develop. 
The traditional, non-sustainable approach to product development 
is a simple linear process that starts with extraction of raw materials 
and ends with disposal of the product, when it’s reached the end of its 
useful life. 
traditional product development
extraction
production
use
disposal

329
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
▷
In 
the 
perfectly-sustainable-but-unachievable 
alternative, production, use, and recovery occur 
in an inﬁnite cycle. The pragmatic middle 
ground is a reasonably sustainable approach 
in which we seek to repeat the production-
use-recovery cycle as many times as possible 
but acknowledge that some external sourcing 
and disposal of material resources will usually be 
required at the beginning and end of a product life cycle.
reasonably sustainable product development
perfectly sustainable product development
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
u
s
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
r
e
c
o
v
e
r
y
sourcing
disposal
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
o
n
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
u
s
e
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
r
e
c
o
v
e
r
y
▷
The most important difference 
between the traditional and 
sustainable models of 
product development 
is the recovery phase. 
But this doesn’t mean 
that 
sustainability 
is 
only considered during 
the recovery phase. Indeed, 
the most important aspect of the sustainable model is that sustainability 
must guide the implementation of all ﬁve phases. To illustrate this point, 
let’s consider this model in the context of some everyday technologies 
you’ve encountered throughout this course. 
▷
In residential construction, for example, the sustainable sourcing of 
materials might include the use of engineered lumber, such as oriented 
strand board and plastic lumber, rather than conventional sawed lumber, 
because engineered products use wood ﬁber far more efficiently. 

LECTURE 36—The Future: Engineering for Sustainability 
330
▷
It might include the use of roof trusses, rather than rafters, because trusses 
are more structurally efficient and thus use signiﬁcantly less lumber. 
▷
It might include the use of cellulose insulation, which is manufactured 
from recycled newsprint and has an R-value comparable to ﬁberglass 
batting. 
▷
It might include the use of metal rooﬁng, rather than asphalt shingles, 
because metal rooﬁng lasts longer and is more easily recycled. In the 
United States alone, 11 million tons of waste asphalt shingles are dumped 
into landﬁlls every year, while nearly 100% of waste steel goes back into 
the furnace to manufacture new steel products.
▷
Sustainable sourcing also entails using locally produced materials 
wherever possible, because shipping materials halfway around the globe 
consumes substantially more energy and, in particular, more fossil fuels.
▷
The concept of sustainable production is best represented by the 
growing number of companies that are building “smart factories”—
facilities employing such technologies as on-site renewable power 
generation, low-energy lighting, rainwater harvesting, water recycling, 
and on-site wastewater treatment—with the resulting methane gas 
captured and used as fuel. These factories are able to manufacture 
useful products with drastic reductions in energy consumption and 
dramatically less environmental impact. 
▷
Sustainable production also can be enhanced through advanced 
engineering processes like 3-D computer modeling and simulation, 
which signiﬁcantly reduce the number of physical prototypes that need 
to be fabricated during the design and testing of new products.
▷
Sustainable use is exempliﬁed by all of the residential energy efficiency 
measures you learned about in the lectures on this subject, including 
the use of enhanced insulation and air-sealing methods, energy-efficient 
heating and air-conditioning equipment, and local renewable power 
generation—all of which reduce the consumption of energy during the 
entire useful life of a house. 

331
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Sustainable Recovery
▷
You might think of sustainable recovery as being synonymous with 
recycling, but it’s actually much broader. There is a hierarchy of 
sustainable recovery options that might be taken at the end of a 
product’s useful life: maintain, refurbish, reuse, recycle, disposal. 
disposal
recycle
reuse
refurbish
maintain
sustainable recovery
▷
The ﬁrst priority in sustainable recovery is rigorous maintenance to 
extend the life of the product. If you change your car’s engine oil often, 
you’ll prolong its useful life and, thus, delay the signiﬁcantly greater 
consumption of resources associated with disposal and replacement of 
the engine or the entire car. Eventually, however, a major component like 
the transmission will fail, and you might choose to have it refurbished or 
replace it with a previously refurbished transmission, which you’ll reuse. 
▷
Both of these options consume considerably less energy and fewer 
resources than buying a newly manufactured transmission and, thus, 
are preferable from a sustainability perspective. If you must replace a 
component that can’t be refurbished, then it should be recycled. And 
only in cases where recycling isn’t possible should the component, 
or the system as a whole, be hauled off to a landﬁll or incinerator for 
disposal, in an environmentally responsible way.
▷
This ﬁve-phase model of sustainable product development is ﬁlled with 
good ideas, but how can they be implemented in a comprehensive way? 
The answer is that sustainable sourcing, production, use, recovery, 
and disposal must be designed into the product from the outset. Thus, 

LECTURE 36—The Future: Engineering for Sustainability 
332
the principal responsibility for sustainability lies with the engineer or 
architect who has principal responsibility for the design. 
▷
Your new house won’t be oriented to maximize solar gain unless the 
designer applies passive solar design principles from the start. Your 
house won’t be built with structural insulated panels unless it’s speciﬁed 
by the designer. And recycling will never be optimized until products 
and their packaging are purposefully designed with recycling in mind. 
Applying Sustainable Design Principles
▷
If designers are principally responsible for sustainability, how do we 
ensure that they apply sustainable design principles in their work? There 
are several feasible approaches. 
▷
One is government action—either legal mandates or incentive 
programs—and this approach can indeed produce results. For example, 
in 1991, Germany passed a law that assigned responsibility for the entire 
life cycle of all packaging to manufacturers. The appeal of this system is 
that it provides a strong economic incentive for manufacturers to avoid 
overpackaging and to design packaging that lends itself to efficient 
recycling. As a result, recycling rates in Germany are typically above 
60%, about twice that of the United States.
▷
The success of this particular initiative notwithstanding, today the most 
important advances in sustainability are happening without government 
intervention. There are two reasons for this encouraging trend.
o Many aspects of sustainability are good for business. It’s not 
unusual for “smart factories” to use half as much power and 
water as conventional factories. That sort of reduction is just as 
beneﬁcial for the bottom line as it is for the environment. Moreover, 
consumers are demonstrating, in increasing numbers, that they’re 
willing to support companies that operate sustainably and to pay for 
sustainable products. 

333
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
o Within the past decade, the engineering community has embraced 
sustainability as a professional responsibility and as a major focus 
area for the future. At the most fundamental level, this is not really a 
change of direction for the engineering profession; the ethical focus 
of engineering has always been on serving humankind. But today, 
engineers have begun to recognize that their obligation to serve 
extends to future generations as well as their own. 
▷
The professional community’s embrace of sustainability has already 
resulted in the inclusion of new energy-efficiency provisions in building 
codes, substantial research and development in sustainable design, 
inclusion of sustainability provisions in professional codes of ethics, and 
adoption of rigorous sustainability certiﬁcation programs—for individual 
architects, engineers, and builders; for the materials they use; and for 
the products of their work.
▷
One such certiﬁcation program is LEED—which stands for Leadership 
in Energy and Environmental Design—a program initiated by the U.S. 
Green Building Council in 2000. LEED provides voluntary certiﬁcation 
of commercial buildings, schools, health-care facilities, neighborhood-
development projects, and private residences. 
▷
In the LEED certiﬁcation process, projects are evaluated according to 
a broad range of sustainability criteria organized into credit categories. 
Points are awarded in each category, and the point total is used as the 
basis for assigning one of four possible certiﬁcation levels (from highest 
to lowest): LEED Platinum, LEED Gold, LEED Silver, and LEED Certiﬁed. 
▷
The LEED credit categories for private homes reﬂect the holistic nature 
of the rating system. 
o 
The Integrative Process category gives credit for the use of an 
integrated project team to manage both design and construction.
o The Location and Transportation category rewards avoidance of 
sensitive land and access to energy-efficient transportation.

LECTURE 36—The Future: Engineering for Sustainability 
334
o The Sustainable Sites category recognizes low-impact storm-water 
management practices.
o The Energy and Atmosphere category allocates points to such 
factors as building orientation, insulation, windows, control of air 
inﬁltration, hot-water distribution, lighting, and appliances. 
o 
The Materials and Resources category rates the use of environmentally 
friendly construction materials and waste-management practices.
o There are also categories for Indoor Environmental Quality, Water 
Efficiency, Innovation, and Regional Priority.
▷
Despite the entirely voluntary nature of this program, more than 
50,000 projects have been LEED certiﬁed since 2000, and the rate of 
participation continues to grow. More importantly, LEED certiﬁcation 
has become a badge of honor among building owners, architects, and 
engineers—a very exciting development that can only further the cause 
of sustainable design.
TERM
sustainable engineering: Engineering that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs.
READING
Johnson and Gibson, Sustainability in Engineering Design.

335
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
QUESTIONS
1 
Why is the use of locally produced materials considered to be more 
sustainable than the use of less expensive materials obtained from 
more distant sources?
2 
How can computer modeling and simulation make industrial production 
more sustainable?

336
Glossary
Glossary
activated sludge: A process used in the secondary treatment of sewage. 
Wastewater is combined with carefully managed populations of bacteria, 
protozoa, worms, and microscopic animals that consume the organic 
compounds in the water and thus reduce its biochemical oxygen demand 
(BOD).
adjacency: An aspect of an architectural design dealing with the proximity 
of rooms and other functional spaces to each other. 
advanced framing: An adaptation of the traditional platform-framing method 
for residential construction. Advanced framing provides better energy 
efficiency, better sustainability, and lower cost.
aeration: The introduction of oxygen into water, for the purpose of reducing 
anoxia.
affordance: In user-centered design, a message conveyed by the physical 
conﬁguration or placement of an object about how people can interact with 
it.
alkane: A chemical compound consisting of a chain of carbon and hydrogen 
atoms with the general chemical formula CnH2n+2, where n is the number of 
carbon atoms. Alkanes are hydrocarbons that constitute a major component 
of unreﬁned crude oil. 
alignment: In highway design, the path a highway takes across the ground. 
A road alignment includes both vertical and horizontal components. 
alternating current (AC): A current that varies continuously in a recurring 
sinusoidal cycle, typically because it is produced by a rotating generator. 
altitude: In orbital mechanics, the distance from the surface of a planet to 
an orbit. The radius of an orbit is equal to the altitude plus the radius of the 
planet.

337
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
ampliﬁer: In telecommunications, a device that uses externally supplied 
energy to boost the power of an input signal.
amplitude: The maximum height (or magnitude) of a waveform.
amplitude modulation (AM): A form of modulation in which the amplitude 
of the carrier signal is modiﬁed to match the amplitude of the voice signal.
anaerobic: Occurring in the absence of oxygen.
anaerobic digestion: A process of bacterial decomposition in the absence 
of oxygen that is used for the treatment of sludge at a sewage treatment 
facility.
analog: In telecommunications, a continuously varying signal that is 
analogous to the sound waves it represents. 
annular gear: A ring-shaped spur gear with teeth oriented inward, typically 
used as a component of a planetary gearset.
anoxia: The depletion of dissolved oxygen near the bottom of a body of 
water.
antenna: An electrical conductor that generates electromagnetic waves for 
wireless transmission of information or that receives such transmissions. 
antilock braking system (ABS): An automotive braking system that 
enhances traction and control by using electronic sensors to detect when 
a wheel is about to lock up and then releasing and reapplying the brakes in 
short pulses, many times per second. 
apogee: The highest point in an elliptical orbit.
aqueduct: A conduit used to transport water from its source to its point of 
use.
aquifer: A porous stratum of soil or rock in which groundwater collects.

Glossary
338
arch: A structural element that carries load primarily in compression and must 
have its outer ends laterally restrained in order to carry load successfully.
arch action: A phenomenon that occurs in soil when loss of support in one 
underground location (e.g., an excavation) causes a redistribution of load to 
the undisturbed adjacent soil. 
arch dam: A dam that resists hydrostatic pressure through the action of an 
arch that transmits load in compression to the walls of the valley in which it 
is constructed.
arterial: A road that provides long-distance mobility, facilitating movement 
from one region or city to another.
associated gas: Natural gas that is found within, and extracted from, 
underground petroleum deposits.
at-grade intersection: In traffic engineering, an intersection at which all 
roads connect at the same level.
attenuation: In telecommunications, the tendency of a transmitted signal to 
become weaker with increasing distance traveled.
attitude: The orientation of a satellite, spacecraft, or other orbiting body in 
three-dimensional space.
balanced earthwork: In highway design, the condition in which the total 
amount of soil removed from the cut sections is equal to the total amount of 
soil placed into the ﬁll sections.
ballast: A layer of gravel used to provide support for railroad ties.
balloon frame: The original light wood frame structural system, developed 
by George Washington Snow in the 1830s. By exploiting the availability of 
standardized lightweight lumber and nails, the balloon frame revolutionized 
residential construction in North America. 

339
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
bandwidth: A range of frequencies.
base station: In a cellular network, a facility that contains the transmitters, 
receivers, and antennas required for communication with mobile devices 
located within the associated cell.
base station controller: A device that connects multiple cellular base 
stations to their associated mobile switching centers.
beam: A structural element that carries load primarily in ﬂexure or bending.
bearing wall construction: A structural system in which the principal vertical 
load-carrying elements are the exterior walls of the building.
Bernoulli’s principle: When the speed of a moving ﬂuid increases, its 
pressure decreases, and vice versa.
bevel gear: A gear with a beveled edge, which allows the transmission of 
torque between two shafts oriented at any angle between 0° and 180° with 
respect to each other.
bias-ply tires: A vehicle tire with its internal reinforcing plies oriented in an 
alternating diagonal pattern.
bimetallic strip: A device for measuring changes in temperature based on 
the thermal deformation of two metals bonded together. 
biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The depletion of dissolved oxygen 
in water as aquatic bacteria and other microorganisms consume organic 
compounds as food. Wastewater has a high BOD, which must be reduced 
through secondary treatment.
bioreactor: A vessel in which the activated sludge process is implemented 
for secondary sewage treatment. 
biomass: A form of renewable energy obtained from plant material or animal 
waste. Biomass is converted into energy by burning wood, manufacturing 

Glossary
340
ethanol-based fuel from plants, capturing methane gas from decomposing 
organic material, and a variety of other means.
bit: The basic unit of information in digital communications. A bit can have 
only two possible values: 1 or 0.
bit rate: The rate of digital data transmission, measured in bits per second.
blower: A centrifugal fan.
boil: To change from the liquid phase to the vapor phase.
boiling water reactor (BWR): A type of nuclear power generation facility in 
which the reactor coolant water is allowed to boil, and the resulting steam is 
circulated through the turbines to generate power. 
brake band: In an automatic transmission, a steel strap that, when pulled 
tight by hydraulic actuators, locks certain components of a planetary 
gearset.
brake fade: The tendency of automotive brakes to lose effectiveness due to 
the buildup of heat.
buckling: A failure mode in which a member subjected to compression 
becomes unstable and bends laterally. Buckling failure is sudden and 
usually catastrophic.
building code: A set of rules specifying minimum standards for construction. 
Building codes are normally enacted through legislation. 
building envelope: An assemblage of building components that protect 
interior spaces from the elements and control interior temperature and 
humidity, while also allowing for access, egress, and natural illumination.
building science: The scientiﬁc study of physical phenomena affecting 
buildings.

341
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
bulldozer: A piece of construction equipment that is used for moving soil 
over short distances.
bursty data: Data transmitted through a network in short spurts, separated 
by longer periods of inactivity.
bus: (1) In electrical power distribution, a set of electrical conductors used 
to route power through a substation. (2) In a communications satellite, the 
equipment responsible for transporting the mission payload into orbit and 
providing electrical power, attitude control, temperature control, and orbital 
adjustments.
bushing: In electrical power transmission and distribution, an insulated 
ﬁtting that allows a high-voltage conductor to pass through a grounded 
metal case without causing a ﬂashover.
capacitor: A device used to store electric charge. A capacitor typically 
consists of two metal plates separated by a dielectric material.
capillary action: The tendency of a liquid to be drawn into a ﬁne-grained or 
ﬁnely divided solid.
carbon sequestration: A process—currently under development—by which 
carbon dioxide is captured from the furnace exhaust of a coal-ﬁred power 
plant and either stored in geologic formations deep underground or reacted 
chemically with metal oxides to produce stable, solid materials called 
carbonates. Also called carbon capture.
carrier: In telecommunications, an electromagnetic signal in which 
information is encoded for transmission. 
cell phone: A radio transmitter-receiver used in cellular communication.
cellular communication: A wireless communication system that uses analog 
or digital encoding of a radio carrier signal.

Glossary
342
cellular reuse pattern: In a cellular communication system, the number of 
adjacent cells in a module that cannot use the same frequencies.
channel: In telecommunications, the pathway through which a stream of 
information is transmitted. 
channelization: In traffic engineering, the use of raised islands or pavement 
markings to reduce conﬂicts by guiding traffic movements into well-deﬁned 
paths.
chemical energy: A form of energy associated with the bonds between the 
atoms that constitute molecules.
circuit: (1) An electrical conductor formed into a closed loop, thus allowing 
current to ﬂow in response to a voltage. (2) A telecommunications channel 
that is transmitted on a physical medium (e.g., copper wire, coaxial cable, or 
optical ﬁber). 
circuit breaker: A switch that interrupts electric current in a conductor, either 
for maintenance or to prevent damage to the system in the event of a short 
circuit or other abnormal event.
circuit-switched network: A communications network in which information 
is transmitted through a dedicated communications channel from one 
terminal through one or more intermediate nodes to another terminal. The 
connection must be fully established, end to end, before the transmission 
can begin, and then it is released after the transmission is complete.
cladding: The outer layer of a building envelope, typically consisting of 
brick, stone, stucco, or siding.
clariﬁcation: In water treatment, the process of removing suspended 
particulate matter from raw water.
clay: An extremely ﬁne-grained soil formed from the weathering of silicate-
bearing rocks. Clay is highly cohesive—capable of holding its shape without 
crumbling—and impervious to water.

343
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
clock bias: In the global positioning system, the difference between 
satellite time and receiver time. Clock bias is accounted for in the navigation 
equation.
clutch: A device that is used to connect and disconnect a driving shaft from 
a driven shaft while one or both shafts are turning.
coagulant: A chemical substance used for clariﬁcation in water treatment. 
The coagulant causes suspended particles to cling together, resulting in 
clumps of impurities—called ﬂocs—sinking to the bottom of the container. 
coal: A black or brownish sedimentary rock, composed primarily of carbon, 
mixed with varying amounts of impurities—primarily hydrogen, sulfur, 
oxygen, and nitrogen.
coaxial cable: A high-capacity telecommunications cable developed as 
a replacement for twisted copper wires in the interexchange trunks of the 
public switched telephone network (PSTN).
code-division multiple access: A system for wireless communication in 
which all mobile devices within a given cell communicate across the full 
frequency spectrum at the same time by modulating each signal according 
to a unique, randomly generated code provided by the cellular base station. 
Also called spread-spectrum multiple access. 
coefficient of static friction: The ratio between the static friction force and 
the associated normal force acting on a body at rest.
coefficient of thermal expansion: A material property that indicates the 
propensity of the material to undergo thermal deformation.
collector: A road that conveys traffic between the local roads and arterials.
column: A vertically oriented structural element that carries load primarily in 
compression. 

Glossary
344
combustion turbine: A turbine engine that is propelled directly by the 
combustion of natural gas. 
compression: An internal force or stress that causes shortening of a 
structural element. 
compression ratio: In an automobile engine, the ratio of the cylinder 
volumes, V2 to V1, where V1 is the volume at top dead center and V2 is the 
volume at bottom dead center. 
compressor: A mechanical device that increases the pressure of a ﬂuid 
while reducing its volume.
concrete: A mixture of Portland cement, sand, and gravel that hardens into a 
rocklike mass when mixed with water. 
condense: To change from the vapor phase to the liquid phase.
condenser: A device that changes vapor into liquid by transferring heat from 
the ﬂuid.
conduction: Heat transfer through a substance or through physical contact 
between substances. 
conductor: A metal wire or cable that provides a path for the ﬂow of electric 
current.
connecting rod: In an automobile engine, a link that connects a piston to the 
crankshaft.
constraint: In user-centered design, a physical limitation that communicates 
how a device can or cannot be used.
contact patch: The interface between a vehicle tire and the surface on 
which it rests.

345
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
containment building: A massive domed concrete building that surrounds 
the reactor core in a pressurized water reactor (PWR) nuclear power plant.
continuous supports: A type of structural support system in which a single 
beam of at least two spans is continuous across at least one intermediate 
support. 
control rod: In nuclear power generation, a boron carbide rod that slows or 
stops the nuclear chain reaction by absorbing neutrons when inserted into 
the reactor core.
convection: Heat transfer through the movement of a liquid or gas. 
control channel: In a cellular network, a communications channel that is 
used to monitor the locations of mobile devices, establish connections, and 
coordinate handoffs between cells.
copper sulfate: A chemical used to kill algae contamination in a water supply 
reservoir. 
crankcase: In an automobile engine, an enclosure at the bottom of the 
engine block that houses the crankshaft.
crankshaft: In an automobile engine, a shaft that converts the reciprocating 
motion of a piston into rotary motion for transmission of power to the drive 
shaft.
crawl space foundation: A type of building foundation for which the ﬁrst ﬂoor 
is a wooden platform, raised slightly above ground level, with no basement. 
cross-section: The geometric shape of the face created by making a 
hypothetical cut perpendicular to the longitudinal axis of a structural 
element, roadway, etc. 
crown gear: A large gear with teeth oriented perpendicular to the plane of 
the gear. 

Glossary
346
curb valve: An exterior valve that can be used to cut off the water supply to 
an individual building.
current: The ﬂow of electrons through a conductor when subjected to a 
voltage. Current is measured in amperes, or amps.
cut-and-cover method: A method of constructing aqueducts and tunnels. 
The tunnel lining is built at the bottom of a trench and then covered over 
with compacted soil. 
cutout fuse: A fuse that can also be operated manually as a switch.
cycle: (1) In thermodynamics, a sequence of processes that begins and 
ends at the same state. (2) In traffic engineering, the total period of time, in 
seconds, required for a signal light to repeat its programmed green-yellow-
red sequence in all directions. 
cylinder: In an automobile engine, a cylindrical cavity in the engine block 
that contains a piston.
cylinder head: In an automobile engine, the heavy metal lid that bolts onto 
the top of the engine block and covers the cylinders.
dam: An engineered structure designed to impound water, generally by 
blocking the ﬂow of a natural watercourse. A dam creates a reservoir and 
must control the release of water from that reservoir. Dams are used for 
water supply, irrigation, ﬂood control, and the generation of hydroelectric 
power.
damper: A valve or gate that controls the ﬂow of air through a conduit.
deﬂection: The bending deformation of a beam under transverse loading.
derrick: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a steel tower from which the drill 
string is suspended.

347
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
desalination: The process of converting seawater into potable water by 
removing salt, typically through reverse osmosis.
design hour volume: In highway design, the amount of traffic on a highway 
during the most heavily congested hour of the day.
design speed: The vehicle speed for which a highway is designed.
design storm: A hypothetical rainstorm with characteristic, statistically 
derived intensity (measured in inches of rainfall per hour); duration 
(measured in minutes); and frequency (represented as a recurrence interval 
in years) that is used as the basis for hydrologic analysis using the rational 
method.
deviation tower: A power transmission tower located at a major change in 
the direction of the transmission line.
dielectric: An electrical insulator used between the two charged plates in a 
capacitor.
diaphragm: (1) A thin disk that vibrates when receiving or producing sound 
waves, as in a microphone or speaker. (2) A cross-frame used to connect 
parallel beams or girders together in a structural system.
differential: A mechanical device that performs three different functions: 
allocating power from the driveshaft to two perpendicular axle shafts, 
increasing the gear ratio of the drivetrain, and allowing the two drive wheels 
to rotate at different speeds when the vehicle is negotiating a turn.
digital: In telecommunications, a signal that is made up of a series of on-off 
pulses, representing ones and zeroes.
dip pole: A utility pole at which a distribution feeder is directed underground.
direct current (DC): A steady, unvarying current, as is produced by a battery.

Glossary
348
direct solar heat gain: The process by which the Sun’s thermal radiation 
enters a building through windows; impinges on ﬂoors, walls, and furniture; 
and is reradiated back into the interior space as heat.
discoverability: In user-centered design, a set of characteristics that 
communicates what actions are possible and how they’re to be performed. 
Designers achieve discoverability through incorporation of affordances, 
signiﬁers, mapping, constraints, and feedback into their designs.
disk brake: An automotive braking system in which a pair of hydraulically 
operated brake pads are forced against a disk to reduce the speed of the 
vehicle. 
disinfection: In water treatment, the use of chlorine, ultraviolet light, or 
ozone to kill bacteria and viruses in raw water. 
displacement: In an automobile engine, the volume swept by the piston as it 
moves from bottom dead center to top dead center.
distribution: (1) The movement of potable water from a local reservoir or 
water treatment facility to consumers. (2) The movement of electrical power 
from a substation to consumers. 
dog clutch: In an automotive transmission, a toothed collar that locks a 
transmission gear to the driveshaft.
downcomer: A vertical pipe that circulates hot water from the steam drum 
back to the boiler in a steam power plant.
down-hole drilling motor: An oil or natural gas drilling rig in which the motor 
driving the drilling bit is located at the bottom of the borehole. A down-
hole drilling motor provides improved control of the bit and thus is used for 
horizontal drilling.
downlink: A radio signal transmitted by a satellite to Earth.

349
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
drain ﬁeld: A component of an on-site septic system that receives 
wastewater from a septic tank and discharges it into the surrounding soil. 
A series of perforated pipes surrounded by a bed of crushed stone and 
covered with soil, the drain ﬁeld promotes ﬁltration and biological treatment 
of wastewater ﬂowing through the system. 
drill collar: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a heavy section of pipe located 
at the bottom of the drill string and immediately above the bit. Drill collars 
provide the weight needed to drive the drill bit downward through solid rock. 
drill string: A series of hollow pipes connected together with threaded 
couplers that is used to drill the borehole for an oil or natural gas well. 
drilling mud: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a mixture of water and 
bentonite clay that is used to lubricate the drilling bit and to carry the rock 
cutting back up to the surface. 
drilling rig: A mechanical system used to drill deep into the Earth’s crust to 
extract petroleum and natural gas.
drip edge: Metal ﬂashing applied to the edges of a roof to prevent water from 
inﬁltrating beneath the protective roof membrane and to direct rainwater 
into the rain gutters. 
drivetrain: An integrated series of automotive components that transmit 
mechanical power from the engine to the drive wheels. The drivetrain 
consists of the ﬂywheel, clutch, transmission, driveshaft, differential, and 
drive axles.
driveshaft: In an automobile drivetrain, a shaft that connects the 
transmission to the differential.
DS-0: Speciﬁcation for the standard voice channel used in the public 
switched telephone network (PSTN)—a bandwidth of 4000 hertz and a bit 
rate of 64,000 bits per second.

Glossary
350
drum brake: An automotive braking system in which a pair of hydraulically 
operated brake shoes are forced against the inner surface of a drum to 
reduce the speed of the vehicle.
drywall: A panel composed of gypsum sandwiched between two layers of 
cardboard that is used as a ﬁre-resistant inner layer of the building envelope.
dual-tone multi-frequency signaling (DTMF): The system used to generate 
tones in touch-tone dialing. In DTMF, a different audio frequency is assigned 
to each row and column of the standard four-by-three telephone keypad.
ductless mini-split: A small, wall-mounted heat pump that blows hot or cold 
air directly into the conditioned space, with no ducts. 
dump truck: A piece of construction equipment that is used for moving soil 
over long distances. 
earth dam: A gravity dam that uses soil as its primary ﬁll material.
earth sheltering: In architectural design, the practice of embedding one 
or more walls of a building within a hillside to reduce daily ﬂuctuations in 
indoor air temperature.
earthwork: The process of re-forming the topographic contours of a project 
site for compatibility with the intended land use. Also called grading.
eccentricity: The extent to which an ellipse deviates from a circle.
efficiency: In thermodynamics, a dimensionless measure of the effectiveness 
of an energy-conversion process in a device that uses thermal energy—e.g., 
an engine, a boiler, a furnace, or a refrigerator. In general, thermodynamic 
efficiency is calculated as a ratio of output to input and thus is always a 
number between 0 and 1 (or between 0% and 100%). Also called thermal 
efficiency.
elastic energy: A form of energy associated with the deformation of a 
material. Also called strain energy.

351
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
electrical energy: A form of potential energy associated with a difference in 
voltage. 
electrical system: A building subsystem that provides electrical power to 
outlets, light ﬁxtures, appliances, control systems, and other devices.
electromagnet: A magnet that uses the magnetic ﬁeld produced by an 
electrical current ﬂowing through a conductor.
electromagnetic induction: The generation of an electric voltage in a 
conductor that is exposed to a varying magnetic ﬁeld. 
electromagnetic radiation: A type of radiant energy emitted by current 
ﬂowing through a conductor and other electromagnetic processes.
electromagnetic spectrum: The range of frequencies associated with 
electromagnetic radiation. 
electrostatic precipitator: A device used to remove ash from the exhaust 
stream of a coal-ﬁred power plant.
end-of-train device: A piece of monitoring equipment mounted on the rear 
of the last car in a train. The device continuously monitors speed and braking 
system pressure, and it transmits these data by radio to the cab. Also called 
a ﬂashing rear-end device (FRED).
energy density: The amount of usable energy stored in a material per unit 
volume of that material. 
engine block: In an automobile engine, the solid block of iron or aluminum 
that incorporates the cylinders.
engineering: The application of math, science, technology, and experience 
to create a system, component, or process that serves our society.
equilibrium: (1) In mechanics, the condition in which all forces acting on a 
body or system are in balance. Mathematically, for a body in equilibrium, 

Glossary
352
the vector sum of all forces acting on the body equals zero. (2) In 
thermodynamics, the condition in which all properties of a system are 
unchanging.
evaporator: A device that changes a liquid to a vapor by transferring heat 
into the ﬂuid.
exciter: A small generator that produces the electricity required to power 
the electromagnets on the rotor of a larger power plant generator.
expansion valve: A device that reduces the pressure of a ﬂuid.
fatigue: The progressive accumulation of damage in metals subjected to 
repetitive loading.
fault: Any abnormal electric current.
feathering: In wind power generation, the process of changing the angle of 
the rotor blades such that the rotor does not rotate.
feedback: In user-centered design, responsive information indicating that 
the user’s interaction with the object or device was or was not correct.
feeder: A main electrical power supply line in either a power transmission or 
distribution system.
fenestration: The sizes, locations, and types of windows in an architectural 
design. 
ﬁber-optic communication: Transmission of information by directing a 
digitally encoded light beam through a tiny ﬁber of glass. 
ﬁberglass batting: A common form of thermal insulation used in residential 
construction.
ﬁll: In power generation, an open web of plastic used in a cooling tower to 
promote the evaporative cooling of water. 

353
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
ﬁltration: In water treatment, the use of a ﬁlter composed of horizontal layers 
of gravel, sand, and anthracite coal to remove particulate matter and volatile 
organic chemicals from raw water.
ﬁnal drive: In an automotive differential, the pinion and crown gears. 
ﬁssile material: A material (e.g., uranium 235) that is capable of sustaining 
the chain reaction associated with nuclear ﬁssion. 
ﬁxture: In a plumbing system, a device that draws clean water from the water 
distribution system and discharges wastewater into the sewage system 
without allowing any ﬂow in the opposite direction. 
ﬂange: (1) One of two horizontal elements forming the top and bottom of 
an I-shaped structural element. (2) The raised edge on the inside of a steel 
railcar wheel.
ﬂapper-ﬂush valve: In a standard ﬂush toilet, a hinged stopper that closes 
off the ﬂush tube connecting the tank to the bowl. Opening the ﬂapper-ﬂush 
valve causes the toilet to ﬂush.
ﬂashing: A strip of sheet metal or plastic conﬁgured to prevent leaks at 
intersections and penetrations in wall and roof surfaces.
ﬂashover: An electrical phenomenon caused by a large voltage difference 
between two closely spaced conductors. If the voltage difference is large 
enough to overcome the electrical resistance of the air between the two 
conductors, current—in the form of a white-hot electrical arc—jumps the gap 
between them.
ﬂexible pavement: A road structure typically consisting of a layer of asphalt 
placed on a layered base of compacted ﬁll. 
ﬂexure: Bending of a structural element characterized by compression on 
the concave face of the element and tension on the convex face.

Glossary
354
ﬂocculation: In water treatment, the process by which suspended particles 
clump together under the action of a chemical coagulant. Each resulting 
clump of particulate matter is called a ﬂoc.
ﬂuid: A liquid or gas.
ﬂywheel: In an automobile drivetrain, a heavy disk that provides for steady 
rotation of the crankshaft in response to repetitive impulsive torques applied 
by the pistons. 
focus: One of two points on which the geometric construction of an ellipse 
are based. 
footing: A foundation element that distributes the weight of a structure to 
the soil below. Wall footings and column footings support walls and columns, 
respectively.
footprint: A satellite antenna’s designated coverage area on the Earth’s 
surface.
force: A push or pull applied to an object. A force is deﬁned in terms of both 
magnitude and direction. 
foundation: An assemblage of building elements that transmit loads from 
the structural system into the Earth.
four-stroke cycle: The process by which an internal combustion engine 
produces mechanical power though a series of four piston strokes: intake, 
compression, power, and exhaust.
fractionating: An industrial process by which crude oil is separated into its 
constituent hydrocarbons. 
freight yard: A railroad hub at which incoming trains are broken apart and 
reorganized into outgoing trains based on the destination of their cargo.

355
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
frequency: For any cyclic phenomenon, the number of alternating cycles 
occurring within a given period of time. Frequency is expressed in hertz or 
cycles per second and is the reciprocal of the period.
frequency-division multiple access: A system for wireless communication 
in which multiple conversations are transmitted independently between 
various mobile devices and a cellular base station on different frequencies.
frequency-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which the 
total bandwidth available for transmission is subdivided into a series of 
nonoverlapping frequency subbands, each of which constitutes a separate 
communications channel.
frequency modulation (FM): A form of modulation in which the frequency of 
the carrier wave is modiﬁed to represent the voice signal.
friction: A resisting force developed at the interface between two bodies. 
The friction force is oriented parallel to the contact surface in the direction 
that opposes motion.
frost heave: The upward swelling of soil caused when water within the soil 
freezes and expands in the winter.
fuel rod: In nuclear power generation, a metal tube containing pellets of 
ﬁssile material. Bundles of fuel rods are combined to form the core of a 
nuclear reactor.
fulcrum: The pivot on which a lever rotates.
full-duplex communication: A form of communication that allows for 
simultaneous transmission and reception. 
fuse: A device that interrupts electric current in a conductor to prevent 
damage to the system in the event of a short circuit or other abnormal event. 
Unlike a circuit breaker, a fuse cannot be operated manually and must be 
replaced after it has operated once.

Glossary
356
gear ratio: The ratio of the numbers of teeth on two meshed gears. The gear 
ratio corresponds to the mechanical advantage of the gears.
general packet radio service: A packet-switched network that is overlaid on 
the circuit-switched phone network and handles all Internet data passing 
between mobile devices and the Internet.
generator: A device that converts the kinetic energy of a rotating shaft into 
electrical energy.
geo-membrane: A ﬂexible, puncture-resistant, low-permeability plastic 
sheet that is used in the liner of a sanitary landﬁll.
geotextile: A durable, permeable synthetic fabric that is used as a ﬁlter in a 
sanitary landﬁll. 
geostationary orbit (GEO): A circular orbit with an altitude of 22,236 miles 
above the Earth’s surface. A satellite in a GEO orbits the Earth in exactly one 
sidereal day. 
geothermal heat pump: A heat pump that uses the earth, rather than the 
outside air, as its heat source in the winter and its heat sink in the summer.
geothermal power generation: The generation of electrical power from 
naturally occurring heat below the Earth’s surface. 
girder: A main beam to which load is transmitted from other elements of a 
structural system.
global positioning system (GPS): A satellite-based system for navigation on 
the surface of the Earth.
governor: In an automatic transmission, a device that controls the ﬂow of 
hydraulic ﬂuid in response to the speed of the rotating shaft to which it is 
ﬁxed.

357
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
grade: (1) A standardized quality rating for commercial lumber. Higher grades 
of wood have fewer defects and, thus, higher strength. (2) Ground level (as 
in slab on grade and railroad grade crossing). (3) The slope of a surface, 
typically measured as a ratio of vertical to horizontal distance and expressed 
as a percentage. Also called a gradient.
grade-separated intersection: In traffic engineering, an intersection at 
which traffic streams cross at two or more different levels. Also called an 
interchange. 
grade tangent: In highway design, a straight-line segment in the vertical 
alignment of a road.
grade tunnel: An aqueduct tunnel that carries the channel through a 
mountain while maintaining a constant gradient.
gradient: The slope of a surface, typically measured as a ratio of vertical to 
horizontal distance and expressed as a percentage. Also called a grade.
grading: The process of re-forming the topographic contours of a project 
site for compatibility with the intended land use. Also called earthwork.
gravity dam: A dam that attains its structural stability from its mass, rather 
than from arch action.
gravity load: A load caused by weight (e.g., of snow, occupants, furnishings, 
or the structure itself).
grid: A network of power plants, substations, and transmission lines serving 
a large geographic area.
ground fault: An electrical fault in which current bypasses the normal load 
and ﬂows into the earth.
groundwater: Water that percolates down through the soil and accumulates 
in an underground aquifer.

Glossary
358
handoff: In a cellular network, the transfer of control of a mobile device from 
one cell to another.
hard water: Water containing dissolved calcium or magnesium, typically 
from natural sources.
header: A structural element used to frame an opening in a ﬂoor platform or 
wall panel. 
heat: Thermal energy transferred from a region of higher temperature to a 
region of lower temperature.
heat exchanger: A device for transferring heat from one ﬂuid to another, 
usually without allowing them to mix.
heat ﬂux: The rate of heat transfer from a warm region to a colder region.
heat pump: A device that uses the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle to 
heat an enclosed space. 
heat recovery ventilator (HRV): A ventilation device that improves energy 
efficiency by transferring heat between the incoming and outgoing 
airstreams.
heavy timber frame construction: A structural system in which wooden 
columns, beams, and braces form a discrete structural skeleton.
helical gear: A gear with radially oriented teeth, the edges of which are not 
parallel to the axis of rotation of the gear. In comparison with spur gears, 
helical gears mesh more fully and run more smoothly.
heliostat: A movable mirror used in solar-thermal power generation.
housewrap: A plastic sheet used to prevent water inﬁltration through a 
building envelope.

359
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
hot-rolled section: A steel structural element manufactured by heating 
a block of steel and then forming it into shape with large hydraulically 
operated rollers.
HVAC: The heating, ventilating, and air-conditioning system for a building.
hybrid coil: A type of transformer that divides an incoming signal among two 
outgoing branches.
hydraulic control unit: In an automatic transmission, a ﬂuid-powered 
computer that uses pressurized transmission ﬂuid moving through a series 
of valves to determine when each shift should occur and to execute the 
changes of gears.
hydraulic fracturing: The process of using a high-pressure ﬂuid to create 
fractures in underground rock to facilitate the extraction of oil or natural gas. 
Fracturing ﬂuid contains proppants, which hold the fractures open after the 
ﬂuid pressure has been reduced.
hydraulics: A scientiﬁc ﬁeld that is broadly concerned with the mechanical 
properties and engineering applications of ﬂuids.
hydrocarbon: An organic chemical compound consisting of hydrogen and 
carbon atoms. 
hydroelectric power: Electric power produced by water ﬂowing through a 
turbine. The source of energy for hydroelectric power is the potential energy 
stored in water contained at a relatively high elevation behind a dam. 
hydrology: The scientiﬁc study of the natural movement and distribution of 
water above, on, and below the surface of the Earth.
hydronic heating: A heating system that operates by circulating hot water 
from a boiler throughout the heated space.
hydrostatic pressure: Pressure caused by the weight of water. Hydrostatic 
pressure acts uniformly in all directions. Where water is in contact with a 

Glossary
360
submerged body, hydrostatic pressure acts perpendicular to the surface of 
the body.
hypoid bevel gear set: In an automotive differential, a paired pinion and 
crown gear with specially curved teeth that allow the pinion shaft to be 
placed below the level of the crown gear shaft. 
hysteresis: A built-in lag between input and output in an automatic control 
system (e.g., a thermostat).
ice dam: An accumulation of ice at the edge of a roof. Water from melting 
snow and ice can back up behind the ice dam and cause leaks through the 
roof membrane. 
idler: In an automotive transmission, a gear used to reverse the rotation of 
the driveshaft.
impedance: Electrical resistance to alternating current.
immersed-tube tunnel: A type of tunnel built of multiple tube segments, 
which are prefabricated on land, ﬂoated into position, sunk to the bottom of 
the watercourse, and connected together.
impulse turbine: A water turbine that operates by directing a stream of water 
into a series of buckets arranged around the circumference of a rotating 
wheel, or runner.
inclined plane: A simple machine that allows one to lift an object using less 
force than the weight of the object.
independent suspension system: An automotive suspension system in 
which the road-induced motion of one suspension unit does not affect the 
motion of the other suspension units. 
infrastructure: Large-scale technological structures and systems that 
enhance societal functions, facilitate economic development, and enhance 
quality of life. The most common infrastructure systems are electrical power, 

361
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
water supply, wastewater disposal, storm drainage, solid waste disposal, 
transportation, and telecommunications. 
input shaft: In an automobile drivetrain, a shaft that connects the engine to 
the transmission.
insulator: A material or object that prevents the ﬂow of electric current.
interchange: In traffic engineering, an intersection at which traffic streams 
cross at two or more different levels. Also called a grade-separated 
intersection.
interconnection: A major regional electric power grid that operates at a 
synchronized frequency.
intermediate storage facility: A tank for temporary water storage in a water 
distribution system.
intermodal transportation: A form of freight transportation in which 
standardized shipping containers are used to move cargo by ship, truck, and 
train.
internal energy: A form of energy associated with the microscopic motions 
of the particles that constitute matter.
internal force: A force developed within a structural element in response 
to one or more applied loads. An internal force can be either tension or 
compression. 
international gateway: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
switch through which international calls are routed. 
intersection: A traffic structure at which two or more streams of traffic cross 
each other, with drivers typically having the option to continue on their 
present route or to switch from one stream to another.

Glossary
362
inverted siphon: A type of aqueduct channel in which the water ﬂows 
through a pipe under pressure from a higher to a lower reservoir. In an 
inverted siphon, much of the channel is typically below the elevation of the 
lower reservoir. 
isotherm: A line of constant temperature, as on a pressure-volume diagram. 
Janney coupler: The mechanism used to connect two railcars together. 
joist: One of a series of parallel beams that directly support a ﬂoor or deck.
kelly: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a four- or six-sided pipe that grips 
the top of the drill string and drives its rotation. 
kinetic energy: The energy associated with a mass in motion.
kinetic friction: The friction force resisting the motion of a body sliding 
across a surface.
knock: In an automobile engine, premature combustion of the fuel-air 
mixture in a cylinder before the spark plug ﬁres. 
landﬁll gas: A mixture of methane, carbon dioxide, and small amounts of 
other gases formed by the decomposition of organic material in a sanitary 
landﬁll.
latency: Delay in a telecommunications transmission.
lateral: A pipe that carries wastewater from a soil stack inside a building to a 
sewer line or on-site septic system.
lateral earth pressure: The horizontal pressure of soil acting on a vertical 
surface. 
lateral-torsional buckling: A structural failure mode in which the 
compression side of a beam (normally the top) buckles sideways, causing the 

363
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
beam to twist. Tall, narrow beam cross-sections are particularly vulnerable 
to lateral-torsional buckling.
layshaft: In an automotive transmission, a shaft that transmits power from 
the input shaft to the driveshaft.
leachate: A toxic, acidic liquid that accumulates within a sanitary landﬁll as a 
result of rainwater percolating down through the solid waste. 
lead: A branch railroad line that terminates at a dead end.
leakage current: The unintended ﬂow of electric current over the surface 
of an insulator, usually due to the presence of moisture, dirt, or salt on the 
insulator.
lever: A simple machine that converts an applied force to a larger force 
through rotation about a fulcrum.
light wood frame construction: A structural system consisting of ﬂoor 
platforms and wall panels fabricated from multiple lightweight elements 
made of standard-sized lumber and fastened with nails. 
lightning arrester: In an electrical transmission or distribution system, a 
device that protects sensitive equipment by routing the power surge caused 
by a lightning strike into the ground. 
line: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a telecommunications 
link designed to support the calling load associated with one person. 
live load: The weight of people, furniture, and other movable objects 
contained within a building.
load: A force applied to a structure. Types of loads include dead load, live 
load, snow load, wind load, and seismic load.
local exchange: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
switch through which all subscribers and private branch exchanges (PBX) 

Glossary
364
communicate with each other and with other exchanges. The local exchange 
is typically housed in a building called the central office.
local loop: In telecommunications, a pair of copper wires running from the 
subscriber’s telephone to the local exchange. Also called a subscriber line.
local road: A road that provides access within residential areas, commercial 
districts, etc.
long-wall mining: An underground coal-mining technique in which a track-
mounted excavating machine moves along an exposed face of coal, shearing 
off and collecting a slice of coal as it moves, protected by hydraulically 
operated overhead shields.
low earth orbit (LEO): A circular orbit with an altitude between 100 and 1240 
miles above the Earth’s surface.
low-emissive coating: A coating applied to energy-efficient windows to limit 
heat transfer by radiation.
mapping: In user-centered design, the relationship between controls and 
the actions they control.
mass diagram: In heavy construction, a graphical tool used to achieve 
balanced earthwork.
mean speed: In traffic engineering, the average speed of all vehicles passing 
a point on a highway within a speciﬁed period of time, measured in miles per 
hour.
mechanical advantage: Magniﬁcation of effort by a mechanical device.
mechanical properties: Characteristics of a material that describe how the 
material responds to forces. 
mechanics: A branch of science that deals with the effects of forces acting 
on physical bodies.

365
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
meltdown: In nuclear power generation, a failure condition that occurs when 
one or more nuclear fuel rods exceeds its melting temperature. A meltdown 
is caused by failure of the reactor cooling system. 
methane: A hydrocarbon with chemical formula CH4. Methane is the principal 
component of natural gas and is also produced by the decomposition of 
organic material.
microphone: A device that converts sound waves into an electrical signal. 
microwave communication: Use of very high-frequency electromagnetic 
radiation for point-to-point communication. 
mission payload: The communications package in a communications 
satellite.
mobile switching center: In a cellular network, a facility that connects to 
and controls all cellular base stations within a region. The mobile switching 
center sets up and releases end-to-end calls—both mobile-to-mobile and 
mobile-to-PSTN calls.
model code: A set of technical standards, guidelines, or speciﬁcations 
promulgated by a professional standards organization but having no legal 
status or enforcement mechanisms. When a model code is adopted by a 
government entity through legislation, it becomes a building code.
modulation: In telecommunications, a process by which voice and carrier 
signals are electronically mixed for transmission.
moment: The tendency of a force to cause rotation, expressed in units of 
force times distance.
mortise-and-tenon joint: A traditional method of joining beams and columns 
in a heavy timber framed structural system. 

Glossary
366
multiplexing: In telecommunications, a process by which multiple signals or 
data streams are combined into one signal for transmission over a shared 
medium.
nacelle: A streamlined housing that encloses the generator of a wind turbine.
navigation equation: In the global positioning system, the equation used to 
calculate the position of the receiver on the Earth’s surface.
net-zero-energy home: A residential building that requires no net input of 
energy over the course of a year.
Newton’s ﬁrst law: An object at rest (or in motion at constant velocity) will 
remain at rest (or in motion at constant velocity) unless it is acted on by an 
unbalanced force.
Newton’s second law: The force acting on a body is equal to its mass times 
its acceleration.
Newton’s third law: For every action, there is an equal and opposite 
reaction.
neutral: An electrical conductor that provides a return path to complete a 
circuit.
noise: In telecommunications, the progressive corruption of a signal as it 
moves along a transmission path.
nonassociated gas: Natural gas that is found in gas ﬁelds and in coal beds 
separate from petroleum deposits.
normal force: A force developed at the interface between two bodies. The 
normal force is always oriented perpendicular to the contact surface.
nuclear chain reaction: A self-sustaining process that occurs when neutrons 
emitted by the ﬁssion of atomic nuclei encounter adjacent nuclei and cause 
them to split and emit more neutrons. 

367
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
nuclear energy: A form of energy associated with the bonds between the 
particles that constitute the atomic nucleus.
nuclear ﬁssion: A process in which an atomic nucleus splits into lighter nuclei 
and releases energy. In a ﬁssile material, ﬁssion can occur spontaneously, or 
it can occur when the nucleus absorbs a free neutron.
Ohm’s law: Voltage = current × resistance.
on-site septic system: A wastewater treatment system for a single residence. 
A typical on-site septic system consists of a septic tank and a drain ﬁeld.
open-cast mining: A form of surface mining used to extract minerals from 
deposits relatively close to the surface. Also called strip mining.
open-channel ﬂow: In hydraulics, a category of ﬂow in which the conduit is 
partially full and the upper surface of the liquid is at atmospheric pressure. 
orbital period: The time required for one orbit.
orbital station: The longitude to which a satellite in a geostationary orbit is 
assigned.
oriented strand board (OSB): An engineered wood panel formed by 
compressing layers of wood strands and adhesive. OSB often serves as a 
substitute for plywood in modern residential construction. 
Otto cycle: A thermodynamic cycle used to model the operation of an 
internal combustion engine.
outfall sewer: A pipe that discharges treated wastewater into a natural 
watercourse.
outlet: The point at which storm runoff departs from a watershed. 
outlet works: A conduit and associated equipment (gates, valves, etc.) that 
is used to control the release of water from a reservoir through a dam. 

Glossary
368
overdrive: In an automotive transmission, a gear ratio for which the 
driveshaft rotates faster than the input shaft. 
packet-switched network: A network in which a transmission is broken 
up into many small chunks (called packets), which are then transmitted 
independently across a shared network, with each packet potentially 
following a different route.
passive solar design: A holistic building design approach in which the 
location, orientation, architectural conﬁguration, and interior features of a 
building are chosen with a focus on maximizing solar heat gain in the winter 
and minimizing it in the summer. 
penstock: In hydroelectric power generation, a large tube that transmits 
water at high velocity from the reservoir to a turbine.
perigee: The lowest point in an elliptical orbit.
period: For any cyclic phenomenon, the time required for one full cycle. The 
period is the reciprocal of the frequency. 
petroleum: A naturally occurring mixture of hydrocarbons, organic 
compounds consisting entirely of hydrogen and carbon atoms. 
phase: In traffic engineering, the portion of a signal-light cycle in which the 
right-of-way is uniquely assigned to one or more traffic streams.
photovoltaic effect: An effect that occurs when photons impinging on 
a semiconductor (e.g., silicon) excite electrons to higher states of energy. 
In a photovoltaic device, these free electrons are captured in an adjoining 
material, where they constitute an electric current.
photovoltaics: Technologies that use solar cells to convert solar radiation 
directly into electricity through the photovoltaic effect. 
pin: A structural support that permits rotation but restrains both horizontal 
and vertical movement.

369
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
pinion: A small gear that is typically positioned on the end of a shaft.
pipe ﬂow: In hydraulics, a category of ﬂow in which the liquid completely ﬁlls 
the conduit and ﬂows under pressure. 
piston: In an automobile engine, a cylindrical element is driven in 
reciprocating motion to produce mechanical power.
plain old telephone service (POTS): The traditional landline telephone 
system.
planet carrier: In a planetary gearset, the ﬁxture on which one or more 
planet gears are mounted.
planetary gearset: An arrangement of one or more sun gears, each of which 
rotates on a ﬁxed shaft, and planet gears, which revolve around the sun 
gears.
plate girder: A girder fabricated by welding or riveting individual steel plates 
together, typically into an I-shaped cross-section.
platform-framed construction: The most common form of modern light 
wood frame construction, named for the modular ﬂoor platform that serves 
as a base for the construction of each story.
plenum: The main air supply duct in a forced-air heating system.
plumbing system: A building subsystem that provides clean water to ﬁxtures 
and transmits wastewater outside the building for disposal. 
potable water: Water that is safe for drinking.
potential energy: The energy associated with the elevation of a mass.
power: (1) The rate at which work is done, measured in units of force × 
distance ÷ time. (2) Voltage × current, measured in watts (or volt-amps).

Glossary
370
pressure tunnel: A type of aqueduct channel in which the water ﬂows 
through a deep underground channel that passes beneath an obstacle. A 
pressure tunnel is a form of inverted siphon. 
pressure-volume diagram: In thermodynamics, a graphical representation 
of equilibrium states or thermodynamic processes in terms of pressure, 
volume, and temperature.
pressurized water reactor (PWR): A type of nuclear power plant in which 
the reactor coolant water is kept at high pressure, such that it never boils. 
In a PWR, the coolant water and the water that drives the steam turbines 
are kept in separate self-contained loops (called primary and secondary) to 
minimize the possibility of contamination.
prestressed concrete: A construction method in which prestretched steel 
reinforcing cables (called tendons) transfer compressive stress to a concrete 
structural element to control cracking and reduce deﬂections. The two 
methods of prestressing concrete are pretensioning and posttensioning.
primary loop: The loop of piping through which reactor coolant water is 
circulated in a pressurized water reactor (PWR). Heat is transferred from the 
primary loop to the secondary loop in a steam generator.
primary treatment: In sewage treatment, the removal of ﬂoatable 
contaminants and sludge from wastewater in a sedimentation tank (also 
called a primary clariﬁer).
private branch exchange (PBX): In telecommunications, a switch that allows 
both internal communication between any two connected subscribers and 
external communication through the local exchange. 
property: In thermodynamics, a characteristic (e.g., mass, volume, pressure, 
temperature, internal energy) that can be measured and expressed 
quantitatively for the system as a whole at a given point in time.

371
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
proppant: In the process of hydraulic fracturing, a solid particulate material 
designed to keep a fracture open to facilitate the extraction of oil or natural 
gas.
public 
switched 
telephone 
network 
(PSTN): 
A 
worldwide 
telecommunications system consisting of conventional telephone lines, 
ﬁber-optic cables, microwave links, communications satellites, and 
undersea cables that are interconnected at exchanges using standardized 
communications protocols. 
pulley: A simple machine that changes the direction of a rope or cable.
R-value: A quantitative measure of thermal resistance.
racking: The distortion of a frame due to lateral loading.
radial tire: A vehicle tire with its internal reinforcing plies oriented in the 
radial direction.
radiant energy: A form of energy associated with light and other forms of 
electromagnetic radiation.
radiant ﬂoor heating: A hydronic heating system in which hot water is 
circulated through the ﬂoor of a building.
rake: The inclined edge of a peaked roof.
rational method: An analysis methodology for calculating maximum rate of 
storm runoff (measured in cubic feet per second) from a watershed during a 
speciﬁed design storm.
raw water: Untreated water obtained from a natural source.
reaction turbine: A water turbine in which the runner is horizontally mounted 
and fully enclosed within a spiral-shaped casing. Water enters the turbine 
tangentially along the circumference of the casing and exits downward 

Glossary
372
through the center. Unlike an impulse turbine, the runner of a reaction 
turbine is always fully submerged. 
reaction wheel: An electric-powered wheel that is used for attitude control 
in a satellite. 
reactor core: In nuclear power generation, the vessel in which the nuclear 
reaction takes place. The reactor core contains nuclear fuel rods and control 
rods.
reciprocating motion: Cyclic up-and-down or back-and-forth motion that is 
characteristic of a piston in a cylinder.
recloser: A circuit breaker that that can automatically reclose the circuit after 
it has been opened due to a short circuit or other abnormal condition.
refrigerant: A ﬂuid used to facilitate the transfer of heat in the vapor-
compression refrigeration cycle. 
regenerative repeater: In digital communications, a device used to eliminate 
the adverse effects of noise by regenerating a new noise-free signal at 
regular intervals along the transmission path.
register: A grill with shutters for controlling the ﬂow of air in a heating or air-
conditioning system.
reheater: In a steam power plant, a device that transfers heat from the 
furnace exhaust gases to the steam en route from the high-pressure turbine 
to the intermediate-pressure turbine. 
remote concentrator: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a 
low-level switch in which multiple subscriber lines are multiplexed into a 
single trunk for transmission to the local exchange. At a remote concentrator, 
the signal is usually converted from analog to digital as well.
renewable energy: Energy produced from resources that are naturally 
replenished on a human timescale. 

373
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
repeater: In satellite communications, a device that receives an uplink, 
boosts the strength of the signal, shifts its frequency, and retransmits it 
back to Earth as a downlink. A repeater incorporates a receiver and multiple 
transponders.
reservoir rock: Porous underground strata of limestone and sandstone in 
which petroleum and natural gas accumulate. 
resistance: The tendency of a conductor or other object to impede the ﬂow 
of electric current through it. Resistance is measured in ohms. 
resistive heating: The dissipation of electrical energy as heat, resulting from 
resistance to the ﬂow of current.
resistivity: The tendency of a material to impede the ﬂow of electric current 
through it. 
reverse osmosis: The process of removing salt from seawater by forcing the 
water through a membrane under high pressure.
rigid pavement: A road structure that typically consists of a reinforced 
concrete slab placed on a layer of compacted ﬁll.
rings: In an automobile engine, metal rings mounted near the top of a piston 
to provide a tight seal between the piston and its associated cylinder.
riser: A vertically oriented water-ﬁlled steel tube integrated within the walls 
of the furnace in a steam power plant. A series of closely spaced risers form 
the walls of the boiler. 
roadholding: The ability of an automotive suspension system to keep the 
tires in contact with the road surface as the vehicle moves.
road isolation: The ability of an automotive suspension system to absorb the 
impacts caused by irregularities in the road surface.
rock-ﬁll dam: A gravity dam that uses rock as its primary ﬁll material.

Glossary
374
roller: A structural support that permits rotation and horizontal movement 
but restrains vertical movement.
room-and-pillar method: An underground coal-mining technique in which 
regularly spaced pillars of solid coal are left intact to hold up the roof of the 
excavation. 
rotational moment of inertia: The resistance of a body to rotation.
rotor: (1) In a steam turbine, a set of angled blades that rotates with the 
turbine shaft. The rotor interacts with a stator to produce shaft power. One 
stator and one rotor constitute one stage of the turbine. (2) In a generator, 
a rotating element on which one or more magnets are mounted. The rotor 
produces a varying magnetic ﬁeld that induces an electrical current in the 
stator. (3) In a wind turbine, the assembly of rotating blades that drives the 
generator shaft.
router: A device that manages the ﬂow of information through a node in a 
packet-switched network.
runner: The rotating element of a water turbine.
sag: For a cable suspended between two supports, the difference in 
elevation between the supports and the lowest point along the cable.
sanitary landﬁll: A solid waste disposal facility designed to return the waste 
to the Earth in a way that maximizes the use of available land and minimizes 
harm to the environment.
sanitary sewer: A municipal wastewater disposal system consisting of 
progressively larger pipes called branches, trunks, and interceptors. 
saturated liquid: The thermodynamic state at which a ﬂuid has just begun to 
boil but is still 100% liquid.
saturated vapor: The thermodynamic state at which a ﬂuid is at its boiling 
point and is 100% vapor.

375
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
scraper: A piece of construction equipment that is used for moving soil 
over moderate distances. A scraper moves soil by scooping it up with its 
hydraulically operated pan.
screw: A simple machine that converts rotational motion into linear motion 
or converts a moment into a linear force directed along the length of the 
screw.
scrubber: A device used to remove sulfur dioxide from the exhaust stream of 
a coal-ﬁred power plant.
secondary loop: The loop of piping through which the steam that drives the 
turbines is circulated in a pressurized water reactor (PWR). Heat is transferred 
from the primary loop to the secondary loop in a steam generator.
secondary treatment: In sewage treatment, the reduction of biochemical 
oxygen demand (BOD) in wastewater through the use of natural biological 
processes.
selective catalytic reduction: A process used to remove nitrogen oxides 
from the exhaust stream of a coal-ﬁred power plant.
septic tank: A closed, watertight container that is used to remove suspended 
solids from wastewater in an on-site septic system. 
service drop: An electrical line that carries power into a building.
servo: In an automatic transmission, a spring-loaded hydraulic piston that is 
used to actuate a brake band or clutch.
sewage lift station: A pump used to lift the ﬂow of sewage to a higher 
elevation in situations where continuous downhill ﬂow are not feasible.
shale: A ﬁne-grained sedimentary rock that is formed primarily from clay 
minerals and quartz.

Glossary
376
shale gas: Natural gas that is found within and extracted from shale, usually 
through the process of hydraulic fracturing.
sheathing: A structural sheet—normally plywood or oriented strand board—
that covers the outside of a wall panel or roof framing in platform-framed 
construction.
shield wire: A wire suspended above electrical power transmission lines to 
protect against lightning strikes.
shock absorber: A device that damps out vibrations.
short circuit: An electrical fault in which the current bypasses the normal 
load. 
short message service (SMS): A wireless text-messaging service introduced 
with the 2G cellular standard.
shotcrete: Concrete that is sprayed onto a surface.
sidereal day: The time required for the Earth to complete one full rotation 
with respect to a nonrotating frame of reference. A sidereal day is 23.93 
hours long.
siding: A branch railroad line that splits off of a main line, runs parallel to it 
for a distance, and then rejoins it.
sight distance: In traffic engineering, the distance a driver must be able to 
see in order to make a decision and then act on that decision without risk of 
collision.
signiﬁer: In user-centered design, an explicit message about how an object 
is to be used.
simple supports: A type of structural support system consisting of a pin at 
one end of an element and a roller at the other end. 

377
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
slab on grade: A type of building foundation for which the ﬁrst ﬂoor is a 
concrete slab placed at ground level, with no basement. 
slurry: A mixture of water and cement, mud, or another insoluble material.
soil stack: A large vertical pipe that collects all wastewater from a plumbing 
system and delivers it to the municipal sewage system or on-site septic 
system.
solar heat gain coefficient: A metric used in the window rating system of the 
National Fenestration Rating Council. This coefficient measures the fraction 
of solar radiation that is admitted through a window. 
solar panel: A device for generating electricity through the photovoltaic 
effect. A solar panel consists of an array of solar cells.
solar power: The conversion of solar radiation into electrical energy. The two 
principal forms of solar power are solar-thermal power and photovoltaics. 
solar-thermal power: A form of solar power generation in which mirrors are 
used to concentrate the Sun’s rays onto a single point, producing enough 
heat to generate electricity.
source rock: Fine-grained shale in which hydrocarbons form deep under the 
surface of the Earth.
space-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which a geographic 
region is subdivided into a regular grid of smaller areas called cells, each 
with its own antenna and base station. 
speaker: A device that converts an electrical signal into sound waves.
spillway: A structure that facilitates the controlled release of surplus water 
from a reservoir to prevent the associated dam from being overtopped.

Glossary
378
spring: (1) A source of water occurring where an aquifer intercepts the 
ground surface. (2) A mechanical device that provides a resisting force 
proportional to its deformation in either tension or compression.
spur gear: A standard gear with radially oriented teeth, the edges of which 
are parallel to the axis of rotation of the gear.
spur line: An electric power distribution line carrying a single phase.
stack ventilation: In architectural design, the practice of using upper-level 
openings to exhaust naturally rising hot air.
standard gravitational parameter: In orbital mechanics, a mathematical 
constant used in the calculation of the orbital velocity and period of a 
satellite. The standard gravitational parameter is equal to the universal 
gravitational constant times the mass of the planet about which the satellite 
is orbiting. 
standards organization: A nonproﬁt professional society that formulates 
one or more model codes.
standup time: The length of time that the walls and ceiling of an excavation 
will support themselves without structural augmentation.
static friction: The friction force between two stationary bodies or between 
a stationary body and a surface.
stator: (1) In a steam turbine, a set of angled blades that are ﬁxed to the 
turbine casing. The stator interacts with a rotor to produce shaft power. One 
stator and one rotor constitute one stage of the turbine. (2) In a generator, 
the stationary coil in which an electrical current is induced by the rotor. 
steam drum: A device that separates high-pressure steam from boiling 
water in a steam power plant.
steam generator: A device that transfers heat from the primary loop to the 
secondary loop in a pressurized water reactor.

379
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
steam turbine: A mechanical device that converts the internal energy in 
steam into the kinetic energy of a rotating shaft.
stilling basin: A pool at the bottom of a spillway that is used to dissipate the 
energy of water ﬂowing over the spillway to prevent scouring at the base of 
the associated dam.
stopping sight distance: In highway design, the distance required for a 
driver of a moving car to recognize a hazard in the roadway and bring the 
vehicle to a halt before reaching the hazard.
storm drainage system: An engineered system that captures the surface 
runoff resulting from precipitation and channels it into a natural watercourse.
storm sewer: A network of underground pipes that collects storm water and 
conveys it to a nearby watercourse, lake, or ocean.
strength: The maximum force a structural element can carry before it fails. 
Strength can be deﬁned for both tension and compression.
stress: The intensity of internal force within a structural element, deﬁned in 
terms of force per area (e.g., pounds per square inch). 
stroke: In an automobile engine, the distance a piston moves within its 
cylinder.
structural insulated panel (SIP): A recently developed technology for highly 
energy-efficient residential construction. A SIP serves as both structure and 
enclosure.
structural system: An assemblage of structural elements—e.g., beams, 
columns, rafters, trusses, wall panels, and connections—designed to carry 
load safely.
subﬂoor: A structural ﬂoor panel that is normally made of plywood or 
oriented strand board and is supported on joists.

Glossary
380
subscriber line: In telecommunications, a pair of copper wires running from 
the subscriber’s telephone to the local exchange. Also called the local loop.
substation: A facility that serves as a node in an electrical power 
transmission or distribution network. Substations may incorporate switches 
(or circuit breakers), transformers, and a variety of other devices for power 
management. 
sump pump: An electric pump that removes groundwater from beneath the 
ﬂoor slab of a building.
superelevation: In highway design, the angle at which a roadway is banked 
in a horizontal curve.
superheater: In a steam power plant, a device that transfers heat from the 
furnace exhaust gases to the steam en route from the steam drum to the 
turbines. 
suspension: In an automobile, a mechanical system that supports the weight 
of the vehicle, provides road isolation, provides roadholding, and prevents 
excessive body roll.
sustainable engineering: Engineering that meets the needs of the present 
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own 
needs.
switch: In a telecommunications network, a computer that is used to 
establish and manage connections between transmission lines. Switches 
are located at nodes in a circuit-switched network.
switchyard: A facility that connects a power plant to its associated power 
transmission system. The principal function of the switchyard is to increase 
voltage for long-distance transmission.
swivel: In an oil or natural gas drilling rig, a rotating ﬁtting from which the drill 
string is suspended. 

381
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
synchromesh: In an automotive transmission, a device that synchronizes the 
rotational speeds of a dog clutch and its paired gear, allowing them to mesh.
system: In thermodynamics, a ﬁxed quantity of matter contained within a 
well-deﬁned boundary.
tailrace: The pipe through which water is carried away from a reaction 
turbine.
tandem exchange: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), 
a switch located immediately above the local exchange in the network 
hierarchy.
tangent: In highway design, a straight-line segment in the horizontal 
alignment of a road.
target cell: In a cellular network, a cell that acquires control of a mobile 
device during a handoff.
technology: The product of engineering.
teleport: A ground-based communications port that provides customers 
with access to satellite communications. 
tendon: A high-strength steel reinforcing cable that is used in prestressed 
concrete. 
tension: An internal force or stress that causes elongation of a structural 
element.
thermal deformation: The tendency of a material to expand when heated 
and contract when cooled.
thermal mass: An object’s capacity to store heat.
thermodynamic efficiency: A dimensionless measure of the effectiveness 
of an energy-conversion process in a device that uses thermal energy—e.g., 

Glossary
382
an engine, a boiler, a furnace, or a refrigerator. In general, thermodynamic 
efficiency is calculated as a ratio of output to input and thus is always a 
number between 0 and 1 (or between 0% and 100%). Also called thermal 
efficiency.
thermostat: A mechanical or electronic device used to control temperature.
three-phase power: Electric power generated, transmitted, and distributed 
through three conductors, each carrying an alternating current (AC) of the 
same frequency and voltage, but each out of phase with the other two by 
120°. 
thermal bridge: A pathway through a wall or other building element that 
provides reduced thermal resistance.
thermal radiation: Heat transfer through electromagnetic waves emitted by 
a substance. 
thermal resistance: The extent to which a particular material resists the 
movement of heat through it.
time-division multiple access: A system for wireless communication in 
which the available frequency spectrum is ﬁrst subdivided into channels, 
and then, within each channel, multiple communication devices are each 
assigned a speciﬁc time slot for transmission.
time-division multiplexing: A form of multiplexing in which multiple signals 
are transmitted over a common path by assigning a unique sequential time 
slot to each signal.
time of concentration: The time it takes for a drop of water to ﬂow from the 
most remote point in the watershed to the outlet.
torque: A moment applied to a shaft, measured in units of force times 
distance.

383
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
torque converter: In an automatic transmission, a device that allows the 
engine to keep running when the vehicle comes to a stop and that cushions 
abrupt changes in the relative speeds of the input and output shafts during 
gear changes. The three main components of a torque converter are the 
impeller, turbine, and stator.
traction: The accelerating, braking, and turning forces generated at the 
interface between a vehicle tire and the surface on which it is rolling.
traffic control feature: A signal light, traffic sign, or pavement marker 
designed to ensure the orderly, predictable, and safe movement of vehicles 
by formally assigning the right-of-way to various routes through the 
intersection.
traffic density: In traffic engineering, the number of vehicles traveling on 
a speciﬁc length of highway at a particular instant in time, measured in 
vehicles per mile. 
traffic ﬂow: In traffic engineering, the hourly rate at which vehicles pass a 
speciﬁc point on a highway, measured in vehicles per hour. 
traffic volume: In highway design, the amount of traffic on a highway, 
measured in vehicles per day.
transaxle: An automotive transmission and differential integrated into a 
single unit.
transformer: A device that either raises or lowers electric voltage.
transmission: (1) The movement of electrical power over long distances 
from power-generating facilities to the regions in which the power will 
be consumed. A transmission line terminates at a substation. (2) In an 
automobile drivetrain, a device that keeps the engine rotating within its 
most efficient range of operation while providing adequate torque across 
the full range of vehicle speeds.

Glossary
384
truss: A structural system composed of slender elements arranged in 
interconnected triangles. Truss elements carry load primarily in tension or 
compression.
toll center: In the public switched telephone network (PSTN), a switch 
through which long-distance calls are routed. 
torsion: The twisting of a structural element around its longitudinal axis.
transponder: In satellite communications, a device that ﬁlters out a particular 
signal from an uplink, ampliﬁes that signal, shifts its frequency, and then 
retransmits it as a downlink. Multiple transponders are incorporated within 
the repeater of a satellite. 
trunk: 
In 
the 
public 
switched 
telephone 
network 
(PSTN), 
a 
telecommunications link designed to support the calling load associated 
with multiple users. 
tunnel lining: A structural shell that covers the inner face of a tunnel, resists 
soil and water pressure, and preserves the stability of the tunnel excavation.
turbine: An engine that produces continuous power by means of a fast-
moving ﬂow of water, steam, gas, or air driving a rotor ﬁtted with vanes or 
blades.
turnout: A railroad switch at which one rail line branches off from another.
twisted pair: Two twisted copper wires that are used for subscriber lines in 
the public switched telephone network (PSTN).
U-factor: Thermal transmittance. The U-factor is the mathematical reciprocal 
of the R-value.
underground mining: The excavation of tunnels and shafts to access 
mineral deposits deep under the surface of the Earth. 

385
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
universal joint: A mechanical connection between two shafts that allows the 
transmission of torque between shafts, even when one shaft is angled with 
respect to the other. 
uplink: A radio signal transmitted to a satellite. 
uranium 235: The most commonly used ﬁssile material for nuclear power 
generation.
vapor: The gaseous phase of a substance.
vapor-compression refrigeration: The thermodynamic cycle that serves as 
the basis for most modern refrigeration. 
vapor dome: On a pressure-volume diagram, the dome-shaped transition 
region between the liquid and vapor phases.
vector: A mathematical quantity that has both magnitude and direction.
vehicle ﬂow rate: In highway design, the amount of traffic on a highway, 
measured in vehicles per hour per lane.
viscosity: The resistance of a ﬂuid to ﬂow.
visible transmittance: A metric used in the window rating system of the 
National Fenestration Rating Council. This coefficient measures the fraction 
of visible light that passes through the glass.
voltage: A difference in electrical potential between two points, measured in 
volts. Voltage causes current to ﬂow through a circuit.
voltage regulator: A device that makes minor adjustments to output voltage 
at an electric substation. 
wastewater: All liquid and solid material that drains from plumbing ﬁxtures in 
a building or other facility.

Glossary
386
water distribution: The delivery of treated water to consumers.
water hammer: A shock that occurs when the ﬂow of water in a pipe is shut 
off suddenly. 
water main: A large pipe that serves as a principal element of a water 
distribution system.
water service line: A pipe that branches off of a water main to supply water 
to an individual building. 
watershed: An area of land deﬁned such that a drop of rainwater falling 
anywhere within its boundaries eventually drains to the same outlet.
weatherhead: A ﬁtting at which an electrical service drop enters a building.
web: The vertical element of an I-shaped structural shape or a railroad rail.
web stiffener: An element used to prevent the web of a beam or girder from 
buckling or failing in shear.
wedge: A simple machine that converts a longitudinal force to two large 
lateral forces. 
weep holes: Openings at or near the bottom of a masonry wall to allow for 
drainage of any water that penetrates the cladding.
well: A shaft excavated from the ground surface into an aquifer for the 
purpose of obtaining groundwater.
well casing: A pipe inserted into an oil or natural gas well to prevent the 
walls of the borehole from collapsing.
wheel and axle: A simple machine that converts an applied force to a larger 
force through rotation.

387
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
wind turbine: A device that converts the kinetic energy in moving air into 
electrical power.
work: Energy transferred through the movement of a force through a 
distance.

388
Bibliography
Bibliography
Allen, Edward. Fundamentals of Building Construction. New York: Wiley, 
1990. A comprehensive, highly detailed, well-illustrated reference covering 
all forms of building construction, residential and commercial.
American Society of Civil Engineers. Minimum Design Loads for Buildings 
and Other Structures (ASCE Standard 7-05). Reston, VA: ASCE, 2005. The 
U.S. technical standard deﬁning all types of loads relevant to the structural 
design of buildings. 
Barker, Richard M., and Jay A. Puckett. Design of Highway Bridges: An LRFD 
Approach. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2013. A comprehensive undergraduate-level 
introduction to bridge design, using the Load and Resistance Factor Design 
(LRFD) methodology.
Blume, Steven W. Electric Power System Basics for the Nonelectrical 
Professional. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley, 2007. An in-depth introduction to 
electrical power systems intended for a nontechnical audience. 
Chapman, David, and Nicole Metje. Introduction to Tunnel Construction. New 
York: Spon Press, 2010. A comprehensive undergraduate-level introduction 
to tunnel design and construction, emphasizing the current state of the art 
in tunneling.
Department of the Army. Technical Manual 9-8000: Principles of Automotive 
Vehicles. Washington, DC: Department of the Army, 1985. Widely available 
as a free download from the Internet, this Army technical manual provides 
a clear, succinct, superbly illustrated overview of all automotive systems. 
Given its publication in 1985, this reference does not cover the current state 
of the art in automotive engineering and must be supplemented with more 
current information.
Dewberry, Sidney O., ed. Land Development Handbook: Planning, 
Engineering, and Surveying. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2002. A superb, 

389
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
comprehensive reference on land development and site design, prepared 
by experienced professionals working in this ﬁeld.
Galusha, Diane. Liquid Assets: A History of New York’s Water Supply System. 
Fleischmanns, NY: Purple Mountain Press, 2002. A comprehensive history of 
the development of the New York City water supply system. This reference 
provides an excellent historical account and statistics but has relatively little 
technical content.
Garber, Nicholas J., and Lester A. Hoel. Traffic and Highway Engineering. 
Paciﬁc Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 2002. A comprehensive undergraduate-
level introduction to traffic and highway engineering, with ample 
computational examples.
Gillespie, Thomas D. Fundamentals of Vehicle Dynamics. Warrendale, PA: 
Society of Automotive Engineers, 2014. An excellent undergraduate-level 
introduction to automotive engineering.
Goleniewski, Lillian. Telecommunications Essentials: The Complete Global 
Source. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2007. A comprehensive 
technical overview of modern telecommunications technology. 
Hayes, Brian. Infrastructure: A Field Guide to the Industrial Landscape. 
New York: Norton, 2005. A superb, richly illustrated overview of all forms 
of infrastructure, intended for a general audience. This book inspired many 
of the lectures in this course. Unfortunately, several chapters (e.g., Power 
Plants and Communications) are now out of date, due to recent technological 
developments.
International Code Council. 2015 International Residential Code for One- and 
Two-Family Dwellings. Country Club Hills, IL: ICC, 2014. The predominant 
model code used for residential construction in the United States, Puerto 
Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Johnson, Anthony, and Andy Gibson. Sustainability in Engineering Design. 
New York: Elsevier, 2014. An excellent introduction to sustainability concepts 

Bibliography
390
as applied to the engineering design process, with emphasis on mechanical 
and aerospace engineering contexts.
Johnston, David, and Scott Gibson. Green from the Ground Up: Sustainable, 
Healthy, and Energy-Efficient Home Construction. Newtown, CT: The 
Taunton Press, 2008. A superb overview of building science principles 
as applied to residential construction. Although this book is targeted at 
builders, it is appropriate for a general audience as well.
Johnston, David, and Scott Gibson. Toward a Zero Energy Home: A Complete 
Guide to Energy Self-Sufficiency at Home. Newtown, CT: The Taunton Press, 
2010. This book is a follow-up to the authors’ earlier Green from the Ground 
Up and describes a higher-level approach to green building, aimed at the 
zero-energy home.
Kosky, Philip, Robert T. Balmer, William D. Keat, and George Wise. Exploring 
Engineering: An Introduction to Engineering and Design. New York: Elsevier, 
2012. A basic-level introduction to engineering and design, including 
introductory coverage of basic scientiﬁc principles and an overview of all 
major engineering disciplines.
Macaulay, David. The New Way Things Work. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1998. 
Although this book is intended for young people, its beautiful illustrations 
provide a rich source of information for anyone interested in how everyday 
technologies work. 
Moran, Michael J., Howard N. Shapiro, Daisie D. Boettner, and Margaret B. 
Bailey. Fundamentals of Engineering Thermodynamics. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley, 2011. An excellent, comprehensive undergraduate-level introduction 
to thermodynamics that incorporates many practical applications and ample 
problem-solving examples.
Nazaroff, William W., and Lisa Alvarez-Cohen. Environmental Engineering 
Science. 
New 
York: 
Wiley, 
2001. 
An 
excellent, 
comprehensive 
undergraduate-level introduction to the science underlying environmental 
engineering.

391
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
Norman, Don. The Design of Everyday Things. New York: Basic, 2013. 
The deﬁnitive reference on user-centered design, written by the man who 
deﬁned the ﬁeld.
Riley, William F., Leroy D. Sturges, and Don H. Morris. Statics and Mechanics 
of Materials: An Integrated Approach. New York: John Wiley and Sons, 
1995. An excellent, comprehensive undergraduate-level introduction to 
engineering mechanics that incorporates many practical applications and 
ample problem-solving examples.
Salvadori, Mario. Why Buildings Stand Up: The Strength of Architecture. 
New York: Norton, 1980. A beautifully written introduction to structural 
engineering concepts, written for a general audience.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Research and Innovative Technology 
Administration, Bureau of Transportation Statistics. Freight in America: A 
New National Picture. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Transportation, 
2006. A technical report that incorporates current statistics on the role of 
freight railroads in the U.S. transportation system.
Welti, C. Robert. Satellite Basics for Everyone: An Illustrated Guide to 
Satellites for Non-Technical and Technical People. Bloomington, IN: 
iUniverse, 2012. A superb introduction to satellites and orbital mechanics, 
intended for a general audience. 
Wing, Charlie. The Visual Handbook of Building and Remodeling. Newtown, 
CT: Taunton, 2009. An excellent how-to book on residential building and 
remodeling. Because of its ample, clear illustrations, this reference serves 
as a superb source of information on how all residential building systems 
work.

392
Image Credits
Image Credits
5 .....................................................................................© hxdyl/iStock/Thinkstock.
6 ............................................................© Thomas_Marchhart/iStock/Thinkstock.
12 ...................................................................© Roman Milert/Hemera/Thinkstock.
14 ............................................................. © Stefanie White/Photodisc/Thinkstock.
21.............................© Monkey Business Images/Monkey Business/Thinkstock.
24 .................................................................................© FSYLN/iStock/Thinkstock.
30 ......................................................................© Andy Dean/Hemera/Thinkstock.
34 ...............................................................................© tfoxfoto/iStock/Thinkstock.
38 ..................................................................................© RG-vc/iStock/Thinkstock.
40 ...........................................................................© Derevo30/iStock/Thinkstock.
44 .............................................................© Christina Richards/iStock/Thinkstock.
48 ............................................................................ © artisticco/iStock/Thinkstock.
49 ........................................................ © Michael Blann/DigitalVision/Thinkstock.
53 ...................................................................... © bannerwega/iStock/Thinkstock.
59 .............................................................. © Kim Steele/DigitalVision/Thinkstock.
67 .................................................................................. © sytilin/iStock/Thinkstock.
71 ...................................................................................© rssfhs/iStock/Thinkstock.
77 ........................................................................© Avatar_023/iStock/Thinkstock.
81 .......................................................................... © antikainen/iStock/Thinkstock.
83 ...................................................... © Jupiterimages/PHOTOS.com/Thinkstock.
88 ......................................................................... © Adam88xx/iStock/Thinkstock.
91 .................................................................... © hanhanpeggy/iStock/Thinkstock.
92 ................................................................................................ © Fuse/Thinkstock.
102 ....................................................© Evgenii Karamyshev/Hemera/Thinkstock.
113 ................................................................© Michal Kodym/Hemera/Thinkstock.
118 ................................................................................ © Ten03/iStock/Thinkstock.
120 .................................................................................. © moodboard/Thinkstock.
123 .................................................................................. © Design Pics/Thinkstock.
127 ............................................................................© Chicetin/iStock/Thinkstock.
134 .............................................................................© Padung/iStock/Thinkstock.
page no. 

393
Everyday Engineering: Understanding the Marvels of Daily Life
138 .................................................................................© mitifo/iStock/Thinkstock.
143 ................................................................. © Jacques Arpin/iStock/Thinkstock.
152 .................................................................................... © ttsz/iStock/Thinkstock.
167 .........................................................................© simazoran/iStock/Thinkstock.
170 ......................................................... © David Sacks/DigitalVision/Thinkstock.
178 ..........................................................© Ryan McVay/DigitalVision/Thinkstock.
180 ...................................................................© Yuriy Chaban/iStock/Thinkstock.
185 ...........................................................© Jupiterimages/Stockbyte/Thinkstock.
187 ................................................................... © Ernest Prim/Hemera/Thinkstock.
197 ................................................................................. © ra3rn/iStock/Thinkstock.
205 .....................................................................© AbeSnap23/iStock/Thinkstock.
228 .................................................................© yogesh_more/iStock/Thinkstock.
232 ..............................................................© Jupiterimages/Creatas/Thinkstock.
239 .............................................................. © Alexey Sokolov/iStock/Thinkstock.
240 .............................................................................. © yotrak/iStock/Thinkstock.
255 ............................................................................... © kkgas/iStock/Thinkstock.
256 .............................................................................© Lizalica/iStock/Thinkstock.
260 ................................................................................ © jacus/iStock/Thinkstock.
264 ...................................................................© goce risteski/iStock/Thinkstock.
272 ................................................................. © Photology1971/iStock/Thinkstock.
273 ..........................................................................© Big Joker/iStock/Thinkstock.
290 ....................................................................© Ron Chapple Stock/Thinkstock.
291 ............................................................... © Philip Voystock/iStock/Thinkstock.
298 ..........................................................................© gezgin01/iStock/Thinkstock.
308 ...............................................................................© VILevi/iStock/Thinkstock. 
313 .............................................................. © 123ArtistImages/iStock/Thinkstock.
317 ............................................................© Allison Achauer/Hemera/Thinkstock.
322................................................................................© Digital Vision/Thinkstock.
324 ............................................................... © Adriana Spurio/iStock/Thinkstock.
page no. 

