1 0
0
74470 03105
5
GUNWORLD
U.S. $4.99
DISPLAY UNTIL: 
10/10/17
OCTOBER 2017 VOLUME 58, NO. 10
SINCE 1959
BULLPUP FACE-OFF: 
CZECH ARMY
MARLIN MODEL 60
PUTTING FOOD ON THE 
LE SINCE 1960
CLEARED
HOT
CHOOSING
THE RIGHT
SELF-DEFENSE
AMMO
SELECT-FIRE 
CARBINE
MODERN DANGEROUS-GAME RIFLE
MONTANA RIFLE CO. AVR .375 H&H
AMMO TEST
SIG ELITE PERFORMANCE
SMLE
THE BRITS’ 
LEGENDARY
MILITARY 
RIFLE
JEFF QUINN
TALKS ABOUT SIX-GUNS, 
GREEN CHILI AND FRIED PIES
WE TAKE THE REMINGTON AWR 
ON A TEXAS EXOTIC HUNT


MADE BY
YOUR WAIT IS OVER
WORLD’S MOST COMPACT RIFLE
sigsauer.com
The pinnacle of portable ﬁ repower,
the MCX Rattler features a 5.5” 
barrel and folding stock, making it
usable as short as 16”
Available in 5.56 NATO and 300
BLK, the switch-barrel MCX
Rattler offers M4 ballistics in a
subgun-sized package
Built for top-tier units, the
short-stroke piston design
eliminates the buffer tube yet
maintains familiar M4 controls
ADVANCED
DISCREET
POWERFUL
SIG MCX®
RATTLER
™
#mcxrattler

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
06 
UP FRONT
08 
KIT UP! 
10 
OPTICS
14 
HUNT
18 
ARTEMIS ARMED          
80 
EDC
84 
TRAIN
88 
PREPS
92 
CLEARED HOT
96 
CHEWING THE FAT
98 
DOWN RANGE 
GUN WORLD (ISSN 0017-5641) is published monthly in January, February, March, 
April, May, June, July, August, September, October, November and December by
Engaged Media Inc., LLC, 17890 Sky Park Circle, Suite 250, Irvine, CA 92614. 
Periodical postage paid at Irvine, CA, and additional mailing offi ces. POSTMASTER: 
Send address changes to GUN WORLD c/o Engaged Media Inc., VSI, Inc., 905 Kent 
Street, Liberty, MO 64068. © 2017 by Engaged Media, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Reproduction of any material from this issue in whole or in part is strictly prohibited. 
GST#855050365RT001. Canadian Post: Publications Mail Agreement Pitney Bowes, 
Inc., P.O. Box 25542, London, ON N6C 6B2, Canada.
GUN: CZ BREN A2 SELECT-FIRE CARBINE
PHOTO: DENNIS M. GIACOBE
DESIGN: JULIAN AVIÑA

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
GUNWORLD
64
SELECT-FIRE BREN
CZ’s 805 Bren S1 has been well received here in the
USA. See how it compares with the Czech army
original: the A2 Select-Fire Carbine.
By Andy Massimilian
OCTOBER I 2017
22 
 SQUIRRELS, RABBITS AND PORCUPINES—BEWARE!
 Eleven million rifles later, little has changed since  
 the Model 60 was released. Marlin’s .22 is 
 
inexpensive, plain and common. But it’s a workhorse 
 
that’s boringly reliable and perfect for putting small 
 
game on the table.
 
By Dana Benner
30 
 BIG GREEN’S GO-ANYWHERE MACHINE
 Built to resist the elements, Remington’s American  
 Wilderness Rifl e proves its mettle on a Texas exotic hunt.
 
By Mike Dickerson
40 
 RUNNING WITH THE BULL … PUPS
 We test two currently popular models—the IWI  
   X95 and Kel-Tec RDB—and put them muzzle to  
                   muzzle to see how they compare.
 
By Robert Sadowski
48 
 HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMP
 Montana Rifl e Company’s AVR chambered in .375 H&H is 
 a modern take on the classic dangerous-game rifl e.
 
By Brad Fitzpatrick
56 
 AMMO TEST: SIG SAUER ELITE PERFORMANCE
 You see it advertised everywhere, but how good is it for  
 self-defense? We put it to the test, and here’s what we found.
 
By Ed Sanow
72 
 THE LEGENDARY BRITISH “SMELLY”
 The British SMLE (Short, Magazine, Lee-Enfield) rifle  
 is one of the longest-serving bolt-action rifles of all  
 
time. Its exploits are legendary.
 
By Bob Campbell

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
W
e love to bash mainstream America for being overly politically 
correct—and rightly so. America has become too sensitive 
about everything. If a person says the wrong thing, someone 
is sure to be offended. 
But here’s something to chew on: Within the gun culture, we have our own 
politically correct terminology being inflicted upon us; it’s mostly being enforced 
by the armchair warriors. The only thing they’ve ever patrolled (or, in this case, 
“trolled”) are the online gun forums. 
Here are a few examples of political correctness gone awry in the gun community:
CLIP VS. MAGAZINE. If you use the word, “clip,” instead of “magazine” in front of 
the wrong gun person, prepare to get lambasted. Believe it or not, many people 
grew up in a time where almost everyone called a magazine a clip. Believe me, I 
know that hearing “clip” misused is like fingernails on chalkboard, but is it worth 
it to alienate new gun owners in order to be politically correct? 
SILENCER VS SUPPRESSOR. Despite the fact that Hiram Percy Maxim—the man 
who invented it—took out a patent for what he called a “silencer,” if you call it 
that today, you’ll be accused of “not being a Special Forces operator.” The ATF 
calls it a silencer, and it’s sure enough written all over the laws that legislate 
its use. But the Internet has recently decided “it doesn’t really silence noise; it 
suppresses noise,” and things have gone downhill from there.
GUN VS. RIFLE. This one has largely spread due to the famous cadence scene from 
the movie, Full Metal Jacket: “This is my rifle, this is my gun; this is for shooting, this 
is for fun.” You want to know a little secret? I could give two rips whether someone 
calls a firearm a “gun.” And now, to protect our image in the media (because the 
media thinks so highly of gun owners), we can’t even call it a “weapon.”
BULLET VS. CARTRIDGE. I know, “It’s not a bullet; it’s a cartridge. The bullet is 
only one component.” Sometimes, for the sake of brevity, it’s convenient to speak 
in vague/generic terms, as in “Grab a handful of bullets.” But don’t let the gun PC 
police hear you. (I guess the Marine Corps was incorrect when it taught me about 
the three Bs of logistics: beans, bandages and … bullets.) 
Why do I care about the gun PC police? Because it alienates people. I’ve seen 
people talking about guns, all animated and excited, and then, they get cut off 
with a correction. A slight roll of the eyes, and the fun is instantly drained out 
of the conversation. 
It’s time we take a look at our own type of PC and stop hammering people. I’m all for 
educating people, but it’s one thing to gently inform and another thing to jump on our 
high horses to show others what super tactical operators we are. 
Gotta run—it’s time to load bullets into my clip so I can shoot my silencer-
equipped gun.  
THE “POLITICALLY CORRECT” GUN CULTURE?
 BY ROBB MANNING RMANNING@ENGAGEDMEDIAINC.COM
GUN WORLD
OCTOBER  2017
Volume 58 • Number 10
EDITORIAL
Robb Manning Editor
Kelly Nomura  Executive Managing Editor
Amy Maclean Managing Editor
DESIGN
Julian Aviña Art Director
CONTRIBUTORS 
Steven Barlow, Dana Benner. Brian Berry, Bob Campbell, Michelle Cerino, Mike Dickerson,
Brad Fitzpatrick, Steven Ledin, Garrett Lucas, Andy Massimilian, Jeff Quinn,
Robert Sadowski, Ed Sanow, Beckey Yackley
ADVERTISING
Gabe Frimmel Ad Sales Director
(714) 200-1930  gfrimmel@engagedmediainc.com 
Casey Clifford Senior Account Executive
(714) 200-1982
Mark Pack Senior Account Executive
(714) 200-1939
Charles Dorr Account Executive
(714) 200-1931
John Bartulin Account Executive
(866) 866-5146 ext. 2746
John Cabral Advertising Design
Eric Gomez Advertising Traffic Coordinator
Gennifer Merriday Advertising Traffic Coordinator
MARKETING
Elise Portale Content Marketing Manager
Brooke Sanders Content Marketing Specialist
Eric Surber Content Marketing Specialist
Michael Chadwick Digital Marketing & Media Coordinator
Andrew Dunbar Videographer
OPERATIONS
Robert Short IT Manager
Parveen Kumar Newsstand and Circulation Analyst
Shailesh Khandelwal Subscriptions Manager
Alex Mendoza Administrative Assistant
Melinda Magde Project Coordinator
Victoria Van Vlear Intern Program Manager
EDITORIAL, PRODUCTION & SALES OFFICE
17890 Sky Park Circle, Suite 250, Irvine, CA 92614
(714) 939-9991 • Fax (800) 249-7761
www.gunworld.com
www.facebook.com/gunworldmagazine
www.facebook.com/eembybeckett 
www.instagram.com/gunworldmagazine
GUN WORLD (ISSN 0017-5641) is published monthly in January, February, March, April, May, June, July, August, 
September, October, November and December by Engaged Media Inc., LLC, 17890 Sky Park Circle, Suite 250, Irvine, CA 
92614. Periodical postage paid at Irvine, CA, and additional mailing offices. POSTMASTER: Send address changes to 
GUN WORLD, c/o Engaged Media Inc, VSI, Inc., 905 Kent Street, Liberty, MO 64068. 
© 2017 by Engaged Media, Inc. All rights reserved. Reproduction of any material from this issue in whole or in part is 
strictly prohibited. GST#855050365RT001. 
Canadian Post: Publications Mail Agreement Pitney Bowes, Inc., P.O. Box 25542, London, ON N6C 6B2, Canada 
CUSTOMER SERVICE
Engaged Media, Inc.
17890 Sky Park Circle, Suite 250, Irvine, CA 92614
Subscriptions, Address Changes, Renewals, 
Missing or Damaged Copies
(800) 764-6278
(239) 653-0225 Foreign Inquiries
subscriptions@engagedmediainc.com
customerservice@engagedmediainc.com
Back Issues: www.engagedmediamags.com
Books, merchandise, reprints
(800) 764-6278 • Foreign (239) 653-0225
Letters to editor, new products or to contribute a story or photo: rmanning@engagedmediainc.com
SUBSCRIPTION RATES
$17.95/1 year, $29.95/2 years. Outside the U.S.: $40.95/1  year, $75.95/2 years. Payable in U.S. funds. Single copy price is $4.99. 
Please allow 6 to 8 weeks for new subscriptions to begin.
ENGAGED MEDIA, INC.
Mike Savino CEO
Jason Mulroney Content Director
Pinaki Bhattacharya Vertical Manager
Philip Trinkle Newsstand Sales Director
Bob Hulsy Business Development Director
Sabra Morris Director of Content Marketing
This magazine is purchased by the buyer with the understanding that  information presented is from various 
sources from which there can be no warranty or responsibility by Engaged Media Inc., as to the legality, 
completeness or technical accuracy.
GST #855050365RT001
Canada Post: Publications Mail Agreement #40612608
Return undeliverable Canadian addresses to: PITNEY BOWES, INC., P.O. Box 25542,
London, ON  N6C 6B2, Canada


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
MODEL: Urban Survival
SIZE: 5.7 inches total; 1.6-inch blade 
length; 0.1-inch blade thickness; 
1-ounce weight
MATERIAL: 440C blade, aluminum 
handle
MSRP: $52
URL: www.BokerUSA.com
Designed by Jim Wagner, the Urban 
Survival is an extremely compact 
knife that fi ts in a briefcase 
penholder. At just 1 ounce, it 
weighs almost nothing (literally). 
You don’t even notice you’re 
carrying it ... until you need it. The 
blade is made of American 440C 
stainless steel and has a scalpel-
like tip that is perfect for detailed 
cutting jobs. It uses screw-type 
blade lifters, and a linerlock keeps 
the blade securely open. It comes 
with a glass-breaker tip installed, 
but it is removable so other 
compatible tips can be installed—
such as a Kubotan. It has a pocket 
clip that can be swapped from the 
right to the left side but is for tip-
up carry only. A law enforcement 
model also includes a fold-out 
handcuff key and arresting pin.
MAKE: Browning Outdoor
Accessories
MODEL: Browning Harper Concealed 
Carry Handbag
OPTIONS: Brown or gray
MSRP: $100
URL: www.BrowningLifestyle.com
This handbag is designed for the 
modern concealed-carry woman. 
It opens via magnetic closure to a 
main compartment with a separator. 
The separator opens from the top 
using a lockable zipper for access to 
the concealed-carry compartment 
and a removable nylon holster 
attached via a hook-and-loop 
closure. Access can also be had on 
both sides of the bag, also using a 
lockable zipper. It has an internal 
organizer for pens, ID, cards and 
other items. The two handbag straps 
are easily removed for conversion to 
backpack or crossbody carry using 
two adjustable backpack straps. 
The handbag has a wide base to sit 
upright and includes heavy-duty, 
antique-style hardware and the 
Browning-branded trim. It is made 
of synthetic “leather” with a 100 
percent polyester camoufl age lining.
MAKE: Federal Premium
MODEL: Edge TLR
CALIBER/LOAD: .308 Win 175-grain; 
.30-06 Spring 175-grain; .300 Win 
Mag 200-grain; .300 Win Short Mag 
200-grain
MSRP: $50 (.308 and .30-06); 
$60 (.300 Win Mag and .300 Win 
Short Mag)
URL: www.FederalPremium.com
Take long-range match-grade 
accuracy, give it a bonded hunting 
bullet, and you get the Edge 
TLR (“terminal long range”). The 
high-heat-resistant Slipstream tip 
initiates expansion at long ranges—
even once the bullet slows to lower 
velocities. The copper shank and 
bonded lead core allow it to hold 
together for deep penetration. 
It’s also effective at close ranges. 
Initially offered in four time-proven 
loads, it’s a true, all-distance, wide-
range-of-velocities hunting load.
MAKE: Weapon Shield
MODEL: Maintenance Kit, 4 ounces
INCLUDES: 4-ounce bottle of solvent,
4-ounce bottle of CLP, precision needle
oiler of CLP, syringe of grease
MSRP: $35
URL: www.WeaponShield.com
Everything in this kit is non-
fl ammable, non-toxic, user-safe and 
environmentally friendly—all of which 
doesn’t mean squat if a product doesn’t 
work. However, we’ve been very 
impressed with these Weapon Shield 
products. The grease was used in a 
belt-fed M249S through two belts of 
ammo; so far, no issues. The solvent 
made quick work of a moderately 
fouled AR. We just sprayed it on and let 
it sit for about 10 minutes. Most fouling 
wiped off with a rag; the rest required 
a nylon brush. Trouble spots such as 
the BCG needed a scraper, but it came 
off easily. The CLP has been used in an 
AR—again, no stoppages. We haven’t 
used it, alone, for cleaning, but it has 
helped make for an easy cleanup for 
the solvent. We have not tested the 
protective element of it at this time.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
MAKE: Alien Gear Holsters
MODEL: ShapeShift Starter Pack
MSRP: $100
URL: www.AlienGearHolsters.com
his starter pack is the base of the 
ShapeShift Modular Holster System 
that allows the user to shift from 
one mode of carry to another. It 
can confi gure into an IWB holster, 
appendix-carry holster, OWB slide 
holster and OWB paddle holster. Plus, 
attach the mounting bracket under a 
desk, car dashboard or other surface, 
and you can release the holster from 
the paddle with one touch of a button 
and re-attach it to the mounting 
bracket—great for road trips. 
The holster backer is made from 
neoprene, making all carry methods 
extremely comfortable. We were 
extremely impressed with appendix 
carry, which is easily the most 
comfortable we’ve tried. The only 
drawback is that the paddle holster 
protrudes pretty far due to the quick-
release knob. All the holsters are 
adjustable for angle, and the paddle 
holster also has an optional active-
retention thumb release. These 
holsters are currently available in 24 
different gun models. To add more 
handgun models to your system, you 
only need an additional shell ($34). 
This is an extremely versatile
holster system.
AKE: Browning Footwear
MODEL: Buck Shadow 8”
INSULATION: Thinsulate
WATERPROOFING: OutDry
(www.OutDry.com)
MSRP: $180 (non-insulated); $190 
(400g); $200 (800g)
URL: www.BrowningFootwear.com
Designed for spot-and-stalk hunting 
over demanding terrain, the Buck 
Shadow is lightweight for long treks, 
because it offers plenty of cushioning 
to keep those puppies from barking. 
It’s stable over rough terrain, thanks 
to the integrated external shank, and 
it’s got great traction, even over wet, 
slippery surfaces. Likewise, the arch-
sole has traction for stepping on and 
over slippery rocks and wet, fallen 
tree trunks. It incorporates an OutDry 
waterproof/breathable membrane to 
keep feet dry. TecTuff covers the toe 
and heel, preventing wear and scuffs. 
It comes in three levels of insulation 
and four camo patterns.
MAKE: TRUGLO 
MODEL: TRU-TEC 20mm 
Red-Dot Sight
SPECS: 2 MOA reticle; 20mm 
objective; auto off/on
MSRP: $221
URL: www.TruGlo.com
TruGlo optics used to be a bit of a 
joke—okay for casual use, but not 
for serious shooters. Things are 
different now. We’ve been running 
this one on our AR without a glitch 
for more than eight months now—
and still on the same battery. This 
optic has withstood recoil up to .458 
SOCOM. But what does-in an optic is 
what happens between shots: Ours 
has been knocked about, submerged 
underwater and unintentionally 
dropped onto a concrete fl oor while 
it was mounted on a rifl e. It’s still 
running strong. This optic comes with 
low and high mounts.
MAKE: Slogan Outdoors
MODEL: Magnum Pro Tactical 3 
Position Sling
MSRP: $60 (with mash hook, 
MIL-SPEC)
URL: www.SloganOutdoors.com
This is one of the most versatile 
slings we’ve tried. The main body is 
made of heavy-duty thermoplastic 
rubber that’s able to carry small- to 
large-size fi rearms (we used it with 
an M249S); and, with it properly 
tightened, there’s no bounce. Yet, 
it has enough elasticity to shoulder 
the weapon. It’s nonslip, impervious 
to elements, won’t crack and retains 
fl exibility down to -40 degrees (F). It 
adjusts from 27 to 58 inches and is 
long enough to work over multiple 
layers and heavy gear. It can be 
used as a one-, two- or three-point 
sling, with a double-strap design 
that can position around backpacks. 
It comes with two attachment 
options—metal trigger and mash 
hook (tested). Both are quiet, with 
no squeak. Plus, a rubber skirt 
covers the swivel to reduce metal-
on-metal contact noise.

 TEXT AND PHOTOS BY STEVEN K. LEDIN
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
S
ixty-nine thousand documented rounds and 
counting, fired under one particular SIG 
ROMEO4B red-dot sight. It’s mounted on a SIG 
MCX SBR (Short Barreled Rifle) in 300 Blackout 
used by the SIG Academy. 
This sight has ridden the subsonic and supersonic recoil so much 
that the gun has required three replacement barrels so far. It’s a 
suppressed select-fire gun, and when it gets too hot, it’s standard 
practice to submerge the whole gun in any available ultrasonic 
cleaning tank—optic still attached.
This is one of the variety of firearm packages that travel the country 
with SIG’s firearm instructors. These firearms and optics get 
abused substantially more than our personally owned equipment 
will ever be. The recoil from 69,000 rounds this ROMEO4B was 
subjected to is certainly a lot to ask of any red-dot sight. 
However, it’s the abuse the sight takes from being handled by 
hundreds of people waiting for their turn to shoot at a SIG dealer 
range day that takes its toll on sights. Heavy-handed hooligans 
abound who treat guns like I treat rental cars and don’t baby the 
SIG’S 
69,000-ROUND 
RED DOT
THANKS TO SIG’S TECHNOLOGICAL 
SAVVY, YOU DON’T HAVE TO 
MERCILESSLY ABUSE THIS SIGHT TO 
PROVE ITS DURABILITY.
This particular SIG 
ROMEO4B sight has been 
through 69,000 rounds of 
recoil—outlasting three 
barrels (cooked) on this 
SIG MCX chambered in 
300 BLK.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The ROMEO4B sights 
ride a variety of firearms 
at the SIG Academy, such 
as this one on an MPX.
Equipment serving duty 
at the SIG Academy has 
a hard life.
equipment—because it’s not theirs, and after all, “It’s supposed to 
be tough!” Some shooters can’t be trusted to not break an anvil. 
Electronics and mounting systems are stressed to maximum from 
accidental forces induced by dropping the gun or banging it off the 
corner of a shooting bench. This type of stress is the toughest on 
equipment. It’s not the normal direction of recoil that the optic feels 
when firing cartridges; rather, it’s the sideways, upside-down and 
angled stresses from dings, bangs and bruises that equipment is 
subjected to during shooting events and teaching. An optic serving 
duty on a gun at the SIG Academy is proof-tested daily.
PERPETUAL MOTION
I spent a day at the scorched and dusty 140-acre SIG Academy 
in Epping, New Hampshire, with a handful of industry experts. 
We subjected a variety of firearms and optics to a day of 
trigger-pulling using unlimited ammo. Most SIG categories 
were represented, including AR and MCX carbines and pistols. 
Many of these were select fire and suppressed with SIG cans, 
as well as traditional pistols and ammo. Throughout it all, the 
ROMEO4B on the MCX was continually in motion. 
SIG is constantly striving to stay on the technological cutting 
edge with its products, and the already excellent ROMEO4B 
discussed in this article has just been upgraded. The new 
version will be assembled in the United States, with the reticle 
life increased from 5,000 to 50,000 hours. The reticle has 10 
daytime and two night vision settings and can be toggled 
between a 2 MOA dot to a 2 MOA dot with a 65 MOA circle 
around it—very similar to the easily recognizable EOTech 
reticle. The sight also has what SIG calls “MOTAC,” which 
means MOTion ACtivated illumination. With MOTAC, the reticle 
turns off when not in use to conserve battery life. Moving the 
gun instantly reactivates the dot.
AS YOU LIKE IT
The ROMEO4B already comes with spacers to position it on your 
carbine for either an absolute or lower 1/3 co-witness, but the 
new version of the product will come with mounts that mimic the 
footprint of the Aimpoint Micro series of sights. This will enable you 
to choose from a variety of aftermarket manufacturers to select the 
attachment design that suits your needs the best. 
The ROMEO4B has an IPX7 waterproof rating to 1 meter for at least 
30 minutes. The body is CNC machined from aluminum, and the 
sight comes with cool and unique flip-down caps. The warranty 
on electronic components in Electro-Optics sights is five years, 
but SIG’s focus is more on the end-user experience than the time 
frame. Call if you have an issue, and you’ll be taken care of.
THESE FIREARMS 
AND OPTICS 
GET ABUSED 
SUBSTANTIALLY 
MORE THAN OUR 
PERSONALLY 
OWNED EQUIPMENT 
WILLEVERBE.
The street price on the quality 4B is affordable: around $350. 
Expect the improved version to have a different letter designation 
and to cost slightly more.
Other SIG sights also take abuse at the SIG Academy, such as a 
ROMEO1 mini reflex sight that rides the slide of a battered SIG 
Mk25 9mm pistol. The pistol, itself, is so deliriously sloppy from 
round count that all parts are worn perfectly in sync—like a 
noisy sewing machine. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Steven K. Ledin is a former U.S. Navy nuclear gunner’s mate and current 
director of a prominent online optics retailer. He’s a CCW and NRA instructor 
and has been a sponsored competitive shooter and private investigator. He has 
hunted (and gotten lost) from Alaska to Africa.
Hot and dirty guns at
SIG events often get
waterboarded—with their
optics still attached!
The ROMEO1 sight on
this Mark 25 pistol is
functionally unaffected by
its cracked sight window.
SPECIFICATIONS
TYPE: Red dot
MAGNIFICATION: 1x
OBJECTIVE LENS DIAMETER: 20mm
EYE RELIEF: Unlimited
ILLUMINATION SETTINGS: 10 daytime; 
2 night vision
RED DOT SIZE: 2 MOA dot or 2 MOA dot inside a 65 
MOA circle
ELEVATION/WINDAGE ADJUSTMENT 
RANGE: +/- 50 MOA
WEATHER RESISTANCE: 1 meter submersed for 
at least 30 minutes (IPX-7); fogproof
WEIGHT: 3.4 ounces
DIMENSIONS: 2.65 (L) x 1.4 (W) x 1.6 (H) inches
POWER: 1x CR2032 battery; 5,000 hours (motion activated)
MSRP: $419 (the price of the 4B—discontinued)
*NOTE: The 4B has been discontinued and will be replaced by a 
U.S.-assembled and updated version with a mounting platform 
compatible with the Aimpoint Micro series of sights and an updated 
reticle with a tenfold life increase to 50,000 hours! It will still be 
called a ROMEO4 but will have a different letter designation. Expect 
the retail price to increase slightly.
SPECIFICATIONS
TYPE: Miniature refl ex sight
MAGNIFICATION: 1x
OBJECTIVE LENS DIAMETER: 30mm
EYE RELIEF: Unlimited
ILLUMINATION SETTING: 5 daytime; 2 night vision
RED DOT SIZE: 3 MOA 
ELEVATION/WINDAGE ADJUSTMENT 
RANGE: +/- 50 MOA
WEATHER RESISTANCE: 1 meter submersed for 
at least 30 minutes (IPX-7); fogproof
WEIGHT: 0.8 ounce
DIMENSIONS: 1.8 (L) x 1.3 (W) x1.1 (H) inches
POWER: 1x CR1632 battery (motion activated)
MSRP: $479 
NOTE: The ROMEO1 Mini Refl ex Sight was awarded the coveted 
Guns & Ammo Optic of the Year award for 2016.
CONTACT INFORMATION
SIG SAUER, INC.
www.SIGSauer.com
The ROMEO1 sight mounted on it is remarkable, because it’s 
been on the gun for thousands of rounds with a cracked lens 
(courtesy of an unfortunately placed carbine muzzle during airport 
transport). There are no functional issues with this sight—other 
than the glaring and obviously broken glass on the bottom of the 
sight window. It’s just fun to shoot with it, and the fractures do not 
occlude any target area.
A great treat is that we, the consumers, can buy these exact 
products, and we don’t have to mercilessly abuse them to prove 
their durability. They have already been well vetted, so we can just 
enjoy shooting with them and relying on them. 
We can even take good care of them … if we choose to.   


www.gunworld.com
OCTOBER I 2017
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY BRAD FITZPATRICK
THE RIFLE AND CALIBER YOU CHOOSE
FOR YOUR HUNTING ARE IMPORTANT, 
BUT AN EFFECTIVE HUNTING BULLET IS 
CRITICAL TO SUCCESS.
G
rowing up, one of my shooting mentors loved 
nothing more than to heap insults on the 
.270 Winchester. A Korean War veteran and a 
competitive rifle shooter, this gentleman had 
nothing good to say about the cartridge famed 
Jack O’Connor spoke so lovingly of. 
“.270s are worthless,” he once said to me. “Absolutely worthless!” 
His rationale? The .270 pushed a bullet too fast and, 
subsequently, it was impossible to recover more than a 
few pounds of edible meat from an animal killed by this 
cartridge. The best meat, he always told me, was practically 
jelly. What a waste. 
Over the past few years, I’ve killed multiple deer with the 
.270, and my personal hunting weapon is a Montana Rifle 
Company bolt action with a Trijicon scope chambered in—
you guessed it—.270. 
So, do I think my old hunting and shooting companion was 
wrong? Yes … sort of. 
When he was first hunting with the .270 back in the 1950s, 
he certainly didn’t have the bullet selection we have today. 
The .270 Winchester is not a slow cartridge, but it has been 
surpassed by many other rounds since that time. This includes 
BULLET 
SELECTION 
FOR BIG-GAME 
HUNTING

www.gunworld.com
OCTOBER I 2017
The author used Nosler’s
versatile Partition to take
this bull elk with a .308
rifle. The Partition’s design
allows for expansion with
minimal weight loss,
making it an ideal bullet for
game of this size.
Large, dangerous game
such as bison demand
special bullets that will hold
up through heavy tissue
and reach vitals. There
are many good expanding
bullet and solid designs.
Great hunting bullets aren’t
limited to centerfire rifles.
These are Remington’s
Premier AccuTip
homogenous muzzleloader
bullets. The bullet on the
left was recovered from a
bull elk shot at 90 yards;
the bullet on the right was
recovered from a bull shot
at 332 yards. Performance
doesn’t get much better
than this on large game.
the popular .270 Winchester Short Magnum. These faster 
magnums are functional on game (that is, they don’t turn a 
deer or elk’s quarters to jelly), because of tough bullets that 
can stand up to higher velocities and will perform reliably. The 
.270 Winchester hasn’t changed since the 1950s. 
But bullets are a different story. 
With so many new bullet options, there are lots of great choices 
today, so I’m breaking this selection guide down by the size of 
the animals hunted. There are three primary categories here—
light game, heavy game and dangerous game—and a list of 
bullets that will work (and won’t work) on each.
LIGHT GAME
The light game category includes deer-sized game such as 
whitetails, pronghorn, sheep and various African species 
(including the springbok, blesbok, impala and all the really 
tiny antelope—suni, duiker, klipspringer, steenbok and the 
like). The good news is that you have a lot of bullet choices 
for this class of game. I’m specifically ignoring a few species 
here, such as feral hogs (which, while generally deer-sized 
or smaller, can grow to immense proportions and have heavy 
skin), aoudad, mountain goats and a few others. These game 
animals are tough enough to move into a higher category. 
For most readers, this boils down to whitetail bullets. While it’s 
true that you don’t want a bullet that won’t reach the vitals, you 
also don’t want a bullet that doesn’t expand at all and leaves a 
pinhole wound directly through the animal and very, very little 
blood to follow. You need expansion and the transfer of shock. 
And modern bullets can do that with little meat damage. 
Cup and core bullets, such as Sierra’s GameKing, Remington’s 
Core-Lokt and Winchester’s Power Point, all work well for deer-
sized game, effectively transferring energy and creating plenty 
of internal damage to drop deer quickly. There is a slew of 
new deer-themed loads such as Winchester’s Deer Season XP, 
Hornady’s American Whitetail and Federal’s new Non-Typical 
ammo. And even though all these loads take a different design 
approach, they all function just fine. 
Other great choices here are Nosler’s Ballistic Tips, Hornady’s 
SST and Browning’s new BXR. I used the BXR bullet on several 
deer and found it to function perfectly, opening a wide wound 
channel and dropping the animals quickly and efficiently. In 
fact, none required a tracking job. 
MEDIUM GAME
Medium game animals are larger and more heavily built than 
whitetails. These include everything from the aoudad and the 
mountain goat mentioned above to elk and moose, red stags, 
black bear and the large African plains game—kudu, zebra and 
eland. Larger game has heavier skin, bone and muscle, all of 
which demand more of a bullet to reach the vitals and provide 
a clean, consistent kill. 
You can argue for a bunch of different expanding bullets here, 
but my favorites are the bonded and homogenous bullets. 
Bonded bullets have copper jackets that are electrochemically 
bonded to the core and greatly reduce the odds of jacket/core 
separation and underpenetration. 

www.gunworld.com
OCTOBER I 2017
Brad Fitzpatrick is a full-time freelance writer based in Ohio. His works have appeared in 
several print and online publications, and he is the author of two books: The Shooter’s Bible 
Guide to Concealed Carry and Handgun Buyer’s Guide 2015. He has hunted on four continents 
and was a collegiate trap and skeet shooter before becoming a writer.
This exit wound in a black 
bear was produced using 
a Hornady Interlock bullet. 
The bullet roughly doubled 
its diameter and left a great 
blood trail that, thanks to 
the bullet’s performance, 
was quite short.
Aoudad are very tough, and
this huge ram was taken by
writer David Draper using
a .25-06. That cartridge is
considered light for aoudad,
but the homogenous GMX
bullet that Draper was firing
held up perfectly and did
the trick.
There are many great options in this category, but four bullets I 
have personally used and had great success with are Nosler’s 
Accubond, Hornady’s Interbond, Federal’s Trophy Bonded Tip 
and the new BXC from Browning. Even with fast magnums 
and heavy game, you should get good penetration with these 
bullets and excellent energy transfer—as long as you don’t 
take any bad shots. 
Homogenous bullets, which generally comprise all-copper alloys, 
don’t risk separation, because there is no lead core. Barnes 
really invented this category with its X Bullet, and its new TSX 
is a fine example of a modern homogenous bullet that has had 
great success. I used the TSX in a .375 H&H Magnum to take a 
large boar hog in California, and it worked perfectly. Other great 
homogenous bullets include the Hornady GMX and Federal’s 
excellent Trophy Copper bullet. 
DANGEROUS GAME
Dangerous game is a limited category—grizzly, brown and 
polar bears, African lion, Cape buffalo, elephant, hippo and our 
American bison. All these animals demand respect, and they 
all require a tough bullet. 
Traditionally, the “soft” bullets for these animals have been the
Swift A-Frame, Woodleigh Weldcore, Nosler Partition and the
Federal Trophy Bonded Bear Claw. All are very capable bullets that
will retain their weight, punch through heavy skin and muscle, and
reach the vitals when it’s vitally important that you do so.
The homogenous bullets work well here, too. In fact, a friend
just sent me three images of Barnes TSX bullets recovered
from Cape buffalo bulls. All of them performed superbly.
In some select instances, such as elephant hunting and charge-
stopping scenarios, you’ll need a solid bullet—a design that 
is rarely called upon when hunting. But when you absolutely 
must have a bullet that offers the best straight-line penetration, 
solids from Federal, Barnes, Nosler and others are the ticket. 
The sheer number of bullet options available today can be 
overwhelming, but if you follow these guidelines, you should have 
minimal meat waste with a quick, humane and safe kill.   
Browning’s BXR bullet is 
designed for deer-sized 
game—and boy, does 
it perform! The polymer 
tip and large nose cavity 
promote expansion, 
but these bullets hold 
up well. This recovered 
bullet was removed from 
a very large Oklahoma 
whitetail buck that died 
within a few steps.
The bullet at the top 
of this image is a 
.375-caliber Barnes 
TSX 300-grain bullet 
recovered from a huge 
California hog. The 
bottom bullet is a Barnes 
solid that was fired 
into a sand medium. 
Both bullets performed 
perfectly and retained all 
their weight.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
BUILDING
FUTURE
GENERATIONS
OFHUNTERS
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY BECKY YACKLEY
Girls who go hunting 
when they are young 
later share hunting 
with their own 
children and families. 
The author was 
introduced to hunting 
as a little girl. She is 
shown here sharing 
that passion with her 
two sons. How many 
more families would 
enjoy hunting trips if 
everyone were part 
of the hunting party? 
More tags to fill, meat 
to eat and time spent 
together outdoors.
M
y birthday falls just before deer-hunting 
season. And, as fate would have it, my 
birthday presents have always involved 
hunting gear. For instance, on my 12th 
birthday, I got a giant Mark Twain anthology, 
long underwear and wool socks—not just any wool socks, but 
the ugly, thick kind with a red stripe around the calves. 
While I used the hunting gear and read the Mark Twain at least twice 
(and have subsequently passed the book down to my youngest), I 
gained a more valuable gift than that book and the hunting gear: 
the experience of time spent in the woods and hunting. 
When you take girls and women hunting, you’re building future 
generations that don’t just tolerate the guns and hunting gear 
around the house; they actually use them. These are women 
who will carry on traditions and teach their own families. You’re 
making it easier and more enjoyable for someone’s son or 
daughter to hunt in the future.
TAG ALONG
The first thing I will suggest to women is that you tag along on 
a hunt. Don’t worry about what clothes you have or what gear 
you’re going to need. Pick a hunt that’s short, nearby and safe, 
such as rabbit hunting with your grandpa or duck hunting with 
your boyfriend. Go along and watch. 
Observation is a good way to find out what sort of hunting you’ll 
like most. Keep in mind, however, that in most states, you’ll 
need to take a hunter safety class in order to carry a gun and 
HUNTING
INTRODUCES 
ENTIRE FAMILIES 
TO HISTORY 
AND TRADITION 
AND PROVIDE 
OPPORTUNITIES 
TO SPEND TIME 
TOGETHER.   

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Hunting introduces
entire families to
history, tradition, and a
chance to share stories
and spend time one on
one. (Shown here is the
author’s hunting rifle.)
Women love to shop for
shoes. It’s like asking
a guy if he wants to
shop for guns. So, get
your wife or girlfriend
interested by taking her
shopping first. And, of
course, every girl needs
something in camo.
Generally, I’d say a gun,
but boots and waders
are good, too.
shoot. Some states offer youth hunts that require a licensed 
adult, but the youth or new hunter can go without hunter safety 
just to see if they like it. 
If you’re an adult and have a daughter, take her with you when 
you hunt, because she won’t hunt as an adult if she never builds 
that experience as a kid. So, dress warmly, put on appropriate 
boots and safety gear, and dress for the weather. Borrow 
something if you need to, but go! 
Maybe you decide you’re just going to go for the first few hours 
of opening morning. Then, you’ll go get lunch and come back a 
few hours before dark. 
Perhaps your daughter is 11, and you’re not sure she’s up for a 
weekend with you and a bunch of guys, so have a back-up plan. 
It’s also good idea to plan a bathroom break in a real bathroom, 
especially for girls who are not outdoorsy. 
GET COMFY
Staying warm and dry are two of the biggest components of 
feeling comfortable in the woods. Sometimes, a guy’s big hunting 
jacket might be nice, because it would fit over your nonhunting 
winter coat. It’s okay to wear what keeps you the warmest, even if 
it’s not hunting gear. As long as you cover up with the appropriate 
or required items—such as blaze-orange for deer hunting or camo 
for turkey hunting—you’ll be good. Some of my favorite things for 
cold hunts are hand warmers, a “mad bomber” fur hat, large outer 
gloves or mittens, and sometimes, a propane heater. 
Gear that you should spend money on? Boots that fit you, whether 
they are waders for duck hunting, hiking boots or cold-weather 
boots. Keeping feet blister-free and warm is a huge part of having 
an enjoyable time outside. And don’t let your tag-along child trip 
around in gear that is too big. My dad understood that; that’s why 
I got wool socks and polypropylene for my birthday. 
Other items you should really have are long underwear (the good 
type that will wick moisture) and something for your hands so 
you can safely handle a firearm. I use gloves for walking into 
the stand and shooting, with mittens to cover them when I sit. 
THE FIRST THING I WILL 
SUGGEST TO WOMEN IS 
THAT YOU TAG ALONG 
ON A HUNT.
And I wasn’t joking about a propane heater. Guys, dads, grandpas: 
If you want your grandkids, wife or daughter to sit in the cold deer 
stand when it’s 5 degrees outside, consider spending some money 
on a portable propane heater. Staging a blanket or setting up a blind 
at your hunting spot the week before your hunt will be well-spent 
effort. We have a propane heater in both our open deer stand and 
the enclosed stand. It makes it much more enjoyable for the kids. 
Getting comfortable also means not waiting all day to use the 
bathroom ... this can be a conundrum. Deer smell you. Serious 
bow hunters will hang their clothes outside and consider what 
they eat and what they bathe with. Marking up your territory 
can be a dicey subject. 
But there are options. Some people even bring a portable 
latrine to an enclosed stand. It all depends on your level of 
commitment to the hunt. It’s important to not cut back on fluids, 
though. Sweating in heavy clothing can make you dehydrate 
faster than you think. 
THERE’S A TIME AND PLACE
Picking where and when you hunt can be just as important as 
picking what you hunt. If you are a guy taking a girl on her first 
hunt, don’t take her out duck hunting in January, when it’s cold. 
Take her on an early-season hunt, when it’s warmer. 
Pick something close to home—somewhere a new hunter 
can leave the woods and keep warm in the car (or return to 
the family farm and sit around the fire). If you want women to 
embrace the fact that you hunt, taking them along and showing 
them the fun (rather than the misery) is a better plan. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Author Becky Yackley competes in action shooting (3 Gun, USPSA, Bianchi and IPSC) 
with her husband and three sons. When she isn’t shooting matches or writing, she 
is busy with her camera. Becky is the founder of the 2A Heritage Junior shooting 
camps and works in social media for several firearms industry companies. 
Warm gear makes happy
hunters. Happy hunters
make happy memories.
Here, the author’s son,
Andrew, hams for the
camera wearing a “mad
bomber” hat.
GRAB A MEAL
Women who didn’t grow up hunting might not have experienced 
an annual hunting trip or time wandering in the woods with 
their friends. That’s a shame. More girls and women should 
enjoy time outside. 
And children should understand where our food comes from. A 
meal of protein that isn’t raised on hormones and antibiotics isn’t 
just healthy eating, it’s teaching your family about responsible 
stewardship of natural resources. Women tend to be the ones who 
do the grocery shopping and tell the menfolk to eat their vegetables, 
so teaching children where protein comes from is a realistic goal.
There are as many types of hunting as there are boots to wear 
for them. Duck, rabbit, squirrel, deer, coyotes, raccoons, hogs—
there are so many types of hunting, you can hunt all year. 
Ladies, keep in mind that what you hunt is less important than 
with whom you hunt and why you’re hunting. Let’s face it, it’s 
cheaper to go buy a pound of ground beef than a pound of 
venison (that is, the cost of deer tags, gas, hotel, time off work, 
gear, guns, ammo). Hunting is really about healthy choices. 
QUALITY TIME
Instead of choosing to eat meat raised in a feedlot, it’s lean, red 
meat raised by Mother Nature. Instead of spending a weekend 
drinking at a bar or at a baseball game, watching other people 
do something they love, hunting is doing something you love. 
It’s quality time outside in nature with people you enjoy. 
These are just some of the reasons men make annual deer hunting 
trips—family and friends with whom they love to spend time. 
Hunting offers opportunities to be close (literally) with others. 
You are sitting right next to someone, possibly to stay warm. 
You share conversation and sights many people might never 
stop to see. 
And aside from memories of the experiences and sights, you 
share a common history. For example, my personal hunting rifle 
is a Mauser my dad re-barreled in .308. My husband, my sons 
and I have all shot our first deer with it. 
Now, that’s shared history.  


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
I
hunt to put food on the table—pure and simple. While
getting a deer, boar or bear will stock the freezer very
quickly and is desirable, I honestly take more small 
game than large game. That is just the way it goes. 
Knowing this is just a part of the life I choose to live, my 
go-to firearm for hunting small game is my Marlin Model 60 
auto-loading .22.
Although there are many really good .22 rifles on the 
market—some with pretty hefty price tags—the Marlin Model 
60 is the best bang for the buck. Priced new, the 60 will run 
you anywhere from $150 to $200, depending on the model 
configuration and where you purchase it. 
I picked mine up used for only $100. It had only had 100 rounds 
MARLINMODEL
60:PLAINJANE
ANDBORINGLY
RELIABLE
SQUIRRELS, 
RABBITS AND 
PORCUPINES—
BEWARE!
TEXT AND PHOTOS BY DANA BENNER
The Marlin Model 60 
(Photo: Marlin)

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
put through it. The previous owner even kept the manual. There 
was nothing wrong with the rifl e; the owner just decided to sell 
it because he wasn’t using it. His loss, my gain.
It’s pretty much the “plain Jane” of the rifle world, but if you 
are looking for a rifle that will put meat on the table time after 
time, this is it. The Model 60 has remained virtually unchanged 
since its introduction in 1960. There have been more than 11 
million of these rifles sold over the past 57 years; this says a 
great deal for its reliability in the field. 
Like many firearm companies of the 1960s, Marlin marketed 
the Model 60 under various names in a variety of locations. 
Back in those days, you could purchase firearms just about 
anywhere, and Marlin took full advantage of that. Some of the 
stores that sold the 60 included Montgomery Ward, J.C. Penny 
and Western Auto. Each store, of course, put its own brand 
name on the rifle.
Many shooters learned the fundamentals of shooting with this 
rifle, and it is still one of the favorite rifles for teaching new 
shooters, young and old, alike. In fact, my son-in-law has just 
asked me to teach him how to shoot, and the Model 60 will be 
the firearm he will learn with. 
LOAD ONCE, HUNT ALL DAY
I called Mark, a hunting buddy of mine, to go shooting. We 
decided to take our .22s out to the Groveton Fish & Game 
Club’s range to do a comparison. 
Mark is a lever-action guy, so he was a little skeptical about 
the auto-loading rifle. His attitude soon changed: He was 
impressed by how fast the 60 was to mount and aim, as well 
as the quick follow-up shots. He was also amazed at how it 
even fed bulk ammo that was jamming in his lever-action rifle.
Unlike some .22 rifles out there, the 60 is only chambered in 
.22 LR. Some might see this as a negative, but for small game, 
the .22LR is the best round out there. It is readily available and 
relatively inexpensive. The .22 LR is the most logical round, 
because it is great for both target shooting and taking small 
game. While some people prefer the .22 Magnum for fox and 
coyote, a properly placed .22 LR will more than do the job. 
Due to its popularity, .22LR ammunition can sometimes be 
hard to find. There is no real shortage; it is just that there are 
a lot of people using it. The trick is being prepared to buy it 
when you see it, because it often sells out fast. And if you can 
get it on sale, even better.
.22LR: the perfect 
round for small game 
(Photo: Robb Manning)

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Weighing in at only 5.5 pounds, the 60 is a joy to carry in the
field. It has a tubular brass magazine that holds 14 rounds,
so I can load it once and hunt rabbits and squirrels all day (or
until I reach my legal limit) and still have rounds left over. The
benefit to the tubular magazine is that there’s no magazine to
lose or forget. In addition, because there’s no magazine well,
the rifle is very streamlined.
The Model 60 is extremely accurate. Part of the reason for
that is the rifling’s design. Marlin uses “micro-groove”
rifling, which is fancy-speak for shallower rifling grooves in
the barrel. The company saw the damage being done to the
bullets in deeper grooves. The shallow rifling resulted in less
bullet wear and greater accuracy.
However, while this rifle is good, it is only as good as the
person shooting it. Putting a few hundred rounds downrange
during off-season practice does not hurt when it comes time
to put a few of these furry critters in the bag.
COLD-WEATHER CONCERNS
Most of my small-game hunting takes place during the cold
winter months. The best time to hunt porcupines is in the winter,
because they are easier to see. Two days before Christmas last
year, I was doing just that and got one porcupine for my efforts.
From 30 yards and with open sights, I put one CCI Copper-22 to
the body and another to the head.
While hares are harder to see due to their white fur, they are 
easier to track during the winter. Squirrels—well, they are 
just squirrels: Either they’re around or they’re not.
 
As with most things exposed to the cold weather, a firearm’s 
moving parts can be adversely affected by extreme temperatures. 
Things just seem to move slower, and sometimes, they do not 
work at all. 
This is especially true with auto-loading firearms. Extreme cold 
will thicken even the best gun oil. Because of that, I either avoid 
going out when it is that cold, or I use graphite instead of normal 
gun oil to lubricate my rifle. Nothing is perfect, but it does help. 
Even so, I have never had an issue with my Model 60. It operates 
Cottontail rabbits are 
the perfect game for the 
Marlin 60.
A porcupine taken with 
the Marlin 60 and CCI 
Copper-22
Prairie dogs are fair game.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The Marlin Model 
60 is a very 
effective hunting 
tool for taking 
small game of all 
sorts.
Get Your Starter Kit Online + FREE Holster Mount - $9988
AlienGearHolsters.com
 Forever Guaranteed
Comfortable in All Configurations
Easily Shifts to 11+ Carry Positions

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Find the right ammo that
works with your rifle.
The Marlin Model 60
with CCI Copper-22
ammunition
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: .22 LR
ACTION: Semiauto
RECEIVER: Aluminum
BARREL: 19 inches; 1:16-inch twist;  
micro-groove rifling
MAGAZINE: 14-shot tubular 
SIGHTS: Adjustable-open rear sight; ramp front sight
STOCK: Walnut-finished hardwood
WEIGHT: 5.5 pounds
OVERALL LENGTH: 37.5 inches
Currently available: Six models (60, 60SB, 60C, 60SN, 
60SN with scope, 60SS)
MSRP: $209
CONTACT INFORMATION
MARLIN FIREARMS
www.MarlinFirearms.com
AMMUNITION
Like most rimfire firearms, the Marlin 60 can be picky 
about the ammunition that it likes, and each rifle will be 
different. The good thing is that .22 LR ammunition is 
cheap enough to allow you to run a few boxes through 
the rifle to find out what really works best for you. I have 
been very lucky with my 60, because it seems to have no 
real issue with any brand of ammunition. Nevertheless, 
it seems to behave better with CCI.
When it comes to ammunition, the type of round used 
is often more important than the brand. For hunting 
purposes, I prefer to use a jacketed hollow point. For 
plinking and fun, solid lead works fine.
My mother always told me, “Cleanliness is next to 
godliness,” and my father always said, “If you take care 
of your tools, they will take care of you.” Both of these 
statements apply to my firearms. My firearms are tools. 
Therefore, I keep them clean and maintained so they will 
never fail me when I need them.
If you are going to go through the effort to maintain your 
firearm, do not skimp on your cleaning products. There are 
some really good ones out there. The best products I have 
used come from Hoppe’s, Outers, Shooter’s Choice and 
GetSome Products. These companies produce some high-
quality products, and they are the ones I trust.
At one time, I would say you should break down your .22 
every time you use it, but ammunition has changed over 
the years. .22 LR ammo has had a reputation for being 
dirty, but today’s ammo is much cleaner. It leaves fewer 
deposits and less fouling, which equates to less-extensive 
cleaning on your part. 
I simply run a rag dipped in bore cleaner down the barrel, 
run a dry rag through it to absorb the excess bore cleaner 
and finish up with some gun oil. This will keep your Marlin 
60 operating. However, I do recommend a complete 
breakdown and cleaning at least once a year.
CLEANING THE MARLIN 60
Quality cleaning products make it 
easier to clean a rimfire.
Marmots and 
woodchucks are easily 
taken with a .22 LR rifle 
such as the Model 60. 

Loading the Marlin 60 is 
as simple as dropping 
the rounds into the 
tubular magazine. 
(Photo: Robb Manning)
THE MARLIN 60 IS A VERY 
BASIC, PLAIN RIFLE THAT JUST 
WON’T QUIT.
WINCHESTER IS A REGISTERED TRADEMARK OF OLIN CORPORATION.
WINCHESTERGUNS.COM
> WATERFOWL HUNTER
MOTHER NATURE IS SUPERB AT OPTIMIZING HER 
CREATIONS TO SURVIVE IN THEIR ENVIRONMENTS. 
GOOD THING WE ARE TOO. THE NEW WINCHESTER® 
SUPER X®4 IS BUILT FOR SPEED WITH PERFECT 
BALANCE AND FAST CYCLING GAS OPERATION, 
MAKING IT IDEALLY SUITED TO SWING ONTO AND 
BRING DOWN BIRDS OF EVERY DESIGN.  

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
just the same in the winter woods as it does on the range
during the summer.
While I religiously clean all my firearms after use, this is
especially important during the winter months, even if they
are taken afield but not fired. Bringing a cold firearm into a
warm building will result in condensation, which leads to rust.
Rust is not your friend, so you need to get that moisture out.
Under normal conditions, a quick field-strip will suffice. But
when you are dealing with a moisture issue, it is a good idea
to do a complete breakdown and dry things out. No matter
what, I always do a complete breakdown once a year.
Many people I have talked to who own the 60 say that cleaning this
firearm is its only drawback. Personally, I’ve never had a real issue
with it. If you pay attention to where the parts go and in what order,
you should have no problems. The toughest part is getting the recoil
spring back in without it kinking. Regardless of how many times I’ve
taken it apart, I always refer back to the manual to make sure I get it
correct. (For more information, see the sidebar on page 27.)
Once everything is thoroughly dried, cleaned and oiled, I spray all
the metal parts with a rust-inhibitor such as Rust Prevent made by
Shooter’s Choice or GetSome1000, made by GetSome Products.
There you have it. The Marlin 60 is a very basic, plain rifle that 
just won’t quit. That is exactly what I want in the woods with 
me. While I do have some very pretty firearms, they are all 
intended to be used. 
There are no wall-hangers in my gun cabinet. “Fancy” won’t 
put meat on my table; reliability will. And that is what I get 
from the Marlin 60.  
The Model 60 is light 
and maneuverable and 
points great.
ALTHOUGH THERE ARE 
MANY REALLY GOOD .22 
RIFLES ON THE MARKET 
... THE MARLIN MODEL 
60 IS THE BEST BANG 
FOR THE BUCK.
Squirrels are probably 
the most popular 
small-game animal to be 
hunted with .22 LR.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
TEXT AND PHOTOS BY MIKE DICKERSON
LITTLE RESEMBLANCE TO 
THE ORIGINAL.
BIGGREEN’S
GO-ANYWHERE
MACHINE
REMINGTON’S NEW AMERICAN
WILDERNESS RIFLE, BUILT TO RESIST
  THE ELEMENTS, PROVES ITS METTLE 
AT THE RANGE AND ON A HUNT FOR 
AN EXOTIC SPECIES IN TEXAS.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
W
hen I first opened the box containing 
Remington’s new Model 700 American 
Wilderness Rifle (AWR) and closely 
examined it, I imagined it was speaking to 
me. It whispered, “I want to go hunting.”
Now, before you alert the mental health authorities to come and 
d
g
f
k
b
d
d
t
d th t I
t th t
made it clear that I wasn’t going to get any closer.
I set up on shooting sticks. I then waited for my breathing 
to slow and the scope reticle to settle on target. I slowly 
squeezed the trigger and touched off a Federal Premium 
Trophy Copper 130-grain round. Lost in recoil, I didn’t see 
the impact—but I did hear it. Greg lowered his binocular and 
informed me that the shot was perfectly placed. The American 
Wilderness Rifle had held up its part of the bargain.
IMPERVIOUS TO THE ELEMENTS
The Remington AWR is built around the venerable Remington 
700 action
and Model 700 rifles have been around in
the rifle is not as light as many of today’s guns marketed as
“wilderness” or “mountain” guns, but it’s worth noting that one 
of the most popular original lightweight rifles, the Winchester 
Model 70 Featherweight, tipped the scales at around the same 
weight. The AWR is, for the most part, light enough to tote just 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
about anywhere. For those who struggle to shoot ultralight 
rifles accurately—and many people do—the AWR strikes a 
nice balance between portability and shootability.
The rifl e comes with Remington’s externally adjustable X-Mark 
Pro trigger. On a Lyman trigger gauge, the trigger broke crisply, 
with no creep, at a pull weight of 5 pounds, 8 ounces. That’s 
WITH REAL-WORLD 
PERFORMANCE … AND A 
DESIGN THAT RESISTS THE 
ELEMENTS, THE REMINGTON 
AMERICAN WILDERNESS 
RIFLE IS A TRUE GO-
ANYWHERE RIFLE.
heavier than I prefer for a hunting rifl e, but I left the trigger at its 
factory setting for testing and for my hunt, in order to duplicate 
a buyer’s out-of-the-box experience. 
After testing was complete, I was able to adjust the trigger 
down to a more acceptable pull weight of 4 pounds, 5 ounces, 
where it seemed to bottom out. That’s fine for many hunters, 
but I’m rather finicky about triggers and would likely drop in a 
Timney trigger if it were my rifle.
The barrel and 
machined-steel action 
have a black Cerakote 
finish, making them 
nearly impervious to the 
elements.
For testing and hunting, 
the author mounted a 
Bushnell Trophy Xtreme 
X30 2.5-10 scope in a 
set of Talley lightweight 
rings.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The author found the 
factory setting on the 
Remington X-Mark Pro 
trigger to be a bit heavy 
for his liking. He was 
able to adjust it down 
to a pull weight of 4 
pounds, 5 ounces.
The knurled surface of 
the bolt handle provides 
a sure grip in any 
weather.
The safety is a two-position type that is located atop the 
right rear of the stock just aft of the bolt handle. It engages 
and disengages with an audible click—and, notably, it 
does not lock the bolt down when the safety is in the “on” 
position. This allows you to cycle rounds through the action 
with the safety engaged.
Initially, the rifle is available chambered in .270 Winchester, .30-06 
Springfield, 7mm Remington Magnum and .300 Winchester Magnum. 
The capacity of the internal box magazine, with a traditional hinged 
floorplate, is four rounds for the standard calibers and three rounds 
for the magnum calibers. Barrels for all calibers have a 1:10 rate 
of twist, except for the 7mm Rem Mag chambering, which has a 
1:9.25 twist rate.
RESULTS AT THE RANGE
For both hunting and accuracy testing, I mounted one of 
Bushnell’s new Trophy Xtreme scopes—the X30 2.5-10 
model with a 30mm tube and 44mm objective lens—in a 
set of Tally lightweight rings. It proved to be a solid and 
reliable combination. I have long been a fan of Talley rings, 
and the Trophy Xtreme scope has so far performed well 
in some high-volume shooting with a couple of rifles. 
Marketed as a scope that delivers premium performance at 
a price that won’t break the bank, the scope is covered by 
a “no-questions-asked” lifetime warranty.
IN KEEPING WITH THE RIFLE’S 
“WILDERNESS” MONIKER, THE BARREL 
AND MACHINED-STEEL ACTION HAVE 
A BLACK CERAKOTE FINISH, MAKING 
THEM VIRTUALLY IMPERVIOUS TO THE 
ELEMENTS.
The author used the AWR 
in .270 Win to make a 
perfect shot placement 
on this trophy blackbuck 
at 250 yards on a hunt 
in Texas.

NEXT
GEN TAVOR
X95
®
The next generation, state-of-the-art CQB Bullpup design is here in the TAVOR X95®
Further reﬁ ning the bullpup design to a more compact, familiar, modular and mode
Tri-rail forearm, modular TAVOR  style trigger guard, traditional AR-15/M16 ambidex
release location, lighter trigger pull. IDF proven, now available for US customers.
INNOVATE. OPTIMIZE. PERFORM.
IWI US, INC.

The release button for 
the hinged magazine 
floorplate is recessed 
and well protected 
within the rifle’s trigger 
guard, making it unlikely 
to accidentally snag and 
trip open.
The bolt of the 
Remington American 
Wilderness Rifle cycled 
with silky smoothness, 
and the rifle fed, fired, 
extracted and ejected 
with no issues.
A close-up view of the 
bolt shows the AWR’s 
two large locking lugs 
and standard plunger-
type ejector.
Functionally, everything on the American Wilderness Rifl e worked 
as you would expect it to. The bolt cycled with silky smoothness, 
and rounds fed, fi red, extracted and ejected without a single issue. 
As a hunter, one feature I really appreciate is the design and 
location of the magazine fl oorplate release button. It’s inside 
the front of the trigger guard and requires a fair amount of 
pressure to operate, which makes it very unlikely to be snagged 
or accidentally tripped open at an inopportune moment.
Because most ammo makers list velocity for 130-grain .270 
Win loads as 3,060 fps, I was keenly interested to see what 
sort of velocities the rifle’s 24-inch barrel would produce. 

With its Grayboe stock
and Cerakote-finished
416 stainless steel
barrel, the Remington
American Wilderness
rifle is designed to
withstand inclement
weather.
SO GOOD-LOOKING  
YOU’LL HATE  
TO CONCEAL IT.
$$$#"! !"# 
800-308-6628  rob@tuckergunleather.com 
! !"""   
"
!"$	 #""""!!!

	

	

#"  
 #$ "#
TUCKER 
GUNLEATHER 
HF1
You can easily 
customize 
your HF1 with 
numerous 
options
All the tested 130-grain loads stepped out a bit slower than that 
3,060 fps mark. The smallest variance was with the Federal 
Trophy Copper load, which was only 14 fps below the factory-
stated velocity. Winchester’s 130-grain Razor Boar load was 
nearly 200 fps slower than advertised, but the single 140-grain 
load tested, also from Winchester, clocked in at 45 fps faster 
than factory-stated velocity.
Accuracy testing with five different factory loads and five-
shot groups yielded mixed results. Three of the five loads 
produced average groups measuring less than 1½ inches, and 
that’s plenty accurate for just about any hunting application 
A GRAYBOE STOCK IS 
A FULLY BEDDABLE, 
DROP-IN DESIGN THAT 
OFFERS MANY OF 
THE ADVANTAGES OF 
MCMILLAN STOCKS AT 
A SIGNIFICANTLY MORE 
AFFORDABLE PRICE.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: .270 Win. (tested), .30-06 Sprg.,
7mm Rem. Mag, .300 Win Mag
ACTION: Bolt action
CAPACITY: 4+1 (standard calibers); 3+1
(magnum calibers)
BARREL: 24 inches; 416 stainless
RIFLING: 5R rifling; 1:10 rate of twist
FINISH: Black Cerakote
STOCK: Grayboe fiberglass and epoxy
TRIGGER: X-Mark Pro adjustable
WEIGHT: 7 pounds, 6 ounces
LENGTH: 44.5 inches
MSRP: $1,150
CONTACT INFORMATION
REMINGTON ARMS
www.Remington.com
COMPETITIVE EDGE DYNAMICS
www.CEDHK.com
FEDERAL PREMIUM AMMUNITION
www.FederalPremium.com
GRAYBOE, LLC
https://Grayboe.com
HILLTOP RANCH
(512) 844-0252
HORNADY MANUFACTURING, INC.
www.Hornady.com
NAGEL’S GUN SHOP
http://NagelsGuns.net
WINCHESTER REPEATING ARMS
www.Winchester.com
Federal Premium Trophy Copper 130 grain
Hornady American Whitetail 130-grain InterLock
Remington Premier 130-grain Accutip Boat Tail
Winchester 140-grain Accubond CT
Winchester Razor Boar 130 grain
NOTE: Five-shot groups were fired in winds of 6–14 mph at 100
yards. Velocities were measured with a Competitive Edge Dynamics M2
chronograph.
0.84
1.23
1.14
1.34
1.51
1.45
1.42
1.40
1.77
1.89
3,046
2,978
2,951
2,995
2,864
Load
Best 100-Yard
Group (inches)
Avg. 100-Yard
Group (inches)
Avg. Muzzle
Velocity (fps)
for which you might utilize a .270 Win. Considering that all 
testing was done on a day with the wind gusting to 14 mph, 
as well as the fact that I tend to shoot tighter groups with 
three rounds versus five, I consider that to be good accuracy. 
Even the two worst-performing rounds delivered 1.5 MOA-or-
smaller best groups.
A couple of loads printed best groups that hint at the rifle’s true 
accuracy potential. Remington’s Premier 130-grain Accutip 
load turned in a best group of slightly over 1 inch, while 
Federal’s Premium Trophy Copper 130-grain load produced a 
best group measuring just 0.84 inch. I suspect groups would 
have been a bit tighter with a lighter trigger pull. In any event, 
the trigger broke so cleanly that its relatively heavy factory-
set pull weight didn’t prevent me from making a textbook shot 
placement with the Trophy Copper round on a relatively small 
target at 250 yards.
With real-world performance such as that and a design that 
resists the elements, the Remington American Wilderness 
Rifle is a true go-anywhere rifle. 
The AWR rifle produced 
this sub-MOA five-shot 
group with Federal’s 
130-grain .270 Win 
Premium Trophy Copper 
load—despite a fairly 
heavy trigger pull and 
winds gusting to 14 mph. 
It’s the load the author 
chose to hunt with.
When in the rear position 
(“safe”), the safety 
doesn’t lock the bolt 
handle down, allowing 
you to cycle rounds 
through the action with 
the safety engaged.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
THE IWI AND KEL-TEC 
BULLPUPS GO MUZZLE 
TO MUZZLE.
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY ROBERT SADOWSKI

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Y
our work space becomes smaller with a 
bullpup: The muzzle is closer; the magazine 
well is behind the trigger. Balance is different, 
too. The weight of the weapon is in the butt. The 
ejection port is also located in the butt. 
Moving from an AR15-style rifle to a bullpup takes some 
ramp-up time. Muscle memory has to be relearned. 
Reloading technique changes. 
The Israel Weapon Industries (IWI) Tavor X95 and Kel-Tec RDB 
are two best-in-breed bullpups. They are not exactly similar in 
operation or manipulation, but both weapons are designed for 
use in close, cramped environments where longer weapons 
can be a liability. 
Bullpups are bred for CQB use; and, with a red-dot or reflex-
style optic, they make a darned near-perfect setup. But that 
doesn’t mean a bullpup is solely a short-range weapon. 
Hardly. By definition, a bullpup is a firearm configured with 
the action located behind the trigger group. Because the 
action is housed in the buttstock, the overall length and 
weight of the weapon are significantly reduced. Even so, a 
bullpup keeps the same barrel length as a conventional AR15. 
With the appropriate optic, a bullpup is capable of the same 
ranges as an AR15.
… THESE “DOGS” OFFER 
UNCOMPROMISED 
FIREPOWER FROM 
ACROSS THE ROOM OR 
OUT TO 100 YARDS AND 
BEYOND.
The IWI Tavor X95 XB16 and Kel-Tec RDB are two bullpups 
with different concept philosophies. One is a no-frills, 
down-and-dirty performer, while the other is modular and 
configurable in a variety of calibers. Both are intensely 
functional. These are ambidextrous rifles that are small in 
hand and shoulder fast. 
Because the weight of both bullpups is in the rear of the 
stock (where the action is), the center of gravity seems off, 
especially for those of us who train with AR-style rifles. All 
the semiautomatic rifles I’ve trained with—AR15s, the Beretta 
ARX, M1 Carbines, AKs, M1As and others—have the magazine 
just forward of the trigger. My ramp-up time with the Kel-Tec 
and IWI took awhile to adjust to, but I do see the advantage a 
bullpup offers over a conventional rifle. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Bullpups are compact 
rifles that pack 16-inch 
barrels in a small 
package. The magazine 
located behind the pistol 
grip means a change 
in the standard AR 
magazine reload.
There is ramp-up time 
required when moving 
from an AR15 to a 
bullpup, because the 
magazine is located 
behind the trigger and 
pistol grip.
Size is the first thing you notice. Both the RDB and Tavor X95 feel 
like an SBR in hand. They both meet the minimum 26-inch overall 
length, so they are not considered SBRs. 
Getting out of a vehicle and maneuvering in tight environments 
is where these weapons excel. They are also slightly lighter 
than the typical 16-inch-barreled AR15. Part of the reason 
bullpups are lighter is that the action is encased in polymer. 
They feel light and lithe in hand. 
While a lot of firearms manufacturers talk about ergonomics, 
with the IWI and Kel-Tec bullpups, you begin to understand 
why the magazine release and safety are placed where they 
are; why the cocking handle is designed the way it is; and so 
on. When running these bulls, I experienced two well-thought-
out weapon systems. 
Field-stripping both bullpups is simple: Push out two pins on 
the Kel-Tec, and it disassembles similarly to an AR15. Rotate 
the grip downward, and the barrel and bolt carrier can be 
removed from the stock/grip assembly. With the IWI, pull one 
pin in the butt and rotate the butt pad down. You can then pull 
out the recoil mechanism.
Both bulls are compatible with standard AR-15/M16 magazines. 
I have a box of Brownells 30-round, aluminum-body magazines, 
Magpul PMags and a stack of Hexmag 30-rounders (you can 
never have too many AR magazines in my opinion), and all 
worked well. Because they use AR15 magazines, the bolt 
design of both the RDB and X95 is similar to that of an AR15.

The pistol grip of the 
IWI can be swapped out 
for an AR open-style 
grip. The author likes 
the closed grip because 
it can be jammed up 
against a barricade for 
steadier shooting.
Running the IWI is
similar to running an
AR. The controls are
in similar places and
work the same. It will
even take any AR-style
magazine, including
this Magpul PMag. The
ejection port is just
above the magazine.
ISRAELI INGENUITY 
A military version of the IWI SAR has been in Israeli military 
service since 2001. The IWI Tavor X95 is an upgraded and 
enhanced version of the battle-proven SAR design. IWI 
made the X95 shorter than the SAR—and, more importantly, 
relocated the operating handle closer to the shooter and the 
shooter’s center of mass. Some ergonomics considerations 
were deftly applied to this bullpup, making it easier to operate 
in cramped quarters and while wearing tactical gear. The
charging handle can also be reversed on the opposite side of
the weapon, depending on the shooter’s preference.
The magazine release has been relocated to operate similar to
an AR15 magazine release, so there is no large learning curve
with the X95 when coming from an AR15.
The bolt release doesn’t 
look like a bolt release, 
but it makes the IWI easy 
to manipulate.
The X95 has BUIS that 
are inset in the top 
rail. They fold up when 
needed and co-witness 
with the Mepro RDS 
red dot.

Removable rail covers
on the forearm have
Picatinny rails at the 3, 6
and 9 o’clock positions.
The ambidextrous safety
selector on the RDB is
located under the thumb
of the firing hand and is
easy to manipulate.
The slot is the eject
port on the RDB. It spits
empties at your feet.
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The forearm has Picatinny rails at the 3, 6 and 9 o’clock positions 
with removable rail covers, so adding a light, laser or grip is simple. 
The Tavor-style pistol grip with the large loop can be swapped out 
by removing one screw if a standard pistol grip with traditional 
trigger guard is desired. The bolt release also has a smaller, lower 
profile—again, for better manipulation in cramped conditions.
The IWI employs a long-stroke piston system that runs clean 
and is reliable. Calibers can be swapped from 5.56 NATO 
to 9mm and 300 BLK using optional conversion kits. A gas 
regulator allows the user to adjust the weapon to the cartridge 
so a can may be used on the IWI. Empties are ejected via an 
eject port just under the shooter’s nose.
Keeping with the Israeli theme, I mounted a Meprolight 
Mepro Tru-Dot RDS with a 1.8 MOA dot reticle. The RDS is 
a commercial version of the Mepro M5 sights used by the 
Israeli Defense Forces.
The IWI is well made, with a polymer body assembly that holds 
the barrel, bolt carrier and piston assembly. Disassembly 
of the X95 is simple, and that fact, plus the ability to swap 
calibers, is what sets the IWI apart from other bullpups. 
Controls are pretty straightforward. The safety selector 
rotates similarly to an AR15, and the ambidextrous magazine 
release can be operated with the trigger finger. The charging 
handle is located on the left side of weapon. I had plenty of 
leverage, so it was easy to cock the X95 with my support hand 
and hold the pistol grip with my firing hand. 
Inserting magazines is where I spent my ramp-up time. 
Training myself to move the fresh magazine behind the pistol 
grip took some getting used to, but I did find myself adapting 
quickly to the X95. 
I used three brands of ammunition: Aguila 5.56 NATO with a 
62-grain FMJ bullet; Federal Fusion .223 Rem. with a 62-grain soft 
point; and SIG Sauer .223 Rem. with a 77-grain OTM Match bullet.
Starting out at 25 yards, I used a rest and found the X95 was 
surgical. Five-shot groups were a ragged hole. Performing 
fast-firing drills with magazines loaded with odd round 
counts, I ran the X95 for speed. A lip on the forend allows 
the operator to grip the rifle as far forward as possible while 
limiting the chance of getting too close to the muzzle. Recoil 
was mild, and empties were thrown well away from where 
I was shooting. 
At first, magazine swaps were awkward while I learned the 
bullpup technique. The bolt release is just to the rear of the 
magazine and can be manipulated in one motion: Dump 
magazine, insert magazine, and press the release to slam the 
bolt forward. Great ergonomics make it a joy to operate. 
The trigger, notably better than the IWI SAR trigger, was still a 
bit heavy and broke on average at 6.8 pounds—not particularly 
helpful at the 100-yard range but a trigger one can adapt to. 
Using a red dot, I was able to get decent groups that averaged 
just under 2 MOA. The IWI ran strong with no malfunctions.
STATESIDE INNOVATION
As much as the IWI X95 is modular and adaptable, Kel-Tec 
takes a more simplistic approach to the 5.56 NATO-caliber 
bullpup with the RDB. Simple and uncomplicated, the RDB 
uses two polymer halves around a steel action and barrel.
The RDB uses a left-side, nonreciprocating charging handle so 
the shooter can charge it using the support hand, keeping the 
firing hand on the grip. It locks against the forend when not 
being used, so it won’t snag.
The polymer forend wraps around the barrel and mechanism. The 
outside texture is a very coarse grid pattern that is comfortable 
and offers plenty of purchase. A Picatinny rail at 12 and 6 o’clock 
allow mounting of an optic on top and various accessories at the 6.

www.magnumresearch.com
Stainless Steel Frame & Barrel with Integral Muzzle Brake
DE50SRMB (.50 AE), DE44SRMB (.44 Magnum) & DE357SRMB (.357 Magnum)
Stainless Steel Frame & Barrel
DE50SR (.50 AE)
“Simple” and 
“uncomplicated” best 
describe the Kel-Tec. It’s 
not fancy, but it is worthy 
of the bullpup name.
The controls consist of an ambidextrous rotating safety selector 
that is easily manipulated by the thumb of the shooting hand, 
like an AR, but only requires a 45-degree rotation. The magazine 
release lever is also suited for left- or right-handed users. The 
lever is designed so the magazine can fall free or a shooter can 
grasp the magazine to remove it (because their hand naturally 
falls on it). Like an AR15, the IWI and Kel-Tec both allow the 
operator to keep their firing hand on the grip while performing 
a magazine reload with the support hand.
The Kel-Tec uses a gas piston system and also has a gas 
regulator, so the user can regulate the weapon to run on all 
sorts of ammunition and a suppressor. The gas regulator can be 
adjusted with the open mouth from an empty 5.56 NATO case. It’s 
click-adjustable, and Kel-Tec recommends firing a few rounds 
after adjusting the regulator to test reliability. It comes from the 
factory ready to run on standard M193-type 55-grain ammo.
Ejection can be an issue with some bullpup designs. The RDB 
uses a unique downward ejecting system: As the bolt moves 
rearward, the extractor pulls the cases out of the chamber and 
into dual ejectors that push the case down a chute. Empties 
then fall at the shooter’s feet.
I mounted a SIG ROMEO4B red-dot on the RBD. Both it and 
the X95 are like an AR15 in that they both need a high 
mount for optics.
In speed testing, the RDB also required ramp-up time. The 
support hand does all the work when reloading. The simple 
metal magazine release is pressed to drop or strip away the 
magazine. Hot brass falls at your feet. 
The trigger was not as refined as the X95 trigger but quite 
usable. At 25 yards using a rest, I could create one large hole 
in the target. “Surgical” is the term I’d use. At 100 yards, the 
accuracy hovered between 2.5 to 3 MOA. 
The Kel-Tec is a more basic bullpup that, in my opinion, will get the 
job done. The IWI is more refined, with more ability for customization.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: 5.56mm NATO
BARREL LENGTH: 16.5 inches
OVERALL LENGTH: 26.13 inches
WEIGHT: 7.9 pounds (empty)
SIGHTS: Folding iron sights; optic-ready Picatinny rail
ACTION: Gas-operated, long-stroke piston
FINISH: Black
CAPACITY: 30+1 
MSRP: $1,999
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: 5.56mm NATO
BARREL LENGTH: 17.3 inches
OVERALL LENGTH: 27.3 inches
WEIGHT: 6.7 pounds (empty)
SIGHTS: Optic-ready Picatinny rail
ACTION: Gas-piston, semiautomatic 
FINISH: Matte black
CAPACITY: 20+1 
MSRP: $1,272
 CONTACT INFORMATION
ISRAEL WEAPON INDUSTRIES, LTD. (IWI)
www.IWI.us
KEL-TEC
www.KelTecWeapons.com
AGUILA
www.AguilaAmmo.com
FEDERAL PREMIUM
www.FederalPremium.com
MEPROLIGHT
www.TheMakoGroup.com
SIG SAUER
www.SIGSauer.com
Bullpups offer better maneuverability creeping around corners,
moving through doorways and rooms, and getting in and out of
vehicles. The weight of the bullpup is in the rear, making it more
comfortable to carry and shoulder fast. 
The costlier IWI offers a more refined bullpup weapon, while 
the less-expensive Kel-Tec is a straightforward approach to the 
design. Either way, these “pups” offer uncompromised firepower 
from across the room or out to 100 yards and beyond.   
Federal Fusion MSR .223 Rem. 62-grain SP
SIG Sauer .223 Rem. 77-grain OTM Match Grade
Aguila 5.56 NATO 62-grain FMJ
Federal Fusion MSR .223 Rem. 62-grain SP 
SIG Sauer .223 Rem. 77-grain OTM Match Grade
Aguila 5.56 NATO 62-grain FMJ
Average
1.9
2.6
2.2
Average
2.5
2.9
2.6
(ft-lbs)
1,132
  929
1,195
(ft-lbs)
1,193
1,005
1,272
FPS
2,867
2,331
2,946
FPS
2,943
2,424
3,040
AMMUNITION
LOAD
GROUP (INCHES) @100 YDS.
GROUP (INCHES) @100 YDS.
AVERAGE VELOCITY
AVERAGE VELOCITY
MUZZLE ENERGY
MUZZLE ENERGY
Best
1.7
1.9
1.8
Best
2.1
2.2
2.4
The beautiful cross-
hatching that adorns the
front strap emphasizes
the grip’s oval shape,
making it a very
comfortable high-
capacity pistol to shoot.
(Photo: Steve Woods)
The Mepro RDS is constructed with
an aluminum body and tough polymer
frame around a large viewing window.
This sight is easy to use when shooting
with both eyes open.
It runs on one AA battery and requires no
tools to change the battery or adjust the
sight. It also turns off when not in use to
conserve battery life.
I’ve used this sight on numerous AR15
rifles, because it is also the perfect height
for an AR15 and co-witnesses with BUIS.
The X95 has BUIS that are inset in the
top rail and fold up when needed. They
co-witnessed with the Mepro RDS.
The reticle has four brightness settings. The 
unit features an integral Picatinny rail mount 
with QD levers. At a total weight of 10.5 
ounces and overall length of 4.5 inches, 
the RDS is as compact as the X95. Once 
mounted, it was at the exact height needed 
for an AR platform.
The SIG ROMEO4B is small, compact
and lightweight. This red dot features a
dual reticle that allows a user to toggle
between a 2 MOA red dot or a circle dot
with a 2 MOA red dot inside a 65 MOA
circle. It’s a nice reticle for close range
and out to 100 yards.
The sight turns off when not in use and
powers up when it senses motion. I’m
notorious for not turning off red dots
after use. This sight is idiot proof. The
CR2032 battery offers 50,000-plus hours
of battery life.
The SIG ROMEO4 has a built-in base that
positions it at the perfect height for an AR or bullpup.
  The Meprolight Mepro RDS is a commercial 
version of the Mepro M5 sights used by the Israeli 
Defense Forces. It paired well with the Tavor X95.
SEEING RED: 
SIG SAUER ROMEO4 
AND MEPROLIGHT 
MEPRO RDS

MADE BY
WE’D LIKE TO THANK OUR COMPETITION FOR 
PAVING THE WAY IN POLYMER PISTOLS.
P320®
sigsauer.com
SHORT RESET TRIGGER
A smooth, crisp trigger pull 
and short tactile reset deliver 
heightened accuracy
MODULAR
Unmatched Modularity in 
Caliber and Frame
SAFETY
No trigger pull assures easiest, 
safest takedown
WE’LL TAKE IT FROM HERE.
#oneforall

The black ebony forend
cap gives the AVR a
classic look, and the
checkered AA-grade
walnut belies its
$1,600 price tag. The
rear Marble sight is
adjustable and robustly
built—an important
feature on a rifle
generating twice the
recoil of a .30-06.
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
A
few years ago, I wrote an article about
the most underrated rifles for big-game
hunters. That list included a bolt-action
from Montana Rifle Company. 
However, if I were given that same assignment today, the 
Montana Rifle Company guns would never make the list. This 
has nothing to do with the quality of the rifles that are rolling 
out of the company’s Kalispell, Montana, facility, because MRC 
guns are as good today as they have ever been … maybe better. 
The reason a Montana Rifle gun wouldn’t make the cut is that 
the brand’s lengthy list of bolt-action offerings has caught the 
attention of the hunting public in a major way. 
THE MONTANA RIFLE 
COMPANY AVR IS A MODERN 
TAKE ON THE CLASSIC 
DANGEROUS-GAME RIFLE.
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY BRAD FITZPATRICK

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The Montana Model 1999 
action combines some of 
the best elements from 
the Winchester Model 
70 with aspects of the 
Mauser 98. It functions 
flawlessly.
The test AVR wore a 
Swarovski 1.7-13.3x42 
Z8i scope—an extremely 
durable and versatile 
piece of glass for hunting 
any game anywhere. 
Note the rover-type bolt 
release, which is easy to 
find and operate.
The rounded forearm has 
generous, high-quality 
checkering, and it is easy 
to grip the rifle under full 
recoil. Some big bores 
have barrel-mounted 
front sling studs, but 
the AVR does not. 
Throughout the testing, 
however, this never 
proved to be a practical 
concern. 
MRC BACK STORY
In case you aren’t familiar with the MRC story, allow me to give 
you some background information. In the late 1990s, Keith 
Sipe, then the company’s owner, was building custom rifles on 
factory actions. Sipe liked many of the design features found on 
the Model 70’s classic controlled-round-feed (CRF) design, but 
he thought the basic design could be enhanced by adding some 
features found on the Mauser 98—another classic CRF action. 
Because Sipe couldn’t find a factory action that combined 
the features he wanted, he decided to simply design his 
own. Known as the Model 1999 (for the year it launched), 
the Montana action combined the Model 70 design’s basic 
layout, three-position safety and original trigger design 
with the Mauser’s C-ring breaching system design and 
claw extractor. Sipe thereby created an all-new action that 
was nearly fail safe—something serious big-game hunters 
(and especially those who hunted large and potentially 
dangerous game) demanded. 
Sipe also added a five-point venting system with dual front 
receiver ring vents to control escaping gases in the event 
of a case rupture and redesigned the bolt shroud to ensure 
maximum safety for the shooter. The one-piece investment 
cast-bolt body is extremely durable, and the Mauser-inspired 
design meant there were no cone cutouts or extractor cutouts 
in the barrel. This meant the MRC Model 1999 would cycle 
reliably and effectively, and the system offered a superior 
level of strength and security. The bolt design, itself, uses 
the same dual-lug design found on both the Model 70 and 
Mauser 98 action. 
THE ACTION 
OPERATES 
WITH EXTREME 
PRECISION, AND 
IT IS SLICK AND 
SMOOTH.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The dual-lug bolt 
requires a 90-degree 
lift to cycle the action. 
The AVR’s trigger is very 
good, coming from the 
factory between 3 and 
3.5 pounds.
The AVR’s 24-inch barrel 
is free floated, and 
the muzzle has been 
crowned to preserve 
accuracy. The front gold-
bead sight is easy to see, 
even in low light.
The AVR in .375 H&H 
is a classic big bore 
built to withstand the 
abuses of life on safari. 
Chambered as such, 
this rifle will work 
on everything from 
whitetails and black 
bear to grizzlies and 
Cape buffalo.
MRC’S AVR
Today, Keith’s son, Jeff, runs MRC, which now offers a huge 
selection of bolt-action tactical and hunting rifles chambered 
in everything from .22-250 to .505 Gibbs. That, alone, speaks 
to the versatility and strength of the Model 1999 action. 
There are many different lines of rifles in the MRC catalog, 
but the AVR, or American Vantage Rifle, is perhaps the most 
classically styled dangerous-game rig in the company’s 
lengthy portfolio. This rifle combines the rugged Model 1999 
action with a gorgeous, AA-grade American walnut stock, 
ebony forend cap and black grip cap. Rather than a traditional 
American straight comb design, the AVR comes with a Monte 
Carlo stock that elevates the shooter’s eye and allows for the 
comfortable use of either the supplied iron sights or an optic. 
The stock has traditional and very high-quality checkering on 
the forearm and the pistol grip, along with a dense, soft, black 
recoil pad. This pad is an excellent feature on a rifle that is 
available in everything from .35 Whelen up to .458 Lott. 
Most dangerous-game rifles wear sturdy iron sights, even 
if they aren’t the primary sighting system. Some shooters 
(particularly guides and African PHs who carry these guns 
as backup for dangerous game but will only be shooting if 
the situation warrants) won’t mount optics on their charge-
stopping heavy rifles. But even if you are a client hunter, 
having a backup sighting system on a hard-kicking rifle 
is a worthwhile insurance policy in the event of a scope 
malfunction under heavy recoil. 
MONTANA RIFLE 
COMPANY’S 
LENGTHY LIST 
OF BOLT-ACTION 
OFFERINGS HAS 
CAUGHT THE 
ATTENTION OF 
THE HUNTING 
PUBLIC IN A 
MAJOR WAY.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The AVR utilizes a three-
position wing safety that
is easy to operate in the
field. The wood-to-metal
finish on the gun is
excellent.
The Model 1999 bolt
incorporates features
from the Winchester
Model 70 design but
also includes Mauser
features, such as the
Mauser C-ring breaching
system. Fewer cutouts
result in added rigidity.
Like both of those other
actions, the Model 1999
uses a dual lug design.
AVR PARTICULARS
The Montana Rifle Company AVR comes with a pair of 
Marble front and rear sights. The rear sight is adjustable for 
both windage and elevation and comes with a notch—as 
opposed to the express-style rear V-type sight found on many 
dangerous-game rifles. While express sights are excellent 
for close-quarters, charge-stopping applications, they 
aren’t particularly well-suited for a broad range of hunting 
applications when the animal you are shooting isn’t bearing 
down on you with homicidal intent. 
The Marble design on the AVR is more versatile; it works fine for 
close, fast shots, but it is more precise if you want to use your 
irons for shooting at longer ranges. The ramped front sight has 
a gold bead that is easy to acquire, even in full sunlight. 
Both the action and the 24-inch barrel on the AVR are made 
from chrome-moly steel with a blued finish (there’s also an 
optional version with all-stainless-steel metalwork). The 
action is glass bedded and hand lapped, and the button-rifled 
barrel is free floated and comes with a recessed crown. These 
rifles are not only built to standards that allow them to handle 
heavy recoil without damage, they are also are designed to 
be extremely accurate. And if you are a southpaw, Jeff Sipe 
hasn’t left you out in the cold: These rifles are available in 
both right- and left-handed versions. 
AVR rifles are available in seven cartridges that are perfect for 
a wide variety of heavy game: .35 Whelen, .375 Ruger, .375 
H&H Magnum, .416 Ruger, .416 Remington Magnum, .458 
Winchester Magnum and the mighty .458 Lott. 
The gun I tested was chambered in .375 H&H Magnum—a classic 
dangerous-game cartridge that has seen service on all sizes of 
quarry the world over for more than a century. Other key features 
on the AVR are dual sling swivel studs, a hinged metal floorplate 
and a rocker-style bolt release that is both robust and easy to 
use. Many dangerous-game rifles mount the front sling stud on 
the barrel to keep it away from the shooter’s hand under heavy 
recoil, and while I can’t attest to the larger-caliber AVRs in .416 or 
.458, there were no issues with finger-stubbing when I fired the 
.375 H&H model. The length of pull is 13.625 inches; it’s overall 
length is 46 inches. Unloaded, this rifle weighs about 9 pounds 
(depending on the caliber and variations in the wood)—perfect 
for heavy-kicking rifles such as this. 
GREAT EYE RELIEF
A premium dangerous-game rifle demands a sturdy optic 
with plenty of eye relief; for that reason, I chose to mount 
Swarovski’s new Z8i 1.7-13.3x42 30mm scope on this rifle. 

The rounded pistol
grip has functional
checkering and a
rounded contour that
makes it easy to hold
when firing. The black
grip cap is another nice
touch added to the AVR.
The Z8i is a world-class piece of glass that fears neither rain 
nor sleet nor magnum recoil, and that 30mm objective offers 
a wide field of view. 
The Swarovski was mated to the rifle using Burris bases and 
Signature rings, and the AVR is compatible with Winchester 
Model 70 bases. With such a rifle in hand, you are ready to 
hunt any game in the world. 
POPULAR CHOICE
I’ve long been a fan of the .375 H&H Magnum, and while my 
own hunting with the caliber has been limited to nondangerous 
species, such as a wide array of African plains game and feral 
hogs, the .375 has a glowing reputation among some of the 
harshest cartridge critics—namely those who rely on their rifles 
to keep themselves and their clients from being mauled, gored, 
hooked or trampled. From whitetails and elk to Cape buffalo and 
coastal brown bears, the .375 H&H is a universal choice. 
Big-bore rifles aren’t known for being terribly accurate, but 
the AVR is an exception. On the range, it averaged just a hair 
over an inch with Barnes 300-grain factory TSX loads and 
Nosler’s 260-grain Partitions—two solid options for just about 
any big game on the planet. The third load tested, Hornady’s 
250-grain GMX, averaged just under 1½ inches. 
There’s a rumor floating around that .375 H&H rifles fire bullets of 
various designs and grain weights to the same point of impact—
indicating that, in theory, you could swap loads and never re-zero. 
I’ve not found that to be true with the over-a-dozen .375s I’ve 
tested, and it isn’t the case with the AVR. 
ROBUST ACTION
I was shooting off sandbags with factory ammo and was still 
grouping under 1½ MOA. I believe that if you wanted to cook 
up a handload this rifle particularly loved, you could squeeze 
those groups under an inch. 
I know sub-MOA groups are all the rage, but I haven’t seen 
THIS RIFLE COMBINES 
THE RUGGED MODEL 
1999 ACTION WITH 
A GORGEOUS, AA-
GRADE AMERICAN 
WALNUT STOCK, 
EBONY FOREND CAP 
AND BLACK GRIP CAP.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
SPECIFICATIONS
ACTION: Bolt-action centerfire
CAPACITY: 3+1 (as tested)
STOCK: AA American walnut
BARREL: 24-inch; blued
WEIGHT: 9 pounds (approximate)
OVERALL LENGTH: 46 inches
SIGHT: Marble adjustable rear; Marble gold-dot front
TRIGGER: 3.5 pounds
MSRP: $1,636
CONTACT INFORMATION
MONTANA RIFLE COMPANY
www.MontanaRifleCo.com
Barnes TSX 300 grain
Hornady TMX 250 grain
Nosler Partition 260 grain
1.09
1.33
1.06
1.17
1.42
1.20
2,540
2,890
2,750
Load
Smallest
Group
(inches)
Average
Group
(inches)
Velocity
(fps)
a lot of those from factory .375s. Of the rifles in this caliber 
I have tested, the Montana ranks among the top three in 
accuracy, and it is the most accurate wood-stocked .375 
factory gun I’ve shot. 
By the time this rifle left the range, I was ready to carry it 
buffalo hunting in Africa. 
That confidence is inspired in part by the AVR’s robust action. 
With some rifles, you have to coax and prod cartridges into the 
magazine; and when you cycle the action, you’re never really 
sure a round was chambered. 
Not so with this gun. The action is silky smooth, and lockup 
is absolutely secure. There were no issues with feeding 
and extraction, and the Mauser-type ejector sent those long 
cartridge cases whirring through the air with each bolt stroke. 
On the range, a few aspects of the gun stood out. First, it 
has a great trigger. It broke at 3½ pounds and helped make 
delivering accurate shots much easier. The easy-to-use rocker 
bolt release is well positioned and very solidly constructed. 
The pistol grip seems a bit narrower and more rounded than 
other big bores I’ve shot. I am a fan of the new grip design, 
which positions your hand comfortably and offers great 
control of the trigger and the rifle itself. 
Recoil was stiff but manageable—on par with other 9-pound, 
wood-stocked .375s I’ve shot. It isn’t vicious like some of the 
lighter .375 synthetic-stocked guns, and the dense recoil pad 
and comb construction help control setback. 
This isn’t a rifle for beginners. However, if you’re an 
experienced shooter, you shouldn’t have issues. 
WHAT A DEAL!
There’s a whole lot to like about this rifle. It’s an American-
made big bore built around an action that is essentially the 
offspring of the Mauser 98 and the Winchester Model 70. The 
action operates with extreme precision, and it is slick and 
smooth. And that walnut stock is absolutely gorgeous—full 
of flame and feather and topped off with a classic black cap. 
But perhaps the best thing about this rifle is its price. The 
MSRP for the blued version I tested is $1,636, and the 
stainless model rings in at $1,756. That may not seem cheap, 
but for a rifle of this ilk, it’s a very good deal. 
With cartridges ranging from .35 Whelen to .458 Lott, there 
isn’t much game this gun can’t cover. On the lower end, 
you have the mild-mannered Whelen, which is a fantastic 
cartridge that works well on deer, black bear, elk and moose, 
as well as all the African plains game. If you’re a guide or PH, 
or you are planning to hunt really big, dangerous game, there 
are many .40-caliber-plus options that will work. If you plan 
to hunt a little bit of everything, an AVR in the venerable .375 
H&H magnum is a great option.
But you can’t buy this particular AVR .375 rifle—it’s already 
spoken for.   
Safari hunters are 
very demanding when 
it comes to their 
rifles—and rightly so. 
The AVR from Montana 
Rifle Company has 
one critical feature—a 
robust CRF action—
that many lifelong 
professional hunters 
demand on their guns. 
The AVR consistently 
produced groups 
between 1 and 1½ 
inches, which is very 
good for a big bore. 
When paired with 
Barnes’ TSX ammo 
(shown here), there’s 
very little game you 
can’t hunt with this 
rifle—including the 
dangerous stuff.
NOTE: Velocity is a 10-shot average. Groups are three three-shot 
groups at 100 yards.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Using state of the art design, 
injection molding and high 
density polymer, Fobus has 
created a holster which 
cannot be duplicated in 
leather or any other material. 
With over 160 different 
passive and active retention 
holsters & pouches, Fobus lets 
you carry with confidence.
L I F E T I M E 
W A R R A N T Y
CONFIDENCE
CONCEALED
WWW.FOBUSHOLSTER.COM
267-803-1517
If you’re serious about hunting dangerous
game, there is some essential gear you
should purchase before heading afield.
For me, that starts with a pair of custom
shooting sticks from African Sporting
Creations. These durable wooden sticks
are quiet and can be customized to your
preferences. I have a pair and count them
among the items I wouldn’t leave home
without. (www.AfricanSportingCreations.
com; MSRP: $199)
While you’re at the ASC website, check
out its line of Courteney Boots—a staple
of life on safari.
There is no better way to keep your
ammo organized and accessible than
Galco’s excellent Field Grade Culling
Belt, which holds 20 rounds close at
hand for fast, reliable reloads. (www.
GalcoGunleather.com; MSRP: $104.95)
  Staying comfortable in the field is also 
important. The Versacarry Cotton Webbing 
Rifle Sling is light and functional—perfect 
for your first safari ... or your tenth. (www.
Versacarry.com; MSRP: $39.99)
GEAR FOR 
DANGEROUS 
GAME
The AVR is loaded with 
high-end features and 
comes at a relatively 
bargain price for a 
dedicated dangerous-
game rifle. If you’ve 
always thought 
about adding 
a high-
quality 
big bore 
to your 
collection, 
this is a great option. 

AMMO TEST
The 9mm 124-grain Elite 
Performance V-Crown 
JHP expands reliably in 
both bare gelatin and 
heavy clothes gelatin. 
The 9mm V-Crown is also 
available in 115- and 
147-grain versions.
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY ED SANOW

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
T
he SIG Sauer V-Crown JHP ammo is designed
for personal defense, but it is also a serious
consideration for duty ammo.
In mid-2014, SIG Sauer introduced its line of
centerfire pistol ammo: Elite Performance Ammunition. This
premium ammo is available in all the police calibers, most
concealed-carry calibers and a few of the most popular
hunting calibers. The SIG ammo product line continues to
expand and now includes SIG’s original V-Crown hollowpoint
loads, FMJ practice ammo, match-grade Open Tip Match rifle
ammo and Hunting Solid Copper loads. 
SIG Sauer says its V-Crown jacketed hollowpoint ammo is
“designed specifically for personal defense.” Our testing
confirms that Elite Performance ammo performs very well in
the entire FBI gelatin test protocol. That means it should also
be seriously considered for police duty use.
For auto pistols, the V-Crown JHP is available in seven calibers:
.380 Auto 90-grain JHP; 9mm 115-grain, 124-grain and
147-grain JHP; .357 SIG 125-grain JHP; .38 Super +P 125-grain
JHP; .40 S&W 165-grain and 180-grain JHP; 10mm 180-grain
JHP; and .45 Auto 185-grain, 200-grain and 230-grain JHP. 
Elite Performance ammo is made by Kentucky’s L-Tech
Enterprises to SIG Sauer’s specifications. This company has
been loading custom ammo for more than 20 years. During the
development process of Elite Performance ammo, SIG Sauer
Academy instructors fired thousands of rounds of ammo, so
it has already been tested in countless officer-involved and
off-duty shooting scenarios.
IN MOST 
TESTS OF SIG 
SAUER ELITE 
PERFORMANCE 
AMMO, HEAVY 
CLOTHES HAVE 
ALMOST NO 
EFFECT ON 
EXPANSION OR 
PENETRATION.
The SIG V-Crown JHP 
uses a dual-stacked 
hollowpoint cavity. A 
shallow, V-shaped cavity 
sits on top of a deep, 
I-shaped cavity. (Photo: 
SIG Sauer) 
V-CROWN JHP BULLET
The SIG Sauer Elite Performance ammo uses a pre-stressed, 
lead core, jacketed hollowpoint. During this JHP bullet-making 
process, a special tool slices the leading edge of the lead core 
into six sections. Then, the lead core is pressed back together to 
look like an ordinary JHP. Because the V-Crown JHP bullet has 
been pre-cut in six areas, during expansion, the lead core simply 
peels back along the areas where it has been pressed together, 
thereby expanding to larger diameters with less expansion force.
The V-Crown JHP bullet has two hollowpoint cavities: a 
shallow, V-shaped main cavity on top of a deep, but narrow, 
I-shaped cavity. With this “stacked” or dual cavity design, the 
hollowpoint cavity is less likely to get plugged with heavy 
clothes, wallboard and plywood. The second cavity walls are 
thicker and stronger and less likely to be mangled by auto 
glass and car bodies. A smaller cavity allows for a more-
rounded bullet profile for more-reliable feeding. 
The V-Crown JHP bullet has a toothed cannelure, or knurled ridge, 
halfway up the bullet. A cannelure on most bullets is used as a 
place to roll the case mouth into the bullet to hold the bullet in 
the case. Not so with the V-Crown JHP: This cannelure is used to 
lock the jacket to the lead core. The jacket must remain with the 
lead core—even after penetrating harsh barriers such as auto 
glass—for the bullet to expand and penetrate properly. 
Locking the jacket to the core increases weight 
retention in two ways. First, the jacket stays 
with the bullet core. Second, the jacket limits 
how much the bullet can expand; it prevents 
big sections of the pre-stressed bullet 
from over-expanding and shearing off. The 
expansion is controlled and uniform, but it 
also results in a larger recovered diameter 
than with most JHP designs.
Elite Performance ammo is available in all the 
traditional auto pistol bullet weights, from 
lighter (more energy) to medium to heavier 
(more momentum). Even so, the bullet 
weights are very mainstream when it comes 
to reliably cycling a police-oriented auto 
pistol. We shot 100 rounds of six different 
Elite Performance calibers and loads from 
a variety of duty and off-duty pistols. Every 
cartridge fed, ejected and fully cycled.
The SIG Sauer V-Crown Elite Performance 
ammo has been awarded “Best Ammo of the 
Year” by two different organizations and also 
received the NRA Golden Bullseye Award. 
SIG ammo is the real deal.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
FBI GELATIN TESTING
The SIG Sauer V-Crown ammo has undergone the entire FBI
protocol gelatin testing: bare gelatin, heavy clothes, sheetrock,
plywood, auto glass and car bodies. That means it is more than
just good personal-defense ammo—it is good police-duty ammo.
As a double-check, we fi red some of the Elite Performance
V-Crown ammo into bare gelatin, heavily clothed gelatin and (the
harshest test) gelatin after passing through glass.
In bare gelatin, the V-Crown JHPs expanded to more than
150 percent. For example, the .40 S&W 165-grain V-Crown
had a recovered diameter of 0.62 inch—a perfect mushroom
penetrating 13.5 inches. The .45 Auto 200-grain V-Crown
perfectly expanded to 0.74 inch and penetrated 13.0 inches.
It was difficult to tell which bullet hit bare gelatin and which
one penetrated heavy clothes first. Heavy clothes had almost
no effect on expansion or penetration. The same held true for
the 9mm 124-grain V-Crown with a 0.60-caliber expanded 
diameter and 12.5 inches of penetration.
Auto glass, of course, is very hard on all bullets. That said, the 
beat-up V-Crown JHP did better than most JHP bullets after 
glass. They expanded a little less but still had 85 percent or 
better weight-retention. All the V-Crown bullets penetrated a 
little deeper than bare gelatin or heavy clothes gelatin, but 
against glass, deeper is better than shallower. Simply put: The 
V-Crown ammo passed the auto glass test.
With the introduction of some top-drawer pistols, the .380 Auto 
is seeing a lot more concealed carry. We fired the 90-grain 
V-Crown JHP into bare gelatin and into heavily clothed gelatin—
the two most appropriate tests for concealed-carry ammo. 
In bare gelatin, the V-Crown expanded to 0.61 inch and 
penetrated 9.0 inches. In heavily clothed gelatin, it expanded 
to 0.54 inch and went in 10.5 inches. Even against heavy 
clothes, it met the industry goal of 150 percent expansion.
PRACTICAL ACCURACY TESTING
The .357 SIG is one of my favorite calibers. When I started in 
law enforcement, the duty gun was a .357 Magnum revolver. It 
still has the best overall stopping power record of any caliber 
in actual officer-involved shootings. The .357 SIG 125-grain 
JHP, at 1,350 fps, is as close as it gets to the .357 Magnum 
125-grain JHP, at 1,425 fps. 
The ultimate measure 
of a police bullet is its 
ability to defeat barriers 
such as wallboard 
(shown to the left of 
the gel block), plywood, 
car bodies and auto 
glass and still expand 
reliably and penetrate 
to the correct depth. 
The V-Crown JHP does 
exactly that. (Photo: SIG 
Sauer)
Since its introduction in 
2014, the made-in-the-
USA Elite Performance 
Ammunition from SIG 
Sauer has achieved 
industry nods as 
“Ammunition of the Year.” 
The V-Crown hollowpoint 
is impressive, indeed. 
(Photo: SIG Sauer)

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
I have traded in the 4-inch .357 Magnum
revolver for a 4-inch .357 SIG pistol. This
caliber has the most energy of any common
police caliber and the most ability to get inside
a car of any common police caliber. With a bit
of felt recoil and a definite muzzle blast, the
.357 SIG is not for everyone … only those who
really miss the .357 Magnum.
Consequently, .357 SIG ammo was used for 
serious accuracy testing. It was conducted 
at the nostalgic distance of 50 yards, a range 
only “police marksmen” shoot any more. 
We were not looking for “rapid fire, combat 
accuracy.” Instead, we wanted to carefully 
compare the Elite Performance V-Crown JHP 
to other common JHP ammo.
We did a mix of strong-side barricade and 
rollover prone, along with 124- or 125-grain 
JHPs from Remington, Winchester, Federal 
and Hornady. With 8-inch average groups 
from 50 yards, the SIG Sauer ammo delivered 
nine-ring, B-27 silhouette accuracy, putting 
it in a three-way tie for second place. The 
Elite Performance ammo was not the most 
accurate from this particular 4-inch duty 
pistol, but it was as accurate as the biggest 
names in the ammo industry.
V-CROWN JHP FOR REVOLVERS
Auto pistols aside, the revolver is widely used 
for concealed carry and home defense and even 
sees some off-duty use. 
With the success of its auto pistol loads, SIG 
Sauer had many requests for a V-Crown JHP 
in the revolver calibers. There are lots of S&W 
Chief’s Specials and M&P Bodyguards, Ruger 
SP-101s and LCRs, Colt Detective Specials and 
The .380 Auto 90-grain 
V-Crown expanded 
to 0.61 inch in bare 
gelatin and penetrated 
9.0 inches—very good 
performance for any 
smaller-caliber off-duty 
or concealed-carry load.
The V-Crown JHP has been pre-stressed and pre-weakened 
along six well-defined lines. As a result, the hollowpoint 
bullet expands right where these internal cuts were made. 
This .45 Auto 200-grain V-Crown expanded to 0.74 inch. 
(Photo: SIG Sauer)

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The original SIG Sauer
loads were the V-Crown
JHPs in the five major
police-duty and off-duty
calibers: (left to right)
.380 Auto, 9mm, .357
SIG, .40 S&W and
.45 Auto. Since then,
the handgun line has
expanded to include
a wide variety of FMJ
practice loads, as well
as V-Crown JHPs in
calibers from .380 Auto
to .45 Colt.
The SIG Elite Performance 
JHP has a smallish 
hollowpoint cavity to keep 
it from being plugged 
by debris such as heavy 
clothes. However, the cavity 
is designed to aggressively 
expand in soft targets and 
a controlled crush after 
hard targets such as glass 
(shown).
Charter Arms Undercovers and Bulldogs still in use. 
In early 2016, SIG Sauer introduced its new Elite Performance 
V-Crown JHP duty and FMJ training loads for the classic 
revolver calibers—.38 Special +P, .357 Magnum, .44 Special, 
.44 Special and .45 Colt. 
While these are no longer police-duty calibers, the V-Crown JHPs 
in the calibers that were in police use passed the FBI gelatin test 
SIMPLY PUT: THE 
V-CROWN AMMO 
PASSED THE AUTO 
GLASS TEST.

40 
vered 
eft) 
he 
nt, 
nts 
d 
ass. 
after-
The author is 
well versed 
in bullet 
performance 
and was 
thrilled with the 
performance of 
SIG’s V-Crown 
JHP.
SIG SAUER ELITE 
PERFORMANCE 
AMMO CYCLES 
FLAWLESSLY IN 
POLICE-DUTY 
PISTOLS. IT 
HAS RELIABLE 
EXPANSION 
AND ADEQUATE 
PENETRATION 
AGAINST COMMON 
POLICE OBSTACLES 
SUCH AS HEAVY 
CLOTHES AND 
AUTO GLASS.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
protocol. As a double-check, we test-fi red some of the new .38 
Special +P 125-grain V-Crown JHP ammo into bare gelatin and 
then into heavily clothed gelatin. 
In bare gelatin, the V-Crown JHP expanded to 0.58 inch, 
beating the ammo industry goal of 150 percent, or 0.54 inch. 
Even from the shorter, 2-inch barrel, the V-Crown expanded to 
a perfect mushroom that measured 0.53 inch. 
In most tests of SIG Sauer Elite Performance ammo, heavy 
clothes had almost no effect on expansion or penetration. When 
the .38 Special +P 125-grain V-Crown JHP was fi red from a 
4-inch barrel, we could not tell which bullet hit bare gelatin and 
which one penetrated heavy clothes fi rst. The expansion and 
penetration were virtually identical. The results were not quite 
as good against heavy clothes from a 2-inch revolver. 
BIG-BORE .44 SPECIAL
The .44 Special is still a favorite among hardcore
handgunners. SIG started with the classic 240-grain bullet 
and then decreased the bullet weight to increase the velocity 
lost from very short barrels. Frankly, with such low velocities 
and low chamber pressures, the .44 Special is a challenging 
caliber, especially for traditional revolver shooters who prefer 
heavy bullets. The resulting 200-grain JHP is the heaviest of 
the high-performance ammo that still expands and penetrates 
in FBI tests like the rest of the Elite Performance ammo.
This 200-grain V-Crown JHP has a noticeably wide and deep 
hollowpoint cavity. From a 3-inch revolver, we got 0.60-inch 
recovered diameters and 15.5 inches of penetration. This 
is just shy of the 150 percent expansion goal but definitely 
makes the most of what the .44 Special has to offer.
The newest SIG loads are in the 9mm caliber—the caliber that 
is being adopted more and more by police departments. With 
the new 124- and 147-grain FMJ loads, SIG now has 9mm 
FMJ qualifying/practice ammo for each of its 9mm V-Crown 
police/self-defense loads.
THE BOTTOM LINE 
SIG Sauer Elite Performance ammo cycles fl awlessly in police-
duty pistols. It has reliable expansion and adequate penetration 
against common police obstacles such as heavy clothes and 
auto glass. That means the Elite Performance ammo has the 
stopping power equal to the best JHPs on the market. It is as 
accurate as any full-power, police-oriented hollowpoint. 
SIG Sauer Elite Performance ammo is worth a hard look for 
use as both an approved duty load and for any concealed-
carry role.  
SIG Sauer Elite 
Performance ammo is 
now available in most 
of the classic revolver 
calibers. New lines of 
rifle ammo include solid 
copper hunting-oriented 
loads and open-tip, boat-
tail, match-grade loads.
The newest loads from 
SIG Sauer are 9mm 
FMJ qualifying/training 
rounds. These are 
available in the same 
three bullet weights as 
the 9mm V-Crown police/
self-defense loads. 
(Photo: SIG Sauer)
CONTACT INFORMATION
SIG SAUER
www.SIGSauer.com

ABOUT
THE 
AUTHOR
Lieutenant Ed Sanow 
is the director of 
training with the 
Benton County, 
Indiana, Sheriff’s 
Department and the 
co-author of three 
ammo stopping 
power books. 
Sanow makes ammo 
recommendations to 
police departments 
across the United 
States.
We shot 100 rounds 
of six different Elite 
Performance calibers 
and loads from a variety 
of duty and off-duty 
pistols. Every V-Crown 
JHP cycled perfectly.
WITH A BIT OF 
FELT RECOIL AND A 
DEFINITE MUZZLE 
BLAST, THE .357 
SIG IS NOT FOR 
EVERYONE … ONLY 
THOSE WHO REALLY 
MISS THE .357 
MAGNUM.

The 805 Bren A2 is a 
select-fire weapon that 
departs from the 805 
Bren S1 Carbine in a 
few key respects. 
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY ANDY MASSIMILIAN
CZ’S SEMIAUTO 805 BREN 
S1 CARBINE HAS BEEN WELL 
RECEIVED IN THE U.S. SEE HOW 
IT STACKS UP TO THE CZECH 
ARMY ORIGINAL.

The plastic shell
deflector works well 
to keep brass clear of 
left-handed shooters. 
Note the fence around 
the magazine release to 
protect it from accidental 
release. Removing the 
pin to its left allows
the magazine well to 
be slid downward off 
the trigger housing to 
allow replacement with 
a different housing that 
accepts CZ’s proprietary 
magazines.
Staked pins on the gas 
block keep them from 
migrating out.
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
T
he U.S. consumer has often benefi tted from 
military arms development that occurs in faraway 
places worldwide and that eventually produces 
civilian versions for U.S. markets. One recent 
example is the Czech CZ 805 Bren that was 
developed in 2009 as a select-fi re military rifl e and debuted in 
the United States in 2015 in both LE/MIL and civilian variants.
The 805 Bren was originally intended to be made in three 
different calibers (7.62x39mm, 5.56 NATO and 6.8x43mm SPC 
Rem.), but only 5.56 NATO rifl es are currently produced, with 
300 BLK soon on the way. 
This article will address the A2 select-fi re version for LE/MIL 
and the semiauto S1 Carbine.
GUN DETAILS
The Bren uses a sturdy, monolithic receiver milled from a 7075 
forging with an integral, full-length MIL-STD 1913 rail on top. 
Two finishes are offered: black hard-coat anodizing or flat 
dark earth that uses a Cerakote-type product. 
The trigger housing and magazine well are polymer. Two 
magazine wells are available: the standard version that accepts 
M-16/AR magazines and has a similar push-button-style release; 
and a European version that fi ts proprietary CZ magazines and 
has a paddle-style release just ahead of the trigger guard. A kit 
to change from the U.S. to the CZ variant is available from CZ USA 
for $150 and includes a magwell and fi ve magazines.
The Bren uses a short-stroke, gas-piston operating system 
with a rotating, seven-lug bolt that resembles the bolt used 
on the M-16. The gas system is made of stainless steel, with 
the tube and piston mounted above the barrel. The gas block 
has a regulator that can be set for normal or reduced gas 
operation. It is usually used when the rifle is equipped with a 
suppressor that typically increases gas pressure.
SPECS
Reflecting the long, all-metal receiver and gas-piston 
operating system, these firearms are not lightweight—8.43 
pounds for the S1 and 7.52 pounds for the A2 (without a 
magazine). Both are also compact (39 inches for the S1 and 
30.7 inches long for the A2 with the stock unfolded and set 
to the shortest length of pull). With the stocks folded, the S1 
is a mere 28.5 inches, while the A2 is 23. Both firearms can 
be fired when folded, which is an important tactical feature.
CZ uses cold-hammer-forged barrels in all of its small arms 
production, and forged barrels are proven to last longer than 
conventional barrels. (FN also uses cold hammer forging in 
its M4 and machinegun barrels.) The A2 barrel is 11 inches 
long and chrome lined; the S1 is 16.2 inches and without 
chrome. Both are a slim, .545 inch in diameter and have a 
two-chamber muzzle brake and a 1:7 rifling twist typically 
used to stabilize longer bullets in the 62- to 74-grain range. 
LOCK, STOCK AND BARREL
The A2 and S1 barrels have different muzzle threads. The S1 
uses the more popular thread of ½x28, and the A2 uses 14x1 
The muzzle brake/
compensator is loud—as 
can be expected from 
sideways venting.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The trigger sear engages
a rear hammer hook
resembling the AK-47
design.
Fire control on the A2 is
semi, two-round burst
and full auto with a rate
of fire of 750 rpm that
is roughly equivalent to
the M-16.
The semiauto trigger
assembly (right), as
compared to the more-
complex select-fire
version (left). Note the
front of the two-tine
auto sear just left of the
hammer on the select-
fire version.
LH metric (early imports of the semiauto were called the “Bren 
PS1” and were classified as pistols, because they didn’t have a 
stock. They used 14x1 LH metric threading). Although the barrel 
isn’t a quick change, it can be replaced without special tools 
or a vise by removing six hex-head screws on the sides of the 
receiver. This feature is a big plus for those who wish to change 
to 300 BLK, which requires only a change in barrel because it 
shares the same magazine and bolt as the 5.56 NATO.
The Bren uses a side-mounted reciprocating charging handle 
that can be easily switched from the left to the right side. 
Reciprocating charging handles make chamber checks easier 
and can be used to seat a partially chambered round, thus 
negating the need for the separate forward assist found on 
an AR. However, they can also cause stoppages if their motion 
is impeded by situations such as the operator’s grip or when 
contacting a barricade that the shooter is using for cover. The 
action on the Bren remains locked open after the last round is 
fired, but the bolt catch works differently than the one found 
on the AR. While the AR’s catch is dual function—it both locks 
and releases the bolt—the Bren’s catch only locks the bolt 
rearward when it is depressed—but it does not release it. 
To chamber a round when the bolt is locked to the rear, the 
charging handle must be retracted and released. 
Both the S1 and the A2 have an ambidextrous safety/selector. The A2 
selector offers 0-1-2-F with automatic fire of 750 rpm. The safety 
locks the action closed when engaged, thus requiring the firearm 
to be placed into “fire” mode to clear the chamber. This system 
is shared by the CZ Scorpion and the AK-47. Magazine release 
buttons are ambidextrous.
The Bren has a stock that folds to the right and is adjustable 
for four lengths of pull. It also has a removable cheek piece 
that snaps over the comb. The grip has a back strap that can 
be replaced with a larger size for $12. Dual-sided sling mount 
plates are at the front and rear of the receiver and accommodate 
either a 1-inch-wide sling or HK-style sling clips. 
The Bren is equipped with removable, adjustable aluminum 
sights. Out front is a post with round protective ears, while 
the rear has two apertures: a ghost ring for CQB and a smaller 
aperture for precision aiming. Windage errors are corrected 
using the rear sight, while elevation is adjusted by rotating the 
front post using a four-prong M-16-style tool or bullet tip. Both 
front and rear sights can be folded down when optics are used 
or for more-compact casing and transport.
The most significant difference between the semiauto S1 and 
the select-fire A2 is the fire control system: The A2 requires 
additional parts in the trigger group and a different bolt 
carrier. The trigger group on the A2 has a modified hammer 
and a burst ratchet and auto sear. The bolt carrier also has an 
extension at its rear—the “auto sear trip.” 
In brief, here’s how it works: In semiauto fire, the hammer 
is held rearward by the disconnector until the trigger is 
released, whereupon the trigger sear mates with the hammer 
sear and retains the hammer in its cocked position. Because 
the trigger is held rearward, it does not connect with the 
hammer.  However, the disconnector makes this connection 
until the trigger is released and reconnects with the hammer. 

WWW.BUTLERCREEK.COM
ASAP
® UNIVERSAL 
AR15/M16 MAG LOADER
ASAP
® UNIVERSAL
AK47/GALILMAG LOADER
ASAP
® UNIVERSAL 
SINGLE STACK MAG LOADER
ASAP
® 
UNIVERSAL 
DOUBLE  STACK 
MAG LOADER
MADE IN USA
Introducing the easy to use, lightning fast, and rugged built, ASAP
® Mag Loaders 
from Butler Creek
®. Load magazines faster and easier than ever before and enjoy 
more time shooting. Constructed using a durable glass-ﬁ lled material and crafted in 
the United States, it’s built for a lifetime of simplicity, speed, and performance. 
Visit our website to ﬁ nd a dealer near you.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Without a disconnector, the hammer would  follow the bolt
carrier forward, causing doubling, failures to fire or out-of-
battery firing. (This malfunction is called “hammer follow” for
that reason.) In “full-auto” mode, the disconnector is made
inoperative, but the auto sear catches the hammer and holds
it rearward in the cocked position. As the bolt carrier comes
forward during counter-recoil, the auto sear trip activates the
auto sear, allowing the hammer to fall. The trip is located at the
rear of the bolt carrier to ensure that the action is close to being
fully locked by the time the hammer reaches the firing pin. This
negates the possibility of hammer follow. In “burst” mode, a
ratchet allows full-auto fire for a given number of cycles; in this
case, two for the A2 when in “two-shot” burst mode.
RANGE TIME
The S1 was tested for accuracy and reliability. It was reliable
with all five different loads used, including steel-cased ammo
that was relatively underpowered. 
Accuracy was tested by mounting a Leopold Mark IV
8.5-25X50mm scope and firing off a Caldwell Tack Driver rest
and sandbag from 100 yards. The S1 showed very inconsistent
performance—shooting average groups of 2 to 4.38 inches, 
with the smaller groups always shot on a cold barrel. 
Some of these groups had a concentration of several rounds in 
a tighter group, with two fliers consistently opening it up. With 
a 1:7 twist, one would think that the heavier, 75-grain Hornady 
match load would shoot the best, but my sample carbine did 
not work well with this otherwise very accurate load. 
The best groups were shot with the Black Hills 60-grain V-Max 
load, with best/average groups of 1.88 and 2.0 inches. This load 
also produced an interesting five-shot group, with four rounds 
dropping into a dime-sized hole and a heart-breaking fifth round 
landing 3 inches wide to spoil an otherwise perfect target!
The additional 5.2 inches of barrel length on the S1 Carbine 
over the A2 produced a material increase in velocity that 
ranged from 151 fps for the Federal 55-grain ball to 254 fps 
for the Black Hills 60-grain V-Max. 
Both the S1 and A2 had smooth trigger strokes but had lots 
of creep and a fair amount of overtravel. The A2’s trigger was 
much better (4.5 pounds), compared to 5 pounds, 10 ounces 
for the S1. 
ACCURACY AND ERGONOMICS
It should be noted that the Bren’s mediocre accuracy was not 
the result of poor workmanship, because this rifle uses durable 
materials and has high-quality machining and precision parts fit 
(no cost-cutting MIM parts are used, which is unusual). Rather, 
the Bren’s design necessarily limits its accuracy—with a thin, 
easily heated barrel having greater muzzle whip than heavier 
Here are two of the six 
hex-head screws that 
attach the barrel to 
the receiver. Note the 
reversible reciprocating 
charging handle.
Aluminum sights are 
flip-up and consist of a 
protected post front (top 
photo) and an aperture 
rear (bottom photo). 
The bolt catch (located 
above the magazine 
release) can be pressed 
to lock the bolt to the 
rear, but pressing it will 
not release a bolt that 
is already locked to the 
rear, as on an AR15. 
Instead, the charging 
handle must be pulled to 
release the bolt.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Takedown is quick and 
easy. Note the stainless 
steel gas tube and 
piston. The receiver 
is milled from a 7075 
forging and attaches to a 
polymer trigger housing 
with a single push pin. 
This aluminum-over-
polymer approach is also 
used by FN on the SCAR 
series rifles, but the Bren 
receiver is far sturdier. 
The Bren can be fired with 
stock folded; doing so 
makes the carbine shorter 
than 30 inches long.
THE ADDITIONAL 5.2 
INCHES OF BARREL 
LENGTH ON THE S1 
CARBINE OVER THE A2 
PRODUCED A MATERIAL 
INCREASE IN VELOCITY ... 

The two-position gas
regulator is indicated by
different-sized dimples
on the piston housing
and turns to adjust using
a bullet tip.
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: 5.56 NATO
BARREL: 16.2 inches
OVERALL LENGTH: 39-inch stock, open
and collapsed
WEIGHT: 8.43 pounds
SIGHTS: Windage-adjustable rear aperture;
elevation-adjustable protected post front
STOCKS: Polymer
ACTION: Semiauto
CAPACITY: 30 +1
MSRP: $1,999
CONTACT INFORMATION
CZ-USA
www.CZ-USA.com
Black Hills 60-grain V-MAX
American Eagle XM193 55-grain FMJ
Hornady Match 75-grain BTHP
Black Hills 60-grain V-MAX
American Eagle XM193 55-grain FMJ
Hornady Match 75-grain BTHP
Average
2.0
3.13
4.38
254
151
241
Smallest
1.88
2.5
2.5
2,549
2,553
2,482
2,801
2,753
2,723
AMMUNITION
AMMUNITION
Group Size (inches)
NOTE: Velocity was measured 15 feet from the muzzle with an Oehler 
35 chronograph. 
NOTE: These are sizes of best and average five-shot group in inches shot by the Bren S1 
Carbine at 100 yards from a Caldwell Tack Driver rest and measured center to center.
Mean Velocity (fps)
S1 Carbine
A2
Gain with S1
 Carbine
Finally, the magazine release button is too far forward (about 
¾ inch more than the AR-15), which slows down mag changes 
for those with average-length fingers and necessitates using 
the support hand to operate it for those with shorter fingers.
Two items to remember when firing the Bren: Do not to use a 
“thumb-up” grip with your support hand without moving the 
charging handle to the opposite side. In addition, it’s best to 
install covers on the side and bottom Picatinny rails, which 
are sharp and easily abrade the hand. 
ROBUST, RELIABLE … AND QUIRKY
The Bren is a well-made, robust and reliable rifle with some 
interesting—and sometimes quirky—elements. Its feature-
laden design accommodates right- and left-hand operation. 
For many, the semiauto S1 Carbine is certainly a contender 
for a home-defense weapon when loaded with appropriate 
ammunition. For those who are accustomed to the AR-15, 
however, training and familiarity are necessary to become 
instinctive and proficient in its operation.   
barrels; a gas piston system that induces inconsistent barrel 
vibrations; a trigger with lots of creep; an imprecise break 
and noticeable overtravel; and a tactical buttstock with some 
looseness and a small comb that can’t provide a full cheek weld 
when firing with a magnified optic. 
With that said, it’s clear that CZ’s main focus was on reliability, 
with accuracy being a secondary concern; “combat accuracy” 
is good enough. 
Ergonomics of the controls could be improved. The grip backstrap 
is curved in a way that doesn’t ideally fit, making it difficult to apply 
uniform tension between the top and bottom of the firing hand. 
Also, the safety lever is way too stiff to be placed into “safe” with 
the thumb and requires using the support hand. The selector on the 
A2 contacted and scraped the trigger finger when in “burst” and 
“full-auto” modes, especially with left-handed shooters. 
The left-side bolt catch has a fence surrounding its lower 
side that makes it fairly difficult to use. That’s a problem if 
the shooter is wearing gloves that reduce dexterity or has an 
injured hand and needs to lock the action open to clear a jam. 
… IT IS CERTAINLY 
A CONTENDER FOR 
A HOME-DEFENSE 
WEAPON WHEN LOADED 
WITH APPROPRIATE 
AMMUNITION.
SPECIFICATIONS
CALIBER: 5.56 NATO
BARREL: 11 inches
OVERALL LENGTH: 30.7-inch stock, 
open and collapsed 
WEIGHT: 7.52 pounds 
SIGHTS: Windage-adjustable rear aperture; 
elevation-adjustable protected post front
STOCKS: Polymer
ACTION: Select fire: 0–1–2–F
CAPACITY: 30 +1
MSRP: N/A


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
THEBRITISHSMLE
RIFLEISONEOFTHE
LONGEST-SERVING
BOLT-ACTIONRIFLES
OFALLTIME.
TEXT BY BOB CAMPBELL
PHOTOS BY BOB CAMPBELL AND ROBB MANNING
Photos: Robb Manning

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
A
mong the longest-serving military firearms 
of all time is the British Lee-Enfield .303 
rifle. The original model was named the 
Magazine Lee-Enfield (MLE)—nicknamed 
the “Emily”—which came into widespread 
service in the mid-1890s. Its successor, the Short Magazine 
Lee-Enfield (SMLE)—affectionately referred to by British 
troops as the less-pleasant “Smelly”—used during World 
War I and World War II, entered service in 1903 and was 
improved as the SMLE MK III/III* in 1907. This rifle and the 
later No. 4 served the British Army well into the 1960s. 
(Note: Unless you are a die-hard Lee-Enfi eld afi cionado, the 
British naming convention can be extremely confusing, even 
using asterisks [*] to differentiate between models. For the sake 
of not getting bogged down in a bunch of numbers, the name, 
Lee-Enfi eld, is going to be used as a catch-all for this article.)
LONG-RUNNING SERVICE
To this day, the Lee-Enfi eld is still the issue weapon of various 
entities around the world. In the form of the Ishapore 2A/2A1, the 
Lee-Enfi eld remains an important part of the Indian Home Guard. 
The SMLE is in use by friend and foe, alike, in the mountains of 
Afghanistan. The impediment to its continued use in that region 
seems to be a shortage of .303 British ammunition. 
One of the most unsung of paramilitary organizations is the 
Canadian Rangers. The Rangers have served in times of peril 
and emergencies such as fl oods and conducted search-and-
rescue missions in arctic conditions, in addition to conducting 
demanding long-range patrols. Their standard rifl e has been 
the Lee-Enfi eld since the Rangers were formed, although it will 
soon be replaced by a modern 10-shot bolt-action .308 rifl e.
The impending retirement of the thousands of Lee-Enfield 
rifles in use by the Canadian Rangers will take some time; 
even so, it is the end of an era and unprecedented service. To 
replace the Lee Enfield, our Canadian allies are adopting what 
is basically a modified Scout rifle in .308 Winchester with a 
AS ONE SOLDIER NOTED IN 
KOREA, “WHEN YOU HIT THEM 
WITH THE LEE-ENFIELD, IT IS 
ALL OVER.”

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
The naming convention used for the SMLE by the British military can be
confusing. U.S. Army Service firearms are named by model (M), the number
designation, alteration (A)—sometimes referred to as “variant”— and what it is.
Here are two examples. The M16A4 rifle designation “translates” as “Rifle,
Model 16, Alteration 4.” The M4A1 carbine has an official military designation
of “Carbine, Model 4, Alteration 1.”
In the day of the SMLE, the British used number (No.) to note major weapons
systems and mark (Mk) as the alteration/variant. The official military
designation was Rifle, Short, Magazine, Lee-Enfield, Number 1, Mark III
(“short” referred to rifle length). The U.S. M16A4, in comparable terms, would
be Rifle, Magazine, Stoner-Hartford, Number 1, Mark IIII; and the M4A1 would
be Rifle, Magazine, Stoner-Hartford, Number 2, Mark I.
The following are the models/marks of the Lee-Enfield rifle. In 1926, “SMLE”
was changed to “Rifle,” so the SMLE Mk III* was renamed Rifle No. 1 Mk III* in
1926, and all subsequent models that went into production were named Rifle.
The * denotes a change in sights and the removal of magazine cut-off.
Magazine Lee-Enfield 1895–1926
Charger Loading Lee-Enfield 1906–1926
Short Magazine Lee-Enfield Mk I 1904–1926
Short Magazine Lee-Enfield Mk II 1906–1927
Short Magazine Lee-Enfield Mk III/III* 1907–present
Short Magazine Lee-Enfield Mk V 1922–1924 (experimental only)
Rifle No. 1 Mk VI 1930–1933 (experimental only)
Rifle No. 4 Mk I 1931–present
Rifle No. 4 Mk I* 1942–present
Rifle No. 5 Mk I 1944–present
Rifle No. 4 Mk 2 1949–present
Rifle 7.62mm 2A 1964–present
  Rifle 7.62mm 2A1  1965–present
The various Gibbs Rifle Company versions are shortened SMLE rifles that are 
often fitted with a sporting-type stock. They may be found modified from any 
of the Lee-Enfield rifles, but many variants were based on the Ishapore rifles. 
The rifl es were produced in England, Canada, Australia and New Zealand, as well 
as India and the United States. Savage-produced rifl es are marked “U.S. Property.”
Be certain not to use commercial .308 Winchester loads in the 7.62mm 
rifles—it is too hot for the action. 
CLARIFYING SMLE 
NAMING CONVENTIONS
10-round magazine in the form of a Sako rifle. 
While much is made of tactical rifles these days, and the 
.303 might seem outdated, I have kept a Lee-Enfield variant 
on hand for many years as a go-anywhere, do-anything 
emergency rifle … and I have seen no need to replace it. 
NO. 5 MK I “JUNGLE CARBINE”
A legendary and often misunderstood rifl e is the No. 5 Mk I, 
which is incorrectly called the “Jungle Carbine” (a name British 
troops likely never called it). 
The No. 5 Mk I carbine was developed during World War II as 
an answer to the need for a fast-handling compact rifle for 
use in the Pacific Campaign and by paratroopers. Rather than 
adopting a self-loading rifle similar to the U.S. M1 Carbine, 
the British adopted a rifle similar in concept to the Russian 
Mosin Nagant M44 carbine. A short-barreled, lightened rifle 
firing a full-power cartridge seemed to fill the needs at that 
time. More than 250,000 No. 5 Mk I rifles were produced, and 
many served during the war. 
 
The rifl e served until at least 1960. It was used in Europe, the Pacifi c 
and later, Korea, along with the Malaysian confl ict, in particular. 
The No. 5 Mk I was not without its faults, including increased 
recoil. Prior to 1900, the British Army issued a load much hotter 
than the later-service .303 British, and it battered both recruits 
and experienced rifl emen. A more-moderate service load was 
adopted. However, even then, the 174-grain 2,500 fps service 
load licked hard in the No. 5—despite a muzzle brake and 
rubber recoil pad. 
The No. 5 was 2 pounds lighter than the No. 4 Lee-Enfield 
The battle sights of 
the No. 5 carbine are 
far from outdated, 
even today.

  

	
All of our Shooting Bags are made 
from heavy duty, 600D nylon with 
micro-suede padding on rifle contact 
points. They are also equipped with a 
non-slip rubberized base to keep them 
stable and in place during use.
Lyman’s Bag Jack makes it easy to 
adjust the elevation of your rifle and 
bring it into line with your target, while 
also allowing you to maintain a 
comfortable shooting position.
Comfort and stability, easily adjusted 
to your exact specifications, puts you 
right on target with every shot.
	

Lyman’s new line of 
shooting rests give you a 
stable shooting platform, 
at the perfect height, 
every time.
rifle. Despite its light weight, the 18.7-inch, free-floating
barrel delivered respectable accuracy to 200 yards. A rifle
with a two-piece stock and military two-stage trigger isn’t
capable of match-grade accuracy, but the rifle was clearly
combat accurate. Rapidity of fire with the cock-on-closing
action (most bolt actions cock when the action is opened) is 
excellent, and malfunctions are practically unheard of. 
 
MYTHS
Several myths surround the No. 5 Mk I carbine. 
The first one is the “wandering zero” complaint reported by
many troops. Supposedly, the rifle could not hold its zero in
extended firing. The complaint was investigated by the British 
military, which reached the same conclusion I have: I fired
several boxes of .303 British as quickly as possible until the
rifle heated. Despite the bruises inflicted upon my shoulder,
the rifle kept its zero. 
The accuracy problem is not a shifting zero; rather, it is recoil. 
Incorrectly—but 
famously—called the 
“Jungle Carbine,” the 
No. 5 rifle is a credible 
defensive piece today. It 
makes a great truck gun.
The Ishapore 7.62 
carbine has early-type 
Lee-Enfield sights. Indian 
production never went to 
the No. 4 aperture sight.
The No. 5 sight features 
windage and elevation 
adjustment.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
rifle for accurate aimed fire. To begin with, the Lee-Enfield is
easily the fastest bolt-action rifle to operate, and its 10-round
magazine offers a good reserve of ammunition.
I also put this legend to the test. The technique is to work the
bolt rapidly in the proper manner—not closing the fingers on
the bolt handle, but using the open hand to lift the bolt, bring
it to the rear and close the bolt. The key part to this technique
for close-range skirmishing is to quickly jerk the trigger finger
with the small finger of the hand.
I was skeptical at first. However, after emptying two
magazines from the No. 5 into a man-sized target at 25
yards, I found that the rifle was, indeed, capable of the
accurate rapid fire of legend and that this technique could
have been very effective. It is faster than moving the
The rifle inflicts a hearty blow on the shooter, who develops
a flinch—which affects marksmanship. Even a trained
marksman begins to jerk the trigger after a few magazines of
full-power ammunition.
In full-sized form, the Lee-Enfield kicks less than the Mosin
Nagant, Mauser 98K, Springfield 1903 or the 1917 Enfield. In
the No 5 carbine version, recoil is rugged and can be brutal in
extended firing. Fire it until you think it has lost its zero, hand
it to another accomplished rifleman, and you will understand
my point. He will drive the rounds home.
A second myth concerning the Enfield is most likely true.
A correspondent told me it was usual for Commonwealth
soldiers to use a firing technique that allowed the Lee-Enfield
to virtually equal the M1 Garand or any other semiautomatic
The Gibbs Rifle Company 
Jungle Carbine (top), 
compared to the No. 5 
carbine (bottom)
The muzzle brake/flash 
hider seems to work 
as designed with the 
7.62mm rifle.
The Gibbs Rifle Company Ishapore 2A 7.62 rifle 
(top) compared to a M1 Carbine. While each 
has merit, the Lee-Enfield variant hits harder.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
FOLLOW US ON
Discover the Premier Knife Magazine.
facebook.com/knivesillustrated
trigger finger to the trigger. 
I have also tested another rifle that has 
its share of myths: The Ishapore 2A is the 
last bolt-action rifle purpose designed for 
military use. Coming into service in 1962, 
this rifle is chambered for the 7.62 NATO 
cartridge. It isn’t suited for the dimensionally 
similar, but hotter, .308 Winchester cartridge, 
so take care with loadings. 
These rifles were not rechambered to the 
NATO cartridge, but they are purpose-
designed new-production rifles. I have fired 
several. On average, they perform well. 
A special version modified in the United 
States by Navy Arms/Gibbs is a short 
version of the 7.62 A2 rifle. It features 
original battle rifle sights, rather than the 
No. 5 aperture sights. (India never adopted 
the No. 4 or No. 5 for production.) It has 
the versatility of the 7.62 cartridge (when 
pressure limits are respected) and is as 
accurate as the .303 British carbine—
sometimes, more so. It handles well and is 
a newer rifle than the British guns. 
I enjoy firing these rifles. They are fast 
handling, accurate enough for most chores 
and are a link to an important part of history. 
ACCURACY, RELIABILITY
How accurate are the Lee-Enfield carbines? 
The No. 5 Mk I “Jungle Carbine,” with the 
Hornady .303 British 174-grain Vintage Match 
offering, will group three shots into 4 inches 
at 100 yards. The A2 7.62 NATO rifle is usually 
fired with handloads using the Hornady 
168-grain A Max at 2,500 fps—a reasonable 
load for this action. This rifle is more accurate, 
at 3.0 inches on average. Both rifles are as 
accurate as the average good, tight AK-47 
rifle and more accurate than most. 
 
The compact, 39-inch, 7-pound “Jungle 
Carbine” handles well and is comparable in 
size and weight to the popular AR. It does 
offer a distinct advantage over the 5.56mm 
AR: penetration of light cover, vehicles and 
barriers. The penetration, sectional density 
of the bullet and the effectiveness of these 
.30-caliber battle rounds are superior. (As 
one soldier noted in Korea, “When you hit 
them with the Lee-Enfield, it is all over.”) 
THE NO. 5 MK I COMES CLOSE ENOUGH 
TO A “DO-EVERYTHING CARBINE” AS 
WE ARE LIKELY TO SEE. AND WITH A 
HEALTHY PORTION OF HISTORY ADDED, 
THE LEE-ENFIELD CARBINES ARE WELL 
WORTH THEIR PRICE.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Hornady ammunition
leads the way in
accuracy and efficient
bullet design in .303
British.
The Lee-Enfield rifle
is on the front lines
worldwide. It isn’t a bad
choice for an emergency
rifle. (This is one of the
author’s “SHTF” rifles.)
The Glosters, a British
unit serving in Korea,
were among the most
decorated units in the
region. They relied upon
their Lee-Enfield rifles.
(Photo: United Nations)
These Canadian Rangers comprise a hardy group patrolling the Arctic. 
They are capable with their Lee-Enfield rifles. (Photo: Alamy)
As far as wound potential goes, the rifles would be effective 
to at least 400 yards. The SMLE No. 5 Mk I has a lot going for 
it as a go-anywhere, do-anything light rifle, scout rifle or truck 
rifle. Not the least of its attributes is reliability. 
There are far more-expensive, short bolt-action “scout” rifles 
available. Most are more accurate than the Lee-Enfield from 
the bench, but I doubt that the practical off-hand accuracy is 
superior. No other rifle could be more reliable. For use inside 
100 yards, the Lee-Enfield rifle is a viable alternative. 
As for hunting use, the Lee-Enfield is as accurate as most 
lever-action rifles and hits harder. Consider your tolerance for 
recoil and ability to use iron sights well. If you hand load, the 
situation isn’t hopeless, but cartridge case life is shortened 
by the Lee-Enfield action. Cartridge cases seem to stretch 
more than with most rifle actions. This is due to the generous 
tolerances that make the Lee-Enfield such a reliable rifle. 
The No. 5 Mk I comes close enough to a “do-everything carbine” 
as we are likely to see. And with a healthy portion of history 
added, the Lee-Enfield carbines are well worth their price. Five 
thousand Canadian Rangers currently trust the rifle, and more 
than 120 years of use cannot be wrong.  
 
THE CANADIAN RANGERS
The Canadian Rangers are reservists similar to 
the National Guard and are officially an arm of the 
Canadian Armed Forces Reserve (CAF). 
The Canadian Rangers are the eyes and ears of the 
North. They have been most famously active in rescue 
operations. They also collect data and perform both 
surveillance and sovereignty patrols. 
International law demands that a nation must patrol 
territory it claims; and Canada claims a huge, but 
largely unoccupied, land mass. There are 5,000 
Rangers in several patrol groups. Each group includes 
30-member patrols. 
The Rangers speak more than 25 dialects, and many 
are First Nation members. British, French and Scottish 
heritage are also represented. 
AMONG THE LONGEST-
SERVING FIREARMS OF ALL 
TIME IS THE BRITISH LEE-
ENFIELD .303 RIFLE. 

Dillon Precision’s
XL650
Dillon Precision’s
XL650
STANDARD FEATURES:
• Automatic Indexing
• Uses Standard 7/8” x 14 Dies
• Loading Rate: 800-1000 Rds./Hr.
• Comes With One Caliber Conversion
• 5-Station Interchangeable Toolhead
• Automatic Powder Measure
• Automatic Primer System
• Lifetime “No-B.S.” Warranty
• RISK FREE 30-Day Trial!
rece ve a
ca
-
-
an as
r s
c num er
-
XL 650 DVD 
Instruction Manual
K91-19484  $19.95
Pictured with optional accessories:
Electric Casefeeder                    K91-210**
Powdercheck System                 K91-21044
Low Powder Sensor                   K91-16306
Aluminum Roller Handle              K91-17950
Strong Mount (550/650)             K91-22051
Aluminum Bullet Tray                  K91-22214

WHATYOUWEARAND
HOWYOUACTMIGHTBE
SCREAMING,“GUN!”
OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
TEXT AND PHOTOS BY STEVEN PAUL BARLOW
DEAD GIVEAWAYS
I
n some places, keeping your gun out of public view is the 
law. However, whether it is or not, I prefer not to advertise 
than I’m carrying a firearm.
A handgun carried for self-defense is your ace in the hole, 
and you don’t want to show that card right away. It should be your 
last option—or the second-to-last option if you’re also carrying 
a knife. Many times, and depending on the situation, avoidance, 
retreat, negotiation, deception and distraction are better choices 
Clothing with pictures 
of guns, names of gun 
companies or pro-gun 
organizations might lead 
people to believe you’re 
carrying a weapon. (Photo: 
Justin Sullivan/Getty 
Images)
Open carry might make 
you feel like a tough guy, 
but it’s usually better to 
keep the fact that you’re 
carrying under cover. 
(Photo: Marc Romanelli/
Getty Images)
… unless things escalate to deadly physical force so quickly that 
you have to jump over those options and go directly to your gun.
Also, carrying a gun doesn’t make you invincible. If you’re 
in a physical struggle, emotions are often out of control. If 
your adversary sees the gun, he’s apt to grab for it in the 
heat of the moment.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Placing several 3x5
index cards in your
pocket can break up the
outline of your pistol and
gives anyone looking
closely the belief that
you have a cell phone
in your pocket. (Shown
here is a Ruger LCP in
a DeSantis Nemesis
holster.)
Additionally, thugs won’t necessarily leave you alone if they see 
you’re armed. Sometimes, it will make you the target of those who 
want your gun. Someone walking past can suddenly restrain you 
until they are aided by several of their nearby buddies, who’ll take 
your gun before you can even clear the holster. 
While the first rule of a gunfight might be “Have a gun,” another 
tenet high on the list is “Don’t get shot with your own gun.”
WALKING BILLBOARD
I don’t like being a walking billboard for any company. If you’re
wearing a hat, t-shirt or jacket with a picture of your favorite gun
or the name of a gun company, you’re not just advertising for the
company; you’re advertising the higher probability that you’re armed. 
Save the NRA cap and pro-Second Amendment shirt for the range
and backyard barbecues with like-minded friends. Out in public, avoid 
wearing any clothing with any references to guns on them.
WHILE THE FIRST 
RULE OF A GUNFIGHT 
MIGHT BE “HAVE 
A GUN,” ANOTHER 
TENET HIGH ON THE 
LIST IS “DON’T GET 
SHOT WITH YOUR 
OWN GUN.”
CLOTHING CHOICES
The type of clothing you wear also makes a difference. Dress 
appropriately for the weather. If you’re wearing a heavy coat in 
warm weather, you will stand out in a crowd, when blending in 
should be your goal. 
Photographer’s vests and fanny packs—both popular at one 
time—are seldom seen these days, although they are dead 
giveaways to other gun owners. People not accustomed to 
thinking about guns are more likely to think you’re merely odd.
A lightweight blazer or sports jacket is often an excellent cover 
garment in situations for which business attire or fashionable 
casual wear is the standard. Loose-fitting polo or t-shirts or 
squared-off button-down shirts commonly worn untucked can 
work in very hot weather.
Some inside-the-waistband holsters are designed so your shirt 
can be tucked in. However, this does bring the shirt in closer 
contact with the gun and makes it more likely for the gun’s grip 
to poke against the shirt, thereby announcing you are trying to 
conceal some object there.
ALWAYS ADJUSTING
If your belt and holster don’t fit properly, you’ll constantly be 
tempted to adjust them. Even when your holster is covered by a 
shirt or jacket, constantly adjusting it, checking it and hiking it up 
are telltale signs that you’re carrying a weapon.
If you’re wearing a short, waist-length cover garment, be aware 
that lifting your arms above your head to reach for something 
might also lift the garment enough to expose your gun.
When you’re carrying in a small-of-the-back holster, be aware 
that bending over might expose more than just plumber’s butt.
 
TRICKS OF THE TRADE
When you’re carrying strong-side hip, either inside or outside 
the waistband, the thing most likely to show through your cover 
garment is the butt end of the gun’s grip. If your gun features 
magazines with flat and extended baseplates, carry the gun with 
the shorter magazine, and keep an extended magazine on the 
opposite side for a quick reload.
Also, if the grip tends to stick out, you might be able to resolve that 
by moving the holster forward (more like appendix carry) or back, 
closer to the small of your back. You might want to consider holsters 
specifically made for carrying those ways. Some holsters are also 
adjustable for cant—your gun is angled forward about 15 degrees. 
This can also help avoid the grip poking your cover garment.
 
Some guns give you the 
option of using higher-
capacity magazines 
or magazines with an 
extended finger-rest 
baseplate. While a 
magazine with an 
extended baseplate often 
allows for a better grip 
on your gun, a magazine 
with a flat baseplate 
is easier to conceal. 
(Shown here are a Ruger 
American Compact .45 
[left] and an HK VP9 SK.)

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Here, the butt end of
a handgun’s grip is
poking against the
shirt. Moving the
holster forward or back
might help resolve this
problem.
With a waist-length 
cover garment, raising 
your arms could expose 
your handgun to view.
Steven Paul Barlow is a retired sergeant/station commander and former firearms 
instructor with the New York State Police. He has been writing on outdoor topics 
for more than 30 years and has served as the editor for a number of Engaged 
Media special publications, including Gunslingers.
If you carry in a pocket holster and the outline of the gun still prints 
on the outside of your pants, simply place several 3x5 index cards 
in the pocket on the outside of the holster. This can help break up 
the gun’s outline without interfering with drawing the pistol when 
needed. The resulting outline will be more rectangular, leading 
anyone carefully looking you over to conclude that you have a cell 
phone in your pocket.
If pants or shorts with cargo pockets is part of your attire, a gun 
larger than a typical pocket pistol can sometimes be carried 
comfortably and unseen in such a pocket.
UNNECESSARY WORRY?
Of course, all this concern might be for nothing. Most people pay 
little attention to their surroundings these days. They’re occupied 
with their own concerns—their faces buried in their cell phones
and/or earphones that cancel all outside sounds. The butt of your
gun poking against your shirt is virtually invisible to them.   
A HANDGUN CARRIED 
FOR SELF-DEFENSE 
IS YOUR ACE IN THE 
HOLE, AND YOU DON’T 
WANT TO SHOW THAT 
CARD RIGHT AWAY. IT 
SHOULD BE YOUR LAST 
OPTION …
Carrying a handgun 
toward the small of your 
back lessens the chance 
the butt of the gun will 
print through your cover 
garment, even if the 
holster isn’t designed 
specifically for that type 
of carry. Shown here is a 
Ruger American Compact 
.45 in an Uncle’s Mike’s 
IWB holster.


OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
 TEXT AND PHOTOS BY MICHELLE CERINO
USECOVERAND
BODY POSITIONS
FOR BETTER
ACCURACY.
J
ust as with any other sport, it’s important to
practice when not under stress.
Shooting in different positions requires some 
forethought to get into position using both 
muscular and skeletal advantage. Using a stage prop can be a 
great advantage if you know how to do it. They say the street is 
a poor place to improvise, and so is a shooting match. 
I’d like to introduce you to some positions and ideas for making 
use of props or barricades.
Quite often in competitions, one criterion of a stage has you 
shooting targets from barricades. Many times, these barricades 
have steps and ports at different levels from which a variety of 
targets are to be engaged. I often watch competitors struggle 
when they approach the barricade, because they don’t know 
how to position their bodies or support their rifl es. Whether it’s 
In the standing 
position, square-up 
to the barricade. 
If the barricade is 
stable, lean into it 
for more stability. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
SHOOTING IN 
DIFFERENT 
POSITIONS 
REQUIRES SOME 
FORETHOUGHT 
TO GET INTO 
POSITION USING 
BOTH MUSCULAR 
AND SKELETAL 
ADVANTAGE.
The C-clamp, along with 
bone on muscle, helps 
stabilize the rifle.
The open-legged seated 
position works great with 
and without a barricade.
a lack of experience or training, they are unable to use these 
barricades to maximize their advantage.
THE C-CLAMP
“C-clamp” is a term shooters use for pinning their rifles to an 
object using their hands. It keeps the rifle from bouncing and 
aids in recoil management. Whenever possible, I clamp my 
support hand over the top or along the side of my rifle to pin it 
against the barricade. 
STANDING
When standing and using a barricade, I square-up to my target 
and use a C-clamp if the object allows. I spread my feet out 
wide to make a stable base and lower my center of gravity. My 
elbows are tucked in to relieve muscular tension and fatigue. 
If the piece of cover is stable, I also lean into it and bear down 
on the gun and cover.
KNEELING
Depending on the height of the barricade, there are two 
kneeling positions I use: two knees down or strong-side knee 
up. If I cannot get my elbow to my strong-side knee for support, 
I will use two knees down and use the barricade—just as if I 
were standing, except I’m on my knees. When I can get low
enough, the strong-side knee up aids in supporting my strong-
side elbow. I can change my elevation by either getting all the 
way down on my nonsupport leg—with the top of my foot flat 
against the ground—or by staying on the toe of my nonsupport 
foot and bending my knee to the appropriate height. Usually, my 
butt is on my heel. I use my foot to adjust elevation.
When I use a part of my body for support, I’m careful to get 
bone on muscle and not bone on bone. This might mean my 
elbow on my thigh or the tip of my knee on the back of my 
upper arm (triceps). 
SITTING
There are two different sitting positions that I use: open-legged 
and cross-legged. Again, the height or position of the barricade 
determines which one I use. In an open-legged position, my 
butt is on the ground, with my feet spread wide enough to 
A standing position with elbows tucked down and a C-clamp increase stability. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Michelle Cerino is both a firearms trainer and the president of Cerino Consulting and 
Training Group, LLC—a firearms training company she built with her husband, Chris, 
in 2011. She writes, hunts and competes in major 3-gun matches nationwide.
Use what you have in 
the environment to aid in 
supporting your firearm.
create pockets for my elbows on the inside of my knees. My 
feet extend out or come in to adjust elevation. 
The cross-legged seated position allows me to get even lower. 
Again, I place my elbows in the pockets of my knees. I can get even 
lower by placing my triceps on the front of my shins. It’s very stable 
and great for shooting downhill. Keep in mind that It’s important to 
maintain bone-to-muscle contact with both positions. 
Although this is written from a competition viewpoint, these 
techniques can be applied to everyday means of support, such 
as cars, fences, buildings and everyday objects. For instance, I 
can use a tree or stump to stabilize on when hunting. 
And yes, should the zombie apocalypse happen, I now have a 
better chance of making those precise head shots, because I’ve 
spent time practicing on the range.   
Practice pinning your 
rifle again the barricade 
using a C-clamp.
WHEN I USE A PART OF 
MY BODY FOR SUPPORT, 
I’M CAREFUL TO GET 
BONE ON MUSCLE AND 
NOT BONE ON BONE.

AVAILABLE AT YOUR PREFERRED RETAILER
MY STANDARD EQUIPMENT
Fact is, you can’t have one without the other. I’ll admit, the
laser was a tough sell at ﬁrst. Didn’t think I needed the extra
help. Might have been the ego of my youth, but I’d be lying
if I said I wasn’t better with it. That’s why I’ve had Crimson
Trace on my 1911 for a decade now. It’s made right just like
everything else I depend on: my truck, my business and my
family. That means something to me.
SURVIVALISMANDATORY.LASERSIGHTSAREVITAL.
crimsontrace.com                     800-442-2406
MEAT AND POTATOES. 
LASERGRIPS
 AND MY .45.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
 TEXT AND PHOTOS  BY GARRETT LUCAS
ANY SCENARIO THAT PLACES
YOU OR YOUR LOVED ONES
IN HARM’S WAY REQUIRES
PLANNING IF YOU’RE GOING TO 
GET OUT OF IT ALIVE.
W
ouldn’t it be nice if we could predict the 
future? We could win the lottery! Even 
better, we could avoid emergencies and 
catastrophes by not being around when 
they occur. We could stay off the road if 
we knew there was going to be an accident, and we’d stay 
away from the coast when a hurricane was about to hit. 
Unfortunately, life doesn’t work that way, so we must be 
prepared the best we can and have plans in place to try to 
deal with any contingency.
Planning and doing drills isn’t as “sexy” as buying gear, 
building a fortress or decking out your bug-out vehicle. 
However, it’s as important—if not more so—than just about 
anything you can do to be prepared for what’s ahead.
Any scenario that places you or your loved ones in harm’s way 
requires a plan. It is my belief that even though you might not 
be a prepper, per se, it’s good medicine to be able to know 
what steps to take ahead of time should the need ever arise. 
For me and my family, planning requires the right gear to deal 
with a situation, a way for all involved to handle the scenario, 
and constant drills and rehearsals to get it right.
For the sake of this article, I’m not necessarily talking about 
long-term planning. It doesn’t take a pandemic or EMP to put 
the ones you love in danger; it could be a fire, an earthquake, 
a home invasion or an evacuation. 
How ready are you to competently handle even these short-
term eventualities? Let’s take a look at a few scenarios and 
discuss what can be done to be ready for them.
What precautions do 
you have in place to 
deal with the threat 
of an armed robber or 
home invader?

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
In case the power grid
goes down or there’s
no access to an ATM,
it’s good to have an
emergency store of
cash to quickly get
the things you need to
stay safe.
Getting children
involved with first
aid or home safety
ensures they know
what to do in case
something serious
happens.
It takes just the blink
of an eye for a fire
to consume a home.
Having a plan for such
a contingency can
mean the difference
between life and
death.
HOME FIRE
The fi rst and often-occurring example is a home fi re. A proper 
reaction would be to simply get out of the house. But what if 
your exit is blocked? What if you’re stuck upstairs and are not 
able to get to everyone in the house? Do they know what to do?
The first step is to be ready with the gear that could help save
lives. In the case of a fire, a prudent measure would be to have
fire extinguishers stored throughout the house—not just in the
kitchen—because fires can happen anywhere. Another wise
choice would be to also have smoke hoods stored. In the event
of a fire, a person can don one of these hoods and be provided
with filtration so they don’t immediately succumb to the smoke.
What if you are stuck on the second floor? Have an escape plan
ready, such as a chain ladder that can fit over a windowsill so
you can climb to safety. Have a wrecking bar(s) ready to bust out
windows and sills to provide enough room for adults to quickly exit.
Some of this seems simple, and some sounds far-fetched. But
how far-fetched would something have to be for you not to
take precautions to save your family?
Next come the actual plans to deal with the event:
Make sure children know how to stay under the smoke.
Teach and show them how to stop, drop and roll to put out
a fire that’s on their person.
Have a specific plan for how each person is to get out. A
generalized plan for the group isn’t good enough.
 Make sure everyone knows where to meet. 
Some consideration should be given to what could happen 
during an emergency so everyone knows how to deal with it.
Finally, rehearsing the plans should be frequent and 
conducted in a manner that’s as close to reality as one could 
possibly get. Just like muscle memory that is developed when 
shooting, being able to deal with a life-threatening event is 
easier if everything has been drilled over and over.
HOME INVASION
A house fire is an obvious example, but it’s up to you to 
imagine what other scenarios might beset your family and 
how to be ready for those, as well. 
For instance, how prepared are you for a home invasion? Do 
you have a readily accessible firearm in each room? I ask, 
because you don’t know where you’ll be in your house if it 
happens—but I can almost guarantee you won’t be sitting 
next to your gun safe.
... BEING ABLE TO 
DEAL WITH A LIFE-
THREATENING EVENT IS 
EASIER IF EVERYTHING 
HAS BEEN DRILLED OVER 
AND OVER.
In the event of an 
attack or disaster, 
it’s likely that 
communications will 
be down, making 
alternative types of 
communication a vital 
part of your plan.
A ruggedized vehicle is a solid 
plan to get off the beaten 
path—away from crowds and 
other potential dangers.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Garrett Lucas has been a member of the prepper community for more than 20 
years. He has served as editor for American Survival Guide and has written 
on topics that include firearms, cutlery, long-term preparedness, wilderness 
survival, first aid and personal/home security. He currently resides in 
Kentucky, where he continues his learning process each and every day. 
In case of a natural 
disaster, having a plan 
in place in advance 
for where family and 
friends should meet 
to regroup is excellent 
forethought.
Readying an evacuation
kit(s) is a step forward 
in making sure your 
family can evacuate the
area immediately.
If you have children and can’t have firearms scattered about, 
that’s OK; consider putting a handgun safe in each room. That 
can be pricey, though. A cheap solution is to carry a weapon 
on your person when you’re in your home. 
Another solution is a safe room. If you have one, make sure 
everyone knows to use it when the time comes. Don’t count 
on being able to get your children to the safe room yourself, 
however. Your children should know where it is, how to access 
it and how to secure it, once inside.
This type of thinking applies to everything that could 
happen. Even natural disasters require some forethought. 
For instance, does everyone have a bug-out bag in case of 
an evacuation? If there’s a hurricane, tornado or earthquake 
and communications are down, have an alternate way (such 
as a ham radio) to contact people in your family. Arrange 
for a place, perhaps another family member’s house, where 
everyone knows to meet up in such an event.
BUGGING OUT
Bug-out situations can happen suddenly and be severe, 
such as Hurricane Katrina. Always keep enough gas in your 
vehicle’s tank to make it 100 miles or more if needed. In the 
event of an emergency, there will be a run on stores and gas 
stations, so be ready beforehand. 
Make sure you have a decent amount of cash on hand: In case 
the power grid is temporarily down, you won’t have access 
to an ATM or be able to charge anything on a credit card. At 
a minimum, $1,000 is a good start—and keep in mind that 
opportunists will be price-gouging. Have tools, water and extra 
food stored in your vehicle for those times a quick getaway is 
required. Everything you do to prepare and plan matters.
Everything discussed here requires some money and time 
away from the ball game to get things in order. You might 
have to forego that nice fishing rod that’s been calling your 
name, or you might have to take a step down in price on your 
next firearm purchase. 
Nevertheless, all of that is worth it. After all, nothing is more 
important than your family.
There are some folks who have a tough time making ends 
meet, so money is a scarcity. But money isn’t the main 
commodity for taking care of your family and yourself. Lots of 
gear can be used in these scenarios that don’t require copious 
amounts of cash. 
Besides, it’s planning, preparation and execution that will 
make all the difference. That requires no money at all. It just 
requires love, sacrifice and commitment. 
What better “currency” is there to spend to make sure your 
loved ones are safe?   
… WE MUST BE PREPARED 
THE BEST WE CAN AND HAVE 
PLANS IN PLACE TO TRY TO 
DEAL WITH ANY CONTINGENCY.

A C T I V A T I O N
GripSense
TM
ARE YOU READY?
FIRST SHOT CONFID
© 2017 LaserMax, Inc. All rights reserved. LaserMax and the LaserMax logo are registered trademarks of LaserMax, Inc.
1-800-LASER-03   |   lasermax.com
Available for Ruger LC9, Glock 42/43, and S&W M&P Shield
CENTERFIRE® LIGHT AND LASER SIGHTS with GripSense™Activation
Get a grip on your ﬁrearm and GripSense™Activation reacts as 
fast as you do to illuminate and guide your sight to threats.
BAD THINGS HAPPEN FAST 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
  TEXT AND PHOTOS BY BRIAN BERRY
WHAT’S 
YOUR 
DEFENSIVE 
AMMO?
I
try to maintain a pretty steady training regimen as far as 
my shooting goes. I adjust my drills and use a variety of 
different methods to keep in shooting shape. 
One thing I have noticed is that occasionally, I forget to 
reload my everyday-carry ammunition back into my magazines. 
Having separate magazines used to be my answer to that, but 
I find I need to use the magazines I am going to carry as much 
as I need to use the gun I am going to carry. I don’t want to find 
out at an inopportune moment that my magazine is not feeding 
rounds into the chamber. 
IS THERE A DIFFERENCE?
At this point, some of you might be asking, “What’s the 
difference? Can’t all bullets stop an assailant?” 
They can, but it’s the number of bullets it takes to stop an 
attacker that is the concern. There is a significant difference 
in the terminal performance of standard training ammunition 
and specifically manufactured defensive ammunition. 
Training ammunition, generally FMJ (full metal jacket) or 
“ball” ammo, is general-purpose ammo. It’s inexpensive 
(relatively speaking), and it’s mediocre as a self-defense ammo. 
Ammunition made for defensive use is engineered to create as 
much internal damage as possible, which will stop the threat 
sooner. It’s also more expensive.
COST DIFFERENCE
Cost is usually a big factor in the amount of training that 
someone might do when it comes to shooting. For standard 9mm 
training ammunition, you might pay between 22 to 32 cents per 
round, as opposed to $1.50 for a single defensive round. When 
looking at that and an average training session involving 150 to 
200 rounds, the difference is not negligible. 
YOUR DEFENSIVE 
AMMUNITION MUST 
CREATE ENOUGH INITIAL 
TRAUMA IN YOUR 
ATTACKER TO EITHER 
UBSTANTIALLY SLOW 
EM OR COMPLETELY 
TOP THEM IN THEIR 
TRACKS.
This is an example of 
extreme ammunition 
corrosion. It is 
important to keep and 
store your ammunition 
as directed by the 
manufacturer.
Defensive ammunition comes in a variety of calibers, bullet 
weights and bullet types. Find one you like that works well in your 
fi rearm and provides you with the right amount of stopping power. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
BE CONFIDENT IN YOUR CHOSEN AMMUNITION
Don’t get me wrong—you still need to conduct some of your 
training with your defensive ammunition, just not at every 
training session. My usual recommendation to my students is to 
shoot several boxes when you first get defensive ammunition to 
see how it shoots and feeds in your gun. 
One of my students recently bought some defensive ammunition 
with an overall length that put the bullet so far in the barrel of 
his semiauto when feeding, he could not pull back the slide; 
the round was lodged tightly into the lands and grooves of the 
barrel. Because of that, he was concerned about shooting the 
weapon. It took some considerable force to dislodge it. That can 
also create some feeding problems with semiautos. 
AMMUNITION EXPIRATION DATE
You should also occasionally cycle through your defensive
ammo. I usually shoot what I have in my carry magazines about
every six to eight months. Modern ammo is manufactured pretty
well, so I don’t worry as much about moisture seeping into the
powder … but better safe than sorry. 
Another concern is that if you live in areas of constantly
changing climate, there are factors to be concerned about.
Those who live near coastal regions need to think about rust or
corrosion—not only of the gun, but the ammo, as well. Northern 
climates need to consider the constant freezing/unfreezing of
ammo and how that could affect ammunition (condensation), 
especially during the early spring and late fall, when freezing/
unfreezing happens almost daily.
If you carry every day and are in and out of buildings, that 
change in temperature can cause moisture to build on metal 
things (condensation), which is never good. 
GAUGING PERFORMANCE
You can see where all this shooting of defensive ammo can get quite 
expensive, so it’s tempting to just carry standard ball ammunition. 
Exit wound from a 
Winchester .45 ACP 
230-grain Round 
Nose—standard 
training ammunition
This is what is left 
of the watermelon 
after being hit with a 
Federal HST JHP.45 ACP 
230-grain Self Defense 
bullet.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
Shown here: examples
of different bullets 
after being fired into 
2½ feet of water. Both 
the 9mm and .45 ACP
completely penetrated
the 2½ feet of water
with no noticeable
distortion of the
bullet. Overpenetration
could be a danger for
anything beyond your
intended target.
Brian Berry is a retired Army Special Forces Command
sergeant major. He is a former Special Forces Weapons
sergeant and has multiple combat tours under his belt. Brian
is the co-founder of Spartan Defensive Concepts, at which
he teaches concealed carry and defensive marksmanship
courses.Brianretiredin2014andisnowaconsultantcurrently
working for the Special Operations community, as well as a
senior instructor forAmerican Survival Guide University.
The simple answer is performance. Your defensive ammunition 
needs to have stopping power, or what is commonly called 
“energy transfer.” The idea is to create enough initial trauma in 
your attacker to either substantially slow them down and give 
you time to get away or completely stop them in their tracks.
FMJ rounds can cause your assailant to eventually bleed out, 
but that might still enable them to continue their attack on you 
or your loved ones. FBI testing requires that “a handgun bullet 
must consistently penetrate a minimum of 12 inches of tissue in 
order to reliably penetrate vital organs within the human target, 
regardless of the angle of impact or intervening obstacles, such as 
arms, clothing, glass, etc. Penetration of 18 inches is even better.” 
With that being said, in order to give the bullet a greater chance of 
being effective, it needs to either be bigger—or get bigger—as it 
penetrates. That is one of the benefits of using ammunition that will 
expand. The other advantage is that for the most part, it will start to 
dissipate energy quicker as it works its way through a target. That 
can mean you are less likely to hit something behind your target. 
TRAINING AND EXPERIMENTATION
In the end, all bullets can provide you with protection in the 
form of defensive ammunition. However, many factors also come 
into play: Marksmanship, distance from the target, amount of 
clothing or other protection your assailant might have on, 
obstacles and many other variables. 
A .22 with training ammo can still stop your attacker, but extreme 
accuracy and volume of bullets will be required. In that same 
sense, 10 misses with a .45 ACP—whether its 230-grain RN or 
230-grain HST—won’t stop anyone.
Experimentation and practice, lots of practice, are what will 
be the difference between being a victim and going home to 
your family. 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
AERO PRECISION .....................................................7
BROWNING ............................................................27
CONNECTICUT SHOTGUN  ................................53, 63
CRIMSON TRACE CORP. .........................................87
CZ-USA ..................................................................59
DAVIDSON’S ..........................................................99
DEL-TON ................................................................71
DILLON PRECISION ................................................79
DOUBLETAP AMMUNITION ......................................2
FOBUS U.S.A. .........................................................55
GALLOWAY PRECISION ..........................................95
GTUL ......................................................................95
GUNCRAFTER INDUSTRIES, LLC ............................13
HOGUE GRIPS ........................................................95
HOLOSUN ...............................................................33
IWI US ....................................................................35
KAHR ARMS ..........................................................45
LASERMAX ............................................................91
LYMAN PRODUCTS CORP. ......................................75
MAGPUL.................................................................17
NAVY ARMS ...........................................................39
NUMRICH GUN PARTS CORPORATION ...................77
REDDING RELOADING EQUIPMENT .......................25
RIO GRANDE CUSTOM GRIPS, LLC ........................69
SIG SAUER .........................................................3, 47
SPRINGFIELD ARMORY .........................................21
STAG ARMS ...........................................................51
STURM, RUGER & COMPANY, INC. .......................100
SUPER VEL AMMO .................................................61
TAURUS INTERNATIONAL ......................................83
TEDDER INDUSTRIES .............................................25
TUCKER GUN LEATHER ..........................................37
VG6 ........................................................................43
VISTA OUTDOOR ....................................................67
WILSON COMBAT ..................................................29
HOGUEINC.COM
| 1-800-438-4747
P.O. BOX 91360, HENDERSON, NV 89009 USA
GRIPS 

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
E
very year about the middle of June, I load 
the Suburban with gear and head out west to 
the NRA Whittington Center near Raton, New 
Mexico, for a week of shooting, relaxing and 
visiting with old friends. 
The “Shootist’s Holiday” was conceived from a story by my 
friend, John Taffin, back in 1984. He was working on a story 
about old six-gunners and the guns they would bring to a 
week-long holiday if allowed to bring just one gun. For the 
meat of the story, he wrote to a few other writers, lawmen 
and assorted others, asking each the one gun he would bring. 
Somewhere among all the correspondence, they decided to 
just do it, and the men met for a few days of visiting and 
shooting. I am not sure how many guns each man brought to 
that first event, but over the years, the number of shooters—
and guns—has grown quite a bit. 
This year, a brother, cousin and my only grandson rode 
along with me. Each has been to this event before; and, as 
in previous years, we all brought a pretty substantial load of 
guns and ammunition. 
FRIED PIES
A couple of days before we left for New Mexico, I had a 
discussion with Peter Caroline, a seasoned gun writer and dear 
friend. At the mention of fried pies, he told me he had never 
SIX-GUNS,
GREEN CHILI
AND FRIEDPIES
  TEXT BY JEFF QUINN
heard of such, so I decided right there to correct the problem.
The source of the very best fried pies I have ever eaten is a 
kind lady named Shelly Strange, who runs a one-woman pie-
making operation called Myohmy Fried Pies. She sells her 
pies at a downtown outdoor market in Clarksville, Tennessee, 
each Saturday morning during the warmer months. 
She makes pies of many flavors, but my favorite is chocolate. 
She makes her own crusts and fillings and apparently fries 
each pie in some heavenly substance, resulting in a pie that 
is good enough to be illegal. 
I was determined to bring my friend a fried pie, but knowing 
myself and the other fellows who would be making the 
trip, there is no way that the single fried pie would make 
the 1,120-mile journey from Tennessee to New Mexico. So, 
I carefully calculated the predicted pie loss rate for the 
road trip (much as a jet pilot calculates his fuel usage) 
and determined we would lose a minimum of one pie per 
man per each 100 miles. Then, I added extra pies to ensure 
we would have a few left when we arrived in New Mexico 
two days later. 
I got in touch with Shelly and ordered 50 fried chocolate 
pies. Just to be safe, and because she is a wonderful 
person, she delivered 60 pies the day before we left on the 
excursion. I love her.
 

www.gunworld.com
OCTOBER I 2017
Jeff Quinn is a full-time writer/reviewer on Gunblast.com, an online gun 
magazine started in 2000. He has also written for the Gun Digest Annual and 
enjoys living life in the woods of Tennessee, where he raises Longhorn cattle 
… and his grandkids.
I carefully packed the pies in among the guns, gear, 
ammo and such, and we loaded up and headed out for the 
mountains of northern New Mexico. The first pie casualties 
occurred before we crossed the Tennessee River at the 
county line, and I was starting to wonder if 60 pies would be 
enough. Thankfully, 1,100 miles later, a few survived that I 
could share with my friends.
SIX-GUNS
At the Whittington Center, we do a lot of long-range shooting with 
both handguns and rifles. It has excellent facilities for shotguns, 
handguns and rifles. However, we mostly use revolvers and 
rifles, with the favorites of many being single-action six-guns 
and vintage lever guns. 
We mostly shoot the revolvers at steel and rocks. Our favorite 
target is Banana Rock. It received that name many years 
ago, because it used to be shaped like a banana and was 
approximately the size of a Volkswagen Beetle. Today, it is more 
like an elongated potato, having been chipped away by many 
years and thousands of bullets. It is 580 yards from the firing line 
but is hit with great regularity by shooters firing heavy-caliber 
revolvers, single-shot pistols and centerfire rifles. 
When Smith & Wesson first introduced its big, .500 magnum 
revolver, one arrived at my home just before the annual trip 
to New Mexico. I carried it along on the trip. 
I had it on my hip when someone suggested I try for Banana 
Rock. I withdrew the big revolver from its holster, carefully 
placed the front sight high out of the sight picture and 
dusted the rock with my first shot. I should have blown the 
smoke from the muzzle, twirled the big gun and re-holstered; 
instead, I tried again, missing with the next four shots. The 
big rock is hard to hit with a revolver, but it can be done—
and is done quite often by the shooters at that annual event. 
GREEN CHILI
Besides visiting with old friends and enjoying the wonderful 
northern New Mexico climate, one of the great joys of making 
that trip is green chili. It is a New Mexico thing, unique to the 
area, but is basically a thick gravy that contains green chili 
peppers and chunks of pork. 
Two local places, El Matador and La Cocina, make what they 
call a “green chili burger.” It is a large sopapilla filled with 
meat, cheese, beans and such that is then folded over and 
covered with green chili. 
My first time eating one was almost like a religious awakening. It 
changed my life. I have not yet determined which establishment 
serves the best green chili burger. However, I am certain that 
many more years of careful study are in order. 
Here, at home, I get to shoot almost every day, have lots 
of friends who live close, and I am accustomed to eating 
well. But the Shootist’s Holiday is a week like no other. The 
combination of old friends, lever guns and the northern New 
Mexico climate keeps me making that trip every year. 
(Of course, fried pies and green chili just make a wonderful 
trip even better.)  
THE “SHOOTIST’S 
HOLIDAY” WAS 
CONCEIVED FROM A 
STORY BY MY FRIEND, 
JOHN TAFFIN, BACK 
IN 1984 … ABOUT 
OLD SIX-GUNNERS 
AND THE GUN THEY 
WOULD BRING TO A 
WEEK-LONG HOLIDAY 
IF ALLOWED TO BRING 
JUST ONE GUN.

OCTOBER I 2017
www.gunworld.com
  PHOTO BY ROBB MANNING
There’s something about 
autumn—the colors, 
the smell of the dead 
leaves, the sounds of 
the woods —that brings 
with it a nostalgia for a 
time when department 
stores carried their own 
brand of fi rearms and 
kids carried a pocket 
of .22 cartridges to the 
woods in search of 
dinner. Shown here: a 
Montgomery-Ward Western 
Field (Savage 29) pump-
action .22

E
• FLUSH FIT ROTARY MAGAZINE
 
         CALIBER                         CAPACITY               BBL
ITEM # 10073        7mm-08 remington       5+1 
        22”
ITEM # 10074        308 winchester             5+1 
        22”
ITEM # 10058         30-06 springfield        5+1 
        22”
ITEM # 10076        7mm rem mag                  4+1 
        24”
ITEM # 10077
300 win mag
       4+1 
        24”
 
        CALIBER                          CAPACITY                  BBL
ITEM # 10070       204 Ruger 
                  5+1 
           22”
ITEM # 10059       5.56|223 remington    5+1 
           22”
ITEM # 10071       22-250 remington         5+1 
           22”
ITEM # 10072       243 winchester             5+1 
           22”
ITEM # 10075
270 winchester
5+1
22”
©2017 Davidson’s, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
LIFETIME
REPLACEMENT
LIFETIME
REPLACEMENT
*))('%$#%"!( %#!$(%(#))$%!"(#%$($%$((#!!(#%#$$($"$
$ )#$"$(#%%#(%("%$(%"#
(!(			#))$%!"(%(#))(
GET YOUR INSTANT QUOTE AT WWW.GALLERYOFGUNS.COM
find yours today at:

RUGER.COM/AMERICANRIFLE
© 2017  Sturm, Ruger & Co., Inc.   022217
Find Ruger:
U L A R  M O D E L S ,  O N E  V E R S A T I L E  L I N E
The 100% American-made Ruger American Riﬂe®, an engineering innovation from
s leading ﬁrearms manufacturer, is now offered in calibers ranging from .204 Ruger  
300 Win. Mag. Each Ruger American Riﬂe® model features Power Bedding ® integral  
dding blocks for outstanding accuracy, a Ruger Marksman Adjustable ™ trigger with  
ble pull weight and a three-lug bolt with a 70 degree throw for smooth, easy cycling  
the shoulder. The Ruger American Riﬂe® combines the rugged reliability of Ruger’s 
past with the award-winning ingenuity featured in so many of Ruger’s new products.
Ruger American Riﬂe ®
All-Weather®
Ruger American Riﬂe ® All-Weather ® Compact
Ruger American Riﬂe ®
Ruger American Riﬂe ® Compact
Ruger American Riﬂe® Predator with
Vortex ® Crossﬁre II ® Riﬂescope
Ruger American Riﬂe ®  
Predator
Ruger American Riﬂe ® Ranch
A N  A M E R I C A N  L E G E N D 
H AS  G ROW N
Ruger American Riﬂe ® with Vortex ® Crossﬁre II ® Riﬂescope
Ruger American Riﬂe ® Magnum

