
Handbook of Semiconductors
This book provides readers with state-of-the-art knowledge of established and emerging semicon­
ducting materials, their processing, and the fabrication of chips and microprocessors. In addition 
to covering the fundamentals of these materials, it details the basics and workings of many semi­
conducting devices and their role in modern electronics and explores emerging semiconductors and 
their importance in future devices.
•
Provides readers with latest advances in semiconductors.
•
Covers diodes, transistors, and other devices using semiconducting materials.
•
Covers advances and challenges in semiconductors and their technological applications.
•
Discusses fundamentals and characteristics of emerging semiconductors for chip
manufacturing.
This book provides directions to scientists, engineers, and researchers in materials engineering and 
related disciplines to help them better understand the physics, characteristics, and applications of 
modern semiconductors.
Ram K. Gupta is an Associate Vice President for Research and Support and a Professor of Chemistry 
at Pittsburg State University. Dr. Gupta has been recently named by Stanford University as being 
among the top 2% of research scientists worldwide. Before joining Pittsburg State University, he 
worked as an Assistant Research Professor at Missouri State University, Springfield, MO, then as 
a Senior Research Scientist at North Carolina A&T State University, Greensboro, NC. Dr. Gupta’s 
research spans a range of subjects critical to current and future societal needs, including semicon­
ducting materials and devices, biopolymers, flame-retardant polymers, green energy production and 
storage using nanostructured materials and conducting polymers, electrocatalysts, optoelectronics 
and photovoltaics devices, organic-inorganic heterojunctions for sensors, nanomagnetism, biocom­
patible nanofibers for tissue regeneration, scaffolds and antibacterial applications, and bio-degrad­
able metallic implants. Dr. Gupta has published over 290 peer-reviewed journal articles, made over 
420 national/international/regional presentations, chaired/organized many sessions at national/inter­
national meetings, wrote several book chapters (100+), worked as Editor for many books (50+), and
received several million dollars for research and educational activities from external agencies. He 
is also serving as Editor, Associate Editor, Guest Editor, and editorial board member for various 
journals.


Handbook of Semiconductors
Fundamentals to Emerging Applications
Edited by 
Ram K. Gupta

Designed cover image: Shutterstock
First edition published 2025
by CRC Press
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431
and by CRC Press
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
© 2025 selection and editorial matter, Ram K. Gupta, individual chapters, the contributors
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted 
to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission 
to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us 
know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or uti­
lized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopy­
ing, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the 
Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not 
available on CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk
Trademark notice : Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for iden­
tification and explanation without intent to infringe.
ISBN: 978-1-032-58455-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-78906-4 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-45014-6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146
Typeset in Times LT Std 
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.

Dedicated to Dr. Shawn Naccarato, whose unwavering dedication to 
the exploration of semiconducting materials has not only inspired but 
also ignited innovation and motivation within the realm of advanced 
applications. Your guidance and vision have illuminated paths of discovery, 
shaping the future of technology with brilliance and purpose. 


vii
Contents
Preface...............................................................................................................................................xi
List of Contributors......................................................................................................................... xiii
Chapter 1	
Semiconductors: An Introduction.................................................................................1
André E. Nogueira, Lucas S. Ribeiro, Francisco G. E. Nogueira, 
and Juliana A. Torres
Chapter 2	
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors..............................................................................12
Mourad Boughrara, Abdelhamid Ait M’hid, and Mohamed Kerouad
Chapter 3	
Types and Properties of Semiconductors....................................................................26
Ajay Lathe and Anil M. Palve
Chapter 4	
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors: Preparation, Tunable Properties, 
and Applications..........................................................................................................40
K. Ravichandran, S. Suvathi, P. Ravikumar, and R. Mohan
Chapter 5	
Doping Methods and Their Effects.............................................................................54
Devi Bala Saraswathi Sethuraman and Chia-Jyi Liu
Chapter 6	
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices..........................................................68
Arpana Agrawal
Chapter 7	
Organic Semiconductor Devices: Materials and Technology..................................... 81
Periyasamy Angamuthu Praveen and Thangavel Kanagasekaran
Chapter 8	
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications..........................94
Jeffery Horinek, Allen Davis, and Ram K. Gupta
Chapter 9	
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors: Role of Nano-Dimensions 
and Thin Film Structure............................................................................................109
Nasrin Babazadeh, Amir Ershad-Langroudi, Seyed Mehdi Mousaei, 
and Farhad Alizadegan
Chapter 10	 The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional 
Semiconductors.........................................................................................................122
Xinghui Liu, Shiheng Xin, Fuchun Zhang, and Chunyi Zhi

viii
Contents
Chapter 11	 Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors.................................... 137
Farida A. Ali and Sabita Mali
Chapter 12	 Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors 
Using Semiconductors............................................................................................... 152
Xi Lin and Xiaoguang Luo
Chapter 13	 Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry..................................................................... 165
Mohsen Lashgari
Chapter 14	 Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors............................................................ 179
Jnanraj Borah, Dipak Barman, and Bimal K. Sarma
Chapter 15	 Semiconductor-based Photodiodes............................................................................194
Adem Kocyigit
Chapter 16	 Semiconductors for Solar Cells.................................................................................207
Santosh V. Patil and Kshitij Bhargava
Chapter 17	 Semiconductor Lasers...............................................................................................222
Shaoteng Wu and Haizhong Weng
Chapter 18	 Light-Emitting Diode................................................................................................235
Asmita Poddar, Madhab Roy, and Sanjib Bhattacharya
Chapter 19	 Transistors: Advanced Logic Devices (RAM, Memristors, Gate)............................246
Arpita Roy, Karuna Kumari, and Soumya J. Ray
Chapter 20	 Non-Volatile Memory Devices..................................................................................260
Neeraj Mehta
Chapter 21	 Sensors Based on Semiconductors............................................................................273
Alper Durmaz, İbrahim M. Kahyaoğlu, Erdi C. Aytar, and Selcan Karakuş
Chapter 22	 Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics.........................................................................287
Rijith Sreenivasan, Akhila Muhammed, and Sumi V. Sasidharan Nair
Chapter 23	 Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices..............................................................301
Navid Nasajpour Esfahani, Amir Koohbor, Hamid Garmestani, 
and Steven Y. Liang

ix
Contents
Chapter 24	 Role of Semiconductors in Future Flexible Batteries............................................... 316
Joseph C. M., Vinuth Raj T. N., and Priya A. Hoskeri
Chapter 25	 Semiconductor-based Materials for Water-Splitting Applications............................324
Arnet Maria Antony, R. Geetha Balakrishna, K. Pramoda, 
and Siddappa A. Patil
Chapter 26	 Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting............... 333
Himanshu S. Sahoo, Debasish Ray, Sangeeta Ghosh, 
and Chinmoy Bhattacharya
Chapter 27	 Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment.....................................347
Arpita Paul Chowdhury, K. S. Anantharaju, Subhajit Das, 
and K. Keshavamurthy
Chapter 28	 Future of the Semiconductor Industry...................................................................... 359
Sujit Mukherjee, Debmalya Pal, Arunava Bhattacharyya, 
and Subhasis Roy
Index............................................................................................................................................... 375


xi
Preface
Semiconducting materials dominate many industries and are used in almost all electronic devices. 
The current chip shortage and its effect on the worldwide economy are concerns for many countries. 
Semiconducting materials provide unique and tunable electrical, optical, and electronic properties. 
Along with these unique characteristics, they also possess high thermal, mechanical, and environ­
mental stability. Apart from traditional silicon-based semiconductors, many emerging semicon­
ductors are being considered for chips and microelectronic manufacturing. Their properties can be 
further improved by doping, growing them in thin-film structures, and creating good heterojunctions. 
A fundamental understanding of the charge-transport mechanism in semiconducting is crucial.
This book provides state-of-the-art knowledge in semiconducting materials, their processing, 
and the fabrication of chips and microprocessors. Applications of semiconductors in electronic 
devices, chips, and microprocessors are covered in detail, along with the fundamentals of semicon­
ductors and their processing. This book provides the basics and workings of many semiconducting 
devices and their role in modern electronics. This book also explores emerging semiconductors and 
their importance in future devices. The future and challenges of many emerging semiconductors are 
also explored. Experts in these areas have covered all the chapters, making this a suitable textbook 
for students and researchers.
Ram K. Gupta, Professor
Department of Chemistry
National Institute for Materials Advancement
Pittsburg State University
Pittsburg, Kansas, USA


xiii
List of Contributors
Arpana Agrawal
Department of Physics
Shri Neelkantheshwar Government Post-
Graduate College
Khandwa, India
Farida A. Ali
ITER, Sikhsha ‘O’ Anusandhan (deemed to be 
University)
Bhubaneswar, India
Farhad Alizadegan
Department of Colour, Resin and Surface 
Coatings
Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute
Tehran, Iran
K. S. Anantharaju
Department of Chemistry
Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering
Shavige Malleshwara Hills
Bengaluru, India
Arnet Maria Antony
Centre for Nano and Material Sciences
Jain (Deemed-to-be University), Jain Global 
Campus
Bangalore, India
Erdi C. Aytar
Department of Horticulture
Uşak University
Uşak, Türkiye
Nasrin Babazadeh
Department of Polymer Engineering and Color 
Technology
Amirkabir University of Technology
Tehran, Iran
R. Geetha Balakrishna
Centre for Nano and Material Sciences
Jain (Deemed-to-be University), Jain Global 
Campus
Bangalore, India
Dipak Barman
Department of Physics
Nanophysics Laboratory
Gauhati University
Guwahati, India
Kshitij Bhargava
Department of Electrical Engineering
Annasaheb Dange College of Engineering and 
Technology (ADCET)
Ashta, India
Arunava Bhattacharyya
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Calcutta
Kolkata, India
Chinmoy Bhattacharya
Department of Chemistry
Indian Institute of Engineering Science & 
Technology, (IIEST)
Howrah, India
Sanjib Bhattacharya
UGC-HRDC
University of North Bengal
Darjeeling, India
Jnanraj Borah
Department of Physics
Nanophysics Laboratory
Gauhati University
Guwahati, India
Mourad Boughrara
Department of Sciences
Physics of Materials and Systems Modeling 
Laboratory (PMSML)
Moulay Ismail University
Zitoune, Morocco
Arpita Paul Chowdhury
Department of Chemistry
Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering
Shavige Malleshwara Hills
Bengaluru, India

xiv
List of Contributors
Subhajit Das
Division of Functional Materials and Devices
CSIR-Central Glass & Ceramic Research 
Institution
Jadavpur, Kolkata, India
Allen Davis
Department of Chemistry
National Institute of Materials Advancement
Pittsburg State University
Pittsburg, Kansas, USA
Alper Durmaz
Ali Nihat Gökyiğit Botanical Garden 
Application and Research Center
Artvin Çoruh University
Artvin, Türkiye
Amir Ershad-Langroudi
Department of Colour, Resin and Surface 
Coatings
Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute
Tehran, Iran
Navid Nasajpour Esfahani
Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Hamid Garmestani
Department of Materials Science and Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Sangeeta Ghosh
Department of Chemistry
Indian Institute of Engineering Science & 
Technology, (IIEST)
Howrah, India
Ram K. Gupta
Department of Chemistry
National Institute for Materials Advancement
Pittsburg State University
Pittsburg, Kansas, USA
Jeffery Horinek
Department of Chemistry
National Institute for Materials Advancement
Pittsburg State University
Pittsburg, Kansas, USA
Priya A. Hoskeri
Department of Physics
Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering
Bangalore, India
İbrahim M. Kahyaoğlu
Department of Chemistry
Ondokuz Mayıs University
Samsun, Türkiye
Thangavel Kanagasekaran
Department of Physics
Organic Optoelectronics Laboratory
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER)
Tirupati, India
Selcan Karakuş
Department of Chemistry
Istanbul University-Cerrahpaşa
Istanbul, Türkiye
Mohamed Kerouad
Department of Sciences
Physics of Materials and Systems Modeling 
Laboratory (PMSML)
Moulay Ismail University
Zitoune, Morocco
K. Keshavamurthy
Department of Physics
Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering
Shavige Malleshwara Hills
Bengaluru, India
Adem Kocyigit
Department of Electronics and Automation
Vocational High School, Bilecik Şeyh Edebali 
University
Bilecik, Turkey
Amir Koohbor
School of Engineering
Georgia State University
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Karuna Kumari
Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Technology
Patna, India

xv
List of Contributors
Mohsen Lashgari
Department of Chemistry
Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic 
Sciences (IASBS)
Zanjan, Iran
Ajay Lathe
Department of Chemistry
Mahatma Phule ASC College
Mumbai, India
Steven Y. Liang
George W. Woodruff School of Mechanical 
Engineering
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia, USA
Xi Lin
Frontiers Science Center for Flexible 
Electronics (FSCFE)
Shaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics 
(SIFE)
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, China
Chia-Jyi Liu
Department of Physics
National Changhua University of 
Education
Changhua County, Taiwan
Xinghui Liu
Science and Technology on Aerospace 
Chemical Power Laboratory 
Hubei Institute of Aerospace 
Chemotechnology 
Xiangyang, China
and
Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering 
City University of Hong Kong 
Hong Kong, China
Xiaoguang Luo
Frontiers Science Center for Flexible 
Electronics (FSCFE)
Shaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics 
(SIFE)
Northwestern Polytechnical University
Xi’an, China
Joseph C. M.
Department of Physics
Dayananda Sagar College of Engineering
Bangalore, India
Abdelhamid Ait M’hid
Department of Sciences
Physics of Materials and Systems Modeling 
Laboratory (PMSML)
Moulay Ismail University
Zitoune, Morocco
Sabita Mali
ITER, Sikhsha ‘O’ Anusandhan (deemed to be 
University)
Bhubaneswar, India
Neeraj Mehta
Department of Physics
Institute of Science, Banaras Hindu 
University
Varanasi, India
R. Mohan
Department of Physics
Sree Sevugan Annamalai College, (Affiliated 
to Alagappa University, Karaikudi)
Devakottai, India
Seyed Mehdi Mousaei
Department of Processing
Iran Polymer and Petrochemical Institute
Iran Institute
Tehran, Iran
Akhila Muhammed
Sree Narayana College (Affiliated to University 
of Kerala)
Kollam, India
and
Government College Attingal (Affiliated to 
University of Kerala)
Thiruvananthapuram, India
Sujit Mukherjee
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Calcutta
Kolkata, India

xvi
List of Contributors
Vinuth Raj T. N.
Department of Physics
Faculty of Engineering and Technology
JAIN (Deemed-to-be) University
Bangalore, India
Sumi V. Sasidharan Nair
Sree Narayana College (Affiliated to University 
of Kerala)
Kollam, India
and
Government College Attingal (Affiliated to 
University of Kerala)
Thiruvananthapuram, India
André E. Nogueira
Department of Chemistry
Division of Fundamental Sciences (IEF)
Aeronautics Institute of Technology - ITA, 
São José dos Campos
São Paulo, Brazil
Francisco G. E. Nogueira
Department Chemical Engineering
University of São Carlos-UFSCar
São Paulo, Brazil
Debmalya Pal
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Calcutta
Kolkata, India
Anil M. Palve
Department of Chemistry
Mahatma Phule ASC College
Mumbai, India
Siddappa A. Patil
Centre for Nano and Material Sciences
Jain (Deemed-to-be University), Jain Global 
Campus
Bangalore, India
Santosh V. Patil
Department of Electrical and Computer 
Science Engineering
Institute of Infrastructure, Technology, 
Research and Management (IITRAM)
Ahmedabad, India
Asmita Poddar
Department of Electrical Engineering
Dream Institute of Technology
Kolkata, India
K. Pramoda
Centre for Nano and Material Sciences
Jain (Deemed-to-be University), Jain Global 
Campus
Bangalore, India
Periyasamy Angamuthu Praveen
Department of Physics
Organic Optoelectronics Laboratory
Indian Institute of Science Education and 
Research (IISER)
Tirupati, India
K. Ravichandran
Department of Physics, PG & Research
AVVM Sri Pushpam College, 
(Affiliated Bharathidasan University, 
Tiruchirappalli)
Thanjavur, India
P. Ravikumar
Department of Physics
Tagore Government Arts and Science College, 
(Affiliated to Pondicherry University)
Puducherry, India
Debasish Ray
Department of Chemistry
Indian Institute of Engineering Science & 
Technology, (IIEST)
Howrah, India
Soumya J. Ray
Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Technology
Patna, India
Lucas S. Ribeiro
Department of Chemistry
University of São Carlos-UFSCar
São Paulo, Brazil
Arpita Roy
Department of Physics
Indian Institute of Technology
Patna, India

xvii
List of Contributors
Madhab Roy
Department of Electrical Engineering
Jadavpur University
Kolkata, India
Subhasis Roy
Department of Chemical Engineering
University of Calcutta
Kolkata, India
Himanshu S. Sahoo
Department of Chemistry
Indian Institute of Engineering Science & 
Technology, (IIEST)
Howrah, India
Bimal K. Sarma
Department of Physics
Nanophysics Laboratory
Gauhati University
Guwahati, India
Devi Bala Saraswathi Sethuraman
Department of Physics
National Changhua University of Education
Changhua County, Taiwan
Rijith Sreenivasan
Sree Narayana College (Affiliated to University 
of Kerala)
Kollam, India
and
Government College Attingal (Affiliated to 
University of Kerala)
Thiruvananthapuram, India
S. Suvathi
Department of Physics, PG & Research
AVVM Sri Pushpam College, (Affiliated 
Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli)
Thanjavur, India
Juliana A. Torres
Department of Chemistry
University of São Carlos
UFSCar-São Carlos
São Paulo, Brazil
Haizhong Weng
School of Physics, CRANN and AMBER
Trinity College Dublin
Dublin, Ireland
Shaoteng Wu
State Key Laboratory of Superlattices and 
Microstructures
Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences
Beijing, China
Shiheng Xin
School of Physics and Electronic Information
Yan’an University 
Yan’an, China
Fuchun Zhang
School of Physics and Electronic Information
Yan’an University 
Yan’an, China
Chunyi Zhi
Department of Materials Science and 
Engineering 
City University of Hong Kong 
Hong Kong, China


1
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-1
Semiconductors
An Introduction
André E. Nogueira, Lucas S. Ribeiro, 
Francisco G. E. Nogueira, and Juliana A. Torres
1.1  INTRODUCTION
The first semiconductor devices and materials emerged in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. 
German physicist Ferdinand Braun developed the first semiconductor diode, known as the “cat’s 
whisker” detector, in 1874, which was used as a signal detector in a crystal radio. Semiconductors 
ushered in a transformative era in technology during the nineteenth century, and their significance 
in contemporary society is undeniable, since they have a wide range of applications such as in 
electronic circuits, solar cells, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), laser technologies, catalysis, and pho­
tocatalysis [1, 2].
Nowadays, a deeper understanding of the properties of the crystal structure of semiconduc­
tors is essential in most branches of science. This involves a detailed examination of the atomic 
arrangement of these materials and its influence on their electronic, optical, and physical properties 
(Table 1.1).
Inorganic semiconductors are composed of inorganic elements, such as silicon (Si), germanium 
(Ge), gallium arsenide (GaAs), and titanium dioxide (TiO2), among others. The arrangement of a 
substantial number of atoms into a long-range ordered atomic structure results in the overlapping 
1
TABLE 1.1
Conductor and Semiconductor Properties
Characteristics
Semiconductor
Conductor
Conductivity
Moderate
High
Resistivity
Moderate
Low
Forbidden gap
Small forbidden gap
No forbidden gap
Temperature coefficient
Negative
Positive
Conduction
Very small number of electrons for conduction
Large number for electrons conduction
Conductivity value
The conductivity of materials can range from 10–7 
to 10–13 mho/m, distinguishing conductors from 
insulators
Very high 10–7 mho/m
Resistivity value
Materials can have electrical conductivity ranging 
from 10–5 to 105 Ω⋅m
Negligible; less than 10–5 Ω⋅m
Current flow
Due to holes and unbound electrons
Due to free electrons
Number of carries at 
normal temperature
Low
Very high
Zero Kelvin behavior
Acts like an insulator
Acts like a superconductor
Formation
Formation by covalent bonding
Formation by metallic bond
Valence electrons
The outermost shell contains a total of four valence 
electrons
One valence electron in outermost shell
Source:	 Adapted with permission from [3], copyright (2023), CRC Press.

2
Handbook of Semiconductors
of adjacent orbitals to form bonds. This three-dimensional lattice extends throughout the material. 
Thus, the linear combination of two atomic orbitals yields two molecular orbitals: a bonding molec­
ular orbital and an antibonding molecular orbital. As more atoms are aligned, additional molecular 
orbitals are created through the interference of the wave functions of their atomic orbitals. This 
results in the establishment of a set of non-degenerate orbitals characterized by a minimal energy 
difference between consecutive levels [4].
The band that is occupied by electrons is referred to as the valence band (VB). It is composed of 
lower-energy orbitals and thus has a higher probability of electron occupation. However, the con­
duction band (CB) comprises higher-energy orbitals and consequently exhibits lower levels of elec­
tron occupancy probability. The energy gap between these two bands is known as band gap energy 
(Eg) (Figure 1.1). The band structure of a semiconductor is a critically important parameter for its 
application as a photocatalyst, since it plays a crucial role in defining the material’s light absorption 
properties and redox capacity.
The probability of occupation of these bands by a free electron is given by the Fermi function, 
which is related to the absolute temperature of the system, the Boltzmann constant, and the Fermi 
level (Ef). The latter is defined as the reference energy level of the material, corresponding to the 
energy level, at which there is a probability of 1/2 for electrons to be occupied, and it is an important 
parameter in predicting its electrical behavior [5].
In semiconductors, the Fermi level is typically positioned near the center of the band gap 
(Ef = 1/2 Eg). This placement allows electrons located at the top of the VB to readily transition to 
the lower levels of the CB at temperatures below 0 K. When the semiconductor absorbs photons 
with energy equal to or greater than the band gap energy, electrons become excited from the VB 
to the CB, generating electron-hole (e–/h+) pairs as charge carriers on the semiconductor’s surface. 
FIGURE 1.1  Schematic representation of the overlap of atomic orbitals to form an energy band and the band 
structure of different materials (conductor, semiconductor, and insulator).

3
Semiconductors
These e–/h+ pairs can catalyze redox reactions, and their behavior is directly influenced by the 
positions of the VBs and CBs [6–8]. For redox reactions to take place, it is essential that the charge 
carriers possess a sufficient lifetime. Conversely, electrons can undergo recombination with holes, 
which diminishes the catalytic efficiency of semiconductors [5].
In the case of chemically pure semiconductors, electrons are promoted from the VB to the CB, 
leaving behind unoccupied states in the VB, which are referred to as holes (h+). In such scenarios, 
conduction occurs intrinsically. Si and Ge are well-known examples of intrinsic semiconductors 
[4, 9]. However, this type of semiconductor has limited application due to its low conductivity. 
In this context, several strategies have been employed to enhance the electrical properties of these 
materials. Notably, one such approach is doping, which involves the introduction of atoms, referred 
to as impurities, into the crystal lattice of the semiconductor. These semiconductors, modified 
through doping, are commonly referred to as extrinsic semiconductors [7].
1.2  SEMICONDUCTOR DOPING
Semiconductors can be divided into two categories: intrinsic and extrinsic. Intrinsic semiconductors 
are those in which their electronic properties are based only on the pure structure of the material, 
that is, a completely full VB separated from a completely empty CB [10]. Furthermore, in this type 
of semiconductor, for every excited electron in the CB, there is a hole in the VB. However, practi­
cally all semiconductors are extrinsic since impurities in the concentration of 1 × 10–12 are already
able to affect the electrical properties through the insertion of excess electrons and holes [11].
Doping is the process of introducing impurities into a semiconductor crystal to deliberately alter 
its conductivity due to electron deficiency or excess [12]. This procedure can happen during semi­
conductor manufacturing, in which the semiconductor is completely doped, or doped partially after 
wafer fabrication. In the case of Si and Ge elemental semiconductors, the wafer can be partially 
doped by diffusion and ion implantation processes (Figure 1.2) [13].
In diffusion doping, impurities are transported from a region of high concentration to a region 
of low concentration by random molecular motion. The dopant material can move through the 
semiconductor structure filling the empty spaces in the crystal lattice, which always exist, even 
in perfect crystals. They can also move in between the atoms in the crystal lattice, or the impu­
rity atoms are located in the crystal lattice and are exchanged with the semiconductor atoms. 
The diffusion movement therefore depends on the temperature, the concentration difference 
between the phases, and the nature of the dopant [14]. In ion implantation, ions are accelerated in 
an electric field and beamed directly into the semiconductor. The ions swiftly enter the semicon­
ductor by occupying interstitial sites, and the depth of penetration can be accurately controlled 
FIGURE 1.2  Structures and band diagrams of n-type and p-type semiconductors. (a) Doping Si with phos­
phorus (P) element results in a new filled level between the VBs and CBs of the host. (b) Doping Si with 
gallium element results in a new empty level between the VBs and CBs of the host. (Figure adapted with per­
mission from Reference [18], copyright by the authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [LibreTexts]. 
Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY) https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.)

4
Handbook of Semiconductors
by adjusting the voltage needed to drive the ions. Unlike the diffusion process, this form of 
doping takes place at room temperature. Regions that should not be doped can be covered with 
a photoresist layer [15].
In elemental semiconductors, which have four electrons, we can add impurities that have more or 
fewer electrons, thus creating an excess of electrons or holes in the structure. In the case of doping 
using elements with valence 5, such as P, As, and Sb, only four of the five electrons of the dopant 
will be able to form covalent bonds with the atoms of the semiconductor [16]. As a consequence, the 
unbound electron is only weakly bound to the region around the impurity by electrostatic attraction. 
Its binding energy is therefore very small, allowing it to become a free electron in the structure and 
create an energy level between the VBs and CBs. For each free electron in the semiconductor, a new 
energy level is created in the band gap region close to the CB [17]. Furthermore, when these elec­
trons are excited, holes are not created in the VB, causing these semiconductors to have a greater 
number of electrons in the conduction layer than holes in the valence layer. This type of doping 
results in n-type semiconductors.
The opposite effect can be obtained by doping Si and Ge with trivalent atoms, such as Al, B and 
Ga. In this case, the impurities are electron-deficient and are unable to form the four bonds as the 
semiconductor atoms. As a consequence, a hole is formed in the structure, which can be rapidly 
filled by an electron from an adjacent bond. Thus, this hole begins to move through the structure, 
changing places with electrons participating in the conduction process. This phenomenon can also 
be explained by the creation of an energy level in the band gap region just above the VB that allows 
the easy excitation of an electron and the creation of holes in the VB. In this case the semiconductor 
is denominated p-type, and no free electrons are created in the CB of the semiconductor [19].
The doping process can also be performed for metal oxide semiconductors. Many of these 
semiconductors are used as photocatalysts for processes involving, for example, photodegrada­
tion of organic pollutants and photoreduction of carbon dioxide into value-added molecules [20]. 
The problem is that these oxides often have a high band gap value and high recombination rates 
of photogenerated charges, which end up limiting their use. One way to reverse these problems, 
including allowing the material to be activated by visible light, is through doping, which can occur 
in different ways.
Self-doping involves the introduction of cations of the same metal as the oxide, albeit with a 
distinct charge, into the material. A case in point is observed in titanium oxide semiconductors 
containing Ti3+ cations within their structure. This doping technique is predominantly employed 
to narrow the band gap of the semiconductor, while inducing minimal structural perturbation. The 
manipulation of heating duration and temperature stands as a pivotal facet of this process [21]. 
Alternatively, doping can be achieved using cationic metals, anionic non-metals, or non-metallic 
molecules. For instance, TiO2 can be doped with a range of cations like Ag+, Fe2+, and Fe3+, as well 
as elements like nitrogen, sulfur, and boron. Analogous to the previous scenario, these dopants 
are introduced to diminish the band gap of TiO2, thereby facilitating its activation under visible 
light, and enhancing its efficacy in breaking down pollutants [22]. Another illustration involves the 
incorporation of copper oxide into photocatalysts employed in CO2 photoreduction. This addition of 
copper empowers certain semiconductors to facilitate the conversion of CO2 into molecules such as 
carbon monoxide, a process previously hindered by their band gap position [23]. Nonetheless, these 
introduced impurities frequently function as sites for charge recombination, thereby diminishing 
the efficiency of these semiconductors. An alternative approach involves co-doping with two or 
more types of dopants, which serves to mitigate the quantity of recombination centers. Instances of 
this include the simultaneous doping of TiO2 with sulfur, nitrogen, and carbon, along with the co-
doping of other oxides utilizing a combination of N and C [24].
As highlighted earlier, the process of doping facilitates not only the enhanced stimulation of elec­
trons and holes through the reduction of the band gap and the establishment of energy levels within 
it, but also leads to a diminished rate of recombination for these excited charges. Consequently, 
these doped semiconductors exhibit heightened electronic conductivity, thereby enabling more 

5
Semiconductors
substantial performance tailored to specific applications. Additionally, doping yields improved 
structural characteristics, including increased surface area, reduced crystallite size, and heightened 
crystallinity [25].
Studies show that semiconductor doping with noble metals significantly enhances the activity of 
semiconductors for environmental applications. Furthermore, noble metals can effectively capture 
the photo-generated charges between VB and CB, resulting in a high efficiency of charge sepa­
ration and a decrease of recombination rate. Consequently, noble metals contribute to enhancing 
photocatalytic performance by generating surface plasmon resonance (SPR) and serving as electron 
traps [26–29].
According to Regmi et al. [30] the Cu-doped BiVO4 semiconductor has better efficiency than 
undoped BiVO4, and the 1 wt. % Cu-doped BiVO4 sample showed the best efficiency to degrada­
tion of methylene blue (dye) and ibuprofen, as well as the inactivation of Escherichia coli (bacteria) 
(Figure 1.3). According to the authors, the incorporation of Cu ions in the BiVO4 lattice creates an 
in-gap state, which facilitates the mobility of the charge carrier and inhibits the recombination of 
electron and hole pairs, leading to improved photocatalytic activities.
1.3  P-N JUNCTION AND SEMICONDUCTOR DEVICES
The p-n junction is one of the fundamental principles that underlie the technological revolution in 
electronics and semiconductor devices. It is an essential component in the manufacture of devices 
FIGURE 1.3  Schematic diagram showing the photocatalytic degradation mechanism of methylene blue 
(MB), ibuprofen (IBP), and inactivation of Escherichia coli by a Cu-doped BiVO4-based semiconductor under 
visible light irradiation. (Adapted with permission from Reference [30], copyright 2023, Elsevier.)

6
Handbook of Semiconductors
such as diodes and transistors, which, in turn, form the basis for much of modern electronics. 
The p-n junction is formed by the combination of p-type and n-type semiconductor materials. When 
these two materials are brought together, electron and hole diffusion take place at the interface, cre­
ating a depletion zone that acts as a natural barrier to an electrical current (Figure 1.4) [3, 31]. This 
depletion zone forms the basis for the functionality of diodes, which are electronic components that 
permit the flow of electrical current in only one direction. When a positive voltage is applied to the 
p-type material and a negative voltage to the n-type material, the barrier is overcome, allowing a
current to pass through the diode. Conversely, if the polarity is reversed, the depletion zone widens,
blocking current flow and preventing undesired electrical flow [3, 31].
Transistors, in turn, are essential semiconductor devices used for amplifying and controlling 
electrical currents. They are constructed using multiple p-n junctions, enabling precise manipula­
tion of current between these junctions. Bipolar junction transistors (BJTs) and field-effect transis­
tors (FETs) are examples of transistors that directly benefit from the properties of the p-n junction. 
Both rely on the ability to regulate current between p-n junctions. In BJTs, the current between the 
collector and emitter is controlled by the base current. In FETs, the current between the drain and 
the source is governed by the electric field generated at the p-n junction between the drain and the 
substrate [3, 31].
The significance of the p-n junction in the fabrication of semiconductor devices is unquestion­
able. It serves as the foundation for creating electronic components that have made possible the 
development of communication systems, computers, smartphones, efficient power sources, and 
numerous other devices that have shaped the modern world. The capacity to regulate the flow of 
electrical current through the p-n junction has catalyzed a technological revolution that continues to 
progress, propelling innovation in various fields of science and industry [32].
Furthermore, the continuous improvement of semiconductor manufacturing technology, enabling 
the reduction of component sizes and increased efficiency, has been one of the primary catalysts of 
FIGURE 1.4  (a) Illustrative depiction of a p-n junction formed by semiconductors. (b) Illustrative depic­
tion of the forward bias condition of a p-n junction (Application of a positive potential to the p-type 
semiconductor induces electron migration to the left, resulting in an abundance of free electrons in the 
conduction band (CB) of the n-type semiconductor, thus facilitating current flow). (c) Illustrative depiction 
of the reverse bias condition of a p-n junction (Application of a positive potential to the n-type semiconduc­
tor triggers electron movement toward the right, while the absence of free electrons in the p-type semicon­
ductor hinders current flow)

7
Semiconductors
technological advancement in recent decades. This is exemplified by Moore’s law, which observes 
the exponential growth in the number of transistors on a chip and the concurrent reduction in costs 
over time [33].
1.4  EMERGING SEMICONDUCTOR APPLICATIONS
As previously mentioned, semiconductors have generated significant interest in various areas such as 
nanophotonics, nanoelectronics, miniaturized sensors, energy conversion, nonlinear optics, detectors, 
imaging devices, quantum applications, solar cells, catalysis, water treatment, and biomedicine [34].
Semiconductor materials have introduced a new paradigm in scientific development. 
Consequently, the development of highly efficient semiconductor materials plays a crucial role in 
the sustainable and economic use of solar energy, mainly where sunlight is readily available. Thus, 
nanomaterials characterized by a high specific surface area, strong visible light absorption, and 
efficient charge separation have attracted growing attention.
A review article by Fang et al. [35] in 2022 showed the potential application of hollow semicon­
ductor photocatalysts for solar energy conversion. This potential arises from the capacity to mod­
ify their structures, thereby enhancing energy conversion through increased specific surface area 
utilization, improved solar light absorption, and greater exposure of active centers. Furthermore, 
multiple articles have demonstrated that when light radiation penetrates a hollow semiconductor, 
it undergoes multiple refractions on the thin inner surface of the shell. This phenomenon enhances 
the light utilization efficiency of the semiconductor, leading to greater energy absorption and the 
separation efficiency of charges [36].
There has been a growing interest in the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) from water using 
semiconductor materials such as ZnO, TiO2, Nb2O5, NiS, SnO2, and CdS. This interest arises from 
the possibility of utilizing inexhaustible sources such as water and sunlight for this purpose [37, 38]. 
Nevertheless, significant challenges persist in improving conversion efficiency. This is primarily 
due to the limitations associated with most semiconductors, including their inability to provide 
active sites, high rates of recombination of charge carriers, and efficient harnessing of visible light 
for the HER. Thus, the incorporation of a co-catalyst or the development of the heterostructure can 
be necessary to improve the conversion efficiency [39].
For instance, numerous studies demonstrate that the electronic coupling of various semicon­
ductors with graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) materials enhances the transport of photogenerated 
charges and improves the HER process. Moreover, the formation of different types of heterojunc­
tions also influences the photocatalytic pathway for HER, thereby impacting the overall efficiency 
of the photocatalyst [40].
The progress made in charge manipulation within nanoscale semiconductor-based devices has 
opened a pioneering avenue for the development of photonic quantum-computation approaches 
since flying qubits are typically associated with photons. Flying qubits constitute an integral com­
ponent of global initiatives aimed at establishing secure data transmission networks, commonly 
referred to as the quantum internet [41]. In semiconductor devices, a single electron is manipulable 
in a surface-gate-defined nanoscale structure such as a quantum dot or a waveguide [42].
In the biomedical field, two-dimensional nanomaterials, including graphene (2D NBG), 
have emerged as a captivating class of materials possessing noteworthy antibacterial properties. 
These materials, exemplified by two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), have 
found applications in anticancer, antimicrobial, and antiviral therapies [43]. The efficacy of these 
treatments’ hinges on numerous factors, encompassing size, morphology, crystalline orientation, 
concentration, stability, and surface functionalization. Furthermore, the non-toxic nature of semi­
conductor materials like TiO2 and ZnO has rendered them of significant interest as sensing materi­
als in medical and pharmaceutical systems since they exhibit biocompatibility and can readily bind 
with biological entities to serve as biosensors for detecting the severity of certain chronic diseases, 
the presence of the Zika virus in urine, or even the coronavirus in fluid samples [44].

8
Handbook of Semiconductors
1.5  CHALLENGES AND FUTURE PERSPECTIVES
Semiconductors face a series of complex and interconnected challenges in the present day, with two 
of the most pressing being miniaturization and energy efficiency. Miniaturization, as an unrelenting 
pursuit of smaller and denser components, has reached a critical point where physical barriers are 
beginning to emerge, making it imperative to explore new materials and architectures to maintain 
the pace of advancement. Concurrently, energy efficiency is a central concern, as the power con­
sumption of electronic devices continues to rise.
It is important to note that the semiconductor industry is in a constant state of growth and evolu­
tion. The global semiconductor market was valued at $591.8 billion in 2022 and is expected to reach 
approximately $1,883.7 billion by 2032, poised to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) 
of 12.28% during the forecast period from 2023 to 2032 [45]. In 2030, the two largest sectors in this 
market will be servers, data centers, and storage, accounting for 22%, and smartphones, accounting 
for 19.4% (Figure 1.5). This expansion of the semiconductor market reflects the increasing demand 
FIGURE 1.5  Semiconductor market size, 2023 to 2032 (billion US dollars) and the percentage of different 
sectors in 2030 [31, 46].

9
Semiconductors
for technology and electronics in an increasingly connected world, underscoring the continued 
importance of semiconductors in future innovations and the global economy [46].
In this context, future prospects for semiconductors point toward the adoption of innovative 
semiconductor materials, such as those based on two-dimensional materials, as well as the explora­
tion of new computational paradigms like quantum and neuromorphic computing. Additionally, 
advancements in component integration, such as the creation of heterogeneous systems on a single 
chip, also promise to play a fundamental role in overcoming these challenges and ushering in a new 
era of more powerful and efficient electronic devices. In conclusion, the journey of semiconductors, 
from the submicron era to the nano era, has revolutionized technology and communication, creating 
a vast market for the internet and wireless communication. The unique properties of semiconductor 
nanomaterials have opened up new frontiers in energy conversion, storage, quantum applications, 
water treatment, biomedical applications, sensors, and electronics. The semiconductor industry 
remains at the forefront of technological innovation, shaping the future of various industries and 
enhancing the quality of life for people around the world.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the National Council for Scientific and Technological Development 
(CNPq) (grants #308823/2022 and #406860/2022-0).
REFERENCES	
1.	 M. Ordu, The role of semiconductors in the future of optical fibers, Front Phys. 11 (2023) 1141795.	
2.	 K. Mishra, N. Devi, S.S. Siwal, V.K. Gupta, V.K. Thakur, Hybrid semiconductor photocatalyst
nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications: Fundamentals, designing, and prospects,
Adv. Sustain. Syst. 7 (2023) 2300095.	
3.	 M.K. Majumder, V.R. Kumbhare, A. Japa, B.K. Kaushik, Introduction to Microelectronics to
Nanoelectronics Design and Technology, CRC Press, 2020.	
4.	 R. Bueno, O.R. Lopes, K. Carvalho, C. Ribeiro, H. Mourão, Semicondutores heteroestruturados: uma
abordagem sobre os principais desafios para a obtenção e aplicação em processos fotoquímicos ambien­
tais e energéticos, Quim. Nova. 42 (2019) 661–675.	
5.	 S. Bai, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Xiong, Steering charge kinetics in photocatalysis: Intersection of materials
syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations, Chem Soc Rev. 44 (2015) 2893–2939.	
6.	 J. Zeng, Z. Li, H. Jiang, X. Wang, Progress on photocatalytic semiconductor hybrids for bacterial inac­
tivation, Mater. Horiz. 8 (2021) 2964–3008.	
7.	 M. Tahir, S. Tasleem, B. Tahir, Recent development in band engineering of binary semiconductor
materials for solar driven photocatalytic hydrogen production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 45 (2020)
15985–16038.	
8.	 J. Lu, S. Gu, H. Li, Y. Wang, M. Guo, G. Zhou, Review on multi-dimensional assembled S-scheme
heterojunction photocatalysts, J. Mater. Sci. Technol. 160 (2023) 214–239.	
9.	 A. Baccaro, I. Gutz, Fotoeletrocatálise em semicondutores: dos princípios básicos até sua conformação
à nanoescala, Quim. Nova. 41 (2017) 326–339.	
10.	 Q. Li, Q. Chen, B. Song, Giant radiative thermal rectification using an intrinsic semiconductor film,
Mater. Today Phys. 23 (2022) 100632.	
11.	 W.D. Callister Jr, D.G. Rethwisch, Callister’s Materials Science and Engineering, John Wiley & Sons,
2020.	
12.	 N. Umezawa, J. Ye, Role of complex defects in photocatalytic activities of nitrogen-doped anatase TiO2,
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 14 (2012) 5924.	
13.	 C. Jacoboni, P. Lugli, Review of Semiconductor Devices. In: The Monte Carlo Method for Semiconductor 
Device Simulation. Comp Microelectronics. (1989) 162–217. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-7091-6963-6_4	
14.	 X. Li, J. Yang, H. Sun, L. Huang, H. Li, J. Shi, Controlled synthesis and accurate doping of wafer-scale
two-dimensional semiconducting transition metal dichalcogenides, Adv. Mater. 2305115 (2023) 1–14.	
15.	 T. Narita, T. Kachi, K. Kataoka, T. Uesugi, P-type doping of GaN by magnesium ion implantation, Appl. 
Phys. Express. 10 (2017) 016501.

10
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 16.	 B. Singha, C.S. Solanki, N-type solar cells: Advantages, issues, and current scenarios, Mater. Res. 
Express. 4 (2017) 072001.
	 17.	 L.J. Geerligs, I.G. Romijn, A.R. Burgers, N. Guillevin, A.W. Weeber, J.H. Bultman, H. Wang, F. Lang, 
W. Zhao, G. Li, Z. Hu, J. Xiong, A. Vlooswijk, Progress in low-cost n-type silicon solar cell technology, 
in: 2012 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, IEEE, (2012) 001701–001704.
	 18.	 LibreTexts Chemistry, Metals and Semiconductors, (2019). https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/42093 
(accessed September 25, 2023).
	 19.	 G.A. Armin, B.B. Matthew, H. Bram, M. Thomas, Industrial silicon wafer solar cells – Status and 
trends, Green. 2 (2012) 135–148.
	 20.	 L.S. Ribeiro, I.M. Pinatti, J.A. Torres, A.S. Giroto, F. Lesse, E. Longo, C. Ribeiro, A.E. Nogueira, Rapid 
microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of CuBi2O4 and its application for the artificial photosyn­
thesis, Mater. Lett. 275 (2020) 128165.
	 21.	 W. Fang, M. Xing, J. Zhang, A new approach to prepare Ti3+ self-doped TiO2 via NaBH4 reduction and 
hydrochloric acid treatment, Appl. Catal. B. 160–161 (2014) 240–246.
	 22.	 C. Sahoo, A.K. Gupta, Characterization and photocatalytic performance evaluation of various metal 
ion-doped microstructured TiO2 under UV and visible light, Journal of Environmental Science and 
Health, Part A. 50 (2015) 659–668.
	 23.	 A.L.A. Faria, H.A. Centurion, J.A. Torres, R.V. Gonçalves, L.S. Ribeiro, C. Riberio, C. da Cruz, F.G.E. 
Nogueira, Enhancing Nb2O5 activity for CO2 photoreduction through Cu nanoparticles cocatalyst 
deposited by DC-magnetron sputtering, J. CO2 Util. 53 (2021) 101739.
	 24.	 S.M. El-Sheikh, T.M. Khedr, A. Hakki, A.A. Ismail, W.A. Badawy, D.W. Bahnemann, Visible light 
activated carbon and nitrogen co-doped mesoporous TiO2 as efficient photocatalyst for degradation of 
ibuprofen, Sep. Purif. Technol. 173 (2017) 258–268.
	 25.	 S.S. Mohtar, F. Aziz, A.F. Ismail, N.S. Sambudi, H. Abdullah, A.N. Rosli, B. Ohtani, Impact of doping 
and additive applications on photocatalyst textural properties in removing organic pollutants: A review, 
Catalysts. 11 (2021) 1160.
	 26.	 M. Arumugam, R. Koutavarapu, K.K. Seralathan, S. Praserthdam, P. Praserthdam, Noble metals (Pd, Ag, 
Pt, and Au) doped bismuth oxybromide photocatalysts for improved visible light-driven catalytic activity 
for the degradation of phenol, Chemosphere. 324 (2023) 138368.
	 27.	 M. Qin, K. Jin, X. Li, R. Wang, Y. Li, H. Wang, Novel highly-active Ag/Bi dual nanoparticles-decorated 
BiOBr photocatalyst for efficient degradation of ibuprofen, Environ. Res. 206 (2022) 112628.
	 28.	 H.T. Ren, S.Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S.H. Wu, T.H. Zhang, X. Han, Improved photochemical reactivities of Ag2O/
g-C3N4 in phenol degradation under UV and visible light, Ind Eng Chem. Res. 53 (2014) 17645–17653.
	 29.	 S.J. Lee, H.J. Jung, R. Koutavarapu, S.H. Lee, M. Arumugam, J.H. Kim, M.Y. Choi, ZnO supported Au/
Pd bimetallic nanocomposites for plasmon improved photocatalytic activity for methylene blue degra­
dation under visible light irradiation, Appl. Surf. Sci. 496 (2019) 143665.
	 30.	 C. Regmi, Y.K. Kshetri, R.P. Pandey, T.H. Kim, G. Gyawali, S.W. Lee, Understanding the multifunc­
tionality in Cu-doped BiVO4 semiconductor photocatalyst, J. Environ. Sci. (China). 75 (2019) 84–97.
	 31.	 G. Domingo, Semiconductor Basics: A Qualitative, Non-Mathematical Explanation of How 
Semiconductors Work and How They Are Used, Wiley, 1st edition, 2020.
	 32.	 N. Hossain, M.H. Mobarak, M.A. Mimona, M.A. Islam, A. Hossain, F.T. Zohura, M.A. Chowdhury, 
Advances and significances of nanoparticles in semiconductor applications – A review, Results in Eng. 
19 (2023) 101347.
	 33.	 G.E. Moore, Cramming more components onto integrated circuits, Reprinted from Electronics. 38 
(1965) 114.
	 34.	 R.V. Nair, V.S. Gummaluri, M.V. Matham, C. Vijayan, A review on optical bandgap engineering in TiO2 
nanostructures via doping and intrinsic vacancy modulation towards visible light applications, J. Phys. 
D. Appl. Phys. 55 (2022) 313003.
	 35.	 B. Fang, Z. Xing, D. Sun, Z. Li, W. Zhou, Hollow semiconductor photocatalysts for solar energy conver­
sion, Adv. Powder Mater. 1 (2022) 100021.
	 36.	 X. Li, D. Chen, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He, J. Lu, AgBr-loaded hollow porous carbon nitride with ultra­
high activity as visible light photocatalysts for water remediation, Appl. Catal. B. 229 (2018) 155–162.
	 37.	 J. Bai, R. Shen, W. Chen, J. Xie, P. Zhang, Z. Jiang, X. Li, Enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution based 
on a Ti3C2/Zn0.7Cd0.3S/Fe2O3 Ohmic/S-scheme hybrid heterojunction with cascade 2D coupling inter­
faces, Chem. Eng. J. 429 (2022) 132587.
	 38.	 K. Chang, X. Hai, H. Pang, H. Zhang, L. Shi, G. Liu, H. Liu, G. Zhao, M. Li, J. Ye, Targeted synthesis of 
2H- and 1T-phase MoS2 monolayers for catalytic hydrogen evolution, Adv. Mater. 28 (2016) 10033–10041.

11
Semiconductors	
39.	 H. Lin, K. Zhang, G. Yang, Y. Li, X. Liu, K. Chang, Y. Xuan, J. Ye, Ultrafine nano 1T-MoS2 monolayers 
with NiOx as dual co-catalysts over TiO2 photoharvester for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen evolution,
Appl. Catal. B. 279 (2020) 119387.	
40.	 Y. Rajput, P. Kumar, T.C. Zhang, D. Kumar, M. Nemiwal, Recent advances in g-C3N4-based photocata­
lysts for hydrogen evolution reactions, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy. 47 (2022) 38533–38555.	
41.	 H. Edlbauer, J. Wang, T. Crozes, P. Perrier, S. Ouacel, C. Geffroy, G. Georgiou, E. Chatzikyriakou, A.
Lacerda-Santos, X. Waintal, D.C. Glattli, P. Roulleau, J. Nath, M. Kataoka, J. Splettstoesser, M. Acciai,
M.C. da Silva Figueira, K. Öztas, A. Trellakis, T. Grange, O.M. Yevtushenko, S. Birner, C. Bäuerle,
Semiconductor-based electron flying qubits: Review on recent progress accelerated by numerical mod­
elling, EPJ Quantum Technol. 9 (2022) 21.	
42.	 A. Peruzzo, J. McClean, P. Shadbolt, M.-H. Yung, X.-Q. Zhou, P.J. Love, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J.L. O’Brien, 
A variational eigenvalue solver on a photonic quantum processor, Nat. Commun. 5 (2014) 4213.	
43.	 S.R. Laraba, W. Luo, A. Rezzoug, Q. ul ain Zahra, S. Zhang, B. Wu, W. Chen, L. Xiao, Y. Yang, J.
Wei, Y. Li, Graphene-based composites for biomedical applications, Green Chem. Lett. Rev. 15 (2022)
724–748.	
44.	 A.D. Terna, E.E. Elemike, J.I. Mbonu, O.E. Osafile, R.O. Ezeani, The future of semiconductors nanopar­
ticles: Synthesis, properties and applications, Mater. Sci. Eng. B. 272 (2021) 115363.	
45.	 Precedence Research, Advanced Optics Market (By Technology: Ray, Wave, Quantum; By Application:
LiDAR, Lighting Solution, Optical Communication, Intelligence, Surveillance & Reconnaissance, Medical 
Equipment, Camera, Metrology Devices, 3D Scanner, Others; By End-Use Industry: Commercial, Industrial, 
Defense, Medical, Aviation (Drone), Automotive, Space, Others) – Global Industry Analysis, Size, Share,
Growth, Trends, Regional Outlook, and Forecast 2023–2032, https://www.precedenceresearch.com/
Advanced-Optics-Market. (2023).	
46.	 Thomas Alsop, Semiconductor market revenue worldwide from 2020 to 2030, by application, https://
www.statista.com/statistics/498265/cagr-main-semiconductor-target-markets/. (2023).

12
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-2
Diluted Magnetic 
Semiconductors
Mourad Boughrara, Abdelhamid Ait M’hid, 
and Mohamed Kerouad
2.1  INTRODUCTION
Following the appearance of the first transistor in 1954, microelectronics became a major techno­
logical revolution of the late twentieth century. Improvements in the performance of computer chips 
have been made possible by a further reduction in component sizes, which are now of the order of 
a few atomic distances. At this scale, fundamental physical obstacles arise, and the quantum nature 
of electrons needs to be considered. At this level, the researchers in this field are trying to find new 
ways of research that can supplant conventional electronics at nanometric dimensions. One interest­
ing alternative is spintronics.
Spintronics has already had many successes. The discovery in 1988 by Albert Fert and Peter 
Grunberg (Nobel Prize in 2007) of the changing magnetic-resistive effect (GMR) in the alternating 
multilayers of ferromagnetic metal and insulating oxide enabled major technological advancements 
in the microcomputing industry. The development of new hard disk reading head architectures was 
based on the principle of the giant magnetoresistive effect. This new technology made it possible to 
increase the density of hard disks in computers. As a result, hard disk capacities grew rapidly from 
just a few gigabytes in the early 1990s to over one terabyte in current times, and they continue to 
increase. Hard disk drives offer attractive characteristics that combine speed, rewrite capability, and 
non-volatile information storage even when the supply voltage is absent. Other applications have 
also been developed, such as magnetoresistive random-access memories (MRAMs), which make 
it possible to replace dynamic random access memory (DRAM) in the random access memory 
(RAM) of current computers with much lower access times. Unlike DRAM memories, the infor­
mation in MRAMs is no longer stored in the form of electric loads but in the form of magnetic 
moments, thanks to the technology of magnetic junctions and tunnels.
To produce innovative spintronic components, researchers are currently looking for ferromag­
netic semiconductors at room temperature. Diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMSs) of type II-VI 
form an important class of DMSs in which electric and magnetic doping can be controlled indepen­
dently; the first to be identified were alloys like Zn1−xMnxTe and Cd1−xMnxTe [1]. More recently, the 
compounds ZnO [2–4], ZnS [5–7], and ZnSe [8–10] have been investigated and need more study to 
understand the nature of the magnetic interactions that control room temperature ferromagnetism. 
The p-type doping of type II-VI DMSs is a challenge, and the control of magnetic interactions 
through electrical doping could lead to a ferromagnetic DMS at room temperature. In addition to 
that, defects can induce long-range ferromagnetic interactions.
This chapter provides a comprehensive overview of DMSs, encompassing both experimental 
synthesis and characterization as well as theoretical investigations. The chapter is structured as fol­
lows: Initially, common experimental techniques utilized to fabricate DMS materials are surveyed, 
including hydrothermal, co-precipitation, sol-gel, sputtering, and electrodeposition methods. The 
subsequent section reviews key findings from recent experimental studies examining the impacts 
of parameters such as semiconductor type, dopant concentration, and growth conditions on the 
electronic and magnetic characteristics of select DMSs. This is followed by an in-depth analysis of 
experimental results on the electronic structure and magnetism of specific DMS systems based on 
2

13
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
ZnO, ZnS, and GaN. The second part of the chapter focuses on theoretical approaches of model­
ing DMS materials using density functional theory and Monte Carlo simulations (MCSs), offering 
insights into the physical underpinnings behind observed electronic and magnetic phenomena.
2.2  EXPERIMENTAL INVESTIGATION OF DMS
2.2.1  Synthesis Techniques
Researchers utilize specialized synthesis techniques to explore novel semiconductor materials and 
applications. In this subsection, we will provide an overview of common DMS fabrication methods 
like hydrothermal method, co-precipitation method, etc. Understanding these fundamental pro­
cesses lays the groundwork for examining new experimental findings about the electronic and mag­
netic behaviors of DMSs.
2.2.1.1  Hydrothermal Method
Hydrothermal synthesis has emerged as a widely used technique for fabricating semiconductor 
nanostructures [11]. This approach involves heating aqueous solutions containing precursor materi­
als in a sealed autoclave at elevated temperatures (130–250°C) and autogenous pressures. Under
these conditions, the precursors undergo dissolution and recrystallization to form nanocrystals with 
well-defined size and morphology. Key advantages of hydrothermal synthesis include its simplicity, 
low cost, and environmental friendliness compared to other methods. By tuning parameters like 
temperature, pressure, reaction time, and solution pH, researchers can exercise precise control over 
nucleation and growth. A wide variety of semiconductor nanomaterials like metal oxides, sulfides, 
and selenides have been synthesized hydrothermally. The technique has also enabled fabrication of 
complex heterostructures by separating nucleation and growth stages.
2.2.1.2  Co-Precipitation Method
Co-precipitation is a straightforward synthesis technique for obtaining semiconductor nanopar­
ticles [12]. In this approach, solutions containing precursor salts are mixed together, causing the 
precursors to precipitate out simultaneously as an intimate mixture. Adding a precipitation agent 
like ammonia adjusts the pH and induces co-precipitation. The precipitate is then filtered, washed, 
dried, and calcined to form the desired nanoparticles. Compared to other methods, co-precipitation 
is simple, economical, and easily scalable. However, it usually provides less control over particle 
size distribution and morphology. Still, co-precipitation allows rapid synthesis of nanoparticles from 
a wide range of semiconductor materials, including metal oxides, chalcogenides, and even doped 
semiconductors. By tuning factors like pH, temperature, and precipitation agent, some control over 
morphology and size can be achieved.
2.2.1.3  Sol-Gel Method
The sol-gel technique is an important synthesis route for fabricating semiconductor nanomateri­
als [13]. This method involves the transition of a colloidal solution “sol” into a solid “gel” phase. 
The sol-gel process typically starts with metal alkoxide precursors that undergo hydrolysis and 
condensation reactions to form a colloid. This colloid can be cast into shapes or films and dried to 
produce oxide gels. Further heating results in pore-free ceramic materials. The sol-gel approach 
provides molecular-level mixing of precursors, enabling fabrication of unique structures like nano­
composites, nanorods, and quantum dots. Key advantages include mild synthesis conditions, simple 
equipment, and fine control over composition and morphology. However, limitations exist like long 
processing times and cracking during drying.
2.2.1.4  RF-Magnetron Sputtering
Sputtering has proven to be an effective technique for fabricating high-quality DMS thin films 
[14]. This method relies on ejecting atoms from a target source material using energetic ion 

14
Handbook of Semiconductors
bombardment and depositing the sputtered atoms onto a substrate. For DMS synthesis, sputtering 
enables precise control over the dopant and host semiconductor composition in the growing film, 
which is critical for achieving the desired magnetic and electronic properties. Specifically, co-
sputtering from multiple target sources allows accurate mixing of the dopant and semiconductor 
atoms during deposition. Another advantage of sputtering is the ability to deposit at lower tem­
peratures, enabling formation of single crystal films on amorphous substrates. The sputtered films 
exhibit smooth surfaces, uniform thickness, good adhesion, and fewer defects compared to other 
fabrication approaches. However, achieving p-type doping during sputtering remains challenging 
due to compensation effects.
2.2.1.5  Electrodeposition Method
Electrodeposition has emerged as a versatile technique for synthesizing semiconductor nano­
structures [15]. This method relies on applying a voltage between two electrodes immersed in an 
aqueous precursor solution. When a semiconductor material is used as the cathode, deposition 
occurs as precursor ions migrate and undergo reduction at the cathode surface. Key parameters 
like applied potential, temperature, pH, and precursor concentration can be tuned to control the 
morphology and properties of the deposited material. Electrodeposition enables formation of 
adherent films, free-standing structures, and nanocomposites on conductive substrates. It is a 
simple and inexpensive approach amenable to scaling up. However, the need for conducting sub­
strates and mass transport limitations are drawbacks. Generally, electrodeposition allows facile 
synthesis of semiconductors like metal chalcogenides, oxides, and doped materials. It has been 
utilized to produce nanowires, nanorods, and thin films for diverse applications in photovoltaics, 
sensing, and electronics. With further development, electrodeposition holds promise as a sustain­
able nanofabrication technique.
2.2.2  Experimental Results
To further understand the electronic and magnetic properties of semiconductors, this subsection 
will explore recent experimental findings on how these characteristics are impacted by parameters 
including semiconductor type, dopant concentration, and synthesis conditions. Specifically, we 
will highlight research on the magnetic attributes of select group II-VI and III-V semiconduc­
tors. Examining studies investigating factors like composition, doping, and growth techniques 
will provide critical insights into the physics governing the electrical and magnetic phenomena 
in these materials. This focused analysis of key experimental works will elucidate the complex 
interplay between band structure, crystal structure, and magnetism that determines semiconductor 
behaviors.
In this part, we provide a compact overview of the key electronic and magnetic characteristics of 
transition metal-doped ZnO DMSs. The experimental results of the electronic structure and carrier-
mediated magnetism are summarized. The outlook on potential spintronic applications is also dis­
cussed. The aims are to review ZnO DMS for spintronics and highlight the opportunities and open 
questions surrounding this emerging class of multifunctional semiconductor materials.
Muhammad Tariq et al. [16] have studied the impact of growth conditions on (Fe, Cu) co-doped 
ZnO nanoparticles by applying a high pulsed magnetic field (4T) during hydrothermal synthesis. 
The researchers dissolved zinc acetate along with ferric nitrate and copper chloride in deionized 
water. After adding sodium hydroxide solution under stirring, the mixture was sealed in a Teflon-
lined autoclave and heated at 140°C for four hours. Following purification and drying, the resulting
nanoparticles were analyzed with and without exposure to the magnetic field during synthesis. The 
introduction of a high pulsed magnetic field during hydrothermal synthesis significantly altered the 
electronic and magnetic properties of the (Fe, Cu) co-doped ZnO nanoparticles. XRD and Raman 
analysis indicated that applying a 4T field led to increased substitutional doping of Fe3+ and Cu2+ 
ions along with enhanced lattice distortions and defects, especially oxygen vacancies, as evidenced 

15
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
by XPS. The higher oxygen vacancy concentration for the 4T sample is attributed to the reduction 
in compressive strain during growth under the magnetic field. The increase in defects and dopant 
incorporation contributed to a three-fold enhancement in the room temperature ferromagnetic satu­
ration magnetization from 0.033 emu/g for the 0T sample to 0.041 emu/g for the 4T sample. This 
significant improvement in ferromagnetism is explained by the bound magnetic polaron model [17], 
where the magnetic exchange interactions between oxygen vacancies and transition metal ions cre­
ate magnetic polarons that can overlap to stabilize long-range ferromagnetic order. The 4T sample 
exhibited more magnetic polarons with improved overlap, leading to superior room-temperature 
ferromagnetism.
Sourav Nayak et al. [18] have synthesized cobalt-doped ZnO nanoparticles using various methods 
including sol-gel, co-precipitation, hydrothermal, and solvothermal with different doping concentra­
tions varied from 0 to 15%. In their investigation, the authors observed that the electronic structure 
and magnetism of the cobalt-doped ZnO nanoparticles were significantly tuned by the doping level. 
Increasing substitutional incorporation of Co2+ ions in place of Zn2+ led to a systematic redshift and 
narrowing of the band gap from 3.37 eV down to 2.9 eV. This reduction of the band gap is attrib­
uted to sp-d exchange interactions between the transition metal Co ions and the host ZnO band. 
The magnetic properties exhibited a strong dependence on Co concentration as well. At low doping 
around 5%, robust room temperature ferromagnetism was observed, with magnetic hysteresis mea­
surements indicating strong ferromagnetic ordering mediated by bound magnetic polarons. These 
polarons involve coupling between oxygen vacancies induced by Co doping and the Co ions’ mag­
netic moments. However, with further increase in Co doping beyond 5%, antiferromagnetic inter­
actions between adjacent Co ions became dominant, leading to a transition from ferromagnetic to 
paramagnetic behavior. The electronic structure was thus effectively tuned via the Co concentration 
to achieve a narrowed band gap, while the magnetic polarity could be controlled between ferromag­
netic and paramagnetic by carefully managing the complex magnetic interactions related to defects 
in the material.
To study the effect of dopant concentration and growth conditions on the electronic and mag­
netic characteristics of the ZnO and CZO films, B.L. Zhu et al. [19] have prepared ZnO and 
Cu-doped ZnO (CZO) thin films using RF-magnetron sputtering. ZnO and Zn0.98Cu0.02O ceramic 
targets were used to deposit films on glass substrates at 300°C. The sputtering was done in either 
pure Ar or Ar+H2 ambient at 1.0 Pa pressure. The authors demonstrated that both Cu doping and 
the introduction of H2 during sputter deposition exerted substantial influence on the electronic 
and magnetic characteristics of the ZnO and CZO films. Resistivity values showed that CZO films 
had over 50 times higher resistivity than ZnO films in both Ar (ZnO: 3.44 Ωcm, CZO: 183.47 
Ωcm) and Ar+H2 (ZnO: 0.10 Ωcm, CZO: 67.54 Ωcm) ambients, stemming from Cu acting as an 
acceptor and reducing carrier concentration. However, Cu incorporation induced strong room tem­
perature ferromagnetism, with CZO films exhibiting saturation magnetization (Ms) values around 
0.5 emu/g compared to negligible Ms for ZnO films. The addition of H2 during growth increased 
the concentration of donors like oxygen vacancies and interstitial Zn, lowering resistivity of ZnO 
and CZO to 0.10 Ωcm and 67.54 Ωcm, respectively. Moreover, the higher oxygen vacancy density 
introduced by H2 resulted in an enhancement of Ms to 0.033 emu/g for ZnO and 0.641 emu/g for 
CZO films deposited in Ar+H2 compared to Ar ambient. The ferromagnetic interactions are medi­
ated by bound magnetic polarons formed by coupling between the increased oxygen vacancies and 
the Cu ions in CZO.
In an analogous study, Hassan Ahmoum et al. [20] undertook the synthesis of nickel-doped zinc 
oxide (ZnO) nanoparticles utilizing the sol-gel method. The Ni doping concentration varied from 
0 to 12%. Their primary objective was to investigate the influence of dopant concentration on the 
electronic and magnetic properties of the ZnO material. The authors found that the electronic struc­
ture and magnetism of the Ni-doped ZnO nanoparticles were significantly modulated by the Ni 
concentration. XRD patterns showed the hexagonal wurtzite structure was retained after doping, 
with systematic peak shifting to higher angles indicating successful Ni2+ substitution on Zn2+ sites. 

16
Handbook of Semiconductors
The corresponding monotonic decrease in lattice parameters from a = 3.259 Å and c = 5.218 Å 
for undoped ZnO to a = 3.247 Å and c = 5.192 Å for 12% Ni-doped ZnO confirms the incorpora­
tion of smaller Ni2+ ions (r = 0.69 Å) versus larger Zn2+ ions (r = 0.74 Å). Meanwhile, broadening 
of the (101) peak signified reduced crystallite size from 25.1 nm down to 21.2 nm and 17.1 nm 
for 6% and 12% Ni doping, respectively, implying constrained nanostructure growth. Detailed 
magnetic characterization revealed emergence of robust room temperature ferromagnetism with 
Ni incorporation, in contrast to the diamagnetic undoped ZnO, which showed negligible saturation 
magnetization (Ms) of 0.033 emu/g. For 6% Ni doping, Ms dramatically increased to 0.94 emu/g 
while the squareness of the hysteresis loop was evidenced by coercivity of 155 Oe and remanence 
of 0.148 emu/g. At higher 12% Ni content, Ms was lowered but still substantial at 0.76 emu/g, with 
coercivity of 142 Oe and remanence of 0.124 emu/g as shown in Figures 2.1 and 2.2. Temperature-
dependent remanence confirmed the critical ferromagnetic transition temperature was around or 
exceeding 300K. The variations in ferromagnetism with Ni clearly demonstrate its efficacy in 
controlling the magnetism.
Cr-doped ZnO nanoparticles with Cr doping concentrations that varied from 0 to 5% were also 
prepared using the solution combustion method [21]. It is found that the electronic structure and 
magnetism of the Cr-doped ZnO nanoparticles were markedly affected by the Cr concentration. 
XRD revealed the systematic reduction in crystallite size from 31 ± 2 nm to 19 ± 1 nm with increas­
ing Cr doping up to 5%, indicative of constrained nanostructure growth. Magnetic characterization 
uncovered the emergence of robust room temperature ferromagnetism in contrast to the diamag­
netic undoped ZnO. The saturation magnetization (Ms) was substantial at 0.867 emu/g for undoped 
ZnO and initially increased to 0.674 emu/g for 3% Cr doping. However, higher 5% Cr incorporation 
FIGURE 2.1  Experimental magnetization versus applied magnetic field for different samples at 300K [20].

17
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
reduced Ms to 0.627 emu/g. The hysteresis loop squareness also decreased with increasing Cr dop­
ing, with the coercivity declining from 228 Oe to 190 Oe for 3% Cr and then rising slightly to 
224 Oe for 5% Cr. Remanence followed the same trend, decreasing from 0.13 emu/g for undoped 
ZnO to 0.07 and 0.05 emu/g for 3% and 5% Cr-doped ZnO, respectively. At lower chromium (Cr) 
doping concentrations, ferromagnetism is initially enhanced due to the formation of bound mag­
netic polarons. These polarons involve a coupling between Cr3+ ions and zinc vacancies, which 
promotes the ferromagnetic alignment of spins. However, as the Cr doping concentration increases 
further, the ferromagnetism begins to reduce. This subsequent reduction in ferromagnetic behavior 
at higher Cr doping levels is also explained by the same mechanism involving bound magnetic 
polarons. However, excessive Cr doping leads to increased antiferromagnetic couplings between 
adjacent Cr ions that lower the overall magnetization.
In the same context, S. Narasimman et al. [22] have synthesized pristine ZnO and Mn-doped 
ZnO nanorods using the hydrothermal method. The authors have studied the effect of Mn doping 
concentration on the electronic and magnetic properties of the ZnO material. Mn doping concen­
trations of 5%, 10%, 15%, and 20% were prepared. Through their rigorous analysis, the authors 
provided a comprehensive understanding of how the electronic structure and magnetism of hydro­
thermally grown ZnO nanorods were methodically adjusted through variations in Mn doping con­
centration. XRD patterns revealed that the hexagonal wurtzite structure was retained after Mn 
incorporation up to 20%, with the emerging impurity peak indicating the formation of ZnMnO3 
clusters. The (101) peak intensity increased while crystallite size concurrently decreased from 
65 nm down to 44 nm, with higher Mn levels as calculated using Scherrer’s equation, indicative 
of constrained nanostructure growth. As Mn content increased, SEM micrographs confirmed the 
rod-shaped morphologies, with average diameter and length reduced from ~13 μm × 1 μm to 
~8 μm × 0.8 μm for pure ZnO to 20% Mn-doped ZnO, respectively. EDS spectra verified the 
elemental composition through the changing Zn:Mn:O ratios. XPS further analyzed the chemical 
FIGURE 2.2  Remanence magnetization versus temperature for 6% of Ni doped ZnO [20].

18
Handbook of Semiconductors
states, with binding energies suggesting Mn4+, Zn2+, and O2– as the dominant species. Magnetic 
characterization was performed by coating the Mn-doped ZnO nanorods in an optical fiber to con­
struct a sensor. The transmission spectrum exhibited predictable increases with an applied mag­
netic field from 17.2 mT to 190.6 mT, owing to positive magneto-refractive effects. A maximum 
sensitivity of 27.2% was attained for 15% Mn doping, with fast response and recovery times of 
7s and 12s, respectively. The changing morphology, magneto-optical activity, and rapid-response 
kinetics demonstrate the potential of hydrothermal Mn-doped ZnO nanorods for tunable and sensi­
tive fiberoptic magnetic field sensing.
To study the impact of the crystallite size and dopant type on dopant concentration, Amarjyoti 
Kalita [23] synthesized Co-doped and Cu-doped ZnO nanocrystals using a chemical co-pre­
cipitation method. Hexagonal wurtzite crystal structure stability was affirmed through XRD 
analysis after the doping process. TEM imaging showed the formation of agglomerated, roughly 
spherical nanocrystals with sizes of 15–20 nm, agreeing with the crystallite sizes determined 
from XRD. EDS analysis indicated the actual Co and Cu doping levels were lower than the 
targeted amounts, likely due to thermodynamic equilibrium effects during growth. The optical 
band gap increased from 3.39 eV for undoped ZnO to 3.60 eV for 2% Co-doped and 3.43 eV 
for 2% Cu-doped samples, showing a clear band gap expansion. The ESR spectra for Co-doped 
samples exhibited broad resonance peaks with g-factors around 2.3, while Cu-doped samples 
showed narrowed peaks with g-factors of 2.1 along with hyperfine splitting from Cu ions. This 
confirms a reduction in ferromagnetic interactions for Cu doping. The room temperature satura­
tion magnetization values measured by VSM were approximately 5 × 10−3 emu/g for undoped 
ZnO, 3 × 10−3 emu/g for 2% Co-doped, and 7 × 10−4 emu/g for 2% Cu-doped samples. The 
substantial decrease in magnetization for Cu-doped ZnO agrees with the ESR results showing 
weakened ferromagnetic coupling. Meanwhile, the Co-doped samples retained decent ferro­
magnetic behavior, though the magnetization also declined somewhat compared to undoped 
ZnO due to antiferromagnetic Co-Co interactions. Generally, the electronic structure was modi­
fied by the dopant ions through band gap changes, enhanced defect formation, and mediation of 
magnetic interactions.
The next part of this synthesis will be devoted to the electronic and magnetic properties 
of zinc sulfide (ZnS) as an important wide band gap II-VI semiconductor, which has received 
much interest as a DMS material. Doping ZnS with transition metals (TM) results in a mate­
rial that exhibits ferromagnetism at certain temperature, making it attractive for spintronics, 
which requires control over both the charge and spin of electrons. In this part, we will provide 
an overview of the electronic and magnetic properties of TM-doped ZnS. Key results from 
experimental studies on the magnetic and electronic structure of ZnS:TM are summarized. 
Vaishali Shukla et al. [24] have synthesized ZnS nanoparticles and TM (Mn, Co, Ni)-doped ZnS 
nanoparticles by a chemical precipitation method in aqueous cetyltrimethylammonium bromide 
(CTAB) micellar solutions. The magnetic measurements revealed a transition from weak dia­
magnetic behavior to ferromagnetism after doping. The saturation magnetization (Ms) at room 
temperature increased from 19.21 × 10−3 emu/g for undoped ZnS to 13.09 × 10−3 emu/g, 9.91 × 
10−3 emu/g, and 13.47 × 10−3 emu/g for Mn-, Co-, and Ni-doped ZnS, respectively. The coercivity 
also decreased to 177.34 G, 176.59 G, and 137.58 G compared to 183.42 G in undoped ZnS. The 
remnant magnetization followed a similar trend. The observed ferromagnetism arises from p-d 
exchange interactions between the localized d electrons of the Mn2+, Co2+, and Ni2+ ions and the 
hybridized p electrons of the S2– ions. In summary, the magnetic measurements quantitatively 
demonstrated that transition metal doping introduces robust room temperature ferromagnetism 
in ZnS by modifying the electronic structure.
To study the effect of co-doping on the magnetic properties of ZnS, B. Poornaprakash et al. 
[25] have synthesized Cr-doped ZnS and (Cr,V)-co-doped ZnS nanoparticles by a hydrothermal 
method using polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) as a surfactant. It is shown that the number of spins 

19
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
increased from 2.14 × 109 in the 1% Cr doped sample to 5.03 × 109 and 5.25 × 109 spins for the 
1% Cr+1% V and 1% Cr+2% V co-doped samples, confirming additional unpaired electrons were 
introduced by the V co-doping. The magnetic measurements showed a clear transition from dia­
magnetism in undoped ZnS to robust room-temperature ferromagnetism after doping. The satura­
tion magnetization (Ms) increased from 0.275 emu/g for 1% Cr doping to 0.431 emu/g and 0.657 
emu/g for the 1% Cr+1% V and 1% Cr+2% V co-doped samples. The remnant magnetization fol­
lowed a similar increasing trend. The enhanced ferromagnetism with higher V doping indicates 
the critical role of V in modulating the exchange interactions. In general, the quantitative magnetic 
characterization conclusively demonstrated the tuned electronic structure and successful introduc­
tion of strong room temperature ferromagnetism in the transition metal doped ZnS nanoparticles, 
indicating enhanced ferromagnetism with higher V doping. The results confirm successful tuning 
of the electronic structure and introduction of robust room temperature ferromagnetism via transi­
tion metal doping.
In a similar investigation, N. Manivannan et al. [26] have synthesized Cr-doped ZnS nanopar­
ticles using a chemical precipitation method. The authors studied the effect of Cr-doping concen­
tration on the electronic and magnetic properties of the ZnS material. Powders with 0.025, 0.05, 
and 0.075 mol% Cr doping were prepared. The vibrating sample magnetometer measurements 
revealed a clear transition from diamagnetism in undoped ZnS to room-temperature ferromag­
netism after Cr doping. The saturation magnetization (Ms) increased from 0 for undoped ZnS to 
1.57 × 10−4 emu/g for 0.025 mol% Cr doping. Further increasing the Cr doping to 0.05 and 0.075 
mol% resulted in Ms values of 2.97 × 10−4 emu/g and 3.68 × 10−4 emu/g, respectively. The remnant 
magnetization followed a similar increasing trend, from 0 for undoped ZnS to 7.54 × 10−5, 1.45 × 
10−4, and 1.83 × 10−4 emu/g for 0.025, 0.05, and 0.075 mol% Cr-doping. The coercivity increased 
as well, from 0 Oe in undoped ZnS to 1593, 1298, and 396 Oe for 0.025, 0.05, and 0.075 mol% 
Cr, respectively. The quantitative magnetic characterization conclusively demonstrates that the 
electronic structure is successfully tuned by Cr doping to introduce robust room temperature fer­
romagnetism, with the strength of ferromagnetism systematically enhanced as the Cr concentra­
tion increases.
The last part of this section will be devoted to the magnetic properties of the GaN DMS as 
another promising candidate for spintronic applications. GaN, a III-V group semiconductor with a 
wide band gap, is renowned for its exceptional electronic properties and has already made signifi­
cant inroads in optoelectronics and high-power electronic devices. However, what truly sets GaN 
apart is its intrinsic ability to integrate magnetism into its electronic structure, thus paving the 
way for the development of next-generation spintronic devices. Yana Grishchenko et al. [27] syn­
thesized nickel-gallium nitride (Ni-GaN) composites through a multi-step process. Initially, they 
grew n-type gallium nitride (GaN) layers using the metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy (MOVPE) 
technique. Subsequently, these n-type GaN layers underwent electrochemical etching to make them 
porous. After creating the porous GaN layers, the researchers incorporated nickel into the porous 
structure to form the desired nickel-GaN composite materials. The synthesis approach involved first 
producing n-type GaN layers by MOVPE, then making them porous via electrochemical etching, 
and finally introducing nickel to obtain the nickel-GaN composites. The nickel-GaN composites 
showed typical ferromagnetic behavior, but with properties tuned by the synthesis approach. For 
the thin nickel film, thickness was measured by SEM as 155 ± 38 nm. The saturation magnetization 
at 2K was 56.5 ± 15 emu/g, agreeing well with the expected bulk nickel value of ~58 emu/g. This 
demonstrated the high quality of the electrodeposited nickel. The thin film showed strong in-plane 
anisotropy with 2K coercivity of <50 Oe in-plane versus >300 Oe out-of-plane. Remanence fol­
lowed an unusual trend, increasing to 0.6 at 300K in-plane. The XRD patterns revealed the film was 
(111) textured with crystallite sizes around 40 nm and low strain (–0.08%). For infiltrated nickel, 
isotropic-like behavior was seen with coercivity <10 Oe and remanence ~0.2 for both orientations at 
300K. The saturation magnetizations were lower, around 0.5 emu/g at 300K for longer depositions. 

20
Handbook of Semiconductors
XRD showed smaller grains (~30 nm) but slightly higher strain (0.06%) for infiltration. Blocking 
temperatures were estimated as >700K. In summary, tailoring of the anisotropy and coercivity was 
achieved between thin film and infiltrated composites by controlling the deposition in the porous 
GaN templates.
2.3  THEORETICAL INVESTIGATIONS OF DILUTED 
MAGNETIC SEMICONDUCTORS
In physics, the use of numerical simulation makes it possible to explore the behavior of a model 
but also to obtain results which will be compared to experimental data. With the development of 
the computational tools and power, an important advance is shown in electronic structure theory 
and algorithmic development. Theoretical investigations became an essential tool to predict and 
understand experimental phenomena. In this section, we will present a review of theoretical studies 
on DMSs.
The theoretical study focused on examining the magnetic properties of semiconductors and 
understanding how the introduction of dopant elements influences the physical characteristics of 
these materials that are intrinsically insulating when no dopants are present, and the researchers 
use MCSs and density functional theory, which are known as powerful techniques that give accu­
rate results.
Boron nitride (BN) and aluminum nitride are extensively studied because of their possible 
uses as diluted magnetic semiconductors in spintronic applications. In this optic, Ahmoum et al. 
[28] have studied structural, electronic, and magnetic properties of the Al-doped BN with the 
presence of N vacancy by using the density functional theory. It is shown that the band gap 
decreases with the increase of the concentration of Al impurities, and these impurities and 
the N vacancy induce magnetic properties. The total magnetization is found to be 0.09 µB for 
undoped BN with N vacancy and 0.12 µB for Al-doped BN with N vacancy. From this work, it is 
concluded that the magnetic properties are due to Al impurities and the four B atoms that sur­
rounded the N vacancy.
The magnetic properties of (Mn, C) co-doped AlN with N vacancy are also investigated [29]. 
In this work, we have also used the density functional theory to discover the effect of co-doping on 
the magnetic properties of this material (AlN). In a previous work [30], the authors theoretically 
studied the carbon-doped AlN, and they found that the substitution of nitrogen by carbon induced 
the magnetic moment by about 1 µB. Our work demonstrates that pure aluminum nitride (AlN) 
does not exhibit magnetic properties. However, when AlN is co-doped with manganese and carbon 
in the presence of nitrogen vacancies, it acquires the characteristics of a magnetic semiconductor. 
Specifically, the AlN co-doped with manganese, carbon, and nitrogen vacancies displays a band gap 
of approximately 2.24 eV for the spin-down electrons. It is also shown that the magnetic properties 
are due to the Mn3+ incorporated in the AlN lattice and to the nitrogen vacancy.
ZnO doped with TM is currently studied as part of research done on the magnetic properties of 
DMSs. Due to its characteristics, such as wide band gap (3.4 eV) [31], very large exciton binding 
energy (60 meV) [32], and high thermal and mechanical stability at room temperature [33], ZnO is 
considered an ideal semiconductor for several applications, such as light-emitting diodes [34], solar 
cells [35], and photodetectors [36].
For magnetic applications, the aim is to obtain a ferromagnetic doped ZnO with a Curie tempera­
ture above temperature ambient. In recent works [20, 37], we have investigated the effect of nickel 
and vanadium concentration on the magnetic properties of doped ZnO.
In the first work, we have studied the Ni-doped ZnO for different nickel concentrations (5.55%, 
8.33%, and 12.5%). We have found the pure ZnO exhibits a weak saturation magnetization of 0.033 
emu/g, which is similar to the results obtained by Chithira et al. [38]. This weak magnetization can 
only be explained by defects that may be present in the sample. A recent work of Fedorov et al. [39] 

21
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
shows that O interstitials and Zn vacancies induce magnetic properties and generate a magnetic 
moment of 1.98 μB and 1.26 μB, respectively. Similar phenomena regarding the weak magnetization 
are also reported in BN with the presence of N defects [28].
By using density functional theory and for low doping concentration of nickel, it is found that the 
ferromagnetic state is the most stable, with a total magnetic moment per cell of around 4.00 µB 
(Table 2.1). It is also shown that the main contribution to the magnetic moment comes from Ni 
atoms (3.2 µB), and a minor contribution of 0.26 µB comes from the O atoms surrounding the Ni 
atoms. For the high concentration of Li (12.5%), the material becomes antiferromagnetic, which 
is due to the increase of Ni content that leads to a reduction of the exchange coupling interactions 
between Ni atoms.
To understand the origin of the magnetic properties of Ni doped ZnO, we have calculated the 
partial density of state for the different concentrations (Figure 2.3). For the low concentration 
(Figures 2.3a and 2.3b), the impurity band is located at the middle of the band gap for the spin-
down channel, which is formed essentially by 3d-Ni states. These findings indicate that Ni-doped 
TABLE 2.1
Bond Length [Å], the Different Energy between AFM and FM [meV], the Total Moment 
Magnetic [µB], and the Localized Moment Magnetic at Ni [µB] [20]
Doping Concentration
Configuration
d[Å]
ΔE[meV]
mtot [µB]
mNi[µB]
5.55% Ni:ZnO
Ni-O-Ni
3.16
19.92
3.90
3.22
8.33% Ni:ZnO
Ni-O-Ni
3.26
16.79
4.00
3.19
12.5% Ni:ZnO
Ni-O-Ni
2.93
–4.612
0.01
0.09
FIGURE 2.3  Partial densities of states of (a) 5.55% Ni-doped ZnO, (b) 8.33% Ni-doped ZnO, and (c) 12.5% 
Ni-doped ZnO [20].

22
Handbook of Semiconductors
ZnO with 5.55% and 8.33% concentration are half-metallic and ferromagnetic. For the 12.5% 
concentration (Figure 2.3c), the band impurity composed of 3d-Ni states is found to be shifted 
deeply inside the conduction band, and the Fermi level is found to cross an impurity level located 
above the valence band maximum, which is formed essentially by 2p-O states. The origin of 
this impurity band can only be explained by the distortion effect caused by the incorporation of 
Ni impurities. This indicates that the material obtained is an antiferromagnetic, non-degenerated 
semiconductor.
After getting the exchange interaction from the calculus made by the density functional theory, 
MCSs based on the heat bath algorithm are used to calculate the magnetization and the hysteresis 
loop. The phase transition from ferromagnetic to paramagnetic phases is second order, and the 
Curie temperatures are found to be 360K and 303K for 5.55% and 8.33% of Ni-doped ZnO respec­
tively. Concerning the hysteresis behavior, the area of the loop decreases with the increasing of the 
Ni concentration.
In other work, the effect of vanadium (V) concentration on the magnetic properties of ZnO 
by using the density functional theory and MCSs are investigated [37]. It is found that V-doped 
ZnO presents a Curie temperature above the room temperature for high doping concentration 
(Figure 2.4). To understand the origin of the ferromagnetism in these samples, the authors have 
calculated the total and partial density of the state of vanadium-doped ZnO (Figure 2.5). The 
results show the emergence of magnetic bands near the Fermi level due to hybridization between 
the V-3d and O-2p orbitals, indicating that the V impurities induce ferromagnetism in ZnO.
FIGURE 2.4  Total magnetization versus temperature of the Zn1−xVxO system for x = 0.12, 0.18, and 
0.25 [37].

23
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J.K. Furdyna, Diluted magnetic semiconductors, J. Appl. Phys. 64 (1988) R29–R64.
	
2.	 K. Sato, H. Katayama-Yoshida, Stabilization of ferromagnetic states by electron doping in Fe-, Co- or 
Ni-doped ZnO, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 40 (2001) L334.
	
3.	 Y. Jiang, W. Wang, C. Jing, C. Cao, J. Chu, Sol-gel synthesis, structure and magnetic properties of 
Mn-doped ZnO diluted magnetic semiconductors, Mater. Sci. Eng. B. 176 (2011) 1301–1306.
	
4.	 K.P. Sheng qiang Zhou, Q. Xu, G. Talut, M. Lorenz, W. Skorupa, M. Helm, J. Fassbender, M. 
Grundmann, H. Schmidt, Ferromagnetic transition metal implanted ZnO: A diluted magnetic semicon­
ductor?, Vacuum. 83 (2009) S13–S19.
	
5.	 D.A. Reddy, C. Liu, R.P. Vijayalakshmi, B.K. Reddy, Effect of Al doping on the structural, optical and 
photoluminescence properties of ZnS nanoparticles, J. Alloys Compd. 582 (2014) 257–264.
FIGURE 2.5  Total (right) and partial (left) density of states (DOS) of Zn1−xVxO; (a) for x = 0.12, (b) for x = 
0.18, and (c) for x = 0.25 [37].

24
Handbook of Semiconductors
	
6.	 A. Roychowdhury, S.P. Pati, S. Kumar, D. Das, Effects of magnetite nanoparticles on optical proper­
ties of zinc sulfide in fluorescent-magnetic Fe3O4/ZnS nanocomposites, Powder Technol. 254 (2014) 
583–590.
	
7.	 J. Cao, D. Han, B. Wang et al., Low temperature synthesis, photoluminescence, magnetic properties of 
the transition metal doped wurtzite ZnS nanowires, J. Solid State Chem. 200 (2013) 317–322.
	
8.	 N.S. Myoung, V.V. Fedorov, S.B. Mirov, L.E. Wenger, Temperature and concentration quenching of 
mid-IR photoluminescence in iron doped ZnSe and ZnS laser crystals, J. Lumin. 132 (2012) 600–606.
	
9.	 S.P. Nehra, M. Singh, Effect of vacuum annealing and hydrogenation on ZnSe/Mn multilayer diluted 
magnetic semiconductor thin films, Vacuum. 85 (2011) 719–724.
	 10.	 T. Li, W. Wang, Q. Shi, J. Zhang, L. Zhao, Transition from ferromagnetism to superparamagnetism in 
diluted magnetic Fe (II)-doped ZnSe microspheres, J. Magn. Magn. Mater. 543 (2022) 168625.
	 11.	 S.S. Ghosh, A. Sil, Effect of microwave processing on Mn doped ZnO diluted magnetic semiconductor 
characteristics, Mater. Today Commun. 32 (2022) 103941.
	 12.	 M.A. Mahmood, K. Althubeiti, S.S. Abdullaev, N. Rahman, M. Sohail, S. Iqbal, K. Safeen, A. Safeen, 
A. Khan, R. Khan, Diluted magnetic semiconductor behavior in Co- and Gd-Co-doped ZnO nanotubes 
for spintronic applications, J. Mater. Sci: Mater. Electron. 34 (2023) 1784.
	 13.	 T.A. Taha, E.M. Ahmed, A.I. El-Tantawy, A.A. Azab, Investigation of the iron doping on the struc­
tural, optical, and magnetic properties of Fe-doped ZnO nanoparticles synthesized by sol–gel method, 
J. Mater. Sci: Mater. Electron. 33 (2022) 6368–6379.
	 14.	 X. Duan, X. Chen, D. Wu, C. Lu, X. He, S. Ye, F. Lin, R. Wang, C. Wang, Te doping effects on the 
ferromagnetic performance of the MnGe/Si quantum dots grown by ion beam sputtering deposition, 
J. Alloys Compd. 34 (2023) 172047.
	 15.	 M.C. Haciismailoglu, M. Ahmetoglu, M. Haciismailoglu, M. Alper, T. Batmaz, Electrical and optical 
properties of Schottky diodes fabricated by electrodeposition of Ni films on n-GaAs, Sens. Actuator A 
Phy. 347 (2022) 113931.
	 16.	 M. Tariq, Y. Zaman, M. Shahzad, K. Ahmad, A.B. Siddique, H. Zaman, O-vacancies induced in co-
doped ZnO:(Cu, Fe) synthesized via hydrothermal method by pulsed magnetic field, Mater. Sci. Engin. 
B. 294 (2023) 116549.
	 17.	 A.C. Durst, R.N. Bhatt, P.A. Wolff, Bound magnetic polaron interactions in insulating doped diluted 
magnetic semiconductors, Phy. Rev. B. 65 (2002) 235205.
	 18.	 S. Nayak, P. Kumar, Review on structure, optical and magnetic properties of cobalt doped ZnO nanopar­
ticles, Mater. Today: Proceed. 01 (2023) 318.
	 19.	 B.L. Zhu, X.M. Cao, M. Xie, J. Wu, X.W. Shi, Effects of Cu doping and deposition atmosphere on struc­
tural, electrical, optical and magnetic properties of ZnO films, Physica B: Condensed Matter. 658 (2023) 
414844.
	 20.	 H. Ahmoum, G. Li, Y. Piao, S. Liu, R. Gebauer, M. Boughrara, M.S. Su’ait, M. Kerouad, Q. Wang, 
Ab-initio, Monte Carlo and experimental investigation on structural, electronic and magnetic properties 
of Zn1-xNixO nanoparticles prepared via sol-gel method, J. Alloys Compd. 854 (2021) 157142.
	 21.	 H.S. Lokesha, A.R.E. Prinsloo, P. Mohanty, C.J. Sheppard, Impact of Cr doping on the structure, optical 
and magnetic properties of nanocrystalline ZnO particles, J. Alloys Compd. (2023) 170815.
	 22.	 S. Narasimman, L. Balakrishnan, Z.C. Alex, Highly sensitive magnetic field sensor based on uniform 
core fiber using Mn doped ZnO nanorods as cladding, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 166 (2023) 
107732.
	 23.	 A. Kalita, Crystallite size controlled doping of transition metals (Co, Cu) in ZnO nanocrystals to inves­
tigate microstructural, optical, magnetic and photocatalytic properties. Curr. Appl. Phys. 52 (2023) 
65–79.
	 24.	 V. Shukla, M. Singh, Room temperature luminescence and ferromagnetism from transition metal ions: 
Mn-, Co- and Ni-doped ZnS nanoparticles, Mater. Sci. Engin. B. 280 (2022) 115685.
	 25.	 B. Poornaprakash, P. Puneetha, K. Subramanyam, M.W. Kwon, D.Y. Lee, M.S.P. Reddy, S. Sangaraju, 
B.A. Al-Asbahi, Y.L. Kim, Synthesis of diluted magnetic semiconductor ZnS: Cr and ZnS:(Cr+V) 
nanoparticles for spintronic applications, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 161 (2023) 107479.
	 26.	 N. Manivannan, B.C. Shekar, P. Matheswaran, M.M. Ibrahim, C.S. Kumaran, Induced ferromagnetic 
behavior of Cr doped ZnS nano particles, Mater. Today: Proceed. 48 (2022) 258–262.
	 27.	 Y. Grishchenko, J. Dawson, S. Ghosh, A. Gundimeda, B.F. Spiridon, N.L. Raveendran, R.A. Oliver, S. 
Kar-Narayan, Y. Calahorra, Magnetic properties of nickel electrodeposited on porous GaN substrates 
with infiltrated and laminated connectivity, J. Magnet. Magnet. Mater. 580 (2023) 170877.
	 28.	 H. Ahmoum, M. Boughrara, M. Kerouad, Electronic and magnetic properties of Al doped (w-BN) with 
intrinsic vacancy, Superlattices Microstruct. 127 (2019) 186–190.

25
Diluted Magnetic Semiconductors
	 29.	 H. Ahmoum, M. Boughrara, M.S. Su’ait, M. Kerouad, Electronic and magnetic properties of Mn-doped 
and (Mn,C)-codoped w-AlN with the presence of N vacancy, J. Supercond. Nov. Magnet. 32 (2019) 
3691.
	 30.	 C.O. López, DFT predictions of ferromagnetism in the AlC0.0625N0.9375 and AlC0.125N0.875 compounds, 
Results Phys. 5 (2015) 281–285.
	 31.	 K. Irikura, F. Marken, P.J. Fletcher, G. Kociok-Kohn, M.V. Boldrin Zanoni, Direct and indirect light 
energy harvesting with films of ambiently deposited ZnO nanoparticles, Appl. Surf. Sci. 527 (2020) 
146927.
	 32.	 J. Pachiyappan, N. Gnanasundaram, G.L. Rao, Preparation and characterization of ZnO, MgO and 
ZnO-MgO hybrid nanomaterials using green chemistry approach, Results Mater. 7 (2020) 100104.
	 33.	 G. Li, Y. Gao, S. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Liu, Q. Wang, Microstructural evolution of the oxidized ZnO: Cu 
films tuned by high magnetic field, J. Alloys Compd. 753 (2018) 673–678.
	 34.	 Y. Peng, M. Que, H.E. Lee, R. Bao, X. Wang, J. Lu, Z. Yuan, X. Li, J. Tao, J. Sun, J. Zhai, K.J. Lee, C. 
Pan, Achieving high-resolution pressure mapping via flexible GaN/ZnO nanowire LEDs array by piezo-
phototronic effect, nanomater, Energy. 58 (2019) 633–640.
	 35.	 Y. Zhang, G. Zhai, L. Gao, Q. Chen, J. Ren, J. Yu, Y. Yang, Y. Hao, X. Liu, B. Xu, Y. Wu, Improving 
performance of perovskite solar cells based on ZnO nanorods via rod-length control and sulfidation 
treatment, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process. 117 (2020) 105205.
	 36.	 M. Zheng, P. Gui, X. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Wan, H. Zhang, G. Fang, H. Wu, Q. Lin, C. Liu, ZnO ultraviolet 
photodetectors with an extremely high detectivity and short response time, Appl. Surf. Sci. 481 (2019) 
437–442.
	 37.	 A. Ait M’hid, M. Boughrara, M. Kerouad, Ab-initio and Monte Carlo studies of the structural, elec­
tronic and magnetic properties of V-doped ZnO compound, Physica B: Condensed Matter. 654 (2023) 
414717.
	 38.	 P.R. Chithira, T.T. John, Defect and dopant induced room temperature ferromagnetism in Ni doped ZnO 
nanoparticles, J. Alloys Compd. 766 (2018) 572–583.
	 39.	 A.S. Fedorov, M.A. Visotin, A.S. Kholtobina, A.A. Kuzubov, N.S. Mikhaleva, H.S. Hsu, Investigation 
of intrinsic defect magnetic properties in wurtzite ZnO materials, J. Magn. Magn Mater. 440 (2017) 5–9.

26
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-3
Types and Properties 
of Semiconductors
Ajay Lathe and Anil M. Palve
3.1  INTRODUCTION
Semiconductors have a rich history that traces back to the invention of the rectifier in 1874. 
However, it wasn’t until the late 1940s that groundbreaking advancements in semiconductor tech­
nology occurred [1]. In 1947, Bell Laboratories in the United States saw the point-contact transistor 
introduction by John Bardeen and Walter Brattain; then in in 1948, William Shockley’s develop­
ment of the junction transistor [2]. These pivotal inventions marked the onset of the transistor era. 
Before the transistor’s emergence, computing technology relied heavily on vacuum tubes. In 1946, 
the University of Pennsylvania constructed a computer using vacuum tubes, an enormous machine 
that consumed required electricity and emitted substantial heat. But this landscape began to change 
dramatically with the introduction of the innovative transistor calculator, signifying a turning point 
in computing technology. In 1956, the collective efforts of Shockley, Bardeen, and Brattain were 
rewarded with the Nobel Prize in Physics, recognizing their pioneering contributions to semicon­
ductor research and the creation of the transistor [3].
Following the transistor’s inception, the semiconductor industry embarked on a rapid expansion. 
By 1957, the industry had already exceeded $100 million. A pivotal moment arrived in 1959 when 
Jack Kilby of Texas Instruments and Robert Noyce of Fairchild Semiconductor in the United States 
independently invented the bipolar integrated circuit (IC), marking the dawn of the IC era. These 
ICs, known for their compact size and lightweight nature, found widespread applications across 
various electronic devices [4]. In 1967, Texas Instruments achieved a significant milestone by devel­
oping the electronic desktop calculator, powered by IC technology. Meanwhile, in Japan, electronic 
equipment manufacturers engaged in a fierce competition known as the “calculator wars,” continu­
ously releasing calculators through the late 1970s. As IC integration continued to advance, the era 
of large-scale integrated circuits (LSIs) emerged, further expanding the horizons of semiconductor 
technology. Progress in the following decades led to the development of very large-scale integrated 
circuits (VLSIs) in the 1980s, housing anywhere from 100,000 to 10 million electronic compo­
nents per chip [5, 6]. The subsequent decade witnessed the creation of ultra-large-scale integrated 
circuits (ULSIs), featuring more than 10 million electronic components per chip. In the 2000s, the 
production of system LSIs, multifunctional chips integrating diverse capabilities into a single unit, 
became widespread. As ICs evolved to offer heightened performance and multifaceted functions, 
their applications proliferated, making semiconductors ubiquitous in our society, playing a vital role 
in supporting our daily lives across various domains [7].
Semiconductors, often overlooked but integral to modern technology, quietly power the digital 
age, permeating every aspect of our lives. These unassuming materials, situated between conduc­
tors like metals and insulators like rubber, hold a distinctive place in material sciences and elec­
tronics. In this introduction, we embark on a journey to uncover the realm of semiconductors, 
beginning with their definition and tracing their remarkable historical evolution. We emphasize 
the importance of understanding the diverse types and properties of semiconductors, laying the 
foundation for comprehensive exploration. Semiconductors, at their core, are materials that occupy 
a captivating middle ground in terms of electrical conductivity. Unlike conductors such as copper 
or aluminum, which facilitate the unimpeded flow of electrical current, or insulators like rubber or 
3

27
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
wood, which staunchly resist its passage, semiconductors possess the extraordinary ability to finely 
modulate their electrical conductivity. This intrinsic trait renders them indispensable in our modern 
electronic landscape [6]. Semiconductors, including silicon nanowire, gallium nitride, carbon nano­
tubes, quantum dot (QD), indium arsenide, and organic semiconductor material, exhibit distinctive 
electrical behavior due to their atomic and electronic structures. Within these materials, electrons 
can precisely traverse a critical energy gap, known as the band gap, enabling controlled electrical 
conduction. This property is fundamental to their versatility, allowing them to function as switches, 
amplifiers, and detectors in various electronic devices [1]. The summary of a variety of semiconduc­
tor materials used to date is tabulated in Table 3.1.
Semiconductor technology, driven by research in materials like carbon nanotubes, QDs, and 
organic semiconductor materials, has continually evolved. This evolution, exemplified by the inte­
gration of nanoscale transistors and advanced fabrication techniques, has led to smaller, faster, and 
more efficient devices. These innovations have revolutionized communication, computation, and 
interaction with the world. Semiconductors remain at the forefront of scientific and technological 
progress, opening new frontiers in an era of limitless possibilities [8]. In today’s world, semicon­
ductors are integral to nearly every aspect of our daily lives, from smartphones and computers to 
renewable energy systems and medical devices. Understanding their types and properties is not 
merely an academic exercise but a fundamental knowledge that underpins the design, development, 
TABLE 3.1
Semiconductor Materials
General Classification
Semiconductor Materials
Symbol
Name
1. Elemental
Si
Silicon
Ge
Germanium
2. Compounds
SiC
Silicon carbide
AlP
Aluminum phosphide
AlAs
Aluminum arsenide
AlSb
Aluminum antimonide
GaN
Gallium nitride
GaP
Gallium phosphide
GaAs
Gallium arsenide
GaSb
Gallium antimonide
InP
Indium phosphide
InAs
Indium arsenide
InSb
Indium antimonide
ZnO
Zinc oxide
ZnS
Zinc sulfide
ZnSe
Zinc selenide
ZnTe
Zinc telluride
CdS
Cadmium sulfide
CdSe
Cadmium selenide
CdTe
Cadmium telluride
HgS
Mercury sulfide
PbS
Lead sulfide
PbSe
Lead selenide
PbTe
Lead telluride

28
Handbook of Semiconductors
and operation of the technology that defines our world. Semiconductor materials and their diverse 
properties serve as the bedrock of innovation and progress. They are the foundation upon which 
the digital revolution stands, and their continued evolution promises to unlock new frontiers in 
electronics, energy, and beyond. Profoundly grasping the types and properties of semiconductors 
equips engineers, scientists, and innovators with the tools to shape the future. It is a journey not 
only of historical significance, but one teeming with boundless potential [9, 10]. The assembly and 
important aspects of QD film as building blocks are shown in Figure 3.1.
3.2  SEMICONDUCTOR FUNDAMENTALS: UNVEILING 
ATOMIC STRUCTURE AND BAND THEORY
Semiconductors, those unassuming materials that bridge the gap between conductors and insula­
tors, are the backbone of modern electronics and technology. To truly grasp their significance and 
versatility, we must embark on a journey into the fundamental principles that govern their behav­
ior. A hydrothermal method of synthesis was used for WO3 nanoparticles and magnesium doped 
WO3 nanoparticles wherein the presence of magnesium dopant slightly increased the d-spacing 
(0.0069 nm) in WO3 nanoparticles [12]. The conduction band electrons are quite easily excited to 
valence band by absorption of natural visible light energy by CdS nanowires [13]. Similarly, the CdS 
nanoparticles and their binary and ternary composites were utilized for ultrafast photoreduction of 
hexavalent chromium, Cr(VI) ions in solution [14]. In this section, we delve into the semiconductor 
fundamentals, peeling back the layers of atomic structure, energy bands, valence and conduction 
bands, and the all-important band gap. The n-type memory device (a-b) tunneling of an electron and 
(c-d) band-to-band tunneling for an electron are shown in Figure 3.2.
3.2.1  Atomic Structure and Semiconductor Crystals
At the heart of semiconductor behavior lies the arrangement of atoms within their crystalline struc­
ture. Semiconductors are typically crystalline in nature, meaning their atoms are arranged in a 
highly ordered, repetitive pattern. The most prevalent semiconductor materials, such as silicon (Si) 
and germanium (Ge), form crystalline lattices composed of covalently bonded atoms. In these lat­
tices, each atom shares electrons with its neighboring atoms, creating a stable structure. However, 
this orderly arrangement also sets the stage for the unique electrical properties of semiconductors. 
When external influences, such as heat or light, are introduced, they can disrupt the balance of 
electrons within the crystal lattice, leading to changes in electrical conductivity [15]. The hexagonal 
crystallized (002) ZnO layers deposited on crystalline, mesoporous, and nanoporous silicon by spin 
FIGURE 3.1  Schematic illustrations describing the assembly and important aspects of quantum dot film as 
the building blocks. (Reproduced with permission from [11]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.)

29
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
coating technique can used to study atomic structure of the semiconductor. The low damping factor 
value defines the crystallinity nature. The spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) was found to be 29 meV 
for ZnO layer composites [16]. The presence of oxygen in solid silicon forms Si-O-Si interstitial 
bonding. The bivalent nature and the small size have higher solubility than nitrogen and carbon due 
to an anomalous distribution coefficient [17].
3.2.2  Energy Bands and the Electron Configuration
To comprehend the electrical behavior of semiconductors, imagine a range of energy levels in which 
electrons are permitted to exist within a semiconductor. This range, known as the energy band, can 
be subdivided into two primary regions: the valence band and the conduction band. The relation 
between electron energies and optical transitions is tabulated in Table 3.2. The reflectance data is in 
the range of photon energies between 1.5 eV to 25 eV for Si, Ge, GaP, GaAs, InAs, and InSb [18].
FIGURE 3.2  n-type memory device (a–b) tunneling of an electron and (c–d) band-to-band tunneling for an 
electron. (Reproduced with permission from [11]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.)
TABLE 3.2
Relation between Electron Energies and 
Optical Transitions
Energy of the Electrons
Optical Transitions
High → Low
Emission
Low → High
Absorption

30
Handbook of Semiconductors
3.2.2.1  Valence Band
The valence band is the lower-energy region of the energy band. Electrons in this band are 
present with their parent atoms tightly bound, and they contribute to the overall stability of 
the crystal structure. In this state, electrons are restricted to move and contribute to electrical 
conduction. A schematic illustration of excitation and valence to conduction band electron 
relaxation is shown in Figure 3.3.
3.2.2.2  Conduction Band
Above the valence band lies the conduction band, an energy level where electrons have mobility 
throughout the crystal lattice. Electrons in the conduction band carry an electric current, making 
CB essential for electrical conductivity.
3.3  TYPES AND PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTOR
The key to understanding semiconductor behavior lies in the energy gap that splits the valence and 
conduction band—the band gap. The nanocomposite device of a hetero p-n CuO-ZnO acts as a 
photo-generated electron reservoir. The use of a wide band gap ZnO nanorod semiconductor along 
with a narrow band gap CuO reduces photogenerated electron-hole pairs to combine. The rightly 
engineered band gap of nanocomposites can enhance the semiconductor activity for a variety of 
purposes, for instance, improved visible light photo-reduction of Cr(VI) capacity [19]. The energy 
gap represents an impassable barrier for electrons in their natural state. Electrons within the valence 
band are forbidden from entering the conduction band unless they acquire sufficient energy to over­
come this gap. This band gap property serves as the linchpin of semiconductor functionality. It is the 
foundation upon which semiconductors modulate their electrical conductivity in response to exter­
nal stimuli [20, 21]. When electrons gain energy, they can jump across the band gap into the conduc­
tion band, creating charge carriers that contribute to electrical current. The use of multi-lanthanoid 
equiatomic oxide with Gd0.2La0.2Ce0.2Hf0.2Zr0.2O2 and Gd0.2La0.2Y0.2Hf0.2Zr0.2O2 compositions were 
utilized efficiently for complete photoreduction of hexavalent chromium due to their distinct band 
gap values [22]. Conversely, without the necessary energy, electrons remain confined to the valence 
band, rendering the material an insulator.
3.3.1  Intrinsic Semiconductors
3.3.1.1  Introduction of Intrinsic Semiconductors
Intrinsic semiconductors are those materials that inherently possess semiconductor properties with­
out the need for intentional doping or modification. Silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge) are prime 
FIGURE 3.3  Schematic illustration of excitation and valence to conduction band electron relaxation.

31
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
examples of intrinsic semiconductors. These materials have a well-defined band gap, allowing them 
to conduct electricity under specific conditions [17, 23].
3.3.1.2  The Properties and Characteristics
In the fascinating world of semiconductors, intrinsic materials stand as fundamental pillars. These 
semiconductors, such as silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge), possess intrinsic properties that allow them 
to conduct electricity under specific conditions (Figure 3.5). In this exploration, we delve deep into 
the properties and characteristics of intrinsic semiconductors, shedding light on their unique behavior, 
intrinsic carrier concentration, and their intriguing temperature-dependent conductivity (Figure 3.4).
3.3.1.3  Properties and Characteristics of Intrinsic Semiconductors
Intrinsic semiconductors are materials that inherently possess semiconductor properties without 
any deliberate doping or modification. Silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge) are exemplary intrinsic 
semiconductors, and they have played pivotal roles in the advancement of electronics. The proper­
ties and characteristics that define intrinsic semiconductors include the following.
3.3.1.3.1  Band gap
One of the defining features of intrinsic semiconductors is their well-defined band gap. For silicon, 
this band gap is approximately 1.1 electron volts (eV), while for germanium, it is approximately 
0.67 eV. This energy gap dictates the conditions under which these materials can conduct electricity. 
A technique for transforming infrared light into more intense visible light, photochemical upcon­
version has potential uses in photovoltaics, photocatalysis, biological imaging, and drug delivery. 
By employing sensitizers made of nanocrystal PbS semiconductors, a composition for upconversion 
absorbs photons below silicon’s band gap, populating triplet energy states below oxygen singlet 
states. The energy required for visible spectrum luminescence of the triplet-state chromophoric 
violanthrone [25] is provided by two singlet oxygen molecules. Conversely, the utilization of bulk 
germanium with its indirect band gap (0.67 eV) poses challenges due to its suboptimal optical 
properties including photoluminescence. Overcoming this longstanding obstacle to germanium’s 
application in optoelectronics remains elusive. Potential solutions include synthesizing ultrathin 
2-D layers of germanium on silicon-based substrates or inducing significant structural modifica­
tions in the crystal lattice [26].
FIGURE 3.4  A diagram showing the amount of trap states and the trap state energies. (Reproduced with 
permission from [24]. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.)

32
Handbook of Semiconductors
3.3.1.3.2  Limited Conductivity
Intrinsic semiconductors exhibit limited electrical conductivity at room temperature. Most of the 
electrons reside in the valence band, tightly constrained to their parent atoms. Only a small fraction 
of electrons possesses sufficient energy to cross the band gap and enter the conduction band, creat­
ing charge carriers that contribute to an electrical current. This limited conductivity is a crucial 
characteristic, allowing precise control of electrical behavior [27, 28].
3.3.1.3.3  Temperature Sensitivity
The electrical conductivity of intrinsic semiconductors is highly temperature-dependent. As tem­
perature increases, more electrons acquire the energy needed to cross the band gap, leading to 
increased electrical conductivity. Conversely, at lower temperatures, fewer electrons can bridge 
the gap, resulting in reduced conductivity. This temperature sensitivity is a vital property that is 
exploited in various semiconductor devices. Silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge) are prime examples 
and are essential intrinsic semiconductors, each with its own set of properties and applications. 
1.	Silicon (Si): This is the most widely used semiconductor material, forming the backbone 
of modern electronics. Silicon’s abundance and compatibility with existing manufacturing 
processes have propelled it to the forefront of the semiconductor industry. It serves as the 
foundation for microprocessors, memory devices, and a host of integrated circuits that 
power computers, smartphones, and countless electronic gadgets.
2.	Germanium (Ge): This was one of the first materials to exhibit semiconductor behavior, 
which led to development of transistors. It has a narrower band gap of approximately 
0.67 eV, which makes it less efficient for certain high-speed applications compared to 
silicon. However, germanium remains important in niche applications such as infrared 
detectors and some high-frequency devices [29].
3.3.1.3.4  Intrinsic Carrier Concentration
Intrinsic semiconductors have an inherent concentration of charge carriers—electrons and 
holes—that is determined by their temperature and the band gap. At absolute zero tempera­
ture (0K), the number of charge carriers is minimal, as very few electrons possess the energy 
to overcome the band gap. As temperature increases, the intrinsic carrier concentration also 
increases exponentially, following a mathematical relationship described by the intrinsic car­
rier concentration equation [30].
3.3.2  Extrinsic Semiconductors
Beyond intrinsic materials, researchers and engineers have devised a method to enhance the electri­
cal characteristics of semiconductors through a process known as doping. Extrinsic semiconductors 
involve the intentional introduction of controlled amounts of specific impurities into the crystalline 
lattice structure of a semiconductor material. This strategic introduction of impurities alters the 
magnitude of charge carriers in the matter, influencing its electrical conductivity. Doping gives 
rise to two primary categories of extrinsic semiconductors: n-type and p-type. n-type semicon­
ductors involve the deliberate inclusion of electron-rich impurities, such as phosphorus or arsenic 
[31]. This process results in an abundance of liberated electrons, thereby augmenting the mate­
rial’s electron conductivity. On the other hand, p-type semiconductors entail the incorporation of 
electron-deficient impurities, like boron or aluminum. This yields an excess of “holes,” or positively 
charged carriers, facilitating efficient hole conduction within the material [32]. The semiconductor 
fundamentals encompass the intricate interplay between atomic structure, energy bands, and the 
all-important band gap. These principles lay the groundwork for understanding the behavior of 
semiconductors, which serves as the cornerstone of modern technology (Figure 3.5) [33].

33
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
FIGURE 3.5  Plots of Ct/C0 vs. irradiation time ln (C0/Ct) vs. irradiation time. The recyclability test are 
shown for the nanocomposites (a–f). (Reproduced with permission from [14]. Copyright 2021 Royal Society 
of Chemistry.)

34
Handbook of Semiconductors
3.3.2.1  The Impact of Dopants on Electrical Conductivity
In the realm of semiconductor technology, extrinsic semiconductors, also known as doped semicon­
ductors, play a pivotal job in tailoring the electrical behavior of materials to meet specific application 
requirements. In this exploration, we delve into the world of extrinsic semiconductors, introducing 
the concept of doping, elucidating the distinctions between n-type and p-type semiconductors, and 
shedding light on critical role that dopants play in influencing electrical conductivity. Extrinsic 
semiconductor materials were intentionally modified with precise impurities to enhance their elec­
trical behavior. These impurities, known as dopants, are carefully introduced into the crystalline 
lattice structure of the semiconductor material. The strategic incorporation of dopants allows for 
precise control over the concentration and mobility of charge carriers within the material, leading 
to tailored electrical behavior [33].
3.3.2.2  N-type and P-type Semiconductors
3.3.2.2.1  N-type Semiconductors
The deliberate inclusion of electron-rich dopants such as phosphorus (P) or arsenic (As) in n-type 
semiconductors introduces additional free electrons into the crystal lattice. These extra electrons 
are the common charge carriers, contributing to electron conductivity within the material. As a 
result, n-type semiconductors exhibit enhanced electron mobility and conductivity compared to 
their intrinsic counterparts [31, 34].
3.3.2.2.2  P-type Semiconductors
Conversely, p-type semiconductors involve the incorporation of electron-deficient dopants, such as 
boron (B) or aluminum (Al). This introduces “holes” or positively charged carriers into the crystal 
lattice, which facilitate hole conduction. In p-type semiconductors, holes are the common charge 
carriers, leading to improved hole mobility and conductivity. p-type materials exhibit characteris­
tics that are complementary to those of n-type semiconductors [35–37].
3.3.2.3  Role of Dopants and Their Impact on Electrical Conductivity
The choice of dopants and their concentration is a critical factor in shaping the electrical proper­
ties of extrinsic semiconductors. Dopants are strategically selected based on their electron donor or 
acceptor characteristics, depending on whether n-type or p-type behavior is desired.
3.3.2.3.1  Electron Donor Dopants
Dopants with extra electrons in their outer atomic shells, such as phosphorus or arsenic, act as 
electron donors when introduced into the crystal lattice. These extra electrons are mobile in the 
conduction band, thus increasing the electron volume and thereby enhancing conductivity in n-type 
semiconductors [38].
3.3.2.3.2  Electron Acceptor Dopants
Dopants with fewer electrons in their outer atomic shells, such as boron or aluminum, act as electron 
acceptors when added to the crystal lattice. They create “holes” in the valence band, where electrons 
are absent due to electron deficiency of the dopant. These holes facilitate hole conduction, increasing 
hole mobility and conductivity in p-type semiconductors. The net result of doping is the generation 
of charge carriers—either mobile electrons in n-type or holes in p-type — that significantly contrib­
ute to electrical current flow. By controlling the type and concentration of dopants, engineers and 
scientists can finely tune the electrical behavior of extrinsic semiconductors to suit a wide range of 
applications. Extrinsic semiconductors or doped semiconductors are integral to the world of semi­
conductor technology, enabling precise control over electrical conductivity and charge carrier behav­
ior. n-type and p-type semiconductors, each with their distinct dopants and charge carriers, offer 
versatile solutions for a multitude of electronic and semiconductor device applications (Figure 3.6).

35
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
3.4  BAND GAP: MODULATION OF CONDUCTIVITY
The band gap property is the requirement of semiconductor functionality, influencing how these 
materials respond to external factors and stimuli. The band gap dictates the conditions under which 
a semiconductor can conduct electricity. Electrons within the valence band are effectively trapped 
unless they acquire sufficient energy to bridge the gap and enter the conduction band. This inherent 
property allows for precise control of electrical conductivity, making semiconductors exceptionally 
versatile. The ability of semiconductors to modulate their electrical conductivity in response to 
external factors is a direct consequence of the band gap. When subjected to alterations in tempera­
ture, exposure to light, or variation in voltage, electrons can gain or lose energy, thereby changing 
their status from bound to mobile and vice versa.
3.4.1  Effects of Temperature Variations on the Band Gap
Temperature has a significant part in influencing the band gap and, consequently, the electrical 
behavior of semiconductors. As temperature increases, the thermal energy provided to electrons 
FIGURE 3.6  A schematic photoreduction mechanism of n-type (AgIn)xZn2(1-x)S2 and p-type Ag2S nanocompos­
ite semiconductor material. (Reproduced with permission from [35]. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.)

36
Handbook of Semiconductors
allows an increasing number of them to acquire the energy needed to cross the band gap into the 
conduction band. This phenomenon leads to enhanced electrical conductivity in semiconductors at 
higher temperatures. Conversely, at lower temperatures, fewer electrons can bridge the gap, result­
ing in reduced conductivity. Temperature sensitivity is a vital characteristic that is exploited in 
semiconductor device design, especially in temperature sensors and thermistors [39].
3.4.2  Effects of Exposure to Light on the Band Gap
Another intriguing aspect of the band gap is its interaction with light. When photons of energy equal 
to or larger than the energy band gap strike a semiconductor, they can excite electrons from the 
valence to the conduction band. This phenomenon, called the photovoltaic effect, is the foundation 
of light-sensitive semiconductor devices such as photodiodes and solar cells. Semiconductors with 
wider band gaps are more suitable for capturing higher-energy photons, such as those from sunlight, 
making them ideal for efficient energy conversion [40].
3.4.3  Effects of Voltage Modulations on the Band Gap
Applying an external voltage across a semiconductor material can also impact the band gap. In cer­
tain devices, such as laser diodes and light-emitting diodes (LEDs), the application of voltage leads 
to electron-hole recombination in the conduction and valence bands. This recombination releases 
energy in the form of photons, resulting in light emission. Thus, voltage manipulation can be used 
to control the light output in these devices, making them crucial for optical communication and 
displays. The band gap phenomenon serves as the cornerstone of semiconductor behavior, allowing 
these materials to finely tune their electrical conductivity in response to external influences [41].
3.4.4  Effect of Ionizing Radiation on Semiconductors
When subjected to ionizing radiation, electrons in a semiconductor may be elevated to the conduc­
tion band, provided they acquire energy greater than the band gap (Egap). Typically, heavy-charged 
particles primarily transfer energy through two mechanisms: (1) cxcitation, where the energy is 
imparted to the atom by the charged particle, which then causes the electrons to make a transition 
to higher energy levels; and (2) ionization, where the charged particle possesses sufficient energy 
to eject an electron from the atom, resulting in formation of ion pairs in the material [42]. Stopping 
power is a parameter that conveniently characterizes the ionization properties of medium, with an 
expression for specific energy loss described by the Bethe formula. Heavy particles like alpha (α) 
have high stopping powers in most materials, leading to short travel distances [43]. An additional 
interaction where beta particles may release energy via a radiative course is known as brems­
strahlung, where the charged particle emits energy as it accelerates or decelerates. This radiation 
is referred to as braking radiation. The photons, including X-rays and gamma rays, ionize an atom 
directly, although they are electrically neutral, primarily through the Compton scattering and pho­
toelectric effect. Three crucial mechanisms are: Compton scattering, photoelectric effect, and pair 
production. Ionizing radiation leaves some of its energy behind in each of these situations. As an 
example, a silicon detector with a thickness of around 300 µm will generate approximately 3.2 × 
104 pairs of electron holes when a minimum ionizing particle (MIP) goes via it perpendicularly. 
This count is relatively small in comparison with the entirety of mobile transporters in an intrinsic 
semiconductor with the same surface area and thickness [44–46]. For instance, at 20°C, pure ger­
manium contains 1.26 × 1021 atoms and consistently generates free electrons (7.5 × 1011) and holes 
(7.5 × 1011) due to thermal energy. Consequently, the signal-to-noise ratio (S/N) is insignificant. 
Introducing a minute amount (0.001%) of arsenic adds extra free electrons (1015) within the same 
capacity, increasing conductivity by 10,000 folds. In doped materials, the S/N ratio remains low. 
One approach to addressing this is by cooling the semiconductor. An enhancement can be realized 

37
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
by employing reverse-bias to p-n junction, a fundamental principle in maximum silicon radiation 
sensors. In this setup, to the p-side, a negative voltage, and to the n-side, a positive voltage, are 
applied. This arrangement causes holes in the p-region to migrate away from the junction toward 
p-contact, while electrons move alike toward the n-contact, effectively depleting the detector of 
free carriers.
3.5  CONCLUSION
In our comprehensive exploration of semiconductor types and properties, we have embarked on a 
fascinating journey through the heart of modern technology. From the inception of semiconductors 
to their pivotal role in today’s world, we have uncovered a multitude of insights that underscore the 
enduring significance of understanding these remarkable materials. As we conclude our expedition, 
let us summarize the key takeaways, recognize the profound and lasting importance of semiconduc­
tor knowledge, and glimpse the boundless possibilities that lie ahead in semiconductor technology. 
(1) Semiconductor fundamentals: We have unraveled the fundamental concepts underpinning semi­
conductors, delving into atomic structures, energy bands, conduction and valence bands, and the 
critical role of the band gap in regulating electrical behavior. These foundational principles are the 
building blocks of semiconductor science. (2) Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors: Our explora­
tion led us to intrinsic semiconductors like silicon (Si) and germanium (Ge), where we discovered 
their unique properties and the temperature-dependent behavior of intrinsic carrier concentration. 
We also explored extrinsic semiconductors, shaped by the art of doping to enhance electrical char­
acteristics. (3) The band gap phenomenon: We delved into the band gap, a defining feature that 
sets semiconductors apart. Its role in governing electrical conductivity and its responsiveness to 
external factors like temperature, light, and voltage were thoroughly examined. (4) Excitation by 
ionizing radiation: We explored how semiconductors respond to ionizing radiation, shedding light 
on processes such as excitation and ionization. By optimizing signal detection while minimizing 
noise, we unveiled the practical implications of these interactions. (5) Significance: Understanding 
semiconductor types and properties is not an academic pursuit; it is a linchpin of contemporary 
technological advancement. Semiconductors underpin the digital age, powering our computers, 
smartphones, and an ever-expanding array of electronic devices. Their significance extends beyond 
electronics, permeating renewable energy systems, medical devices, and communication networks. 
Semiconductors are the invisible architects of modern society. Semiconductors enable revolutions 
in computing and information technology. They drive miniaturization, boosting performance and 
energy efficiency. As we step into the era of quantum computing, artificial intelligence, and the 
Internet of Things (IoT), semiconductors will continue to steer innovation, reshaping our world in 
ways we can scarcely imagine.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Al-Ahmadi N A 2020 Metal oxide semiconductor-based Schottky diodes: A review of recent advances 
Mater. Res. Express 7 032001
	
2.	 Andrews E G 1963 Telephone switching and the early Bell Laboratories computers Bell Syst. Tech. J 42 
341–53
	
3.	 Huff H R 2001 John Bardeen and transistor physics AIP Conference Proceedings vol 550 (AIP) pp 3–32
	
4.	 Khan H N, Hounshell D A and Fuchs E R H 2018 Science and research policy at the end of Moore’s law 
Nat. Electron 1 14–21
	
5.	 Brazier J and McMorrow K 2021 Instrumental: Collections from Science. Calculating and Computing, 
Chau Chak Wing Museum, The University of Sydney, 2021.
	
6.	 O’Regan G 2018 A Concise History of Computing. In World of Computing (Cham: Springer International 
Publishing) pp 29–74
	
7.	 Iwai H, Kakushima K and Wong H 2006 Challenges for future semiconductor manufacturing Int. J. 
High Speed Electron. Syst 16 43–81

38
Handbook of Semiconductors
	
8.	 Graham A P, Duesberg G S, Hoenlein W, Kreupl F, Liebau M, Martin R, Rajasekharan B, Pamler W, 
Seidel R, Steinhoegl W and Unger E 2005 How do carbon nanotubes fit into the semiconductor road­
map? Appl. Phys. A Mater. Sci. Process 80 1141–51
	
9.	 Lathe A and Palve A M 2023 A review: Engineered nanomaterials for photoreduction of Cr(VI) to 
Cr(III) J. Hazard. Mater. Adv 12 100333
	 10.	 Gupta R, Peveler W J, Lix K and Algar W R 2019 Comparison of semiconducting polymer dots and 
semiconductor quantum dots for smartphone-based fluorescence assays Anal. Chem. 91 10955–60
	 11.	 Lv Z, Wang Y, Chen J, Wang J, Zhou Y and Han S-T 2020 Semiconductor quantum dots for memories 
and neuromorphic computing systems Chem. Rev. 120 3941–4006
	 12.	 Thwala M M and Dlamini L N 2020 Photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI) using Mg-doped WO3 nanopar­
ticles Environ. Technol 41 2277–92
	 13.	 Ganesh R S, Durgadevi E, Navaneethan M, Sharma S K, Binitha H S, Ponnusamy S, Muthamizhchelvan 
C and Hayakawa Y 2017 Visible light induced photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue and rhoda­
mine B from the catalyst of CdS nanowire Chem. Phys. Lett. 684 126–34
	 14.	 Lathe A and Palve A M 2021 Reduced graphene oxide-decorated CdS/ZnO nanocomposites for 
photoreduction of hexavalent chromium and photodegradation of methylene blue Dalt. Trans 50 
14163–75
	 15.	 von Behren J, van Buuren T, Zacharias M, Chimowitz E H and Fauchet P M 1998 Quantum confinement 
in nanoscale silicon: The correlation of size with bandgap and luminescence Solid State Commun 105 
317–22
	 16.	 Bouzourâa M-B, Naciri A E, Moadhen A, Rinnert H, Guendouz M, Battie Y, Chaillou A, Zaïbi M-A 
and Oueslati M 2016 Effects of silicon porosity on physical properties of ZnO films Mater. Chem. Phys 
175 233–40
	 17.	 Ye H and Yu J 2014 Germanium epitaxy on silicon Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater 15 024601
	 18.	 Wilson N P, Lee K, Cenker J, Xie K, Dismukes A H, Telford E J, Fonseca J, Sivakumar S, Dean C, Cao 
T, Roy X, Xu X and Zhu X 2021 Interlayer electronic coupling on demand in a 2D magnetic semicon­
ductor Nat. Mater. 20 1657–62
	 19.	 Yu J, Zhuang S, Xu X, Zhu W, Feng B and Hu J 2015 Photogenerated electron reservoir in hetero-p–n 
CuO–ZnO nanocomposite device for visible-light-driven photocatalytic reduction of aqueous Cr(VI) 
J. Mater. Chem. A 3 1199–207
	 20.	 Lathe A, Ansari A, Badhe R, Palve A M and Garje S S 2021 Single-step production of a TiO 2 @MoS 
2 heterostructure and its applications as a supercapacitor electrode and photocatalyst for reduction of 
Cr(VI) to Cr(III) ACS Omega 6 13008–14
	 21.	 Gupta A, Sardana S, Dalal J, Lather S, Maan A S, Tripathi R, Punia R, Singh K and Ohlan A 2020 
Nanostructured polyaniline/graphene/Fe 2 O 3 composites hydrogel as a high-performance flexible 
supercapacitor electrode material ACS Appl. Energy Mater 3 6434–46
	 22.	 Anandkumar M, Lathe A, Palve A M and Deshpande A S 2021 Single-phase Gd0.2La0.2Ce0.2Hf0.2Zr0.2O2 
and Gd0.2La0.2Y0.2Hf0.2Zr0.2O2 nanoparticles as efficient photocatalysts for the reduction of Cr(VI) and 
degradation of methylene blue dye J. Alloys Compd 850 156716
	 23.	 Zhou W and Coleman J J 2016 Semiconductor quantum dots Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci 20 
352–60
	 24.	 Tan C-S, Lu M-Y, Peng W-H, Chen L-J and Huang M H 2020 Germanium possessing facet-specific trap 
states and carrier lifetimes J. Phys. Chem. C 124 13304–9
	 25.	 Gholizadeh E M, Prasad S K K, Teh Z L, Ishwara T, Norman S, Petty A J, Cole J H, Cheong S, Tilley 
R D, Anthony J E, Huang S and Schmidt T W 2020 Photochemical upconversion of near-infrared light 
from below the silicon bandgap Nat. Photonics 14 585–90
	 26.	 Liu Y, Yang D, Xu T, Shi Y, Song L and Yu Z-Z 2020 Continuous photocatalytic removal of chromium 
(VI) with structurally stable and porous Ag/Ag3PO4/reduced graphene oxide microspheres Chem. Eng. 
J 379 122200
	 27.	 Mitchell E W J and Sillars R W 1949 Observations of the electrical behaviour of silicon carbide contacts 
Proc. Phys. Soc. Sect. B 62 509–22
	 28.	 Anon 1948 Electronic applications of germanium Nature 162 982–3
	 29.	 Becker J A, Green C B and Pearson G L 1947 Properties and uses of thermistors-thermally sensitive 
resistors Bell Syst. Tech. J 26 170–212
	 30.	 Shockley W, Pearson G L and Haynes J R 1949 Hole injection in germanium-quantitative studies and 
filamentary transistors Bell Syst. Tech. J 28 344–66
	 31.	 Pon A, Bhattacharyya A and Rathinam R 2021 Recent developments in black phosphorous transistors: 
A review J. Electron. Mater 50 6020–36

39
Types and Properties of Semiconductors
	 32.	 Cai W, Mu X, Pan Y, Guo W, Wang J, Yuan B, Feng X, Tai Q and Hu Y 2018 Facile fabrication of 
organically modified boron nitride nanosheets and its effect on the thermal stability, flame retardant, 
and mechanical properties of thermoplastic polyurethane Polym. Adv. Technol 29 2545–52
	 33.	 Liu A, Phang S P and Macdonald D 2022 Gettering in silicon photovoltaics: A review Sol. Energy 
Mater. Sol. Cells 234 111447
	 34.	 Mauersberger T, Ibrahim I, Grube M, Heinzig A, Mikolajick T and Weber W M 2020 Size effect of 
electronic properties in highly arsenic-doped silicon nanowires Solid. State. Electron 168 107724
	 35.	 Abdullah H and Kuo D-H 2015 Facile synthesis of n-type (AgIn)xZn2(1– x)S2/p-type Ag2S nanocom­
posite for visible light photocatalytic reduction to detoxify hexavalent chromium ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 7 26941–51
	 36.	 Kozhakhmetov A, Stolz S, Tan A M Z, Pendurthi R, Bachu S, Turker F, Alem N, Kachian J, Das S, 
Hennig R G, Gröning O, Schuler B and Robinson J A 2021 Controllable p-type doping of 2D WSe2 via 
vanadium substitution Adv. Funct. Mater 31 2105252
	 37.	 Tsao J Y, Chowdhury S, Hollis M A, Jena D, Johnson N M, Jones K A, Kaplar R J, Rajan S, Van de 
Walle C G, Bellotti E, Chua C L, Collazo R, Coltrin M E, Cooper J A, Evans K R, Graham S, Grotjohn 
T A, Heller E R, Higashiwaki M, Islam M S, Juodawlkis P W, Khan M A, Koehler A D, Leach J H, 
Mishra U K, Nemanich R J, Pilawa-Podgurski R C N, Shealy J B, Sitar Z, Tadjer M J, Witulski A F, 
Wraback M and Simmons J A 2018 Ultrawide-bandgap semiconductors: Research opportunities and 
challenges Adv. Electron. Mater 4 1600501
	 38.	 Chaves A, Azadani J G, Alsalman H, da Costa D R, Frisenda R, Chaves A J, Song S H, Kim Y D, He D, 
Zhou J, Castellanos-Gomez A, Peeters F M, Liu Z, Hinkle C L, Oh S-H, Ye P D, Koester S J, Lee Y H, 
Avouris P, Wang X and Low T 2020 Bandgap engineering of two-dimensional semiconductor materials 
npj 2D Mater. Appl 4 29
	 39.	 Gunawan S D, Djunaidi M C and Haris A 2022 Variation of annealing temperature with excess of 
NaOH concentration on Ag2S synthesis from argentometry titration waste as NTC thermistor Mater. 
Today Proc 63 S385–90
	 40.	 Wagner E P 2016 Investigating bandgap energies, materials, and design of light-emitting diodes 
J. Chem. Educ 93 1289–98
	 41.	 Lashkov I, Krechan K, Ortstein K, Talnack F, Wang S-J, Mannsfeld S C B, Kleemann H and Leo K 2021 
Modulation doping for threshold voltage control in organic field-effect transistors ACS Appl. Mater. 
Interfaces 13 8664–71
	 42.	 Almora O, García-Batlle M and Garcia-Belmonte G 2019 Utilization of temperature-sweeping capaci­
tive techniques to evaluate band gap defect densities in photovoltaic perovskites J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 10 
3661–9
	 43.	 Blase X, Duchemin I, Jacquemin D and Loos P-F 2020 The Bethe-Salpeter equation formalism: From 
physics to chemistry J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 11 7371–82
	 44.	 Rogers F, Xiao M, Perez K M, Boggs S, Erjavec T, Fabris L, Fuke H, Hailey C J, Kozai M, Lowell A, 
Madden N, Manghisoni M, McBride S, Re V, Riceputi E, Saffold N and Shimizu Y 2019 Large-area 
Si(Li) detectors for X-ray spectrometry and particle tracking in the GAPS experiment J. Instrum 14 
P10009–P10009
	 45.	 Abubakr E, Ohmagari S, Zkria A, Ikenoue H and Yoshitake T 2022 Laser-induced novel ohmic con­
tact formation for effective charge collection in diamond detectors Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process 139 
106370
	 46.	 Tsai H, Ghosh D, Panaccione W, Su L-Y, Hou C-H, Wang L, Cao L R, Tretiak S and Nie W 2022 
Addressing the voltage induced instability problem of perovskite semiconductor detectors ACS Energy 
Lett 7 3871–9

40
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-4
Wide Band Gap 
Semiconductors
Preparation, Tunable Properties, 
and Applications
K. Ravichandran, S. Suvathi, P. Ravikumar, 
and R. Mohan
4.1  INTRODUCTION
Research in various areas of materials science throws light on the properties of materials under 
different conditions and leads to the development of new technologies for producing materials with 
tuned properties suitable for a wide range of applications. Materials scientists have established that 
the characteristics of several kinds of materials can be modified as required by appropriately chang­
ing the preparation methods, process parameters, and/or by adding other suitable materials (such as 
dopants/composite or alloy partners) to make them fit for the application of interest.
In recent decades, wide band gap semiconductors (WBSs), materials having band energy gaps 
greater than those of conventional semiconductors, have been increasingly used in various tech­
nological applications as their properties can be tuned desirably. For example,  tunable wide band 
gap semiconductors like zinc oxide (ZnO) and tin oxide (SnO2) are considered desirable candi­
dates in many fields/devices that include cost-effective solar cells, sensors, LEDs, super capacitors, 
photocatalytic and antibacterial systems, etc. The optical, electrical, structural, magnetic, thermal, 
mechanical, and photocatalysis characteristics of these materials can be tuned by adding compat­
ible dopants with optimum concentrations [1]. These wide band gap transparent conducting oxides 
have specific characteristics: a wide band gap ranging from 2.0 to 3.60 eV, abundance in nature, 
long shelf life, chemical stability, and non-toxicity, to name a few. The addition of transition metals 
in optimum proportion and the preparation of nanocomposites with compatible composite partners 
like carbonaceous materials can tune the band gap of the TCOs, making them photocatalysts under 
visible light.
4.2  TECHNOLOGICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF WBS MATERIALS
Wide band gap semiconducting materials are a class of materials that includes zinc oxide, tin oxide, 
cadmium sulfide, cadmium selenide, gallium selenide, copper oxide, zinc telluride, zinc sulfide, 
zinc selenide, gallium phosphide, aluminum arsenide, aluminum phosphide, and diamond. These 
wide band gap materials are widely used in various technological and environmental applications 
like solar cells [2, 3], photocatalysis [4], supercapacitors [5], opto-electronics [6], gas sensors [7], 
antibacterial systems [8], LEDs [9], fuel cells, spintronics, photonics, biomedical applications, bio­
imaging, biotags, giant magnetic resistance sensors, and rechargeable batteries. Certain representa­
tive WBS materials, methods that are commonly used for the preparation of these WBS materials, 
their tunable properties, and applications in which they are used owing to their tunable properties 
are depicted in Figure 4.1.
The band gaps of common WBS materials and their important applications as reported in the 
literature are presented in Table 4.1. As given in the table, the band gap of the WBS ranges from 
4

41
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
1.24 eV for copper oxide to 5.95 eV for boron nitride. This wide variation in band gap makes this 
class of materials fit for different applications. Moreover, this band gap can be varied suitably by 
changing the process parameters like dopant concentration and preparation methods, as presented 
in Table 4.2 for zinc oxide and Table 4.3 for cadmium sulfide.
4.3  ZINC OXIDE, TIN OXIDE, AND CADMIUM SULFIDE– 
CERTAIN REPRESENTATIVE WBS MATERIALS
Being one of the technologically important wide band gap semiconductors, ZnO offers  many 
advantages, which include low cost [10], abundancy, non-toxicity, superior durability, thermal 
and chemical stability, tunable surface morphology, and environmentally friendly features [11]. 
It can be used as a cost-effective sensor in industry for monitoring toxic gases. Due to the wider 
band gap of 3.37 eV, ZnO can act as an effective photocatalytic material only under UV irradia­
tion. However, its tunable band gap makes it a cost-effective alternative to titanium oxide (TiO2), 
which is a commercially common photocatalytic material. ZnO is used in sunscreen lotions, 
as it has UV blocking ability. When prepared in thin film form, ZnO exhibits good optical and 
electrical properties desirable for solar cell window layers [12]. When ZnO is prepared in nano-
structured forms, its surface morphology and surface-to-volume ratio can be tuned for a wide 
range of applications. Being a chemically inert antibacterial agent, it is used in food packaging 
[13]. In general, properties like resistivity, band gap, crystallite size, and surface morphology of 
ZnO prepared in thin films, nanomaterial, or other forms depend on the synthesis method and the 
process parameters employed.
FIGURE 4.1  Certain important wide band gap semiconductors, their preparation methods and applications.

42
Handbook of Semiconductors
TABLE 4.2
Preparation Methods and Tunable Properties of Zinc Oxide Nanomaterial
S. No.
Material
Methods
Crystallite Size Morphology
Band Gap Applications
Ref.
1.
ZnO
Green synthesis
28.12 nm
Hexagonal
3.01 eV
Photocatalysis
[30]
2.
ZnO
Hydrothermal
precipitation
24.70 nm
23.09 nm
Pseudospherical
Spherical
3.25 eV
Photocatalysis
[31]
3.
ZnO: Tb
Co-precipitation
18.06 nm
20.00 nm
Spherical
2.61 eV
Gas sensors
[32]
4.
ZnO: Co
Spray pyrolysis
19.20 nm
Packed and faded-like 
structure
3.22 eV
Gas sensors
[33]
5.
ZnO: Al
Sol-gel
Porous
3.40 eV
Perovskite solar cell
[34]
6.
ZnO: Ni
Chemical vapor 
deposition
32.90 nm
Nanorods
3.22 eV
Solar cells
[35]
7.
ZnO: Sn
Simplified
spray pyrolysis
26.68 nm
Hexagonal with 
micropore
3.23 eV
Antibacterial study
[36]
TABLE 4.1
Important Applications of Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
S. No.
Wide Band Gap 
Semiconductors
Band Gap (eV)
Applications
Reference
  1.
Zinc oxide
3.37
Solar cells
Gas sensors
UV light emitters
Photocatalysis
Luminescent materials
Heat mirrors and coatings
[14]
  2.
Tin oxide
3.60
Solar cell electrodes
Opto-electronics,
Light emitting diodes,
Flat panel displays and transparent electronics
[15]
  3.
Cadmium sulfide
2.42
Solar cells
[16]
  4.
Cadmium selenide
1.74
Supercapacitors
[17]
  5.
Gallium selenide
2.10
Photovoltaics
[18]
  6.
Copper oxide
1.24
Solar selective absorbers
[19]
  7.
Zinc telluride
2.26
Opto-electronics
[20]
  8.
Zinc sulfide
3.60
Gas sensors
Bio-sensors
Flat panel displays
[21]
  9.
Zinc selenide
2.82
Optical temperature sensors
[22]
10.
Gallium phosphide
2.24
Light emitting diodes
Gas captors and solar cells
[23]
11.
Gallium nitride
3.40
Photoelectric detectors
[24]
12.
Aluminum arsenide
2.12
Opto-electronics
[25]
13.
Aluminum phosphide
2.50
Gas sensors
[26]
14.
Boron nitride
5.95
Opto-electronic devices
[27]
15.
Silicon carbide
3.26
Photoelectronic devices
[28]
16.
Diamond
5.30
Bio-sensors
Solar cells
[29]

43
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
4.4  IMPORTANT PROPERTIES OF ZnO, SnO2, AND CdS
Generally, ZnO and CdS appear in one of the two crystal structures, viz. cubic (zinc blende) and hex­
agonal (wurtzite), whereas SnO2 has a tetragonal (rutile) structure (Figure 4.2). Some important physi­
cal, structural, electrical, and optical characteristics of ZnO, SnO2, and CdS are presented in Table 4.4.
TABLE 4.3
Preparation Methods and Tunable Properties of Cadmium Sulfide Nanomaterial
S. No.
Material
Methods
Crystallite Size
Morphology
Band Gap
Applications
Ref.
1.
CdS: Zn
Co-precipitation
44.00 nm
Nano-flacks
Supercapacitor
[37]
2.
CdS
Atomic layer deposition 
8.70 nm
Nanorods
1.93 eV
Dye-sensitized 
solar cells
[38]
3.
CdS
Biosynthesis 
4.00 nm
Spherical
3.31 eV
Photocatalysis
[39]
4.
CdS
SILAR
CBD
11.90 nm
13.29 nm
Spherical
2.35 eV 
2.46 eV
Photovoltaic
[40]
FIGURE 4.2  Crystal structure of (a) ZnO, (b) SnO2, and (c) CdS.

44
Handbook of Semiconductors
4.5  PREPARATION OF WIDE BAND GAP SEMICONDUCTORS
Wide band gap semiconductors can be prepared using various physical, chemical, and green synthe­
sis methods as depicted in Figure 4.3. Sputtering, thermal evaporation, lithography, and ball-milling 
are some of the common physical methods used for the preparation of wide band gap semiconduc­
tors. Similarly, chemical methods like chemical bath deposition, spray pyrolysis, and successive 
ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) are adopted for the preparation of WBS. Nowadays, 
the green synthesis route greatly attracts the attention of materials scientists, as it does not require 
chemicals that are hazardous to the environment and living beings. In green synthesis, extracts of 
TABLE 4.4
Properties of Three Important WBS Materials, viz. ZnO, SnO2, 
and CdS
Property
Zinc Oxide
Tin Oxide
Cadmium Sulfide
Molecular formula
ZnO
SnO2
CdS
Band gap
3.37 eV
3.80 eV
2.42 eV
Space group
P63mc
P42/mnm
P63/mc
Volume of unit cell
47.62 (Å)3
75.73 (Å)3
104.86 (Å)3
Conductivity
n-type
n-type
n-type
Melting point
1974oC
1630°C
1750°C
Ionic radius
1.53 Å
1.18 Å
0.97 Å
Molecular weight
81.38 g/mol
150.71 g/mol
144.47 g/mol
Density
5.606 g/cm3
6.95 g/cm3
4.826 g/cm3
FIGURE 4.3  Different methods for the synthesis of diverse wide band gap semiconductor materials.

45
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
different parts of plants like leaves, flowers, and petals are used for reducing and capping agents 
during the synthesis process. Interestingly, biowastes such as fruit peels, vegetable wastes, and food 
wastes are also used for biosynthesis. Certain microorganisms are also used for biosynthesizing 
WBS materials. The chart given in Figure 4.3 lists the different methods categorized under these 
three broad classifications of preparation methods generally adopted to prepare WBS materials. 
Schematic diagrams of certain equipment used for the preparation of WBS materials via certain 
physical methods (like ball milling, vacuum evaporation, DC sputtering, and laser ablation), chemi­
cal methods (such  as chemical vapor deposition and electrochemical deposition), and biological 
methods (like green synthesis and biosynthesis) are shown in Figure 4.4 (a)–(c).
By choosing suitable preparation methods and by optimizing the control/process parameters, 
wide band gap semiconductors with required properties can be obtained. For instance, cadmium 
sulfide (CdS) prepared by employing different methods shows different crystallite size, different 
surface morphology with grain shapes, and different band gaps.
4.6  TUNABLE PROPERTIES OF WBS MATERIALS
By appropriately varying the process parameters (like the concentration of the precursor solution, 
type of solvent, dopants added, concentration of the dopants, process temperature, post-synthesis/
deposition heat treatments, pH of the starting solution, and atmospheric conditions), the properties 
of WBS can be varied accordingly. For instance, the electrical and optical properties of zinc oxide 
and cadmium sulfide can be tuned depending on the applications for which the material is prepared.
4.6.1  Zinc Oxide
4.6.1.1  Structural Properties
The structural properties of WBS materials are generally investigated by employing the most com­
mon analytical technique, X-ray diffraction. In 1908, Swiss physicist Paul Scherrer developed a 
formula known as Scherrer’s formula to estimate the size of the crystallites. From this formula, we 
can realize that the wider the FWHM, the smaller the size of the crystallite.
It is established that by using different source materials and changing process parameters, the 
crystallite size can be modified. For example, Lee et al. [8], synthesized one of the most common 
WBS, zinc oxide, through a precipitation method using Zn(CH3CO2)2⋅2H2O as the source material 
and found that the crystallite size of the resultant product was nearly 20 nm, whereas Sharma et al. 
prepared ZnO using anhydrous ZnCl2 with a crystallite size of 8 nm [22]. Similarly, Anandhi et al. 
using Zn(CH3CO2)2 tuned the crystallite size of ZnO from 25 to 46 nm by changing the concentra­
tion of the precipitating agent [41]. The size of the crystallite, surface area, growth rate, and surface 
morphology of the synthesized ZnO can be tuned by fixing process parameters like pH, process 
temperature, and proportion of the dopants added. The lattice constants a, b, and c, the dislocation 
density, and the number of crystallites per unit area can also be tuned by suitably varying the crucial 
process parameters.
Some of the reported properties of ZnO tuned by doping with different dopants for enhancing 
photocatalytic, antibacterial, opto-electronics, and gas sensing applications are presented in Tables 
4.2 and 4.3. Even the lattice constants of the hexagonal structure of ZnO can be modified by adding 
certain dopants like Al and F to the ZnO lattice. As seen in Table 4.5, when Al is doped with ZnO, 
the lattice constant a changes remarkably from 3.239 to 3.408. Similarly, when fluorine is doped 
with ZnO the lattice constant c decreases from 5.204 to 5.193. Changes are also observed in other 
WBS like ZnO and CdS for different dopants (Table 4.5).
Vacuum annealing improves crystal quality of the transparent conducting oxides of doped zinc 
oxide films. Such annealing-induced modification makes this material more suitable for optoelec­
tronic devices.

46
Handbook of Semiconductors
(a) (i)
(b) (i)
(c) (i)
(ii)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(iii)
(iv)
(ii)
Gas seal
Vacuum chamber
Vacuum chamber
Substrate holder
Substrate holder
Deposit
Deposit
Evaporated species
Evaporated species
Crucible
Crucible
Vacuum
chamber
Vacuum
Vacuum
Flow meter
Flow control
valves
Other reactors
and dopants
Gas bottle
Exhaust
Solution
reservoir
Stirring at
85°C for 2 h
Cooling
at room
temperature
Calcinating the
powder at
550°C for 3 h
Filtering
Separated precipitate
Drying the precipitate
Alpha Amylase
enzymes powder
Nanopowder
Nanopowder
Extract
Preparation
Nanoparticle
Synthesis
DST-SERB
Final product
Pressure
gauge
Control
valve
Compressed
gas
Spray
gun
Substrate
Display panel
Temperature
controller
Thermocouple
Reactor
Thermally
insulated
chamber
Substrate
Hot water bath
Rotating
magnetic pellet
Heater
Magnet and
motor
Substrates
Substrate
holder
Electrical
heater
Vacuum pumps
Exhaust
Reaction bath
Temperature
controller
Substrate
Substrate
Source material
Source material
Resistive heater
Laser
source
Focusing
Laser
beam
Inert gas inlet
Sputtered
Target
Plasma
Power
supply
Substrate
Steel ball
bearings
FIGURE 4.4  (a) Schematic diagram of certain physical methods: (i) ball milling, (ii) vacuum evaporation, (iii) 
DC sputtering, and (iv) laser ablation method. (b) Schematic diagram of certain chemical methods: (i) chemical 
vapor deposition, (ii) chemical bath deposition, (iii) spray pyrolysis, (iv) SILAR, and (v) coprecipitation/soft-
chemical method. (c) Schematic diagram of certain biological methods: (i) green synthesis and (ii) biosynthesis.

47
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
The incorporation of dopants and addition of composite partners generally cause changes in the 
intensity of the diffraction peaks and/or shift in the peak positions. The former suggests changes 
in the crystalline quality, and the latter indicates changes in the respective inter-planar distances of 
ZnO lattice. For instance, the addition of graphene oxide (GO) and Ag leads to a reduction in the 
peak intensities, indicating a decrease in the crystalline quality.
In general, ZnO thin films have hexagonal grains on the surface. Sometimes, spherical, linear, 
and polygon like grains can also be observed when the process parameters and material composi­
tions are changed. It is well-known that smaller grains are desirable for better photocatalytic and 
sensor applications as they lead to an enhanced reactive surface area.
4.6.1.2  Surface Morphological Properties
Surface morphology with porous structure is also a desirable factor for better gas sensing and photo­
catalytic abilities of zinc oxide thin films, as they can improve the adsorption of dye molecules/gas 
molecules during dye degradation/gas sensing processes. When recording the surface morphology 
of prepared nanomaterials, many different grain shapes have been observed, of which some images 
are shown in Figure 4.5.
TABLE 4.5
Tunable Properties of Zinc Oxide Nanomaterial
S. No.
Material
Crystallite Size (nm)
Lattice Constants (a & c)
Ref.
1.
ZnO
ZnO:Al
39.970
35.217
3.239 & 5.191
3.408 & 5.189
[42]
2.
S:Cd (1:1)
S:Cd (7:1)
11.900
33.000
5.787
5.821
[40]
3.
ZnO
ZnO:F
30.000
35.000
3.247 & 5.205
3.244 & 5.193
[43]
FIGURE 4.5  Tunable morphologies of the synthesized WBS nanomaterials by different methods.

48
Handbook of Semiconductors
Doping/co-doping of certain materials, vacuum annealing, variation in solvent volume, and 
aging treatment strongly influence the surface morphology (grain size, shape, and surface rough­
ness) of WBS materials.
Surface morphology of the fluorine doped ZnO (ZnO:F) thin films deposited using a simplified 
spray pyrolysis is strongly influenced by aging time. Fresh starting solution results in non-uniform 
spherical grains with widely varied diameters, whereas four-days-aged solution leads to uniformly 
sized spherical grains. Decreased grain size was observed for four-days-aged solution due to F 
incorporation caused by aging [41]. When the aging period is increased further, cylindrical grains 
replace the spherical ones, and at 16 days of aging, cylindrical grains are formed. Similarly, the 
variation in solvent volume also affects the morphology of ZnO:F films. The grain size increases 
progressively as the solvent volume is increased, suggesting a progressive increase in the crystallin­
ity of the film. The gradual decrease in the F incorporation into the ZnO lattice with the increase in 
solvent volume may be the reason for this increase in grain size. Generally, increase in F incorpora­
tion in the ZnO:F lattice decreases the crystallinity of the material as observed by Tsin et al. [12]. 
Large grain size is desirable for optoelectronic applications, as larger grains support the release of 
stresses. The post-deposition annealing process plays an important role in the surface morphology 
of ZnO-based films. The increase in annealing temperature causes an increase in the grain size, 
which can be correlated with the Ostwald ripening effect [44].
The porous nature of the surface of WBS materials in thin film form is suitable for gas-sensing 
applications. For instance, a possible mechanism for the enhanced ammonia gas-sensing ability of 
chromium-doped zinc oxide thin films prepared using spray pyrolysis method can be explained as 
follows: The oxygen vacancies present in the sample serve as the adsorption sites, which leads to a 
stimulated adsorption of oxygen molecules on the surface. Hence, when the sample is exposed to 
ammonia gas, more ammonia molecules will react with the largely available oxygen molecules on 
the surface, resulting in an enhanced sensitivity. The porous nature of the sample provides more 
active sites for the interaction of the gas molecules and thereby the inner surface also contributes by 
sensing the ammonia gas along with the top surface. The results reveal that even a small amount of 
leakage of ammonia gas (10 ppm) can effectively be sensed by this ZnO:Cr sensor under light and 
dark conditions [45].
4.6.1.3  Transparent Conducting Properties
Wide band gap semiconductors like SnO2 and ZnO are transparent conducting oxide materials. 
For transparent conducting oxides in thin film form, high visible transmittance and low sheet resis­
tance (sheet resistance is the resistance offered by a square of any size on the film’s surface) are the 
parameters required for getting a good quality factor. The quality factor is one of the most crucial 
factors needed for solar cell window layer applications. The Hackee’s quality factor depends on both 
optical transmittance (T) and sheet resistance Rsh. The optical transmittance of nebulizer-sprayed 
ZnO film is in the range of 70–96%. The transmittance of a thin film mainly depends on its texture. 
Low scattering owing to structural homogeneity and high crystalline quality of the films are attrib­
uted to high transmittance, whereas the metal richness leads to an adverse effect on transmittance. 
The addition of graphene oxide (GO) and silver (Ag) causes a decrease in transmittance of ZnO 
film [46]. The study on Mo+F-doped ZnO film demonstrated that fluorine doping increases the 
transmittance of ZnO films slightly with increasing doping level because of the proper substitution 
of F– ions into the O2– sites that suppresses the metal richness of the system. However, at the high 
doping concentrations (say 20 at.%), the visible transmittance decreases due to scattering of photons 
that present at large numbers. A notable decrease in the IR transmittance upon fluorine doping is 
strong evidence for the scattering by charge carriers. The transmittance increases with the increase 
in the substrate temperature reported by Subha et al. [14]. The absorption edge of undoped ZnO is 
generally sharp, and this sharpness is affected by the influence of certain dopants and composite 
partners, as the addition of these materials introduce defects in the system.

49
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
The bandgap of nebulizer-sprayed ZnO found via Tauc’s plot technique is in  the range of 
3.12–3.39 eV is reported by Christuraj et al. [37]. When appropriate dopants are added, the band 
gap reduces substantially. As per our study, the band gap is reduced from 3.2 to 2.6 eV when Ag and 
g-C3N4 are added with ZnO.
As per the observations, the electrical resistivity of ZnO film decreases upon the addition of suit­
able anionic/cationic dopants like F, Mo, and Ta [46]. The addition of higher ionic state cations and 
suitable anions can increase the carrier concentration of the films and thereby results in reduced 
sheet resistance: The Mo + F doping increases the quality factor of ZnO film by nearly two orders 
of magnitude. The synergistic effects of the dopants result in a low resistivity of 5.12 × 10−3 Ω cm 
with good mobility (2.00 cm2/Vs) and carrier concentration (24.5 × 1020 cm−3) at the Mo and F 
doping concentrations of 2 and 15 at.%, respectively. The results on the influence of air/vacuum 
annealing on the properties of Mo+F co-doped ZnO thin films showed that the resistivity decreases 
upon vacuum annealing, whereas it increases upon air annealing. The vacuum annealing treatment 
favorably influences the optical transmittance, too, i.e., the vacuum annealing yields high visible 
transmittance and thereby has high quality factor.
4.6.2  Tin Oxide (SnO2)
Tin oxide is another wide band gap (3.8 eV) n-type semiconducting material that attracts the atten­
tion of materials scientists owing to its unique combined properties, viz. excellent optical access, 
good electrical conductivity, high infrared reflectance, good thermal and chemical stability, non-
toxicity, and abundance in nature. These characteristic features along with its tunable properties 
make SnO2 a fitting material for display devices, defrosting/defogging windows, solar cell window 
layers, and certain other optoelectronic devices. The photocatalytic ability of SnO2 makes it a 
good choice for photocatalytic water purification processes. It can also act as an antibacterial and 
antifungal agent. Recently, p-type tin oxide films have been prepared by adding suitable acceptor 
dopants, which paves the way for the development of an interesting new field called transpar­
ent electronics. Tin oxide can be used in photoconductors, photo switches, ultraviolet detectors, 
electromagnetic shields, functional glasses, organic light emitting devices, varistors, flat panel 
displays, touch panels, heat mirrors, non-volatile memory devices, and electrochemical lithium-ion 
storage, to name a few.
4.6.3  Cadmium Sulfide (CdS)
Cadmium sulfide is a promising candidate of wide band gap semiconductor for solar cells with high 
efficiency heterojunction thin films. It is a semiconductor (n-type) having band gap of 2.42 eV with 
excellent optical properties. It is one of the promising candidates for various applications. Cadmium 
sulfide is a good sensitizer. It is considered for reliable, low-cost, cost-effective photovoltaics. 
Although it is a toxic material, its modification in properties attracts the attention of researchers.
Stoichiometry is one of the crucial parameters of CdS thin films required for many applications 
like CdS/CdTe thin film solar cells. Sulfur deficiency is a common defect that leads to poor stoichi­
ometry in CdS films deposited by chemical methods. The simple modification made in the SILAR 
deposition procedure can rectify this sulfur deficiency defect (stoichiometric deviation) [40].
Studies on wide band gap semiconductors revealed that by adopting different preparation meth­
ods, adding suitable dopants, and appropriately changing process parameters, the properties of 
WBS materials can be tuned for environmental applications like photocatalytic degradation of 
toxic organic dye molecules, prevention of bacterial growth, gas sensing, super capacitors, bio-
imaging, fuel cells, biotags, cell labeling, tissue engineering, low-cost rechargeable batteries, 
GMRs, and cost-effective solar cells [14–17]. Other materials of this class, which include gal­
lium phosphide (p-GaP), gallium nitride (GaN), boron nitride (BN), zinc selenide (ZnSe), silicon 
carbide (SiC), zinc telluride (ZnTe), and zinc sulfide (ZnS), also have tunable properties suitable 

50
Handbook of Semiconductors
for various applications [14–20]. All of these materials are promising for various environmen­
tal, energy, and opto-electronic applications and can be prepared by cost-effective methods. For 
instance, gallium phosphide can be used as a photocathode material for photocatalytic hydrogen 
evolution and photo voltage generation. Boron nitride nanotube is a potential material for wastewa­
ter treatment and antibacterial applications. Gallium nitride is a good gas sensor for sensing gases 
like hydrogen (H2), methane (CH4), benzene, nitric oxide (NO), sulfur-dioxide (SO2), ammonia 
(NH3), and carbon dioxide (CO2). It is a promising material for cost-effective lighting, too. Zinc 
sulfide is a potential photocatalyst for water remediation. Zinc selenide and zinc telluride can be 
used for saving energy, solar cells, sensors, and photocatalytic applications.
4.7  APPLICATION OF WBS MATERIALS
4.7.1  Photocatalytic Dye Degradation Ability of WBS Materials
Photocatalytic efficiency of WBS materials in thin film form is independent of film thickness, 
whereas the intensity of irradiated light and pH of the test dye solution play considerable roles in 
enhancing the dye degradation ability of the photocatalytic material. For wide band semiconductor 
material, knowing the point of zero charge (PZC) and the pH values corresponding to the maximum 
surface negative/positive charge will be useful for achieving the maximum dye (cationic/anionic) 
degradation efficiency for a photocatalytic material. Addition of g-C3N4, Ag, Co, La, Mo, Cu, Mn, 
Ta, W, F, and N enhances the photocatalytic dye degradation ability of ZnO thin film deposited on 
glass/stainless steel substrates.
4.7.2  Gas Sensing Ability
Addition of Cr, La, Tb, Y, and Sn improves the ammonia gas sensitivity of ZnO thin films.
4.7.3  Antibacterial Ability of Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
Addition of certain carbonaceous materials and metals, viz. Cu+Graphene, Ag+ Graphene, 
Sr+Graphene, Co+rGO, Mg+rGO, and g-C3N4, improves the photocatalytic dye degradation and 
antibacterial abilities of ZnO nanopowder/nancomposites. The efficient separation of photoinduced 
charge carriers and the consequent delay in their recombination caused by the graphene layers may 
be the main reasons for the improved photocatalytic and antibacterial efficacy of the photocatalytic 
material. The addition of Mn, Mn+Ni, Mn+Co, Mn+F, and Mg+Co enhances the magnetic and 
antibacterial properties of ZnO nanopowder. When fluorine is added as a dopant or co-dopant along 
with certain metals, viz. Co, Fe, Ag and Mg, the antibacterial efficiency of ZnO increases. The ZnO 
nanomaterial activated with enzymes like amylase, phosphatase, urease, and protease through the 
addition of vermiwash exhibits enhanced photocatalytic activity.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Fatemi, A., Tohidi, T., Jamshidi-Galeh, K., Rasouli, M., & Ostrikov, K. (2022). Optical and structural 
properties of Sn and Ag-doped PbS/PVA nanocomposites synthesized by chemical bath deposition. 
Scientific Reports, 12(1), 12893.
	
2.	 Jang, S., Jang, J.S., Karade, V., Jo, E., Kim, J., Suryawanshi, M.P., He, M., Park, J., & Kim, J.H. (2021). 
Evolution of structural and optoelectronic properties in fluorine-aluminum co-doped zinc oxide (FAZO) 
thin films and their application in CZTSSe thin-film solar cells. Solar Energy Materials and Solar Cells, 
232, 111342.
	
3.	 Palanchoke, U., Kurz, H., Noriega, R., Arabi, S., Jovanov, V., Magnus, P., Aftab, H., Salleo, A., Stiebig, 
H., & Knipp, D. (2014). Tuning the plasmonic absorption of metal reflectors by zinc oxide nanoparticles: 
Application in thin film solar cells. Nano Energy, 6, 167–172.

51
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
	
4.	 Qumar, U., Hassan, J.Z., Bhatt, R.A., Raza, A., Nazir, G., Nabgari, W., & Ikram, M. (2022). 
Photocatalysis vs adsorption by metal oxide nanoparticles. Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 
131, 122–166.
	
5.	 Berrabah, S.E., Benchettara, A., Smaili, F., Benchettara, A., & Mahieddine, A. (2023). High perfor­
mance hybrid supercapacitor based on electrochemical deposed of nickel hydroxide on zinc oxide sup­
ported by graphite electrode. Journal of Alloys and Compounds, 942, 169112.
	
6.	 Hu, H., Xiong, Z., Khang, C., Cui, Y., & Chen, L. (2023). Hydroxyl-functionalized ZnO monolayers for 
optoelectronic devices: Atomic structures and electronic properties. Vacuum, 208, 111721.
	
7.	 Tseng, S.F., Chen, P.S., Hsu, S.H., Hsiao, W.T., & Peng, W.J. (2023). Investigation of fiber laser-induced 
porous graphene electrodes in controlled atmospheres for ZnO nanorod-based NO2 gas sensors. Applied 
Surface Science, 620, 156847.
	
8.	 Lee, P.-M., Wu, Y.-J., Hsieh, C.-Y., Liao, C.-H., Liu, Y.-S., & Liu, C.-Y. (2015). Observation of 
Ni3+ acceptor in P-type Ni(P):SnO2. Applied Surface Science, 337, 33–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
apsusc.2015.02.060
	
9.	 Gunshor, R.L., & Nurmikko, A.V. (1996). Wide band gap semiconductors and their application to light 
emitting devices. Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science, 1(1), 4–10.
	 10.	 Puri, N., & Gupta, A. (2023). Water remediation using titanium and zinc oxide nanomaterials through 
disinfection and photocatalysis process: A review. Environmental Research, 227, 115786.
	 11.	 Ishwarya, R., Tamilmani, G., Jayakumar, R., Albeshr, M.F., Mahboob, S., Shshid, D., Riaz, M.N., & 
Govindarajan, M., Vaseeharan. (2023). Synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles using Vigna munga seed 
husk extract: An enhanced antibacterial, anticancer activity and eco-friendly bio-toxicity assessment on 
algae and zooplankton. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology, 79, 104002.
	 12.	 Tsin, F., Venerosy, A., Vidal, J., Collin, S., Clatot, J., Lombez, L., Paire, M., Borensztajn, S., Broussillou, 
C., Grand, P.P., Jaime, S., Lincot, D., & Rousset, J. (2015). Electrodeposition of ZnO window layer for 
chalcogenide solar cell. Scientific Reports, 5(1), 8961. https://doi.org/10.1038/srep08961
	 13.	 Meindrawan, B., Suyatma, N.E., Wardana, A.A., & Pamela, V.Y. (2018). Nanocomposite coating based 
on carrageenan and ZnO nanoparticles to maintain the storage quality of mango. Food Packaging and 
Shelf Life, 18, 140–146. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.fpsl.2018.10.006
	 14.	 Debanath, M.K., & Karmakar, S. (2013). Study of blueshift of optical band gap in zinc oxide (ZnO) 
nanoparticles prepared by low-temperature wet chemical method. Materials Letters, 111, 116–119.
	 15.	 Rana, M.P.S., Singh, F., Negi, S., Gautam, S.K., Singh, R.G., & Ramola, R.C. (2016). Band gap engi­
neering and low temperature transport phenomenon in highly conducting antimony doped tin oxide thin 
films. Ceramics International, 42(5), 5932–5941.
	 16.	 Liu, J., Cao, M., Feng, Z., Ni, X., Zhang, J., Qu, J., Zhang, S., Guo, H., Yuan, N., & Ding, J. (2022). 
Thermal evaporation-deposited hexagonal CdS buffer layer with improved quality, enlarged band 
gap, and reduced band gap offset to boost performance of Sb2(S,Se)3 solar cells. Journal of Alloys and 
Compounds, 920, 165885.
	 17.	 Shah, M.S.U., Zue, X., Shah, M.Z.U., Hou, H., Shah, M.K., Ahmad, I., Sajad, M., & Shah, A. (2023). 
Nickel selenide nano-cubes anchored on cadmium selenide nanoparticles: First-ever designed as elec­
trode material for advanced hybrid energy storage applications. Journal of Energy Storage, 63(2023), 
107065.
	 18.	 Mousavi, S.H., Muller, T.S., & Oliveria, P.W.D. (2012). Synthesis of colloidal nanoscaled copper-indium-
gallium-selenide (CIGS) particles for photovoltaic applications. Journal of Colloid and Interface 
Science, 182(1), 48–52.
	 19.	 Aakib, H.E., Rochdi, N., Tchenka, A., & Pierson, J.F.., Outzourhit. (2023). Copper oxide coatings depos­
ited by reactive radio-frequency sputtering for solar absorber applications. Materials Chemistry and 
Physics, 296, 121796.
	 20.	 Hu, C., Chen, J., Wang, Y., H, Y., & Wang, S. (2022). A telluride-doped porous carbon as highly efficient 
bifunctional catalyst for rechargeable Zn-air batteries. Electrochimica Acta, 404, 139606.
	 21.	 Onochie, U.P., Ikpeseni, S.C., Owamah, H.J., Igweoko, A.E., Ukala, D.C., Nwigwe, H.J., & Augustine, 
C. (2021). Analysis of optical band gap and Urbach tail of zinc sulphide coated with aqueous and organic 
dye extracts prepared by chemical Bath deposition technique. Optical Materials, 114, 110970.
	 22.	 Sharma, V., & Mehata, M.S. (2022). A parallel investigation of un-doped and manganese ion-doped 
zinc selenide quantum dots at cryogenic temperature and application as an optical temperature sensor. 
Material Chemistry and Physics, 276, 125349.
	 23.	 Benalia, S., Merabet, M., Rached, D., Douri, Y.A., Abidri, B., Khenata, R., & Labair, M. (2015). Band 
gap behavior of scandium aluminum phosphide and scandium gallium phosphide ternary alloys and 
superlattices. Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, 31, 493–500.

52
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 24.	 Amir, H.A.A.A., Fakhri, M.A., Alwahib, A.A., Salim, E.T., Alsultany, F.H., & Hashim, U. (2022). 
Synthesis of gallium nitride nanostructure using pulsed laser ablation in liquid for photoelectric detec­
tor. Materials Science in Semiconductor Processing, 150, 106911.
	 25.	 Zhang, Z., Fan, X., Zhu, J., Yuan, K., Zhou, J., & Tang, D. (2023). Pressure-driven anomalous thermal 
transport behaviors in gallium arsenide. Journal of Materials Science & Technology, 142, 89–97.
	 26.	 Kosar, N., Asgar, M., Ayub, K., & Mahmood, T. (2019). Halides encapsulation in aluminum/boron 
phosphide nanoclusters: An effective strategy for high cells voltages in Na-ion battery. Material Science 
in Semiconductor Processing, 97, 71–79.
	 27.	 Legesse, M., Rashkeev, S.N., Saidoui, H., Mellouhi, F.E., Ahzi, S., & Alharbi, F.H. (2020). Band gap 
tuning in aluminum doped two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride. Material Chemistry and Physics, 
250, 123176.
	 28.	 Liu, Z.Y., Yang, D.C., Eglitis, R.I., Jia, R., & Zhang, H.X. (2022). Penta-silicon carbide: A theoretical 
investigation. Materials Science And Engineering: B, 281, 115740.
	 29.	 Deng, Z., Zhu, R., Ma, L., Zhou, K., Yu, Z., & Wei, Q. (2022). Diamond for antifouling applications: A 
review. Carbon, 196, 923–939.
	 30.	 K K, S., P M, P.N., & Vasundhara, M. (2023). Enhanced photocatalytic activity in ZnO nanoparticles 
developed using novel Lepidagathis ananthapuramensis leaf extract. RSC Advances, 13(3), 1497–1515. 
https://doi.org/10.1039/D2RA06967A
	 31.	 Yusoff, N., Ho, L.-N., Ong, S.-A., Wong, Y.-S., & Khalik, W. (2016). Photocatalytic activity of zinc 
oxide (ZnO) synthesized through different methods. Desalination and Water Treatment, 57(27), 12496–
12507. https://doi.org/10.1080/19443994.2015.1054312
	 32.	 Hastir, A., Kohli, N., & Singh, R.C. (2016). Temperature dependent selective and sensitive terbium 
doped ZnO nanostructures. Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, 231, 110–119. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
snb.2016.03.001
	 33.	 Mani, G.K., & Rayappan, J.B.B. (2015). A highly selective and wide range ammonia sensor—
Nanostructured ZnO:Co thin film. Materials Science and Engineering: B, 191, 41–50. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mseb.2014.10.007
	 34.	 Zhao, X., Shen, H., Zhou, C., Lin, S., Li, X., Zhao, X., Deng, X., Li, J., & Lin, H. (2016). Preparation 
of aluminum doped zinc oxide films with low resistivity and outstanding transparency by a sol–gel 
method for potential applications in perovskite solar cell. Thin Solid Films, 605, 208–214. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.tsf.2015.11.001
	 35.	 Mudusu, D., Nandanapalli, K.R., Dugasani, S.R., Park, S.H., & Tu, C.W. (2016). Zinc oxide nanorods 
shielded with an ultrathin nickel layer: Tailoring of physical properties. Scientific Reports, 6(1), 28561. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep28561
	 36.	 Vasanthi, M., Ravichandran, K., Jabena Begum, N., Muruganantham, G., Snega, S., Panneerselvam, A., 
& Kavitha, P. (2013). Influence of Sn doping level on antibacterial activity and certain physical properties 
of ZnO films deposited using a simplified spray pyrolysis technique. Superlattices and Microstructures, 
55, 180–190. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spmi.2012.12.011
	 37.	 Christuraj, P., Dinesh Raja, M., Pari, S., Madankumar, D., & Shankar, V.U. (2022). Synthesis and 
characterization of Zn doped CdS nanoparticles as electrode material for supercapacitor application. 
Materials Today: Proceedings, 50, 2691–2694. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.matpr.2020.08.220
	 38.	 Alkuam, E., Mohammed, M., & Chen, T.-P. (2017). Fabrication of CdS nanorods and nanoparticles 
with PANI for (DSSCs) dye-sensitized solar cells. Solar Energy, 150, 317–324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
solener.2017.04.056
	 39.	 Bhadwal, A.S., Tripathi, R.M., Gupta, R.K., Kumar, N., Singh, R.P., & Shrivastav, A. (2014). Biogenic 
synthesis and photocatalytic activity of CdS nanoparticles. RSC Advances, 4(19), 9484. https://doi.
org/10.1039/c3ra46221h
	 40.	 Senthamilselvi, V., Saravanakumar, K., Jabena Begum, N., Anandhi, R., Ravichandran, A.T., Sakthivel, 
B., & Ravichandran, K. (2012). Photovoltaic properties of nanocrystalline CdS films deposited by SILAR 
and CBD techniques—a comparative study. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, 
23(1), 302–308. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-011-0409-7
	 41.	 Anandhi, R., Mohan, R., Swaminathan, K., & Ravichandran, K. (2012). Influence of aging time of the 
starting solution on the physical properties of fluorine doped zinc oxide films deposited by a simplified 
spray pyrolysis technique. Superlattices and Microstructures, 51(5), 680–689. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
spmi.2012.02.006
	 42.	 Saravanakumar, K., & Ravichandran, K. (2012). Synthesis of heavily doped nanocrystalline ZnO:Al 
powders using a simple soft chemical method. Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Electronics, 
23(8), 1462–1469. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10854-011-0612-6

53
Wide Band Gap Semiconductors
	 43.	 Ravichandran, K., Snega, S., Jabena Begum, N., Swaminathan, K., Sakthivel, B., Rene Christena, L., 
Chandramohan, G., & Ochiai, S. (2014). Enhancement in the antibacterial efficiency of ZnO nanopow­
ders by tuning the shape of the nanograins through fluorine doping. Superlattices and Microstructures, 
69, 17–28. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.spmi.2014.01.020
	 44.	 Ravichandran, K., Vasanthi, M., Thirumurugan, K., Sakthivel, B., & Karthika, K. (2014). Annealing 
induced reorientation of crystallites in Sn doped ZnO films. Optical Materials, 37, 59–64. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.optmat.2014.04.045
	 45.	 Manivasaham, A., Ravichandran, K., & Subha, K. (2017). Light intensity effects on the sensitivity 
of ZnO:Cr gas sensor. Surface Engineering, 33(11), 866–876. https://doi.org/10.1080/02670844.2017.
1331724
	 46.	 Ravichandran, K., Uma, R., Sriram, S., & Balamurgan, D. (2017). Fabrication of ZnO:Ag/GO composite 
thin films for enhanced photocatalytic activity. Ceramics International, 43(13), 10041–10051. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2017.05.020

54
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-5
Doping Methods 
and Their Effects
Devi Bala Saraswathi Sethuraman and Chia-Jyi Liu
5.1  INTRODUCTION
One of the primary drivers behind the success of the microelectronics industry lies in its capac­
ity to modify the physical and electrical properties of semiconductor materials through a process 
known as doping, involving the introduction of substitutional impurities into the crystal lattice. 
This capability has enabled the continuous pursuit of Moore’s law [1], which has, in turn, led to 
the relentless miniaturization of semiconductor-based microelectronic components. This trend 
has resulted in devices with improved performance, reduced power consumption, and more cost-
effective production.
In 2012, the traditional planar design of metal oxide semiconductor field effect transistor 
(MOSFET) transistors encountered an obstacle due to short channel effects, posing a fundamental 
limitation to further downsizing. Consequently, the semiconductor industry made a pivotal shift from 
planar technology to three-dimensional (3D) solutions, such as FinFET transistors. These FinFET 
transistors offered superior control over current flow in the conduction channel, increased speed, and 
reduced parasitic capacitance. By 2020, the semiconductor industry had commenced mass produc­
tion of fin field effect transistor (FinFET) devices at the 5 nm node [2].
Today, research is focused on investigating alternative stacked architectures such as gate-all-
around field-effect transistors (GAAFETs). In this innovative design, the gate completely surrounds 
a silicon nanosheet used as the channel, resulting in an even more impressive performance. The 
adoption of this groundbreaking device structure is expected to begin at the 2 nm technology node 
in the coming period.
The doping of these 3D devices has given rise to new technological and fundamental challenges. 
In the mass production of highly miniaturized transistors, the conventional doping method involves 
ion implantation, which entails bombarding the material with high-energy dopant ions. However, 
this approach is rendered inefficient for nanoscale electronic devices due to the damage inflicted on 
the crystal lattice as ions traverse through it. Even employing high-temperature thermal treatments 
to restore the silicon lattice’s structure does not fully address this issue. Furthermore, ion implanta­
tion is ill-suited for complex 3D geometries because the ion beam has a highly directional nature.
In contrast, diffusion from solid and gaseous sources offers a gentler doping solution but faces 
challenges in precisely controlling doping concentration and uniformity, which are crucial consid­
erations for these extremely miniaturized devices. Additionally, alternative top-down doping tech­
niques that have shown success in research contexts [3] are not practical for industrial applications.
To address this, Ho et al. introduced self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) in 2007, allowing non-
destructive, uniform, and conformal doping via molecular diffusion method — a promising bottom-
up approach ideal for complex 3D structures.
With the dominance of FinFETs and the shift toward gate all around (GAA) nanowire architec­
ture, exploring new materials and processes is crucial, given the high surface-to-volume ratios in 
thin-body structures. Understanding doping methods is pivotal for assessing these structures’ suit­
ability for future applications. This chapter seeks to shed light on the intricate interplay between 
emerging materials, advanced processes, and doping strategies within the dynamic landscape of 
semiconductor technology, aiming to guide researchers and engineers toward optimized solutions 
for the technology challenges of tomorrow.
5

55
Doping Methods and Their Effects
5.2  SEMICONDUCTOR MATERIALS
Solid-state materials can be categorized into three primary classes: insulators, semiconductors, 
and conductors. Figure 5.1 illustrates the range of electrical conductivity (σ), associated with key 
materials within each of these three categories [4]. Insulators, exemplified by materials like fused 
quartz and glass, exhibit extremely low conductivities, typically in the range of 10−18 to 10−8 S/cm. 
In contrast, conductors such as aluminum and silver showcase high conductivities, typically ranging 
from 104 to 106 S/cm [4].
Semiconductors, occupying an intermediate position between insulators and conductors, display 
conductivities that fall within this range. The conductivity of a semiconductor is notably responsive 
to various factors, including temperature, illumination, magnetic fields, and the presence of trace 
quantities of impurity atoms—typically, on the order of 1 microgram to 1 gram of impurity atoms 
per kilogram of semiconductor material. This sensitivity in conductivity renders semiconductors 
among the most crucial materials in the realm of electronic applications [4].
5.2.1  Fundamentals of Doping
Pure silicon or germanium are rarely used as semiconductors. In order to be practically useful, 
semiconductors need to undergo a deliberate introduction of impurities. This addition of impu­
rities changes their conductivity characteristics, essentially converting them into semiconduc­
tors. This process of introducing impurities into an initially pure substance is called doping [5], 
and the added substance is a dopant. After the doping process, an initially pure material trans­
forms into an impure one. It’s only after doping that these materials become suitable for practical 
applications.
FIGURE 5.1  Typical conductivity ranges for insulators, semiconductors, and conductors [4].

56
Handbook of Semiconductors
5.2.2  N-Type Doping
Figure 5.2a depicts n-type doping in silicon using arsenic, where donor impurities possess higher 
valence than the host material’s atoms. Upon ionization, a donor impurity contributes an electron 
to the conduction band, increasing mobile electron count and classifying the material as n-type. 
This process involves introducing Group 5 impurity atoms (e.g., phosphorus or arsenic) into the 
semiconductor with four valence electrons. Substituting a silicon atom with a five-valence electron 
impurity generates a surplus electron, elevating electrical conductivity by adding free electrons to 
the material’s structure.
5.2.3  P-Type Doping
Figure 5.2b illustrates the p-type doping of silicon with boron. Acceptors are impurities that have a 
lower valence compared to the host material, resulting in incomplete atomic bonding within the lat­
tice. Consequently, they capture electrons, essentially creating holes in the valence band. This process 
causes the acceptor centers to acquire a negative charge, and the semiconductor is designated as p-type. 
In other words, materials whose valence band minimum (VBM) is close to the vacuum level promote 
“p-type doping” [5]. This is achieved by introducing impurity atoms derived from Group 3 of the 
periodic table, such as boron or aluminum, into the semiconductor material, which inherently has four 
valence electrons. These impurity atoms have only three valence electrons, and when they replace a 
silicon atom within the crystal lattice, they create a vacancy where an electron is missing. These vacan­
cies, known as holes, also have the capacity to influence the electrical conductivity of the material.
In a semiconductor’s energy band diagram (Figure 5.3a), donor and acceptor levels lie within the 
forbidden energy gap [6]. Impurity energy levels within this gap are categorized as shallow or deep. 
Donors are referred to as shallow when their energy levels are in proximity to the bottom of the conduc­
tion band, while acceptors are considered shallow when their energy levels are close to the top of the 
valence band. Shallow impurities are those that usually require energies roughly equivalent to thermal 
energy for ionization to take place. Conversely, deep impurities demand higher energies for ionization, 
making them generally less likely to produce free carriers. These deep impurities, however, can serve as 
effective recombination centers where electrons and holes recombine and neutralize each other.
5.3  THE EFFECTS OF DOPING ON THE PROPERTIES OF SEMICONDUCTORS
5.3.1  Background
Doping has a significant impact on the Fermi energy (also known as the Fermi level) of semiconduc­
tors by introducing additional electronic states into the material’s energy band structure. The Fermi 
energy represents the highest energy level within a material that electrons can occupy at absolute 
FIGURE 5.2  (a) N-type doping: The arsenic atom contributes its fifth valence electron, functioning as a 
mobile charge carrier; (b) P-type doping: An electron fills the vacant position on the boron atom, leading to 
the formation of a new hole.

57
Doping Methods and Their Effects
zero temperature and serves as a reference point for understanding the distribution of electrons and 
holes within the semiconductor. Here’s how doping affects the Fermi energy of semiconductors.
5.3.1.1  Intrinsic Semiconductor (Pure Semiconductor)
In an intrinsic semiconductor, the Fermi energy lies within the energy band gap between the 
valence band and the conduction band [5]. At absolute zero temperature, all electronic states below 
the Fermi energy are occupied, while those above it remain empty. In this state, there is an equal 
number of electrons and holes, resulting in no net charge density.
5.3.1.2  Influence of N-Type Doping on the Fermi Energy Position
N-type doping involves adding impurity atoms, typically from Group 5 of the periodic table (e.g., 
phosphorus or arsenic), which have more valence electrons than the host semiconductor material 
(e.g., silicon or germanium). These impurity atoms introduce additional electrons into the crystal 
lattice, which become part of the conduction band due to their higher energy compared to the 
valence band electrons in the host material [5]. Consequently, the Fermi energy shifts closer to the 
conduction band because of the increased electron concentration in the conduction band resulting 
from the presence of dopant atoms.
5.3.1.3  Influence of P-Type Doping on the Fermi Energy Position
P-type doping involves adding impurity atoms, typically from Group 3 of the periodic table (e.g., 
boron or aluminum), which have fewer valence electrons than the host semiconductor material. 
These impurity atoms create holes in the crystal lattice, which act as positively charged mobile 
FIGURE 5.3  (a) Energy band diagram of semiconductors. (b) Alteration in the Fermi energy position and 
the incorporation of allowed energy levels within the bandgap resulting from the process of doping [6]. (c) The 
range of doping levels used in c-Si [6].

58
Handbook of Semiconductors
carriers in the valence band. The Fermi energy shifts closer to the valence band because of the 
increased hole concentration in the valence band due to the presence of dopant atoms [5].
Figure 5.3b depicts Fermi energy shifts and introduced energy levels in the band gap due to 
doping [6]. Donor and acceptor atoms inserted into silicon create permissible energy levels within 
the forbidden band gap. For instance, the weakly bound fifth valence electron of a phosphorus (P) 
atom easily transitions to the conduction band (EC). These energy levels, denoted as Ed, relate to 
loosely bound valence electrons of donors, placed near EC as dashed lines, indicating localized 
electrons around donor atoms. Similarly, acceptor atoms introduce allowable energy levels, Ea, near 
the valence band (EV) [6].
Semiconductors modify electrical conductivity via doping, relying on charge carrier concen­
tration and mobility. Figure 5.3c shows the typical doping range for crystalline silicon (c-Si) [6]. 
Semiconductor conductivity, whether p-type or n-type, relies on hole or electron predominance. The 
abundant carriers are majority carriers (holes in p-type, electrons in n-type), while less prevalent 
ones are minority carriers (electrons in p-type, holes in n-type) [6]. This carrier asymmetry defines 
a semiconductor’s conductivity behavior.
5.4  ADVANCED DOPING TECHNIQUES
5.4.1  Ion Implantation Method
5.4.1.1  Fundamentals of Ion Implantation
Ion implantation was initially introduced in semiconductor technology more than three decades 
ago to enable precise incorporation of n- and p-type dopants at specific depths below the mate­
rial’s surface. Today, it has become a vital and irreplaceable step in integrated circuit production, 
serving as a key doping method where high-energy dopant-containing ions are directed at the 
semiconductor, replacing atoms in the lattice through high-temperature processing. Its advan­
tage lies in precise control over dopant amount and depth distribution within the host semicon­
ductor, ensuring consistent doping across vast semiconductor areas, making it a cornerstone in 
microelectronics.
However, ion implantation technology has several drawbacks. Firstly, it can cause damage to the 
crystal lattice due to ion bombardment. Additionally, defects may arise during subsequent thermal 
treatments, leading to transient enhanced diffusion. Moreover, many of the source gases commonly 
used in ion implantation are considered hazardous from both health and environmental perspec­
tives. Finally, this technique is not suitable for 3D nanostructured materials since it cannot provide 
uniform dopant incorporation for non-planar nanostructures.
5.4.1.2  Plasma Immersion Ion Implantation – Advanced Technique
5.4.1.2.1  Introduction
Plasma immersion ion implantation (PIII), often referred to as plasma doping, is an innovative 
method involving the extraction of accelerated ions from plasma using high voltage. These ions are 
then implanted into a semiconductor substrate. This approach offers significant advantages over tra­
ditional ion implantation, typically resulting in more conformal doping profiles than conventional 
ion implantation techniques. Conrad et al. [7] and Tendys et al. [8] introduced the PIII technique 
in the late 1980s. Originally known as plasma source ion implantation (PSII), this method is now 
commonly referred to as PIII to distinguish it from traditional beamline implantation involving 
plasma ion sources.
5.4.1.2.2  Plasma-Surface Modification Mechanisms
Plasma discharges, often referred to as the fourth state of matter, exhibit exceptional physical char­
acteristics. These properties are profoundly influenced by electromagnetic fields due to the quasi-
neutral equilibrium maintained between electrons and ions and the dominance of electrostatic 

59
Doping Methods and Their Effects
forces over typical gas dynamics. Low electron temperature (Te) plasmas are extensively used in 
material processing, harnessing these phenomena to facilitate chemical reactions at gas-solid inter­
faces and induce directional etching processes [9]. However, the complex interplay of reactions 
within plasma discharges leads to various pathways for material structural deterioration, including 
the formation of defects, voids, grain enlargement, and other effects. Consequently, these transfor­
mations adversely affect the electrical properties of devices, resulting in increased leakage current 
and shifts in threshold voltage, among other issues. A schematic representation of such effects is 
presented in Figure 5.4 [10].
5.4.1.2.3  Ion Energy Control
One of the most foundational yet highly impactful observations in the realm of plasma dis­
charges revolves around the manipulation of positively charged ions by applying a negative poten­
tial difference, achieved through either direct current (DC) or radio frequency (RF) generators. 
Groundbreaking research conducted by Coburn and Winters showcased the immense potential of 
these ions in driving chemical reactions, exemplified by the synergistic etching behavior of silicon 
(Si) in a system involving argon (Ar) and xenon difluoride (XeF2) [9]. Consequently, the role of ion 
energy in various etching mechanisms, such as sputter yield and ion-enhanced chemical etching, 
has been extensively studied for key material systems. These investigations have significantly con­
tributed to advancements in logic and memory technologies.
As the rapid downscaling of complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology 
progressed and intricate architectures like the FinFET emerged, addressing plasma-induced dam­
age (PID) became increasingly crucial. In response, alternative solutions were introduced, includ­
ing inductive coupling (ICP) and electron cyclotron resonance (ECR), along with the incorporation 
of multiple RF sources to power the plasma. These innovations led to the achievement of lower 
FIGURE 5.4  Diagram illustrating the mechanisms of damage and reactions induced by plasma: (a) 
Introduction of oxygen from reactor components; (b) surface oxidation through interactions with ion bom­
bardment; (c) sputtering and creation of vacancies caused by ion bombardment; (d) lateral straggling at the 
etch front of features; (e) ion reflection along the sidewalls of features; (f) alteration of the surface layer due 
to low-energy ions; and (g) generation of vacancies caused by vacuum ultraviolet (VUV) emissions. (Adapted 
with permission from [10]. Copyright [2021] AIP Publishing.)

60
Handbook of Semiconductors
electron temperatures at high plasma densities, enabling a partial decoupling between ionization 
fraction and ion energy. This level of control was previously unattainable using reactive ion etching 
(RIE).
Precise control of ion energy distribution functions has gained even greater importance with the 
emergence of plasma-enhanced atomic layer etching (PEALE) processes. In PEALE, achieving 
self-limited behavior regarding the formation and removal of a modified surface is only possible 
within a narrow ion energy window.
Energetic species within plasma discharges have played pivotal roles extending beyond the realm 
of etching processes. They have been instrumental in enabling advancements in plasma-enhanced 
chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) and plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (PEALD) 
techniques. More recently, researchers have explored the application of bias power as a means to 
induce geometry-dependent phase variations in materials deposited through PEALD. For instance, 
Figure 5.5a presents results from Marchack et al.’s research group [10], where oxygen plasma was 
used to induce surface modifications in titanium nitride (TiN) films produced via physical vapor 
deposition (PVD). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images reveal that grain boundaries at the 
film’s surface are accentuated without removing bulk material. This morphological alteration, in 
conjunction with films featuring precisely engineered grain sizes, holds the potential to facilitate 
the ordered growth of nanoparticles or the self-assembly of polymers with a level of control that was 
previously unimaginable, as illustrated in Figure 5.5b [10].
5.4.1.2.4  Applications
5.4.1.2.4.1  Material Functionalization through Plasma Doping  In addition to its role in mate­
rial etching and deposition, plasmas have found applications in surface treatment and modification 
to enhance functionality. One notable process in this category is plasma doping (PD), where ionized 
species are implanted into the surface of a wafer through bias application. By carefully selecting 
process conditions and gas precursors, these impacting ions become part of the target substrate as 
either interstitial or substitutional dopants, thus altering the material’s physical properties. The use 
of PD in the semiconductor industry dates back to the early 1990s, primarily driven by the need for 
FIGURE 5.5  (a) Enhanced visualization of grain boundaries on the surface of titanium nitride (TiN) 
produced through physical vapor deposition (PVD) after undergoing modification using O2/Ar plasma. (b) 
Schematic illustration depicting the creation of selectively functionalized growth templates for self-assembled 
monolayers at sub-lithographic length scales. (Adapted with permission from [10]. Copyright [2021] AIP 
Publishing.)

61
Doping Methods and Their Effects
ultra-shallow junctions in integrated circuits (ICs). Traditional ion implantation methods typically 
required high powers exceeding 10 kV, making them unsuitable for achieving ultra-shallow junctions. 
However, the flexibility provided by source and bias power generators, along with precise control over 
substrate temperature, allowed for the attainment of the required dopant depth profiles with minimal 
channel damage. Through extensive development and refinement, PD has been successfully applied 
to tight-pitch 3D FinFET structures, which come with stringent requirements for conformality and 
uniformity. This highlights the adaptability and effectiveness of PD as a versatile technique for tailor­
ing semiconductor material properties to meet the evolving demands of the semiconductor industry.
Significant research efforts have been dedicated to III-V devices, primarily due to their remarkable 
carrier mobility. However, a key challenge has been reducing source/drain contact resistance in these 
materials. To address this challenge, researchers have explored Si, Sn, and Ge as n-type dopants. 
Conventional ion implantation methods have proven less effective for III-V materials like InGaAs due 
to the need for high-temperature dopant activation. Group V species tend to evaporate under these 
conditions, leading to stoichiometry loss and surface degradation. Additionally, the native oxide of 
InGaAs is resistant to typical etchants like HCl or HF solutions, which can hinder dopant incorporation.
PD performed within a manufacturing-compatible plasma reactor offers unique advantages in 
overcoming these challenges. These advantages include independent control of dose rate regardless 
of implant energy and the ability to switch between implantation, deposition, and etching regimes. 
The research group led by Marchack et al. [10] conducted plasma ion doping of Si and Sn into 
InGaAs using high-density plasma systems to investigate the effects of key PD process parameters, 
such as plasma source power, gas pressure, applied bias power, and processing time. Their study 
aimed to characterize the influence on dopant depth profiles, concentration, surface damage, and 
structural modifications. They confirmed that ion density and energy play a crucial role in deter­
mining the dopant depth profile. Of particular significance, applied bias power emerged as the most 
reliable and repeatable input parameter for defining the dopant depth profile and concentration. 
Moreover, it had the capability to modulate the transition between doping, deposition, and etching 
processes. Figure 5.6a illustrates the exposed In, Ga, and As bonds on the surface of InGaAs fol­
lowing the elimination of the native oxide layer through Ar/He ion bombardment [10], and Figure 
5.6b shows the process flow demonstrating an integrated in situ approach involving plasma surface 
cleaning, plasma ion doping, and plasma deposition [10].
5.4.1.2.4.2  ALD/ALE: The Role of Plasma Processing in Atomic Layer Deposition  Atomic 
layer deposition (ALD) has become an indispensable technique in the CMOS industry for deposit­
ing thin films precisely with exceptional control over their thickness [11]. ALD stands out due to 
the self-saturating surface reactivity of the precursor molecules it uses and its sequential, cyclical 
dosing of these molecules. These inherent qualities make ALD particularly valuable for achieving 
uniform and conformal coatings on 3D structures with high aspect ratios.
FIGURE 5.6  (a) Illustration showing exposed In, Ga, and As bonds on the InGaAs surface subsequent to 
the removal of the native oxide layer through Ar/He ion bombardment. (b) Process flow diagram outlining the 
integrated in situ approach involving plasma-based surface cleaning, ion doping, and capping. (Adapted with 
permission from [10]. Copyright [2021] AIP Publishing.)

62
Handbook of Semiconductors
Plasma plays a significant role in enhancing the microstructural characteristics of thin films 
within the generic ALD process. This improvement in microstructure subsequently enhances 
other physical properties, and this innovative technique is known as atomic layer annealing 
(ALA) [12]. In ALA, a brief exposure to a chemically inert plasma, typically argon, is performed 
at the end of each ALD cycle. During this exposure, kinetic energy from the plasma is transferred 
to the substrate surface, resulting in surface annealing. This annealing effect leads to the rear­
rangement of surface atoms and an improvement in the crystallographic ordering of the mate­
rial. One practical example is the deposition of aluminum nitride (AlN) using ALA. Traditional 
PEALD of AlN involves cyclical exposures to trimethylaluminum (TMA) and nitrogen plasma at 
temperatures around 250°C. However, incorporating ALA at the end of each cycle significantly 
enhances the crystallinity of the AlN film. Initially developed by Shih et al., this technique has 
since been successfully applied by various research groups to other material systems, resulting 
in films with improved optical, electrical, and templating properties. For instance, ALA has been 
integrated into TiN PEALD processes, reducing the resistivity of the film by up to 50%.
While ALD is known for its conformal coating properties, there are situations where the oppo­
site is desired—where ALD nucleation is intentionally inhibited on certain surfaces while promoted 
on others. This technique, known as area-selective deposition (ASD), allows for unique process 
flows and enables the fabrication of micro- and nanostructures that would otherwise be unattain­
able. The core concept of ASD is to achieve ALD coating exclusively on specific, predefined regions 
of the sample surface. This naturally requires the utilization of a material system with at least two 
chemically distinct surfaces. For instance, surfaces terminated with hydroxyl groups can readily 
facilitate chemical reactions with many ALD precursor molecules, enabling selective deposition on 
these hydroxyl-terminated regions.
On the opposite end of the atomic-scale patterning spectrum is atomic layer etching (ALE). 
Similar to ALD, ALE processes involve nominally self-limited half-reaction steps, and these 
reactions can be driven either thermally or through plasmas, known as PEALE. The capability 
of PEALE to create modified surface layers significantly thinner than those achieved with con­
ventional continuous wave (CW) plasma processes is a crucial factor in enabling next-generation 
technologies. In recent demonstrations, Marchack et al. [13] showcased precise control over the 
oxygen concentration within an ultra-thin (~ 2 nm) surface layer in tantalum nitride (TaN) through 
exposure to hydrogen (H2) plasma in a cyclic PEALE process using a standard inductively coupled 
plasma (ICP) reactor. This achievement has significant implications for achieving etch uniformity 
and reducing sputter redeposition, especially in densely packed structures. Further exploration of 
such techniques, particularly with low electron temperature (Te) sources, could potentially refine 
this level of control down to true monolayer length scales.
Cyclic ALE processes also offer the advantage of controlling the etch selectivity of materials, 
thereby expanding the possibilities of integration schemes without the need for additional lithographic 
masks or novel gas chemistries. Despite its advantages, ALE is not a cure-all for the challenges that 
lie ahead. As future technologies target reduced dimensions and intricate architectures, the impact of 
surface layer composition becomes more pronounced, necessitating a higher degree of tunability in 
plasma processes. Furthermore, the complexity introduced by device constituents, mask materials, and 
chamber components can inadvertently lead to unwanted reactions and affect final etch profiles. While 
undesired reactions, such as oxidation, pose challenges to achieving ideal ALE behavior, they should 
not discourage us from pursuing this line of research. Even unintended consequences can be leveraged 
to develop novel fabrication schemes, such as self-aligned masking for lithographic subdivision.
5.4.2  Diffusion Methods and Advancements
Alternatively, impurity introduction can be achieved through a diffusion process, which 
involves the movement of atoms from regions with a high concentration to regions with a low 
concentration.

63
Doping Methods and Their Effects
5.4.2.1  Gas Phase or Solid Phase Diffusion – Advanced Techniques
Other advanced methods based on gas-phase or solid-phase diffusion have also been explored. 
However, these approaches encounter fundamental challenges in managing dopant concentration 
near the surface and achieving uniformity. In gas-source doping, a gas is utilized to deliver the dop­
ant to the substrate, providing equal access to all surfaces of the silicon device. On the other hand, 
solid-source doping involves applying a solution to silicon surfaces, followed by a thermal treatment 
to facilitate diffusion. The solution containing the dopant typically consists of a mixture of SiO2 
and dopant atoms or Si-based polymers with dopant atoms incorporated into the polymer chains, 
such as phosphosilicates or borosilicates [14]. Unfortunately, while this method is straightforward 
and non-destructive, it does not ensure precise dose control over large substrate areas. Moreover, 
residues from the dopant precursor solution are challenging to remove from the surface, leading to 
the formation of a chemically modified layer that is difficult to strip off.
To address these limitations, self-assembly techniques followed by molecular grafting have dem­
onstrated their effectiveness in producing a consistent monolayer of dopant-containing molecules 
attached to pristine crystalline silicon substrates over large areas. Assuming there are enough reac­
tive sites on the substrates, the actual density of grafted molecules is primarily determined by the 
molecular footprint. This self-limiting reaction has been utilized in conjunction with conventional 
spike annealing procedures to facilitate the creation of ultra-shallow junctions in silicon doped with 
boron, phosphorus, and arsenic, achieving depths below 5 nm [15].
5.4.2.2  Molecular Monolayer Doping (MLD) – Advanced Technique
Molecular monolayer doping (MLD) offers exceptional versatility by enabling precise adjustments 
of various parameters, including surface preparation, molecular footprint, capping layer, and ther­
mal treatment, to optimize both the surface coverage of molecules and the diffusion of dopants into 
the semiconductor. However, the wet chemistry commonly employed in the MLD process pres­
ents significant challenges in terms of its suitability for manufacturing [16]. Furthermore, the dop­
ant concentrations typically achieved through MLD are in the range of ~1020 cm−3. To make this 
approach viable for industrial applications, it is essential to expand its capabilities to achieve doping 
concentrations ranging from 1015 to 1021 cm−3. One modified approach proposed to tackle this chal­
lenge involves blending dopant-containing molecules with dopant-free molecules and subsequently 
grafting them onto the silicon surface. The composition of the final monolayer is assumed to be pro­
portional to the fraction of dopant-containing molecules in the solution. While this method allows 
for some variation in doping dose over an order of magnitude, concerns have been raised about its 
reproducibility and accuracy.
5.5  OVERVIEW OF THE DIFFERENT DOPING PROCESSES – PROS AND CONS
Table 5.1 provides an overview of the advantages and disadvantages of different doping methods, 
including (1) ion implantation, (2) plasma-assisted doping, (3) gas-source doping, (4) solid-source 
doping, and (5) MLD [17]. In the following paragraphs, we will examine each row of Table 5.1 
separately, evaluating each assessment criterion independently.
i.	High dose incorporation: Incorporating a substantial amount of dopants is crucial for vari­
ous device applications, particularly for reducing access resistance. Ensuring the effec­
tive activation of these dopants is a distinct research area that deserves comprehensive 
examination. When it comes to achieving high-dose dopant incorporation, ion implanta­
tion emerges as the preferred choice. Modern implantation tools can handle extremely high 
implant doses, reaching levels of approximately 1015 to 1016 atoms/cm2 [18]. This results 
in chemical concentrations exceeding 1020 atoms/cm3 or even higher, meeting the require­
ments of most semiconductor device applications. Plasma-assisted doping processes are 
also well-suited for achieving high doses, as specific conditions within the process can 

64
Handbook of Semiconductors
accelerate charged ions toward the target. In the case of gas or solid sources, they can 
be considered suitable for achieving chemical concentrations in the range of 1019 to 1020 
atoms/cm3 [19]. However, techniques relying on in-diffusion often face challenges, as the 
surface can act as a trapping site for common impurities.
Currently, MLD is not considered a high-dose process because its dopant incorporation 
levels are relatively lower compared to competing processes. Nevertheless, it’s important 
to note that MLD is still in a less mature stage compared to other techniques, and ongoing 
research holds the potential for breakthroughs. For instance, strategies such as achiev­
ing denser packing of molecules after surface functionalization and overcoming surface 
barriers could advance this chemistry-based process technology. Additionally, exploring 
molecules containing polymers may offer a path to improved MLD concentration levels, 
making it an exciting and rapidly evolving research area [20].
ii.	Bulk crystal damage (physical): When considering the issue of bulk crystal damage, it is 
generally recommended to minimize it whenever feasible. Such damage can lead to sub­
optimal device performance, giving rise to unwanted problems such as leakage current or 
reduced device-to-device reliability due to extended defects and stacking faults. Given this 
concern, processes with a significant physical component, namely ion implantation and 
plasma-assisted methods, may require more extensive optimization or innovative process 
integration approaches to overcome this limitation. In contrast, gas-source, solid-source, 
and MLD techniques do not encounter this specific challenge.
TABLE 5.1
An Overview of the Strengths and Weaknesses of Various Doping Processes
Assessment
criteria
High dose
incorporation
Bulk crystal damage
(physical)
Surface crystal
damage (chemical)
Cleaning recipe
development required
after deposition
Barrier at surface that
inhibits incorporation
Industry standard
Suitability for 3D
structures
(conformality)
Suitability for
TMD materials
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
(iv)
(v)
(vi)
(vii)
(viii)
Unlikely
Most used
Not used as much
as ion implant
Not used as much
as ion implant
Not used as much
as ion implant
Needs
development
Can inject
beyond surface
with energy
No
No
Limiting
Limiting
Limiting
No
Yes
Shadowing
can be an issue
Unlikely
Possible
Possible
Possible
Better than
lon Implant
Can be
conformal
Can be
conformal
Can be
conformal
Unlikely
Needs
thermal treatment
to repair
Needs
thermal treatment
to repair
Unlikely
Yes, if operating in
deposition mode
Can inject
beyond surface
with energy
Needs care
and attention
Needs care
and attention
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
Unlikely
lon implant
Very good
Very good
Good
Good
Needs
development
Plasma-
assisted
Gas-source
Solid-source
MLD
Source:	 Adapted with permission from [17]. Copyright (2023), Margarita Georgieva, Nikolay Petkov, Ray Duffy, some 
rights reserved; exclusive license (Elsevier Ltd.).

65
Doping Methods and Their Effects
iii.	 Surface crystal damage (chemical): Surface damage to the target substrate or structure can
also occur, primarily due to unintended or unexpected chemical reactions. Ion implanta­
tion and plasma-assisted processes propel ions past the surface, while solid sources often
consist of non-corrosive silicon oxides. Gas sources can potentially disassociate into other
species, such as atomic hydrogen, which might etch the surface under certain conditions,
demanding careful attention. MLD, being a chemistry-based process, involves wet treat­
ments for cleaning and functionalization that can create rough or textured surfaces if not
properly optimized.
iv.	 Cleaning recipe development required after deposition: The need for a cleaning step arises
from any material deposition that must be removed before further device fabrication can
proceed. For example, solid sources in the form of oxides must be eliminated after dop­
ant drive-in, necessitating an additional round of testing and optimization. This, in turn,
adds both cost and complexity to the overall process flow. In the case of plasma-assisted
doping, a thin film of material can often be deposited, depending on the tool setup, and
it also requires a subsequent cleaning step. MLD typically involves the use of an oxide-
capping layer to encapsulate the molecules on the surface during thermal treatment, which
promotes dopant incorporation. However, this cap oxide must be removed after the dopant
drive-in phase.
v.	 Barrier at the surface that inhibits incorporation: The surface plays a critical role in semi­
conductor doping. It serves as a collector of point defects, which can be advantageous and
a trapping site for dopant atoms, effectively preventing them from modifying the underly­
ing semiconductor. This surface trapping can be viewed as an energy barrier that must
be overcome to introduce impurities into the target material. Doping techniques that rely
primarily on in-diffusion and have minimal physical components in their dopant delivery
are particularly susceptible to this surface barrier. In the future, achieving a state of dopant
supersaturation at the surface interface may help address this issue.
vi.	 Industry standard: The designation of a process or technology as an industry standard
depends not only on its performance but also on its level of maturity, reliability, and
reproducibility. Ion implantation stands out as a leader in this category due to decades of
research, tool development, and extensive exploration of the associated physics. Its advan­
tages include the ability to achieve high levels of dopant incorporation and a wide range of
available elemental species. Ion implantation is undeniably a crucial part of the semicon­
ductor device manufacturing value chain.
vii.	 Suitability for 3D structures (conformality): While not as mature as ion implantation, PD
offers solutions for applications where ion implantation may face challenges. This includes
scenarios involving 3D structures that demand a high degree of dopant uniformity and
conformality. It’s worth noting that a lack of conformality can result in local resistance
variations within a device, and the highly directional ion beam of ion implantation has
limitations in this regard. For example, densely packed structures may cast shadows over
neighboring regions during ion implantation. In contrast, plasma doping can deposit mate­
rial uniformly on a surface, which can then serve as a dopant source during subsequent
thermal treatment. In-diffusion-based processes have a distinct advantage in addressing
shadowing concerns, and this should be considered when dealing with solid-source depo­
sitions to ensure they are conformal. ALD can offer a solution to enhance conformality
in such cases. Gas sources can be adjusted using chamber pressures and gas flow rates,
while MLD relies on surface reactions and is expected to provide excellent conformality
to surfaces.
viii.	 Suitability for TMD materials:  Lastly, when assessing doping solutions for transition metal 
dichalcogenide (TMD) thin-film devices, it’s important to note that this research area is
still in its infancy. Therefore, the conclusions drawn here may evolve as more research is
conducted in the future. In general, subjecting TMDs to physical bombardment results

66
Handbook of Semiconductors
in the creation of defects that are not easily remedied through thermal treatment, such as 
vacancies in metal or chalcogen atoms. It is the efficient repair mechanism for damage in 
group IV semiconductors that allows ion implantation to dominate the market. However, 
TMDs do not exhibit the same self-repair capability, and the solution to this issue is not 
yet clear. Further research is required to address this challenge. In any case, it is advisable 
to avoid the physical injection of ions into TMDs, and instead rely on gentler deposition or 
chemistry-functionalization processes in this specific application domain.
5.6  FUTURE OF SEMICONDUCTOR TECHNOLOGY
When considering the high-level evaluation of the advantages and disadvantages, epitaxial growth 
presents a notable benefit by allowing for the incorporation of high levels of dopants into the target 
substrate without causing physical harm to the semiconductor crystal or disturbing the semiconduc­
tor surface. It circumvents surface energy barriers associated with dopant inclusion, and the process 
has reached a sufficient level of maturity for utilization in manufacturing settings. Nevertheless, it 
necessitates the growth of a new layer or material, which may require careful consideration when 
dealing with limited spaces and distances between features. Additionally, its suitability for novel 
materials like TMDs warrants further exploration, as the idea of elevated source drains in TMD 
MOS (Transition Metal Dichalcogenide Metal Oxide Semiconductor) devices has not been firmly 
established. The potential advantages of proximity doping arising from surface layers should not be 
underestimated, particularly since 2D materials are significantly influenced by their surfaces and 
encapsulation.
5.7  SUMMARY
This chapter explores state-of-the-art doping techniques in semiconductor technology. It begins by 
examining plasma doping’s role and delves into its synergy with ALD and ALE. Gas-phase and 
solid-phase diffusion methods are scrutinized for their impact. MLD precision is discussed, fol­
lowed by tailored doping for TMDs. The significance of epitaxial growth and proximity doping in 
crafting advanced semiconductor structures is highlighted. This chapter serves as a comprehensive 
guide to the cutting-edge doping techniques that underpin the ever-evolving landscape of semicon­
ductor technology within the context of this book.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 G. E. Moore, Cramming more components onto integrated circuits, Reprinted from Electronics, 
volume 38, number 8, April 19, 1965, pp.114 ff., IEEE Solid-State Circuits Soc. Newsletter. 11 (3) (2006) 
33–35.
	
2.	 E. Sicard, L. Trojman, Introducing 5-nm FinFET technology in microwind. (2021).
	
3.	 E. S. Snow, P. M. Campbell, P. J. McMarr, Fabrication of silicon nanostructures with a scanning tunnel­
ing microscope, Appl. Phys. Lett. 63 (1993) 749–751.
	
4.	 S. M. Sze, M. K. Lee, K. Singleton, S. Mendel, Semiconductor Devices – Physics and Technology, 
Chapter 1, 2008, Hoboken, NJ, John Wiley & Sons, INC.
	
5.	 B. G. Yacobi, I. Brodie, A. Sher, Semiconductor Materials – An Introduction to Basic Principles, 
Chapter 4, 2003, New York, NY, Kluwer Academic Publishers.
	
6.	 A. Smets, K. Jäger, O. Isabella, R. Van Swaaij, M. Zeman, Solar Energy: The Physics and Engineering 
of Photovoltaic Conversion, Technologies and Systems, Chapter 6, 2016, Cambridge, UIT Cambridge 
Ltd.
	
7.	 J. R. Conrad, J. L. Radtke, R. A. Dodd, F. J. Worzata, N. C. Tran, Plasma source ion-implantation tech­
nique for surface modification of materials, J. Appl. Phys. 62 (1987) 4591–4596.
	
8.	 J. Tendys, L. J. Donnelly, M. J. Kenny, J. T. A. Pollock, Plasma immersion ion implantation using plas­
mas generated by radio frequency techniques, Appl. Phys. Lett. 53 (1988) 2143–2145.

67
Doping Methods and Their Effects
	
9.	 J. W. Coburn, H. F. Winters, Plasma etching—A discussion of mechanisms, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. 16 (2) 
(1979) 391–403.
	 10.	 N. Marchack, L. Buzi, D. B. Farmer, H. Miyazoe, J. M. Papalia, H. Yan, G. Totir, S. U. Engelmann, 
Plasma processing for advanced microelectronics beyond CMOS, J. Appl. Phys. 130 (2021) 
080901-2–080901-16.
	 11.	 B. C. Mallick, C.-T. Hsieh, K.-M. Yin, Y. A. Gandomi, K.-T. Huang, Review—On atomic layer deposi­
tion: Current progress and future challenges, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol. 8 (2019) N55–N78.
	 12.	 W.-H. Lee, Y.-T. Yin, P.-H. Cheng, J.-J. Shyue, M. Shiojiri, H.-C. Lin, M.-J. Chen, Nanoscale GaN 
epilayer grown by atomic layer annealing and epitaxy at low temperature, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng. 
7 (2019) 487–495.
	 13.	 N. Marchack, J. Innocent-Dolor, M. Hopstaken, S. Engelmann, Control of surface oxide formation 
in plasma-enhanced quasiatomic layer etching of tantalum nitride, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A. 38 (2020) 
022609.
	 14.	 M. L. Hoarfrost, K. Takei, V. Ho, A. Heitsch, P. Trefonas, A. Javey, R. A. Segalman, Spin-on organic 
polymer dopants for silicon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 4 (2013) 3741–3746.
	 15.	 C. Qin, H. Yin, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, Q. Zhang, H. Zhu, C. Zhao, H. H. Radamson, A novel method 
for source/drain ion implantation for 20 nm FinFETs and beyond, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron. 31 
(2020) 98–104.
	 16.	 J. C. Ho, R. Yerushalmi, Z. Jacobson, Z. Fan, R. L. Alley, A. Javey, Controlled nanoscale doping of 
semiconductors via molecular monolayers, Nat. Mater. 7 (2008) 62–67.
	 17.	 M. Georgieva, N. Petkov, R. Duffy, 3D to 2D perspectives - traditional and new doping and metrology 
challenges at the nanoscale, Mater. Sci. Semicond. 163 (2023) 107584.
	 18.	 Y. Sasaki, K. Okashita, B. Mizuo, M. Kubota, M. Ogura, O. Nishijima, Conformal doping mechanism 
for fin field effect transistors by self-regulatory plasma doping with AsH3 plasma diluted with He, 
J. Appl. Phys. 111 (2012) 013712.
	 19.	 Y. Kiyota, T. Inada, Sticking coefficient of boron and phosphorus on silicon during vapor-phase doping, 
J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A. 19 (2001) 2441.
	 20.	 M. Perego, F. Caruso, G. Seguini, E. Arduca, R. Mantovan, K. Sparnacci, M. Laus, Doping of silicon by 
phosphorus end-terminated polymers: Drive-in and activation of dopants, J. Mater. Chem. C. 8 (2020) 
10229–10237.

68
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-6
Emerging Materials in 
Semiconductor Devices
Arpana Agrawal
6.1  INTRODUCTION
The rapid advancement of technology and the ever-increasing demand for more efficient and power­
ful electronic devices have led to a constant search for new materials with enhanced properties. In 
the field of semiconductor devices, emerging materials have garnered significant attention due to 
their potential to revolutionize the performance and functionality of electronic components. These 
materials, which encompass a wide range of novel substances, offer unique characteristics that 
could surpass the limitations of traditional semiconductor materials.
The importance of emerging materials in semiconductor devices cannot be overstated as they hold 
the promise of enabling higher-speed and lower-power electronics, paving the way for the develop­
ment of advanced technologies such as flexible electronics, wearable devices, and high-performance 
computing. By harnessing the distinctive properties of these materials, engineers and researchers can 
explore new design possibilities and overcome the bottlenecks faced by conventional semiconductor 
technologies. A few of the emerging materials for semiconductor technology are organic semicon­
ductors, two-dimensional (2D) materials (i.e. graphene-based materials), transition metal dichalco­
genides (TMDs) (MoS2, WS2, WSe2, etc.), hybrid systems (combining inorganic/organic materials or 
2D materials with traditional semiconductors), or perovskite materials, etc. [1–4].
Organic semiconductors represent an exciting avenue in semiconductor technology. Their versa­
tile electronic properties, solution processability, and flexibility make them promising candidates for 
applications ranging from flexible displays to energy-efficient electronics. Ongoing research endeav­
ors are aimed at overcoming their challenges and realizing their full potential, paving the way for a 
new era of electronic devices that blend advanced functionality with innovative design. As innova­
tions unfold, 2D materials including graphene-based materials, TMDs, or hybrid systems are poised 
to reshape semiconductor technology and impact industries ranging from electronics to energy and 
beyond. Moreover, perovskite materials have also ushered in a new era of semiconductor device tech­
nology. Their remarkable optoelectronic properties, cost-effective synthesis methods, and versatility 
position them as contenders for next-generation solar cells, light-emitting devices (LEDs), and more. 
All these materials have revolutionized the field of semiconductor devices. However, the synthesis 
method and fabrication technology along with the integration of these emerging materials with the 
modern fabrication techniques also play a vital role in semiconductor device fabrication.
Accordingly, the present chapter aims to provide a comprehensive overview of the exciting field 
of emerging materials for semiconductor devices,  including organic semiconductors, 2D materials, 
perovskite materials, their characteristics, integration with modern fabrication techniques, applica­
tions, and challenges. A brief discussion on traditional semiconductor materials and the limita­
tions they present will also be discussed. Furthermore, the characterization techniques essential for 
evaluating their properties and performance will also breifly be described.
6.2  TRADITIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR MATERIALS
Traditional semiconductor materials have been the cornerstone of modern electronics for several 
decades. These materials, such as silicon (Si), germanium (Ge), InAs, gallium arsenide (GaAs), 
wide band gap semiconductors, etc. have proven to be highly reliable and versatile for a wide range 
6

69
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
of electronic applications [5–9]. They possess unique electrical properties that allow for the con­
trolled flow of electrons, making them essential for the construction of transistors, integrated cir­
cuits, and other semiconductor devices.
Silicon, in particular, has been the dominant material in the semiconductor industry due to its 
abundance, excellent electrical properties, and well-established manufacturing processes. It has 
facilitated the exponential growth of computational power and the miniaturization of electronic 
components, leading to the development of modern computing devices. Germanium, though less 
widely used than silicon, has similar electrical properties and has found applications in niche 
areas such as infrared detectors and high-speed transistors. Gallium arsenide, with its superior 
electron mobility, has been employed in high-frequency applications, microwave devices, and 
optoelectronics.
Despite their long-standing success, traditional semiconductor materials are not without limita­
tions. These limitations have motivated researchers to explore and develop emerging materials with 
improved properties. Some key challenges and limitations of traditional semiconductor materials 
include the performance limitations, physical limitations, manufacturing complexity and cost, envi­
ronmetal impact, limited functional diversity, etc. As device dimensions shrink to nanoscale levels, 
traditional materials face challenges in maintaining performance and functionality. Issues like leak­
age currents, heat dissipation, and power consumption become more prominent, hampering further 
advancements in device performance.
Also, traditional materials have limited optical properties, restricting their application in opto­
electronic devices such as LEDs and solar cells. The mechanical properties of these materials may 
also hinder the realization of flexible or stretchable electronic devices.
Apart from this, while silicon-based processes have been optimized over the years, the manu­
facturing of traditional semiconductor materials can still be complex and expensive. The fabrica­
tion of high-quality single-crystal substrates and precise doping processes can add significant costs 
to semiconductor device production. The extraction and purification of traditional semiconductor 
materials, such as silicon, can also have environmental consequences due to energy-intensive pro­
cesses and the generation of hazardous waste materials. Addressing these limitations and challenges 
has become a driving force behind the exploration and development of emerging materials for semi­
conductor devices. By leveraging the unique properties of newly emerging materials, researchers 
aim to overcome the hurdles encountered by traditional materials and unlock new opportunities for 
next-generation electronic devices.
6.3  OVERVIEW OF EMERGING MATERIALS
Emerging materials refer to a diverse group of novel substances that exhibit unique properties and 
functionalities, distinct from traditional semiconductor materials. These materials are typically 
characterized by their exceptional electrical, optical, mechanical, or thermal properties, which 
make them promising candidates for applications in semiconductor devices. Emerging materials 
encompass various classes, including organic semiconductors, 2D materials, perovskite materi­
als, etc.
The characteristics of emerging materials vary depending on their specific class. Organic semi­
conductors, for example, are carbon-based compounds that possess inherent flexibility, low cost, 
and the ability to be processed through solution-based techniques. 2D materials, such as graphene 
and TMDs, have a single or few atomic layers, offering exceptional mechanical strength, high car­
rier mobility, and unique electrical properties. Perovskite materials are a class of compounds with a 
distinctive crystal structure that exhibits excellent light-absorbing properties and high charge carrier 
mobility. The emergence of new materials for semiconductor devices holds immense importance 
due to their potential to overcome the limitations of traditional materials and drive advancements 
in various areas of technology. The importance of emerging materials lies in their ability to enable 

70
Handbook of Semiconductors
the development of high-performance electronic devices with enhanced capabilities. By harness­
ing their unique properties, researchers can explore new avenues for applications such as flexible 
electronics, wearable devices, bendable displays, high-speed transistors, energy harvesting devices, 
optoelectronics, and sensing technologies. For example, organic semiconductors offer the poten­
tial for flexible, lightweight, and low-cost electronics. They can be utilized in flexible displays, 
electronic skins, and wearable sensors. 2D materials exhibit exceptional electrical and thermal 
properties, making them suitable for high-speed transistors, sensors, and energy-efficient devices. 
Perovskite materials have shown tremendous potential in solar cells, LEDs, and photodetectors due 
to their excellent light-absorption and charge transport properties.
The integration of emerging materials in semiconductor devices has the potential to revolu­
tionize various industries, including electronics, energy, healthcare, and communications. The 
exploration and utilization of these materials are crucial for pushing the boundaries of current 
technological capabilities and creating innovative solutions to address the demands of a rapidly 
evolving world.
6.4  CHARACTERIZATION TECHNIQUES FOR EMERGING MATERIALS
Characterization techniques play a crucial role in understanding the properties and behavior of 
emerging materials for semiconductor devices. These techniques allow researchers to analyze, mea­
sure, and evaluate the structural, electrical, optical, thermal, and mechanical properties of these 
materials. By gaining insights into these properties, researchers can optimize material synthesis, 
device fabrication processes, and performance. Characterization techniques typically involve a com­
bination of experimental measurements, imaging, spectroscopy, and analysis and provide valuable 
information about the material’s composition, crystal structure, surface morphology, charge trans­
port, optical absorption, emission properties, and more. The data obtained from these techniques 
aids in the development and improvement of emerging materials for semiconductor applications. 
The techniques for analyzing and evaluating emerging materials for semiconductor devices include 
X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), transmission electron microscopy 
(TEM), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Raman spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy 
(XPS), photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL), electrical characterization, thermal analysis, Z-scan 
technique, magnetic measurements, etc. [10–17].
XRD is used to determine the crystal structure, lattice parameters, and phase purity of materi­
als. By analyzing the diffraction pattern resulting from X-ray scattering, researchers can identify 
the crystallographic phases present in the material, assess the quality of crystal growth, and verify 
the structural properties of emerging materials. SEM provides high-resolution imaging of material 
surfaces and enables researchers to visualize the morphology, surface features, and topography of 
emerging materials. This technique also  allows for the characterization of nanostructures, such 
as nanowires and quantum dots, and aids in assessing the quality and uniformity of materials. 
TEM provides detailed information about the internal structure, crystal defects, and composition of 
materials at the nanoscale, offering high-resolution imaging and allowing researchers to visualize 
the atomic arrangement and interfaces within emerging materials. This technique is particularly 
useful for analyzing 2D materials, nanowires, and quantum dots. AFM is employed to investigate 
the surface topography, roughness, and mechanical properties of materials and uses a cantilever 
with a sharp tip to scan the material’s surface, providing detailed information about its features 
at the nanoscale. This technique is valuable for assessing the quality and uniformity of emerging 
materials. Raman spectroscopy utilizes laser-induced scattering of light to analyze the vibrational 
modes of materials and provides information about the molecular structure, chemical composition, 
and crystallinity of emerging materials. This spectroscopy can be used to study the optical proper­
ties, strain, and doping effects in 2D materials and nanowires. XPS is a surface sensitive technique 
and allows the determination of electronic band alingments, core level and valence level studies, 
chemical composition, etc. PL spectroscopy measures the emission of light from materials upon 

71
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
excitation with a light source and is used to evaluate the optical properties, bandgaps, and defect 
states in emerging materials. PL spectroscopy is particularly useful for characterizing quantum 
dots, perovskite materials, and organic semiconductors. Vibrating-sample magnetometers, magne­
toresistance, and superconducting quantum interference devices facilitate their magnetic and mag­
netotransport studies.
For semiconductor devices, electrical characterization techniques, such as Hall effect mea­
surements, conductivity measurements, and transistor characterization are requiredto assess 
the electronic properties and charge transport behavior of emerging materials. These tech­
niques provide insights into carrier concentration, mobility, resistivity, and device performance. 
Thermal analysis techniques, such as differential scanning calorimetry and thermogravimetric 
analysis, are used to investigate the thermal stability, phase transitions, and thermal proper­
ties of emerging materials. This information is critical for assessing the suitability of materials 
for high-temperature applications and understanding their thermal behavior. Z-scan techniques 
facilitate determining the nonlinear optical parameters, particularly nonlinear absorption and 
nonlinear refraction, which are prerequisites for adapting the material for optoelectronic device 
applications.
6.5  EMERGING MATERIALS FOR SEMICONDUCTING DEVICES
6.5.1  Organic Semiconductors
Organic semiconductors, a class of materials at the intersection of organic chemistry and semicon­
ductor physics, have emerged as a versatile and promising alternative to traditional inorganic semi­
conductors. These carbon-based compounds exhibit unique electrical properties, making them ideal 
candidates for various electronic applications. The key advantage of organic semiconductors lies in 
their tunable electronic properties via chemical modification which allows  fine control over their 
energy levels and charge carrier transport. This  facilitates tailoring the properties of organic semi­
conductors for specific applications and also enhance device performance. One of their remarkable 
features is their compatibility with solution-based processing techniques. This enables large-area, 
low-cost, and flexible fabrication methods, which contrast with the energy-intensive processes 
used for traditional semiconductors. The lightweight and flexible nature of organic semiconductors 
makes them suitable for applications requiring conformable electronics, such as flexible displays, 
wearable sensors, and rollable screens.
Organic semiconductors have found applications in a diverse range of electronic devices. Organic 
LEDs stand out as one of the most successful applications, providing vivid displays with lower 
energy consumption. Organic photovoltaics (OPVs) offer a unique approach to solar energy harvest­
ing, demonstrating potential for lightweight and semi-transparent solar panels. Organic thin-film 
transistors (OTFTs) are utilized in flexible electronics, enabling bendable and stretchable circuits. 
Wilbers et al. [18], have demonstrated the mechganism of charge transport in vertical pillar struc­
tures at nanoscale regime, which consists of a thin layer (~5 nm) of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), 
a well known organic semiconductor. A high current density of 106 A/m2 has been obtained. 
Figure 6.1 illustrates the sequential steps involved in producing vertical metal-P3HT-metal pillars. 
Initially, a layer of P3HT was applied through spin-coating onto clean Au bottom electrodes situ­
ated on Si/SiO2 substrates as shown in Figure 6.1a and 6.1b). The top metal contacts of Au disks 
(diameters: 200 nm to 2 μm; thickness: 70 nm) were wedged onto the P3HT.
For wedging transfer, these top contacts were encapsulated within a hydrophobic polymer (cel­
lulose acetate butyrate [CAB]) which was prepared by dissolving CAB in ethyl acetate. When the 
device is submerged in water, the water infiltrates between the hydrophilic SiO2 substrate and the 
hydrophobic CAB, causing the polymer to detach. Due to the low adhesion between Au and SiO2, 
the Au disks were lifted off along with the CAB polymer. Subsequently, the Au disks were wedged 
onto the new substrate featuring 5 μm wide bottom electrodes coated with P3HT. This was achieved 

72
Handbook of Semiconductors
by placing the substrate at an angle of approximately 45° on a grid holder within a beaker filled with 
Milli-Q water and slowly draining the water (Figure 6.1c). In this manner, the cellulose polymer 
initially made contact with the hydrophilic SiO2 and then gently adhered to the P3HT. The next step 
involved performing directional reactive ion beam etching to create vertical pillars (Figure 6.1d). 
The Au disks served as an etch mask for the P3HT during this process. Subsequently, the pillars were 
enclosed within an electrically insulating layer of hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ), which was thin­
ner on top of the pillars compared to the substrate. While maintaining the protection of the organic 
FIGURE 6.1  Diagram illustrating the fabrication process for vertical Au-P3HT-Au pillars, with both top 
and side views depicted: (a) Initiation process involving pattern creations for the bottom electrodes through 
photolithography on Si/SiO2 substrates. (b) Following this, a layer of P3HT is uniformly applied through spin-
coating. (c) Transferring of top contacts onto the thin P3HT film using a wedging technique. (d) Subsequently, 
the vertical pillars are formed through directional dry etching using oxygen plasma, with the top contacts 
functioning as an etch mask for the P3HT. (e) To complete the process, a layer of HSQ is spin-coated and 
then planarized through reactive ion etching, opening up the top Au contacts. (f) Finally, large top contacts 
are evaporated onto the structure, and their pattern is defined through photolithography. Cross-sectional SEM 
images: Pt-P3HT-Au test structure (g), Au-P3HT-Au test structure following the dry etching and spin coating 
of HSQ (h), and the final test structure (i). (Adapted with permission [18]. Copyright [2017] Copyright the 
Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [Nature Springer]. Distributed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 [CC BY] https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.)

73
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
layer (as demonstrated in Figure 6.1e), the Au top contacts of the pillars were exposed through reac­
tive ion beam etching. To establish contact with the pillar structures, a 100 nm thick metal layer was 
then deposited and patterned using photolithography to form substantial contact pads (Figure 6.1f). 
For a more comprehensive description of the fabrication procedure, please refer to the experimental 
section in the associated documentation. Figure 6.1g−6.1i gives the cross-sectional images obtained 
using SEM for the Pt-P3HT-Au test structure (g), the Au-P3HT-Au test structure following the dry 
etching, and spin coating of HSQ (h) and the final test structure (i).
Mensfoort et al. [19], have examined the current density voltage behavior of various orgaic semi­
conductorbased, sandwichtype structures. Wang et al. [20], have also studied the hopping transport 
behavior of electrochemically gated transistors based on P3HT. Polythiophene based thin-film tran­
sistorswere also fabricated by Kline et al. [21]. Apart from P3HT, PCBM is also a promising mate­
rial for trasistor applications [22]. It is noteworthy to mention here that fabricating hybrid structures 
where inorganic materials were combined with organic materials also leads to various fascinating 
applications. Such a hybrid structure was also reported by Krieg et al. [23], combining GaN with 
oxidative chemical vapor deposited PEDOT for optoelectronic applications.
Apart from immense advantages of organic semiconductors, they also present challenges. One 
major concern is their relatively low charge carrier mobility compared to inorganic counterparts, 
limiting their application in high-speed electronic devices. Additionally, environmental stability 
and degradation over time pose obstacles for widespread commercial adoption. Developing efficient 
and stable manufacturing processes and addressing the issue of charge carrier mobility are focal 
points of ongoing research.
6.5.2  Two-dimensional Materials
2D materials, consisting of atomically thin layers, have sparked a revolution in materials science and 
semiconductor technology. With unique properties stemming from their nanoscale thickness, these 
materials offer remarkable opportunities for a wide array of applications as shown in Figure 6.2. At 
the forefront of 2D materials is graphene, a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal 
lattice. Beyond graphene, TMDs and other materials like h-BN, phosphorene, and black phosphorus 
exhibit diverse properties due to their distinct crystal structures and compositions. Huang et al. [24], 
presented a comprehensive review of various 2D semiconductors.
Two-dimensional materials exhibit extraordinary electrical, optical, mechanical, and thermal 
properties and high charge carrier mobility, making them potential candidates for high-speed 
transistors and logic devices. Their nanoscale thickness enables unique mechanical flexibility and 
strength, making them ideal for flexible electronics and wearable devices. Moreover, their direct 
bandgap in TMDs leads to strong light-matter interactions, promising breakthroughs in optoelectron­
ics and photodetectors. In electronics, they are being explored for ultra-thin and high-performance 
transistors, memory devices, and logic circuits. Their exceptional thermal conductivity makes them 
appealing for thermal management in advanced electronics. In photonics, they enable efficient light 
emission and detection, paving the way for improved LEDs, photodetectors, and quantum devices. 
Mechanically flexible and transparent, 2D materials are indispensable in flexible electronics and 
transparent conductive films. Their gas-sensing capabilities are harnessed for environmental moni­
toring and medical diagnostics. Additionally, their large surface areas and tailored functionalization 
support advancements in energy storage and conversion devices, such as batteries, supercapacitors, 
and catalysts.
The advent of the first-ever monolayer MoS2 transistor with an exceptionally high on/off ratio 
served as a catalyst for a surge in research on 2D semiconductor transistors [25]. While 2D semi­
conductors can easily achieve atomic layers thinner than 1 nm, it is their performance at extremely 
reduced channel lengths that dictates their potential applications in high-performance transis­
tors. To ascertain their resistance to short-channel effects, experiments were conducted on MoS2 
field effect transistors (FETs) with channel lengths ranging from microns to tens of nanometers, 

74
Handbook of Semiconductors
revealing MoS2’s immunity to short channels [26, 27]. Furthermore, a MoS2 transistor employing 
carbon nanotubes as the gate electrode demonstrated remarkable switching performance with an 
on/off ratio exceeding 106, despite having a gate of only 1 nm [28]. In a conventional planar gate 
device setup, Xie et al. [29], managed to achieve physical channel lengths as short as 8 and 3.8 nm 
using graphene as the electrode.
The current performance is the fundamental metric for 2D semiconductors acting as channels, 
with the effective mass and bandgap being critical factors primarily determined by the material 
itself. The effective mass is an intrinsic parameter that gauges the maximum current achievable 
through the channel and is directly related to the material’s band structure, representing the second 
derivative of the band dispersion [30]. The maximum ballistic current flowing through the channel 
is proportionate to the ballistic velocity of the carriers. A low effective mass facilitates achieving 
high carrier velocities, implying that materials exhibiting lower effective masses can offer higher 
current limits [31]. However, the effective mass should not be too low, as it may lead to carrier tun­
neling between the source and drain while failing to provide sufficient carrier density of states, ulti­
mately compromising transistor performance [32, 33]. Different 2D semiconductors offer choices 
for selecting the appropriate effective mass to meet specific current performance requirements. For 
instance, MoS2, with a substantial effective mass for electrons (about 0.5mo), effectively mitigates 
direct tunneling between source and drain electrodes in ultra-short channel devices, thus suppress­
ing leakage currents. In contrast, WS2 has a relatively smaller effective mass for both electrons and 
FIGURE 6.2  Schematic illustration showing the road map of several novel properties and applications of 
2D semiconductors. (Adapted with permission [24]. Copyright [2022] Copyright the Authors, some rights 
reserved; exclusive licensee [Nature Springer]. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 
[CC BY] https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.)

75
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
holes, making it a promising candidate for transistor channels [34]. The bandgap directly influences 
the on-state current to off-state leakage current ratio, with band structures evolving as thickness 
decreases due to interlayer coupling and confinement effects [35].
Resta et al. [36], have fabricated a polarity controllable device based on WSe2 layers which were 
obtianed via a mechanical exfoliation method similar to graphene synthesis. TheAFM images of 
the mechanicxally exfoliated WSe2 onto SiO2/Si substrate after residue tape cleaning are depicted 
in Figure 6.3a. Figure 6.3b depicts the corresponding height profile to extract the thickness of WSe2 
flake across the cutline shown in Figure 6.3a. Figure 6.3c gives the optical image of the fabricated 
device consisting of a channel of length 1.5 µm. Herein, two gates are involved, namely the control 
gate (CG) and the program gate (PG). The former is used to perform the ON/OFF function by prop­
erly gating the channel region while the latter facilitates the device polarity or the carrier injection 
by tailoring the contact Schottky barrier. Figure 6.3d schematically illustrates the crosssectional 
image of the device across the cutline shown in Figure 6.3c.
It’s important to note that gate-all-around devices are predominantly gifted due to their excep­
tional electrostatic control capabilities and space efficiency. Oh et al. [37], developed a vertical field-
effect transistor utilizing position-controlled ZnO nanotubes grown on a graphene substrate. While 
2D materials hold tremendous promise, challenges remain. Scalable production methods, reproduc­
ibility, and precise manipulation are central concerns. Moreover, preserving the pristine quality of 
2D materials during device fabrication and integration requires careful attention.
FIGURE 6.3  An overview of the WSe2 flake characteristics and device fabrication: (a) An AFM topography 
image showing the cleaned WSe2 flake with a 7.5 nm thickness, equivalent to approximately 10 monolayers. 
(b) The height profile of the flake confirming its thickness as mentioned in (a). (c) An optical image display­
ing the fabricated device with specific regions controlled by bulk-Si And program gates. (d) A 3D schematic 
cross-section of the device is presented across a red cutline in (c). (Adapted with permission [36]. Copyright 
[2016] Copyright the Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [Nature Springer]. Distributed under a 
Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 [CC BY] https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.)

76
Handbook of Semiconductors
6.5.3  Perovskite Materials
Perovskite materials have rapidly emerged as a captivating class of compounds with immense 
potential in the realm of semiconductor devices. Named after their crystal structure, these materi­
als exhibit an astonishing range of properties that make them appealing for various applications, 
especially in photovoltaics and optoelectronics. Perovskite materials have a general formula ABX3, 
where A and B are cations and X is an anion. They boast exceptional light-absorbing properties due 
to their high optical absorption coefficient and long carrier diffusion length. This property, coupled 
with their ability to be easily synthesized using solution-based methods, have spurred tremendous 
interest in perovskite solar cells. These materials also possess high charge carrier mobility and 
diffusion coefficients, contributing to their application in light-emitting devices and photodetec­
tors. Their direct bandgap and tunable optical properties offer remarkable versatility for designing 
devices across the electromagnetic spectrum.
Perovskite solar cells, in particular, have revolutionized photovoltaics due to their cost-
effectiveness, ease of fabrication, and rapid efficiency improvement. The power conversion efficien­
cies of perovskite solar cells have soared within a short span, rivaling traditional silicon-based solar 
cells. In the realm of light-emitting devices, perovskite materials have demonstrated potential for 
efficient light emission. Their emission wavelength can be tailored from the visible to near-infrared 
region, making them valuable for displays, LEDs, and lasers. Moreover, perovskite materials’ versa­
tility is leading to new applications. They hold potential in photodetectors, where their exceptional 
sensitivity across a wide range of wavelengths is advantageous.
Additionally, perovskite tandem solar cells, combining multiple layers of perovskite materi­
als, offer a path toward achieving even higher efficiencies. Figure 6.4 schematically illustrates 
the perovskite framework possessing different dimensionalities along with their various optoelec­
tronic applicatios [38]. Liu et al. [39], have reported the defects in perovskite based solar cells. 
Perovskite filled membranes are also important for the preparation of X-ray detector arrays [40]. 
LEDs based on perovskite materials have also been demonstrated by Cho et al. [41]. However, 
challenges related to long-term stability, material toxicity, and scalability need to be addressed for 
their commercial viability.
FIGURE 6.4  Schematic illustration of perovskite frameworks exhibiting various dimensionalities along with 
their optoelectronic applications. (Adapted with permission [38]. Copyright [2023] Copyright the Authors, 
some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [Nature Springer]. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
License 4.0 [CC BY] https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.)

77
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
6.6  SYNTHESIS, MODERN DEVICE FABRICATION 
TECHNIQUES, AND INTEGRATION CHALLENGES
Synthesis and fabrication techniques for emerging materials play a critical role in realizing their 
potential for semiconductor devices. These methods involve the synthesis of emerging materials and 
their deposition, patterning, and post-processing to create functional structures and devices. The 
choice of fabrication technique depends on the specific material, device requirements, and desired 
properties.
The emerging matterials for semiconductor devices can be synthesized via various methods 
including solution processing, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), physical vapor deposition (PVD), 
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), etc. [42–46]. Solution processing techniques, such as spin coat­
ing, dip coating, and inkjet printing, are widely used for fabricating organic semiconductors and 
perovskite materials and involve the deposition of a solution containing the material onto a substrate, 
followed by drying or annealing to form the desired film. Solution processing enables large-area 
deposition, low-cost fabrication, and compatibility with flexible substrates. CVD is a commonly 
employed technique for growing thin films of emerging materials and involves the reaction of pre­
cursor gases on a heated substrate to deposit the material layer by layer. CVD can be used for the 
synthesis of 2D materials, nanowires, and quantum dots, allowing control over the film thickness, 
crystallinity, and doping. On the other hand, PVD techniques, including pulsed laser deposition, 
sputtering and evaporation, are employed for depositing thin films of emerging materials involving 
the physical vaporization of the material, followed by condensation onto a substrate. PVD is used 
for depositing metals, oxides, and other materials with precise control over film thickness and com­
position. MBE is a high-precision technique used for growing epitaxial thin films with atomic-level 
control and includes the deposition of materials under ultra-high vacuum conditions using molecu­
lar or atomic beams. MBE is commonly used for the growth of 2D materials and semiconductor 
heterostructures, providing excellent control over material quality and interface engineering.
Once the emerging materials are synthesized, they are employed for semiconductor device fab­
rications. Various modern device fabrication techniques have been succesfuly employed for this 
pupose, including, lithography, 3D printing, 4D printing, etc. [47]. Lithography techniques, such as 
photolithography and electron beam lithography, are employed for patterning emerging materials 
at the nanoscale and involve the use of masks or electron beams to selectively expose and etch the 
material, creating patterns and structures necessary for device fabrication. Patterning is crucial for 
defining device features and interconnections.
The integration of emerging materials into semiconductor devices presents several challenges 
due to differences in material properties, compatibility with existing technologies, and device per­
formance requirements. Strategies such as interface engineering, strain engineering, formation of 
hybrid structures, device design optimization, scalability and manufacturing, etc. are employed to 
address these challenges and enable effective integration of emerging materials.
Emerging materials often require suitable interfaces with other materials to ensure efficient 
charge transport, minimize defects, and optimize device performance. Interface engineering tech­
niques, such as interfacial layers, surface treatments, and passivation, are employed to enhance the 
compatibility and performance of emerging materials in semiconductor devices. Integrating emerg­
ing materials with existing semiconductor technologies may require addressing compatibility issues 
such as lattice mismatches, thermal expansion coefficients, and chemical interactions. Hence, incul­
sion of buffer layers, strain engineering, and hybrid structures to accommodate these differences 
can circumvent such issues and enable seamless integration.
Device design plays a crucial role in harnessing the unique properties of emerging materials. 
Design optimization involves tailoring the device structure, geometry, and dimensions to leverage 
the advantages of the material while mitigating any limitations. Simulation tools and modeling 
techniques aid in optimizing device performance and functionality. Ensuring the scalability and 
manufacturability of emerging materials is essential for their widespread adoption.

78
Handbook of Semiconductors
6.7  PERFORMANCE AND FUTURE PROSPECTS
Comparing the performance of emerging materials with traditional semiconductor materials pro­
vides valuable insights into their advantages, limitations, and potential for improvement. Several 
key parameters are commonly considered for performance evaluation, incuding electrical, optical, 
mechanical, and thermal performance. Emerging materials, such as organic semiconductors, 2D 
materials, and perovskites, often exhibit unique electrical properties compared to traditional materi­
als like silicon and gallium arsenide. Parameters such as charge carrier mobility, on/off ratio, and 
sub-threshold swing are analyzed to assess the suitability of emerging materials for high-perfor­
mance semiconductor devices. The optical properties of emerging materials, such as absorption and 
emission spectra, quantum yield, and exciton dynamics are crucial for applications such as LEDs, 
photodetectors, and solar cells, where the material’s light-emitting or light-harvesting capabilities 
are critical.
Flexibility, stretchability, and mechanical robustness are also very important for emerging mate­
rials for their utility in flexible electronics and wearable devices. Comparing the mechanical proper­
ties, such as Young’s modulus and fracture strength, of emerging materials with traditional materials 
helps understand their suitability for these applications. Emerging materials’ thermal properties, 
including thermal conductivity and coefficient of thermal expansion, help in evaluating their ability 
to dissipate heat and withstand high-temperature operation and are particularly important for power 
electronics and high-performance devices.
The field of emerging materials for semiconductor devices continues to evolve rapidly, with 
ongoing research and development efforts driving advancements. Researchers are actively working 
on enhancing the performance of emerging materials by improving their structural quality, charge 
carrier mobility, thermal stability, and environmental robustness. This involves the discovery and 
synthesis of new material variants, exploring doping strategies, and developing novel synthesis and 
fabrication techniques. Efforts are underway to overcome integration challenges and enable seam­
less incorporation of emerging materials into existing semiconductor technologies. This includes 
developing new device architectures, optimizing interfaces, and exploring hybrid material combina­
tions to improve compatibility and maximize device performance.
The advancements in the field of emerging materials and technologies may lead to breakthrough 
applications in areas like healthcare, Internet of Things (IoT), and energy harvesting. To enable 
widespread adoption, efforts are being made to improve the scalability and manufacturability of 
emerging materials by developing large-scale synthesis and deposition techniques, optimizing fab­
rication processes, and integrating emerging materials into existing semiconductor manufactur­
ing infrastructure. Continued research aims to improve the energy conversion efficiency of solar 
cells, reduce power consumption in electronics, and explore emerging materials for energy storage 
devices. Additionally, efforts are being made to address environmental concerns associated with the 
use of certain materials, such as toxicity and recycling.
6.8  CONCLUSION
Various aspects of emerging materials including organic semiconductors, 2D materials, such as 
graphene and TMDs, and perovskite materials employed for semiconductor device applications 
have been explored in this chapter. The chapter began with an overview of emerging materials 
including types, their unique properties, applications, advantages over traditional materials, as 
well as the challenges associated with their use. Furthermore, various characterization techniques 
used to analyze and evaluate them, including XRD, SEM, TEM, Raman spectroscopy, AFM, XPS, 
PL spectroscopy, electrical characterization, thermal analysis, and Z-scan technique, have been 
briefly described. Various synthesis methods (e.g. solution processing, CVD, PVD, and MBE) 
adopted for the synthesis of emerging materials, along with their device fabrication techniques 
(lithography, 3D/4D printing), have also been highlighted. Integration challenges and strategies for 

79
Emerging Materials in Semiconductor Devices
incorporating emerging materials into semiconductor devices were also explored, including inter­
face engineering, material compatibility, device design optimization, and scalability and manu­
facturing considerations. Lastly, the performance of emerging materials compared to traditional 
materials has been examined and the potential future developments and advancements in emerg­
ing materials for semiconductor devices have also been concluded.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J.C. Blakesley, F.A. Castro, W. Kylberg, G.F. Dibb, C. Arantes, R. Valaski, M. Cremona, J.S. Kim, 
Towards reliable charge-mobility benchmark measurements for organic semiconductors. Org. Electron., 
15 (2014) 1263–1272.
	
2.	 S. Chu, Y. Zhang, P. Xiao, W. Chen, R. Tang, Y. Shao, T. Chen, X. Zhang, F. Liu, Z. Xiao, Large-
area and efficient sky-blue perovskite light-emitting diodes via blade-coating. Adv. Mater., 34 (2022) 
2108939.
	
3.	 A. Agrawal, G.C. Yi, Database on the nonlinear optical properties of graphene based materials. Data in 
Brief, 28 (2020) 105049.
	
4.	 A. Agrawal, G.C. Yi (2023). Photonic and optoelectronic applications of graphene: nonlinear optical 
properties of graphene and its applications. In Recent Advances in Graphene and Graphene-Based 
Technologies (pp. 9-1 to 9-22). Bristol, UK: IOP Publishing.
	
5.	 R.A. Soref, Silicon-based optoelectronics. Proceedings of the IEEE, 81 (1993) 1687–1706.
	
6.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, P. Sen, Structural and optical studies of magnesium doped zinc oxide thin films. 
J. Nano Electron. Phys., 5 (2013) 02025–28.
	
7.	 M. Fiederle, S. Procz, E. Hamann, A. Fauler, C. Fröjdh, Overview of GaAs and CdTe pixel detectors 
using medipix electronics. Cryst. Res. Technol., 55 (2020) 2000021.
	
8.	 F.A. Tantray, A. Agrawal, M. Gupta, J.T. Andrews, P. Sen, Effect of oxygen partial pressure on the struc­
tural and optical properties of ion beam sputtered TiO2 thin films. Thin Solid Films, 619 (2016) 86–90.
	
9.	 A. Agrawal, Y. Tchoe, H. Kim, J.Y. Park, Qualitative analysis of growth mechanism of polycrystalline 
InAs thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. Appl. Surf. Sci., 462 (2018) 81–85.
	 10.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, D.M. Phase, P. Sen, Anomalous band bowing in pulsed laser deposited Mg 
Zn1−O films. J. Cryst. Growth, 384 (2013) 9–12.
	 11.	 E. Ghanbari, S.J. Picken, J.H. van Esch, Analysis of differential scanning calorimetry (DSC): 
Determining the transition temperatures, and enthalpy and heat capacity changes in multicomponent 
systems by analytical model fitting. J. Thermal Anal. Calorimetry, 1–17 (2023).
	 12.	 T.A. Dar, A. Agrawal, R.J. Choudhary, P. Sen, Electrical and magnetic transport properties of undoped 
and Ni doped ZnO thin films. Thin Solid Films, 589 (2015) 817–821.
	 13.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, P. Sen, D.M. Phase, Transport and magneto transport study of Mg doped ZnO 
thin films. J. Appl. Phys., 115 (2014).
	 14.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, D.M. Phase, P. Sen, Type I and type II band alignments in ZnO/MgZnO bilayer 
films. Appl. Phys. Lett., 105 (2014).
	 15.	 R. Chouhan, P. Baraskar, A. Agrawal, M. Gupta, P.K. Sen, P. Sen, Effects of oxygen partial pressure and 
annealing on dispersive optical nonlinearity in NiO thin films. J. Appl. Phys., 122 (2017).
	 16.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, J.T. Andrews, P.K. Sen, P. Sen, Negative thermo-optic coefficients and optical 
limiting response in pulsed laser deposited Mg-doped ZnO thin films. JOSA B, 33 (2016) 2015–2019.
	 17.	 A. Agrawal, T.A. Dar, R. Solanki, D.M. Phase, P. Sen, Study of nonlinear optical properties of pure and 
Mg-doped ZnO films. Physica Status Solidi (b), 252 (2015) 1848–1853.
	 18.	 J.G. Wilbers, B. Xu, P.A. Bobbert, M.P. de Jong, W.G. van der Wiel, Charge transport in nanoscale verti­
cal organic semiconductor pillar devices. Sci. Rep., 7 (2017) 41171.
	 19.	 S.L.M. Van Mensfoort, R. Coehoorn, Effect of Gaussian disorder on the voltage dependence of the cur­
rent density in sandwich-type devices based on organic semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B, 78 (2008) 085207.
	 20.	 S. Wang, M. Ha, M. Manno, C. Daniel Frisbie, C. Leighton, Hopping transport and the Hall effect 
near the insulator–metal transition in electrochemically gated poly (3-hexylthiophene) transistors. Nat. 
Commun., 3 (2012) 1210.
	 21.	 R. Joseph Kline, M.D. McGehee, M.F. Toney, Highly oriented crystals at the buried interface in poly­
thiophene thin-film transistors. Nat. Mater., 5 (2006) 222–228.
	 22.	 H. Aarnio, P. Sehati, S. Braun, M. Nyman, M.P. de Jong, M. Fahlman, R. Österbacka, Spontaneous 
charge transfer and dipole formation at the interface between P3HT and PCBM. Adv. Energy Mater., 1 
(2011) 792–797.

80
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 23.	 L. Krieg, F. Meierhofer, S. Gorny, S. Leis, D. Splith, Z. Zhang, H. von Wenckstern, M. Grundmann, X. 
Wang, J. Hartmann, C. Margenfeld, T. Voss, Toward three-dimensional hybrid inorganic/organic opto­
electronics based on GaN/oCVD-PEDOT structures. Nat. Commun., 11 (2020) 5092.
	 24.	 X. Huang, C. Liu, P. Zhou, 2D semiconductors for specific electronic applications: From device to sys­
tem. NPJ 2D Mater. App., 6 (2022) 51.
	 25.	 B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti, A. Kis, Single-layer MoS2 transistors. Nat. 
Nanotechnol., 6 (2011) 147–150.
	 26.	 H. Liu, A.T. Neal, P.D. Ye, Channel length scaling of MoS2 MOSFETs. ACS Nano., 6 (2012) 8563–8569.
	 27.	 F. Zhang, J. Appenzeller, Tunability of short-channel effects in MoS2 field-effect devices. Nano Lett., 15 
(2015) 301–306.
	 28.	 S.B. Desai, S.R. Madhvapathy, A.B. Sachid, J.P. Llinas, Q. Wang, G.H. Ahn, G. Pitner, M.J. Kim, 
J. Bokor, C. Hu, H.S.P. Wong, MoS2 transistors with 1-nanometer gate lengths. Science., 354 (2016) 
99–102.
	 29.	 L. Xie, M. Liao, S. Wang, H. Yu, L. Du, J. Tang, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Lu, G. Wang, Graphene-
contacted ultrashort channel monolayer MoS2 transistors. Adv. Mater., 29 (2017) 1702522.
	 30.	 S.K. Su, C.P. Chuu, M.Y. Li, C.C. Cheng, H.S.P. Wong, L.J. Li, Layered semiconducting 2D materials 
for future transistor applications. Small Structures, 2 (2021) 2000103.
	 31.	 M.S. Lundstrom (2017). Fundamentals of Nanotransistors (Vol. 6). World Scientific Publishing 
Company.
	 32.	 G. Hiblot, Q. Rafhay, F. Boeuf, G. Ghibaudo, Analytical relationship between subthreshold swing of 
thermionic and tunnelling currents. Electron. Lett., 50 (2014) 1745–1747.
	 33.	 Y. Liu, X. Duan, H.J. Shin, S. Park, Y. Huang, X. Duan, Promises and prospects of two-dimensional 
transistors. Nature, 591 (2021) 43–53.
	 34.	 Z. Jin, X. Li, J.T. Mullen, K.W. Kim, Intrinsic transport properties of electrons and holes in monolayer 
transition-metal dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. B, 90 (2014) 045422.
	 35.	 S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O.V. Yazyev, A. Kis, 2D transition metal dichalcogenides. Nat. 
Rev. Mater., 2 (2017) 1–15.
	 36.	 G.V. Resta, S. Sutar, Y. Balaji, D. Lin, P. Raghavan, I. Radu, F. Catthoor, A. Thean, P.E. Gaillardon, 
G. De Micheli, Polarity control in WSe2 double-gate transistors. Sci. Rep., 6 (2016) 29448.
	 37.	 H. Oh, J. Park, W. Choi, H. Kim, Y. Tchoe, A. Agrawal, G.C. Yi, Vertical ZnO nanotube transistor on a 
graphene film for flexible inorganic electronics. Small, 14 (2018) 1800240.
	 38.	 C. He, X. Liu, The rise of halide perovskite semiconductors. Light: Sci. App., 12 (2023) 15.
	 39.	 Z. Liu, J. Hu, H. Jiao, L. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, Q. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Chen, H. Zhou, 
Chemical reduction of intrinsic defects in thicker heterojunction planar perovskite solar cells. Adv. 
Mater., 29 (2017) 1606774.
	 40.	 J. Zhao, L. Zhao, Y. Deng, X. Xiao, Z. Ni, S. Xu, J. Huang, Perovskite-filled membranes for flexible and 
large-area direct-conversion x-ray detector arrays. Nat. Photonics, 14 (2020) 612–617.
	 41.	 H. Cho, S.H. Jeong, M.H. Park, Y.H. Kim, C. Wolf, C.L. Lee, J.H. Heo, A. Sadhanala, N. Myoung, S. 
Yoo, T.W. Lee, Overcoming the electroluminescence efficiency limitations of perovskite light-emitting 
diodes. Science, 350 (2015) 1222–1225.
	 42.	 A. Agrawal, J.Y. Park, P. Sen, G.C. Yi, Unraveling absorptive and refractive optical nonlinearities in 
CVD grown graphene layers transferred onto a foreign quartz substrate. Appl. Surf. Sci., 505 (2020) 
144392.
	 43.	 A. Agrawal, R.K. Saroj, T.A. Dar, P. Baraskar, P. Sen, S. Dhar, Insight into the effect of screw disloca­
tions and oxygen vacancy defects on the optical nonlinear refraction response in chemically grown ZnO/
Al2O3 films. J. Appl. Phys., 122 (2017).
	 44.	 T.A. Dar, A. Agrawal, P. Sen, Pulsed laser deposited nickel doped zinc oxide thin films: Structural and 
optical investigations. J. Nano Electron. Phys., 5 (2013) 02025–27.
	 45.	 P. Baraskar, R. Chouhan, A. Agrawal, R.J. Choudhary, P.K. Sen, P. Sen, Magnetic field induced changes 
in linear and nonlinear optical properties of Ti incorporated Cr2O3 nanostructured thin film. Phys Lett. 
A, 382 (2018) 860–864.
	 46.	 A. Agrawal, Y. Tchoe, Scaling study of molecular beam epitaxy grown InAs/Al2O3 films using atomic 
force microscopy. Thin Solid Films, 709 (2020) 138204.
	 47.	 A. Agrawal, C.M. Hussain (2023). Materials and technologies for flexible and wearable sensors. Flexible 
and Wearable Sensors: Materials, Technologies, and Challenges (Vol. 21). CRC Press.

81
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-7
Organic Semiconductor Devices
Materials and Technology
Periyasamy Angamuthu Praveen 
and Thangavel Kanagasekaran
7.1  INTRODUCTION
Organic semiconductors (OSCs), as the name implies, are the organic or carbon version of semi­
conductors. Like the conventional inorganic semiconductors (ISCs), they possess band gaps in the 
range of 3.0–4.0 eV. However, the fundamental difference between ISCs and OSCs is their energy 
bands. ISCs possess continuous energy bands whereas their counterparts have discrete energy lev­
els in the form of molecular orbitals. Due to this, molecular systems offer unique ways to tune and 
customize their charge-transferring capabilities and achieve specific properties of interest. These 
features majorly arise due to the π-bonding orbitals in the OSC and can be precisely modeled using 
quantum chemical techniques. This enables the possibility of molecular design and synthesizing the 
materials of interest with required highest occupied molecular orbitals (HOMOs–equivalent to the 
valence band in ISC) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals (LUMOs–equivalent to the conduc­
tion band) energy levels [1].
The first organic charge transfer complexes were reported during the 1940s. Since then, the 
realm has seen several important discoveries, ranging from crystalline theories to commercial suc­
cess like active-matrix organic light emitting diodes (AMOLEDs) and a few Nobel prizes [2, 3]. 
Already the sister fields, such as organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and organic photovoltaic 
(OPV) devices, are matured and are reaching the performance of commercial systems [4]. Further, 
organic semiconductor devices (OSD) are expected to contribute in other important areas such as 
biosensors, photodetectors, and the organic lasers [5]. We hope a chapter on organic semiconductors 
would shed a ray of new possibilities in a book that discusses the key advances and technology of 
inorganic semiconductors.
One of the major advantages of OSCs is that they can be tailor-made, which results in variety of 
materials ranging from small molecules to dendrimers and then to polymers. Discussion of such a 
vast database of materials is cumbersome and not suitable for the objectives of this chapter. So we 
will restrict the discussions within the small molecule OSC, particularly of single crystals in nature. 
This is advantageous as this knowledge can be further extrapolated to other systems like polymers. 
The chapter is organized in the following way: Section 7.2 describes the basic materials aspects of 
OSCs. Section 7.3 introduces the theory of charge transfer in organic complexes followed by the 
discussion of major fabrication techniques in OSDs in Section 7.4. Section 7.5 briefly describes the 
key characterization techniques followed by the working principles of different OSDs. Section 7.6 
describes the notable applications and Sections 7.7 and 7.8 summarize the chapter with a remark on 
key open problems.
7.2  STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES
In OSCs, molecular structure and their packing features determine their semiconducting behavior. 
With a proper molecular design and crystalline packing, the electrical and optical properties of 
the systems can be tuned. Considering the molecular structure, OSCs are usually π-conjugated 
systems, resulting in their conducting behavior. These π-orbitals overlap with the adjacent single 
7

82
Handbook of Semiconductors
bonds leading to the delocalization of electrons along all the π-orbitals in the molecule. This over­
lapping is called sp2-hybridization and results in two bonds termed as π and σ. However, the energy 
gap between the bonding and antibonding orbitals is very high for σ bonds resulting an insulation 
behavior. On the other hand, a small energy difference in the case of π bonds results in the semicon­
ducting property. If the OSC is a planar system, the π bonds become delocalized to form a π-system, 
which in turn reduces the energy gap and improves the charge transport. In the case of polymers, the 
π bonds are delocalized along the entire chain, forming a single transport channel. Another impor­
tant parameter in OSCs that determines their charge transport properties is their molecular pack­
ing motifs [6]. Depending upon the molecular packing, the intermolecular interaction between the 
OSCs can be determined. There are four major molecular packings in the case of OSCs (Figure 7.1): 
(a) herringbone, (b) sandwiched herringbone, (c) lamellar packing with one-dimensional (1D) π-π 
stacking, and (d) lamellar packing with two-dimensional (2D) stacking.
Of these, π-π stacking is the best motif for organic electronics and optoelectronic devices. Since 
the charge transfer in OSCs is between the neighboring molecules, π-π stacking can stabilize the 
charged molecular states. This transfer process is called polaron hopping mechanism and is dis­
cussed in detail in the following section.
7.3  CHARGE TRANSPORT IN OSCs
The charge transport in OSC can be modeled as the hopping process between two molecules 
(called dimers) [7]. The charge transport between the molecules in a dimer can be interpreted as 
charge mobilities, a value indicates how fast an electron or hole moves between one molecule and 
another. In case the system possesses high hole mobility, it is termed as p-type, and if it has higher 
electron mobility, it is called n-type. If the OSC possesses both the hole and electron transport, 
it is termed ambipolar. The charge hopping between two identical molecules can be expressed as 
M+/−… → M…M+/−. When the charge is injected to a molecule, it undergoes structural relaxation 
to obtain a stable structure in the charged state. Such distorted molecules are called polarons. The 
polaron falls back to neutral state by transferring its charge to the neighboring molecule. In model­
ing OSC charge transport, two parameters play a dominant role: (1) reorganization energy and (2) 
charge transfer integral. Using these two parameters, the charge transfer rate k can be described as:
	
4
 
4
 exp
4
2
2
π
πλ
λ
=
−




±
±
±
k
h
J
k T
k T
e
B
B
	
(7.1)
FIGURE 7.1  Different packing motifs in OSCs: (a) herringbone, (b) sandwiched herringbone, (c) lamellar 
packing with 1D π-π stacking, and (d) lamellar packing with 2D π-π stacking.

83
Organic Semiconductor Devices
Here λ ± is the reorganization energy for the hole or electron, 
±
Je  is the transfer integral for 
the hole or electron, h is the Planck’s constant, T is the temperature, and kB is the Boltzmann 
constant.
Of which the λ can be calculated as the energy difference between the neutral and charged states 
of a molecule. Whereas the transfer integrals are obtained by modeling the orbital splitting in dimer 
systems. According to Marcus theory, λ is the measure of energy variation in a molecule by adding 
or removing a charge, which in turn induces a structural change and is often expressed as inner and 
outer sphere reorganization energies. However, in most of the theoretical calculations, only inner 
sphere reorganization values are calculated owing to the high computational cost and its minimal 
contribution to the overall charge transport. The inner reorganization energy can be expressed as:
	
1
2
λ
λ
λ
=
+
±
±
±	
(7.2)
Here ± is the hole or electron state of the molecule and the 1
λ ± and 
2
λ ± values can be calculated from 
the difference in adiabatic potential energy as:
	
1
2
3
λ
=
−
±
±
±
E
E 	
(7.3)
	
2
4
1
λ
=
−
±
±
±
E
E 	
(7.4)
where E1 is the neutral state in neutral geometry, E2 is the charged state in neutral geometry, E3 
is the charged state in charged geometry, and E4 is the neutral state in charged geometry. In a gas 
phase computational calculation (Figure 7.2a), E1 is the energy of the optimized molecule. Then the 
charge state of the molecule is changed to either cation or anion, resulting in a variation in molecu­
lar structure, and the corresponding energy is E2. Then this structure will be optimized to global 
minima to obtain the E3 value. Finally, the charge of the molecule is changed to a neutral state to 
obtain the E4 values.
The other parameter, Je, indicates how strong the coupling between two molecules in a dimer 
is to exchange charge carriers between them (Figure 7.2b). Usually, the dimer consists of identical 
molecules. However, due to their molecular packing in crystalline state, the angle between them 
varies up to 90°. As a simple case, let us assume an identical dimer system with a co-facial geome­
try, and the distance between the two molecules is d in angstrom. In the dimer state, the HOMO and 
FIGURE 7.2  (a) Reorganization energy calculation from neutral and charged states. (b) Co-facial dimer 
separated at a distance d.

84
Handbook of Semiconductors
LUMO of the molecules are combined to form the HOMO and HOMO-1 (or LUMO and LUMO+1), 
inducing an energy splitting in the system, given as:
	
2
1
=
−




±
−
J
E
E
e
HOMO
HOMO
	
(7.5)
By substituting the resultant values, the charge transfer rate can be estimated. Further, by substi­
tuting the k values in the Einstein’s relation, the charge transfer mobility can be obtained as,
	
2
2
µ = ed k
k T
B
	
(7.6)
Here e is the electronic charge. As noted earlier, λ ± and 
±
Je  influence the µ values and ideally higher 
±
Je  values and minimal λ ± values are required to get higher charge transport in an OSC.
7.4  FABRICATION OF OSC DEVICES
OSC devices are primarily fabricated in planar architecture using either a single crystal or a thin 
film. From the application point of view, thin films of either vacuum evaporated or solution pro­
cessed such as spin casting is used [8]. However, many small molecule OSCs are insoluble in organic 
solvents, limiting their solution processability. In such cases, thermal evaporation of the material 
is preferred. On the other hand, the single crystalline form of the material is used in laboratory 
conditions to obtain high quality results as well as to understand the structure property relationship. 
Again, owing to their limited solubility, small molecule OSC single crystals are grown thermally 
using methods such as Bridgman, Chozcralski, or physical vapor transport (PVT). Of these, PVT 
is the widely adopted method for organic electronics due to its simplicity. The following sections 
briefly describe the crystal growth and metal contact deposition using PVT and thermal evaporation.
7.4.1  Physical Vapor Transport
In OSC, the sublimation point is typically lower than their melting and boiling points. So, it is 
possible to convert them directly from solid state into gaseous state at lower temperatures. The 
sublimed materials can be, with proper temperature profiles, fabricated as high-quality single 
crystals. PVT is one of the finest sublimation point-based crystal growth techniques and can 
produce high-quality OSC single crystals [9]. Another interesting and useful aspect of utilizing 
sublimation is that different materials have different vapor pressures and deposits at different 
temperature ranges. So, minute impurities present in the material can be purified in this way. 
On the other hand, by utilizing the same principle, with materials of similar sublimation points 
and crystal lattices, doping can also be done [10]. A schematic of the PVT setup is shown in 
Figure 7.3. It consists of a tube furnace featuring two or three distinct temperature zones, and 
a quartz tube with open ends. The initial materials are positioned and vaporized within the high-
temperature zone. For better transport, usually an inert carrier gas such as Ar, N2, He, or H2 is 
used. But often N2 is considered less than the others due to the presence of oxygen impurities in 
nitrogen. Removing oxygen from nitrogen is technologically more challenging and may lead to 
the formation of oxygenated byproducts. The evaporated material is subsequently conveyed by 
the carrier gas to the low-temperature zone for crystallization. Both material and its impurities 
undergo crystallization; however, the impurities are deposited either preceding or succeeding the 
crystallization zone. There is also the possibility of forming co-crystals with the material.
The temperature of the high-temperature zone governs the sublimation rate and holds a 
pivotal role in crystal growth. Slightly surpassing the sublimation point leads to slow crystal 

85
Organic Semiconductor Devices
growth generating large, high-quality crystals. Modulating this temperature can yield different 
crystal morphologies or molecular arrangements. This is likely because higher temperatures 
facilitate more molecular movement. In such cases, molecules tend to grow along orienta­
tions with stronger intermolecular interactions, resulting in crystals with an equilibrium shape. 
Moreover, both the quantity and purity of the initial materials play a significant role in subse­
quent crystal growth. Larger amounts of starting materials result in a higher evaporation rate, 
leading to faster crystallization.
7.4.2  Substrate Preparation
For OSC device fabrication, a Si++ wafer with a SiO2 dielectric layer of thickness 100 to 500 nm 
often serves as the substrate. Indium tin oxide (ITO) on a fused silica is another widely used sub­
strate. However, in the case of Si wafer, in addition to SiO2, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) or 
polystyrene (PS) dielectric layers have also been used to improve the carrier transport and to reduce 
the trap states [11]. Furthermore, when the single crystals are laminated on these substrates, these 
extra layers provide better lamination through electrostatic force. In addition to polymers, inorganic 
materials like Al2O3 and monolayers of hexamethyldisilazane are also used as dielectric layers. A 
combination of these layers along with polymers was also reported. Ideally, the higher the dielectric 
values the better the charge transport in the system. The thickness of this additional layer can be 
tailored based on the polymer weight percentage if it is solution-processed. Before the deposition of 
the polymer layer, the substrate usually undergoes a rigorous cleaning process involving treatment 
with piranha solution, rinsing in IPA, and an ozone plasma treatment [12]. Subsequently, a polymer 
solution is applied to form a thin layer on the prepared substrate, which is then annealed overnight 
in an inert atmosphere. Finally, PVT-grown crystals are electrostatically transferred and laminated 
onto the substrate. Alternatively, OSC films are deposited by means of thermal evaporation or solu­
tion processing.
7.4.3  Contacts Deposition
In OSC devices, fabrication of contacts plays a crucial role in the efficiency and overall performance 
of the device. Usually, two types of device architectures are possible in this realm. One is based on 
diodes and another one is based on transistors. Organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), OPVs are 
FIGURE 7.3  Approximate temperature profile with different growth zones in a physical vapor transport 
system.

86
Handbook of Semiconductors
fabricated in diode architecture, with additional layers like electron and hole injection layers, etc. 
Whereas OFETs are the base architecture for organic photodetectors (OPDs) and organic biosen­
sors (OBSs). The devices are often fabricated as a stacked structure where more than one layer is 
deposited using a solution or evaporation process. On top of these stacked layers, often two contacts, 
say, source and drain, are deposited to inject and collect the charges through the device. Depending 
upon the HOMO and LUMO values of the molecule, the type of metal should be chosen. For 
example, if a molecule has a HOMO value of 5 eV, then metal with a work function near to 5 eV, like 
Au, can be used as the contact. Similarly, if the material has a LUMO value of 3 eV, Ca with work 
function of 2.7 eV could be a better choice. A mismatch between the orbital energy values and the 
metal work function would significantly affect the charge injection and extraction from the device. 
Usually, materials like WO3 or MoO3 for hole injection and V2O5 or CsF for electron injection are 
used to address this issue [13]. Other combinations like introducing tetratetraconate as an interlayer 
have also proven to be very efficient [14].
Both contacts and interlayers are often fabricated using physical methods such as thermal 
evaporation in the ultrahigh vacuum of around 10−6 Torr. When air-sensitive materials like Ca are 
used for the fabrication, entire device fabrication as well as the characterization will be done inside 
the inert atmosphere. If more than one material is involved in the fabrication of contacts/interlayers, 
a shadow mask approach is utilized to avoid multiple exposures to vacuum and inert atmosphere. 
Figure 7.4 shows the schematic of a shadow mask-based contact fabrication. The sources and 
substrates are aligned precisely so that the source and drain are fabricated with different materi­
als. The quality of the contacts and overall device performance depend on the material purity as 
well as the deposition parameters such as rate and thickness. Post-deposition processes can also 
be employed to further optimize the device. This could involve controlled annealing at specific 
temperatures to enhance the interfaces between metal and semiconductor materials, as well as to 
alleviate any residual stresses.
7.5  CHARACTERIZATION OF OSC DEVICES
7.5.1  Diode Characteristics
OLEDs and OPVs are the two major devices fabricated as diodes, and for the analysis of their per­
formance and efficiency, many different characterization tools are employed. However, their I-V 
characteristics can be used as a foundation for assessing their efficiency, stability, and potential for 
various applications in optoelectronics as well as in energy harvesting.
In the case of OLEDs, when they are operating in the forward bias region (Figure 7.5a), an expo­
nential increase in current with respect to voltage can be observed [15]. This is due to the charge 
FIGURE 7.4  Deposition of two different metal sources using a shadow mask.

87
Organic Semiconductor Devices
carriers are injected from the electrodes into the active medium. The subsequent charge recombina­
tion leads to light emission from the device. By using the ideality factor from diode characteristics, 
the quality of charge injection and recombination in the device can be determined. In the reverse 
bias region, initially a sharp increase in current with respect to the voltage can be observed, indi­
cating the onset of device breakdown. This is due to the injection of carriers from the opposite 
electrodes, resulting undesirable effects such as emission quenching. Usually this would potentially 
damage the organic layer and device; however, understanding and characterizing the reverse bias 
behavior is crucial for ensuring the stability and longevity of the OLED devices.
For OPVs, I-V characteristics can be used to evaluate the power conversion efficiency in the 
devices [16]. Like OLEDs, OPVs operate like a diode in the forward bias region, allowing the flow 
of current and generating power. Parameters such as short-circuit current (Isc) – maximum current 
obtained from the device with zero voltage – and open-circuit voltage (Voc) – the voltage across 
the device when no current is flowing – can be obtained from this region. The shape of an OPV 
I-V curve can also provide information about the fill factor (FF) of the device, which quantifies the 
efficiency of power extraction from the cell and the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of devices, 
a critical parameter for evaluating the performance in solar cell applications. It is worth noting that 
these parameters might be influenced by a variety of factors, including the material properties, 
device architecture, and fabrication techniques used.
7.5.2  Transistor Characteristics
Transistor characteristics are majorly analyzed in the form of their transfer and output character­
istics and serve as a fundamental tool to optimize the performance of OFETs and related devices.
7.5.2.1  Transfer Characteristics
The transfer characteristics of an OFET can be depicted (Figure 7.5b) as a relationship between 
input gate voltage (Vg) and the resulting drain current (Id) while maintaining a constant drain-
source voltage (Vds) [17]. The sub-threshold region, followed by the threshold voltage (Vth), 
indicates the role of Vg on the operation of a transistor and its switching behavior. Transfer 
curves can be influenced by factors such as trap states, interface charges, and the semiconduc­
tor-dielectric interface quality. Above the threshold region, the drain current saturates and it 
is no longer affected by the gate voltage. The sub-threshold slope (S) shows the rate at which 
the logarithm of the drain current changes with respect to the gate voltage. A lower sub-thresh­
old slope indicates a better control efficiency of the gate. Further, the threshold voltage (Vth) 
obtained from the slope of the transfer curve indicates the required gate voltage to initiate a 
current flow in the channel. Finally, the field-effect mobility (μ), extracted from the transfer 
curve, serves as a vital measure to estimate charge carrier mobility in the device. Additionally, 
FIGURE 7.5  (a) I-V characteristics of a diode, (b) transfer, and (c) output characteristics of a OFET.

88
Handbook of Semiconductors
the on-off ratio (Ion/Ioff), a crucial factor for digital applications, can also be extracted and used 
to analyze the switching ability of OFETs.
7.5.2.2  Output Characteristics
The output characteristics (Figure 7.5c) are plotted between the drain current (Id) against the drain-
source voltage (Vds) with varying gate-source voltages (Vgs) [18]. It contains a linear and satura­
tion regime. In the linear region, the drain current increases linearly with Vds, and is termed as a 
resistance-controlled regime. On the other hand, the saturation region indicates that the channel is 
fully conducting and operating at its maximum current-carrying capacity. Basically, output char­
acteristics are used to obtain information about the saturation current (Id_sat), and it represents the 
maximum current that OFET can carry under specific operating conditions, a parameter essential 
to estimate efficiency for high-current applications. Further, the output conductance (gds) indicates 
variation in drain current with respect to the changes in Vds. A lower gds indicates a better channel 
pinch-off and higher output resistance.
7.6  APPLICATIONS
7.6.1  Organic Light Emitting Diodes
OLEDs are well-known candidates for light-emitting devices and have gained significant atten­
tion and application in the field of display technology. Current commercial OLEDs offer potential 
advantages such as high contrast, wide viewing angles, and energy efficiency compared to their 
inorganic counterparts [19–20]. In OLEDs, light is emitted in the form of electroluminescence due 
to the recombination of electrons and holes within the active medium. Usually, OLEDs are made of 
multiple layers of organic materials sandwiched between two electrodes termed a cathode and an 
anode. When the voltage is applied across the electrodes, electrons are injected from the cathode 
and holes from the anode into the OSC layer, usually through an electron transmitting layer (ETL) 
and hole transmitting layers (HTLs). These layers enhance the chances for more charges to be 
transferred to the active medium and improve the charge recombination rate. As the emission color 
depends on the molecular energy levels of the active medium, different colors can be achieved by 
using different organic systems. Alternatively, molecules can be tailor made to achieve a particular 
emission wavelength. In the case of commercial displays, full-color emission is achieved by the 
matrix of different organic emissive layers. Even though almost all commercial displays are made 
on a rigid flat panel of glass, due to their processability, OLEDs can also be fabricated on flexible 
substrates like plastics, and few flexible commercial products have already appeared in the market. 
Yet, issues like durability are still a major concern in this arena, and often OLEDs are encapsulated 
with polymeric protective layers such as CYTOP [21]. Another notable challenge lies in achieving 
high-performance OLEDs, and it is expected that designing and synthesizing advanced molecular 
emitting materials with efficient energy conversion from singlet and triplet excitons can address 
this issue. Solutions like thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) are already proven to be 
efficient in this regard [22].
7.6.2  Organic Light Emitting Transistors
Organic light emitting transistors (OLETs) are a combination of two well-known components in 
modern electronics such as the OFET and OLED. Unlike the OLED, which requires a back panel 
transistor support, OLETs can control both electrical and optical properties in a single, compact 
unit [23]. As a transistor, OLET is essentially a three-terminal device containing a source, drain, 
and gate. The crucial difference is that the OSC acts as the channel for both charge transport as 
well as for light emission. Though there are reports with ETL and HTL as in OLEDs, due to the 
ambipolar nature of its active medium, most of the OLETs are reported as a single-layer device. 

89
Organic Semiconductor Devices
So, this architecture holds great promise for the investigation of the structure-property relationship 
in OSCs [24]. On the other hand, materials for OLETs should have both high mobility as well as 
high photoluminescence quantum yield, which is very scarce among OSCs.
The operation of the OLET is the same as that of the OFET. A field is applied between the 
source and drain electrodes and is manipulated by means of applied gate voltage. With a suitable 
Vg the charges recombine in the form of photons to emit light. Like an OLED, the emission color 
depends on the molecular energy levels and can be tuned by altering the structure, planarity, or 
crystal packing [25].
Though the field is in active research for more than a decade, still many challenges must be 
addressed for the successful commercialization of the devices. Improvements like luminescence 
quenching due to contacts, high threshold voltages, device stability, and new active mediums that 
cover the entire visible spectrum are required. Already solutions like transparent contacts and 
high k-dielectrics like Al2O3 are reported as possible and potential solutions to overcome some 
of the issues [26].
7.6.3  Organic Semiconductor Lasers
Realization of an electrically pumped organic semiconductor laser (OSL) is one of the holy grails 
in the arena of organic optoelectronics. To employ organics for lasing, two essential proper­
ties are needed: high gain by the effective conversion of excitons into light emission and low 
threshold with minimal electrical or optical energy as input for pumping states [27]. A practical 
OSL consists of three essential components such as the organic medium, a microresonator, and 
metal contacts [28, 29]. Applying potential through the contacts induces charge carriers in the 
organic medium and is responsible for light emission. The generated light is called spontaneous 
emission, which is then amplified by the built-in resonators, and the resulting edge emission con­
tains the output laser beam. To achieve the lasing, organics often function as a four-level system 
(Figure 7.6a). Initially, electrons are excited from the ground state to a higher energy state using 
electrical or optical pumping. Within a picosecond time frame, these excited species transit to a 
lower, stable excited state (referred to as S1) via vibrational relaxation. If there are more excited 
species than ground-state species, this is known as population inversion. Then these excited elec­
trons fall back to the ground state through the photon emission and ground state thermalization. 
As Figure 7.6b depicts, a sudden increment in output intensity with respect to the reduction of 
full-width half-maximum (FWHM), possibly approaching the resolution limit of the detectors, 
is the vital sign to confirm the lasing from a system. However, this is specific to singlets; in the 
presence of triplets, intersystem crossing hinders the population inversion and consequently, the 
output. Additionally, polarons and other device-related issues can significantly impact the device 
and final output [30, 31].
FIGURE 7.6  (a) Energy level diagram for a lasing medium. (b) Output profile to recognize lasing from an 
organic system.

90
Handbook of Semiconductors
The quest for new gain materials is imperative in this arena. As mentioned earlier, in organic 
emissive systems there is a trade-off between mobility and photoluminescence quantum yield 
(PLQY). High mobility materials tend to have low PLQY and vice versa due to the vibrational 
coupling effects in the organic medium. Achieving a balance between moderate mobility and 
moderate PLQY is crucial for lasing, yet such materials are currently scarce. Theoretical design 
and engineering of material properties hold great promise for synthesizing new materials to meet 
these criteria.
7.6.4  Organic Photodetectors
OPDs are a class of devices that can efficiently convert light into an electrical signal and have poten­
tial applications in imaging, sensing, and optical communication [32]. OFET-based OPDs operate 
on the principle of photoconduction, i.e., the conductivity of the device changes with respect to the 
incident light, allowing it to detect and convert light signals into electrical signals. Like most of 
its counterparts, OPDs have an OSC as an active layer, and this layer is responsible for the charge 
transport in response to light exposure. There can be a few other layers to effectively inject photons 
and extract electrons. When a photon of appropriate energy is incident on the OSC layer, the elec­
trons in the HOMO level are excited to the LUMO level, creating electron-hole pairs. The number 
of electron-hole pairs generated is directly proportional to the intensity of the incident light. The 
generated charges are then moved through the active layer under the influence of an electric field 
applied through the drain and source electrodes. In the case of an OFET architecture, gate voltage 
can be applied to further control the flow of charges and thus enhance the sensitivity and response 
of the photodetector. The change in conductivity due to incident light can be read out as an electrical 
signal and can be further amplified and processed to extract useful information about the incident 
light, such as intensity, wavelength, or spatial distribution [33].
Despite the numerous advantages of OPDs, their practical applications have not materialized yet. 
Still the performance of OPDs is inferior to their inorganic counterparts [40]. While the OSC offers 
benefits like flexibility, large area, and low cost, these advantages are not fully incorporated into 
OPDs. Most research on OPDs is currently at laboratory level with limited participation from com­
panies. Like their sister fields, OPDs are also susceptible to degradation by means of atmospheric 
contamination, and this limits the device’s lifetime and the practical applications [34].
7.6.5  Organic Biosensors
OBSs are often constructed as an extension of OFETs and are used to detect active chemicals and 
biological species. Like all OSC devices, OBSs are advantageous in the sense of flexibility and 
low-cost fabrication. But the major advantage lies in their compatibility with biological systems. 
OBSs are working on the principle that the interaction between OSCs and target molecules such as 
proteins or DNA strands would alter the conductivity of the device and act as the sensing element 
[35]. OBSs can be designed in a way that either the active medium or the extended gate acts as the 
target site. The extended gate mechanism is preferable in the case of reusable sensors, and usually a 
metal-organic framework or functionalized proteins are deposited on the gate electrodes to ensure 
the proper interaction. Various mechanisms can be accounted for the interaction between OBS 
and target molecules, including charge transfer, electrostatic interactions, or chemical binding. For 
example, in DNA sensors, the DNA strings hybridize with the complementary sequences on the 
OSC surface, leading to a change in charge distribution and consequently altering the electronic 
properties. Such alterations can then be transduced into an electrical signal.
OBSs have a wide range of applications in fields such as healthcare. For example, OBS-based 
flexible glucose sensors are demonstrated for continuous monitoring of sugar levels in diabetic 
patients using their sweat. Additionally, the active OSCs in OBSs can be tailor-made to detect 

91
Organic Semiconductor Devices
various proteins, viruses, and genetic mutations, aiding in the early detection of diseases. OBSs also 
have significant potential in environmental monitoring and can be employed to detect pollutants, 
toxins, and pathogens in air, water, and soil [36].
7.7  CHALLENGES
One of the primary challenges in the field of OSC materials and devices is to achieve higher charge 
carrier mobilities [37]. The OSC charge carrier mobility is often much lower than the ISC and this is 
a critical factor for applications like detectors and sensors. Developing strategies to enhance charge 
transport properties while maintaining the advantages of organic materials remains a significant 
research focus. Another challenge lies in achieving the long-term stability and reliability of OSDs 
[38]. Most of the OSCs are susceptible to degradation over time, particularly when exposed to envi­
ronmental factors such as moisture, oxygen, and light. This is an important concern for devices to 
operate over extended periods, such as in displays or medical implants. Strategies to encapsulate 
and protect OSDs from environmental factors are actively being explored. The development of 
efficient and stable interfaces between OSCs and other materials, such as electrodes or dielectrics, 
is also a crucial challenge [39]. Achieving good charge injection, extraction, and transport at these 
interfaces is necessary for optimizing the device performance. As we have seen in Section 7.2, the 
arrangement of molecules within the active layer of an organic device strongly influences its elec­
tronic properties [40]. Achieving uniform and well-ordered film morphologies is critical for repro­
ducibility and device optimization. Methods to precisely control film deposition, such as advanced 
processing methods and molecular alignment techniques, are actively being explored. While OSC 
offers advantages such as low cost and flexibility, achieving high throughput and yield in large-
scale production remains a complex problem [41]. Techniques for high-speed printing, roll-to-roll 
processing, and other scalable fabrication methods are continuously being developed to address 
this challenge. Lastly, variations in material properties, fabrication processes, and environmental 
conditions can lead to inconsistencies in device performance. Developing techniques for accurate 
characterization and quality control, as well as designing robust device architectures, are essential 
for ensuring the reliable and consistent operation of OSDs in practical applications.
7.8  CONCLUSION
OSCs are a class of materials that have potential applications in the arena of optoelectronics. Unlike 
their inorganic counterparts, organic materials have discrete bands termed molecular orbitals, and 
their properties depend entirely on the molecular structure and its packing. Of the four major motif 
packings, π-π stacking is the most favorable for optoelectronic applications. These materials can 
be processed both in solution and in thermal evaporation process. However, owing to their lim­
ited solubility, small molecular systems are often fabricated using thermal methods. Physical vapor 
transport is one of the widely used techniques for the growth of OSCs, and depending upon their 
HOMO and LUMO, a choice of metal contacts can be fabricated. Once fabricated, most of the 
devices are characterized for current-voltage characteristics, and based on that, their performance 
and efficiency can be estimated. OLEDs are among the widely recognized applications of OSCs, 
and their sister fields, such as photovoltaic cells, sensors, and detectors, are maturing and approach­
ing commercial device limits. To fully recognize the potential of OSCs, their mobility and overall 
stability still have to be improved.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors acknowledge the financial support from SERB CRG in the form of a research grant by 
the Government of India (CRG/2022/006100). One of the author PAP thanks the Indian Institute of 
Science Education and Research – Tirupati for the financial support.

92
Handbook of Semiconductors
REFERENCES
	
1.	 M. Gregor, T. Grasser, eds. Organic electronics. Springer Berlin, Heidelberg (2009).
	
2.	 W. Wei, L. Luo, P. Sheng, J. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Multifunctional features of organic charge-transfer 
complexes: Advances and perspectives, Chemistry–A European Journal 27(2) (2021) 464–490.
	
3.	 F. Stephen R., M. E. Thompson, Introduction: Organic electronics and optoelectronics, Chemical 
Reviews 107(4) (2007) 923–925.
	
4.	 W. Cong, X. Zhang, H. Dong, X. Chen, W. Hu, Challenges and emerging opportunities in high-mobility 
and low-energy-consumption organic field-effect transistors, Advanced Energy Materials 10(29) (2020) 
2000955.
	
5.	 O. Toshihiro, C. P. Yu, C. Mitsui, M. Yamagishi, H. Ishii, J. Takeya, Bent-shaped p-type small-molecule 
organic semiconductors: A molecular design strategy for next-generation practical applications, Journal 
of the American Chemical Society 142(20) (2020) 9083–9096.
	
6.	 H. Guangchao, Y. Yi, Z. Shuai, From molecular packing structures to electronic processes: Theoretical 
simulations for organic solar cells, Advanced Energy Materials 8(28) (2018) 1702743.
	
7.	 B. Arka, P. A. Praveen, S. V. Bhat, S. Dhanapal, A. Kandhasamy, T. Kanagasekaran, Theoretical 
insights on pyrene end-capped thiophenes/furans and their suitability towards optoelectronic applica­
tions, Computational and Theoretical Chemistry 1225 (2023) 114135.
	
8.	 A. K. Chauhan, J. Purushottam, D. K. Aswal, J. V. Yakhmi, Organic devices: Fabrication, applications, 
and challenges, Journal of Electronic Materials 51(2) (2022) 1–39.
	
9.	 J. Hui, C. Kloc, Single-crystal growth of organic semiconductors, MRS Bulletin 38(1) (2013) 28–33.
	 10.	 Z. Xiaotao, H. Dong, W. Hu, Organic semiconductor single crystals for electronics and photonics, 
Advanced Materials 30(44) (2018) 1801048.
	 11.	 B. Arka, P. A. Praveen, T. Kanagasekaran, A combined theoretical and experimental approach to deduce 
the role of dielectric layer on interface trap density in single crystal organic field-effect transistors, 
Crystal Research and Technology 58(7) (2023) 2200263.
	 12.	 H. H. Richter, A. Wolff, K. Blum, K. Hoeppner, D. Krüger, R. Sorge, Damage to Si substrates during 
SiO2 etching: Opportunities of subsequent removal by optimized cleaning procedures, Vacuum 47(5) 
(1996) 437–443.
	 13.	 H. Szuheng, S. Liu, Y. Chen, F. So, Review of recent progress in multilayer solution-processed organic 
light-emitting diodes, Journal of Photonics for Energy 5(1) (2015) 057611–057611.
	 14.	 K. Thangavel, H. Shimotani, R. Shimizu, T. Hitosugi, K. Tanigaki, A new electrode design for ambipo­
lar injection in organic semiconductors, Nature Communications 8(1) (2017) 999.
	 15.	 V. David, OLED characterization, OLED microdisplays: Technology and applications, Wiley (2014) 
53–94.
	 16.	 S. Vishal, G. Li, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, Y. Yang, Accurate measurement and characterization 
of organic solar cells, Advanced Functional Materials 16(15) (2006) 2016–2023.
	 17.	 K. Ioannis, Organic field effect transistors: Theory, fabrication and characterization, Springer Science 
& Business Media (2008).
	 18.	 W. Yugeng, Y. Liu, Y. Guo, G. Yu, W. Hu, Experimental techniques for the fabrication and characteriza­
tion of organic thin films for field-effect transistors, Chemical Reviews 111(5) (2011) 3358–3406.
	 19.	 K. N. Thejo, S. J. Dhoble, Organic light emitting diodes: Energy saving lighting technology—A review, 
Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews 16(5) (2012) 2696–2723.
	 20.	 L. Yuchao, C. Li, Z. Ren, S. Yan, M. R. Bryce, All-organic thermally activated delayed fluorescence 
materials for organic light-emitting diodes, Nature Reviews Materials 3(4) (2018) 1–20.
	 21.	 J. Granstrom, J. S. Swensen, J. S. Moon, G. Rowell, J. Yuen, A. J. Heeger, Encapsulation of organic 
light-emitting devices using a perfluorinated polymer, Applied Physics Letters 93(19) (2008).
	 22.	 S. Jinouk, H. Lee, E. G. Jeong, K. C. Choi, S. Yoo, Organic light-emitting diodes: Pushing toward the 
limits and beyond, Advanced Materials 32(35) (2020) 1907539.
	 23.	 Q. Zhengsheng, H. Gao, H. Dong, W. Hu, Organic light-emitting transistors entering a new development 
stage, Advanced Materials 33(31) (2021) 2007149.
	 24.	 Z. Congcong, P. Chen, W. Hu, Organic light-emitting transistors: Materials, device configurations, and 
operations, Small 12(10) (2016) 1252–1294.
	 25.	 Y. Dafei, V. Sharapov, X. Liu, L. Yu, Design of high-performance organic light-emitting transistors, 
ACS Omega 5(1) (2019) 68–74.
	 26.	 S. Caterina, Engineering dielectric materials for high-performance organic light emitting transistors 
(OLETs, Materials 14(13) (2021) 3756.

93
Organic Semiconductor Devices
	 27.	 K. Alexander JC, M. C. Gather, Organic lasers: Recent developments on materials, device geometries, 
and fabrication techniques, Chemical Reviews 116(21) (2016) 12823–12864.
	 28.	 J. Yi, Y.-Y. Liu, X. Liu, H. Lin, K. Gao, W.-Y. Lai, W. Huang, Organic solid-state lasers: A materials 
view and future development, Chemical Society Reviews 49(16) (2020) 5885–5944.
	 29.	 W. Jun-Jie, X.-D. Wang, L. S. Liao, Advances in energy-level systems of organic lasers, Laser & 
Photonics Reviews 16(12) (2022) 2200366.
	 30.	 A. S. D. Sandanayaka, T. Matsushima, F. Bencheikh, S. Terakawa, W. J. Potscavage, C. Qin, T. Fujihara, 
K. Goushi, J.-C. Ribierre, C. Adachi, Indication of current-injection lasing from an organic semiconduc­
tor, Applied Physics Express 12(6) (2019) 061010.
	 31.	 K. Thangavel, H. Shimotani, K. Kasai, S. Onuki, R. D. Kavthe, R. Kumashiro, N. Hiroshiba, T. Jin, N. 
Asao, K. Tanigaki, Towards electrically driven organic semiconductor laser with field-effective transis­
tor structure, arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.08869 (2019).
	 32.	 R. Hao, J. D. Chen, Y. Li, J. Tang, Recent progress in organic photodetectors and their applications, 
Advanced Science 8(1) (2021) 2002418.
	 33.	 C. Philip, T. Someya, Organic photodetectors for next-generation wearable electronics, Advanced 
Materials 32(15) (2020) 1902045.
	 34.	 Y. Dezhi, D. Ma, Development of organic semiconductor photodetectors: From mechanism to applica­
tions, Advanced Optical Materials 7(1) (2019) 1800522.
	 35.	 W. Juan, D. Ye, Q. Meng, C. Di, D. Zhu, Advances in organic transistor-based biosensors, Advanced 
Materials Technologies 5(7) (2020) 2000218.
	 36.	 S. Chenfang, X. Wang, M. A. Auwalu, S. Cheng, W. Hu, Organic thin film transistors-based biosensors, 
EcoMat 3(2) (2021) e12094.
	 37.	 H. Hamna F, A. M. Zeidell, O. D. Jurchescu, Charge carrier traps in organic semiconductors: A review 
on the underlying physics and impact on electronic devices, Journal of Materials Chemistry C 8(3) 
(2020) 759–787.
	 38.	 A. Seung-Hee, J. Jeong, S. June Kim, Emerging encapsulation technologies for long-term reliability of 
microfabricated implantable devices, Micromachines 10(8) (2019) 508.
	 39.	 C. Hongliang, W. Zhang, M. Li, G. He, X. Guo, Interface engineering in organic field-effect transistors: 
Principles, applications, and perspectives, Chemical Reviews 120(5) (2020) 2879–2949.
	 40.	 Z. Fuwen, C. Wang, X. Zhan, Morphology control in organic solar cells, Advanced Energy Materials 
8(28) (2018) 1703147.
	 41.	 P. Sungmin, T. Kim, S. Yoon, C. W. Koh, H. Y. Woo, H. J. Son, Progress in materials, solution processes, 
and long-term stability for large-area organic photovoltaics, Advanced Materials 32(51) (2020) 2002217.

94
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-8
Organic Semiconductors 
for Electrochemical 
Energy Applications
Jeffery Horinek, Allen Davis, and Ram K. Gupta
8.1  INTRODUCTION
As global energy requirements continue to rise, the need for sustainable materials has never been 
more apparent. One field that stands to benefit the most from stability is that of energy. In its 
current state, the major applications for energy materials can be broken into three distinct catego­
ries. The first of these categories is that of materials for energy production. This group usually 
encompasses materials such as petroleum products, natural gas, and coal [1]. In terms of stain­
ability, renewable sources such as wind, hydroelectric, and solar have been explored. The second 
category of materials are those involved in energy transportation. This section of materials typi­
cally encompasses conductive materials such as copper, steel, and aluminum [2]. Sustainability in 
this field primarily involves metal reclamation and recycling, as well as research towards cleaner 
source extraction. The final collection of materials is those involved in energy storage. This class 
of materials includes alkali/alkali earth metals, transition metal oxides, and some carbon-based 
materials. These base materials are then applied to energy storage devices such as batteries, 
supercapacitors, and fuel cells. Sustainability in energy storage is of extreme interest in the sci­
entific community, as there are many different paths to consider. Lithium is a powerful option for 
batteries but is limited in availability. Meanwhile, precious metals such as platinum and iridium 
are efficient fuel cell electrocatalysts but suffer from cost, scarcity, and stability. These examples 
express the immense need for more varied and efficient materials, of which nanoparticles are a 
potential solution.
Nanoparticles are a unique class of material that receive their name from their extremely small 
size. Nanoparticles consist of solid colloidal particles that range in size from as small as 10 nm up 
to 1000 nm [3]. In conjunction with their small size, nanoparticles exhibit a wide range of shapes. 
These shapes range from simple spheres, cubes, rods, and plates to more complex forms such as 
ribbons, flowers, and crystals [4].
Due to their small size and plethora of shapes, nanoparticles can be used in a variety of applica­
tions. These applications include drug delivery, chemical sensing, catalysis, water treatment, and 
many more [5]. As for their application in energy storage, there are several types of nanoparti­
cles that can be used, each with their own unique advantages. One of the more common varieties 
are metal nanoparticles. This class of nanoparticles includes noble metals such as gold, silver, and 
copper, as well as more common transition metals like iron and nickel. The advantages of metal 
nanoparticles are high thermal stability, low cost, ecological compatibility, and high conductivity. 
Metal oxide nanoparticles exist as a derivative of transition metal-based nanoparticles. Despite their 
initial similarities, metal oxide nanoparticles can exhibit vastly different properties. Rapid ion trans­
port, high electronic conductivity, high surface area, high porosity, and high theoretical capacitance 
are all factors seen in these materials [6, 7]. Another commonly used nanoparticle class is that of 
carbon-based nanoparticles. This family of nanoparticles focuses on allotropes of carbon, such as 
fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, nanodiamonds, and graphene. Examples of these nanoparticles can be 
seen in Figure 8.1.
8

95
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
These nanoparticles offer a plethora of desirable characteristics such as a high surface area, 
tunable morphologies, excellent thermal/chemical stability, and high mechanical strength [9]. The 
final class of nanoparticles are known as organic nanoparticles. This group of materials encom­
passes metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), nanopolymers, dendrimers, and certain biological mac­
romolecules such as micelles and proteins [10, 11]. This class of nanoparticles offers advantages 
like increased ion transport, low cost, recyclability, and increased redox potential when applied 
to energy applications [12]. Despite the wide range of options available, few organic materials are 
compatible with the energy field, Of the materials that demonstrate compatibility, organic semicon­
ductors are the most promising. Organic semiconductors can be divided between two distinct types. 
These are polymer-based semiconductors and small molecule-based semiconductors. Polymeric 
semiconductors are comprised of long polymer chains and tend to be semicrystalline in nature. 
Opposingly, small molecule semiconductors tend to have discrete, well-defined shapes, with distinct 
crystalline features [13]. The semiconductive nature of these materials is defined by the size of their 
band gap. Like insulators, they feature a noticeable band gap that inhibits electron flow. Unlike 
insulators, this gap is greatly reduced to a size of ~1–3 electron volts. Through doping, this gap can 
be further reduced, endowing conductivity to the material. This in turn allows for the material to 
switch between a conductor and an insulator depending on the need.
8.2  SYNTHESIS AND CHARACTERIZATION OF ORGANIC SEMICONDUCTORS
As stated earlier there are two types of organic semiconductors, polymeric semiconductors and 
small molecule semiconductors, and each of these materials have their own unique properties. 
Additionally, they may vary in their synthesis methods. In the case of polymeric semiconduc­
tors, they are strictly limited to solution synthesis, whereas small-molecule semiconductors can be 
synthesized by either solution or vacuum deposition methods [14, 15]. Furthermore, these two con­
ductor types also differ in the advantages they possess. In the case of polymer organic semiconduc­
tors, they feature easy processability, good bandgap adjustability, excellent mechanical properties, 
and low-temperature processing. This type of semiconductor can be processed at low temperatures 
as allowed by the mechanics of solution synthesis, since high temperatures are not required [16]. As 
for small molecule organic semiconductors, they offer a well-defined chemical structure, definite 
molecular weight, and low batch-to-batch variation. The limited variation allows the semiconduc­
tors produced by vacuum deposition to demonstrate remarkable consistency, leading to more con­
sistent products [17].
FIGURE 8.1  Examples of various carbon-based nanoparticles. (Adapted with permission [8]. Copyright 2021, 
American Chemical Society.)

96
Handbook of Semiconductors
An example of polymer organic semiconductor synthesis was presented in a study conducted 
by Jarrahi et al., wherein polyaniline was combined with cadmium sulfide in a one-pot solution 
synthesis to fabricate an organic polymer semiconductor nanocomposite for photovoltaic applica­
tions [18]. This process was accomplished by synthesizing three solutions. To start, solution 1 was 
synthesized by dissolving 15 mmol of ammonium persulfate in 50 mL of distilled water. Solution 2 
was then prepared by dissolving sodium sulfide in 50 mL of distilled water. Finally, solution 3 was 
created by dissolving 17 mmol paratoluene sulfonic acid in 50 mL of distilled water. Aniline and 
cadmium chloride were added to this solution, then sonicated and stirred simultaneously for one 
hour. Following this, solutions 1 and 2 were added to solution 3 dropwise at a rate of one drop every 
20 seconds. This step was done under a neutral atmosphere at 0°C. The solution was then stirred 
under the same conditions for 24 hours. Afterward, the solution was washed several times with dis­
tilled water and ethanol to remove any unreacted materials. The solution was then filtered to retrieve 
the nanocomposite materials, which were then subsequently dried in an oven for 24 hours at 60°C. 
A scheme depicting this reaction process can be seen in Figure 8.2 [18].
Small molecule semiconductors made via solution synthesis typically follow procedures like 
their polymeric counterparts. Vacuum deposition synthesis, on the other hand, is a completely dif­
ferent process. An example of this process was shown in a study by Kim et al., where N,N′-bis(2-
ethylhexyl)-1,7-dicyanoperylene-3,4:9,10-bis(dicarboxyimide) (PDI-CN2) semiconductors were 
synthesized for electronic applications [19]. This was accomplished by first coating a mesh wafer 
in silicon oxide. After coating, this wafer was vigorously washed with distilled water. Following 
this, the wafer was coated with the organic coupling agent octadecyltrichlorosilane via dip coating 
FIGURE 8.2  Example of the synthesis scheme for the polyaniline-based organic semiconductor via solution 
synthesis. (Adapted with permission [18]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.)

97
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
to create a dielectric substrate. After dip coating, the substrates were baked at 120°C for 20 minutes 
under a nitrogen atmosphere. Finally, the PDI-CN2 was deposited on the substrate using organic 
molecular beam deposition. This process was completed in a vacuum with a pressure of 10−7 Torr.
Regardless of the semiconductor type, the characterization methods used are the same. To ana­
lyze the functional groups of these semiconductors Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy 
is used. To analyze the crystallinity and crystal phase of these semiconductors, X-ray diffraction 
(XRD) is performed. To analyze the surface of these semiconductors, scanning electron microscopy 
(SEM) is used. These methods help to confirm pore size, surface area, and nanoparticle shape. One 
final characterization method is UV-Vis spectroscopy. This method is used to measure the transpar­
ency of the materials. More importantly, this method helps to confirm the conjugated pi bonds and 
band gaps that make up organic semiconductors [20].
8.3  ELECTROCHEMICAL ENERGY APPLICATIONS 
OF ORGANIC SEMICONDUCTORS
8.3.1  Organic Semiconductors for Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors are a class of energy storage devices known for possessing high power density at 
the cost of a low energy density. This factor makes them popular for applications that require a 
high volume of electricity to be delivered quickly. Along with this characteristic, supercapacitors 
also feature stable cycling performance, long use life, and relatively low cost [22]. The method of 
energy storage used in supercapacitors depends on the design of their electrodes. The first type of 
supercapacitor is the electrical double-layer capacitor (EDLC). This device functions by forming 
a Helmholtz layer at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte, with charge being stored 
on the surface of the electrode [23]. EDLCs typically use carbonaceous materials such as car­
bon nanotubes and graphene due to their high porosity and surface area. However, the limitations 
inherent to surface-based energy storage causes EDLCs to suffer from limited energy density [24]. 
Pseudocapacitors are another common supercapacitor design that functions due to fast and revers­
ible redox reactions on and within the surface of the electrodes. These capacitors typically rely on 
redox active materials such as metal oxides and sulfides. Unlike EDLCs, pseudocapacitors store 
much of their energy chemically. This provides pseudocapacitors with higher energy density, spe­
cific capacitance, and charge storage. Consequently, deformations in the structure of the material 
may occur due to continuous charge-discharge cycling, greatly reducing their stability [25]. The 
final family of supercapacitors are hybrid supercapacitors, which try to marry the effects of the prior 
two. These supercapacitors operate by combining the characteristics of pseudocapacitors with those 
of EDLC devices. As such, hybrid supercapacitors often rely on a combination of the prior materials 
in their construction [26].
Despite the vast quantity of materials that can be used in supercapacitor design, researchers 
are still searching for materials that can provide higher energy density, power density, and capaci­
tance. In terms of supercapacitor application, organic semiconductors are most suited to electrode 
construction. This concept was illustrated in a study by Wang et al., wherein uniform polypyrrole 
nanowires were synthesized for use as supercapacitor electrodes [27]. An image detailing the syn­
thesis of the polypyrrole nanowires can be seen in Figure 8.3 [27].
The nanowires were then suspended in ethanol and combined with acetylene black, polyvinyli­
dene difluoride, and N-methylpyrrolidone to make a slurry. This slurry was then coated onto carbon 
cloth to fabricate the working electrode. Using the same methods, two composite electrodes were 
also fabricated. One of these composite electrodes had gemini surfactant added to it while the other 
had CTAB added. These electrodes had the material added during the first step of the nanowire 
synthesis and had the following molar ratios (0.2,0.4,0.6,0.8). This in turn created PPy-GS and PPy-
CTAB electrodes. These three electrodes were tested using a three-electrode system in 1.0 mol/L 

98
Handbook of Semiconductors
H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte, and out of all the electrodes, the PPy-GS with a GS molar ratio 0.4 was 
found to have the superior electrochemical properties. The electrode featured a specific capacitance 
of about 556 F/g at 1 A/g. As for the energy and power density of these electrodes, they also fared 
the best as those values came in at about 49.4 Wh/kg and 400 W/kg. Additionally, this electrode 
featured a capacity retention of about 85.4% after 2000 cycles. The reason that this electrode was 
able to perform better than the others was attributed to the GS, as it provided a better distribution of 
the polypyrrole nanowires throughout the electrode.
Aside from being used as the nanoparticle in the electrode, organic semiconducting materials 
can be used to entrap nanoparticles to help improve their electrochemical properties. This con­
cept was illustrated in a study by Baby et al. wherein the organic semi-conducting polymer, poly­
aniline, was combined with graphene oxide to fabricate nanocomposite electrodes with excellent 
electrochemical properties [28]. To begin, graphene oxide was synthesized using a modified 
Hummers method. The graphene was then modified using an azopyridine derivative to create 
GO-Azo. Following this, the polyaniline GO-Azo nanocomposite was synthesized via solution 
synthesis. The electrodes were then prepared by coating a slurry of active material (85 wt %), 
polyvinylidene fluoride (10 wt %), and carbon black (5 wt %) onto prepared carbon cloth pieces. 
In total, two working electrodes were prepared, one using the GO-Azo compound and the other 
using the polyaniline GO-Azo nanocomposite (PANI/GO-Azo). These electrodes then under­
went extensive electrochemical analysis using a three-electrode testing system to examine the 
EIS, CV, and GCD of each electrode. A figure showing the results of these tests can be seen in 
Figure 8.4 [28].
As seen above, the addition of PANI to GO-Azo outperformed the standard GO-Azo handily. At 
a current density of 0.25 A/g, this electrode recorded the highest gravimetric capacitance and areal-
specific capacitance with a value of about 426.25 F/g and 622 mF/cm2, respectively. This electrode 
also demonstrated excellent columbic efficiency as after 5,000 cycles at a current density of 7 A/g 
the columbic efficiency was found to be 98.5%. Furthermore, this electrode featured a high electro­
chemical durability as after 5,000 cycles a charge retention rate of 89% was found.
Another way supercapacitor electrodes can be fabricated is by bonding an organic thin film to a 
substrate. This concept was shown in a study by Han et al., where poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) 
(PEDOT) nanowires were used to fabricate PEDOT thin films for supercapacitor electrodes [29]. 
To start with, PEDOT nanowires were synthesized via solution synthesis and then suspended in a 
methanol solution during polymerization. The thin films were polymerized for different lengths 
of time in order to produce different films. After polymerization, the films were retrieved via vac­
uum filtration. The thin films were then cut into circular shapes with identical geometric areas of 
1.13 cm2. These electrodes were then tested using the three-electrode testing system. After testing, 
it was discovered that the PEDOT film that polymerized for six hours yielded the best results. This 
electrode featured an energy density of 1.69 mWh cm−3. Along with this energy density, a power 
FIGURE 8.3  Depiction of the polypyrrole nanowire synthesis. (Adapted with permission [27]. Copyright 
2023, American Chemical Society.)

99
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
density of 30.5 mW cm−3. Additionally, at a current density of 0.3 A/g, a specific capacitance of 
117 F/g was achieved. Along with these values, a coulombic efficiency of 100% was found after 
10,000 charge-discharge cycles. This shows the PEDOT films that were synthesized exhibit excel­
lent electrochemical stability. Also, after 10,000 charge-discharge cycles, a capacitance retention 
of 98% was found.
Even though organic semiconductors perform very well in supercapacitor applications on their 
own, researchers recently have begun combining organic semiconductors with MOFs. This was pre­
sented in a study by Yue et al. wherein a porous polypyrrole scaffold was combined with MOFs to 
fabricate flexible solid-state supercapacitors. This was accomplished by first using solution synthe­
sis to produce a porous polypyrrole scaffold. This scaffold was then immersed in a solution of cop­
per acetate monohydrate and 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11-hexahydroxytriphenylene at 85°C for 6 hours. After 
this, the product was removed and washed with distilled water and dimethylformamide (DMF) 
before being soaked in acetone at 80°C for two days. The product was then combined with poly­
vinylidene fluoride and carbon black to make a slurry. This slurry was then coated onto prepared 
carbon cloth sheets to fabricate a working electrode. This electrode then underwent testing using a 
three-electrode system. This electrode featured a high specific capacitance of about 233 mF/cm at a 
current density of 0.5 mA/cm2. Additionally, the electrode had an energy density of μWh/cm2 and 
a power density of about 1.5mW/cm2. Along with these values the electrode also had an incredibly 
high specific surface area of about 107 m2/g.
FIGURE 8.4  (a) GCD at different current densities, (b) gravimetric specific capacitance at various current 
densities, (c) areal specific capacitance at different current densities, and (d) capacitance retention vs. coulom­
bic efficiency. (Adapted with permission [28]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.)

100
Handbook of Semiconductors
8.3.2  Organic Semiconductors for Batteries
As an energy storage device, batteries occupy a happy medium between energy and power density. 
The most common batteries function using a relatively simple electrochemical redox process. The 
process starts at the anode (negative terminal) where electrons are produced through an oxidation 
reaction. These electrons are then accepted by the cathode (positive terminal) and used in a reduc­
tion reaction. Between these two reaction sites exists an electrolyte that is used to help ferry ions 
between the two reactions. This reaction cycle is what helps batteries to have a higher energy density 
when compared to supercapacitors. More advanced batteries rely on intercalation to function. This 
process is the reversable insertion of a molecule into a layered material. Through this process the 
ions can flow between the terminals of the battery and be stored to a much greater degree. One of the 
most common batteries that uses intercalation is the lithium-ion battery [30]. As stated in the name, 
this battery relies on lithium as the redox agent, where it offers several desirable characteristics such 
as excellent reversible capacity, high energy density, long service life, and wide operating tempera­
ture [31]. Despite these excellent characteristics, lithium suffers from extremely limited stores and 
detrimental environmental impact [32]. Another common battery is the zinc ion battery. Similarly, 
to lithium ion, these batteries function via intercalation of zinc ions in the battery. These batteries 
feature advantages like high gravimetric and volumetric capacities, high safety and environmental 
friendliness, the abundance on earth, and ease of manufacturing [33]. Another battery type is the 
alkaline battery. This battery functions via a redox reaction. These batteries typically use materials 
like zinc, manganese oxide, and graphite. The advantages associated with this battery include cost, 
safety, ability to deal with heavy-duty discharge, long storage life, and being leak proof [34]. One 
final battery is the metal air battery. These batteries work by first letting oxygen into the battery 
at the cathode. This oxygen is then reduced to form hydroxide ions. These hydroxide ions travel to 
the anode through the electrolyte where they participate in the oxidation of the metal in the anode. 
The oxidation of this metal produces free electrons and metal cations. These batteries are typically 
made of materials like zinc, aluminum, magnesium, and lithium. Additionally they offer advantages 
like cost, energy efficiency, high energy density, and environmental friendliness [34, 35]. Although 
these batteries have excellent properties, researchers are continuing to dive deeper into the inclusion 
of organic semiconductors into everyday batteries. As it stands now organic semiconductors offer 
several advantages that other materials cannot, such as low cost, high flexibility, large area fabrica­
tion, easy processability, light weight, and low toxicity [36].
With the push for flexible electronics garnering evermore support, extremely flexible organic 
semiconductors have gained increased attention. This fact was demonstrated in a study by Cang 
et al. [37], wherein poly(3,4,9,10-perylentetracarboxylic dimide) (PPTCDI), an organic semicon­
ducting material, was used to fabricate the anode in a flexible zinc ion battery. Firstly, PPTCDI par­
ticles were prepared via solution synthesis, then the PPTCDI, polyvinylidene difluoride, acetylene 
black, and 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidone was mixed to prepare a slurry. This slurry was then coated on 
carbon fiber cloth in order to fabricate a working anode terminal. This anode was combined with a 
zinc electrolyte and activated carbon cathode to fabricate the battery. Said battery then underwent 
electrochemical analysis using a LAND battery testing system [37].
Using an organic semiconducting polymer as an anode, the zinc batteries achieved an excel­
lent reversible capacity of 199.1 mAh/g at 100 mA/g. Along with the reversible capacity, a current 
density of 100 mA/g between 0 and 1.8 V was found, alongside an energy density of 174.3 Wh/kg. 
Finally, a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% was found after 5,000 charge-discharge cycles, with 
a capacitance retention of 98%.
While the hallmark flexibility of some organic semiconductors pushes them into the realm 
of flexible batteries, they still demonstrate usefulness in the fabrication of more traditional bat­
teries. This is due to the ability of organic semiconductors to provide the battery with increased 
functionality in various climates. This was seen in a study by Wu et al. wherein the organic 
semiconductor 5,7,12,14-pentacenetetrone (PT) was used as a cathode material in aqueous 

101
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
zinc-organic batteries [38]. This was accomplished by fabricating a cathode electrode using 
50 wt % PT, 40 wt % conductive carbon, and 10 wt % polytetrafluoroethylene binder on a 400-
mesh stainless steel mesh. This electrode was then combined with a zinc anode and a trimethyl 
phosphate water hybrid electrolyte to fabricate the battery. After undergoing electrochemical 
analysis, it was discovered that these batteries function well in a range of temperatures. At room 
temperature, these batteries featured a specific capacitance of 229.4 mA h/g at a current density 
of 0.1 A/g. This was complemented by an excellent coulombic efficiency of 99.99% after 9,600 
cycles, showing these batteries are extremely stable. Additionally, the battery was found to have 
a capacity retention of 84.2%. This equates to a retention loss of 0.16% per 100 cycles. Following 
this, the batteries were tested at three other temperatures (–20, 45, and 60°C). At –20°C a specific 
capacitance of 83 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A/g was found after 3,000 cycles. As the tem­
perature was increased to 45°C, the specific capacitance saw a drastic increase up to 111.8 mAh/g 
at a current density of 1 A/g after 1,200 cycles. Finally, the batteries were tested at 65°C. At this 
temperature, the specific capacitance decreased slightly but was still high at about 103.2 mAh/g 
after 1,200 cycles. Additionally, at all these temperatures the coulombic efficiency was 99.99%. 
The graphs produced from cycling analysis at different temperatures demonstrate that these bat­
teries featured extreme electrochemical stability at all observed temperatures.
Another reason organic semiconductors are used in the fabrication of batteries is because of 
their ability to be readily modified. This was presented by a study by Luo et al. where the organic 
semiconductor perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) was sulfurized and then used to fab­
ricate the cathode in an aluminum organic battery [39]. This was accomplished by taking a novel 
PTCDA powder and combining it with sublimed sulfur powder at a ratio of 1:1.3. This mixture 
was then heat-treated under an argon atmosphere at 500°C for 5 hours. After heating, this mixture 
was washed in a carbon disulfide solvent to remove unreacted sulfur. Finally, the mixture was 
washed with water and ethanol, then dried overnight at 70°C. To confirm successful sulfurization, 
an XPS spectrum was run on the powder. During the analysis of the spectrum at peak value of 
approximately 284.5 eV, it indicated the presence of a C-S-C bond confirming the sulfurization. 
Once sulfurization was confirmed, the powder was used to fabricate the cathode for an aluminum 
organic battery. This battery was then tested and compared to a battery using a pristine cathode. 
During early testing both batteries performed very similarly, with CV curves for the pristine and 
sulfurized electrodes at 1.38/0.98 V and 1.32/1.04 V, respectively, demonstrating that both batteries 
had excellent reversible redox potential. Additionally, after the first charge discharge cycle, both 
electrodes featured similar specific capacities of about 264 and 252 mAh/g, respectively. However, 
when looking at the specific capacities of the reverse reaction, the sulfurized cathode had a value of 
113 mAh/g after 200 cycles at a current density of 1,000 mA/g, whereas the pristine electrode only 
had a value of about 83 mAh/g.
8.3.3  Organic Semiconductors for Fuel Cells
Fuel cells are a type of device that is nearly as old as batteries. Despite this, their widespread use 
has been rather limited due to a number of issues. These issues include costly materials, volatile fuel 
sources, and short lifespans. With the growing need for renewable energy, however, these devices are 
rapidly growing in popularity. One of the most common fuel cells used are proton-exchange mem­
brane (PEM) fuel cells. PEMs function by pumping hydrogen into the anode. These hydrogen atoms 
then undergo an oxidation reaction to liberate electrons and hydrogen cations. Simultaneously at the 
cathode, O2 is pumped into the cell, where the oxygen undergoes a reduction reaction to produce 
oxygen anions. To complete these reactions, the hydrogen cations travel across the proton exchange 
membrane to the anode, where they bond with the oxygen anions to produce water as a byproduct 
[40]. A diagram of this cell can be seen in Figure 8.5 [41].
Another common fuel cell type is the alkaline fuel cell. Alkaline fuel cells function similarly to 
PEMs; however, there is one key difference. In this cell, hydrogen cations are not transferred to the 

102
Handbook of Semiconductors
cathode; rather, the oxygen anions are transferred to the anode through the anion exchange mem­
brane. One final variety of fuel cell type is the direct methanol fuel cell. Methanol fuel cells work by 
pumping a dilute methanol solution into the anode to produce CO2, electrons, and hydrogen cations. 
After this point the reactions that take place are like PEMs.
Even though these examples function via different processes, they typically use similar materi­
als. One of the most common materials shared by these cells is platinum. In the cell, platinum is 
often used in the electrodes as an efficient electrocatalyst for redox reactions. Other rare earth met­
als like ruthenium and iridium are also popular for this same reason. [42]. Aside from these rare 
metals, there are several other materials used as catalysts. These materials include metal oxides and 
a plethora of carbon-based materials [43, 44]. As for organic semiconductors, these are typically 
used as proton and anion exchange membranes, with limited research being done on their effective­
ness as a cathode material.
One of the primary ways that organic semiconductors can be used in fuel cells is as a compo­
nent of the proton exchange membrane. These membranes help conduct protons from the anode to 
the cathode while insulating against the current and preventing the crossover of the reagent gases. 
The advantages of organic semiconductors for this purpose are small size, low weight, efficient 
energy conversion, high current, power densities, and ideal conductive properties [45]. Several of 
these properties can been seen in a study by Wang et al. wherein the organic semiconducting poly­
mer, polyethyleneimine, was used to fabricate a free-standing covalent organic framework mem­
brane with high proton conductivity [46]. First, polyethylenimine was synthesized via the solution 
synthesis method. The resulting product was then added to a solution of 2,5-diaminobenzenesul­
fonic acid and 1,3,5-trihydroxyhomobenzaldehyde. The amount of polyethylenimine added to the 
preceding solution varied from 0 to 0.1 g. Finally, p-toluenesulfonic acid and water were added 
to the solution, after which films were cast onto glass to form a membrane. After the membranes 
were fabricated, they underwent extensive mechanical and electrochemical analysis. After the 
completion of all the testing, the membrane made from 0.02 g of polyethylenimine stood out from 
the other electrodes. This material had the highest tensile strength of ~45.4 MPa. Additionally, 
this membrane featured a swelling ratio of less than 2%. As for the electrochemical properties, 
this membrane had a high conductivity at about 223 mS/cm. Along with this high conductivity, 
extraordinary power and energy densities were found. These values came out to be 111.1 mW/cm 
and 664 mA/cm, respectively.
Another application for organic semiconductors in fuel cells is as an anion exchange membrane. 
This fact was illustrated in a study by Najafi et al. wherein the organic semiconductor poly(arylene-
imidazolium) was used to fabricate anion exchange membranes with high conductivity [47]. This 
was achieved by first synthesizing two aryl imidazolium monomers via solution synthesis. These 
monomers were then taken and used to fabricate two batches of poly(arylene-imidazolium).
FIGURE 8.5  Diagram of how a PEM fuel cell functions. (Adapted with permission [41]. Copyright 2014, 
American Chemical Society.)

103
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
Following this, a portion of each of the batches of poly(arylene-imidazolium) were mixed. The 
mixture was then combined with N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP). This 
solution was then heated in a petri dish to make a blended membrane of batch one and two PAIm1,2/
PVP. Another membrane was made just using batch one of the poly(arylene-imidazolium); how­
ever, this batch was crosslinked with the PVP to fabricate the cross-PAIm1-PVP membrane. These 
membranes underwent testing for their electrochemical properties, and between the two, the Cross-
PAIm1-PVP membrane performed the best. The membrane featured a conductivity of about 356.1 
mS/cm. The membrane also showed excellent power density as peak power densities of 17.7, 11.1, 
and 9.1 mW/cm were recorded.
Aside from being used as exchange membranes in fuel cells, organic semiconductors also have 
the potential to be used as an electrode material. This was observed in a study by Miglbauer et al. 
wherein hydrogen peroxide fuel cells were fabricated using the organic semiconductor poly(3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene) as a cathode [48]. This was done by first synthesizing PEDOT via solu­
tion synthesis. This solution was then mixed with dimethylsulfoxide and (3-glycidyloxypropyl)
trimethoxysilane. This mixture was then poured in a petri dish and dried overnight to obtain a, 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) foil. This foil then had its 
electrochemical properties analyzed in conjunction with a nickel mesh anode. This testing revealed 
that the foil had an open circuit voltage of 0.56V, in conjunction with a short current density of 
2.0 mA/cm. Additionally, the decomposition of peroxide was analyzed. It was discovered that a 
0.1 M H2O2 in 0.05 M HCl decomposes at a rate of 0.52 mM/h. When a nickel anode was added to 
this, decomposition reached 2.6 mM/h. Then when the PEDOT:PSS cathode was added, the decom­
position was stabilized to 0.34 mM/h. This shows how the PEDOT:PSS cathode not only stabilizes 
the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, but also induces it. With more work the PEDOT:PSS foil 
could be used as both a cathode and anode in large-scale hydrogen fuel cells. Outside of fuel cells, 
organic semiconductors have found their way into another high energy density application, and that 
application is the solar cell. This is due to the ability of these semiconductors to be fabricated as thin 
films with extremely low transparency.
8.3.4  Organic Semiconductors for Solar Cells
Like fuel cells, solar cells, also known as photovoltaic cells, are used in the generation of energy. 
To generate energy, solar cells rely on the absorption of light, often from the sun. First photons are 
absorbed by a semiconducting material embedded in the cell. These photons provide the semi-
conducting material with energy to dislodge its electrons. When the electrons dislodge, they create 
holes. These holes facilitate the flow of electrons across the material where they can be siphoned 
off into a circuit as a usable form of energy [49]. Due to most solar cells requiring a semiconducting 
material, organic semiconductors have garnered increased attention for this role due to a plethora of 
reasons which include tunable properties, manufactured using non-toxic raw materials, use manu­
facturing technologies, capable of coating large areas inexpensively and fast, synthesis uses little 
material consumption, low-temperature processing, and excellent compatibility with flexible sub­
strates [13].
As the push for flexible solar cells becomes increasingly popular, the ability of organic semicon­
ductors to bind to flexible substrates shines. This idea was shown in a study by Kwon et al., where 
the organic semiconducting polymer, PEDOT:PSS, was used to fabricate a stretchable electrode 
[50]. To begin, a wavy silver nanowire network was deposited on a pre-strained substrate. This 
substrate was then spin coated with a PEDOT:PSS solution to form a nanowire organic conduct­
ing polymer composite. The composite was then run through spin coating again to coat it in an 
ionic solution to increase the flexibility and conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS. Then, using thermal 
annealing, the ionic solution was permeated into the composite. Then after washing and drying, a 
stretchable, transparent electrode was retrieved. A depiction of the electrode fabrication can be seen 
in Figure 8.6 [50].

104
Handbook of Semiconductors
Using the aforementioned process, three separate electrodes were synthesized. These three elec­
trodes were put through electrochemical analysis and tensile testing to analyze their properties. 
Of all the electrodes tested, the S-NPI composite electrode performed the best in all these tests. 
To begin, the conductivity of the electrodes was tested using conductive atomic force microscopy, 
where it was revealed that the S-NPI electrode had the highest current flowing through. This showed 
that the electrode had the most uniform dispersion of nanowires, providing it with the highest con­
ductivity of all the electrodes. The tensile testing of this electrode revealed this electrode was also 
the most flexible, as it had a tensile modulus of ~2.7 GPa. This was significantly lower than the other 
two electrodes and explained why this was the only material to not experience structural defects in 
its surface during the testing. This electrode also exhibited the highest power conversion efficiency 
at 11.3%, open circuit voltage at 0.781V, short circuit current at 22.74 mA/cm, and fill factor at 0.63. 
These factors are mainly attributed to the electrode’s low surface roughness of 5.1 nm and sheet 
resistance of 33.5 Ω.
When looking at the fabrication of solar devices, organic semiconductors have one specific 
advantage that allows them to outpace inorganic semiconductors, which is the ability to have their 
colors modified without sacrificing performance. This ability allows these solar cells to be used in 
more diverse and/or aestetic applications. [51]. In a study by Li et al., organic polymer solar cells 
featuring vivid colors were fabricated [52]. This was accomplished by taking prepared indium tin 
oxide glass substrates and spin coating them in the organic semiconducting polymer PEDOT:PSS. 
Then in a nitrogen filled glove box, PM6 and Y6, common industrial compounds that facilitate the 
transfer of electrons, were spin coated onto the electrodes as an active layer. Finally, to fabricate 
colorful electrodes, silver and tellurium oxide were spin coated on at varying thicknesses [52].
After all the electrodes underwent testing for their photovoltaic capabilities, it was discovered 
the R-3 electrode performed the best out of all the colored electrodes. This electrode featured an 
open circuit voltage of about 0.85 V. Along with that, it featured a short circuit current of about 24.1 
mA cm−2. Additionally, this electrode featured a fill factor of 0.76. Finally, and most importantly, a 
power conversion efficiency of about 15.57% was displayed. This power conversion was only 0.37% 
off the recorded value of a transparent electrode. This fact proves that colored solar cells fabricated 
using organic semiconductors have the potential to be as efficient as transparent solar cells, poten­
tially guiding solar cells to be used in new and diverse applications.
Speaking more specifically on diverse applications there is one fabrication method that is slowly 
catching up to more traditional fabrication methods, and that is the 3D printing of solar cell devices. 
The 3D printing of solar cells relies heavily on the processing of solutions [53]. This is where poly­
mer organic semiconductors shine as they rely solely on solution synthesis. Furthermore, polymer 
FIGURE 8.6  The process of making the sequentially introduced wavy nanowire network/PEDOT:PSS/ionic 
liquid (S–NPI) electrode, starting with the pre-strained substrate and finishing with the fabricated electrode. 
(Adapted with permission [50]. Copyright 2023, American Chemical Society.)

105
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
organic semiconductors can be used as a matrix to fabricate composite solar cell electrodes. These 
two concepts were illustrated in a study conducted by Kim et al., where PEDOT:PSS thylakoid com­
posite electrodes were fabricated. This was achieved by first lyophilizing a prepared PEDOT:PSS 
solution. This solution was then dissolved in a 15% DMSO solvent to produce a 6% 3D-printable 
conductive ink. To this ink, a crude TM pellet made from spinach leaves was dissolved.  This ink 
was then loaded into an air pressure 3D printer to fabricate an electrode. Three different electrodes 
were fabricated. The difference between each electrode was the number of layers varying from 1 
to 3 layers. After extensive electrochemical testing, it was discovered the three-layer electrode per­
formed the best. This electrode had an excellent open circuit voltage of 689 mV when illuminated. 
While unilluminated, the open circuit voltage only measured 168 mV. Along with these values the 
short circuit current density was also found. Under illumination it was found to be 0.57 mA/cm2. 
Without illumination the short current density was only 0.27 mA/cm2. Finally, the power density 
of this electrode was found. Under illumination it was found to be 101.7 μW/cm2. Without the illu­
mination the power density was significantly lower at about 37.6 μW/cm2. As seen above, all the 
recorded electrochemical values increased when the electrode was tested under illumination. This 
fact shows how these electrodes are perfect for solar cell application as light increased the value of 
every category. Thus, 3D electrodes fabricated using organic semiconducting polymers may have 
a place in the solar cell industry. This area of energy storage uses more organic semiconductors 
than any of the other areas. This is due to the fact that most solar cells require thin semiconductors 
to properly set under the glass and to keep the size of the cell down. With this area containing the 
largest share of organic semiconductors, it is often looked at as the most promising future of organic 
semiconductors; as of now, organic solar cells are one of the most popular research areas when it 
comes to solar cells [54].
8.4  CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
With the world’s global energy needs constantly increasing, it is no surprise that researchers are 
working around the clock to find solutions. Green sourcing, sustainability, cost effectiveness and 
general efficiency are all factors that are explored to conquer these growing energy needs. Due to 
these factors, organic semiconductors have positioned themselves as a promising answer. Organic 
semiconductors attribute their low cost to simple synthesis methods and resource availability. 
Solution synthesis offers a facile method for nanoparticle production, while the various polymer­
ization methods are conducive for batch processing. Meanwhile, the wide availability of different 
organic compounds leads to lower overhead costs when compared to purified silicon wafers. These 
properties translate into efficiency gains, even before factors like energy efficiency and reliability 
are involved. For batteries and supercapacitors, organic semiconductors imbue both physical and 
chemical flexibility. Energy storage devices that can flex and bend are greatly desired for their appli­
cations in wearable electronics. Medical devices designed to monitor vital signs and general con­
sumer electronics stand to benefit most from these advances. For energy cell applications, organic 
semiconductors demonstrated their applicability towards different processing methods and uses. 
With the constant advances observed with material processing technology, new materials need to 
be developed to match. Conducting polymers and inks rose to this occasion, becoming particularly 
popular in the field of 3D printing. Meanwhile, the variety of properties present in these materials 
allows for their application to different parts of the apparatus, further expanding their use. This is 
all without mentioning the electrochemical properties of organic semiconductors, which have more­
over proven their competitiveness with traditional mediums.
With the diversity of advantages seen in organic semiconductor applications, it comes with little 
shock that their outlook is so promising. By the year 2030, the global market for organic superca­
pacitors is expected to reach $566.38 [55]. A majority of this will be centered in the energy sec­
tor, as that is where the largest share sits currently. As stated earlier, one of the most promising 
futures for organic semiconductors is in organic solar cells. However, this is not the only area. As 

106
Handbook of Semiconductors
more structurally complex organic semiconducting materials are developed, they will experience 
increased usage in the various applications that they can be found in.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 M. Fichtner, Materials for sustainable energy production, storage, and conversion, Beilstein J. 
Nanotechnol. 6 (2015) 1601–1602.
	
2.	 Transmission Lines, in: Electr. Power Syst. Basics Nonelectrical Prof., 2017: pp. 43–52. https://ieeex­
plore.ieee.org/document/779420210.1002/9781119180227.ch3
	
3.	 S.A.A. Rizvi, A.M. Saleh, Applications of nanoparticle systems in drug delivery technology, Saudi 
Pharm. J. 26 (2018) 64–70.
	
4.	 G. Adamo, S. Campora, G. Ghersi, Chapter 3 - Functionalization of nanoparticles in specific targeting 
and mechanism release, in: D. Ficai and A.M. Grumezescu (Eds.), Micro Nano Technol, Elsevier, 2017: 
pp. 57–80.
	
5.	 S. Moeinzadeh, E. Jabbari, Nanoparticles and their applications BT, in: B. Bhushan (Ed.), Springer 
Handbook of Nanotechnology, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2017: pp. 335–361.
	
6.	 A.A. Yaqoob, A. Ahmad, M.N.M. Ibrahim, R.R. Karri, M. Rashid, Z. Ahamd, Chapter 23 – Synthesis 
of metal oxide–based nanocomposites for energy storage application, in: J.R. Koduru, R.R. Karri, 
N.M. Mubarak, and E.R. Bandala (Eds.), Sustainable Nanotechnology for Environmental Remediation, 
Elsevier, 2022: pp. 611–635.
	
7.	 P. Kamaraj, R. Vennila, M. Sridharan, P.A. Vivekanand, Super capacitance of metal oxide nanopar­
ticles BT, in: O.V. Kharissova, L.M.T. Martínez, B.I. Kharisov (Eds.), Handbook of Nanomaterials and 
Nanocomposites for Energy and Environmental Applications, Springer International Publishing, Cham, 
2020: pp. 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11155-7_120-1
	
8.	 S. Wickramasinghe, J. Wang, B. Morsi, B. Li, Carbon dioxide conversion to nanomaterials: Methods, 
applications, and challenges, Energy & Fuels. 35 (2021) 11820–11834.
	
9.	 G. Kothandam, G. Singh, X. Guan, J.M. Lee, K. Ramadass, S. Joseph, M. Benzigar, A. Karakoti, J. Yi, 
P. Kumar, A. Vinu, Recent advances in carbon-based electrodes for energy storage and conversion, Adv. 
Sci. 10 (2023) 2301045.
	 10.	 K.R. Reddy, B. Hemavathi, G.R. Balakrishna, A.V. Raghu, S. Naveen, M.V. Shankar, 11 – Organic 
conjugated polymer-based functional nanohybrids: Synthesis methods, mechanisms and its applications 
in electrochemical energy storage supercapacitors and solar cells, in: K. Pielichowski and T.M. Majka 
(Eds.), Polymer Composites with Functionalized Nanoparticles: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, 
Elsevier, 2019: pp. 357–379.
	 11.	 J. Ding, W. Xu, X. Zhu, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Jiang, All-organic nanocomposite dielectrics contained 
with polymer dots for high-temperature capacitive energy storage, Nano Res. 16 (2023) 10183–10190.
	 12.	 C.N. Gannett, L. Melecio-Zambrano, M.J. Theibault, B.M. Peterson, B.P. Fors, H.D. Abruña, Organic 
electrode materials for fast-rate, high-power battery applications, Mater. Reports Energy. 1 (2021) 
100008.
	 13.	 M. Riede, D. Spoltore, K. Leo, Organic solar cells—The path to commercial success, Adv Energy 
Mater. 11 (2021) 2002653.
	 14.	 T.J. Dawidczyk, H. Kong, H.E. Katz, 20 - Organic semiconductors (OSCs) for electronic chemical 
sensors, in: O. Ostroverkhova (Ed.), Handbook of Organic Materials for Optical and (Opto)electronic 
Devices: Properties and Applications, Woodhead Publishing, 2013: pp. 577–596.
	 15.	 M. Sawatzki-Park, S.-J. Wang, H. Kleemann, K. Leo, Highly ordered small molecule organic semicon­
ductor thin-films enabling complex, high-performance multi-junction devices, Chem. Rev. 123 (2023) 
8232–8250.
	 16.	 Z. Zhou, N. Luo, X. Shao, H.-L. Zhang, Z. Liu, Hyperbranched polymers for organic semiconductors, 
Chempluschem. 88 (2023) e202300261.
	 17.	 A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, Small molecule organic semiconductors on the move: Promises for future solar 
energy technology, Angew, Chemie Int. Ed. 51 (2012) 2020–2067.
	 18.	 Z. Jarrahi, G. Farzi, A. Fischer, Synthesis of polyaniline/cadmium sulfide hybrid nanocomposites 
via a one-pot process: Morphology control for improvement of photovoltaic performance, ACS Appl. 
Electron. Mater. 5 (2023) 1156–1163.
	 19.	 J.-H. Kim, S. Han, H. Jeong, H. Jang, S. Baek, J. Hu, M. Lee, B. Choi, H.S. Lee, Thermal gradient during 
vacuum-deposition dramatically enhances charge transport in organic semiconductors: Toward high-
performance n-type organic field-effect transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 9 (2017) 9910–9917.

107
Organic Semiconductors for Electrochemical Energy Applications
	 20.	 V.J. Rao, M. Matthiesen, K.P. Goetz, C. Huck, C. Yim, R. Siris, J. Han, S. Hahn, U.H.F. Bunz, A. 
Dreuw, G.S. Duesberg, A. Pucci, J. Zaumseil, AFM-IR and IR-SNOM for the characterization of small 
molecule organic semiconductors, J. Phys. Chem. C. 124 (2020) 5331–5344.
	 21.	 D. Zhu, J. Hui, N. Rowell, Y. Liu, Q.Y. Chen, T. Steegemans, H. Fan, M. Zhang, K. Yu, Interpreting the 
ultraviolet absorption in the spectrum of 415 nm-bandgap CdSe magic-size clusters, J. Phys. Chem. Lett. 
9 (2018) 2818–2824.
	 22.	 X. Liu, X. Yi, J. Zhang, X. Zhao, S. Liu, T. Wang, S. Cui, Synthetic strategy for MnO2 Nanoparticle/
Carbon aerogel heterostructures for improved supercapacitor performance, ACS Appl. Nano Mater. 6 
(2023) 14127–14135.
	 23.	 S. Cho, J. Lim, Y. Seo, Flexible solid supercapacitors of novel nanostructured electrodes outperform 
most supercapacitors, ACS Omega. 7 (2022) 37825–37833.
	 24.	 Y. Abdul Wahab, M.N. Naseer, A.A. Zaidi, T. Umair, H. Khan, M.M. Siddiqi, M.S. Javed, Super capac­
itors in various dimensionalities: Applications and recent advancements, in: E. Cabeza (Ed.), Super 
Capacitors in Various Dimensionalities: Applications and Recent Advancements Elsevier, Oxford, 
2022: pp. 682–691.
	 25.	 L. Zhou, C. Li, X. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu, T. van Ree, 7 - Metal oxides in supercapacitors, in:Y. Wu (Ed.), 
Metal Oxides in Energy Technologies. A Volume in Metal Oxides, Elsevier, 2019: pp. 169–203.
	 26.	 A. Afif, S.M.H. Rahman, A. Tasfiah Azad, J. Zaini, M.A. Islan, A.K. Azad, Advanced materials and tech­
nologies for hybrid supercapacitors for energy storage – A review, J. Energy Storage. 25(2019) 100852.
	 27.	 Y. Wang, H. Wang, W. Zhang, G. Fei, K. Shu, L. Sun, S. Tian, H. Niu, M. Wang, G. Hu, Y. Duan, 
A simple route to fabricate ultralong and uniform polypyrrole nanowires with high electrochemical 
capacitance for supercapacitor electrodes, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater. 5 (2023) 1254–1263.
	 28.	 A. Baby, S. Sunny, J. Vigneshwaran, S. Abraham, S.P. Jose, W.S. Saeed, M.R. Pallavolu, J. Cherusseri, 
S. Puthenveetil Balakrishnan, Azopyridine as a linker molecule in polyaniline-grafted graphene 
oxide nanocomposite electrodes for asymmetric supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Energy Mater. 6 (2023) 
10442–10456.
	 29.	 X. Han, J. Sun, Q. Li, X. He, L. Dang, Z. Liu, Z. Lei, Highly flexible PEDOT film assembled with solu­
tion-processed nanowires for high-rate and long-life solid-state supercapacitors, ACS Sustain. Chem. 
Eng. 11 (2023) 2938–2948.
	 30.	 R.C. Massé, C. Liu, Y. Li, L. Mai, G. Cao, Energy storage through intercalation reactions: Electrodes for 
rechargeable batteries, Natl. Sci. Rev. 4 (2017) 26–53.
	 31.	 H. Liu, X. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, H. Zhang, J. Shi, W. Liu, M. Huang, J. Kan, X. Zhao, D. Li, High-
performance sodium-ion capacitor constructed by well-matched dual-carbon electrodes from a single 
biomass, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7 (2019) 12188–12199.
	 32.	 X. Jia, Y. Ge, L. Shao, C. Wang, G.G. Wallace, Tunable conducting polymers: Toward sustainable and 
versatile batteries, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 7 (2019) 14321–14340.
	 33.	 P. Samanta, S. Ghosh, A. Kundu, P. Samanta, N.C. Murmu, T. Kuila, Recent progress on the perfor­
mance of Zn-ion battery using various electrolyte salt and solvent concentrations, ACS Appl. Electron. 
Mater. 5 (2023) 100–116.
	 34.	 T. Takamura, Primary batteries – Aqueous systems | Alkaline manganese–zinc. Encyclopedia of 
Electrochemical Power Sources. (2009) 28–42. https://www.sciencedirect.com/referencework/978044
4527455/encyclopedia-of-electrochemical-power-sources
	 35.	 M. Salado, E. Lizundia, Advances, challenges, and environmental impacts in metal–air battery electro­
lytes, Mater. Today Energy. 28 (2022) 101064.
	 36.	 N. Goujon, N. Casado, N. Patil, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes, Organic batteries based on just redox poly­
mers, Prog. Polym. Sci. 122 (2021) 101449.
	 37.	 R. Cang, K. Ye, K. Zhu, D. Cao, Environmentally friendly and flexible aqueous zinc ion batteries using 
an organic anode and activated carbon as the cathode, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 11 (2023) 5065–5071.
	 38.	 M. Wu, W. Su, X. Wang, Z. Liu, F. Zhang, Z. Luo, A. Yang, P. Yeleken, Z. Miao, Y. Huang, Long-
life aqueous Zinc–Organic batteries with a trimethyl phosphate electrolyte and organic cathode, ACS 
Sustain. Chem. Eng. 11 (2023) 957–964.
	 39.	 W. Luo, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang, F. Li, Z. Chao, J. Fan, Rational molecular design strategy of a carbonyl cath­
ode for better aluminum organic batteries, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng. 11 (2023) 11406–11414.
	 40.	 L. Fan, Z. Tu, S.H. Chan, Recent development of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies: A review, Energy 
Reports. 7 (2021) 8421–8446.
	 41.	 A. Bailey, L. Andrews, A. Khot, L. Rubin, J. Young, T.D. Allston, G.A. Takacs, Hydrogen storage 
experiments for an undergraduate laboratory course—Clean energy: Hydrogen/Fuel cells, J. Chem. 
Educ. 92 (2015) 688–692.

108
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 42.	 X. Hu, B. Yang, S. Ke, Y. Liu, M. Fang, Z. Huang, X. Min, Review and perspectives of carbon-sup­
ported platinum-based catalysts for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Energy & Fuels. 37, 16 (2023) 
11532–11566.
	 43.	 M. Gasik, 1 - Introduction: Materials challenges in fuel cells, in: M. Gasik (Ed.), Materials for Fuel Cells. 
A Volume in Woodhead Publishing Series in Electronic and Optical Materials, Woodhead Publishing, 
2008: pp. 1–5.
	 44.	 K. Föger, 2 - Materials basics for fuel cells, in: M. Gasik (Ed.), Materials for Fuel Cells. A Volume 
in Woodhead Publishing Series in Electronic and Optical Materials, Woodhead Publishing, 2008: 
pp. 6–63.
	 45.	 H.A. Elwan, M. Mamlouk, K. Scott, A review of proton exchange membranes based on protic ionic liq­
uid/polymer blends for polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells, J. Power Sources. 484 (2021) 229197.
	 46.	 L. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Ren, Z. Yang, Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, W. Wu, J. Wang, Free-standing polymer 
covalent organic framework membrane with high proton conductivity and structure stability, ACS Appl. 
Polym. Mater. 5 (2023) 7562–7570.
	 47.	 H.N. Fath Dehghan, A. Abdolmaleki, M. Zhiani, Highly conducting poly(arylene-imidazolium) anion 
exchange membranes containing thin-span channels constructed by Cation–Dipole interaction, ACS 
Appl. Polym. Mater. 5 (2023) 1965–1976.
	 48.	 E. Miglbauer, P.J. Wójcik, E.D. Głowacki, Single-compartment hydrogen peroxide fuel cells with 
poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) cathodes, Chem. Commun. 54 (2018) 11873–11876.
	 49.	 S. Battersby, News feature: The solar cell of the future, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 116 (2019) 7–10.
	 50.	 H.J. Kwon, G.-U. Kim, C. Lim, J.K. Kim, S.-S. Lee, J. Cho, H.-J. Koo, B.J. Kim, K. Char, J.G. Son, 
Sequentially coated wavy nanowire composite transparent electrode for stretchable solar cells, ACS 
Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 15 (2023) 13656–13667.
	 51.	 J. Kong, M. Mohadjer Beromi, M. Mariano, T. Goh, F. Antonio, N. Hazari, A.D. Taylor, Colorful poly­
mer solar cells employing an energy transfer dye molecule, Nano Energy. 38 (2017) 36–42.
	 52.	 X. Li, R. Xia, K. Yan, J. Ren, H.-L. Yip, C.-Z. Li, H. Chen, Semitransparent organic solar cells with 
vivid colors, ACS Energy Lett. 5 (2020) 3115–3123.
	 53.	 B.R. Hunde, A.D. Woldeyohannes, 3D printing and solar cell fabrication methods: A review of chal­
lenges, opportunities, and future prospects, Results Opt. 11 (2023) 100385.
	 54.	 Q. Zhang, W. Hu, H. Sirringhaus, K. Müllen, Recent progress in emerging organic semiconductors, 
Adv. Mater. 34 (2022) 2108701.

109
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-9
Nanotechnology in 
Semiconductors 
Role of Nano-Dimensions 
and Thin Film Structure
Nasrin Babazadeh, Amir Ershad-Langroudi, 
Seyed Mehdi Mousaei, and Farhad Alizadegan
9.1  AN INTRODUCTION TO NANOTECHNOLOGY 
AND SEMICONDUCTORS
9.1.1  Basic Concepts of Nanotechnology
Nanotechnology can be defined as a branch of technology that pertains to the manipulation and 
utilization of objects and systems at the nanoscale, or on a minuscule level [1]. However, the term 
“nano” carries an additional connotation within scientific discourse, denoting a unit of measure­
ment equivalent to one billionth of a meter, commonly known as a “nanometer” [2, 3]. In light 
of this, nanotechnology is associated with technologies functioning at the scale of nanometers. 
Nanotechnology encompasses materials and systems characterized by altered chemical, biological, 
and physical characteristics resulting from their dimensions at the nanoscale. Materials composed 
of structures with dimensions ranging from approximately 1–100 nm exhibit significant alterations 
in their properties when compared to isolated molecules (1 nm) or bulk materials [4].
Nanotechnology has emerged as a prominent concept in the current millennium, contributing 
greatly to the improvement of living standards. Consequently, this era might be aptly characterized 
as the age of nanomaterials. This article presents a comprehensive overview of the fundamental 
elements of nanotechnology, introducing the expansive subject of transition metal nanoparticles. It 
delves into their properties, as well as the techniques employed for their production and character­
ization [1].
9.1.2  Properties of Nano-Dimensions in Semiconductors
The characteristics associated with nanoscale dimensions in semiconductors present a wide range 
of remarkable capacities. Semiconductors demonstrate distinct properties at the nanoscale, dis­
tinguishing them from their larger-scale counterparts. The phenomenon of quantum confinement 
gives rise to size-dependent fluctuations in the electrical, optical, and thermal characteristics of 
materials, thereby facilitating meticulous manipulation of their behavior. Nanostructured semicon­
ductors frequently exhibit heightened electrical conductivity, higher carrier mobility, and adjust­
able bandgaps, rendering them very suitable for the development of high-performance electronic 
and optoelectronic devices. The discrete energy levels observed in nanostructures, such as quan­
tum dots, offer customized light emission, thereby opening up possibilities for enhanced applica­
tions in the fields of displays and imaging technology. The utilization of these qualities enables the 
semiconductor industry to drive innovation and bring forth revolutionary advancements in diverse 
technical domains [5].
9

110
Handbook of Semiconductors
Furthermore, the characteristics associated with nanoscale dimensions in semiconductors tran­
scend the domain of electronics. These distinct materials are utilized in several domains, including 
as medicine, energy, and environmental monitoring. The utilization of nanostructured semicon­
ductors is observed in targeted drug delivery systems, wherein their small size enables accurate 
administration of medicinal drugs to certain cells, hence reducing adverse effects and optimizing 
treatment effectiveness.
Nanostructured semiconductors have been found to significantly enhance the absorption of light, 
hence leading to a notable increase in the overall efficiency of solar panels. Furthermore, they 
enhance the efficiency of batteries and supercapacitors by the provision of an increased surface area 
for the storage of charges. This facilitates expedited charging processes and enables the attainment 
of prolonged energy storage capabilities [6].
Nanotechnology also serves a crucial function in the realm of environmental monitoring and 
pollution detection. Sensors that are capable of detecting and analyzing contaminants in air and 
water utilize semiconductors with nanoscale dimensions. They enable real-time monitoring because 
of their both sensitivity and selectivity, which aids in our ability to comprehend and manage envi­
ronmental issues [7].
The properties of semiconductor dimensions at the nanoscale present novel prospects. Engineered 
materials play a significant role in shaping technology and fostering global sustainability and 
connectivity through their transformative impact on the fields of electronics, medicine, and the 
environment. As the scientific community continues to explore and harness the capabilities of semi­
conductor nanotechnology, it is anticipated that there will be further notable advancements in this 
field. Nano-sized structures in semiconductors demonstrate distinct characteristics compared to 
their larger counterparts, mostly attributed to quantum phenomena and an enhanced ratio of surface 
area to volume.
9.1.2.1 Band Gap Engineering
This is feasible to achieve nanoscale modification of the band gap of a semiconductor, which 
refers to the energy range devoid of electron states. The ability to modify the nanostructure size 
and composition allows researchers to tailor the band gap to certain optical and electrical charac­
teristics [8]. These findings have significant effects on optoelectronic devices such as lasers and 
photodetectors.
Abnormal electrical transport and optical effects have been observed in band gap-designed 
quantum devices, including lasers and heterojunction bipolar transistors. The emergence of 
synthetic materials, including carbon fullerenes, carbon nanotubes, and organized mesoporous 
materials, has significantly contributed to the advancement of nanotechnology and nanomaterials 
research [5].
9.1.2.2  Enhanced Surface Effects
Nanoscale semiconductors exhibit a greater surface area in proportion to their volume, resulting in 
enhanced surface phenomena. The influence of surface states and defects on the properties of mate­
rials is considerable, as they impact various aspects such as charge carrier dynamics, recombination 
rates, and chemical reactivity [9].
The nanocrystals have a comparatively greater surface area in relation to an equivalent amount 
of material composed of larger particles [10]. The augmented surface area provides a greater num­
ber of atoms, hence enhancing chemical and physical processes such as catalysis and detecting 
reactions [11].
9.1.2.3  Size-Dependent Optical Properties
The advantages of semiconductors are contingent upon their ability to manipulate material struc­
tures at a much-reduced scale in order to get the desired properties [10]. In the world of nanoscale 

111
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
semiconductors, two primary phenomena that govern their behavior are the size and the surface 
effects. Semiconductor nanocrystals possess distinctive physical and chemical characteristics 
that render them well-suited for implementation in several new technologies. These applications 
encompass catalysis, nanoelectronics, nanophotonics, energy conversion, non-linear optics, solar 
cells, and detectors, among others [12]. The electrical conductivity of semiconductor nanocrys­
tals, as well as their optical properties, including absorption and fluorescence spectra, refractive 
index, and absorption coefficient, can be substantially modified by manipulating the crystalline 
sizes [10].
The size-dependent tuning of optical characteristics in nanoscale semiconductors is a notable 
characteristic. Quantum dots, for example, demonstrate emission spectra that rely on their size. The 
aforementioned characteristic is used in many applications such as displays, sensors, and biological 
imaging [13].
9.1.2.4  Thermal Properties
The thermal conductivity of nanostructures may be modified as a result of photon scattering occur­
ring at the interfaces. The impacts of this feature are relevant to the fields of nanoelectronics and 
thermoelectric applications. The scientific community has shown significant interest in the thermal 
characteristics of wide band gap (WBG) nanowires, since these qualities play a crucial role in 
environmental applications, namely in the fields of energy conversion and thermoelectric devices. 
Recent studies have shown that the thermal characteristics of thin-film WBG materials have been 
effectively manipulated by several creative methods, including strain [14, 15] or buffer layer engi­
neering [16].
9.1.3  Applications of Nanotechnology in the Semiconductor Industry
The advent of nanotechnology has brought about a paradigm shift in the semiconductor industry. 
The use of nanoscale materials and technologies has facilitated the development of electronic com­
ponents that are characterized by reduced size, enhanced speed, and improved energy efficiency. 
The strict control of nanomaterials has facilitated the development of state-of-the-art semiconduc­
tor technology [5]. The semiconductor industry has seen many uses of nanotechnology, which are 
described below.
9.1.3.1  Smaller Transistors
The field of nanotechnology has facilitated the development of transistors that are both smaller 
in size and more efficient in their performance. As the size of transistors decreases to nanoscale 
levels, their operational speed increases, power consumption decreases, and the potential for 
more device integration on a single chip is enabled. The aforementioned progress has propelled 
the evolution of electronic gadgets that are characterized by enhanced speed and increased 
power [17].
The transparency of applications is contingent upon the quality of materials used and the func­
tioning of the device. Therefore, it is important to thoroughly analyze the circuit, system, and manu­
facturing obstacles in order to conduct a realistic assessment of transparent nanotechnology [18]. 
Hoffman et al. [18] examined the progression of a distinctive nanostructure, the characteristics of 
the materials used, and the efficacy of nanoelectronics. Thin-film transistors (TFTs) are produced 
via optical transmission and are composed of very transparent ZnO-based materials. These TFTs 
operate in the enhancement mode and exhibit a transmission efficiency of 75% within the visible 
range of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The field of nanotechnology has significantly contributed to the development of cutting-edge 
gadgets and computers, characterized by their enhanced speed, reduced size, portability, and sub­
stantial data storage capabilities. The manufacturing process of transistors is seeing a reduction 

112
Handbook of Semiconductors
in size via the use of nanotechnology. Companies including Intel, IBM, and Samsung have made 
significant advancements in the development of nanoscale transistors [19].
9.1.3.2  Quantum Dots (QDs) for Displays
QDs refer to semiconductors at the nanoscale that exhibit size-dependent emission of distinct hues 
of light. Display technologies often use these components to improve the precision of color repro­
duction and optimize energy usage. Qd-enhanced displays have been shown to provide height­
ened brightness and increased color vibrancy, hence enhancing the visual perception and quality of 
devices like TVs, desktop computers, and smartphones [20].
García de Arquer et al. [21] published a review with the title of “Semiconductor quantum dots: 
Technological progress and future challenges.” The authors provided a comprehensive analysis of 
recent progress in the synthesis and comprehension of QD nanomaterials, with particular empha­
sis on colloidal QDs. They also examined the potential applications of these materials in many 
technologies, including displays and lighting, lasers, sensors, electronics, solar energy conversion, 
photocatalysis, and quantum information [21].
9.1.3.3 Nanowires for Sensors
Nanowires, characterized by their nanometer scale, are used in a multitude of applications as sen­
sors. Nanowires may consist of conducting materials, such as aluminum, platinum, and gold, as 
well as semiconducting materials, such as silicon, germanium, and gallium nitride. Additionally, 
nanowires can be composed of insulating materials, including SiO2, TiO2, HfO2, and so on [22].
The distinctive characteristics shown by nanowires, such as their superior electron transport 
capabilities, exceptional mechanical durability, expansive surface area, and capacity for intrinsic 
property manipulation, facilitate the emergence of new categories of nanoelectromechanical sys­
tems (NEMS) [23].
These entities possess the capability to discern variations in temperature, pressure, or chemical 
composition with a notable degree of sensitivity. Nanowire-based sensors have been used in several 
fields such as healthcare, environmental monitoring, and industrial operations [5].
The distinctive electrical characteristics shown by semiconductor nanowires, namely silicon 
nanowires (SiNWs), render them very appealing for the detection of diverse gases in a label-free, 
real-time, and highly sensitive manner. Consequently, significant endeavors have been undertaken 
in the last twenty years to investigate the gas-sensing capabilities of nanowires. Akbari-Saatlu et al. 
[24] in their review paper, provided an overview of the current advancements in the use of SiNWs 
for gas sensing purposes. The material started with introducing the two fundamental synthesis 
methodologies, namely top-down and bottom-up methods, followed by a comprehensive examina­
tion of the merits and drawbacks associated with each technique. Then, a concise overview was 
provided on the fundamental sensing mechanism of SiNWs in both resistor and field effect transis­
tor configurations. Additionally, the sensitivity and selectivity of SiNWs towards various gases fol­
lowing distinct functionalization techniques were then elucidated.
9.1.3.4  Nanoelectromechanical Systems (NEMS)
NEMS integrates nanotechnology with microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) to construct very 
miniature mechanical systems. These devices possess many applications in the domains of sens­
ing, actuation, and signal processing. Accelerometers, resonators, and gyroscopes find use in many 
electrical devices. Nanowires composed of WBG semiconductors have been a prominent area of 
study due to their significant potential in the field of NEMS. Specifically, these nanowires hold great 
promise for applications such as environmental monitoring and energy harvesting [23]. Pham et al. 
[23] provided a thorough examination of the latest advancements in the development, characteris­
tics, and uses of silicon carbide (SiC), group III-nitrides, and diamond nanowires as the preferred 
materials for NEMS.

113
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
9.1.3.5  Photolithography Advances
Nanotechnology has made significant advancements in the field of semiconductor photolithography, 
which is widely recognized as a crucial manufacturing process. Enhanced nanolithography tech­
nologies enable the fabrication of high-density integrated circuits, characterized by reduced feature 
sizes and improved patterning accuracy [25].
Silicon wafers are frequently employed in many fabrication methods, including photolithography 
patterning, doping and ion implantation, thin-film deposition, as well as etching. Gopinath et al. 
[26], conducted a comprehensive review that highlights the significance of semiconductor materials 
in combination with biosensors for the purpose of health monitoring and diagnosis. The process of 
wet thermal oxidation was used to oxidize a silicon wafer at a temperature of 1000°C, resulting in 
the formation of a thin layer of silicon oxide. Silica can be employed in the process of photolithogra­
phy production to generate two distinct visible epilayers when seen from a top-down perspective. Al 
metal is then used as an intermediate metal, where it is put onto a silica substrate and subsequently 
subjected to etching using the photolithography process.
9.1.3.6  Carbon Nanotubes and Graphene
Nano-sized carbon-based materials such as carbon nanotubes and graphene exhibit distinctive elec­
trical and mechanical characteristics. The extraordinary conductivity, strength, and flexibility of 
these materials have led to their investigation for potential applications in transistors, interconnects, 
and flexible electronics [27]. In 2022, Ramalingam et al. [28], published a review with the title of “A 
review of graphene-based semiconductors for photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in wastewa­
ter.” Graphene-based photocatalysts have garnered significant attention in the field of waste water 
treatment owing to their exceptional physical, chemical, and mechanical characteristics. These 
photocatalysts exhibit remarkable electron conductivity, wide light absorption spectrum, extensive 
surface area, and substantial adsorption capacity. The incorporation of these substances into various 
materials such as metals, metal-containing nanocomposites, semiconductor nanocomposites, poly­
mers, MXene, and other compounds has been shown to significantly enhance the photocatalytic 
activity for the purpose of photodegradation of pollutants.
Graphene finds use in single-electron transistors and high-frequency graphene field-effect tran­
sistors owing to its electrical properties. The electron mobility in graphene has a much higher speed, 
ranging from 1000 to 10,000 times quicker than that seen in silicon [29]. Graphene electrodes find 
use in rechargeable batteries and the construction of electrochemical double capacitors [30]. The 
efficiency of batteries is enhanced via accelerated charging, increased energy production, extended 
cycle periods, and prolonged lives.
9.1.3.7  Energy Harvesting
The combination of conducting polymers with inorganic hybrid and organic nanomaterials has led 
to the development of multifunctional hybrid nanocomposites that exhibit enhanced performance 
in many applications, such as sensors, energy storage, energy harvesting, and defense devices. The 
use of nanoscale materials and structures has the potential to significantly improve the operational 
efficiency of several energy-related technologies, such as solar cells, thermoelectric generators, and 
energy storage devices. Due to its capacity to improve polymers’ thermal, morphological, electri­
cal, and mechanical characteristics, conducting polymers with carbon nanomaterial composites has 
become popular for chemical sensors and energy harvesting. Table 9.1 presents a comprehensive 
compilation of multiple applications of conducting polymers in the field of energy harvesting [31].
9.1.3.8  Nanocomposites for Packaging
Semiconductor packaging materials serve the dual purpose of safeguarding chips and facilitating 
electrical connectivity. Nanocomposite materials have been shown to enhance thermal conductivity, 
mechanical strength, and electromagnetic interference insulation, hence enhancing the reliability 
and performance of electronic devices [32].

114
Handbook of Semiconductors
The rapid advancement of personal portable electronic devices necessitates the investigation 
of novel die attach film (DAF) materials within the constraints of restricted mounting area and 
height. This exploration is crucial to fulfill the demands of achieving high package density and 
operating speed. In this regard, Sun et al. [33] in 2022, presented melamine–graphene epoxy 
nanocomposite-based DAFs for advanced three-dimensional semiconductor packing applications. 
Melamine functionalized graphene was synthesized by a nondestructive ball milling technique 
and then incorporated into an epoxy matrix at different weight percentages, namely 1, 4, 7, and 
10 wt%. The melamine molecule has a sp2 hybridized conjugated structure, allowing for π–π stack­
ing interactions with graphene nanosheets. This contact leads to improved dispersion of melamine 
on the graphene surface, while avoiding the formation of any surface defects. The dependability of 
DAFs is influenced by the adsorption of moisture since the presence of adsorbed moisture may lead 
to vaporization during high-temperature processing. The resulting high-pressure water vapor can 
induce package breaking or interface delamination, which is popularly referred to as popcorn fail­
ure in semiconductor packaging. Furthermore, moisture serves as a plasticizer in order to decrease 
the modulus and Tg of the cured epoxy composites. The moisture adsorption of neat epoxy resins 
is comparatively greater than that of M-G epoxy nanocomposites due to the absence of moisture 
absorption by inorganic graphene fillers. Furthermore, melamine modifications result in a reduction 
in the mobility of polymer chains and an increase in cross-linking, hence restricting the rotational 
and alignment movements of the polar groups in both melamine and epoxy. The polarity of the 
epoxy composite is decreased as a result of this. Nevertheless, the presence of melamine results in 
an increased number of amine polar groups being present on the surface of graphene. When the 
filler loading is increased from 4 wt% to 7 wt%, the impact of these two conflicting effects on mois­
ture adsorption becomes almost equal [33].
The aforementioned applications exemplify the profound influence of nanotechnology on the 
semiconductor sector, resulting in the development of electronic devices that are characterized by 
enhanced power, efficiency, and versatility.
9.2  SEMICONDUCTOR NANOSTRUCTURES
9.2.1  Methods of Making Nanostructures in Semiconductors
Various techniques are utilized to fabricate nanostructures in semiconductors. Methods such as 
chemical vapor deposition, lithography, and self-assembly facilitate the attainment of meticulous 
control in the process of manufacturing. Etching techniques and electrochemical deposition play a 
significant role in the fabrication of complex nanostructures, which are crucial for a wide range of 
semiconductor applications [5, 34].
TABLE 9.1
Some Energy Harvesting Applications for Conducting Polymers
Polymer
Possible Applications
Polypyrrole
Rechargeable batteries, printed electronics, circuit boards, condensers, chemical sensors, 
electroplating, electroacoustic devices, adhesives, electromagnetic shielding, transparent 
coating, electro-photochemical cells, photocatalysts, physiological implantations, field effect 
transistors
Polyaniline
Rechargeable batteries, chemical and biosensors, indicator devices, electrochromic devices, textiles
Poly (p-phenylene)
Rechargeable batteries, photocatalysts, fillers
Polythiophene
Rechargeable batteries, gas and chemical sensors, optoelectronics, display devices, fillers, field 
effect transistors, photocatalysts

115
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
9.2.1.1 Lithography
The process of lithography entails the generation of patterns on a substrate via the use of masks and 
exposure to light. Various techniques, including as optical lithography, electron beam lithography, 
and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography, enable the accurate formation of nanostructures on 
semiconductor surfaces [35].
Lithography, also known as photoengraving, involves the transfer of a pattern onto a reactive 
polymer film known as resist. This pattern is then replicated onto a thin film or substrate situated 
underneath the resist. Over the last fifty years, several lithography methods have been developed, 
using different lens systems and exposure radiation sources such as photons, X-rays, electrons, ions, 
and neutral atoms [5].
9.2.1.2 Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD)
CVD involves the chemical reaction of a volatile component of a specific material with other gases. 
This reaction results in the formation of a nonvolatile solid, which is then deposited atomistically 
onto a substrate that has been appropriately positioned. This is a widely used technique in which thin 
films of various materials are deposited onto a substrate. The growth of nanowires, nanotubes, or 
thin films with nanoscale characteristics may be achieved depending on the specific process circum­
stances. Metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) and plasma-enhanced chemical vapor 
deposition (PECVD) are widely used techniques in the field of semiconductor manufacture [36].
Due to the various features of CVD, its chemistry exhibits a high degree of complexity, includ­
ing a diverse array of chemical reactions. The significance of gas phase reactions (homogeneous) 
increases as the temperature and relative pressure of the reactants rise. Gas phase reactions become 
prominent, and homogenous nucleation occurs when there is an exceptionally high concentration of 
reactants. In order to achieve the deposition of high-quality films, it is essential to prevent the occur­
rence of homogenous nucleation. Chemical reactions include a diverse range of processes, which 
may be categorized into several groups based on the precursors used and the circumstances under 
which deposition occurs. These groups include pyrolysis, reduction, oxidation, compound synthesis, 
disproportionation, and reversible transfer [5].
9.2.1.3 Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)
The process of MBE entails the precise deposition of crystalline layers of semiconductor materials 
at the atomic level. The mentioned technique is well-suited for the fabrication of nanostructures of 
superior quality, allowing for meticulous regulation of both layer thickness and composition. In the 
study of Nguyen et al. [37] in 2023, they utilized a two-step co-deposition technique and molecu­
lar beam epitaxy on an Al2O3 (0001) substrate at temperatures below 250°C, to form high-quality 
ordered L10-FeNi films. Reflection high energy electron diffraction and X-ray diffraction patterns 
verified that the films were epitaxially formed in the (111) orientation. To design the next generation 
of rare-earth-free constant magnets, they presented an efficient molecular beam epitaxy growth 
technique of high-quality ordered L10-FeNi (111) film.
9.2.1.4 Self-Assembly
Self-assembly is a broad word used to denote a phenomenon whereby the spontaneous organization 
of molecules and microscopic components, such as particles, takes place in an organized manner 
due to the effect of many factors, including chemical reactions, electrostatic attraction, and capillary 
forces [38]. The process of self-assembly is predicated upon the inherent characteristics of materi­
als, which enable them to autonomously organize into certain nanostructures. The aforementioned 
technique demonstrates use in the generation of surface patterns and the organized arrangement of 
nanoparticles [5].
The utilization of block-copolymer self-assembly exhibits significant potential for extensive nano­
manufacturing applications in both bulk and thin film types. The resulting nanopatterns possess the 

116
Handbook of Semiconductors
capability to serve as templates for the self-assembly of functional nanomaterials, thereby facili­
tating the development of energy-harvesting devices, photonic metasurfaces, nanofiltration mem­
branes, and antibacterial coatings [39, 40].
In 2023, Walker et al. [41] examined the feasibility of using spin-coating techniques to facilitate 
the self-assembly process of silica nanocolloids with a diameter of 150 nm into extensive crystal 
formations on mica. The researchers explored various colloidal concentrations, accelerations, and 
rotational speeds as part of their investigation. The ordering arrangement was influenced by the low 
concentration of colloidal particles, which exhibited a size-dependent behavior. The nanocolloidal 
particles of the greatest size exhibited crystalline close-packed arrangements, whereas progres­
sively smaller nanocolloids displayed configurations characterized by polycrystalline or amorphous 
structures.
9.2.1.5 Etching Techniques
Etching techniques, such as deep reactive ion etching (DRIE) and reactive ion etching (RIE) are 
used for the purpose of selectively eliminating material from a substrate, hence generating precisely 
defined nanostructures. Techniques such as atomic layer etching (ALE) enable meticulous manipu­
lation of etching processes at the atomic scale.
In 2023, Ratha et al. [42], focused on optimizing the circumstances of reactive ion etching 
to minimize damage in BiFeO3-based thin films with Eu/Co substitution. The objective was to 
enhance the functionality of magnetic nanodevices in these films. In their work, they tested the abil­
ity of thin films to endure etching, a fundamental step in microfabrication. They claimed that reac­
tive ion etching might end up in an alteration in crystallography that could alter the ferromagnetic 
and ferroelectric phases of multi-ferroic thin films. Consequently, the researchers undertake an 
investigation into the potential morphological and magnetic impairments resulting from the process 
of reactive ion etching on thin films based on BFO ((Bi,Eu)(Fe,Co)O3). In addition, the researchers 
examined an optimal etching condition in order to minimize magnetic damage in the thin film of 
(Bi,Eu)(Fe,Co)O3.
9.2.1.6 Sol-Gel Method
Sol-gel is a process that is a commonly employed technique for the synthesis of both inorganic 
and organic-inorganic hybrid materials. This versatile method enables the production of various 
structures such as nanoparticles, nanorods, thin films, and monoliths. The sol-gel process includes 
the transformation of precursor solutions into solid materials via chemical reactions. It is particu­
larly utilized for the fabrication of nanoparticles, thin films, and coatings that possess nanoscale 
characteristics [5]. Balakrishnan and John [43], synthesized the multiphase TiO2 (TAB)-ZnO (ZW) 
nanostructure through sol-gel technique. Sol-gel-produced TiO2-ZnO nanostructure was studied for 
its structure, electrical properties, and photocatalytic performance.
These techniques allow for the precise manufacture of semiconductor nanostructures, giving 
scientists and engineers unprecedented control over the characteristics of the final goods for use in 
electronics, photonics, and other areas.
9.2.2  Electronic and Optical Properties of Semiconductor Nanostructures
The size, shape, and composition of semiconductor nanostructures have a significant impact on 
their electronic and optical characteristics. The electronic band structure is modified as a result 
of the discrete energy levels caused by quantum confinement phenomena. Band gap energies may 
be manipulated via the use of nanostructures to create tailored optoelectronics. Surface effects, 
which affect charge carrier dynamics and recombination rates, are modified by increased surface-
to-volume ratios. Quantum dots, with their size-dependent optical features such as emission spectra, 
are used in displays and sensors [12].

117
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
9.3  NANOTECHNOLOGY CHALLENGES IN SEMICONDUCTORS
9.3.1  Problems of Manufacturing and Controlling Nanostructures and Thin Films
The semiconductor business has been profoundly impacted by nanotechnology, which has allowed 
for the creation of smaller, quicker, and more efficient electronic devices. It raises a number of dif­
ficulties, however, that must be overcome. Nanostructures and thin films have unique difficulties in 
manufacturing and regulating. Some typical issues that arise during these procedures are as follows:
Nanostructures and thin films may be difficult to fabricate with a high degree of uniformity. 
Film thickness, content, and shape might vary depending on the deposition rate, substrate qualities, 
and other process factors. Particularly challenging is maintaining uniformity over wide regions or 
complicated structures, since this calls for careful regulation of deposition methods and process 
conditions. Soltani-kordshuli et al. [44] documented the first achievement in producing graphene-
doped PEDOT:PSS composite thin films that had both high conductivity and transparency. This was 
accomplished by the use of conventional spray coating and substrate vibration-assisted ultrasonic 
spray coating (SVASC) techniques. In order to mitigate the aggregation of dopant particles, enhance 
conductivity, and enhance film homogeneity and nanostructure, composite PEDOT: PSS films were 
subjected to concurrent vertical and lateral ultrasonic vibration.
The reliability and efficacy of nanostructures and thin films may be greatly affected by the 
presence of contamination and flaws. Contaminants, including impurities, particles, and residual 
gases, have the potential to be introduced throughout the manufacturing process, which may result 
in adverse impacts on the characteristics of materials and the performance of devices. The presence 
of various imperfections, including as vacancies, dislocations, and grain boundaries, may have sig­
nificant implications for the structural integrity, electrical characteristics, and mechanical stability 
of materials. It is of utmost importance to minimize the occurrence of contamination and defects 
in order to guarantee the intended attributes and performance of nanostructures and thin films [45].
The attainment of the intended surface roughness and morphology of nanostructures and thin 
films is essential in order to optimize their functional and optical characteristics. The presence of 
uncontrolled surface roughness has the potential to significantly impact the performance of devices, 
as well as influence light scattering and adhesion qualities. In order to get the appropriate surface 
roughness and morphology, it is essential to have control over the growth or deposition parameters, 
including temperature, pressure, and precursor flow [46].
The adhesion between thin films and the substrate is of utmost importance in ensuring their 
mechanical stability and long-term functionality. Insufficient adhesion has the potential to result 
in the separation of the film, hence compromising the structural integrity and performance of the 
system. To provide a robust bond between the film and substrate, it is essential to undertake appro­
priate surface preparation techniques, engage in interfacial engineering practices, and optimize the 
deposition parameters [47].
The precise characterization of nanostructures and thin films plays a vital role in comprehend­
ing their characteristics and evaluating their performance. Nevertheless, the characterization of 
nanoscale features and thin film characteristics may pose significant challenges as a result of the 
restrictions inherent in existing methodologies and equipment. The current field of study involves 
the development of proficient characterization methods that have the capability to investigate 
nanoscale characteristics and precisely quantify aspects of thin films [48].
9.3.2  The Effect of Environment and External Conditions 
on the Behavior of Nanostructures and Thin Films
The performance of nanostructures and thin films may be significantly impacted by their surround­
ing environment and external factors. These minuscule substances, characterized by their some­
times nanoscale size, have exceptional characteristics that may either thrive or decline based on a 

118
Handbook of Semiconductors
range of variables. This part aims to examine the intricate relationship between nanostructures, thin 
films, and their surrounding environment, elucidating the significant impact of external factors on 
their performance.
The efficiency and durability of these materials may be considerably influenced by several envi­
ronmental factors, such as ambient temperature, humidity, mechanical stress, and chemical interac­
tions. Furthermore, it is crucial to comprehend and regulate variables such as radiation exposure 
and atmospheric gases, since they have the potential to induce transformational alterations. This 
understanding and control are essential for a wide range of applications.
The behavior of nanostructures and thin films is significantly influenced by temperature. The 
phenomenon of thermal expansion and contraction has the ability to induce mechanical stress and 
strain inside materials, which may result in various forms of deformation, such as buckling or 
delamination. Furthermore, changes in temperature have the potential to impact the crystal struc­
ture, phase transitions, and electrical characteristics of certain materials [49]. The maintenance of 
stability and performance in nanostructures and thin films is heavily reliant on effective thermal 
management. Gahtar et al. [50] employed the spray pyrolysis process to fabricate novel nickel sul­
fide thin films. These materials were intended to serve as potential co-catalysts, with the aim of 
enhancing photocatalytic efficiency or superconductivity. Subsequently, an investigation was con­
ducted to examine the impact of deposition temperatures of 523, 573, and 623 K on the optical, 
structural, and electrical features. The thin films that were fabricated at temperatures of 523 K and 
573 K have a favorable transmittance level of around 20%. The Ni1S2 thin film was characterized 
by determining its lowest optical band gap and Urbach energy at a temperature of 623 K. At 573K, 
and the compound Ni17S18 exhibited a maximum electrical conductivity of 4.29 × 105 (Ω.cm)−1. The 
nickel sulfide thin films that were deposited at 573 K exhibited favorable characteristics in terms of 
their optical, structural, and electrical properties.
The presence of humidity and moisture may adversely impact the qualities and performance 
of nanostructures and thin films. These factors have the potential to initiate corrosion, oxidation, 
or chemical reactions, resulting in the deterioration of material characteristics, changes in surface 
morphology, and diminished performance of the device. Thin films are susceptible to swelling and 
delamination when exposed to moisture. Protection against moisture and humidity requires proper 
encapsulation, sealing, or the application of coatings [51].
Nanostructures and thin films may be profoundly affected by the presence of certain gases. Thin 
film growth dynamics, surface composition, and the induction of chemical reactions are all influ­
enced by the presence of reactive gases. On the other hand, inert gases may provide a safe space free 
from any reactions. Maintaining the intended characteristics and functionalities of nanostructures 
and thin films requires strict control over gas composition, pressure, and purity throughout manu­
facturing, processing, and operation. The effects of NO2 and reducing gases including H2 and NH3, 
as well as relative humidity, on the physicochemical characteristics of ZnO nanostructures were 
investigated by Procek et al. [52]. Extensive experiments were conducted at room temperature and 
200°C to determine the impact of the gases under study on the resistivity of the ZnO nanostruc­
tures. These experiments demonstrated a remarkable sensitivity of ZnO nanostructures to even low 
NO2 concentrations. Approximately 600% in N2/230% in the air at 200°C in the dark and 430% in 
N2/340% in the air at RT accompanied by UV excitation were the structural responses to 1 ppm of 
NO2. The structural reaction to the impact of NO2 at a temperature of 200°C has a magnitude that 
surpasses the response to NH3 by a factor exceeding 105 and exceeds the response to H2 by a factor 
exceeding 106, both in relation to a concentration of 1 ppm.
The behavior of nanostructures and thin films may be influenced by light and radiation via 
a variety of mechanisms. The existence of light may impact optical qualities, including absorp­
tion, reflection, and transmission. Nanostructures and thin films are susceptible to photon-induced 
processes such as photoluminescence, photoexcitation, and photochemical reactions. Furthermore, 
ionizing radiation exposure may cause radiation-induced flaws, changes in material features, and 
device performance deterioration [53].

119
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
REFERENCES
	
1.	 P. Szczyglewska, A. Feliczak-Guzik, I. Nowak, Nanotechnology–General aspects: A chemical reduc­
tion approach to the synthesis of nanoparticles, Molecules. 28 (2023) 4932.
	
2.	 R.W. Whatmore, Nanotechnology—What is it? Should we be worried? Occup. Med. 56 (2006) 295–299.
	
3.	 S. Bayda, M. Adeel, T. Tuccinardi, M. Cordani, F. Rizzolio, The history of nanoscience and nanotech­
nology: From chemical–physical applications to nanomedicine, Molecules. 25 (2019) 112.
	
4.	 A. Selmani, D. Kovačević, K. Bohinc, Nanoparticles: From synthesis to applications and beyond, Adv. 
Colloid Interface Sci. 303 (2022) 102640.
	
5.	 G. Cao, Nanostructures & Nanomaterials: Synthesis, Properties & Applications, Imperial College Press 
(2004).
	
6.	 A. Nayak, B. Bhushan, S. Kotnala, N. Kukretee, P. Chaudhary, A.R. Tripathy, K. Ghai, S.L. Mudliar, 
Nanomaterials for supercapacitors as energy storage application: Focus on its characteristics and limita­
tions, Mater. Today Proc. 73 (2023) 227–232.
	
7.	 M. Ikram, U. Qumar, S. Ali, A. Ul-Hamid, Impact of metal oxide nanoparticles on adsorptive and pho­
tocatalytic schemes: Fundamentals to Applications, in: Chapter 3 of Advanced Materials for Wastewater 
Treatment and Desalination Editors: A.F. Ismail, P.S. Goh, H. Hasbullah, and F. Aziz, CRC Press (2022).
	
8.	 Z. Liu, S. Fu, X. Liu, A. Narita, P. Samorì, M. Bonn, H.I. Wang, Small size, big impact: Recent progress 
in bottom-up synthesized nanographenes for optoelectronic and energy applications, Adv. Sci. 9 (2022) 
2106055.
	
9.	 A. Niyati, M. Haghighi, M. Shabani, Solar-assisted photocatalytic elimination of Azo dye effluent using 
plasmonic AgCl anchored flower-like Bi4O5I2 as staggered nano-sized photocatalyst designed via 
sono-precipitation method, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 115 (2020) 144–159.
	 10.	 A.I. Onyia, H.I. Ikeri, A.I. Chima, Surface and quantum effects in nanosized semiconductor, Am. J. 
Nano Res. Appl. 8 (2020) 35–41.
	 11.	 P.E. Sheehan, L.J. Whitman, Detection limits for nanoscale biosensors, Nano Lett. 5 (2005) 803–807.
	 12.	 L.E. Brus, Electron–electron and electron-hole interactions in small semiconductor crystallites: The 
size dependence of the lowest excited electronic state, J. Chem. Phys. 80 (1984) 4403–4409.
	 13.	 S. Kargozar, S.J. Hoseini, P.B. Milan, S. Hooshmand, H. Kim, M. Mozafari, Quantum dots: A review 
from concept to clinic, Biotechnol. J. 15 (2020) 2000117.
	 14.	 X. Tang, J. Wang, L. Zhu, W. Yin, Simulating stress-tunable phonon and thermal properties in hetero­
structured AlN/GaN/AlN-nanofilms, Mater. Res. Express. 6 (2018) 15018.
	 15.	 S. Zhang, X. Tang, H. Ruan, L. Zhu, Effects of surface/interface stress on phonon properties and ther­
mal conductivity in AlN/GaN/AlN heterostructural nanofilms, Appl. Phys. A. 125 (2019) 1–14.
	 16.	 A.S. Yalamarthy, H. So, M. Muñoz Rojo, A.J. Suria, X. Xu, E. Pop, D.G. Senesky, Tuning electrical and 
thermal transport in AlGaN/GaN heterostructures via buffer layer engineering, Adv. Funct. Mater. 28 
(2018) 1705823.
	 17.	 E.K. Hamza, S.N. Jaafar, Nanotechnology application for wireless communication system, in: Chapter 
6 of Nanotechnology for Electronic Applications, Editors: N.M. Mubarak, S. Gopi, P. Balakrishnan, 
Springer Nature Singapore (2022), pp. 115–130.
	 18.	 R.L. Hoffman, B.J. Norris, J.F. Wager, ZnO-based transparent thin-film transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett. 82 
(2003) 733–735.
	 19.	 B. Shrestha, Nanotechnology for biosensor applications, in: Chapter 20 of Sustainable Nanotechnology 
for Environmental Remediation, Elsevier (2022), pp. 513–531.
	 20.	 Z. Liu, C.-H. Lin, B.-R. Hyun, C.-W. Sher, Z. Lv, B. Luo, F. Jiang, T. Wu, C.-H. Ho, H.-C. Kuo, Micro-
light-emitting diodes with quantum dots in display technology, Light Sci. Appl. 9 (2020) 83.
	 21.	 F.P. García de Arquer, D.V. Talapin, V.I. Klimov, Y. Arakawa, M. Bayer, E.H. Sargent, Semiconductor 
quantum dots: Technological progress and future challenges, Science. 373 (2021) eaaz8541.
	 22.	 S.K. Sharma, P. Kumar, B. Raj, Introduction to nanowires: Types, proprieties, and application of nanow­
ires, in: Chapter 1 of Innovative Applications of Nanowires for Circuit Design, Editor: B. Raj, IGI 
Global (2021), pp. 1–15.
	 23.	 T. Pham, A. Qamar, T. Dinh, M.K. Masud, M. Rais-Zadeh, D.G. Senesky, Y. Yamauchi, N. Nguyen, H. 
Phan, Nanoarchitectonics for wide bandgap semiconductor nanowires: Toward the next generation of 
nanoelectromechanical systems for environmental monitoring, Adv. Sci. 7 (2020) 2001294.
	 24.	 M. Akbari-Saatlu, M. Procek, C. Mattsson, G. Thungström, H.-E. Nilsson, W. Xiong, B. Xu, Y. Li, H.H. 
Radamson, Silicon nanowires for gas sensing: A review, Nanomaterials. 10 (2020) 2215.
	 25.	 K. Okamoto, M. Sugiyama, S. Mabu, Importance of advanced metrology in semiconductor industry and 
value-added creation using AI/ML, E-Journal Surf. Sci. Nanotechnol. 18 (2020) 214–222.

120
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 26.	 C.B. Gopinath, S. Ramanathan, M.N.M. Yasin, M.I. Shapiai, Z.H. Ismail, S. Subramaniam, Essential 
semiconductor films in micro-/nano-biosensors: Current scenarios, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng. 127 
(2021) 302–311.
	 27.	 G. Boschetto, S. Carapezzi, A. Todri-Sanial, Graphene and carbon nanotubes for electronics nanopack­
aging, IEEE Open J. Nanotechnol. 2 (2021) 120–128.
	 28.	 G. Ramalingam, N. Perumal, A.K. Priya, S. Rajendran, A review of graphene-based semiconductors for 
photocatalytic degradation of pollutants in wastewater, Chemosphere. 300 (2022) 134391.
	 29.	 S. Trivedi, K. Lobo, H.S.S.R. Matte, Synthesis, properties, and applications of graphene, in: Chapter 
3 of Fundamentals and Sensing Applications of 2D Materials, Editors: M. Hywel, C. S. Rout, and D.J. 
Late, Elsevier (2019), pp. 25–90.
	 30.	 M.B. Tahir, T. Iqbal, M. Rafique, M.S. Rafique, T. Nawaz, M. Sagir, Nanomaterials for photocatalysis, 
in: Nanotechnol. Photocatal. Environ. Appl., Elsevier, 2020: pp. 65–76.
	 31.	 S.K. Verma, S. Samanta, A.K. Srivastava, S. Biswas, R.M. Alsharabi, S. Rajput, Conducting polymer 
nanocomposite for energy storage and energy harvesting systems, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng. 2022 (2022).
	 32.	 T. Li, P. Li, R. Sun, S. Yu, Polymer-based nanocomposites in semiconductor packaging, IET 
Nanodielectrics. 6 (2023) 147–158.
	 33.	 Z. Sun, R. Wong, Y. Liu, M. Yu, J. Li, D. Spence, M. Zhang, M. Kathaperumal, C.-P. Wong, Melamine–
graphene epoxy nanocomposite based die attach films for advanced 3D semiconductor packaging appli­
cations, Nanoscale. 14 (2022) 15193–15202.
	 34.	 S. Suresh, Semiconductor nanomaterials, methods and applications: A review, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. 3 
(2013) 62–74.
	 35.	 C.D. Dieleman, W. Ding, L. Wu, N. Thakur, I. Bespalov, B. Daiber, Y. Ekinci, S. Castellanos, B. Ehrler, 
Universal direct patterning of colloidal quantum dots by (extreme) ultraviolet and electron beam lithog­
raphy, Nanoscale. 12 (2020) 11306–11316.
	 36.	 M.K. Patil, S. Shaikh, I. Ganesh, Recent advances on TiO2 thin film based photocatalytic applications 
(a review), Curr. Nanosci. 11 (2015) 271–285.
	 37.	 B.-H. Jun, Y.-B. Chun, J.H. Lee, Ordered L10-FeNi (111) epitaxial thin film on Al2O3 (0001) substrate: 
Molecular beam epitaxy growth and characterizations, Thin Solid Films. 780 (2023) 139962.
	 38.	 A.A. Kulkarni, G.S. Doerk, Thin film block copolymer self-assembly for nanophotonics, Nanotechnology. 
33 (2022) 292001.
	 39.	 C. Cummins, R. Lundy, J.J. Walsh, V. Ponsinet, G. Fleury, M.A. Morris, Enabling future nanomanufac­
turing through block copolymer self-assembly: A review, Nano Today. 35 (2020) 100936.
	 40.	 J.H. Kim, H.M. Jin, G.G. Yang, K.H. Han, T. Yun, J.Y. Shin, S. Jeong, S.O. Kim, Smart nanostructured 
materials based on self-assembly of block copolymers, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (2020) 1902049.
	 41.	 J. Walker, V. Koutsos, Spin coating of silica nanocolloids on mica: Self-assembly of two-dimensional 
colloid crystal structures and thin films, Coatings. 13 (2023) 1488.
	 42.	 S. Ratha, G. Egawa, S. Yoshimura, Optimizing the Reactive Ion Etching Conditions with Minimal 
Damage for High Functional Magnetic Nano Device Application in Bifeo3-Based Thin Film by Eu/Co 
Substitution, Co Substit. (n.d.).
	 43.	 M. Balakrishnan, R. John, Properties of sol-gel synthesized multiphase TiO2 (AB)-ZnO (ZW) semicon­
ductor nanostructure: An effective catalyst for methylene blue dye degradation, Iran. J. Catal. 10 (2020) 
1–16.
	 44.	 F. Soltani-kordshuli, F. Zabihi, M. Eslamian, Graphene-doped PEDOT: PSS nanocomposite thin films 
fabricated by conventional and substrate vibration-assisted spray coating (SVASC, Eng. Sci. Technol. an 
Int. J. 19 (2016) 1216–1223.
	 45.	 X. Wu, X. Chen, Q.M. Zhang, D.Q. Tan, Advanced dielectric polymers for energy storage, Energy 
Storage Mater. 44 (2022) 29–47.
	 46.	 R. Kesarwani, P.P. Dey, A. Khare, Correlation between surface scaling behavior and surface plasmon 
resonance properties of semitransparent nanostructured Cu thin films deposited via PLD, RSC Adv. 9 
(2019) 7967–7974.
	 47.	 J.-H. Kim, H.-J. Kil, S. Lee, J. Park, J.-W. Park, Interfacial delamination at multilayer thin films in semi­
conductor devices, ACS Omega. 7 (2022) 25219–25228.
	 48.	 M.R. Baklanov, K.P. Mogilnikov, A.S. Vishnevskiy, Challenges in porosity characterization of thin 
films: Cross-evaluation of different techniques, J. Vac. Sci. Technol. A. 41 (2023).
	 49.	 M. Huff, Residual stresses in deposited thin-film material layers for micro-and nano-systems manufac­
turing, Micromachines. 13 (2022) 2084.
	 50.	 A. Gahtar, S. Benramache, C. Zaouche, A. Boukacham, A. Sayah, Effect of temperature on the proper­
ties of nickel sulfide films performed by spray pyrolysis technique, Adv. Mater. Sci. 20 (2020) 36–51.

121
Nanotechnology in Semiconductors 
	 51.	 C. Han, Analysis of moisture-induced degradation of thin-film photovoltaic module, Sol. Energy Mater. 
Sol. Cells. 210 (2020) 110488.
	 52.	 M. Procek, T. Pustelny, A. Stolarczyk, Influence of external gaseous environments on the electrical 
properties of ZnO nanostructures obtained by a hydrothermal method, Nanomaterials. 6 (2016) 227.
	 53.	 A. Peter Amalathas, M.M. Alkaisi, Nanostructures for light trapping in thin film solar cells, 
Micromachines. 10 (2019) 619.

122
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-10
The Development and 
Processing of Advanced 
Low-Dimensional 
Semiconductors
Xinghui Liu, Shiheng Xin, Fuchun Zhang, and Chunyi Zhi
10.1  INTRODUCTION
The development of materials has been closely intertwined with the progress of human civilization. 
With the advent of the “Silicon Age” at the end of the 20th century, research on new materials has 
gained significant attention, marking a pivotal era in the 21st century. Traditional semiconductors 
have played a prominent role in this historical period, accompanied by advancements in fabrication 
processes. However, in recent decades, the rapid development of low-dimensional (LD) semicon­
ductors, such as carbon-based allotropes, phosphorus allotropes, and transition-metal dichalcogen­
ides (TMDs), has garnered immense interest as potential key components for electronic devices.
This chapter aims to introduce a representative traditional semiconductor and delve into the 
associated eight fabrication processes. By comprehensively understanding the intricacies of semi­
conductor development, we can unlock new possibilities and drive innovation in various fields, 
ultimately shaping the trajectory of modern civilization in the 21st century and beyond.
10.2  CONVENTIONAL SEMICONDUCTOR MATERIALS AND PROCESSES
Semiconductors are used in every aspect of our lives: From smartphones and laptops to credit cards 
and subways, semiconductors are used in many items we rely on daily. This section will introduce 
common and well-established semiconductor materials and how they are processed.
10.2.1  Silicon (Si)
Silicon (Si), the well-established and long-applied semiconductor material, has contributed indelibly 
to the world’s development. Silicon exists in large quantities on the earth, second only to oxygen in 
the earth’s crust, accounting for about 25.8% of the mass of the earth’s crust; the silicon content in 
sand can be up to 90% [1–3].
The semiconductor processing of silicon-type, including germanium, has become so sophisti­
cated today that scientists have researched whether other semiconductor materials can also replace 
the high-cost silicon-type materials [4–6].
10.2.2  Overview of the Development of Other Semiconductor Materials
10.2.2.1  Gallium Arsenide (GaAs), Indium Phosphide (InP), and Gallium Nitride (GaN)
GaAs, InP, and GaN materials have high electron mobility due to a small, effective mass of elec­
trons, making them suitable for high-frequency and high-speed electronic devices such as tran­
sistors and high-frequency power amplifiers. They have good optoelectronic properties for laser 
10

123
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
diodes (LEDs) and photodetectors because of their excellent light emission and detection proper­
ties. Through years of research, GaAs, InP, and GaN materials have been widely used in fiberoptic, 
radar, and wireless communications.
However, the cost of producing GaAs, InP, and GaN manufacturing is relatively high because of 
the preparation and processing technology requirements; the process is pretty complex and requires 
unique technology and equipment. They are susceptible to oxidation and moisture, requiring special 
handling and packaging to ensure device stability. Devices made with GaAs materials typically 
have relatively high power consumption, which may not be applicable in specific low-power applica­
tions. Moreover, InP materials are sensitive to oxidation and moisture and require special treatment. 
Choosing the suitable substrate is critical and a challenge to the growth and preparation process of 
InP materials [7–10].
10.2.2.2  Silicon Carbide (SiC)
SiC has high thermal stability and can be applied to high-temperature electronic devices, which 
work stably in high-temperature environments. It has high electron mobility, which can be used for 
high-frequency and high-power devices. Simultaneously, it has good radiation resistance, making it 
suitable for nuclear energy and space applications. However, SiC is relatively expensive to manufac­
ture since making the quality and homogeneity of SiC materials is a challenge [11].
10.2.2.3  Diamond
Diamond materials have ultra-high thermal stability and can be used in high-temperature, high-
power, high-frequency electronic devices. Their harmful effects have excellent thermal conductiv­
ity and can be used for heat dissipation in high-power devices. However, diamond is costly and 
requires high preparation and processing technology [12].
10.2.2.4  Gallium Oxide (GaO)
GaO has high electron mobility, small electron effective mass, and excellent insulating properties, 
which helps to improve e-motion performance and makes it stand out from many semiconductor 
materials. Furthermore, GaO preparation and processing technologies are being explored step by 
step, with numerous production and cost challenges [13–16].
10.2.3  Processing Flow of the Traditional Semiconductor
Over the years, the traditional semiconductor processing described above has matured into industri­
alization and commercialization. The eight semiconductor processing steps in the industrialization 
process will be described here.
10.2.3.1  Wafer Processing
All semiconductor processes begin with a grain of sand because the silicon contained in the sand 
is the raw material needed to produce wafers. A wafer is a round sheet formed by cutting a single 
crystal column made of silicon. To extract high-purity silicon materials, we need to use silica sand, 
a silica content of up to 95% of the unique materials, but the production of wafers is the primary 
raw material.
•	 Ingots
The sand is first heated to separate the carbon monoxide from the silicon, and the pro­
cess is repeated until ultra-high purity electronic-grade silicon (EG-Si) is obtained. The 
first step in semiconductor manufacturing is melting high-purity silicon into a liquid, then 
solidified into a single-crystal solid form called an ingot. Silicon ingots (pillars) are made 
with a high degree of precision down to the nanometer level, and the widely used manufac­
turing method is the lifting and pulling method.

124
Handbook of Semiconductors
•	 Spindle Cutting
Once the previous step is completed, the ends of the ingot must be cut off with a diamond 
saw and then cut into thin slices of a certain thickness. Larger and thinner wafers can be 
divided into more usable units, which helps to reduce production costs. After cutting the 
ingots, the wafers are marked with flat zones or dents, which can be used as a standard to 
set the processing direction in subsequent steps.
•	 Wafer Surface Polishing
The thin wafers obtained through the above cutting process are called bare wafers, 
which are unprocessed raw wafers. The surface of a bare wafer is so uneven that it is 
impossible to print circuit graphics on it directly. Therefore, surface imperfections are 
removed by grinding and chemical etching, then polished to create a clean surface, and 
then cleaned to remove residual contaminants, resulting in a finished wafer with a clean 
surface [3, 17–20].
10.2.3.2  Oxidation
The function of the oxidation process is to form a protective film on the surface of the wafer. It 
protects the wafer from chemical impurities, prevents leakage currents from entering the circuit, 
prevents diffusion during ion implantation, and prevents the wafer from slipping during etching.
The first step in the oxidation process is the removal of impurities and contaminants, which 
requires four steps to remove impurities such as organics, metals, and evaporated water residues. 
Once cleaned, the wafers can be placed in a high-temperature environment of 800–1200°C through 
the flow of oxygen or vapor on the surface of the wafer to form a layer of silicon dioxide (i.e., oxide).
•	 Dry and wet oxidation
Depending on the oxidizing agent in the oxidation reaction, the thermal oxidation process 
can be divided into dry oxidation, which uses pure oxygen to produce a silica layer at a 
slow rate but with a thin and dense oxide layer, and wet oxidation, which requires the 
simultaneous use of oxygen and highly soluble water vapor and is characterized by a fast 
growth rate but with a relatively thick and low-density protective layer.
In addition to the oxidizer, other variables affect the thickness of the silica layer. First, the wafer 
structure, surface defects, and internal doping concentration affect the oxide layer’s generation rate. 
In addition, the higher the pressure and temperature generated by the oxidizing equipment, the 
faster the oxide layer is generated [13, 14, 21, 22].
10.2.3.3  Photolithography
Photolithography is the printing of circuit patterns onto wafers by means of light, which we can 
understand as drawing a planar design on the surface of a wafer necessary for semiconductor manu­
facturing. The higher the fineness of the circuit pattern, the higher the integration of the finished 
chip, which must be realized through advanced photolithography. Specifically, lithography can be 
divided into three steps: coating photoresist, exposure, and development.
•	 Coated photoresist
The first step in drawing a circuit on a wafer is to coat the oxide layer with photoresist. The 
photoresist turns the wafer into photo paper by changing its chemical properties. The thin­
ner the layer of photoresist on the surface of the wafer and the more uniformly it is coated, 
the finer the pattern that can be printed.
•	 Exposure
We can selectively pass light through an exposure device, and when the light passes 
through the mask containing the circuit pattern, the circuit is printed onto the wafer with 
the photoresist film underneath.

125
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
The finer the print pattern during the exposure process, the more components the final 
chip will be able to accommodate, which helps to increase production efficiency and reduce 
the cost of individual components. A new technology currently receiving much attention in 
this area is extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography.
•	 Expose (a photographic plate)
The step after exposure is to spray a developer on the wafer to remove the photoresist from 
the uncovered areas of the graphic, thus allowing the printed circuit pattern to appear. 
After the development is completed, it needs to be checked by various measuring devices 
and optical microscopes to ensure the quality of the circuit drawing [6, 22–24]. The pro­
cess of photolithography, etching, and thin film deposition is shown in Figure 10.1.
10.2.3.4  Etching
After the circuit diagram is photolithographed on the wafer, an etching process removes any excess 
oxide film and leaves only the semiconductor circuit diagram. This is accomplished using a liquid, 
gas, or plasma to remove the selected excess.
There are two main types of etching methods, depending on the substance used: wet etching, 
which uses a chemical reaction with a specific chemical solution to remove the oxide film, and dry 
etching, which uses gas or plasma.
•	 Wet etching
Wet etching using a chemical solution to remove the oxide film has the advantage of low 
cost, high etching speed, and high productivity. However, wet etching is isotropic, i.e., its 
velocity is the same in any direction. This results in the mask (or sensitive film) not being 
perfectly aligned with the etched oxide film, making it challenging to process excellent 
circuit diagrams.
•	 Dry etching
Dry etching can be categorized into three different types. The first is chemical etching, 
which uses an etching gas (mainly hydrogen fluoride). Like wet etching, this method is 
isotropic, which means it is also unsuitable for fine etching.
FIGURE 10.1  Photolithography, etching, and thin film deposition.

126
Handbook of Semiconductors
The second method is physical sputtering, where ions in a plasma are used to impact and remove 
the excess oxide layer. As an anisotropic etching method, sputter etching has different etching 
speeds in the horizontal and vertical directions, and therefore, it is finer than chemical etching. 
However, the disadvantage of this method is that the etching rate is slower, because it relies entirely 
on the physical reaction caused by ion collisions.
The final third method is reactive ion etching (RIE), which combines the first two methods, i.e., 
ionized physical etching by plasma and chemical etching by free radicals generated by plasma acti­
vation. In addition to the etching speed exceeding that of the previous two methods, RIE can utilize 
the anisotropic properties of ions to etch highly detailed patterns.
Dry etching is widely used today to improve the yield of exemplary semiconductor circuits. 
Maintaining whole wafer etch uniformity and increasing etch speeds is critical, and today’s state-
of-the-art dry etch equipment supports the production of the most advanced logic and memory chips 
at higher performance [2, 16, 22, 24–26].
10.2.3.5  Thin Film Deposition
To create the miniature devices inside the chip, we need to continuously deposit layers of film, 
remove the excess by etching, and add materials to separate the different devices. Each transistor 
or memory cell is built step by step through this process. By thin film, we mean a film that is less 
than one micron (μm, one-millionth of a meter) thick and cannot be made by ordinary mechanical 
processes. Placing a thin film containing the desired molecular or atomic units onto a wafer is called 
deposition.
To form multilayer semiconductor structures, we need to create device stacks, which are alter­
nating layers of thin metallic (conductive) and dielectric (insulating) films on the wafer surface, 
followed by a repetitive etching process that removes the excess and creates a three-dimensional 
structure. Techniques that can be used for the deposition process include chemical vapor deposition 
(CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), and physical vapor deposition (PVD), and the methods used 
for these techniques can be categorized into dry and wet deposition.
•	 Chemical vapor deposition
In CVD, the precursor gas reacts chemically in the reaction chamber, producing a thin film 
that adheres to the wafer’s surface and byproducts pumped out of the chamber.
Plasma-enhanced CVD requires plasma to generate a reaction gas. This method reduces 
the reaction temperature, making it ideal for temperature-sensitive structures. Plasma also 
reduces the number of deposit passes, often resulting in higher-quality films.
•	 Atomic Layer Deposition
ALD forms thin films by depositing only a few atomic layers at a time. The key to the 
method is to cycle through the separate steps in a specific order and to maintain reasonable 
control. Coating the wafer surface with a precursor is the first step, after which different 
gases are introduced to react with the precursor to form the desired substance on the wafer 
surface.
•	 Physical vapor deposition
As the name implies, PVD refers to forming thin films by physical means. Sputtering is a 
PVD method based on the principle that atoms of the target material are sputtered by argon 
plasma bombardment and deposited on the wafer surface to form a thin film.
In some cases, the deposited film can be treated, and its properties are improved by ultraviolet 
thermal treatment (UVTP) [6, 24].
10.2.3.6  Interconnection
Semiconductors conduct electricity between conductors and non-conductors (i.e., insulators), a 
property that gives us complete control over electric currents. Components such as transistors can 

127
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
be constructed through wafer-based lithography, etching, and deposition processes, but they also 
need to be connected to send and receive power and signals.
Metals are used for circuit interconnections because of their electrical conductivity. Metals used 
in semiconductors need to fulfill the following conditions:
•	 Low resistivity: Since metal circuits are required to transmit current, the metal in them 
should have a low resistance.
•	 Thermo-chemical stability: The properties of the metal material must remain unchanged 
during the metal interconnection process.
•	 High reliability: As IC technology evolves, even small amounts of metallic interconnect 
materials must be durable enough.
•	 Manufacturing cost: Even if the previous three conditions have been met, if the material 
cost is too high, it will not be able to meet the needs of mass production.
The interconnect process uses two main substances, aluminum and copper [1, 3, 17, 18, 20, 22].
10.2.3.7  Testing
The main goal of testing is to verify that the quality of semiconductor chips meets specific stan­
dards, thereby eliminating defective products and improving chip reliability. Additionally, products 
tested for defects do not make it to the packaging step, helping to save costs and time. Electronic 
core sorting (EDS) is one such test method for wafers. EDS is a process that verifies the electrical 
characteristics of each chip in the wafer state, thus improving semiconductor yields [1, 21].
10.2.3.8  Encapsulation
After the previous processes, square chips of equal size (or individual wafers) are formed on the 
wafer. The next step is to obtain individual chips by dicing. Freshly diced chips are fragile, cannot 
exchange electrical signals, and must be handled separately. This process is called encapsulation, 
which involves forming a protective shell around the semiconductor chips and allowing them to 
exchange electrical signals with the outside world.
Through hundreds of processes and eight significant steps, the standard “sand” of our daily life is 
processed into various semiconductor devices and chips that serve all aspects of human life [1, 21].
10.3  LOW-DIMENSIONAL SEMICONDUCTORS AND PROCESSES
As Moore’s law ends, the future design of chips is beginning to face various difficulties. As the fea­
ture size of functional devices continues to decrease, the quantum size effect, short channel effect, 
quantum tunneling effect, and thermal effect in the devices will lead to the degradation of device 
performance or even failure. Silicon-based functional devices based on conventional semiconductor 
materials have reached their limits. In that case, the effect is always limited, so it is undoubtedly an 
excellent direction to look for new semiconductor materials from the new semiconductor materials 
themselves.
Low-dimensional materials refer to the three-dimensional space in at least one dimension in the 
nanoscale range or as the basic unit of the material according to the number of sizes. These nano­
structures are distinguished from bulk materials and are called low-dimensional nanostructures.
10.3.1  Basic Properties of LD Semiconductor Material
10.3.1.1  Quantum Size Effect
The quantum size effect is a phenomenon in which the electronic energy levels near the Fermi 
energy level change from quasi-continuous to discrete energy levels, also known as energy level 

128
Handbook of Semiconductors
splitting or energy gap widening, when the particle size decreases to a particular value. When the 
degree of change in the energy levels is greater than the change in thermal, optical, and electromag­
netic energy, it results in nanoparticle magnetic, optical, acoustic, thermal, electrical, and supercon­
ducting properties significantly different from those of conventional materials [27–29].
10.3.1.2  Short Channel Effect
These are some effects in semiconductor field effect transistors when the conductive channel length 
is reduced to a few nanometers. These effects include, among others, a decrease in threshold voltage 
with channel length, a reduction in the leakage barrier, carrier surface scattering, velocity satura­
tion, ionization, and hot-electron effects. This is particularly noticeable in short channels and can 
lead to severe source-drain-through device failure [27, 28, 30].
10.3.1.3  Small Size Effect
The small size effect is a phenomenon in which electron transport and device performance are sig­
nificantly affected when the critical dimension of a semiconductor device is reduced to the nanome­
ter level. This includes quantum size and short channel effects but can consist of other factors such 
as charge quantization and electron tunneling effects [27, 28].
10.3.1.4  Surface Effects
Surface effects include the appearance of surface states and electron transport between surface 
and bulk states. These effects can affect the electrical conductivity, chemical reactivity, and optical 
properties of the material [27, 28, 31].
10.3.1.5  Cooren Blockage Effect
As electrons move through a semiconductor, they are subjected to coulombic interaction forces 
from other electrons. The coulomb blocking effect refers to the fact that this interaction causes the 
movement of electrons to be hindered, especially at high electron concentrations, and it can reduce 
electron mobility and conductivity [27, 28, 32].
10.3.1.6  Quantum Interference Effects
When electrons propagate as waves, they can undergo interference effects, similar to optical inter­
ference. In semiconductor nanostructures, this effect can affect the wave function distribution of 
electrons, leading to changes in the energy band structure and transport properties of electrons in 
the crystal [27, 28].
10.3.1.7  Two-dimensional Electron Gas and the Quantum Hall Effect
•	 Two-dimensional electron gas: In a two-dimensional material or two-dimensional elec­
tronic system, electrons are confined in a plane and are free to move in a direction perpen­
dicular to that plane [27, 28, 33].
•	 Quantum hall effect: This is a quantum effect that occurs in two-dimensional electron 
gases, where electrons form discrete energy levels perpendicular to the direction of the 
magnetic field and exhibit a high degree of conductivity when subjected to a strong mag­
netic field [27, 28, 34].
10.3.1.8  Quantum Tunneling Effects
It is assumed that a particle with a specific energy moves from the left side of the potential barrier to 
the right side. In classical mechanics, only particles with energy more incredible than the barrier can 
cross the barrier and move to the right of the barrier, while particles with energy less than the barrier 
are reflected and cannot pass through the wall. The quantum tunneling effect is the phenomenon 

129
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
that particles with energy less than the height of the potential barrier can still penetrate the barrier. 
The probability of quantum tunneling is related to the height and thickness of the potential barrier 
and the effective mass of the particle; in resonance tunneling, it is also associated with the width of 
the potential well and the energy band structure of the material [27, 28].
10.3.2  Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
LD materials have attracted everyone’s attention due to their unique characteristics and structures 
[27, 28]. Among them, carbon-based and phosphorus-based materials are representative LD mate­
rial, which is demonstrated as follows (Figure 10.2).
10.3.2.1  Carbon-based Materials
Carbon-based semiconductor materials include carbon nanotubes (CNT), graphene-based 
nanoribbons, and graphdiyne. Carbon-based two-dimensional materials may continue the elec­
tronic Moore’s law. LD materials can be constructed as a few or even a single atomic layer, thus 
providing fragile channel areas and eliminating the need to worry about short-channel effects 
[35, 36].
10.3.2.1.1  Carbon Nanotubes (CNTs)
CNT materials have high electron and hole mobility, allowing them to excel in high-speed elec­
tronic devices such as transistors and radio frequency (RF) switches. Their structural versatility 
allows for selection of different types of CNTs, including semiconductors, metals, and insulators, to 
FIGURE 10.2  Carbon-based materials. (Adapted with permission [35]. Copyright [2019], ACS publications.)

130
Handbook of Semiconductors
meet the needs of varying semiconductor applications. CNT materials also have excellent thermal 
conductivity, allowing them to be used in high-performance heat sinks and thermal management 
devices. The electrical properties of CNTs are unstable due to their structure and defects, which 
leads to inconsistent performance. Producing high-quality CNT is costly, which may limit its com­
mercialization in some applications [35, 37].
10.3.2.1.2  Graphene-based Materials
Graphene-based materials have high electron and hole mobility and are suitable for high-frequency 
and high-speed electronic devices such as transistors and photodetectors. However, graphene is 
typically a zero-bandgap material and lacks a bandgap, which limits its use in conventional semi­
conductor applications. It is structurally unstable and susceptible to structural defects and oxidation, 
which affects its performance and stability. Difficult to integrate and prepare, integrating graphene 
into existing semiconductor processes can be challenging, and complex techniques are required to 
prepare high-quality graphene [27, 35, 38–40].
Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs) materials have a tunable bandgap that can be precisely con­
trolled by width and edge structure adjustments, extending their use in semiconductors. GNRs 
have high electron mobility, making them suitable for high-performance semiconductor devices. 
However, preparing narrow and long GNRs is usually difficult and requires sophisticated prepara­
tion processes. The edge structure of GNRs is unstable and prone to defects, which may affect their 
performance. Moreover, their integration is difficult, and integrating GNRs into electronic devices 
is complex and challenging [35, 37].
10.3.2.1.3  Graphdiyne
Compared with two-dimensional graphene-based semiconductor materials, the emerging graphdi­
yne (graphyne) has attracted much attention for its theoretically higher mobility and narrower for­
bidden bandwidth than traditional two-dimensional materials. Graphdiyne has a tunable band gap 
and high electron mobility, making it suitable for high-performance semiconductor device applica­
tions. However, preparing high-purity graphdiyne is usually complex and requires sophisticated 
preparation processes that require further research and development [27, 35, 41, 42].
10.3.2.2  Phosphorus-based Materials (P)
10.3.2.2.1  Phosphorus-based Materials and Their Isomers
Among the low-dimensional semiconductors, the polycrystalline nature of phosphorus-based 
materials has attracted significant research interest, and their variable chemical bonding structure 
gives rise to a wide variety of micro- and nanostructures. The properties of monolithic phospho­
rus materials are closely related to the geometrical arrangement of phosphorus atoms. Among 
the monolithic phosphorus materials are black phosphorus (a bipolar semiconductor in which 
holes are slightly dominant), violet phosphorus (a p-type semiconductor), and fiber phosphorus 
(an n-type semiconductor). Most monolithic phosphorus semiconductors have in-plane anisot­
ropy, making them suitable for constructing polarization-sensitive optoelectronic components. 
In addition to the energy band structure, the mobility of charge carriers plays an essential role 
in determining the electronic properties of semiconductors. Monolayer phosphenes tend to have 
high carrier mobility.
Monomorphic phosphorus and phosphorus isomers, black phosphorus, white phosphorus, red 
phosphorus, green phosphorus, blue phosphorus, violet phosphorus, and fibrous phosphorus are dif­
ferent forms of phosphorus isomers, which have their advantages and disadvantages in semiconductor 
applications and prospects. The following is a detailed description of the properties of each phos­
phorus heterogeneous body and their application prospects in the semiconductor field [43]. Atomic 
structures of white, violet, fibrous, black, blue, and green phosphorus are shown in Figure 10.3.

131
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
10.3.2.2.2  Black Phosphorus
Black phosphorus exhibits high carrier mobility in a two-dimensional lattice structure, making it a 
candidate for high-performance field-effect transistor materials. The size of its tunable band gap can 
be regulated by changes in the number of layers, allowing it to be engineered in different applica­
tions. However, black phosphorus oxidizes quickly and loses its properties rapidly in air, requiring 
special treatment and encapsulation.
The material properties of black phosphorus make it promising for use in two-dimensional 
materials for high-performance transistors, nanoelectronic devices, and optoelectronic devices. 
However, further research is still needed to improve its stability and promote its application in the 
semiconductor industry [43–45].
10.3.2.2.3  White and Red Phosphorus
White phosphorus is widely found in nature, is easy to extract and process, and has a low produc­
tion cost, making it economically beneficial. However, white phosphorus is toxic to human beings 
and requires special treatment, which brings many limitations to processing, and in semiconductor 
applications, it is unsuitable for high-performance electronic devices due to its low electron mobil­
ity. White phosphorus is more likely to be mainly used in gunpowder and military applications and 
is unsuitable for a wide range of applications in semiconductors [43, 46].
FIGURE 10.3  Atomic structures of white, violet, fibrous, black, blue, and green phosphorus. (Adapted with 
permission [43]. Copyright [2023], Chemical Society Reviews.)

132
Handbook of Semiconductors
Red phosphorus can be found as widely in nature as white phosphorus and is relatively simple 
to prepare. Moreover, it is stable at room temperature, not readily oxidized, and has considerable 
stability characteristics. Red phosphorus may be used in flexible electronic devices, energy stor­
age, and energy production in the future, but its main advantage lies in its stability rather than high 
performance [46].
The research on these phosphorus (green phosphorus, blue phosphorus, and purple phosphorus) 
heterostructures is more limited and has not yet reached the stage of industrial application. More 
research is needed to determine their potential and limitations in semiconductor applications 
[43–45, 47].
10.3.2.2.4  Fibrous Phosphorus
Fibrous phosphorus has a one-dimensional structure, and the structural properties of the one-
dimensional system are expected to enable its use in the preparation of nanowires and nanotubes. 
However, the challenges in preparing and handling fibrous phosphorus have not yet been fully 
resolved, and the research is still in the preliminary stage. Fibrous phosphorus is promising for 
nanoelectronic devices, sensors, and nano-optoelectronic devices to play their role in semiconductor 
systems, but further research and engineering improvements are still needed [43].
The presence of intractable layers and structural defects in the preparation of monolithic phos­
phorus and its allotropes and interfacial resistance during detection are attributed to these dif­
ferences. The different forms of phosphorus isomers have distinct advantages, disadvantages, 
and future perspectives for semiconductor applications. In addition to continuing to search for 
phosphorus materials or their micro- and nanostructures with superior properties, future research 
should fully exploit their potential to promote innovation and development in the semiconductor 
field [43].
10.3.2.3  Transition Metal Dichalcogenides (TMDs)
TMDs metal dichalcogenides are graphene-like, two-dimensional materials due to their similar 
structure, which is usually composed of metallic elements (e.g., W, Mo, and Ti) and sulfur elements 
(S, Se, and Te). For semiconductor applications, TMDs have the following advantages:
Band gap: The band gap of TMDs can be adjusted by changing the ratio of metal and sulfur 
elements, which gives them a wide range of applications in optoelectronic devices, solar 
cells, and other fields.
Variable carrier types: The carrier types of TMDs can be either electrons or holes, giving 
them the potential to make different semiconductor devices.
Larger atomic number: The larger atomic number of TMD makes its electronic structure 
more stable, with a higher melting point and hardness, which is conducive to improving 
the stability of the device.
However, there are some drawbacks, as below:
Difficult synthesis: The synthesis of TMD requires high-temperature and high-pressure con­
ditions, and there are more side reactions during the preparation process, leading to syn­
thesis difficulty.
Poor stability: TMD is easily oxidized in air, and moisture is easily adsorbed on the surface, 
affecting its performance and application.
Low carrier mobility: Although TMDs have variable types of carriers, they generally have 
low mobility, which will limit their application in high-speed electronics [15, 16, 48, 49].

133
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
10.3.3  Controlled Synthesis Technologies for Semiconductor Materials
Faced with how to continue Moore’s Law, two-dimensional materials are potent seeds. However, 
at present, the way to industrialization of two-dimensional materials are challenging and a problem 
that needs a breakthrough. Today’s preparation and synthesis methods for low-dimensional semi­
conductors focus on two directions (top-down and bottom-up) [36, 50].
10.3.3.1  Bottom-up Approach
The bottom-up approach is a process of molecular self-assembly to prepare materials based on 
molecules. It mainly includes self-assembly, solution method, and the vapor phase deposition 
method. Self-assembly refers to the self-assembly of macromolecules into a new structure, which 
can prepare two-dimensional materials, such as graphene and molybdenum disulfide. The solu­
tion method involves dissolving the synthesized molecules in an organic solvent and depositing 
them onto a substrate, followed by a process such as temperature or chemical reaction, which 
causes the molecules in the solution to form a suitable crystal structure. Vapor phase deposition is 
a method of preparing materials by compressing a gas or atmosphere into high temperature and 
pressure and is ideal for preparing low-dimensional materials such as nanowires and quantum 
dots [27, 28, 36, 50]. Figure 10.4 shows top-down and bottom-up approaches.
FIGURE 10.4  Top-down and bottom-up approach. (Adapted with permission [50]. Copyright [2019], ACS 
Publications.)

134
Handbook of Semiconductors
10.3.3.2  Top-down Approach
The top-down method is to prepare a large piece of material first and then gradually reduce its 
size employing cutting or chemical erosion. It mainly includes mechanical chipping, electron beam 
etching, and chemical vapor deposition methods. Mechanical chipping is the earliest preparation 
method to prepare high-quality monolayer graphene films and photonic crystals. The e-beam etch­
ing method is to focus and heat the electron beam directionally and then etch under the etching 
agent’s action to prepare materials with nanofeatures [50].
Different nanostructures correspond to different preparation routes and synthesis methods. 
Nanomaterials are synthesized in top-down and bottom-up ways. The top-down approach is to 
etch the whole silicon wafer by photolithography and mask technology, adjust the photolithography 
size by changing the wavelength of the light beam and the size of the mask, and adjust the thick­
ness by adjusting the evaporation parameters, which is suitable for the preparation of planar two-
dimensional structures. The bottom-up method is through molecules, atoms, or ions by changing 
the external environment or chemical reaction so that the solute from the supersaturated dispersed 
phase (gas or liquid phase) forms a solid. It can regulate the composition, structure, size, and mor­
phology of substances at the nanoscale, realizing the control of physical, chemical, biological, and 
mechanical properties [27, 28, 36, 50].
10.4  CONCLUSION
It is undoubtedly a highly disruptive process to enable the entire semiconductor industry to adopt 
new materials in industrial production. That’s why LD materials are starting to become the focus 
of the industry’s attention. However, LD materials today are only produced in small quantities in 
labs to support academic research. The process of inheriting LD materials and scaling them up for 
industrialization faces several issues, including changes in design tools, material growth, material 
transfer, and integration of production lines. Each step of the process requires specially designed 
and customized specialized production tools.
LD semiconductors have a unique atomic arrangement and excellent optoelectronic properties, 
such as high absorbance, mechanical properties, and the absence of tilted bonds on the surface. 
However, the applications of LD materials are limited by their properties, such as size constraints, 
considerable dark current, high noise, low quantum efficiency, and slow response speed. Here, we 
need to invest in the innovative development of science and technology to fully explore the potential 
of various semiconductor materials for the human semiconductor industry to add another brick.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Rajeshwar K, De Tacconi N R, Chenthamarakshan C R. Semiconductor-Based Composite Materials:  
Preparation, Properties, and Performance. Chemistry of Materials, 2001, 13(9): 2765–82.
	
2.	 Hildreth O J, Lin W, Wong C P. Effect of Catalyst Shape and Etchant Composition on Etching Direction 
in Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching of Silicon to Fabricate 3D Nanostructures. ACS Nano, 2009, 3(12): 
4033–42.
	
3.	 Cho W, Edgar T F, Lee J. Nonlinear Model Identification for Temperature Control in Single Wafer Rapid 
Thermal Processing. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 2008, 47(14): 4791–6.
	
4.	 Vaughn D D II, Bondi J F, Schaak R E. Colloidal Synthesis of Air-Stable Crystalline Germanium 
Nanoparticles with Tunable Sizes and Shapes. Chemistry of Materials, 2010, 22(22): 6103–8.
	
5.	 Rurali R. Colloquium: Structural, Electronic, and Transport Properties of Silicon Nanowires. Reviews 
of Modern Physics, 2010, 82(1): 427–49.
	
6.	 Wu X, Kulkarni J S, Collins G, et al. Synthesis and Electrical and Mechanical Properties of Silicon and 
Germanium Nanowires. Chemistry of Materials, 2008, 20(19): 5954–67.
	
7.	 Güniat L, Caroff P, Fontcuberta I, Morral A. Vapor Phase Growth of Semiconductor Nanowires: Key 
Developments and Open Questions. Chemical Reviews, 2019, 119(15): 8958–71.
	
8.	 Feng T, Zhou H, Cheng Z, et al. A Critical Review of Thermal Boundary Conductance across Wide 
and Ultrawide Bandgap Semiconductor Interfaces. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2023, 15(25): 
29655–73.

135
The Development and Processing of Advanced Low-Dimensional Semiconductors
	
9.	 Luo Q, Xiao K, Zhang J, et al. Direct-Current Triboelectric Nanogenerators Based on Semiconductor 
Structure. ACS Applied Electronic Materials, 2022, 4(9): 4212–30.
	 10.	 Barrigón E, Heurlin M, Bi Z, et al. Synthesis and Applications of III–V Nanowires. Chemical Reviews, 
2019, 119(15): 9170–220.
	 11.	 Tuci G, Liu Y, Rossin A, et al. Porous Silicon Carbide (SiC): A Chance for Improving Catalysts or Just 
Another Active-Phase Carrier?. Chemical Reviews, 2021, 121(17): 10559–665.
	 12.	 Ashfold M N R, Goss J P, Green B L, et al. Nitrogen in Diamond. Chemical Reviews, 2020, 120(12): 
5745–94.
	 13.	 Sharma S, Sunkara M K. Direct Synthesis of Gallium Oxide Tubes, Nanowires, and Nanopaintbrushes. 
Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2002, 124(41): 12288–93.
	 14.	 Chun H J, Choi Y S, Bae S Y, et al. Controlled Structure of Gallium Oxide Nanowires. The Journal of 
Physical Chemistry B, 2003, 107(34): 9042–6.
	 15.	 Ryder C R, Wood J D, Wells S A, et al. Chemically Tailoring Semiconducting Two-Dimensional 
Transition Metal Dichalcogenides and Black Phosphorus. ACS Nano, 2016, 10(4): 3900–17.
	 16.	 Zhao Y, Kong X, Shearer M J, et al. Chemical Etching of Screw Dislocated Transition Metal 
Dichalcogenides. Nano Letters, 2021, 21(18): 7815–22.
	 17.	 Bersin R L. Eliminating Solvents and Acids in Wafer Processing. in: Green Engineering, Paul T. 
Anastas. American Chemical Society. 2000: 29–41.
	 18.	 Lenigk R, Carles M, Ip N Y, et al. Surface Characterization of a Silicon-Chip-Based DNA Microarray. 
Langmuir, 2001, 17(8): 2497–501.
	 19.	 Kulkarni M S. A Review and Unifying Analysis of Defect Decoration and Surface Polishing by Chemical 
Etching in Silicon Processing. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 2003, 42(12): 2558–88.
	 20.	 Lee K S, Lee J, Chin I, et al. Control of Wafer Temperature Uniformity in Rapid Thermal Processing 
Using an Optimal Iterative Learning Control Technique. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 
2001, 40(7): 1661–72.
	 21.	 Maria Angela V, Anjali A, Harshini D, et al. Organic Light-Emitting Transistors: From Understanding 
to Molecular Design and Architecture. ACS Applied Electronic Materials, 2021, 3(2): 550–73.
	 22.	 Arjmand T, Legallais M, Nguyen T T, et al. Functional Devices from Bottom-Up Silicon Nanowires: A 
Review. Nanomaterials, 2022, 12(7): 1043.
	 23.	 Sanders D P. Advances in Patterning Materials for 193 nm Immersion Lithography. Chemical Reviews, 
2010, 110(1): 321–60.
	 24.	 Song S K, Kim J-S, Margavio H R M, et al. Multimaterial Self-Aligned Nanopatterning by Simultaneous 
Adjacent Thin Film Deposition and Etching. ACS Nano, 2021, 15(7): 12276–85.
	 25.	 Khan M B, Shakeel S, Richter K, et al. Atomic Layer Etching of Nanowires Using Conventional 
Reactive Ion Etching Tool. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2023, 2443(1): 012004.
	 26.	 Brunet M, Aureau D, Chantraine P, et al. Etching and Chemical Control of the Silicon Nitride Surface. 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2017, 9(3): 3075–84.
	 27.	 Huang C, Li Y, Wang N, et al. Progress in Research into 2D Graphdiyne-Based Materials. Chemical 
Reviews, 2018, 118(16): 7744–803.
	 28.	 Reiss P, Carrière M, Lincheneau C, et al. Synthesis of Semiconductor Nanocrystals, Focusing on 
Nontoxic and Earth-Abundant Materials. Chemical Reviews, 2016, 116(18): 10731–819.
	 29.	 Srdanov V I, Blake N P, Markgraber D, et al. Alkali Metal and Semiconductor Clusters in Zeolites. 
in: Jansen J C, Stöcker M, Karge H G, et al. Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis. Elsevier. 1994: 
115–44.
	 30.	 Duvvury C. A Guide to Short-Channel Effects in MOSFETs. IEEE Circuits and Devices Magazine, 
1986, 2(6): 6–10.
	 31.	 Pichon A. Surface Effects. Nature Chemistry, 2013, 5(7): 551.
	 32.	 Kavokine N, Marbach S, Siria A, et al. Ionic Coulomb Blockade as a Fractional Wien Effect. Nature 
Nanotechnology, 2019, 14(6): 573–8.
	 33.	 Clarke W R, Simmons M Y, Liang C T, et al. Ballistic Transport in 1D GaAs/AlGaAs Heterostructures 
[M]. Reference Module in Materials Science and Materials Engineering. Elsevier. 2016.
	 34.	 Von Klitzing K, Chakraborty T, Kim P, et al. 40 Years of the Quantum Hall Effect. Nature Reviews 
Physics, 2020, 2(8): 397–401.
	 35.	 Kharissova O V, Kharisov B I, Oliva González C M. Carbon–Carbon Allotropic Hybrids and 
Composites: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications. Industrial & Engineering Chemistry Research, 
2019, 58(10): 3921–48.
	 36.	 Hobbs R G, Petkov N, Holmes J D. Semiconductor Nanowire Fabrication by Bottom-Up and Top-Down 
Paradigms. Chemistry of Materials, 2012, 24(11): 1975–91.

136
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 37.	 Wu Y, Zhao X, Shang Y, et al. Application-Driven Carbon Nanotube Functional Materials.  ACS Nano, 
2021, 15(5): 7946–74.
	 38.	 Bao H, Wang L, Li C, et al. Structural Characterization and Identification of Graphdiyne and Graphdiyne-
Based Materials. ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 2019, 11(3): 2717–29.
	 39.	 Zheng X, Chen S, Li J, et al. Two-Dimensional Carbon Graphdiyne: Advances in Fundamental and 
Application Research. ACS Nano, 2023, 17(15): 14309–46.
	 40.	 Kang J, Wei Z, Li J. Graphyne and Its Family: Recent Theoretical Advances. ACS Applied Materials & 
Interfaces, 2019, 11(3): 2692–706.
	 41.	 Jia Z, Li Y, Zuo Z, et al. Synthesis and Properties of 2D Carbon—Graphdiyne. Accounts of Chemical 
Research, 2017, 50(10): 2470–8.
	 42.	 Liu X, Cho S M, Lin S, et al. Constructing Two-Dimensional Holey Graphyne With Unusual Annulative 
π-Extension. Matter, 2022, 5(7): 2306–18.
	 43.	 Tian H, Wang J, Lai G, et al. Renaissance of Elemental Phosphorus Materials: Properties, Synthesis, 
and Applications in Sustainable Energy and Environment. Chemical Society Reviews, 2023, 52(16): 
5388–484.
	 44.	 Liu Y, Cui D, Chen M, et al. Synthesis of Red and Black Phosphorus Nanomaterials. in: Fundamentals 
and Applications of Phosphorus Nanomaterials, Hai-Feng (Frank) Ji. American Chemical Society. 
2019: 1–25.
	 45.	 Zhu Q, Wang H, Yang J, et al. Red Phosphorus: An Elementary Semiconductor for Room-Temperature 
NO2 Gas Sensing. ACS Sensors, 2018, 3(12): 2629–36.
	 46.	 Fung C-M, Er C-C, Tan L-L, et al. Red Phosphorus: An Up-and-Coming Photocatalyst on the Horizon 
for Sustainable Energy Development and Environmental Remediation. Chemical Reviews, 2022, 122(3): 
3879–965.
	 47.	 Ricciardulli A G, Wang Y, Yang S, et al. Two-Dimensional Violet Phosphorus: A p-Type Semiconductor 
for (Opto)electronics. Journal of the American Chemical Society, 2022, 144(8): 3660–6.
	 48.	 Ning J, Zhang B, Siqin L, et al. Designing Advanced S-scheme CdS QDs/La-Bi2WO6 Photocatalysts 
for Efficient Degradation of RhB. Exploration, 2023, 3(5): 20230050.
	 49.	 Ji X-Y, Sun K, Liu Z-K, et al. Identification of Dynamic Active Sites Among Cu Species Derived from 
MOFs@CuPc for Electrocatalytic Nitrate Reduction Reaction to Ammonia. Nano-Micro Letters, 2023, 
15(1): 110.
	 50.	 Ambrosi A, Chua C K, Bonanni A, et al. Electrochemistry of Graphene and Related Materials. Chemical 
Reviews, 2014, 114(14): 7150–88.

137
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-11
Fundamentals and Advanced 
Concepts of Microprocessors
Farida A. Ali and Sabita Mali
11.1  INTRODUCTION
Microprocessors have emerged as the unsung champions of modern technology in the 21st century, 
silently but profoundly influencing nearly every aspect of our existence. These minuscule electronic 
processors, often referred to as central processing units (CPUs), are at the core of a staggering vari­
ety of devices, including smartphones, laptops, industrial apparatus, and space-based equipment. 
Their function and significance in the modern world are nothing short of revolutionary.
A microprocessor is, at its core, a semiconductor device that conducts the fundamental computa­
tions and data processing duties that power modern technology. It executes a series of instructions, 
processes data, and manages the different operations necessary for a device to perform its intended 
function. This function spans from powering the applications on your smartphone and executing 
complex algorithms on your laptop to controlling industrial robotics and ensuring the proper opera­
tion of essential medical equipment. Microprocessors are, in essence, the digital minds of these 
devices, responsible for their functionality, performance, and efficiency.
In addition, they play a crucial role in our interconnected world by powering the communication 
networks and smartphones that have revolutionized the way we share information globally. The 
intricate interaction between microprocessors in data centers, routers, and network switches enables 
the Internet, which has become an indispensable aspect of our existence. The Internet of Things 
(IoT) is a swiftly expanding ecosystem of interconnected devices that is propelled by microproces­
sors. These devices rely on microprocessors to process data, make decisions, and communicate with 
other devices and systems. Examples include smart thermostats, wearable fitness monitors, indus­
trial sensors, and autonomous vehicles. The result is a world that is more connected and efficient, 
where data-driven insights and automation improve our daily lives.
Furthermore, microprocessors are essential to the operation of advanced medical devices in the 
healthcare industry. In MRI machines, pacemakers, and insulin pumps, they process medical data, 
monitor vital signs, and provide precise control. In the automotive industry, microprocessors are 
used to operate engine control units (ECUs) that optimize engine performance, advanced driver-
assistance systems (ADAS) that increase safety, and infotainment systems that enhance the driving 
experience. Even in space exploration, microprocessors enable scientific research and interplan­
etary missions by controlling satellites, spacecraft, and rovers.
Microprocessors’ significance extends beyond their mere prevalence. They continually 
improve in efficacy, energy efficiency, and adaptability. Microprocessors have integrated billions 
of transistors into a single device as a result of Moore’s law and unrelenting research and develop­
ment efforts. This miniaturization enables devices to become smaller and lighter while retain­
ing exceptional computational capability. Moreover, energy efficiency has become a top priority, 
resulting in the development of low-power designs, dynamic voltage and frequency scaling, and 
power gating techniques. As a consequence, the battery life of portable devices is increased and 
the energy consumption of data centers is decreased, contributing to environmental sustainability 
and cost savings.
The last-but-not-least aspect of microprocessors’ significance is their versatility. They are pro­
grammable, which means that their functionality can be modified via software modifications. This 
adaptability makes them cost-effective solutions for a vast array of applications, ranging from 
11

138
Handbook of Semiconductors
consumer electronics to industrial automation. Additionally, it fosters innovation in disciplines 
such as artificial intelligence, machine learning, augmented reality, and quantum computation. 
Microprocessors provide the processing capacity required for the development of these revolution­
ary technologies, reshaping industries and creating new opportunities.
Microprocessors are the driving force behind the digital revolution, enabling the development 
of sophisticated and intelligent electronic devices. Their architecture, functionality, and program­
mability make them versatile and adaptable to different applications. As technology continues to 
advance, microprocessors will play an increasingly vital role in shaping the future of computing and 
transforming various industries, from artificial intelligence and robotics to the IoT and beyond. This 
primer seeks to offer a fundamental grasp of microprocessors, their relevance, and their function in 
numerous applications [1, 2].
11.2  A SHORT HISTORY
The fascinating history of microprocessors stretches over half a century, documenting the evo­
lution of computing technology from its rudimentary beginnings to the cutting-edge innovations 
as depicted in Figure 11.1 defines the modern era. The introduction of the Intel 4004 as the first 
commercially available microprocessor in the early 1970s marked a turning point in the history of 
computing. With its modest 2,300 transistors, this 4-bit processor paved the way for a new era of 
miniaturized and integrated CPUs. These early microprocessors, initially utilized in calculators and 
simple embedded systems, paved the way for a technological revolution.
As the 1970s progressed, so did the capabilities of the microprocessor. The introduction of 8-bit 
processors such as the Intel 8008 and 8080 made personal computing possible. These processors, 
though rudimentary by today’s standards, propelled the first microcomputers and ignited a flame 
that would eventually lead to the personal computer revolution of the 1980s.  The year 1978 marked 
FIGURE 11.1  History and evolution of the microprocessor.

139
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
the introduction of the x86 architecture with the Intel 8086, amidst these developments. This 16-bit 
CPU would eventually evolve into the x86 architecture that currently underpins the vast majority 
of personal computers. The x86 architecture evolved from 16-bit to 32-bit to 64-bit, continually 
stretching the limits of computing capacity and efficacy.
In the 1980s, two distinct approaches to microprocessor design emerged: reduced instruction 
set computer (RISC) and complex instruction set computer (CISC). RISC processors, such as 
those based on the Million Instructions per Second (MIPS) architecture and Scalable Processor 
Architecture (SPARC), prioritized simplicity and optimized instruction execution for performance. 
In contrast, CISC processors, led by the x86 family, prioritized versatility and maintained software 
backward compatibility. This architectural schism fostered competition and innovation, thereby 
accelerating the evolution of the microprocessor [3, 4].
In the subsequent decade, the 1990s, energy efficiency became the focal point. Microprocessor 
manufacturers embarked on a search for more sustainable technologies in response to the prolifera­
tion of mobile devices and the growing demand for energy-efficient computation. To reduce energy 
consumption, techniques such as dynamic voltage and frequency scaling (DVFS) and power gating 
were implemented. In addition to extending the battery life of portable devices, these innovations 
also contributed to more environmentally favorable data center operations [5].
As the 21st century dawned, microprocessors initiated the on-score revolution. Faced with physi­
cal constraints on clock speed increases, designers have turned to multicore architectures. These 
processors integrated multiple CPU cores into a single device, thereby heralding in the era of paral­
lel computation. The era of multi-core processors has not only improved computational capabilities 
but also made multitasking and parallel workload execution more efficient.
In addition, the pursuit of miniaturization and energy efficiency has persisted unabatedly. 
The incorporation of billions of transistors into a single microprocessor device was made pos­
sible by the nanometer scale reduction in feature sizes. This miniaturization not only facilitates 
the development of ever-more-powerful processors but also of compact, more energy-efficient 
devices [6].
The evolution of microprocessors exemplifies the unrelenting pursuit of innovation and advance­
ment in the field of computing. From the Intel 4004’s humble beginnings to today’s complex multi-
core processors, microprocessors have continuously pushed the limits of what is possible in the 
technological world. Not only are they the center of modern computation, but they are also the 
generators of innovation in innumerable industries. Microprocessors will continue to evolve as time 
passes, influencing the future of technology and our digital world [7, 8].
11.3  EMERGING TRENDS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
FOR ADVANCED PROCESSORS
Microprocessors are becoming more powerful, compact, and energy-efficient. They are present in 
a broad range of devices, from smartphones and tablets to servers and embedded systems, and are 
driving technological innovation in a variety of industries. Since their introduction in the early 
1970s, microprocessors have advanced tremendously. Microprocessors have altered the world 
of computing, from the basic beginnings of 4-bit processors to the powerful and sophisticated 
designs of today. Their on-going growth has resulted in quicker processing speeds, expanded 
capabilities, and better integration, allowing technology to progress and influencing the digital 
era we live in.
The constant push for better functionality, efficiency, and adaptability is what keeps the cutting-
edge processor industry moving forward. The landscape of sophisticated processors is being shaped 
by a number of new trends and directions [9]. This section will discuss these fascinating break­
throughs and their possible effects on the future of computing.

140
Handbook of Semiconductors
11.3.1  Multi-Core and Many-Core Processors
Multiple processing cores on a single silicon chip (also called a multi-core processor) are now 
standard in most electronic gadgets. However, many-core CPUs are becoming more popular as 
they pack more processing cores onto a single silicon die. Applications like AI, data analytics, and 
scientific simulations are driving this change because they need more parallelism and faster perfor­
mance. Extreme computing capacity is available from many-core computers, allowing for quicker 
and more efficient execution of complicated tasks.
11.3.2  Heterogeneous Computing
Convergence was the dominating trend in computer science throughout the last decade. The integra­
tion of Serial Attached SCSI (SAS) and Fiber Channel (FC) with the Ethernet fabric has reached 
a level of maturity that allows for convergence. The access times for cutting-edge data storage 
were measured in milliseconds as the instructions were executed by the CPU cores. Over the last 
decade, there has been a shift storage standards also, with the introduction of non-volatile memory 
express over fibres (NVMeoF), which has substituted SAS/FC protocols. Solid state devices (SSDs) 
have reduced data access times from milliseconds to microseconds or less, with little protocol 
cost relative to native device latencies. Moore’s law and efficient algorithmic programming reduce 
software execution times, emphasizing the importance of data strategy. The feeds, or interconnects, 
are developing slowly as a core explosion occurs. The CPU-core-based homogenous computing 
paradigm is under pressure. Application programmers’ hunt for optimal hardware is driving hybrid 
cloud computing worldwide. Heterogeneous computing is replacing homogeneous computing at 
the micro level. Heterogeneous computing optimizes speed and efficiency by combining Central 
Processing Units (CPUs), Graphics Processing Units (GPUs), Field Programmable Grid Arrays 
(FPGAs), and accelerators. Using each processor’s best features boosts performance [10].
11.3.3  Quantum Computing
The discipline of quantum computing is an advanced area of study and technological development 
that utilizes the principles of quantum physics to perform information processing in a fundamen­
tally distinct manner compared to traditional computers. Fundamentally, quantum computing is 
based on the use of quantum bits, often referred to as qubits, which possess the ability to exist in 
several states concurrently due to the phenomenon known as superposition. The aforementioned 
characteristic allows quantum computers to execute certain categories of computations at a sig­
nificantly accelerated rate compared to conventional computers. Furthermore, entanglement, a dis­
tinct quantum phenomenon, facilitates the interconnection of qubits in a manner where the state of 
one qubit is instantaneously linked with the state of another, irrespective of the spatial separation 
between them. The presence of this distinctive attribute provides an opportunity to address intricate 
challenges in fields such as encryption, optimization, and materials science that were previously 
deemed computationally insurmountable. Although quantum computing is now in its early stages 
and encounters several technological obstacles, its ability to potentially transform various domains, 
including finance and drug development, makes it an exceptionally captivating frontier in contem­
porary science and technology [11].
11.3.4  Neuromorphic Computing
Quantum computing is a cutting-edge field of research and technological advancement that uses 
the laws of quantum physics to process data in a fundamentally new way from classical computers. 
Qubits are the fundamental building blocks of quantum computing; they may exist in a superposi­
tion of states, each with its own unique properties. Due to the aforementioned quality, quantum 
computers can do certain types of calculations at an extremely fast pace compared to classical 
computers. In addition, entanglement, a unique quantum phenomenon, makes it possible for qubits 

141
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
to be connected in a way that links the state of one qubit instantly to the state of another, regard­
less of their physical distance from one another. This unique quality allows for the possibility of 
solving computationally intractable problems in areas like cryptography, optimization, and materi­
als research. Quantum computing is an intriguing new frontier in modern science and technology 
because of its potential to revolutionize a wide range of fields, from finance to drug discovery. 
However, the field is still in its infancy and faces a number of technical challenges [12].
11.3.5  Energy-Efficient Designs
Minimizing power usage while maintaining performance on modern CPUs is essential. The ris­
ing need for more potent and versatile CPUs has made energy efficiency optimization an essential 
goal. This plan covers all the bases, including advances in semiconductor manufacturing techniques, 
improved architecture, and new power management techniques. Reduced transistor sizes and inno­
vative materials, such as Fin-shaped Field Effect Transistor (FinFET) technology, are incorporated 
into today’s CPUs to provide increased performance with less power consumption. By improving 
computing efficiency and optimizing the allocation of workloads, new architectural developments 
like out-of-order execution and multi-core designs hope to cut down on energy consumption. In addi­
tion, advanced power management features are built in to dynamically adjust CPU clock speeds and 
voltages in response to workload demands, maximizing performance only when it’s really needed. 
Collectively, these activities provide a major contribution to the research and development of more 
power-efficient CPUs. This is crucial because it allows for longer battery life on mobile devices, low­
ers data center power consumption, and helps mitigate the environmental impacts of computing [13].
11.3.6  Security and Privacy Enhancements
Advanced processors have improved security and privacy, easing our connected society’s concerns. 
Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs), secure enclaves, and hardware-based cryptographic 
accelerators are among the hardware-level security features described. TEEs isolate processor 
data and code from external vulnerabilities. Intel’s Software Guard Extensions (SGX) and AMD’s 
Secure Encrypted Virtualization (SEV) allow programs to run in encrypted memory sectors, pro­
tecting against unauthorized access even by privileged applications. Current CPUs feature hardware 
components that support current encryption protocols, improving safe data transfer and storage. 
These methods protect data and combat vulnerabilities like Spectre and Meltdown. Additionally, 
processors use differential privacy, secure boot methods, and increased access controls. As society 
becomes increasingly dependent on data-driven technology, these precautions protect user data and 
privacy. Technology improves security and privacy, enhancing confidence in our digital world.
Without hardware, software, and academic collaboration, contemporary CPUs cannot reach their 
full potential. By carefully embracing these changes and overcoming their difficulties, we may cre­
ate a future where powerful processors help us solve complex problems, make new discoveries, and 
enhance our lives and interactions. The continual reduction in nanometer measured feature sizes is 
another major advancement in microprocessor technology. Moore’s law, which states that computer 
chip transistors double every two years, drives this trend. Smaller feature sizes allow more transistors 
on a semiconductor, increasing processing power and usefulness. The upcoming  section anticipates 
the revolutionary effects of  miniaturization on computers and society from the futuristic CPUs [14].
11.4  IMPLICATIONS OF SMALLER FEATURE SIZES 
AND HIGHER PERFORMANCE
Advanced processors with smaller feature sizes and higher performance affect many technical and 
social domains. Processor power efficiency improves with smaller feature sizes, extending mobile 
device battery life and reducing data center energy use. This promotes environmental sustainability. 

142
Handbook of Semiconductors
Improved performance speeds up complex computations and data processing, advancing artificial 
intelligence, scientific investigation, and computer graphics.
Technology increases heat generation and requires more advanced cooling devices, which pres­
ents certain challenges. Security and privacy concerns are developing as processors get more pow­
erful. This requires stronger encryption and cybersecurity. Since certain people or locations may 
not have access to the latest and most powerful processors, rapid technological advancement may 
increase digital access disparities. The integration of lower feature sizes and higher performance, as 
represented in Figure 11.2 for the future computing platforms, is important, but it also raises impor­
tant issues that must be addressed to provide a fair and well-rounded technical environment [15]. 
Thus, the implications can be discussed in a broader sense as mentioned in the following subsections.
11.4.1  Higher Transistor Density
By increasing transistor density, semiconductor manufacturing advancements have driven com­
puter technology’s rapid expansion. The increase in transistor density per unit space on integrated 
circuits has enabled powerful CPUs and microchips. Modern devices can efficiently do complex 
tasks like AI-based computations and HD video processing. Due to improved transistor density, 
electronic components are smaller, lighter, and more energy-efficient, making smartphones, tab­
lets, and wearables possible. In emerging technologies like 5G, IoT, and autonomous vehicles, tiny, 
energy-efficient CPUs are required for rapid data processing and networking. The constant increase 
in transistor density is redefining electronics’ limits, allowing breakthroughs that affect our daily 
lives and technological development [16].
11.4.2  Low Power Consumption
Power consumption is affected by semiconductor technology’s smaller feature sizes and higher 
performance. Smaller transistors reduce switching energy, improving computer power efficiency. 
FIGURE 11.2  Integration of lower feature size and higher performance for future computing platforms.

143
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
Battery-operated gadgets like smartphones and laptops need to reduce power usage to improve bat­
tery life and energy efficiency. However, modern CPUs’ improved performance may offset some 
of these benefits. Computers may perform processes quicker by employing higher clock speeds or 
more cores, which increases power consumption. The shrinkage of transistors may also raise con­
cerns about leakage currents, which increase idle power usage. Workload, design efficiency, and 
power management affect power consumption when feature sizes are lowered and performance is 
improved. Designers must include advanced power management algorithms and optimizations into 
CPU architectures to effectively manage power usage and maximize these advancements.
11.4.3  Increased Performance
Because there are more transistors available, microprocessors can execute instructions in parallel 
and handle bigger data sets more effectively. This improves performance in activities like multitask­
ing, calculation, and multimedia processing.
Increased microprocessor performance has various advantages.
11.4.3.1  Quicker Task Execution
Enhanced microprocessor performance has greatly improved digital work execution speed and 
efficiency. Processors have become more powerful because of smaller transistors, multi-core 
architectures, and improved instruction sets. Processes that were formerly slow are now fast. 
The improved speed of computer systems makes 3D visualizations, scientific data analysis, and 
complex machine learning algorithms quicker and more responsive. Faster acceleration improves 
financial market decision-making and autonomous car response. Additionally, it has enabled the 
development of cutting-edge technologies like augmented and virtual reality, which demand con­
tinuous, speedy processing to provide immersive experiences. In essence, microprocessors have 
improved everyday computer operations, boosted creativity, and opened new doors in our techno­
logically evolved world.
11.4.3.2  Advanced Computing Applications
The exponential growth in microprocessor performance enabled advanced computer applications. 
Advanced transistor technology, parallel processing, and optimization have allowed these high-
performance CPUs, offering unmatched potential. AI and machine learning have built algorithms 
that interpret spoken language, recognize photos, and make autonomous decisions. Science has 
progressed due to speedier simulations and data processing. Genetics and climate models have 
advanced. This enhances entertainment-sector 3D graphics, virtual reality, and HD video render­
ing. Healthcare, banking, and cybersecurity employ advanced computer systems to analyze enor­
mous data sets for diagnosis, risk assessment, and threat detection. Improved microprocessor speed 
has sped up current programs and allowed the introduction of novel solutions that are transforming 
our work, daily lives, and technology interactions [17].
11.4.3.3  Clock Speed
Processor performance depends on clock speed. A CPU’s cycle rate is measured in gigahertz. Faster 
clocks increase data processing and job efficiency. The speed at which a processor executes instruc­
tions speeds up computational tasks and improves responsiveness. This is useful for quick process­
ing in gaming, video editing, and science simulations. However, increasing clock speeds to boost 
performance has limits. Clock speed increases power consumption and heat generation, requiring 
more complicated cooling solutions and lowering energy efficiency. Some tasks may be parallelized 
and use multi-core processors; therefore, higher clock rates affect application performance differ­
ently. Thus, clock speed, power consumption, and multi-core design must be balanced to optimize 
microprocessor performance for different processing demands [18].

144
Handbook of Semiconductors
11.4.3.4  Improved Instruction Set
Improved instruction sets boost microprocessor performance in several ways. An optimized instruc­
tion set may boost a processor’s efficiency, speeding up and improving job performance. These 
improvements improve system performance, task execution, and power consumption. Specialized 
instructions for common tasks or emerging technologies, such as multimedia processing or encryp­
tion, improve processor performance and reduce the need for additional, less efficient instruc­
tions. This speeds up certain tasks and enhances system responsiveness. Enhanced instruction 
sets may also help software developers maximize processor capabilities, enabling more creative 
and resource-efficient applications. An enlarged instruction set is crucial to microprocessor per­
formance. It drives advancement in consumer electronics, scientific computers, and other fields. 
An enlarged instruction set helps computer systems meet modern computing needs by promoting 
technological improvements.
11.4.3.5  Memory and Cache Performance
Memory and cache efficiency impact CPU speed. Memory retrieval efficiency affects CPU per­
formance and responsiveness. Larger, quicker L1, L2, and L3 caches store frequently requested 
data and instructions closer to CPU cores in advanced CPUs. The CPU and main memory are 
close, minimizing data retrieval latency and accelerating task execution and multitasking. Games, 
video editing, and database administration need frequent data retrieval; therefore, cache efficiency 
is essential. More data in larger caches reduces access to slower main memory. This may remove 
the bottleneck. Bandwidth and latency enhancements in memory subsystems increase CPU per­
formance. With enormous datasets and complicated applications, modern computing demands 
memory and cache optimization. Data management and processing by the processor are necessary 
for rapid and responsive job completion. Memory and cache technologies improve microprocessor 
performance and enable technology to fulfill digital needs.
11.4.3.6  Parallel Processing
Parallelism altered CPU performance. Many processor cores tackle subtasks simultaneously in this 
method. Parallel processing boosts computationally demanding program performance. Once time-
consuming and computationally expensive processes can now be done quickly. Scientific comput­
ing, AI, and simulations need vast processing power for large datasets and complicated algorithms. 
Parallel processing boosts computer speed and job completion. Smartphones and high-end servers 
multitask and run resource-intensive applications on multicore CPUs. Parallel processing may chal­
lenge developers with software optimizations and parallel techniques. However, parallel processing 
speeds up microprocessors, advancing technology and solving intractable issues. Faster CPUs and 
smaller feature sizes have improved computing device development. Tiny characteristics boost tran­
sistor density, power efficiency, and utility. Work execution, sophisticated computer programs, and 
new technologies increase with performance. Better microprocessors will make computers more 
powerful, energy-efficient, and capable.
11.5  RECOGNIZING ENERGY EFFICIENT DESIGNS
Energy efficiency in microprocessors is a system’s ability to calculate and operate with less power. 
Optimizing many components, circuits, and design methods reduces energy usage while retaining 
performance and functionality. Today’s technology-driven world prioritizes energy efficiency in 
microprocessor and computer design. High demand for portable devices, longer battery life, and 
environmental sustainability have increased the focus on energy-efficient constructions and low-
power solutions. Here are some energy-efficiency techniques and effects of energy-efficient archi­
tectures and low-power designs in microprocessors.

145
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
11.5.1  Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS)
Energy-efficient advanced processors use DVFS. This innovative technology allows processors to 
dynamically adjust operating voltage and clock frequency to the workload. To conserve power and 
heat, DVFS lowers voltage and clock frequency when workload is low. DVFS boosts voltage and 
frequency for peak computation. The tricky performance-power economy balance makes DVFS 
critical. By enhancing processor performance, DVFS saves energy, extends mobile device battery 
life, and reduces data center energy use. This strategy is crucial when processors speed up and 
power efficiency increases. It helps upgraded CPUs meet modern application performance criteria 
while decreasing cooling and environmental impact. DVFS helps modern processors be energy-
efficient for smarter, more sustainable computing.
11.5.2  Clock Gating
Modern CPUs use clock gating for energy efficiency. Clock signal gating during data processing 
dormancy is this technique. Reducing unneeded clock pulses saves CPU power and heat. Modern 
processors with numerous transistors utilize clock gating to selectively activate CPU components 
to save energy. Energy efficiency and performance integrity are advantages of modern CPU clock 
gating. Powering down inactive semiconductor components saves energy, increases processor life, 
and lowers temperature. Mobile devices and data centers with massive computing arrays need this 
for battery life and energy savings. In conclusion, energy-efficient CPUs need clock gating. Modern 
computer systems depend on the approach, which balances power consumption and computational 
performance for high-speed processors.
11.5.3  Power Gating
Energy-efficient CPU designs need power gating. It involves gating CPU power during inactivity. 
Energy usage and heat production are reduced by cutting power to inactive central processing unit 
parts. Complex high-performance computers with high power demands benefit from power gating. 
Power gating enhances advanced CPU power efficiency and performance, making it crucial. Reduce 
power consumption in idle or inactive chip areas to save energy, processor life, and heat. Mobile 
devices need this feature for battery life. In data centers with enormous processor clusters, energy 
savings are crucial. Power gating is essential for energy-efficient CPU architecture. Advanced CPUs 
combine power and performance. Modern computer systems depend on them, particularly in an 
energy-efficient and sustainable era.
11.5.4  Pipelining and Parallelism
Energy-efficient CPUs need pipelining and parallelism. Pipelining simplifies complicated instruc­
tions into one-task stages. Multi-level pipeline instructions may be performed concurrently. This 
method optimizes step execution to boost CPU performance and reduce idle time and power con­
sumption. In contrast, parallelism runs several instructions or processes. ILP and DLP enable 
sophisticated processors to execute several instructions or data bits concurrently. Thereby, com­
pleting the processes faster, save electricity and enhance processing efficiency. Newer CPUs save 
energy through pipelining and parallelism. They improve instruction execution and allow the CPU 
to multitask, reducing active state duration and idle power consumption. Optimizing mobile device 
battery life and data center energy usage, where processors work 24/7, is critical. Finally, energy-
efficient processor designs in current computer systems that prioritize speed and sustainability need 
pipelining and parallelism technologies [19].

146
Handbook of Semiconductors
11.5.5  Low-Power Modes
Energy-efficient CPU designs need low-power modes. CPUs utilize less power in sleep or idle states. 
CPU cores and caches may be partly or totally deactivated on low power while retaining data and 
state. This strategy saves energy and heat, prolonging CPU life and simplifying cooling. Low-power 
modes are essential for performance and energy economy. Long-term connectivity and productiv­
ity need mobile device energy-saving settings. In data centers, low-power modes minimize server 
farm power usage while idle. This strategy is key to energy and cost savings. Energy-efficient CPU 
designs need low-power modes. Advanced processors can dynamically adjust workloads in these 
modes, boosting sustainability and resource efficiency [8]. In an era of electrical usage and environ­
mental impact, this matters.
Energy-efficient architectures and low-power designs are critical for portable devices like smart­
phones, laptops, and wearable technologies. Microprocessors may improve battery life by optimiz­
ing power use, giving customers more usage time, and minimizing the need for frequent recharging 
[20, 21]. Besides the energy-efficient techniques, energy-efficient architectures and low-power 
designs also have their own implications as discussed below.
11.5.5.1  Environmental Sustainability
Modern processors with energy-efficient and low-power architectures must be assessed for envi­
ronmental sustainability. These design principles enhance processor efficiency and reduce carbon 
emissions and environmental impact. By improving power utilization, these processors cut comput­
ing equipment energy use and greenhouse gas emissions. Given global climate change and energy 
reduction initiatives, this is vital. These CPUs and other components last longer and need fewer 
hardware repairs due to their decreased heat output and operating efficiency, thereby improving 
electronic equipment reliability and longevity. In data centers, where thousands of CPUs run con­
tinuously, these architectural choices save energy and reduce cooling needs, promoting sustainabil­
ity. In an age of increased technological dependency given the growing requirement for complex 
processors, sustainability must be considered in their design. Environmentally responsible and sus­
tainable futures depend on these design choices.
11.5.5.2  Heat Dissipation and Cooling
Heat dissipation and cooling are essential to new CPUs’ energy-efficient architectures. Although 
intended to consume less power and heat, modern CPUs create heat. Cooling and heat dissipation 
affect CPU performance and longevity. Energy-efficient CPUs minimize heat through DVFS, clock 
gating, and power gating when processing demand is low. These CPUs use temperature sensors and 
throttling algorithms to optimize performance and avoid overheating. CPU cooling solutions vary 
per device/application. Mobile electronics may use heat sinks and thermal pads for passive cooling. 
Laptops and servers cool via fans or liquid. This assures optimum performance, increases processor 
life, and lowers heat output.
11.5.5.3  Scalability and Integration
Scalability and integration are essential for low-power CPUs. The following design approaches meet 
dynamic computing needs. CPU performance may be scalable to meet individual needs, saving 
power and resources. Multiple cores or processing units may be parallelized effortlessly. Data cen­
ters need scalable processing for workloads. However, microchip integration involves several parts 
and technologies. Processors with CPU cores, GPUs, memory controllers, and hardware accel­
erators are advanced. Because components are nearby, data transmission consumes less power. 
Energy-efficient and low-power CPU architectures scale and integrate well with developing tech­
nologies [18, 22].
Energy-efficient buildings and low-power technologies are needed to meet portable device 
demand, improve battery life, and ensure environmental sustainability. Microprocessors may 

147
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
optimize power use without sacrificing performance via dynamic voltage and frequency scaling, 
clock gating, power gating, and low-power modes. Battery life, temperature control, scalability, 
and computer platform compatibility increase with energy-efficient designs. Microprocessor design 
will emphasize energy efficiency as technology advances to promote innovation and sustainable 
computing.
11.6  ADOPTION OF CUTTING-EDGE TECHNOLOGY
Neuromorphic computing and quantum computing are two cutting-edge technologies that have the 
potential to completely transform the computer sector. While their approaches and ideas differ, both 
strive to solve complicated computational problems that standard computer structures are incapable 
of handling. Let us investigate these fascinating disciplines and comprehend their significance for 
the future advance microprocessors.
11.6.1  Cognitive Neuromorphic Computing
Neuromorphic computing is an interdisciplinary field that involves the development of custom­
ized computer systems by leveraging the structural and operational principles seen in the human 
brain [23]. The objective is to replicate the neural networks and cognitive capabilities of the human 
brain, enabling computers to process information in a manner like that of the human brain. The 
advancement of neuromorphic systems has promise for augmenting artificial intelligence, robotics, 
sensor technologies, and brain-machine interfaces. These systems possess the capacity to provide 
efficient and advanced processing capabilities, enabling the development of novel applications in 
autonomous systems and cognitive computing [24]. Key characteristics features of neuromorphic 
computing are as shown in Figure 11.3 and as discussed further.
11.6.1.1  Spiking Neural Networks
Spike-based neural networks are often used in neuromorphic computing architectures to effectively 
interpret input data that is represented as discrete spikes or pulses of activity. This phenomenon 
FIGURE 11.3  Fundamental features in the cognitive neuromorphic computing system.

148
Handbook of Semiconductors
exhibits similarities to the way in which neurons inside the brain participate in communication and 
coordination [1].
11.6.1.2  Parallelism and Efficiency
Parallelism and efficiency are key to neuromorphic computing. Due to the brain’s outstanding par­
allel processing skills, these systems can manage vast amounts of data and several tasks at once. 
Neuromorphic hardware and algorithms strive to mimic the brain’s coupled and distributed neu­
rons. This approach allows simultaneous calculations and consistent data flow. Neuromorphic com­
puting uses parallelism to process complex data patterns faster and save energy. These systems use 
less electricity than von Neumann architectures by spreading computations over several cores or 
neuromorphic units. The brain’s ability to process information simultaneously enhances neuromor­
phic devices’ energy efficiency. Neuromorphic computing systems excel in low-energy, real-time 
data processing, making them ideal for edge computing, robotics, and sensor networks. Artificial 
intelligence and cognitive computing differ in their ability to spot patterns, adapt to changing envi­
ronments, and learn from datasets. In summary, neuromorphic computing systems that integrate 
parallelism and efficiency provide a groundbreaking computing paradigm that mimics the brain’s 
cognitive capacities and improves speed, energy conservation, and flexibility. This opens the door 
to innovative artificial intelligence, machine learning, and other applications.
11.6.1.3  Hardware Acceleration
Hardware accelerators are crucial for neuromorphic computing. The above specialist hardware com­
ponents are designed to perform artificial neural network and cognitive computing tasks more effi­
ciently than standard CPUs. Neuromorphic computing relies on hardware accelerators to simulate 
neural connections and synaptic plasticity in the brain. Hardware accelerators in neuromorphic sys­
tems speed up artificial neural network training and inference. Matrix operations, convolutions, and 
other deep learning model computations can be performed faster than on CPUs or GPUs. Speed boosts 
neuromorphic system functioning and optimizes energy usage, which is vital in cognitive comput­
ing. Hardware accelerators help achieve real-time processing and reduce latency in image and audio 
recognition, natural language understanding, and sensor data analysis. Neuromorphic systems excel 
at processing complex data patterns quickly and efficiently because of  their specialist components. 
Neuromorphic computing systems employ hardware accelerators to make use of specialized hardware 
for cognitive tasks for improving artificial intelligence and cognitive computing applications.
11.6.1.4  Pattern Recognition and Cognitive Activities
Neuromorphic computer systems focus on pattern recognition and cognition. These systems are 
inspired by the human brain and excel in processing and identifying complex patterns, making 
them ideal for sensory perception, learning, and decision-making. Artificial neural networks and 
specialized hardware emulate the brain’s coupled neurons and synapses in neuromorphic comput­
ing. This emulation lets computers analyze and interpret data like humans. These systems excel in 
image and audio recognition, natural language processing, and sensor data analysis. AI systems 
excel in unstructured or chaotic input circumstances because they can dynamically adapt and learn 
from their environment. Neuromorphic computing’s energy-efficient design matches the brain’s low 
power consumption, making it ideal for edge devices, robots, and other energy-constrained appli­
cations. Artificial intelligence may benefit from neuromorphic computing, which allows robots to 
think, solve problems, and make context-aware decisions. These technologies demonstrate a major 
leap in intelligent computers that can interact with and understand the world like humans.
11.6.2  Computing at the Quantum Level
Quantum computing leverages principles from quantum physics to do computational tasks that are 
beyond the capability of conventional computers. In contrast to conventional computers that rely on 

149
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
bits to represent binary values of 0 or 1, quantum computers use qubits, which may simultaneously 
exist in several states due to the principles of quantum superposition and entanglement as shown in 
Figure 11.4. The field of quantum computing holds promise for addressing complex problems that 
now remain intractable for classical computing systems. Applications such as cryptography, optimi­
zation, drug development, materials research, and quantum system modeling have been identified in 
the field. The development of fault-tolerant quantum computers and quantum algorithms will play a 
pivotal role in driving further progress in the field [25]. Key characteristics of quantum computing 
are as follows.
11.6.2.1  Superposition and Entanglement
Qubits within the context of a quantum computer have the ability to occupy a state of superposition, 
whereby they may simultaneously represent several possibilities. The phenomenon of entanglement 
enables the coupling of qubits, hence facilitating computations that use the collective behavior of 
these qubits.
11.6.2.2  Quantum Gates and Quantum Circuits
Quantum computing involves the manipulation and transformation of qubits via the use of quantum 
gates, which have resemblance to conventional logic gates. Quantum circuits are constructed using 
these gates in order to execute quantum algorithms.
11.6.2.3  Quantum Parallelism and Speedup
Quantum computers use the concepts of quantum parallelism to do several computations concur­
rently. In some scenarios, such as the process of factoring large numbers and addressing optimi­
zation problems, quantum algorithms have the potential to provide exponential improvements in 
computational performance compared to traditional methods.
11.6.2.4  Error Correction and Quantum Decoherence
Quantum systems are susceptible to errors due to the influence of environmental interactions and 
the phenomenon of decoherence. The objective of quantum error correction methodologies is to 
mitigate these imperfections while maintaining the fidelity of quantum computations.
Neuromorphic computing and quantum computing are two distinct and captivating areas of com­
puter research that have significant implications and future prospects across several disciplines. 
Neuromorphic computing draws inspiration from the anatomical and functional characteristics of 
the brain, while quantum computing leverages principles of quantum physics to address complex 
computational challenges. Both areas possess the capacity to revolutionize computer capabilities 
and pave the path for novel applications across diverse industries. Ongoing research and develop­
ment in these domains will shape the trajectory of computers and provide novel approaches for 
addressing complex issues.
FIGURE 11.4  Features of quantum computing.

150
Handbook of Semiconductors
11.7  CONCLUSION
The current trajectory of sophisticated processors is driving the expansion of computing capabili­
ties, with new trends and future directions playing a pivotal role in this progression. The sector is 
seeing significant developments facilitated by multi-core and many-core processors, heterogeneous 
computing, quantum computing, neuromorphic computing, energy-efficient designs, and increased 
security and privacy features. These advancements will have a transformative impact on several 
fields, including artificial intelligence, scientific inquiry, data analysis, and beyond.
The realization of the full potential of improved processors in the context of technological growth 
necessitates the imperative cooperation of hardware designers, software developers, and research­
ers. By responsibly adopting these developing trends and effectively tackling the associated issues, 
we have the potential to facilitate a future in which enhanced processors enable us to effectively 
handle intricate problems, uncover novel discoveries, and enrich our lifestyles and interactions with 
the environment. The potential of improved processors is very promising, and there is much antici­
pation of the revolutionary effects they will bring to the field of computing and society at large.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 N. L. Vintan, Neural branch prediction: From the first ideas, to implementations in advanced micropro­
cessors and medical applications. In Proceedings of the Romanian Academy, Series A: Mathematics, 
Physics, Technical Sciences, Information Science, 20(2), 200–207, 2019.
	
2.	 A. Lorusso, & G. Domenico, IoT System for Structural Monitoring, International Conference New 
Technologies, Development and Application, Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2022.
	
3.	 C. Mazuré, G. K. Celler, C. Maleville, & I. Cayrefourcq, Advanced SOI Substrate Manufacturing, In 
2004 International Conference on Integrated Circuit Design and Technology (IEEE Cat. No. 04EX866), 
pp. 105–111. IEEE, 2004.
	
4.	 J. McMahon, S. Crago, & D. Yeung, Advanced Microprocessor Architectures. In High Performance 
Embedded Computing Handbook (pp. 499–521). CRC Press (2018).
	
5.	 https://oercommons.org/courseware/lesson/69411/student/?section=2
	
6.	 C. Lichtenau, A. G. Ortiz, & T. Pfluger, Technological and architectural power optimizations for 
advance microprocessors, In International Symposium on Signals, Circuits and Systems, 2005 (ISSCS 
2005), vol. 1, pp. 11–14. IEEE, 2005.
	
7.	 A. K. Ray, & K. M. Bhurchandi, Advanced Microprocessors and Peripherals: Architecture, Programming 
and Interfacing. McGraw-Hill/Irwin (2006).
	
8.	 B. P. Singh, & R. Singh, Advanced Microprocessors and Microcontrollers. New Age International 
(2008).
	
9.	 A. K. Ganguly, Architecture, Programming and Applications of Advanced Microprocessors. Alpha 
Science International, Ltd (2013).
	 10.	 J. L. Hennessy, & A. P. David, Computer Architecture: A Quantitative Approach. Elsevier (2011).
	 11.	 J. Singh, & M. Singh, Evolution in quantum computing, In 2016 International Conference System 
Modeling & Advancement in Research Trends (SMART) (pp. 267–270). IEEE, (2016, November).
	 12.	 C. Pan, C. Y. Wang, S. J. Liang, Y. Wang, T. Cao, P. Wang, & F. Miao, Reconfigurable logic and neu­
romorphic circuits based on electrically tunable two-dimensional homojunctions. Nature Electronics, 
3(7), 383–390 (2020).
	 13.	 J. Stokes, Inside the Machine: An Illustrated Introduction to Microprocessors and Computer Architecture. 
No Starch Press, 2007.
	 14.	 I. A. Young, Analog mixed-signal circuits in advanced nano-scale CMOS technology for microproces­
sors and SoCs. In 2010 Proceedings of ESSCIRC (pp. 61–70). IEEE, (2010, September)
	 15.	 W. Pan, Z. Li, & Y. Zhang, The new hardware development trend and the challenges in data manage­
ment and analysis. Data Science and Engineering, 3, 263–276 (2018).
	 16.	 M. Horstmann, M. Wiatr, A. Wei, J. Hoentschel, T. Feudel, T. Scheiper, & M. Raab, Advanced SOI 
CMOS transistor technology for high performance microprocessors, In 2009 10th International 
Conference on Ultimate Integration of Silicon (pp. 11–14). IEEE, (2009, March)
	 17.	 A. M. Veronis, Survey of Advanced Microprocessors. Springer Science & Business Media (2012).
	 18.	 A. FOG, The Microarchitecture of Intel, AMD, and VIA CPUs, 2014, available online at http://www.
agner.org/optimize/microarchitecture.pdf (accessed on August 7, 2018).

151
Fundamentals and Advanced Concepts of Microprocessors
	 19.	 S. Hill, The ARM10 family of advanced microprocessor cores. In Symposium on High-Performance 
Chips at Stanford University (HOT Chips 13), (2001, August).
	 20.	 M. T. Bohr, & Y. A. El-Mansy, Technology for advanced high-performance microprocessors. IEEE 
Transactions on Electron Devices, 45(3), 620–625 (1998).
	 21.	 B. W. Liu, S. M. Chen, & D. Wang, Survey on advance microprocessor architecture and its development 
trends. Jisuanji Yingyong Yanjiu/Application Research of Computers, 24(3), 16–20 (2007).
	 22.	 C. Jacobi, A. Saporito, M. Recktenwald, A. Tsai, U. Mayer, M. Helms, A. B. Collura, P. K. Mak, 
R. J. Sonnelitter, M. A. Blake, & T. C. Bronson, Design of the IBM z14 microprocessor. IBM Journal of 
Research and Development, 62, 2–3 (2018).
	 23.	 N. K. Upadhyay, H. Jiang, Z. Wang, S. Asapu, Q. Xia, & J. J. Yang, Emerging memory devices for neu­
romorphic computing. Advanced Materials Technologies, 4(4), 1800589 (2019).
	 24.	 C. D. Schuman, S. R. Kulkarni, & M. Parsa, Opportunities for neuromorphic computing algorithms and 
applications. Nature Computational Science, 2, 10–19 (2022).
	 25.	 https://insights.daffodilsw.com/blog/quantum-computing-applications-for-software-development

152
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-12
Fundamentals and 
Recent Advancements 
in Photodetectors Using 
Semiconductors
Xi Lin and Xiaoguang Luo
12.1  INTRODUCTION
Semiconductor photodetectors are optoelectronic devices based on semiconductors, which are usu­
ally used to detect light by the conversion ability (from light to electrical signal) of semiconductors. 
As the core components of modern optoelectronics, semiconductor photodetectors have a wide 
range of potential applications in military (including infrared imaging, missile guidance, naviga­
tion, etc.) and civilian fields (including environmental monitoring, optoelectronic imaging, optical 
communication, etc.) [1–7]. When light is impinged on the surface of the semiconductor, the pho­
tons will be absorbed by electrons or lattices through electron transition or the photo-thermoelectric 
effect, then forming the electron-hole pairs. With the assistance of the electric field (either a built-in 
or applied electric field), the electron-hole pairs will be separated as photogenerated electrons and 
holes and collected by the electrodes, forming the photocurrent or photovoltage. Therein, the band-
to-band transition in semiconductors is widely employed to design specific photodetectors. Under 
this mechanism, only the photons with energy larger than the band gap of semiconductors can be 
absorbed, and therefore the working spectrum of photodetectors is dramatically limited by the band 
gap of semiconductors. Fortunately, the working spectrum can be extended beyond the band gap 
by the interaction among photons, electrons, and phonons, leading to a rise in temperature and a 
temperature-induced change in electron conductivity.
Currently, the most widely used commercial photodetectors are based on bulk Silicon (Si), 
Germanium (Ge), and III-V semiconductors. However, the intrinsic nature of these traditional semi­
conductors is also challenging some of their applications in photodetection. Due to the indirect and 
specific band gap, Si and Ge materials cannot effectively absorb light, and their response spectrum 
is out of long wavelength. Still, under the premise in high crystallinity, the size of these traditional 
semiconductors is too difficult to reach the nanoscale or sub-nanoscale in technique, although the 
miniaturization for devices is an important and promising trend for technological advancement cur­
rently and in the future. The main restraining factors are the dangling bonds, defects, impurities, 
unstable interface, and quantum effect [8]. So far, some low-dimensional semiconductors such as 
quantum dots, nanowire, and two-dimensional semiconductors are emerging in the field of photo­
detection [9, 10]. Based on the single low-dimensional semiconductors or the hybrid structure with 
traditional semiconductors, various nanoscale photodetectors have been designed for high perfor­
mance and exploited for the potential applications.
In this chapter, the main performance parameters of a photodetector are first introduced, and then 
the main mechanisms of photodetection are reviewed and illustrated with some new study progress 
of photodetectors, including photovoltaic effect, photoconductive effect, photogating effect, photo-
thermoelectric effect, and photo-bolometric effect.
12

153
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
12.2  PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF PHOTODETECTORS
There are many performance parameters for a photodetector; here, the general ones are introduced 
to evaluate the devices from one to another, such as the carrier mobility (µ), photocurrent ( ph
I ), 
responsivity (R), external quantum efficiency (EQE), response time (τ), photoconductive gain (G), 
signal-to-noise ratio, noise equivalent power (NEP), and specific detectivity (
*
D ) [11–14].
As an optoelectronic device, the carrier mobility is very important for both the fundamental 
analysis and the performance study of a photodetector. It is an intrinsic parameter of a semiconduc­
tor that is used to evaluate the transport speed of carriers, and a high mobility is indicative of rapid 
response speed and even high photoconductive gain. For a field-effect transistor configuration, the 
mobility in the linear region for both electrons and hole can be expressed by the formula of
	
µ = ∆
∆
I
V
L
W CV
1
ds
g
ds
	
(12.1)
where L and W are the length and width of channel, ds
I  and ds
V  are source-drain current and voltage, 
respectively, g
V  is the gate voltage, 
/
0
ε ε
=
C
d is dielectric layer capacitance density, 0
ε  is permittiv­
ity of vacuum, and ε and d are the relative dielectric constant and thickness of the dielectric layer, 
respectively.
The directly measured parameter for a photodetector is photocurrent or photovoltage. Here, we 
focus on the former (unless otherwise specified), which is defined as the current difference with and 
without light illumination, expressed as
	
ph
illu.
dark
=
−
I
I
I
	
(12.2)
where the dark current dark
I
 is related to the noise of the device.
The responsivity (in the unit of A/W) is a very important parameter of a photodetector to char­
acterize the input-output efficiency, which is defined as the ratio of photocurrent to effective light 
power:
	
=
R
I
P A
Ph
in
	
(12.3)
where 
in
P  is the light power density and A is the effective active area of the photodetector. A high 
responsivity denotes a high convert efficiency from light to electrical signal, which can also be 
described by the external quantum efficiency. EQE is defined as the number ratio of collected car­
riers to the incident photons, i.e.,
	
λ
=
=
EQE
n
n
R hc
q
q
ph
	
(12.4)
where h is Planck’s constant, q is the element charge, and c and λ are light speed and wavelength, 
respectively. It can be found EQE is proportional to the responsivity. Generally different from the 
internal quantum efficiency, EQE can exceed 100% at the existence of photoconductive gain, with 
which the responsivity can be enhanced by several orders. In some literatures, EQE is regarded 
as the photoconductive gain [15]. However, the incident photons are not absorbed totally; thus, 
/
abs
η
EQE
 can also be adopted after considering the light absorbance 
abs
η
 [16].
The photoconductive gain can also be estimated by the response time and the transit time 
(
/
tran
2
ds
τ
µ
= L
V ) of photogenerated carriers, especially for the phototransistors. As the light is turned 

154
Handbook of Semiconductors
on and off, the photocurrent will rise and decay accordingly. The rise time ( rτ ) and decay time ( d
τ ) 
can be extracted using two methods, including the duration time from 10% to 90% its maximum 
value, and fitting factor τ by the exponential term of 
/τ
−
e t . 
d
τ  is generally larger than the rise time 
and is actually the lifetime 
life
τ
 of photogenerated carriers. Then the photoconductive gain can be 
calculated by
	
τ
τ
=
G
life
tran
	
(12.5)
To a photodetector, sensitivity is a crucial figure of merit, which concerns the detection limit at 
a certain level of noise. With the decrease of the light intensity, the photocurrent will be reduced 
accordingly, as well as the signal-to-noise ratio. The detection limit is often defined as the light 
intensity when the signal-to-noise ratio lowers to unity at the output bandwidth of 1 Hz, which is 
called noise equivalent power (in unit of W·Hz−1/2) [4]. NEP can be calculated by the formula of
	
n
=
NEP
i
R	
(12.6)
where the noise current ni  (in a unit of A·Hz−1/2) can be calculated by the spectral noise density [17]
	
( )
( )
=
+
+
i
f
q i
k T
R
i
f
f
2
4
n
2
dark
B
shunt
1/
2
	
(12.7)
and three terms denote shot noise, thermal noise, and 1/f noise, respectively. Here, B
k  is Boltzmann 
constant, T is temperature, 
shunt
R
 is shunt resistance, and ∆f  is the electrical bandwidth (i.e., the 
measurement bandwidth). In experiments, the spectral noise density can be measured directly under 
dark conditions or calculated through Fourier transform with dark current [18]. Then one can cal­
culate the noise current by 
1
n
0
n
2 ( )
=
∆∫∆
i
f
i
f df
f
, and finally get NEP. The minimum NEP value is 
the sensitivity of the photodetector.
The sensitivity parameters NEP can be replaced by the specific detectivity (in unit of cm·Hz1/2·W−1 
or Jones), which is defined as the normalized signal-to-noise ratio for a photodetector with an active 
area of 1 cm2 at the incident power of 1 W when the electrical bandwidth is 1 Hz, i.e.,
	
*
0
2 ( )
=
=
=
∆
∫∆
D
A
NEP
R
A
i
R
A f
i
f df
n
f
n
	
(12.8)
This formula is a universal assessment method of specific detectivity for any kinds of photodetec­
tors, and it can be approximated as 
/
*
n
2 (
)
=
∆
D
R A i
f  at a small bandwidth. While, for photodiodes, 
shot noise component is dominating, thus the specific detectivity can be further approximated as 
=
D
R A
q i
/2
*
dark .
12.3  WORKING MECHANISMS OF SEMICONDUCTOR 
PHOTODETECTORS AND THEIR PROGRESS
When light is absorbed by the semiconductor photodetectors, plenty of electron-hole pairs will be 
generated. The photocurrent can only be formed with the effective separation and transmission 
processes. There are so many device designs for high-efficiency separation and transmission based 

155
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
on the mechanisms of photovoltaic effect (PVE), photoconductive effect (PCE), photogating effect 
(PGE), photo-thermoelectric effect (PTE), and photo-bolometric effect (PBE) [9, 11, 12]. In the fol­
lowing, these mechanisms are illustrated one by one with the specific examples.
12.3.1  Photovoltaic Effect
Almost all the self-powered or self-driven photodetectors are based on PVE, where the photocur­
rent is produced spontaneously under illumination even at the absence of bias voltage. The driven 
force for separation and transmission originates from the built-in electric field, which only exists 
in asymmetric electrical conditions. So many efforts have been made by researchers to realize the 
asymmetric electrical conditions with semiconductors, with the common strategy of fabricating 
photodiode with heterojunctions and homojunctions, such as PN, P+P, N+N junctions, Schottky junc­
tions, and so on [19]. Figure 12.1 shows the PVE schematics in a PN junction photodiode. Under 
illumination, photons with energy greater than the band gap of the semiconductor are absorbed, 
leading to the generation of electron-hole pairs. The photogenerated electron-hole pairs are sepa­
rated with the assistance of a built-in electric field and finally collected by electrodes to form a 
photocurrent [11, 20, 21]. The typical characteristic parameters of the PVE are the short-circuit 
current ( SC
I ) and open-circuit voltage ( OC
V ), which are also important in the field of solar cells. PVE 
photodetectors usually work at photovoltaic mode (no bias) with low-energy consumption, low dark 
current, linear response, and fast response speed. However, the input-output efficiency is relatively 
low because of the absence of photoconductive gain. Thus, the photodiodes are sometimes studied 
under photoconductive mode (reverse bias) [22] or avalanche mode (large reverse bias) [23] to gain 
higher responsivity.
To realize the lateral PN junction, the half of N-type InSe channel have been doped with Cu by 
solid-state reaction technology [24], thereby forming the InSe/CuInSe2 lateral PN heterojunction, as 
shown in Figure 12.2a. The built-in field is produced at the junction between N-type InSe and P-type 
CuInSe2, which facilitates the PVE of the device. Figure 12.2b displays the output curves ( ds
ds
−
I
V ) 
of the device under dark and illumination conditions. It can be observed that the dark current shows 
the typical rectification behavior of the PN junction photodiode, with 
0
ds =
I
 at 
0
ds =
V
. However, 
the current deviates from zero point under illumination, where the non-zero current at 
0
ds =
V
 is the 
short-circuit current and the non-zero voltage at 
0
ds =
I
 is the open-circuit voltage. The extracted 
SC
I  can be regarded as the photocurrent because of the low dark current, and Figure 12.2c shows 
that SC
I  increases linearly with the light power density, indicating a good linear response of the PVE 
device. Nevertheless, the responsivity at photovoltaic mode is relatively low (with the power conver­
sion efficiency ~ 3.5%), which will be improved to 4.2 A/W after applying a very large bias voltage 
(–10 V). One main reason for this low efficiency of the lateral PN heterojunction is the small active 
area which can be enlarged by the vertical configuration of the heterojunction. Wu et al. [25] designed 
FIGURE 12.1  Photovoltaic effect schematics of a PN junction photodiode. (a) Band alignment and carrier 
behavior in the PN junction. (b) Output curves under dark and illumination conditions, respectively.

156
Handbook of Semiconductors
the photodiode with a WS2/AlOx/Ge vertical NN heterojunction for ultrabroadband (wavelength from 
200 nm to 4.6 μm) and high-detectivity (as high as 4.3 × 1011 Jones) photodetection, as shown in 
Figures 12.2d–12.2f. Clear PVE can be confirmed by the deviation of current from zero point (
0
ds =
I
 
when 
0
ds =
V
), and the interface passivation layer AlOx is beneficial to lower dark current and enhances 
the photoresponse. The ultrabroadband response (Figure 12.2f) is ascribed to the narrow band gap of 
Ge and the tunable band gap of WS2 (effectively narrowed by controlling the concentration of S vacan­
cies), and the fast response speed (on 10 μs order) is due to the strong built-in field and the reduction 
of recombination at the WS2/Ge interface. However, the linearity of the photoresponse in this NN 
photodiode is poor, where the responsivity decreases with the light intensity. Effective control for the 
photogenerated carriers may be a way for good linearity. Dou et al. [26] prepared a PIN photodiode 
based on organic-inorganic hybrid perovskite of CH3NH3PbI3−xClx, where the I-type perovskite is 
sandwiched between a P-type hole-transporting material and an N-type electron-transporting mate­
rial. In addition to the high 
~ 70%
EQE
 and detectivity ~1014 Jones, the device also achieves a linear 
dynamic range of over 100 dB based on the formula of
	
=
LDR
P
P
20log
u
l
	
(12.9)
where the light power densities of 
uP  and 
lP are the upper bound and lower bound of the linear 
region, respectively.
12.3.2  Photoconductive Effect
Different from PVE, an external bias voltage is required when the photodetection is carried out with 
PCE-based photodetectors, otherwise no photocurrent can be detected. According to the existence 
of photoconductive gain or not, the PCE is commonly divided into two types, with the former and 
the latter being recalled as PGE and PCE here, respectively. Figures 12.3a and 12.3b illustrate the 
FIGURE 12.2  (a–c) Structure schematic of InSe/CuInSe2 PN junction photodiode, output curves of the 
photodiode under dark and illumination conditions, and short-circuit current as a function of light intensity, 
respectively [24]. (Copyright [2015] American Chemical Society.) (d–f) Schematic of the WS2/AlOx/Ge NN 
photodiode, output curves of the photodiode under dark and illumination conditions, and ultrabroadband pho­
toresponse characteristics, respectively [25]. (Copyright [2021] American Chemical Society.)

157
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
carrier behavior of PCE in an N-type phototransistor. Under dark conditions, the current caused 
by the external bias voltage is attributed to the transport of electrons. When the device is illumi­
nated, the electron-hole pairs are generated and then separated with the assistance of the applied 
electric field. As a result, the carrier concentration increases accordingly, leading to the photocur­
rent [11, 20, 21]. In this mechanism, as the incident light power increases, the accumulation of 
photogenerated carriers leads to a decrease in resistance of the channel material and an increase in 
conductivity. Figures 12.3d and 12.3e display the typical transfer and output curves of the N-type 
PCE phototransistor. The transfer curve under illumination is lifted as compared to that under dark 
condition, while all output curves pass through the zero point.
Without the photoconductive gain, the EQE of phototransistors based on PCE cannot exceed 
100%, which limits the responsivity. However, linear response and fast response speed can be 
achieved because of the weak interaction in those carriers, defects, impurities, and other forms of 
charge. Figure 12.4 shows an example of an In2Se3 phototransistor for realizing the photodetec­
tion based on PCE [27]. For this N-type phototransistor, the carriers transport can be turned from 
FIGURE 12.3  Schematic of the photoconductive effect and photogating effect. (a) Band diagram and carrier 
behavior of a phototransistor with external bias under dark condition. (b) Carrier behavior at photoconductive 
mode under illumination. (c) Carrier behavior at photogating mode under illumination. (d–e) Transfer curves 
and output curves of the photoconductive mechanism under dark and illumination conditions. (f–g) Transfer 
curves and output curves of the photogating mechanism under dark and illumination conditions.

158
Handbook of Semiconductors
“OFF” to “ON” when the gate voltage changes from –40 to 40 V, and the working mechanism is 
tuned from PCE to PGE accordingly. At the intrinsic PGE mechanism, the responsivity for 640 nm 
illumination is only about 0.02 A/W as compared to the high responsivity ~105 A/W under PCE. 
However, the response speed ~30 ms for PGE is much faster than that ~9 s for PCE.
12.3.3  Photogating Effect
PGE refers to a particular case of PCE in semiconductor phototransistors, with the typical feature 
of huge photoconductive gain. The key to achieving the PGE is the trapping of minority carriers. 
Under illumination, photogenerated minority carriers (electrons for P-type channel and holes for 
N-type channel) can be captured by defect states inside or other materials outside the semiconduc­
tor channel. These captured carriers then act as localized gates, allowing for the control of channel 
carriers through the gating effect. Figure 12.3c shows the representative PGE in an N-type photo­
transistor through defect trapping, where the photogenerated holes are trapped by defects and form 
the gating effect on the channel. Therefore, the lifetime of trapped holes has a significant impact on 
the photoconductive gain (equal to the ratio of lifetime of trapped holes to transit time of transmitted 
electrons). It is known that the majority carriers in a semiconductor have a higher mobility, corre­
sponding to a shorter transit time. The photogenerated majority carriers can drift across the channel 
more quickly than the minority carriers. In order to maintain the charge neutrality, more majority 
carriers are supplied from the opposite electrode during the life of holes. Therefore, prolonging the 
lifetime of minority carriers and improving the mobility of majority carriers are effective strategies 
for getting high photoconductive gain. However, long lifetime means slow response speed. Thus, 
a trade-off must be made between gain and response speed to achieve reasonable performance of 
a phototransistor. The transfer and output curves of an N-type dominating phototransistor (light 
P-type) are shown in Figures 12.3f and 12.3g. The transfer curve under illumination is the shift of 
transfer curve at dark toward negative direction for hole trapping and positive direction for electron 
trapping. For the case of hole trapping, the positive photocurrent is produced at N-branch and nega­
tive photocurrent can be found at P-branch.
It is worth noting that PGE is particularly prominent in nanoscale materials with a large surface-
to-volume ratio, such as colloidal quantum dots, nanowires, and two-dimensional layered materials. 
By employing the defects of the channel materials or the nanomaterials with strong quantum con­
finement effect, minority carriers can be trapped inside or outside the channel, respectively. Lopez-
Sanchez et al. [28] developed a monolayer MoS2 phototransistor and achieved the high responsivity 
of ~880 A/W at 561 nm illumination when the channel was at “OFF” state. Such high responsivity 
implies the high photoconductive gain, which can be attributed to the hole trapping-induced PGE 
FIGURE 12.4  Realizing the photodetection based on the photoconductive effect. (a) Optical image of an 
In2Se3 phototransistor. (b) Photocurrent and (c) responsivity versus laser power for different gate voltages 
under 640 nm illumination [27]. (Copyright [2015] American Chemical Society.)

159
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
in the MoS2 channel. The PGE can also be confirmed by the long photocurrent decay time of ~9 s. 
The responsivity exhibits an exponential decay with respect to the light intensity, which is the typi­
cal nonlinear phenomenon of PGE because of the saturated filling of deep defects [29]. It should 
be noted that 880 A/W is not the limit of this phototransistor. Higher responsivity can be extracted 
at “ON” state for the channel. However, large dark current and high noise level are also produced.
As aforementioned, both large mobility of majority carriers and long lifetime of minority carri­
ers are the key to achieve high photoconductive gain. Thus, the assembly of graphene and quantum 
dots is a promising strategy for high-performance phototransistors. Konstantatos et al. [30] have 
developed a hybrid phototransistor with graphene PbS colloidal quantum dots by using spin casting. 
Once illuminated, the transfer curves turn to the positive direction of the gate voltage, identifying 
the electron trapping in the quantum dots. Combined with the ultra large hole mobility in graphene 
and the electron trapping in the quantum dots, a high photoconductive gain of ~108 is realized under 
532 nm illumination, resulting in the high responsivity ~107 A/W and the high specific detectivity 
~7 × 1013 Jones. However, the long response time (on the order of several seconds) challenges high-
speed applications of this hybrid phototransistor, unless reset with the pulsed gate bias. Other hybrid 
photodetectors such as MoS2/ZnO phototransistors [31] and WSe2/InSe phototransistors [32] also 
show great enhancement on the responsivity through PGE. Under the premise in high photoconduc­
tive gain, the lifetime under PGE can be shortened with some methods, such as the clear interface 
[33] and the strain manipulation [18]. Liu et al. [33] reported an organic-inorganic hybrid photo­
transistor with the epitaxial ultrathin organic crystals (C8-BTBT) on Graphene, as shown in Figures 
12.5a–12.5c, which exhibited a high gain of >109 when C8-BTBT was thicker than 5 layers. Hole 
trapping in C8-BTBT film can be identified by the transfer curves change of the phototransistor, i.e., 
the shift in the negative direction after illuminated. The clean C8-BTBT/Graphene interface allows 
a fast response speed, with the response time spanning from 25 ms to 830 ms for the C8-BTBT 
layer from 1 to 6. Even for the 1-layer C8-BTBT, the responsivity is still as large as 1.57 × 104 A/W. 
FIGURE 12.5  (a–c) Schematic of a C8-BTBT/graphene hybrid phototransistor, responsivities for different 
grown times, and photoconductive gains versus C8-BTBT layers under 355 nm illumination [33]. (Copyright 
[2016], Wiley-VCH.) (d–f) Schematic of a dual-gate WSe2 phototransistor, responsivities at different top gate 
voltage when the Bottom gate voltage is −70 V, and the corresponding spectral noise density, where the light 
wavelength is 532 nm [16]. (Copyright [2021] Wiley-VCH.)

160
Handbook of Semiconductors
Strain distribution in the channel plane can also shorten the response time. After studying the pho­
totransistor with grown monolayer WS2 on Si3N4 substrate, Liu et al. [18] found that the responsivity 
reached up to 1.58 × 105 A/W, while the response time was just on the order of 40 ms. This fast 
response speed is probably attributed to the partially suspended characteristics of the WS2 channel 
on the porous Si3N4 surface (revealed by atomic force microscopy). The strain distribution in the 
partially suspended WS2 induces an in-plane built-in electric field and less carrier mass, benefiting 
the separation of electron-hole pairs and the carrier mobility.
The nonlinearity of PGE impedes the applications of the phototransistor in some fields, such 
as quantitative light detection, high-resolution imaging, machine vision technology, and so on. 
However, realizing the robust linearity with high gain is still a challenge. Several attempts have been 
reported for linearity with the vertically heterojunctioned phototransistors, and all of them require 
rigorous gating conditions. Ho et al. [34] fabricated the Ta2O5 /graphene phototransistor and realized 
the linear response at weak illumination (wavelength from 200 nm and 10.6 μm) when 
7
g =
V
 V, 
with 
~ 80
LDR
 dB at 940 nm. Surprisingly, the responsivity retains a high value of ~105 A/W. The 
reason to the linear response is the light-tunable built-in field at the Ta2O5/graphene heterostructure, 
which influences the lifetime of trapped minority carriers. At the specific gate voltage, the photo­
conductive gain holds a constant value in a range of light intensity, resulting in the linear response. 
However, the dark current is on the order of 100 μA, resulting in a high noise level and low detectiv­
ity. To lower the noise level, the configuration of vertical dual-gate WSe2 phototransistors has been 
studied [16], as shown in Figures 12.5d–12.5f. With the help of the vertical dual-gating, electrons 
and holes accumulate to the two interfaces of the WSe2 channel and form the vertical homojunction. 
The separation of electrons and holes further weakens the interaction between carriers, resulting in 
a low noise level (Figure 12.5f).
Large dark current is an intrinsic nature of phototransistors because of the applied bias voltage, 
which, however, goes against the sensitivity. Therefore, achieving both high gain and high sensitiv­
ity is a promising research direction for phototransistors in the future.
12.3.4  Photo-thermoelectric Effect
PTE refers to the uneven heating of the channel material, resulting in a temperature gradient ∆T 
across the channel. For symmetric photodetectors, ∆T is often generated by localized illumination 
with a focused laser spot with dimensions much smaller than those of devices [35, 36]. For asym­
metric devices, global illumination can also produce ∆T due to the uneven light absorbance or 
thermal conductivity [20]. According to the Seebeck effect, a voltage difference
	
PTE
∆
= ∆
V
S T	
(12.10)
is generated across the semiconductor by the movement of charge carriers (from the hot to cold 
terminal due to the temperature gradient), where S represents the Seebeck coefficient. The PTE cur­
rent will be formed once the device is connected to a circuit. To a PTE photodetector, the generation 
of ∆T is of great importance, and the response band can even be extended beyond the bandgap of 
the semiconductor channel.
Similar to the PVE, a PTE photodetector has no need of bias voltage, and PTE voltage is often 
focused for the performance evaluation. Figures 12.6a–12.6c show the example of a symmetric PTE 
phototransistor based on NbS3 [37]. The temperature of one Au/NbS3 contact will rise after illumi­
nated by a focused laser spot. Then the charge carriers flow from one contact to the other through 
the NbS3 channel, leading to the difference in Fermi levels of two terminals and the PTE voltage (or 
current) as well. The PTE voltage and PTE current can be extracted from the output curves under 
dark and illumination, i.e., the deviation from zero point, as depicted in Figure 12.6b. A strong 
PTE response is produced due to the short thermal decay length and low thermal loss in the device, 
showcasing a considerable performance from ultraviolet (375 nm) to terahertz (118.8 μm), as shown 

161
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
in Figure 12.6c. The responsivities for all examined wavelengths are larger than 1.5 V/W, and the 
response time is less than 10 ms.
The localized illumination is not controllable, especially for the micro- or even nano-devices. 
Therefore, so many asymmetric PTE photodetectors have been designed for photodetection under 
global illumination. Liu et al. [38] utilized suspended carbon nanotubes (CNTs) to achieve a broad­
band (from ultraviolet [375 nm] to terahertz [118.8 μm]) PTE photodiode with faster response speed 
(several milliseconds), low noise (the smallest NEP is ~0.05 nW·Hz−1/2), and high responsivity (from 
0.35 to 158 V/W), as shown in the Figures 12.6d–12.6f. Generally, high electrical conductivity 
and low thermal conductivity benefit the PTE. In this device, the thermal conductivity of CNTs is 
effectively reduced by depositing Ti and Pd on terminals. After that, N-type and P-type doping are 
formed at the respective terminals due to different work functions of Ti, Pd, and CNTs. In addi­
tion, the introduction of metals also leads to thermal localization, increasing ∆T between the hot 
terminal and cold terminal, enhancing the PTE response of the device. Owing to the heat exchange 
between the device and the surrounding environment, the responsivities in air are at least one order 
smaller than those in vacuum (Figure 12.6f). Photodetectors based on the PTE exhibit so many 
advantages, such as wide spectral response beyond semiconductor band gap, operating at zero bias 
voltage, detection at room temperature, and so on. Hence, the PTE photodetectors are expected to 
be applied in infrared and even terahertz band photodetection.
12.3.5  Photo-bolometric Effect
PBE primarily occurs in thermosensitive semiconductors under global illumination, where the tem­
perature rise occurs in the semiconductors and results in the resistance change of the semiconductor 
[11]. Generally, either positive or negative photocurrent can be generated under PBE. The resis­
tance variation induced by the incident light is governed by two ways, including changes in carrier 
FIGURE 12.6  (a–c) Schematic of NbS3-based PTE photodetector, output characteristics of the device under 
dark and localized 532 nm illumination, and responsivity versus light wavelength [37]. (Copyright [2020] 
American Chemical Society.) (d–f) Schematic of the Ti-CNT-Pd PTE photodetector, output characteristics of 
the device in the air under dark and global illumination, and responsivity versus light wavelength in air and in 
vacuum [38]. (Copyright [2022] American Chemical Society.)

162
Handbook of Semiconductors
mobility and changes in the number of carriers due to the temperature variations. The magnitude of 
the PBE is jointly determined by the degree of conductivity variation with temperature in the semi­
conductor and how much the temperature increases by the illumination [39]. The photodetection 
based on PBE requires the bias voltage, which is similar to PCE and PGE and different from PTE. 
The sign of the photoresponse is also very different between PTE and PBE. The former is related 
to the difference in Seeback coefficients between the components of the junction and the type of 
charge carriers in the semiconductor material, while the latter is related to the change in the mate­
rial conductivity with temperature. Nevertheless, both these two kinds of thermoelectric effects 
can be widely applied in the broadband detection beyond the semiconductor bandgap, because the 
photoresponse is based on the temperature-induced carrier generation (namely hot holes or hot elec­
trons), rather than photoexcited carrier generation.
Yin et al. [40] reported an ultrabroadband phototransistor up to 10.6 μm with 2D Fe3O4 
nanosheets. The lift of transfer curves under illumination implies the existence of PCE or PBE, 
and the dominating PBE is verified with the similar lift of transfer curves with the increase of the 
substrate temperature. The PBE phototransistor displays a high-performance detecting capabil­
ity. When illuminated by 10.6 μm laser, the photoresponsivity, external quantum efficiency, and 
detectivity reach 561.2 A/W, 6.6 × 103% and 7.42 × 108 Jones, respectively. However, the response 
time (on the order of second) is relatively long, which may be ascribed to the slow behavior of the 
phonons. Through the study of black phosphorus phototransistors, Miao et al. [41] found that the 
carrier mobility and carrier concentration under PBE contributed jointly to the conductivity. No 
photodetector can operate just based on PBE, and the photoresponse is often from complementary 
mixing mechanisms. For example, in the investigation of the Bi2O2Se phototransistor, Yang et al. 
[42] clarified three kinds of contribution to the photocurrent (including PBE, PCE, and PTE) by 
local heating method [43, 44], and concluded that the PBE plays a dominant role in the entire pho­
togeneration process of Bi2O2Se.
12.4  CONCLUSIONS
In summary, we introduced the main mechanisms of photodetection based on three-dimensional 
and low-dimensional semiconductors, including PVE, PCE, PGE, PTE, and PBE. In addition, we 
also clarified the common performance parameters used to evaluate the photodetectors. The car­
rier generation, electron-hole pair separation, and carrier transmission are the main processes of 
a photodetector, which definitively influence the detection performance. Combined with emerg­
ing achievements in the field of photodetection, the mechanisms with corresponding performance 
parameters were discussed in detail, as well as the advantages and disadvantages of those mecha­
nisms. For instance, PVE and PTE are nice choices for low-power and fast-speed detection due to 
their ability to operate without bias voltage. However, the input-output efficiency is very low under 
the absence of photoconductive gain. PGE is good for enhancing efficiency based on the huge gain, 
while its large dark current results in high noise level and low sensitivity. PCE and PBE are always 
contributed together to the photoresponse, and PTE and PBE can be employed to realize the broad­
band photodetection beyond the semiconductor bandgap. With the development of materials science 
and semiconductor physics, we believe that more surprising achievements about photodetection will 
be made in the future, which may further promote the advances of electronics and optoelectronics.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 S. Chen, C. Teng, M. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Xie, G. Shi, A flexible UV-vis-NIR photodetector based on a 
perovskite/conjugated-polymer composite, Advanced Materials, 28 (2016) 5969–5974.
	
2.	 H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, T. Li, Q. Li, Y. Yu, Z. Chen, Y. Li, J. Yao, Self-driven visible-near infrared photo­
detector with vertical CsPbBr3/PbS quantum dots heterojunction structure, Nanotechnology, 31 (2020) 
035202.

163
Fundamentals and Recent Advancements in Photodetectors Using Semiconductors
	
3.	 Z. Huang, W. Zhou, J. Tong, J. Huang, C. Ouyang, Y. Qu, J. Wu, Y. Gao, J. Chu, Extreme sensitivity of 
room-temperature photoelectric effect for terahertz detection, Advanced Materials, 28 (2016) 112–117.
	
4.	 F.H.L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A.C. Ferrari, M.S. Vitiello, M. Polini, Photodetectors based 
on graphene, other two-dimensional materials and hybrid systems, Nature Nanotechnology, 9 (2014) 
780–793.
	
5.	 G.A. Rance, D.H. Marsh, R.J. Nicholas, A.N. Khlobystov, UV–vis absorption spectroscopy of carbon 
nanotubes: Relationship between the π-electron plasmon and nanotube diameter, Chemical Physics 
Letters, 493 (2010) 19–23.
	
6.	 C. Chen, P. Zhou, N. Wang, Y. Ma, H. San, UV-assisted photochemical synthesis of reduced graphene 
Oxide/ZnO nanowires composite for photoresponse enhancement in UV photodetectors, Nanomaterials, 
8 (2018) 26.
	
7.	 G. Li, L. Liu, G. Wu, W. Chen, S. Qin, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, Self-powered UV-near infrared photodetec­
tor based on reduced graphene Oxide/n-Si vertical heterojunction, Small, 12 (2016) 5019–5026.
	
8.	 M.-Y. Li, S.-K. Su, H.S.P. Wong, L.-J. Li, How 2D semiconductors could extend Moore’s law, Nature, 
567 (2019) 169–170.
	
9.	 F. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Gao, P. Luo, J. Su, W. Han, K. Liu, H. Li, T. Zhai, 2D metal chalcogenides for IR 
photodetection, Small, 15 (2019) 1901347.
	 10.	 S.-H. Jo, H.-Y. Park, D.-H. Kang, J. Shim, J. Jeon, S. Choi, M. Kim, Y. Park, J. Lee, Y.J. Song, S. 
Lee, J.-H. Park, Broad detection range rhenium diselenide photodetector enhanced by (3-aminopropyl) 
triethoxysilane and triphenylphosphine treatment, Advanced Materials, 28 (2016) 6711–6718.
	 11.	 M. Long, P. Wang, H. Fang, W. Hu, Progress, challenges, and opportunities for 2D material based pho­
todetectors, Advanced Functional Materials, 29 (2018) 1803807.
	 12.	 J. Wang, J. Han, X. Chen, X. Wang, Design strategies for two-dimensional material photodetectors to 
enhance device performance, InfoMat, 1 (2019) 33–53.
	 13.	 Z. Cheng, C.-S. Pang, P. Wang, S.T. Le, Y. Wu, D. Shahrjerdi, I. Radu, M.C. Lemme, L.-M. Peng, X. 
Duan, Z. Chen, J. Appenzeller, S.J. Koester, E. Pop, A.D. Franklin, C.A. Richter, How to report and 
benchmark emerging field-effect transistors, Nature Electronics, 5 (2022) 416–423.
	 14.	 S. Kaushik, R. Singh, 2D layered materials for ultraviolet photodetection: A review, Advanced Optical 
Materials, 9 (2021) 2002214.
	 15.	 G. Konstantatos, E.H. Sargent, Nanostructured materials for photon detection, Nature Nanotechnology, 
5 (2010) 391–400.
	 16.	 J. Xu, X. Luo, S. Hu, X. Zhang, D. Mei, F. Liu, N. Han, D. Liu, X. Gan, Y. Cheng, W. Huang, Tunable 
linearity of high-performance vertical dual-gate vdW phototransistors, Advanced Materials, 33 (2021) 
2008080.
	 17.	 Y. Fang, A. Armin, P. Meredith, J. Huang, Accurate characterization of next-generation thin-film pho­
todetectors, Nature Photonics, 13 (2019) 1–4.
	 18.	 F. Liu, J. Xu, Y. Yan, J. Shi, S. Ahmad, X. Gan, Y. Cheng, X. Luo, Highly sensitive phototransistors 
based on partially suspended monolayer WS2, ACS Photonics, 10 (2023) 1126–1135.
	 19.	 G. Konstantatos, E.H. Sargent, Erratum: Nanostructured materials for photon detection, Nature 
Nanotechnology, 5 (2010) 885–885.
	 20.	 M. Buscema, J.O. Island, D.J. Groenendijk, S.I. Blanter, G.A. Steele, H.S.J. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-
Gomez, Photocurrent generation with two-dimensional van der Waals semiconductors, Chemical 
Society Reviews, 44 (2015) 3691–3718.
	 21.	 J. Jiang, Y. Wen, H. Wang, L. Yin, R. Cheng, C. Liu, L. Feng, J. He, Recent advances in 2D materials 
for photodetectors, Advanced Electronic Materials, 7 (2021) 2001125.
	 22.	 S. Hu, Q. Zhang, X. Luo, X. Zhang, T. Wang, Y. Cheng, W. Jie, J. Zhao, T. Mei, X. Gan, Au–InSe van der 
Waals Schottky junctions with ultralow reverse current and high photosensitivity, Nanoscale, 12 (2020) 
4094–4100.
	 23.	 A. Gao, J. Lai, Y. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Zeng, G. Yu, N. Wang, W. Chen, T. Cao, W. Hu, D. Sun, X. Chen, 
F. Miao, Y. Shi, X. Wang, Observation of ballistic avalanche phenomena in nanoscale vertical InSe/BP 
heterostructures, Nature Nanotechnology, 14 (2019) 217–222.
	 24.	 W. Feng, W. Zheng, X. Chen, G. Liu, W. Cao, P. Hu, Solid-state reaction synthesis of a InSe/CuInSe2 
lateral p–n heterojunction and application in high performance optoelectronic devices, Chemistry of 
Materials, 27 (2015) 983–989.
	 25.	 D. Wu, J. Guo, C. Wang, X. Ren, Y. Chen, P. Lin, L. Zeng, Z. Shi, X.J. Li, C.-X. Shan, J. Jie, 
Ultrabroadband and high-detectivity photodetector based on WS2/Ge heterojunction through defect 
engineering and interface passivation, ACS Nano, 15 (2021) 10119–10129.

164
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 26.	 L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li, Y. Yang, Solution-processed hybrid perovskite 
photodetectors with high detectivity, Nature Communications, 5 (2014) 5404.
	 27.	 J.O. Island, S.I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H.S.J. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-Gomez, Gate controlled 
photocurrent generation mechanisms in high-gain In2Se3 phototransistors, Nano Letters, 15 (2015) 
7853–7858.
	 28.	 O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic, A. Kis, Ultrasensitive photodetectors based on 
monolayer MoS2, Nature Nanotechnology, 8 (2013) 497–501.
	 29.	 J. Jiang, C. Ling, T. Xu, W. Wang, X. Niu, A. Zafar, Z. Yan, X. Wang, Y. You, L. Sun, J. Lu, J. Wang, Z. 
Ni, Defect engineering for modulating the trap States in 2D photoconductors, Advanced Materials, 30 
(2018) 1804332.
	 30.	 G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F.P.G. de Arquer, F. Gatti, F.H.L. 
Koppens, Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors with ultrahigh gain, Nature Nanotechnology, 
7 (2012) 363–368.
	 31.	 X.-L. Zhang, J. Li, B. Leng, L. Yang, Y.-D. Song, S.-Y. Feng, L.-Z. Feng, Z.-T. Liu, Z.-W. Fu, X. Jiang, 
B.-D. Liu, High-performance ultraviolet-visible photodetector with high sensitivity and fast response 
speed based on MoS2-on-ZnO photogating heterojunction, Tungsten, 5 (2022) 91–99.
	 32.	 T. Lei, H. Tu, W. Lv, H. Ma, J. Wang, R. Hu, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Fang, Z. Liu, W. Shi, Z. Zeng, 
Ambipolar photoresponsivity in an ultrasensitive photodetector based on a WSe2/InSe heterostructure 
by a photogating effect, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 13 (2021) 50213–50219.
	 33.	 X. Liu, X. Luo, H. Nan, H. Guo, P. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Yang, Y. Shi, W. Hu, Z. Ni, T. Qiu, Z. 
Yu, J.-B. Xu, X. Wang, Epitaxial ultrathin organic crystals on graphene for high-efficiency phototransis­
tors, Advanced Materials, 28 (2016) 5200–5205.
	 34.	 V.X. Ho, Y. Wang, M.P. Cooney, N.Q. Vinh, Graphene-Ta2O5 heterostructure enabled high performance, 
deep-ultraviolet to mid-infrared photodetection, Nanoscale, 13 (2021) 10526–10535.
	 35.	 J. Park, Y.H. Ahn, C. Ruiz-Vargas, Imaging of photocurrent generation and collection in single-layer 
graphene, Nano Letters, 9 (2009) 1742–1746.
	 36.	 M. Buscema, M. Barkelid, V. Zwiller, H.S.J. van der Zant, G.A. Steele, A. Castellanos-Gomez, Large 
and tunable photothermoelectric effect in single-layer MoS2, Nano Letters, 13 (2013) 358–363.
	 37.	 W. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Niu, P. Wang, M. Chen, J. Sun, N. Wang, D. Wu, Z. Zhao, Thermal localization 
enhanced fast photothermoelectric response in a quasi-one-dimensional flexible NbS3 photodetector, 
ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 12 (2020) 14165–14173.
	 38.	 Y. Liu, Q. Hu, Y. Cao, P. Wang, J. Wei, W. Wu, J. Wang, F. Huang, J.-L. Sun, High-performance ultra­
broadband photodetector based on photothermoelectric effect, ACS Applied Materials & Interfaces, 14 
(2022) 29077–29086.
	 39.	 C. Xie, C. Mak, X. Tao, F. Yan, Photodetectors based on two-dimensional layered materials beyond 
graphene, Advanced Functional Materials, 27 (2016) 1603886.
	 40.	 C. Yin, C. Gong, J. Chu, X. Wang, C. Yan, S. Qian, Y. Wang, G. Rao, H. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wang, 
J. Wang, W. Hu, C. Li, J. Xiong, Ultrabroadband photodetectors up to 10.6 µm based on 2D Fe3O4 
nanosheets, Advanced Materials, 32 (2020) 2002237.
	 41.	 J. Miao, B. Song, Q. Li, L. Cai, S. Zhang, W. Hu, L. Dong, C. Wang, Photothermal effect induced nega­
tive photoconductivity and high responsivity in flexible black phosphorus transistors, ACS Nano, 11 
(2017) 6048–6056.
	 42.	 H. Yang, C. Tan, C. Deng, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Hu, X. Guo, G. Wang, T. Jiang, Y. Zhang, 
G. Peng, H. Peng, X. Zhang, S. Qin, Bolometric Effect in Bi2O2Se Photodetectors, Small, 15 (2019) 
1904482.
	 43.	 M.-J. Lee, J.-H. Ahn, J.H. Sung, H. Heo, S.G. Jeon, W. Lee, J.Y. Song, K.-H. Hong, B. Choi, S.-H. 
Lee, M.-H. Jo, Thermoelectric materials by using two-dimensional materials with negative correlation 
between electrical and thermal conductivity, Nature Communications, 7 (2016) 12011.
	 44.	 H. Yuan, X. Wang, B. Lian, H. Zhang, X. Fang, B. Shen, G. Xu, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang, H.Y. Hwang, Y. Cui, 
Generation and electric control of spin–valley-coupled circular photogalvanic current in WSe2, Nature 
Nanotechnology, 9 (2014) 851–857.

165
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-13
Semiconductor 
Photoelectrochemistry
Mohsen Lashgari
13.1  INTRODUCTION
Before delving into semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, it is essential to remember that any phe­
nomenon involving electron transfer can be viewed as an electrochemical process. Concerning the 
electron transport phenomena, we can exemplify two well-known electrochemical reactions: proton 
reduction at the cathode and hydroxide oxidation at the anode of an electrochemical cell. In the 
first reaction (Equation 13.1), protons gain electrons and evolve into hydrogen gas, while in the 
second, hydroxide anions lose their electrons and are transformed into water and oxygen molecules 
(Equation 13.2).
	
+
→
↑
+
−
2H
2e
H2
	
(13.1)
	
→
+
+
↑
−
−
2OH
H O
2e
1 / 2O
2
2
	
(13.2)
Electrochemical processes are a type of reduction-oxidation (redox) reaction. They can occur 
within an electrochemical cell, where the reduction reaction happens at the cathode – the electrode 
connected to the negative pole – while the oxidation reaction simultaneously takes place at the 
opposite electrode (called anode), which is connected to the positive pole of a power supply. Of 
course, spontaneous redox phenomena can occur without the need for an external power supply 
(a dc rectifier or a battery) and the use of an electrode. These redox reactions can happen through 
the direct transfer of electrons between reducing and oxidizing species. Such electron transferring 
reactions can be referred to as electroless phenomena [1]. As an example of electroless reactions, we 
can refer to the combustion process [2], in which a fuel (e.g., H2) is oxidized and the resulting elec­
trons are transferred to the oxidant (O2). The outcome of this process is energy release and product 
formation (water):
	
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
→
+
Fuel  H
Oxidant  O
 Product  H O
Energy
2
2
2
	
(13.3)
If this spontaneous (thermodynamically favored) redox process occurs on two separate electrodes 
inside an electrochemical reactor (fuel cell), it results in the fuel oxidation and generation of electrons 
(negative charges) at the anode. Simultaneously, the oxidant undergoes reduction at the cathode, cre­
ating a positive polarity on its terminal. By generation of a potential difference and flow of electrons 
between anode and cathode, the chemical energy stored in the fuel is released as electricity.
During redox reactions that occur inside an electrochemical reactor/cell, a potential gradient 
exists between the anodic and cathodic terminals of the reactor. In the case of non-spontaneous 
processes (such as electrolysis and conversion of water into oxygen and hydrogen), the mentioned 
potential difference is supplied by connecting the reactor terminals to an external potential source 
(e.g., a dc rectifier). For spontaneous redox processes (such as those reactions occurring in a fuel 
cell or battery), by contrast, there is no need to employ a power supply and spend electricity. The 
potential gradient (E) is naturally generated between the electrodes’ terminals, as follows:
	
= ∆
−
E
G
nF
r
	
(13.4)
13

166
Handbook of Semiconductors
where n is the number of electrons being transferred during the redox process, F is the Faraday 
constant (charge of one mole electrons; 96485 C), and ∆G
r
 is the Gibbs free energy change accom­
panying the redox reaction.
By connecting the negative pole of a DC power source to the cathode and the positive pole 
to the anode of an electrochemical cell, electrons start to accumulate on the cathode surface. In 
contrast, they become depleted on the anode surface, causing reduction and oxidation processes 
to occur simultaneously at the cathode and anode surfaces, respectively. Furthermore, it is worth 
highlighting that the matter of electron depletion and anodic reactions in electrochemical systems 
can be reconsidered by introducing the concept of the hole to these systems. Unlike an electron, 
which is a physical reality and a fundamental particle with the smallest unit of charge, a hole is 
merely an abstract concept with the opposite charge, being described as the lack of electrons in a 
system (
+
=
−
+
e
h
0). Based on this concept, an anode can be redefined as an electrode with positive 
polarity that accommodates holes on its surface. By transferring holes to a species located at the 
electrode/solution interface, oxidation takes place. Briefly, we can say by applying a potential gradi­
ent, a charge separation occurs between the electrodes. Electrons are accommodated on the cathode 
and holes on the anode, leading to reduction and oxidation reactions on the mentioned electrodes, 
respectively.
To make a charge separation and generate an e/h pair in an electrochemical system, instead 
of consuming electricity and applying a potential difference between the anode and cathode, the 
charge (e/h) separation/generation can be photonically attained by utilizing semiconductor materi­
als. In this environmentally friendly approach, photons provide the necessary energy for redox 
reactions, inducing an electronic excitation and generating holes in the ground and electrons in the 
excited level. As a result, redox processes occur on the semiconductor surface without the need 
for an external power source (dc rectifier). This green strategy, which relies on the use of semi­
conductor materials and sunlight, is extremely important from technological, environmental, and 
academic perspectives. The field that scientifically studies this approach is known as semiconductor 
photoelectrochemistry.
13.2  BAND STRUCTURE AND ENERGY DIAGRAM OF e/h 
(REDUCING/OXIDIZING AGENT) IN SEMICONDUCTING MATERIALS: 
A PHYSICOCHEMICAL PERSPECTIVE AND CONDUCTIVITY TYPE
Similar to molecules and atoms, whose electronic energy levels are quantized, a semiconducting 
material can be thought of as a hyper-molecule composed of a large number of atoms (on the order 
of Avogadro’s number). Its energy levels are so closely spaced that we observe them in a continuous 
form, rather than as discrete levels. These continuous energy levels are referred to as bands, and 
the electronic structure of semiconductor materials is known as the band structure (Figure 13.1a). 
As we know from general chemistry and molecular orbital (MO) theory [3, 4], the highest elec­
tron-occupied MO energy level is called HOMO and the lowest unoccupied one is named LUMO. 
Regarding the energy levels of semiconducting materials, we should state that the band consisting 
of the HOMO and energy levels below it (naturally occupied by electrons) is referred to as a valence 
band (VB). The band consisting of the LUMO and higher energy levels (which are normally empty 
of electrons) is named a conduction band (CB). Therefore, the maximum of valence bands and 
minimum of conduction bands, denoted by VBM and CBM, correspond to the HOMO and LUMO 
energy levels, respectively. Due to the absence of a quantum state, the gap between the valence 
and conduction bands is called a forbidden region, implying that electrons cannot exist within this 
energy range. The presence of this gap (distance between VBM and CBM) is of great significance 
in the realm of semiconductors and their applications in science and technology. This energy gap 
(
=
−
E
E
E
g
CBM
VBM) serves as the origin of electric potential difference, being created under stimu­
lated conditions within semiconducting materials. When photons with appropriate energy ν ≥
h
Eg
(
) 

167
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
strike a semiconductor surface, they excite electrons, creating holes (oxidizing agent) in VB and 
electrons (reducing agent) in the CB of the material. Under an external electric field, the organized 
motion of electrons in the CB and holes in the VB leads to the flow of electricity through the semi­
conductor (Figure 13.1b).
FIGURE 13.1  Semiconductors' energy quantization (a), conduction (b), energy diagram (c), and bandgap 
determination (d).
The irradiation of photons causes an increase in the number of electrons in the CB and holes in 
the VB, thereby enhancing the conductivity of the semiconducting material.  This property can be 
used as a simple method to determine whether a material is a semiconductor. Regarding the band 
structure of materials, which is schematically drawn and routinely utilized in the context of semi-
conductor photoelectrochemistry, the vertical axis represents energy (in eV), while the horizontal 
axis (often not depicted) is wave vector/momentum (
ℏ

=
p
k ). Assuming that the behavior of an 
electron in a semiconductor can be described using a simple model of a free particle (no interac-
tion with the surrounding environment), its energy will be different depending on what momentum 
(wave vector) it has (Equation 13.5).
 

=
=
E
p
m
m k
2
2
2
2
2 
(13.5)

168
Handbook of Semiconductors
Due to the interaction of the particles (e/h) with the surrounding environment, the band structure 
diagram in reality is more complicated than what is obtained from the simple free particle model 
[5, 6]. This complexity of the band structure is schematically drawn in Figure 13.1d. This figure 
clearly demonstrates that in real systems, the position (momentum) of the CB curve minimum can 
differ from that of the VB curve maximum. In such cases, the electronic excitation is accompanied 
by a change in the wave momentum. This phenomenon is referred to as an indirect transition. In 
the case of semiconductors with a direct band gap, however, the electronic transition is not accom­
panied by a change in the momentum of the wave vector. Figure 13.1d also shows that to find the 
energy gap of a semiconductor with a complex band structure, two parallel lines are normally drawn 
from the maximum point of the VB and the minimum point of the CB. The distance between these 
lines represents the band gap.
Regarding the types of conductivity in semiconducting materials, it is worth mentioning that 
materials whose conductivity is mainly based on holes (positive charges) are called p-type semi­
conductors. Examples from this category of materials include CuO, a narrow band gap (
~ 1.7eV
Eg
) 
semiconductor, and NiO, a wide band gap (
~ 3.1eV
Eg
) semiconductor. On the other hand, semi­
conductors in which their conduction is mainly based on electrons (negative charge) are referred to 
as n-type semiconductors. Examples of n-type semiconductors include hematite (α-Fe2O3, a narrow 
band gap semiconductor with 
~1.7eV
Eg
), TiO2, and ZnO (a wide band gap semiconductor with 
~ 3.2eV
Eg
) [7, 8].
The reason why the compounds like TiO2 are often n-type semiconductors and why compounds 
like CuO are often p-type semiconductors can be explained in terms of lattice defects and the type 
of vacancies present in these materials [9, 10]. The vacancy in TiO2 is typically of the oxygen type 
(VO), while in CuO, it is of the metal type (VM). ​Since there is naturally a negative charge (
−
O2 ) at 
the location of oxygen atoms in the semiconductor lattice, the creation of an oxygen vacancy in TiO2 
causes the electrons of the oxide anion to be localized in the vacancy. This phenomenon results in 
the formation of new quantum states (energy levels) in the forbidden region, near the conduction 
band minimum (CBM). These vacancy-related quantum states, which are occupied by the excess 
electrons of the oxide anions that leave the lattice as oxygen molecules, serve as electron-donat­
ing centers that can easily transfer their electrons to the semiconductor’s CB [2]. These vacancy-
induced electrons are mobile in the CB and are responsible for the n-type conductivity of TiO2. In 
the case of CuO, unlike TiO2, the vacancy is of a metal type. Furthermore, since there is naturally a 
positive charge in the place of the metal cation, when the metal atom leaves the lattice, the positive 
charge (hole) is left in the vacancy of this metal deficient semiconductor. This results in the creation 
of new quantum states (energy levels) in the gap region, near the valence band maximum (VBM). 
These energy levels (related to metal vacancies) act as electron acceptors and, by gaining electrons 
from the VB, holes appear in the semiconductor’s VB [2]. This causes the semiconductor to exhibit 
a p-type nature.
where m is the mass of electron and  is reduced Planck’s constant (
)
π
h
2
. In this model, an upward 
parabolic trend with a minimum is obtained between the energy of the electron and the magnitude 
of the wave vector/momentum (Figure 13.1c). In the case of a hole, however, since it is an imaginary 
particle, its mass is considered apparently to be negative. Therefore, the coefficient of k2 in Equation 
13.5 gets negative, causing its corresponding parabola to point downward and exhibit a maximum. 
Furthermore, once the band structure of a semiconducting material becomes known, the effective 
mass (m*) of its particles (electron/hole) can be defined and calculated using this formula:
 


∂
∂
=
→
= ∂
∂
 
: 
2
2
2
*
2
2
2
E
k
m
m
E
k
 
(13.6)

169
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
Based on the explanations provided above, we can conclude that the synthesis method of a mate­
rial determines its semiconducting property. When the synthesis route results in a metal vacancy 
(deficiency), the semiconductor will be of the p-type, whereas if it creates an anion vacancy, the 
resulting semiconductor will be of the n-type. For instance, consider pyrite (FeS2): It exhibits n-type 
behavior when synthesized in bulk form but switches to p-type when electrosynthesized as a film 
[11, 12].
13.3  SEMICONDUCTORS IN ELECTROCHEMICAL 
AND PHOTOREDOX SYSTEMS
In electrochemical setups, the difference between a conductor and a semiconductor is that, depend­
ing on the polarity of applied potential, the conductive (metal) electrode can act as either a cathode 
(negative polarity) or an as anode (positive polarity). In contrast, semiconductor electrodes behave 
differently. In n-type semiconductors under dark conditions, because the majority charge is elec­
tron, these electrodes can act as a cathode when connected to the negative pole of a power supply. 
Conversely, in p-type semiconductors, since the majority charge is a hole, these electrodes can serve 
as an anode in the absence of light by connecting them to the positive pole of the power supply. 
Regardless of the type of semiconductor, in the application of semiconducting materials in photo­
electrochemical (PEC) systems, as mentioned earlier, electronic excitation occurs under illuminated 
conditions. This generates holes (oxidizing agent) in the valence band (VB) and electrons (reducing 
agent) in the conduction band (CB) of the semiconducting material. Therefore, like a traditional 
electrolyzer, redox reactions take place in a PEC reactor, composed of semiconducting particles and 
photons as energy source; see Figures 13.2a and 13.2b.
In another common application of semiconductors in PEC systems, instead of using dispersed 
semiconductor particles in the electrolyte solution, thin-film semiconductors are fabricated and used 
FIGURE 13.2  Electrolysis through traditional (a) and modern semiconductor-based light-induced (b) 
approaches. (c) Photoanode and (d) photocathode.

170
Handbook of Semiconductors
as photoelectrodes. Although in classical applications of electrochemistry, p-type semiconductor 
electrodes act as anodes and n-type as cathodes, the behavior of these electrodes changes under illu­
minated conditions. A p-type electrode serves as a photocathode and conducts a reduction process, 
whereas an n-type electrode acts as a photoanode and carries out an oxidation reaction. This differ­
ent behavior of a semiconductor electrode under dark and light conditions can be explained in terms 
of band bending [13]. As shown in Figure 13.2c, for the n-type semiconductor electrode, the band 
bending is upward at the semiconductor/solution interface. When photons strike and generate e/h in 
the CB and VB, the electrons are pushed toward the conductor support (electrode terminal), while 
the holes are consumed in an oxidation process on the electrode surface. In the case of the p-type 
electrode (Figure 13.2d), however, the band bending and hence the redox process are reversed. 
Reduction reaction (electron consumption) occurs on the electrode surface, and the photogenerated 
holes accumulate in the photoelectrode, making its polarity positive.
In the absence of light, when a negative polarity is applied to an n-type electrode, electrons (the 
majority charge) gain the necessary energy to overcome the energy barrier of the interface region. 
This causes electrons to be transported from the electrode and consumed in a reduction (cathodic) 
process on the electrode surface. On the other hand, when a positive polarity is applied to a p-type 
electrode, species at the interface region are oxidized and the resulting electrons are neutralized by 
holes (the majority charge carriers) that reach the surface of the electrode.
13.4  PN JUNCTION AND ITS IMPORTANCE IN PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL 
PHENOMENA AND CHARGE SEPARATION
Compared to powdery systems (so-called photocatalytics; Figure 13.2b), photoelectrodics (Figures 
13.2c, 13.2d; routinely referred to as PEC or SPEC) exhibit superior charge separation due to band 
bending at the electrode/solution interface. As a result, in the latter system, the photogenerated 
charges (e/h) can be more effectively utilized in redox processes. In relation to photocatalytic (pow­
dery) systems, it is worth mentioning that their performance can be enhanced by applying the same 
concept of band bending and charge separation improvement through the synthesis of p-n junction 
composites [7, 14]. A pn junction photocatalyst is a composite of p-type and n-type semiconduc­
tors, joined together at atomistic scale. Under this condition, there is an exchange of electrons (and 
holes) between two semiconducting components. Because of higher electronic chemical potential 
(µ
µ
>
e
n
e
p) [15, 16], electrons migrate from n to p, in the direction of decreasing electronic pressure 
(concentration) in the n component, where the majority charges are electrons. Due to the migration/
transport of electrons (and holes), the junction of pn semiconductors becomes polarized, and an 
electric field forms at the interface region (see Figure 13.3). The transfer of e/h continues until the 
forces of chemical potential ( µ
∇
e; also known as thermodynamic force [17]) and electric field (eE) 
are balanced. Upon this circumstance, the Fermi levels of the p and n semiconductors equalize, and 
band alignment occurs. Under illuminated conditions, the electric field of the pn interface exerts 
FIGURE 13.3  Electron/hole separation and photoredox phenomena in a pn-junction system.

171
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
an electrostatic force on the photogenerated electrons and holes, pushing them in opposite direc­
tions. By improving their separation, the photogenerated charges can be more effectively utilized as 
reducing/oxidizing agents in redox processes.
13.5  PHOTOVOLTAGE AND PHOTOCURRENT RESPONSE, 
AND SEMICONDUCTOR TYPE RECOGNITION
When a semiconductor electrode in an electrochemical cell is exposed to light, a potential differ­
ence called photovoltage is created. This light-induced voltage is attributed to the existence of a 
band gap and the generation of electron-hole pairs in the CB and VB of the semiconducting mate­
rial. In a PEC system, the reducing and oxidizing potency of the photogenerated electrons and holes 
depends on the semiconductor’s CBM and VBM energy levels, respectively. So, the photogenerated 
electrons with higher CBM (more negative potential value) would have more energy and thus exhibit 
a greater reducing ability. On the other hand, a lower VBM (more positive potential value) would 
result in a higher oxidizing power for its photogenerated holes. Therefore, from an energy perspec­
tive, to determine whether a semiconductor is suitable for a specific redox process, it is important to 
consider not just the band gap, but also its CBM and VBM. For example, for a semiconductor with 
the ability of water splitting, its band gap should be greater than 1.23 eV 
≤∆
−
°
E
( (in volt)
)
G
nF :
	
+
+
→
=
=
→
+
+
=
=
↔
+







−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−
→
+
∆
= +
=
−
= −
+
−
°
−
−
°
+
−
°
°
°
°
E
at p
E
at p
E
E
E
c
a
cell
c
a
2H
2e
H ; 
0 V (
  H
0)
2OH
H O
2e
1
2 O ; 
1.23 V (
  H
0)
2[H O
H
OH ] 
H O
H
1
2 O ;  G
237 kJ
mol ; 
1.23 V
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
	
(13.7)
Furthermore, the semiconductor will be able to reduce protons and evolve hydrogen gas if its 
CBM potential becomes negative (less than zero, the redox potential of hydrogen under standard 
condition). This semiconductor can also perform the oxidation of hydroxide anions and produce 
oxygen if the potential corresponding to the semiconductor’s VBM becomes greater than +1.23 V 
(see Equation 13.7). Besides photovoltage, which is a thermodynamic quantity and influenced by the 
semiconductor band gap, the kinetics of a photo-redox process can be determined by measuring pho­
tocurrent [8]. A larger photocurrent indicates a faster light-induced redox process in a PEC reactor.
A straightforward method to identify the type of a semiconductor electrode is to measure its 
open circuit potential (OCP) in the absence and presence of light. For p-type electrodes, since the 
band bending is downward, upon light irradiation, the photogenerated electrons are consumed in 
a reduction process and holes are transferred to the electrode terminal, resulting in the OCP shift 
toward positive values. For n-type electrodes, however, OCP changes toward negative values. This 
is because for n-type electrodes, the band bending is upward, holes are consumed in an oxidation 
(anodic) process but electrons are accumulated at the electrode terminal (see Figure 13.4).
Besides photovoltage (Figures 13.4a and 13.4b), photocurrent (Figures 13.4c and 13.4d) can also 
be used to determine the type of semiconductor electrode. In the case of n-type electrodes (h+ is the 
minority charge), the anodic current is low in the absence of light. However, the current increases 
significantly upon exposure to photons by generating additional holes (oxidizing agents) on the elec­
trode surface. Similarly, in the case of p-type electrodes ( −
e  is the minority charge), the irradiation 
of light generates extra electrons. These electrons act as a reducing agent and consequently boost the 
cathodic current. Therefore, by shining light on the surface of the semiconductor electrode, if the 

172
Handbook of Semiconductors
anodic current is strengthened, the semiconductor is n-type, and if the cathodic current is increased, 
the semiconductor is p-type.
13.6  IDENTIFYING THE TYPE OF SEMICONDUCTOR 
BY THE MOTT-SCHOTTKY METHOD
Before explaining the Mott-Schottky (MS) method, it is necessary to note that due to the differ­
ent electronic chemical potential across the semiconductor/solution interface (µ
µ
≠
e
SC
e
Sol), electron 
migration occurs in the interface region. This causes the energy of electrons on the semiconductor 
surface to become different from its value in the semiconductor bulk. The result of this electron 
migration process is band bending and a difference in the electric potential between the surface 
of the semiconductor and its bulk ( φ
∆
≠0
sc
). Furthermore, it is worth mentioning that by applying 
negative and positive potentials to the semiconductor electrode, the energy of electrons within the 
semiconductor can either increase or decrease. This, in turn, can intensify, weaken, or even make 
the band bending disappear. A potential where the energy of electron on the surface of the semicon­
ductor becomes equal to its energy in the bulk ( φ
∆
= 0
sc
), is called flat band potential (Efb).
In the previous section, we used photovoltage and photocurrent to determine the semiconductor 
type. Now, we are going to introduce the MS approach, which does not require light. This method 
is based on measuring the system capacitance (Cobs) at different potential biases. Before delving 
into the details, it is necessary to note that one of the major differences between semiconductor 
FIGURE 13.4  Light-induced potential and current for p-type (a, c) and n-type (b, d) semiconductors.

173
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
and metal electrodes is that in the case of metals, the movement of electric charge is confined to 
the metal surface. By conducting a faradaic process (redox reaction) and consuming charge on the 
metal surface, electrons (or holes) are immediately replenished. As a result, no polarization (charge 
separation) occurs within the metal electrode. In the case of semiconductor electrodes, however, 
due to their low electrical conductivity, the consumed charges (e/h) are not immediately restored. 
This leads to charge diffusion and polarization issues within the semiconductor material near the 
electrode/electrolyte interface. In other words, in electrochemical systems based on semiconductor 
electrodes, the charge (e/h) density on the semiconductor surface differs from its value in the semi-
conductor bulk. This difference leads to the formation of a region called space charge (SC), near 
the surface of the electrode. In the SC region, unlike the semiconductor bulk, the net charge density 
(ρ) and hence the electric potential (ψ ; 

ρ
κε
ψ
= −
∇
 
2
) is not zero, but it changes exponentially with 
distance [1]:
 



ψ
ψ
κε
( ) =
= 



−
x
e
L
k T
n e
s
x
L
D
B
D
.
; 
2
2
0.5
 
(13.8)
where ψ s is the electric potential at the semiconductor surface, LD Debye length, 
n  charge concen-
tration (number per unit volume), κ  dielectric constant of the semiconductor, e  electron charge, ε  
vacuum permittivity, kB Boltzmann’s constant, and T temperature in Kelvin. It should also be noted 
that by having LD, the thickness of the space charge (dSC) can be calculated under different poten-
tials (being applied to the semiconductor electrode) using this formula [18]:
 
φ
φ
=
∆
−




∆
=
−
d
L
e
k T
E
E
sc
D
sc
B
sc
fb
2
1
; 
0.5
 
(13.9)
Equations (13.8) and (13.9) indicate that in the case of metals, which can be considered as semi-
conductors with a high electron concentration (
n ), the thicknesses of LD and dsc are both small. 
Consequently, the space-charge region disappears and electrons accumulate on the metal surface. 
These equations also reveal that by applying different electrical potentials to a semiconductor elec-
trode, the values of dsc, ψ ( )
x , and hence the SC capacitance (Csc) are changed. Furthermore, it 
is crucial to note that the interface between a semiconductor electrode and an electrolyte com-
prises two capacitors in series: one for the space charge (Csc) and another for the Helmholtz layer 
(CH). Given that the thickness of the space-charge capacitor is significantly larger than that of the 
Helmholtz layer (approximately 100 times), the charge distribution in the space-charge capacitor 
spans a greater distance. As a result, Csc has a smaller value 

κε
(
)
=
↓
↑
C
A
d
 and can be overlooked 
in comparison to CH (

C
C
SC
H). However, when considering the inverse of the capacitance, the 
relationship is reversed (

−
−
1
1
C
C
H
sc ). Therefore, the observed equivalent capacitance (Cobs) equals 
the space-charge capacitance (Csc), which can be used in practical studies.
 

=
+

→

≈
−
−
−
−
−
C
C
C
C
C
obs
H
sc
C
C
obs
sc
H
sc
 
 
1
1
1
1
1
 
(13.10)
For a semiconductor electrode, by measuring the system capacitance (per unit area of the elec-
trode surface) at different applied potentials and plotting the data as the inverse square of Csc versus 
potential, a linear dependency is expected according to the MS formula (Equation 13.11) [18, 19]:
 



κε
=
⋅
−
−




−
C
k T
n
e
E
E
k T
e
sc
B
fb
B
2
 
2
 
(13.11)

174
Handbook of Semiconductors
FIGURE 13.5  Mott-Schottky and semiconductor electrodes.
In the MS analysis, the observation of lines with positive and negative slopes (see Figure 13.5) 
indicates that the semiconductor is of n and p type, respectively [2]. The concentration of electron 
donor (Nd) and acceptor (Na) can also be determined for the mentioned semiconductors from the 
slope of MS lines and dielectric constant data of the semiconducting material (see Equation 13.12).
 


κε
=
×
=
−



1
2
N , for   
N , for   
d
a
n
Slope
k T
e
n type
p type
B
 
(13.12)
Furthermore, from the intersection of the MS line with the potential axis, E fb (the flat band 
potential) is determined:
 

=
−
.
E
E
k T
e
fb
int
B
 
(13.13)
where, Eint. corresponds to the potential at which the MS line intersects the x-axis (see Figure 13.5) 
and, 

k T
e
B  equals 25.7 mV at 298 K.
13.7  APPLYING FARADAIC AND ELECTROSTATIC BIASES 
TO A SEMICONDUCTOR PHOTOELECTRODE: 
IMPACTS AND ELECTRICITY CONSUMPTION
As mentioned earlier, by applying an electric potential to a semiconductor electrode, the energy of 
electrons can be altered and by displacing the semiconductor’s band structure, the band bending is 
changed. For example, when the negative pole of a power supply is connected to a semiconductor 
electrode and electrons are transferred to the semiconductor, its Fermi level increases. This shifts 
the band structure toward higher energy values, which increases the reducing ability of photopro-
duced electrons and decreases the oxidizing ability of holes. Electron injection into the semiconduc-
tor or electron removal from the semiconductor can be done in two ways: electrostatic and faradaic 
[20]. In the first method (electrostatic bias), the system behaves like a capacitor. Depending on the 
type of induced charges, whether they are electrons or holes, the semiconductor electrode will 
acquire either negative or positive charges. To achieve the desired charge, the appropriate pole of 
a power supply is connected to the semiconductor electrode, while the other pole is connected to 
earth (ground). In the second method (faradaic bias), in addition to the presence of the semiconduc-
tor photoelectrode (SPE), it is necessary to have an auxiliary electrode in the cell (reactor). This 
electrode is electrically connected to the SPE, thereby completing the system’s electrical circuit. 
Moreover, in the latter method, the potential bias is applied to the photoelectrode with respect to a 

175
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
reference or auxiliary (counter) electrode. By passing current through the PEC reactor, electricity is 
consumed and the electrical work/energy is calculated using this formula:
	
∫
(
)
=
∆
τ
0
W
I V dt 	
(13.14)
where ∆V is a potential difference between working (photoelectrode) and counter electrodes, I is the 
electrical current passing through the PEC reactor, and τ is the reactor operation period.
In the electrostatic bias method, unlike the faradaic, the system is single-electrode in nature and 
the electrical circuit is incomplete. As a result, the current passing through the system and hence the 
electricity consumption becomes almost zero (Figure 13.6). By contrast, in the case of faradaic bias, 
the completeness of the circuit allows for the passage of electricity. This leads to the consumption of 
electrical energy as an additional, non-photonic source for the generation of e/h pairs, i.e., reducing/
oxidizing agents on the electrodes’ surface (cf. Figure 13.2a and 13.2b).
13.8  TYPES OF SEMICONDUCTOR PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL 
SYSTEMS AND THEIR APPLICATIONS
As deduced from Section 13.3 (Figure 13.2), semiconductor photoelectrochemical systems (SPECs) 
can be classified into two main categories. The first category, popularly referred to as photocatalyst 
or photocatalysis, consists of powdery semiconducting particles that are dispersed/suspended in an 
electrolyte medium. The second category, called a single-electrode photoreactor, is made up of a 
semiconductor thin film that is supported on a conductive substrate and immersed in the electrolyte 
medium. In both systems, due to direct contact of the anodic and cathodic zones of the semiconduc­
tor (either as separated particles or as a unified thin film), the light-induced charges (electricity), 
being transferred across the zones, cannot be externally utilized. In the case of a thin-film semicon­
ductor, however, if the conductive support (CS) is not in direct contact with the electrolyte solution 
and its connection is done through an external circuit via an auxiliary electrode, then the anodic 
and cathodic processes occur upon two separate electrodes. Hence, the flow of electricity between 
them can also be exploited. The latter system, which is usually made of two or three electrodes (the 
third is a reference electrode), is routinely referred to as a PEC reactor. If the semiconductor elec­
trode is of the p-type, as mentioned earlier, it is termed a photocathode and a reductive reaction is 
performed on its surface. Conversely, an n-type electrode is called a photoanode, and an oxidative 
reaction occurs upon it. Furthermore, for each of these electrodes, their complementary reactions 
are simultaneously carried out on the system’s counter electrode. In a PEC reactor, the semiconduc­
tor and counter electrodes may be connected directly by a wire (short circuit), or they may be con­
nected indirectly by inserting a power supply and applying a potential bias between the electrodes 
(Figure 13.6b). If no bias is needed to carry out a desired redox process and the reactor can operate 
FIGURE 13.6  Applying electrostatic (a) and faradaic (b) biases to a semiconductor photoelectrode (SPE).

176
Handbook of Semiconductors
independently under a wired (short circuit) condition, it is referred to as a standalone PEC. Notably, 
photocatalyst systems (powdery semiconductors) are also considered standalone, as no external 
electrical biases are applied to the system. Furthermore, in the case of a single-electrode PEC, even 
though an electrostatic bias is applied to the photoelectrode (Figure 13.6a), it can still be considered 
standalone because its circuit is incomplete and no significant electricity (non-photonic energy) is 
consumed during the redox process.
SPECs are widely used in various fields of energy and fuel production, as well as in pollutant 
removal and its conversion to value-added materials [8, 12, 21, 22]. In all these applications, as men­
tioned before, the basic and important point is that when photons strike the semiconductor surface, 
reducing (electron) and oxidizing (hole) agents are created in the CB and VB of the semiconducting 
material, respectively; see Equation 13.15.
	
ν
[
]
[
]

→

+
−
+
h
e
reductant
h
oxidant
 SPEC 
CB
VB
	
(13.15)
These photogenerated charges (electrons and holes) may directly participate in a desired redox 
process or be transformed into H atoms and hydroxyl radicals in aqueous media (Equation 13.16), 
which can further serve as powerful reducing and oxidizing chemicals, respectively [23].
	
e
H
H  serving as a reducing agent
h
OH
OH  serving as an oxidizing  H abstracting  agent
CB
VB
(
)
(
)
[
]
+
→
+
→
−
+
+
−
	
(13.16)
The transiently generated H atoms are indeed reactive chemical reducers. They can be effec­
tively employed in the atomistic hydrogenation of environmentally important molecules such as 
CO2 and N2. This process allows for their conversion to value-added products such as methanol 
(CH3OH), C/H/O based chemicals/fuels, ammonia (NH3), and hydrazine (N2H4) [2, 23, 24]. These 
H atoms can also be used in the hydrodesulfurization of S-containing fuels [25, 26]. If no additional 
molecules (e.g., CO2, N2) are present in the reaction medium, the reactive H atoms recombine and 
evolve as H2 gas [27, 28]:
	
+
→
↑
H
H
H2
	
(13.17)
Regarding the transiently generated OH radicals, they are potent oxidants capable of H abstrac­
tion. These radicals can effectively destroy and mineralize water pollutants, including dye mol­
ecules, antibiotics, and bacteria [20, 29, 30]. This capability of OH radicals can also be utilized 
for the oxidative desulfurization of organosulfur compounds (e.g., dibenzothiophene) mixed with 
hydrocarbon fuel, converting them into polar sulfones. The oxidation products are subsequently 
separated from the reaction medium through a solvent extraction method [31]. In the absence of 
additional molecules in the reaction medium, hydroxyl radicals are recombined, and oxygen is 
evolved [11]:
	
+
→
+
↑
OH
OH
H O
0.5 O
2
2
	
(13.18)
SPEC systems can also be employed to resolve the H2S issue in sour oil/gas industries. They can 
convert this corrosive hazardous gas into hydrogen clean fuel and a value-added semiconductor or 
sulfur in an economic and safe manner [13, 32, 33]. In addition, these systems can be applied in the 
development of green technologies and conversion of atmospheric pollutants such as SOx to sulfuric 
acid inside a standalone PEC reactor [21].
At the end, it should be highlighted that besides photosynthesis and production of H-based solar 
fuels/chemicals, semiconductor photoelectrochemistry has also been employed in electricity gener­
ation and fabrication of PEC solar cells and photovoltaics. Depending on the type of semiconductor 

177
Semiconductor Photoelectrochemistry
and band structure engineering, it is possible to make efficient photocathodes/photoanodes and 
ultimately fabricate high-performance solar cells [34–37].
REFERENCES
	
1	 J. O’M. Bockris, A. K. N. Reddy, Modern Electrochemistry 2B: Electrodics in Chemistry, Engineering, 
Biology and Environmental Science. Kluwer Academic Publishers, New York, 2004 (Ch. 10).
	
2.	 M. Lashgari, “Fundamental aspects of CO2 transformation into C/H/O based fuels/chemicals” in 
Nanomaterials for CO2 Capture, Storage, Conversion and Utilization. (eds. P. N. Tri, H. Wu, T. A. 
Nguyen, S. Barnabé, P. Bénard). Elsevier, Amsterdam, 2021 (pp. 283–305)
	
3.	 M. S. Silberberg, Principles of General Chemistry. McGraw-Hill Higher Education, Boston, 2007 (Ch. 11).
	
4.	 I. N. Levine, Quantum Chemistry. Pearson, Boston, 2013 (Ch. 17).
	
5.	 R. Dovesi, B. Civalleri, C. Roetti, V. R. Saunders, R. Orlando, Ab initio quantum simulation in solid 
state chemistry, Rev. Comput. Chem. 21 (2005) 1–125.
	
6.	 P. Kratzer, J. Neugebauer, The basics of electronic structure theory for periodic systems, Front. Chem. 
7 (2019) 106.
	
7.	 M. Lashgari, P. Elyas-Haghighi, M. Takeguchi, A highly efficient pn junction nanocomposite solar-
energy-material [nano-photovoltaic] for direct conversion of water molecules to hydrogen solar fuel, Sol. 
Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 165 (2017) 9–16.
	
8.	 M. Lashgari, S. Soodi, CO2 conversion into methanol under ambient conditions using efficient nano­
composite photocatalyst/solar-energy materials in aqueous medium, RSC Adv. 10 (2020) 15072–15078.
	
9.	 V. C. Anitha, A. N. Banerjee, S. W. Joo, Recent developments in TiO2 as n- and p-type transparent 
semiconductors: Synthesis, modification, properties, and energy-related applications, J. Mater. Sci. 50 
(2015) 7495–7536.
	 10.	 A. Živković, N. H. de Leeuw, Exploring the formation of intrinsic p-type and n-type defects in CuO, 
Phys. Rev. Mater. 4 (2020) 074606.
	 11.	 M. Lashgari, P. Zeinalkhani, Ammonia photosynthesis under ambient conditions using an efficient 
nanostructured FeS2/CNT solar-energy-material with water feedstock and nitrogen gas, Nano Energy 
48 (2018) 361–368.
	 12.	 M. Lashgari, P. Zeinalkhani, Electrostatic promotion of the catalyst activity for ammonia photosynthe­
sis upon a robust affordable nanostructured uni-electrodic photodevice/reactor, Catal. Sci. Technol. 10 
(2020) 7998–8004.
	 13.	 Z. Zhang, J. T. Yates Jr, Band bending in semiconductors: Chemical and physical consequences at sur­
faces and interfaces, Chem. Rev. 112 (2012) 5520–5551.
	 14.	 M. Lashgari, M. Ghanimati, An excellent heterojunction nanocomposite solar-energy material for pho­
tocatalytic transformation of hydrogen sulfide pollutant to hydrogen fuel and elemental sulfur: A mech­
anistic insight, J. Colloid Interface Sci. 555 (2019) 187–194.
	 15.	 S. W. Boettcher, S. Z. Oener, M. C. Lonergan, Y. Surendranath, S. Ardo, C. Brozek, P. A. Kempler, 
Potentially confusing: Potentials in electrochemistry, ACS Energy Lett. 6 (2020) 261–266.
	 16.	 R. G. Pearson, The electronic chemical potential and chemical hardness, J. Mol. Struct. (THEOCHEM) 
255 (1992) 261–270.
	 17.	 P. W. Atkins, J. de Paula, Atkins’ Physical Chemistry. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006 (Ch. 21).
	 18.	 R. Memming, Semiconductor Electrochemistry. Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2015 (Ch. 5).
	 19.	 K. Gelderman, L. Lee, S. W. Donne, Flat-band potential of a semiconductor: Using the Mott–Schottky 
equation, J. Chem. Educ. 84 (2007) 685–688.
	 20.	 M. Lashgari, S. Naseri-Moghanlou, T. Khanahmadlou, R. Hempelmann, Electrostatic boosting of ionic 
dye pollutant removal from aquatic environment using a single electrode photoreactor, NPJ Clean Water 
6 (2023) 10.
	 21.	 M. Lashgari, S. Afshari, M. Ghanimati, J. Seo, SO2 pollutant conversion to sulfuric acid inside a stand-
alone photoelectrochemical reactor: A novel, green, and safe strategy for H2SO4 photosynthesis, J. Ind. 
Eng. Chem. 121 (2023) 529–535.
	 22.	 M. Lashgari, M. Ghanimati, Pollutant photo-conversion strategy to produce hydrogen green fuel and 
valuable sulfur element using H2S feed and nanostructured alloy photocatalysts: Ni-dopant effect, 
energy diagram and photo-electrochemical characterization, Chem. Eng. Res. Des. 162 (2020) 85–93.
	 23.	 M. Lashgari, P. Zeinalkhani, Photocatalytic N2 conversion to ammonia using efficient nanostructured 
solar-energy-materials in aqueous media: A novel hydrogenation strategy and basic understanding of 
the phenomenon, Appl. Catal. A Gen. 529 (2017) 91–97.

178
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 24.	 M. Lashgari, S. Soodi, P. Zeinalkhani, Photocatalytic back-conversion of CO2 into oxygenate fuels 
using an efficient ZnO/CuO/carbon nanotube solar-energy-material: Artificial photosynthesis, J. CO2 
Util. 18 (2017) 89–97.
	 25.	 H. Tominaga, M. Nagai, Mechanism of thiophene hydrodesulfurization on clean/sulfided β-Mo2C (001) 
based on density functional theory—cis- and trans-2-butene formation at the initial stage, Appl. Catal. 
A Gen. 343 (2008) 95–103.
	 26.	 P. Zheng, A. Duan, K. Chi, L. Zhao, C. Zhang, C. Xu, Z. Zhao, W. Song, X. Wang, J. Fan, Influence of 
sulfur vacancy on thiophene hydrodesulfurization mechanism at different MoS2 edges: A DFT study, 
Chem. Eng. Sci. 164 (2017) 292–306.
	 27.	 M. Lashgari, D. Matloubi, Atomistic understanding of hydrogen loading phenomenon into palla­
dium cathode: A simple nanocluster approach and electrochemical evidence, J. Chem. Sci. 127 (2015) 
575–581.
	 28.	 M. Lashgari, M. Ghanimati, Efficient mesoporous/nanostructured Ag-doped alloy semiconductor for 
solar hydrogen generation, J. Photonics Energy 4 (2014) 044099.
	 29.	 S. Gligorovski, R. Strekowski, S. Barbati, D. Vione, Environmental implications of hydroxyl radicals 
(•OH), Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 13051–13092.
	 30.	 C. P. Huang, C. Dong, Z. Tang, Advanced chemical oxidation: Its present role and potential future in 
hazardous waste treatment, Waste Manage 13 (1993) 361–377.
	 31.	 I. Shafiq, S. Shafique, P. Akhter, G. Abbas, A. Qurashi, M. Hussain, Efficient catalyst development for 
deep aerobic photocatalytic oxidative desulfurization: Recent advances, Confines, and outlooks, Catal. 
Rev. 64 (2022) 789–834.
	 32.	 M. Lashgari, M. Ghanimati, Photocatalytic degradation of H2S aqueous media using sulfide nanostruc­
tured solid-solution solar-energy-materials to produce hydrogen fuel, J. Hazard. Mater. 345 (2018) 
10–17.
	 33.	 M. Lashgari, M. Sabeti-Khabbazmoayed, M. Konsolakis, A cost-effective H2S pollutant electro-trans­
formation to hydrogen clean fuel and value-added semiconducting materials: A green alternative to 
Claus process, J. Ind. Eng. Chem. 122 (2023) 326–333.
	 34.	 R. N. Pandey, K. C. Babu, O. N. Srivastava, High conversion efficiency photoelectrochemical solar cells, 
Prog. Surf. Sci. 52 (1996) 125–192.
	 35.	 P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker, E. J. Radich, Beyond photovoltaics: Semiconductor nanoarchitec­
tures for liquid-junction solar cells, Chem. Rev. 110 (2010) 6664–6688.
	 36.	 M. Lashgari, N. Shafizadeh, P. Zeinalkhani, A nanocomposite p-type semiconductor film for possi­
ble application in solar cells: Photo-electrochemical studies, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells 137 (2015) 
274–279.
	 37.	 S. D. Tilley, Recent advances and emerging trends in photo-electrochemical solar energy conversion, 
Adv. Energy Mater. 9 (2019) 1802877.

179
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-14
Semiconductors for 
Transparent Conductors
Jnanraj Borah, Dipak Barman, 
and Bimal K. Sarma
14.1  INTRODUCTION
The inherently high electrical conductivity is generally exhibited by metals, which is credited to 
the presence of a sea of free electrons with optimum mobility. High carrier density in metals also 
enables high plasma frequency limiting the transparency to the visible light [1, 2]. Transparent 
conductors find widespread applications in a diverse array of optoelectronic devices. Transparent 
conductors are equally vital in display technologies, serving as transparent electrodes in organic 
light-emitting diode (OLED) displays, liquid crystal displays (LCDs), and electroluminescent dis­
plays, ensuring that these screens produce clear and vibrant images. Some of the important applica­
tions are presented in Figure 14.1a. These electrodes collect the electricity generated by the solar 
cells while permitting sunlight to transmit and reach the active layer for energy conversion, making 
solar energy capture efficient. Moreover, in the pursuit of energy-efficient buildings, transparent 
conductors are deployed in smart windows and electrochromic devices. These applications utilize 
the material’s ability to control light transmission and regulate indoor temperatures. All these appli­
cations require components possessing coexistence of high electrical conductivity and visible light 
transparency [3–5]. Conceptually, wide band gap semiconductors are transparent in the region of 
interest and hence projected as possible candidates provided their electrical conductivity can be 
enhanced, which otherwise falls below the metallic regime [6]. This type of conductor is realized 
by methods such as doping or incorporating some carrier injecting system like metal nanoparticles, 
thin metallic layer (~5–10 nm), mesh made of metallic nanowires, etc. in the semiconductors to sup­
ply extra free carriers. A typical transparent conductor possesses a resistivity of ~10−3 Ω·cm or lower 
and a transparency of 80% or higher in the visible region [7]. A transparent conductor allows light 
with frequencies higher than the plasma frequency to pass through, rendering them transparent at 
higher frequencies (Figure 14.1b) [8]. Figure 14.1c displays the spectral behavior of wide band gap 
degenerate semiconductors in the ultraviolet (UV), visible, and near infrared (NIR). It illustrates 
key characteristics of the material: fundamental absorption in the UV, high visible light transpar­
ency, and free carrier absorption in the NIR.
Recently, there was a surge in research and development related to transparent conductors, 
marked by a substantial increase in the research publications and patents and a broader range of 
materials and methodologies being explored. Metal oxide semiconductors are regarded as front 
runners in the race of components like TCO [9]. Currently, Sn-doped In2O3, commonly known as 
indium tin oxide (ITO), is commercially used, but it suffers from major drawbacks of scarcity, tox­
icity, brittleness, and inferior mechanical flexibility, and efforts are being made to find alternatives 
to ITO [10]. Graphene and Ag nanowires are promising transparent conductor candidates due to 
their favorable electrical conductivity, optical transparency, and flexibility. Ag nanowires, forming 
efficient networks, provide flexibility, making them suitable for emerging technologies like flex­
ible displays and solar panels [11, 12]. Conductive polymers like poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-
polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) deserve mention here, combining transparency and electrical 
conductivity for use in organic electronics [13].
14

180
Handbook of Semiconductors
The challenges like fragility, oxidation susceptibility, high sheet resistance, and complex syn­
thesis accompany these materials. Al-doped ZnO (AZO) stands out for its economic, eco-friendly, 
and electro-optical performances, making it an appealing alternative to ITO in transparent conduc­
tors. Various deposition techniques ensure precise deposition of transparent conductors on diverse 
surfaces [14]. This review delves into semiconductor characteristics tailored for transparent conduc­
tors, covering electronic structures, synthesis methods, microstructure, electro-optical behavior, 
aging stability, and mechanical flexibility of ITO and AZO. The chapter concludes with emerging 
applications of TCOs.
14.2  ELECTRONIC STRUCTURE OF A TCO
Here, In2O3 and ZnO are mainly considered, although there exists a multitude of TCO materials. 
In2O3 adopts the bixbyite structure, characterized by a close-packed arrangement of O and In atoms 
situated at both sixfold and fourfold interstitial positions. The overall symmetry of this structure is 
cubic, albeit with a notably large unit cell comprising 40 atoms [15]. The band structure for In2O3 
is shown in Figure 14.2a. The first accurate calculations for In2O3 were conducted by Shigesato 
et al. followed by subsequent work by Mi et al., and Mryasov and Freeman [16–18]. In2O3 possesses 
FIGURE 14.1  (a) Different applications of transparent conductors. Figure 14.1a adapted with permission 
from [5]. Copyright the Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [RSC publishing]. Distributed under 
a Creative Commons Attribution License 3.0 (CC BY). (b) Reflectivity as a function of frequency of electro­
magnetic waves. Figure 14.2b adapted with permission from [8]. Copyright the Authors, some rights reserved; 
exclusive licensee [Springer Nature]. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 (CC BY). 
(c) Spectral response of a wide band gap semiconductor-based TCO.

181
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
transparency to visible light but exhibits robust optical absorption in the ultraviolet region, charac­
terized as a direct and wide band gap of 3.7 eV. Interestingly, this specific value, although errone­
ously, has been extensively disseminated as the primary band gap of In2O3. Furthermore, there is 
a notably weaker absorption at lower energy levels, which effectively obstructs the blue portion 
of the visible light spectrum when dealing with thick films or bulk substrates. This lower energy 
absorption has historically been interpreted as an indirect band gap measuring 2.6 eV, with the 
valence band maximum (VBM) positioned away from the Γ-point. Recent experiments employing 
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) challenged the previously widely accepted band gap value 
(derived from optical absorption in thin films), revising it to a range of 2.7 to 2.9 eV [15]. Angle-
resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (ARPES) has ultimately substantiated a band gap of approxi­
mately 2.7 eV, precisely located at the Γ-point of the Brillouin zone. In line with this, recent ab initio 
calculations questioned the notion of a distinct indirect band gap. The observations indicate the 
potential existence of either a direct band gap or an indirect band gap, whereby the VBM is slightly 
raised by a mere 50 meV in comparison to its position at the Γ-point. The discord between optical 
FIGURE 14.2  Band structures of (a) In2O3, (b) Sn: In2O3. (Adapted with permission [15], Copyright [2009], 
American Physical Society.) (c) ZnO and (d) Al:ZnO (AZO). (Adapted with permission from [16]. Copyright 
the Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [Springer Nature]. Distributed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution License 4.0 [CC BY].) (e) Schematic representation of the increased optical band gap of AZO 
owing to the Burstein-Moss effect. (Adapted with permission [23], Copyright [2021], Elsevier.)

182
Handbook of Semiconductors
absorption data and band structure data has been resolved by identifying a minimal dipole matrix 
toward the parity-restricted direct optical transition between the conduction band minimum (CBM) 
and the VBM at the Γ-point. The first observable strong optical transition occurs between the CBM 
and valence bands, positioned approximately 0.8 eV below the VBM. Whether the faint absorption 
initiation at 2.6 eV arises from the parity-prohibited direct band gap or represents a slightly indirect 
band gap remains a subject of ongoing and contentious debate [17, 18].
ZnO, another significant TCO material, historically used in ancient China for brass production, 
exhibits three structures: rock salt, zinc blende, and hexagonal wurtzite.
The hexagonal wurtzite structure is more prevalent due to its stability at ambient conditions [19]. 
A polar hexagonal axis is designated as the c-axis, parallel to the [001] direction. The O atoms are 
situated inside a tetrahedral group of four Zn atoms, while the Zn atoms are packed in close proxim­
ity to one another in a nearly hexagonal pattern. ZnO structure with space group P63mc have several 
planes in which Zn2+ and O2– ions are tetrahedrally coordinated and alternately placed along the 
c-axis [19, 20]. ZnO has a direct band gap of 3.37eV, and its electronic structure is explored using 
the density functional theory (DFT) and DFT+U (Figure 14.2c). The band gap of ZnO exceeds 
3.0 eV, depending on the method used. Experimental results align with calculated band structures, 
confirming ZnO as a direct band gap semiconductor [21, 22].
Doping involves adding impurities to semiconductors to alter their physical and chemical attri­
butes. Sn doping in In2O3 increases free carrier density, boosting electrical characteristics, con­
ductivity, and introducing plasmonic behavior [15]. Figure 14.2b illustrates the band gap alteration 
compared to In2O3. Undoped ZnO is highly transparent but lacks sufficient conductivity for next-
gen electronics. The n-type doping with Group III elements increases the electron density while 
preserving visible light transparency. Ga or Al addition to ZnO significantly alters its electrical 
properties. The substitutional incorporation of Al in the ZnO lattice facilitates to tune the electro-
optical properties required for different applications. Due to the trivalent nature of Al, doping adds 
additional electrons, ultimately raising the free carrier density (Figure 14.2d). The level of Al dop­
ing is adjusted as per the requirement of the end application. The band structure is highly dependent 
on the Al concentration and synthesis methods. The Fermi level of intrinsic ZnO is positioned 
deep below the conduction band. However, due to the introduction of Al as a dopant, the Fermi 
level moves upward and rises above the CBM upon heavy doping, and AZO becomes a degener­
ate semiconductor behaving like metals [23]. The upward shift of the Fermi level is known as the 
Burstein-Moss shift (BMS), as shown in Figure 14.2e. The free carrier density in AZO can reach as 
high as 1020 cm−3 [24, 25].
14.3  PREPARATIONS OF TCO
The methods used to grow TCO have a significant influence on their electro-optical properties. 
When considering two TCOs with the same chemical composition, their electrical and optical prop­
erties can vary depending on the deposition techniques employed. Magnetron sputtering yields 
smoother, more uniform films compared to alternative methods. There exist several deposition 
methods for the development of transparent conductors, and a brief elucidation of a few of these 
techniques is presented below.
14.3.1  Spray Pyrolysis
The spray pyrolysis represents a commonly employed and cost-effective approach for creating thin 
films. TCO films are fabricated using the spray pyrolysis method. In this procedure, a thin film is 
crafted by spraying a solution onto a heated surface, where the elements within the solution undergo 
reactions to produce the desired thin solid film. This method proves highly efficient in the produc­
tion of transparent conducting films. For details, readers may check the excellent review articles, 
and one such review is included in ref. [26].

183
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
14.3.2  Chemical Vapor Deposition
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is another prevalent method for depositing solid thin films. High-
performance thin films in a vacuum environment can be prepared using CVD. Materials generated 
via the CVD method possess inherent high purity, as this method falls within the category of vapor 
transfer processes. Here, gaseous precursors decompose at the heated substrate, resulting in the 
deposition of the film. A detailed presentation of CVD in the context of TCO deposition is provided 
in ref. [27].
14.3.3  Pulsed Laser Deposition
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) stands out as an effective approach for depositing TCO thin film 
coatings. However, this technique is less widely used as a commercial technique due to limited uni­
formity. Here, photon energy in the form of a laser characterized by pulse duration and frequency is 
absorbed by the target material, which gets ablated and deposited on a substrate. Interested readers 
can see reference [28] for details.
14.3.4  Sputtering
Sputtering is a widely utilized method for the deposition of thin films onto substrates. This tech­
nique relies on ion bombardment of a source material known as the target. The impact of ion bom­
bardment leads to the liberation of target atoms and nucleation on a substrate. A practical method 
for growing thin films by sputtering involves the use of a magnetron source for confinement of 
plasma near the target. The bombarding ions can be energized by providing bias in various ways, 
spanning from direct current (DC) for conductive targets to pulsed DC and radio frequency (RF) 
for nonconductive targets. Sputtering offers advantages over methods like PLD and molecular beam 
epitaxy, especially in the manufacturing of large-area films for industrial applications. Synthesis 
pathways to high-quality transparent and conductive oxides through sputtering have been achieved, 
contributing to the scientific advancement as presented in refs. [10, 29, 30].
14.4  TCO AND MULTILAYER TRANSPARENT ELECTRODE
A variety of TCO materials are realized, with certain ones achieving widespread commercial suc­
cess, while others remain in the research phase. However, as of now, transparent conductors with 
p-type conductivity having practical applications are not realized. NiO and Cu2O are some very 
commonly speculated semiconductors expected to show p-type conductivity [31, 32]. The main 
challenge in achieving p-type conductivity is getting a favorable conduction path in the hole-
dominated TCOs, which are formed by filled valence bands. The presence of almost no overlapping 
oxygen ions in the valence bands of oxides, ascribed to the fact that most of the filled 2p orbitals 
contain nonbonding states, limits the formation of the conduction paths for the carriers in usual 
conditions [32]. Hence, till now, the focus has been on developing n-type transparent conductors. 
The current scenario of In-based and ZnO-based TCOs is presented in the following sub-sections 
including mechanically flexible multilayer transparent electrodes.
14.4.1  Indium-based TCOs
A crucial element in all flat-panel displays, ranging from basic liquid-crystal displays found in 
calculators to expensive liquid-crystal color screens, is the electrode responsible for governing the 
alignment of liquid-crystal molecules. These electrodes, in turn, determine whether light gets easy 
access or is blocked, essentially controlling the on-off state of the display. It is essential for at least 
one of these electrodes to be transparent. This transparency is imperative as either the surrounding 

184
Handbook of Semiconductors
ambient light or transmitted light, such as backlighting, needs to traverse the device and arrive at 
the viewer’s sight. The favored choice for this transparent conductor has been ITO. Nonetheless, 
alternative transparent conductors like SnO2 are also available. ITO is predominantly preferred 
within this category of materials because it boasts an achievable level of high transparency for vis­
ible light while simultaneously exhibiting low electrical resistivity. As a result, it finds applications 
not only in flat-panel displays but also in energy-efficient window coatings. Through appropriate 
processing methods, the free carrier density in ITO can be increased to approximately 1–2 × 1021 
cm−3 by heavily doping it with Sn at levels ranging from 5 to 10 at.%. These free carriers originate 
from two distinct sources within the material: substitutional Sn ions and oxygen vacancies. When it 
comes to producing top-quality thin films of ITO, the versatile methods are magnetron sputtering 
and activated electron beam (EB) evaporation. Films prepared by these techniques typically exhibit 
a resistivity in the range of 1.5–2.0 × 10−4 Ω·cm [33, 34].
The current change on the road to enhance the performance electrodes in flat-panel devices 
has given rise to novel display technologies characterized by significantly thinner electrodes. 
Consequently, there is an increased demand for further refinement in the properties of ITO and the 
conditions under which it is processed. These cutting-edge and sophisticated technologies necessi­
tate even lower film resistivities, aiming for levels as low as 1 × 10−4 Ω·cm. Achieving this requires 
the use of lower substrate temperatures during the deposition process. The need for reduced deposi­
tion temperatures is primarily driven by the emergence of newer device designs, such as flexible dis­
plays, which require the deposition of ITO films onto polymer substrates incapable of withstanding 
vacuum processing temperatures exceeding 100°C. Meeting this requirement calls for the develop­
ment of fresh approaches to enhance traditional deposition techniques. The DC magnetron sputter­
ing through amplifying the magnetic field intensity at the cathode or introducing the RF discharge 
can be vital in attaining deposition on polymeric substrates. The use of tungsten electron emitters or 
arc plasma generators may further enhance EB evaporation, leading to plasma-assisted EB evapora­
tion with a high density, resulting in high-density plasma-assisted EB evaporation [33]. Amorphous 
ITO films can only be reliably deposited at high total gas pressures, typically in the range of 3–5 Pa, 
while maintaining a substrate temperature around room temperature. Presently, amorphous indium 
zinc oxide (IZO) films with a fully amorphous structure can be produced through DC magnetron 
sputtering using an oxide target comprising 89.3% In2O3 and 10.7% ZnO by weight [18]. This pro­
cess offers high reproducibility across a wide range of deposition conditions, including total gas 
pressure and substrate temperatures of up to 300°C. As a result, IZO is emerging as a promising 
candidate for transparent electrodes, particularly in applications such as thin-film transistor LCDs 
or OLEDs [33, 35].
14.4.2  ZnO-based TCOs
Although ITO has enjoyed immense success and widespread use as a TCO material thanks to its 
outstanding electro-optical characteristics, the escalating demand for ITO as a TCO thin film has 
driven up its price. Simultaneously, the availability of indium, a key component of ITO, is diminish­
ing. Additionally, concerns about the toxicity associated with indium pose significant challenges 
related to ITO, especially for large-scale uses. ZnO, characterized by its cost-effectiveness and eco-
friendliness as a wide band gap semiconductor (> 3.0 eV), emerges as a promising alternative to ITO. 
ZnO, in its pristine, stoichiometric state, boasts impressive transparency to visible light but grapples 
with electrical resistivity. An alternative strategy involves harnessing the intrinsic defects in ZnO, 
which induce n-type conductivity through oxygen vacancies. However, the conductivity stemming 
from these native vacancies falls short of the requisites for a TCO [29, 30]. ZnO is composed of ele­
ments that are abundantly available, with Zn and O making up 132 ppm and 49.4%, respectively, of 
the Earth’s crust. This abundance is crucial for large-scale applications of ZnO, such as its use as 
transparent electrodes in thin-film solar cells or flat-panel displays. It also presents an advantage over 
ITO as In has a much lower abundance in the Earth’s crust, at only 0.1 ppm [36]. Therefore, obtaining 

185
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
the required low resistivity, often referred to as degenerate doping, to make ZnO films suitable for use 
as transparent electrodes can be achieved through two separate approaches [37]:
i.	Generating intrinsic donors via lattice imperfections, such as oxygen vacancies or the pres­
ence of zinc atoms occupying interstitial lattice positions.
ii.	Introducing extrinsic dopants involves incorporating foreign elements, such as metals with 
an oxidation state of three substituting for metal lattice positions.
However, it is worth noting that films doped intrinsically are not well-suited for practical appli­
cations. Firstly, their resistivity typically falls within the range of 10−2 to 10−3 Ω·cm. Additionally, 
these films exhibit poor stability, especially at elevated temperatures. This instability is attributed to 
the reoxidation of the films, which are oxygen-deficient or enriched in zinc, leading to a significant 
increase in resistivity [38].
It is essential to heavily dope ZnO with Group III elements like Al and Ga, and studies indicate 
that AZO films offer economic and environmental viabilities, while achieving high conductivity 
through a significant increase in the concentration of free charge carriers. Interestingly, the visible 
light transmittance of AZO films remains nearly unchanged compared to pure ZnO films. Optimal 
doping concentration maintains transparency without introducing additional states that would 
absorb visible light in this degenerate semiconductor [23, 39]. A study, conducted by the authors 
revealed high-quality indium-free TCO films primarily composed of ZnO with Al as the sole dop­
ant [29]. AZO transparent conductors with appealing electro-optical properties were developed 
using AZO sputtering targets, incorporating dopant concentrations corresponding to 0.5–5.0 wt.% 
Al2O3, which involves subjecting the surface of the AZO target to high-energy Ar ions produced 
through a low-pressure gas discharge utilizing a magnetron cathode (Figure 14.3a). Microstructural 
and morphological properties unveil highly crystalline films with dense surfaces (Figures 14.3b and 
14.3c). Optimal electro-optical characteristics include a sheet resistance of 2.3 Ω/sq, visible light 
transmittance exceeding 90%, and a figure of merit of 75.9 mΩ−1 for AZO thin films. The resistiv­
ity of AZO films depends on dopant concentrations, with the lowest value measured at 1.66 × 10−4 
Ω·cm. Comparing the figure of merit of AZO films with that of ITO suggests potential applications 
for AZO as a TCO. The high transparency of AZO films in the near-UV spectral region is limited 
by strong fundamental absorption. In another study, AZO thin films were investigated as potential 
alternatives to ITO for transparent electrodes in optoelectronic devices [30]. The deposition of AZO 
thin films was carried out using pulsed DC magnetron sputtering, with variations in sputtering 
power and pulse frequencies. These AZO thin films exhibit exceptional transparency in the visible 
light range but limited transparency in the NIR region due to free carrier absorption (Figure 14.3g).
The sheet resistance falls within the range of 9–45 Ω/sq, which is acceptable for TCOs to qualify 
for their use in optoelectronics. The outstanding figure of merit and stability exhibited by AZO thin 
films make them well-suited for serving as transparent electrodes in photovoltaic applications. It 
was reported [31] that beyond 1.0 wt.% of Al2O3 as the dopant material, a notable shift of the onset 
of band-to-band absorption occurs, primarily due to the BMS effect (Figures 14.3h and 14.3i). Bulk 
plasmon frequencies fall in the NIR, affecting the transmittance of AZO films for light frequen­
cies below that of visible light. This significant free carrier absorption suggests the existence of a 
conduction electron gas upon doping, making AZO a promising material for infrared plasmonic 
applications. Flexible electronics require a transparent conductor, which should maintain suitable 
electro-optical properties while being flexible. Typically, dielectric/metal/dielectric multilayers 
display transparency, conductivity, and stability. Kim and co-workers have created a transparent 
conducting electrode using ZnO/Ag nanowire (NW)/ZnO multilayers with a sheet resistance of 
8.0 Ω/sq demonstrating exceptional thermal stability and flexibility (Figures 14.4a–14.4c) [39]. 
A highly flexible transparent electrode composed of AZO/Ag nanoparticles (NP)/AZO with very 
low resistivity (3.3 × 10−5 Ω·cm) was developed in one go for three-step deposition by magnetron 
sputtering without exposure to ambient oxidizing atmosphere [40]. These films exhibit excellent 

186
Handbook of Semiconductors
morphology and bending stability, with no visible microcracks even after few hundreds of bending 
cycles (Figures 14.4d–14.4m).
A significant concern with AZO is its limited electrical stability in an ambient oxidizing environ­
ment. During the deposition, unwanted defects and impurities may be introduced, potentially alter­
ing the electro-optical properties of AZO films. The density of defects and surface imperfections 
in AZO films are influenced by the growth methods and, more importantly, by the deposition and 
post-deposition conditions. The authors conducted an extensive study to create aging stable AZO 
transparent conductors by pulsed DC magnetron sputtering [23]. The achievement of a high figure 
FIGURE 14.3  (a) A schematic of the AZO target surface bombarded by high-energy Ar ions generated 
through low-pressure gas discharge utilizing a magnetron cathode. (b) XRD patterns of sputtered AZO thin 
films with varying dopant content. (c) Two-dimensional atomic force microscopy image of an AZO film. 
(d)–(e) Resistivity, sheet resistance, average transmittance, and figure of merit of AZO TCO films prepared 
under different conditions. (f) Digital photographs of the glass substrate (without AZO) and AZO coated glass. 
(g) UV-Vis-NIR transmission spectra of AZO deposited on quartz. (h) Dependence of optical band gaps of 
AZO on the dopant content. (i) Absorption coefficients of AZO films showing absorption in the UV and NIR. 
(Adapted with permission [29, 30], Copyright [2019, 2020], Elsevier.)

187
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
of merit, typically on the order of 10−2 Ω−1, which results from the favorable balance between low 
electrical resistivity and high optical transparency, is significantly influenced by both the sputtering 
process conditions and the levels of doping content.
The electrical stability of the TCO films is enhanced by their highly crystalline microstructure, 
characterized by a uniform morphology and highly regular columnar growth (Figures 14.5a, 14.4b). 
FIGURE 14.4  (a) Schematic of ZnO/AgNW/ZnO multilayer transparent conductor. (b) Digital photograph and 
(c) mechanical bending result of ZnO/AgNW/ZnO multilayer transparent conductor. (Adapted with permission
[39], Copyright [2013], American Chemical Society.) (d, e) Surface morphology and cross-sectional view of
AZO/AgNP/AZO multilayer composite structure. (f)-(i) mechanical bending test results and digital photographs
of AZO and AZO/AgNP/AZO multilayer film. Surface morphology of (j, k) single layer AZO, (l, m) AZO/AgNP/
AZO multilayer composite structure after bending. (Adapted with permission [40], Copyright [2020], Elsevier.)

188
Handbook of Semiconductors
FIGURE 14.5  (a)–(b) Morphology and cross-sectional view of AZO TCO films grown on glass. (c) Plot of 
plasma frequency against working pressure. (d) Variations of plasma frequency with the carrier concentration 
to the effective mass ratio in AZO films. (e, f) Results of an aging stability study of sheet resistance of AZO 
coated glass in an ambient oxidizing environment. (g, h) Schematic representation of adsorption centers and 
its linkage with aging stability of AZO. (Adapted with permission [23], Copyright [2021], Elsevier.)

189
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
An insight into the plasma frequency is presented in Figures 14.5c and 14.5d, which suggests free 
carrier absorption in the NIR, and it is tunable by controlling the effective carrier concentration by 
the deposition conditions, like sputtering pressure. The influence of interface chemistry on achiev­
ing aging stable AZO films is critically examined and supported by the adsorption kinetics of 
cationic and anionic dyes at the AZO surface. The results shed light on the intricate connection 
between the excellent stability of AZO films, the specific process conditions employed, and the 
dopant material content in the AZO sputtering targets. The findings affirm that the sheet resistances 
of particular AZO films remain unchanged, consistently measuring at 4.5 Ω/sq, even after an aging 
period extending over 180 days of aging (Figures 14.5e–14.5h). Surface roughness, defects, and 
impurities serve as potential adsorption sites for molecules like O2, CO2, and water vapor. This, in 
turn, leads to a gradual rise in the sheet resistance of AZO films over time.
14.5  APPLICATIONS OF TCOs
14.5.1  Transparent Heaters
TCOs can be used to convert electric energy to thermal energy where the temperature is controlled 
by the voltage applied to the material. These electrical heaters find applications in many important 
areas like temperature control in industrial processes, heating of microchannel chips, and defogging 
surfaces. TCO coatings need to have either very low resistance (~ 1.0 Ω/sq) or a very high voltage 
power source. TCO heaters are used as defrosters in aircraft windshields, as they are advantageous 
over traditional hot air blowers for faster defrosting and uniform heating over larger areas [41]. 
Figures 14.6a–14.6c nicely illustrate the use of ITO as a transparent heater.
14.5.2  Solar Cells
TCOs play a pivotal role in the domain of solar cell technology, exerting a profound impact on the 
efficiency and functionality of photovoltaic systems. In particular, ITO has emerged as a prominent 
choice for this function due to its exceptional transparent plus conductive properties. A represen­
tative use of transparent electrodes in solar cells is presented in Figures 14.6d–14.6h, and ZnO/
AgNW/ZnO emerges as a suitable front electrode in the tandem structure [39]. Moreover, TCOs 
can be intricately engineered with nanostructures or textured surfaces to optimize light entrapment 
within the solar cell. This technique is employed to enhance light collection ability of a solar cell, 
which improves the power conversion efficiency. TCOs are indispensable in the next generation 
flexible and thin-film solar cells, enabling the creation of lightweight and bendable solar panels 
that seamlessly integrate into curved and flexible substrates. Additionally, TCOs are progressively 
penetrating emerging solar cell technologies like perovskite solar cells and organic photovoltaics.
14.5.3  Photodetectors
Photodetectors, designed to convert incident light into electrical signals, benefit extensively from 
TCO integration. TCOs predominantly serve as transparent conductive electrodes in photodetec­
tors, functioning as essential front and back contacts that permit light penetration while efficiently 
collecting and transporting electrical charges generated during the photon absorption process. 
Materials like ITO and AZO are preferred due to their exceptional blend of electrical and optical 
attributes (Figures 14.6i–14.6k). Furthermore, engineered TCO surfaces with textures and nano­
structures enhance light absorption, mitigating reflection and scattering, thereby improving photo­
detector efficiency, particularly in low-light conditions. Flexible photodetectors benefit from TCOs, 
a boon for wearable technology and curved displays. A transparent electrode is a vital component 
that augments the performance, sensitivity, and adaptability of photodetectors across diverse appli­
cations [42].

190
Handbook of Semiconductors
FIGURE 14.6  An ITO-based transparent heater lying on a block of dry ice (a) before and (b) after apply­
ing voltage and (c) its thermal image after voltage applied. (Adapted with permission from [41], Copyright 
[2010], Elsevier.) (d)–(h) Schematic structures and current density vs. voltage characteristics of solar cells with 
transparent electrodes. (Adapted with permission from [39], Copyright [2013], American Chemical Society.) 
(i)–(k) J-V characteristics, current-time measurement, and responsivity of CuCrO2 photovoltaic and photocon­
ductive photodetectors using AZO electrodes. (Adapted with permission from [42]. Copyright the Authors, 
some rights reserved; exclusive licensee [Springer Nature]. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution 
License 4.0 [CC BY].) (l)–(n) Schematic of possible arrangement of AZO and Ag crystallites, reflectance 
spectra in NIR, and photocatalysis results of AZO and AZO-Ag@AZO nanocomposite-based broadband pho­
tocatalyst. (Adapted with permission [44], Copyright [2023], Elsevier.)

191
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
14.5.4  Semiconductor Plasmonics
Transparent conductors have fascinating applications in the field of semiconductor plasmonics. 
TCOs assume a vital role as integral components, facilitating the manipulation of surface plasmon 
polaritons (SPPs) and contributing significantly to the advancement of sophisticated optoelectronic 
devices.
TCO nanocrystals can be employed to engineer plasmonic nanostructure, which enables the 
localization of optical fields within subwavelength regions, thereby improving the efficiency of 
various processes such as light absorption, emission, and nonlinear optics. These advancements 
hold a great promise for the development of exceptionally efficient photodetectors, photocatalysts, 
and light-emitting devices [43]. For instance, AZO-Ag@AZO broadband photocatalysts are highly 
sensitive to NIR light as depicted in Figures 14.6l–14.6n. A series of photocatalysis experiments 
reveal the role of NIR photons exciting NIR plasmonics for the efficient degradation of rhodamine 
6G dye [44].
14.6  CONCLUSION
Semiconductors for transparent conductors represent a dynamic and evolving field with far-reaching 
implications for various technological applications. This chapter has explored the fundamental prin­
ciples, material properties, and fabrication techniques that underpin the development of TCOs and 
their integration into optoelectronic devices. The indispensable use of transparent conductors in 
solar cells to photodetectors, displays, and beyond have reshaped the landscape of  transparent elec­
tronics [45]. The pursuit of novel materials and innovative fabrication methods continues to drive 
progress in this field, promising even higher performance, lower costs, and sustainability. Future 
endeavors will undoubtedly focus on addressing the challenges of reducing material costs, enhanc­
ing electrical and optical performance, and broadening the range of applications especially in the 
field of miniaturized devices and sensors.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J. Gao, K. Kempa, M. Giersig, E.M. Akinoglu, B. Han, R. Li, Physics of transparent conductors. Adv. 
Phys. 65 (2016) 553–617.
	
2.	 R.A. Afre, N. Sharma, M. Sharon, M. Sharon, Transparent conducting oxide films for various applica­
tions: A review. Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci. 53 (2018) 79–89.
	
3.	 H. Liu, V. Avrutin, N. Izyumskaya, U. Özgür, H. Morkoç, Transparent conducting oxides for electrode 
applications in light emitting and absorbing devices. Superlattices Microstruct. 48 (2010) 458–484.
	
4.	 S.C. Dixon, D.O. Scanlon, C.J. Carmalt, I.P. Parkin, n-Type doped transparent conducting binary oxides: 
An overview. J. Mater. Chem. C 4 (2016) 6946–6961.
	
5.	 G.K. Dalapati, H. Sharma, A. Guchhait, N. Chakrabarty, P. Bamola, Q. Liu, M. Sharma, Tin oxide 
for optoelectronic, photovoltaic and energy storage devices: A review. J. Mater. Chem. A 9 (2021) 
16621–16684.
	
6.	 S. Lany, A. Zunger, Dopability, intrinsic conductivity, and nonstoichiometry of transparent conducting 
oxides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 98 (2007) 045501.
	
7.	 D.S. Ginley, C. Bright, Transparent conducting oxides. MRS Bulletin 25 (2000) 15–18.
	
8.	 T. Kim, G. Kim, H. Kim, H.J. Yoon, T. Kim, Y. Jun, W. Shim, Megahertz-wave-transmitting conducting 
polymer electrode for device-to-device integration. Nat. Commun. 10 (2019) 653.
	
9.	 H. Hosono, K. Ueda, Transparent Conductive Oxides (p. 1). Springer Handbook of Electronic and 
Photonic Materials (2017).
	 10.	 T. Minami, Present status of transparent conducting oxide thin-film development for indium-tin-oxide 
(ITO) substitutes. Thin Solid Films 516 (2008) 5822–5828.
	 11.	 N.N. Rosli, M.A. Ibrahim, N.A. Ludin, M.A.M. Teridi, K. Sopian, A review of graphene based trans­
parent conducting films for use in solar photovoltaic applications. Renew. Sust. Energ. Rev. 99 (2019) 
83–99.
	 12.	 Z. Chen, X. Su, H. Luo, A. Ade, H. Zhu, Y. Zhang, L. Yu, Transparent conductive film of silver nanow­
ires employed for SERS detection of mercury ions. Mater. Chem. Phys. 309 (2023) 128335.

192
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 13.	 M.B. Lee, C.T. Lee, W.W.F. Chong, S.M. Sanip, A quick and facile solution-processed method for 
PEDOT: PSS transparent conductive thin film. IIUM Eng. J. 24 (2023) 170–182.
	 14.	 K. McLellan, Y. Yoon, S.N. Leung, S.H. Ko, Recent progress in transparent conductors based on 
nanomaterials: Advancements and challenges. Adv. Mater. Technol. 5 (2020) 1900939.
	 15.	 J. Rosén, O. Warschkow, Electronic structure of amorphous indium oxide transparent conductors. 
Phys. Rev. B 80 (2009) 115215.
	 16.	 S.M. Sun, W.J. Liu, Y.F. Xiao, Y.W. Huan, H. Liu, S.J. Ding, D.W. Zhang, Investigation of energy band 
at atomic-layer-deposited ZnO/β-Ga2O3 (201) heterojunctions. Nanoscale Res. Lett. 13 (2018) 1–6.
	 17.	 H. Odaka, S. Iwata, N. Taga, S. Ohnishi, Y. Kaneta, Y. Shigesato, Study on electronic structure and 
optoelectronic properties of indium oxide by first-principles calculations. Japanese J. Appl. Phys. 36 
(1997) 5551.
	 18.	 J. Robertson, B. Falabretti, Electronic structure of transparent conducting oxides. In Handbook of 
Transparent Conductors (pp. 27–50). Boston, MA: Springer US (2010).
	 19.	 Ü. Özgür, Y.I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M.A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, A.H. Morkoç, A comprehensive 
review of ZnO materials and devices. J. Appl. Phys. 98 (2005) 041301 (1-103).
	 20.	 Ü. Özgür, D. Hofstetter, H. Morkoc, ZnO devices and applications: A review of current status and future 
prospects. Proc. IEEE 98 (2010) 1255–1268.
	 21.	 P. Sikam, P. Moontragoon, Z. Ikonic, T. Kaewmaraya, P. Thongbai, The study of structural, morphologi­
cal and optical properties of (Al, Ga)-doped ZnO: DFT and experimental approaches. Appl. Surf. Sci. 
480 (2019) 621–635.
	 22.	 K. Qi, X. Xing, A. Zada, M. Li, Q. Wang, S.Y. Liu, G. Wang, Transition metal doped ZnO nanoparticles 
with enhanced photocatalytic and antibacterial performances: Experimental and DFT studies. Ceram. 
Int. 46 (2020) 1494–1502.
	 23.	 J. Borah, B.K. Sarma, Design strategy and interface chemistry of ageing stable AZO films as high qual­
ity transparent conducting oxide. J. Colloid Interface Sci. 582 (2021) 1041–1057.
	 24.	 T. Jan, S. Azmat, A.U. Rahman, S.Z. Ilyas, A. Mehmood, Experimental and DFT study of Al doped 
ZnO nanoparticles with enhanced antibacterial activity. Ceram. Int. 48 (2022) 20838–20847.
	 25.	 L.C. Damonte, G.N. Darriba, M. Rentería, Structural and electronic properties of Al-doped ZnO semi­
conductor nanopowders: Interplay between XRD and PALS experiments and first-principles/DFT mod­
eling. J. Alloys Compd. 735 (2018) 2471–2478.
	 26.	 P.S. Patil, Versatility of chemical spray pyrolysis technique. Mater. Chem. Phys. 59 (1999) 185–198.
	 27.	 T. Shirahata, T. Kawaharamura, S. Fujita, H. Orita, Transparent conductive zinc-oxide-based films 
grown at low temperature by mist chemical vapor deposition. Thin Solid Films 597 (2015) 30–38.
	 28.	 K.B. Masood, P. Kumar, M.A. Malik, J. Singh, A comprehensive tutorial on the pulsed laser deposi­
tion technique and developments in the fabrication of low dimensional systems and nanostructures. 
Emergent Mater. 4 (2021) 737–754.
	 29.	 B.K. Sarma, P. Rajkumar, Al-doped ZnO transparent conducting oxide with appealing electro-optical 
properties–Realization of indium free transparent conductors from sputtering targets with varying dop­
ant concentrations. Mater. Today Commun. 23 (2020) 100870.
	 30.	 B. Sarma, D. Barman, B.K. Sarma, AZO (Al: ZnO) thin films with high figure of merit as stable indium 
free transparent conducting oxide. Appl. Surf. Sci. 479 (2019) 786–795.
	 31.	 K.H. Zhang, K. Xi, M.G. Blamire, R.G. Egdell, P-type transparent conducting oxides. J. Phys. Condens. 
Matter. 28 (2016) 383002.
	 32.	 M. Johnson-Groh, Comprehensive review of p-and n-type transparent conducting materials. Scilight 
2021 (2021) 341105.
	 33.	 Y. Shigesato, In based TCOs. In: Ginley, D. (ed) Handbook of Transparent Conductors. Boston, MA: 
Springer (2011).
	 34.	 I. Hamberg, C.G. Granqvist, Evaporated Sn-doped In2O3 films: Basic optical properties and applica­
tions to energy-efficient windows. J. Appl. Phys. 60 (1986) R123–R160.
	 35.	 T. Sasabayashi, N. Ito, E. Nishimura, M. Kon, P.K. Song, K. Utsumi, Y. Shigesato, Comparative study 
on structure and internal stress in tin-doped indium oxide and indium-zinc oxide films deposited by rf 
magnetron sputtering. Thin Solid Films 445 (2003) 219–223.
	 36.	 K. Ellmer, Transparent conductive zinc oxide and its derivatives. In: Handbook of Transparent 
Conductors (pp. 193–263) Springer US (2011).
	 37.	 K. Ellmer, A. Bikowski, Intrinsic and extrinsic doping of ZnO and ZnO alloys. J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 
49 (2016) 413002.
	 38.	 M.D. McCluskey, S.J. Jokela, Defects in ZnO J. Appl. Phys. 106 (2019) 071101 (1-13).

193
Semiconductors for Transparent Conductors
	 39.	 A. Kim, Y. Won, K. Woo, C.H. Kim, J. Moon, Highly transparent low resistance ZnO/Ag nanowire/ZnO 
composite electrode for thin film solar cells. ACS Nano. 7 (2013) 1081–1091.
	 40.	 D. Barman, B.K. Sarma, Thin and flexible transparent conductors with superior bendability having 
Al-doped ZnO layers with embedded Ag nanoparticles prepared by magnetron sputtering. Vacuum 177 
(2020) 109367.
	 41.	 K. Im, K. Cho, J. Kim, S. Kim, Transparent heaters based on solution-processed indium tin oxide 
nanoparticles. Thin Solid Films 518 (2010) 3960–3963.
	 42.	 M. Ahmadi, M. Abrari, M. Ghanaatshoar, An all-sputtered photovoltaic ultraviolet photodetector based 
on co-doped CuCrO2 and Al-doped ZnO heterojunction. Sci. Rep. 11 (2021) 18694.
	 43.	 A. Calzolari, A. Ruini, A. Catellani, Transparent conductive oxides as near-IR plasmonic materials: The 
case of Al-doped ZnO derivatives. ACS Photonics 1 (2014) 703–709.
	 44.	 J. Borah, B.K. Sarma, Realization of Al: ZnO (AZO)-Ag nanocomposite as a novel photocatalyst 
capable of broadband photon harnessing driven by near-infrared plasmonics. J. Alloys Compd. 956 
(2023) 170312.
	 45.	 X. Zhao, H. Shen, Y. Zhang, X. Li, X. Zhao, M. Tai, H. Lin, Aluminum-doped zinc oxide as highly sta­
ble electron collection layer for perovskite solar cells. ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 8 (2016) 7826–7833.

194
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-15
Semiconductor-based 
Photodiodes
Adem Kocyigit
15.1  INTRODUCTION TO PHOTODIODES
Light is an electromagnetic wave that propagates linearly in a medium and can give information 
about any condition or any object around. The detection and manipulation of light is important 
in optics and electronics. Harnessing the power of light is not only essential for human vision but 
also important for various applications [1]. Light sensors are employed to detect the light. One of 
the most fundamental elements to detect light is semiconductor photodiodes. A photodiode is a 
specialized diode designed to convert incoming photons of light into an electrical current. This 
unique ability has made photodiodes indispensable in a wide range of applications as eyes of elec­
tronic systems for capturing and processing optical information [2]. Photodiodes are important 
for scientists and engineers in the field of optics, photonics, electronics, and telecommunications. 
Photodiodes are crucial for various today’s applications such as high-speed data transmission sys­
tems, sensitive light sensors for scientific instruments, or digital cameras [3]. Although photodiodes 
were invented in the middle of the 20th century, studies on photodiodes have gained great interest 
due to advancements in semiconductors and nanotechnology [4, 5]. Nowadays, increasing their 
performance (responsivity, specific detectivity, quantum efficiency, and noise equivalent power) and 
enhancing their usability in smart technologies such as mobile phones, smart homes, and unmanned 
vehicles are very popular [6].
In this chapter, the principles, structures, and applications of photodiodes will be explained in 
detail. The chapter also explores the underlying physics behind photodetection, discusses materi­
als that are used in photodiodes, and explains their types, key characteristics and parameters, and 
emerging trends in photodiode technology.
15.2  PRINCIPLES OF PHOTODETECTION AND WORKING 
PRINCIPLES OF PHOTODIODES
A fundamental understanding of the photodetection principles for photodiode operation will be pro­
vided in this section. Thus, the working principle of the photodiode can be understood. Photodetection 
is the sensing of light by capturing photons with an active material and generating measurable electri­
cal signals. The transformation from photons to electrical signals is fundamental to various technolo­
gies and applications ranging from simple light sensors to advanced imaging systems [7].
The operation of photodiodes relies on the fundamental principles of semiconductor physics. 
It is important to know some of the terms, such as the physics of semiconductors, P-N junctions, 
biasing, and photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect is very important at the heart of photo­
detection. When photons with sufficient energies strike the surface of a semiconductor, it causes 
electron-hole pairs according to this effect. These pairs provide the flow of electrical current in 
photodiodes under biasing. Photodiodes are typically constructed on semiconductor materials like 
silicon or gallium arsenide and their electrical conductivity is increased by doping. They have a 
band gap energy level higher than metal and lower than insulators. Photons with greater energies 
than this band gap can release electrons to higher energy levels, allowing them to contribute to the 
electrical current.
15

195
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes
A P-N junction is fundamental to understanding the operation of photodiodes. P- and N-type 
are doped semiconductors with other atoms such as boron (B) for P-type conductivity or phospho­
rus (P) for N-type conductivity as an example of silicon. Thus, N- and P-regions have an excess 
of negatively charged electrons and positively charged holes, respectively. In the case of unbiased 
conditions, there is a depletion region in the interface of the junction. The depletion region does 
not have mobile charges except for ionized atoms, and an internal electric field from the N-region 
to the P-region is formed. When photons are absorbed in the depletion region of this junction, 
electron-hole pairs are created. An internal electric field causes these charge carriers to separate 
and generate a photocurrent [8]. Typically, a reverse external biasing is applied on the photodiode 
to widen the depletion region and increase the chances of photon absorption. This bias provides 
a low-dark-current mode to decrease noise or separate better photoinduced charges by illumina­
tion. Nowadays, there is a popularity of self-powered photodiodes without biasing due to easy 
operation in the literature [9]. Working principles of the P-N photodiodes have been represented 
in Figure 15.1a. Figure 15.1b shows the current-voltage characteristics (I-V) of a photodiode. In 
dark condition, the device works as a diode that conducts current at forward biases and blocks 
current at reverse biases. However, the current increases by the intensity of light power by illu­
mination at reverse biases. The working principle of photodiodes was explained by the example 
of P-N photodiodes here. Other photodiodes have almost the same working principle as P-N 
photodiodes.
In summary, the working of a photodiode starts with photon absorption, it forms electron-hole 
pairs, and photogenerated charges cause an electrical current. Understanding these fundamental 
principles is essential for utilizing and designing photodiodes effectively in a wide area of applica­
tions [10].
15.3  PHOTODIODE MATERIALS, STRUCTURES, FABRICATION, AND TESTING
15.3.1  Materials in Photodiodes
Photodiodes are used for converting light into electrical signals. To carry out this conversion effec­
tively, the choice of semiconductor is important for photodiode performance. Common semiconduc­
tors employed for the fabrication of photodiodes include silicon, germanium (Ge), gallium arsenide 
(GaAs), indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), etc. They can be separated from each other depending 
on some of the behaviors such as costs, abundance in the world, speeds, dark current, and spectral 
FIGURE 15.1  (a) Working principle of the P-N photodiode. (b) I-V characteristics of a photodiode for 
increasing light power intensity.

196
Handbook of Semiconductors
responses. The other active materials with semiconductors are 2D materials such as transition metal 
dichalcogenides (TMDs), graphene metal oxides, etc. [11]. Germanium photodiodes are sensitive to 
longer wavelengths, particularly in the infrared (IR) region. They have high absorption coefficients 
but often require cooling due to increasing dark current [12]. Silicon photodiodes are widely used 
for their excellent responsivity in the visible and near-IR spectrum, and they have low dark cur­
rent and good quantum efficiency [13]. InGaAs photodiodes are optimized for IR applications and 
exhibit excellent sensitivity in the 1.0 to 2.6 μm range. GaAs photodiodes are suitable for high-speed 
applications in the near IR. They offer fast response times but may have higher dark currents and 
high costs [14].
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have gained significant attention in photodiodes due to their 
unique optical, electrical, and mechanical properties. These materials, which consist of a single 
or few layers of atoms or molecules, have demonstrated promising characteristics for various pho­
todetection applications [15]. Some 2D materials used in photodiodes include graphene, TMDs, 
and black phosphorus (BP). A graphene is a single layer of carbon atoms arranged in a hexago­
nal lattice. Graphene-based photodiodes are highly sensitive to light due to the direct bandgap in 
graphene. Graphene photodiodes have fast response times and wide spectral response and can be 
used in high-speed optical communications [16]. TMDs, such as molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) and 
tungsten diselenide (WSe2), are layered materials with a direct band gap. TMD-based photodiodes 
can be designed to have high sensitivity in the visible and near-IR range. They offer good photo­
detection performance and are suitable for applications like image sensors and wearable devices 
[17]. BP is a 2D layered structure and has an adjustable band gap that can be tuned by changing the 
number of layers. BP-based photodiodes can cover a broad range of wavelengths from visible to IR. 
They exhibit high responsivity and tunable photoresponse, making them suitable for multispectral 
imaging and optoelectronic applications [18]. 2D materials can be integrated with conventional 
semiconductor materials to create hybrid photodiodes. Combining different 2D materials as hetero­
structures can lead to enhanced photodetector performance. For example, stacking graphene and 
TMDs can create a Schottky junction photodiode with improved responsivity and tunable spectral 
sensitivity [19]. Since 2D materials are thin and flexible, they are suitable for flexible and wearable 
photodetectors. These devices can be incorporated into clothing or wearable devices for various 
applications, including health monitoring and augmented reality [20].
15.3.2  Photodiode Structures
Photodiodes have various structures according to specific applications. Figures 15.2a–15.2e display 
photodiodes structures of PN, PIN, avalanche, Schottky photodiodes, and metal-semiconductor-
metal (MSM) Schottky configuration, respectively. PN photodiodes are the most common photodi­
ode structures, consisting of a P-N junction (Figure 15.2a). Their simplicity makes them suitable for 
a wide range of applications. PIN photodiodes have a P-N structure with an intrinsic region between 
the P- and N-type layers (Figure 15.2b). PIN photodiodes offer high-speed performance and reduced 
capacitance. Avalanche photodiodes (APDs) are specialized photodiodes that use avalanche mul­
tiplication to amplify the photocurrent (Figure 15.2c). They are ideal for low-light applications but 
require higher bias voltages. A Schottky photodiode uses a metal-semiconductor junction (Schottky 
barrier) instead of a P-N junction (Figure 15.2d). It is known for its fast response time and low 
capacitance, making it suitable for high-frequency applications. Schottky photodiodes are often 
used in photodetectors for radio frequency (RF) and microwave applications. The MSM configura­
tion of the Schottky photodiode contains two metal electrodes (usually made of materials like gold 
or aluminum) on top of a semiconductor (Figure 15.2e). The metal-semiconductor interface forms 
Schottky barriers, which are responsible for the photoresponse of the device. These are some of the 
common photodiode structures, and they have specific applications based on sensitivity, speed, and 
spectral range. The choice of photodiode structure depends on the requirements of the optical or 
optoelectronic system. Figure 15.2f exhibits an electrical circuit diagram of the photodiodes. When 

197
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes
the light strikes the photodiode, electrical current flows through it. This structural circuit diagram 
represents this condition [21].
15.3.3  Fabrication and Testing of Photodiodes
15.3.3.1  Fabrication of the Photodiodes
Photodiode fabrication requires precise semiconductor manufacturing techniques such as photo­
lithography, etching, and ion implementation. The semiconductor material is doped with specific 
impurities to create the P- and N- regions for altering its electrical properties by ion implementa­
tion, diffusion, and epitaxial methods. Metal contacts are deposited on the photodiodes to provide 
electrical connections. A protective layer such as SiO2 is applied to prevent surface contamination 
and enhance the reliability of the device [22].
Photodiode fabrication processes start with selecting a suitable semiconductor substrate such 
as silicon (Si), indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), gallium arsenide (GaAs), etc. depending on the 
performance requirements. The cleaning procedure is applied to the substrate to remove contamina­
tions. This procedure involves cleaning alcohol and deionized water by an ultrasonic cleaner and 
dumping diluted acidic solvents such as H2O2 or HF in a short time [23]. Another method to clean 
substrate is Radio Corporation of America (RCA), which included removal organic contaminations, 
oxide layers and ionic contaminations [24]. Epitaxial growth provides the depositing of a thin layer 
of material on top of the substrate. This growth is usually achieved by various techniques such as 
metal-organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD), liquid phase epitaxy (LPE), and molecular 
beam epitaxy (MBE). The epitaxial layer is formed for composing specific electrical and opti­
cal properties [25]. Other techniques such as spin coating, atomic layer deposition, spray coating, 
physical vapor deposition, etc. can also be used to grow thin film layers for photodiode applications. 
FIGURE 15.2  General structure geometries of photodiodes (a) PN, (b) PIN, (c) avalanche, (d) Schottky pho­
todiodes, (e) MSM configuration of Schottky photodiodes, and (f) electrical circuit diagram of a photodiode.

198
Handbook of Semiconductors
In the case of P-N photodiodes, ion implantation or diffusion techniques are used to obtain P- or 
N-type regions. Photolithography is used to restrict or determine structural regions of the photodi­
ode. A photoresist is coated on the substrate of surface and exposed to ultraviolet (UV) light through 
a photomask to create a pattern. This pattern defines the active region of the photodiode. Plasma 
or chemical etching methods are used to remove the related layer not protected by the photoresist. 
Metal contacts are deposited onto the semiconductor surface to create electrical connections to 
compose anode and cathode. The fabricated photodiode is typically packaged with a transparent 
window (for incident light) to protect it from environmental conditions and external contaminants. 
Figures 15.3a–15.3c display the cleaning and fabrication processes of Schottky photodiodes and 
MSM configuration. While Figure 15.3a represents the cleaning of the substrate, Figure 15.3b shows 
the fabrication procedure of the Schottky photodiodes, and Figure 15.3c displays the formation of 
MSM configuration. While the Schottky photodiode has back and metallic contact growth with 
an interlayer thin film, the MSM configuration needs photomasking with photoresist, UV expo­
sure, etching of interlayer, and deposition of metallic contacts. Sometimes, photodiodes may be 
integrated with other electronic components or systems to form more complex devices like opto­
electronic integrated circuits (OEICs) or photodetector arrays, and the fabrication method can be 
changed according to complex devices.
15.3.3.2  Testing and Characterization of the Photodiodes
The specific details of the photodiode fabrication process can vary depending on the desired appli­
cation, the semiconductor material, and advancements in semiconductor manufacturing technology. 
Photodiodes undergo rigorous testing to ensure their performance meets specifications in the per­
formance parameters such as responsivity, detectivity, dark current, and quantum efficiency after 
FIGURE 15.3  (a) Cleaning procedure of substrates, (b) fabrication procedure of Schottky photodiodes, and 
(c) MSM configuration.

199
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes
fabrication. Characterization equipment such as a source meter for I-V characteristics is used to 
measure their performance under various operating conditions such as dark or changing illuminated 
power [26]. Dark current is used to test photodiodes and is critical for low-light applications. It is 
typically measured at different bias voltages and temperatures. Noise measurements, including shot 
noise and thermal noise, help assess signal quality with dark current noise. Responsivity is another 
parameter for assessing the ability of a photodiode for conversion of light into electrical current and 
is given in the A/W unit. Frequency response and bandwidth testing are important for high-speed 
applications. The linearity of a photodiode reveals how responsivity changes depending on optical 
power. Spectral response helps to determine the sensitivity of a photodiode for various wavelengths. 
Photodiodes used in space or nuclear environments are tested for resistance to ionizing radiation 
[27]. Photodiodes can be fabricated for specific applications with high reliability and performance 
depending on the above parameters. The key parameters for testing the performance of a photodi­
ode are discussed in the next section.
15.4  KEY PARAMETERS OF PHOTODIODES
To comprehend the performance of a photodiode, it is essential to determine some of the key param­
eters such as photosensitive area and material, responsivity, spectral response, dark current, quan­
tum efficiency (QE), noise equivalent power (NEP), bandwidth, reverse bias voltage, capacitance, 
rise and fall times, and linearity to obtain high-performance photodiodes [28].
A photosensitive area or active area is a portion of the photodiode that is sensitive to light and 
generates photocurrent when the photodiode is illuminated. It is usually a thin, circular, or rect­
angular region on the surface of the photodiode. The size of this area affects the sensitivity of 
photodiodes, and larger areas generally capture more photons. The photosensitive area is gener­
ally protected by encapsulation materials to shield it from environmental factors. Proper alignment 
between light and photosensitive provides capturing the maximum amount of light for high effi­
ciency. In the case of imaging, the size and arrangement of the photosensitive areas on a photodiode 
array are very important for spatial resolution. Smaller and densely packed photosensitive areas can 
capture finer details in an image [29]. Another important thing is photosensitive materials for light 
detection. Various materials such as quantum dots, 2D materials, etc. increase photodiode perfor­
mance. These materials have been explained in the previous sections.
The dark current (Idark) of a photodiode indicates a flowing electrical current over the photodiode 
in the dark. Particularly in low-light-level applications, dark current is very important to detect low 
light. Thermally generated electron-hole pairs cause the dark current within the photodiode because 
electrons can gain enough energy to jump from the valence band to the conduction band toward 
higher temperatures. Increasing temperatures typically lead to higher dark currents which have an 
exponential relationship with temperature. Low dark current is important in applications where the 
background noise must be minimized. For example, dark current can limit the ability to detect faint 
objects in low-light imaging or astronomical observations [30].
The photocurrent refers to the electrical current generated when photons strike the photosensi­
tive area of a photodiode and cause electron-hole pairs in the interface. These pairs contribute to the 
flow of photocurrent. Its magnitude is directly related to the number of generated electron-hole pairs. 
Therefore, the intensity of the incident light directly influences the photocurrent. The photocurrent 
is a crucial parameter for light detection in some applications such as spectroscopy, optical commu­
nication, imaging, and photometry. The photocurrent formula is given by the following expression:	
=
−
I
I
I
ph
light
dark	
(15.1)
Photosensitivity (K) implies the ability of a photodiode to respond and interact with light. 
Photosensitivity (K) represents the signal (photocurrent) to noise (dark current) ratio of the photodiode. 

200
Handbook of Semiconductors
The level of photosensitivity is an essential factor in the performance and design of many optical 
and optoelectronic devices. Photosensitivity (K) can vary with the wavelength of incident light, 
and it is essential in various applications, including photography, astronomy, remote sensing, com­
munication systems, medical imaging, and renewable energy (solar panels) [31]. The formula of 
photosensitivity is given below.	
 
=
K
I
I
ph
dark	
(15.2)
Responsivity is another key parameter of a photodiode that quantifies its sensitivity to light. 
It represents a relationship between the incident optical power and the resulting photocurrent. 
Responsivity indicates how efficiently a photodiode converts light into a photocurrent. It can be 
expressed as	
=
R
I
PA
ph	
(15.3)
where P is the power intensity of incident light, and A is the active area. It is important to note that 
the responsivity of a photodiode can vary with the wavelength of the incident light. Responsivity 
is a critical parameter when choosing a photodiode for various applications such as light detection, 
optical communication, spectroscopy, and photometry.
Specific detectivity, denoted as D*, is a figure of merit used to evaluate the performance of a 
photodiode, especially in low-light conditions. It quantifies how effectively a photodetector can 
distinguish a weak optical signal from background noise. Specific detectivity considers various 
parameters such as responsivity, noise characteristics, and area of a photodiode. The formula for 
specific detectivity is as follows:	
2q
* =
D
R
A
Idark	
(15.4)
where q is the charge of an electron. The unit of the D* is Jones (cm.√Hz/W). The specific detectiv­
ity provides a valuable metric for comparing the performance of different photodiodes in low-light 
conditions. Photodiodes with higher specific detectivity values are often preferred for extremely 
weak signal applications such as astronomical observations, remote sensing, and scientific instru­
mentation [32].
NEP is a measure of the smallest distinguishable optical power level that can be detected by pho­
todiodes in the presence of noise. NEP considers both the responsivity and noise characteristics of 
the photodiode. It is important in high-sensitivity applications such as scientific experiments, spec­
troscopy, and optical communication, provides a measure of the noise performance, and is typically 
expressed in units of watts per square root of hertz (W/√Hz). The NEP is calculated as follows:	
*
=
∆
NEP
A f
D	
(15.5)
where ∆f  is bandwidth. It represents the range of frequencies or modulation speeds. ∆f  is typically 
specified in hertz (Hz) or megahertz (MHz). To achieve the best performance in the case of NEP, 
it needs to consider factors like temperature control and signal processing to minimize noise and 
maximize sensitivity.
QE is another crucial parameter for photodiodes and shows how many incident photons are con­
verted into photocurrent. QE is expressed as a percentage and represents the ratio of the number of 

201
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes
electron-hole pairs generated by incoming photons to the total number of incident photons. The QE 
formula is given by: 	
=
QE
N
N
e
v	
(15.6)
where Ne and Nv are the number of electrons produced and the number of photons absorbed, respec­
tively. It can be calculated as a percentage multiplied by 100. The maximum possible QE is 100%, 
which would mean that every incident photon generates an electron-hole pair. However, achieving 
100% QE in practice is challenging because of surface reflections, material properties, and design 
limitations.
Rise and fall times describe the time it takes for the photocurrent to rise from a low level to a 
specified percentage (generally 90%) of its final value (rise time) or fall from a high level to the same 
specified percentage (fall time). The rise and fall times of a photodiode are important parameters 
that exhibit the response speed to incident light intensity. They are particularly relevant in applica­
tions where the photodiode needs to capture rapidly changing optical signals. However, shorter rise 
and fall times of a photodiode may lead to a decrease in the responsivity [33].
Linearity is another important parameter for photodiodes and shows how accurately its out­
put current or voltage response corresponds to changes in incident light intensity. The relationship 
between the light input and electrical output should be proportional and predictable in a linear 
photodiode. The linear dynamic range (LDR) of a photodiode indicates that the response of the 
photodiode is linear in the range of incident light intensities. The relationship between the incident 
light power and the photocurrent is approximately linear in this range. However, beyond this range, 
the response may become nonlinear due to saturation effects [34].
Other key parameters are reverse bias, capacitance, and packaging. Photodiodes are generally 
operated in reverse bias to increase their speed and reduce their capacitance. The junction capaci­
tance of the photodiode affects its response time and bandwidth. Lower capacitance is desirable for 
high-speed applications. The package of the photodiode can also be important, especially for appli­
cations where protection from environmental factors or mechanical robustness is required. These 
are some of the key parameters required for obtaining high-performance photodiodes.
15.5  TYPES OF PHOTODIODES
Photodiodes are fabricated in various types and designed to cater to specific applications and opera­
tional requirements, depending on sensitivity, speed, wavelength range, etc. Thus, photodiode types 
can change according to their application areas or specific needs. In this section, common photo­
diode types of PN, PIN, avalanche, and Schottky photodiodes are explained in the case of their 
advantages and disadvantages.
A PN photodiode is the most basic type of photodiode and works according to obtaining electrons 
when exposed to photons with sufficient energy. The structure, fabrication, and working principle of 
PN photodiodes have been discussed above sections. PN photodiodes have several advantages, which 
make them widely used in optoelectronic applications. They can be fabricated easily and have high 
responsivity due to high sensitivity in reverse biases. PN photodiodes also have fast response times, 
typically in the nanosecond-to-microsecond range depending on the specific design and application. 
This makes them suitable for high-speed applications due to capturing rapid changes in light inten­
sity. They typically exhibit low noise characteristics. Depending on the semiconductor material used, 
PN photodiodes can be designed to be sensitive to a wide range of wavelengths changing from UV 
to IR. They generally exhibit good linearity over a wide range of light intensity. PN photodiodes can 
have a long operational lifespan, making them reliable for long-term applications. PN photodiodes 
are often cost-effective compared to some other types of photodiodes such as APDs or photomulti­
plier tubes (PMTs). They can be easily integrated into electronic circuits and systems [35].

202
Handbook of Semiconductors
A PIN photodiode works with the same fundamental principles as standard PN photodiodes but 
with the addition of a lightly doped intrinsic (I) layer placed between the N- and P-type layers. This 
layer serves as a wide, low-doped region that enhances the performance of the photodiode by behaving 
as an insulator layer for electric field strength. The intrinsic layer reduces the capacitance of the diode, 
enabling faster response times compared to standard PN photodiodes. PIN photodiodes are known for 
their low capacitance, low reverse bias voltage, high quantum efficiency, larger bandwidth, and high-
speed response. They have a wide linear range, allowing them to accurately measure a broad range of 
light intensities without saturating, and are often used in high-frequency applications like optical com­
munication and spectroscopy. However, PIN photodiodes are less sensitive, have slower recovery time 
and high power loss, and their sensitivity is affected so much with varying temperatures [36].
An APD is a specialized photodiode designed to provide internal signal amplification through 
avalanche breakdown. When a high reverse bias voltage is applied, the electrons and holes gener­
ated by incident light collide with other atoms, creating additional electron-hole pairs. This ava­
lanche effect leads to higher sensitivity and lower noise, making APDs suitable for low-light-level 
detection, such as in optical communication systems and photon-counting applications. They can 
detect very weak optical signals, making them suitable for applications involving low-light condi­
tions, such as long-range optical communication and light detection and ranging (LIDAR). While 
APDs offer excellent sensitivity, they have a limited linear range compared to standard photodiodes. 
In high light power conditions, they can saturate due to the avalanche multiplication effect. APD 
performance can be affected by temperature variations, and careful temperature control may be 
necessary in some applications [37].
Schottky photodiodes form a metal-semiconductor junction instead of a P-N junction. They are 
also known as Schottky barrier photodiodes, which use a metal-semiconductor junction to convert 
incident light into photocurrent. Schottky photodiodes operate on the principle of the Schottky 
diodes but work at reverse biases. They offer very fast response times, typically in the picosecond 
to nanosecond range. This rapid response makes them suitable for high-speed photodetection appli­
cations, such as laser pulse measurements and time-resolved spectroscopy. Due to the absence of 
depletion region seen in PN photodiodes, Schottky photodiodes have lower capacitance. This low 
capacitance allows them to operate at high frequencies and respond quickly to changes in incident 
light intensity. Although Schottky photodiodes are good for their speed and sensitivity, they may 
not be as widely used in low-light-level applications compared to APDs or PIN photodiodes due to 
higher dark current and light reflection from metal layer [38].
Sometimes, photodiodes can be classified in the case of UV, IR, and visible ranges. The catego­
rization of photodiodes depending on spectral response can be thought of for various applications. 
Furthermore, fabricated array and multi-junction photodiodes can also be included as types of pho­
todiodes [39, 40].
15.6  APPLICATIONS OF PHOTODIODES
Photodiodes find widespread usage in various applications due to converting photons into photocur­
rent with high sensitivity and speed. The general application areas are optical communications, sens­
ing applications, monitoring, and imaging. Figure 15.4 shows general applications of photodiodes. 
Photodiodes are integral components in optical communication systems, including fiber-optic net­
works. Photodiodes are extensively used in long-distance and high-speed fiber-optic communication 
because they serve as the core component in optical receivers. Optical receivers are an important part 
of optical communication systems, including fiber-optic communication networks [41]. Photodiodes 
are also used for visible light communication (VLC) receivers. Photodiodes for VLC applications 
are critical for achieving high-speed, secure, and energy-efficient data communication using visible 
light. Careful consideration of the photodiode characteristics and performance parameters is essential 
to ensure the success of VLC systems in various real-world applications such as indoor positioning, 
underwater communication, and secure data transmission in sensitive environments [42].

203
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes
Photodiodes are commonly used as the core sensing elements in light sensors or photodetector 
sensors. These sensors are designed to detect and measure light levels. Photodiodes are used in 
light sensors for various applications, such as automatic brightness control in displays, ambient light 
sensing or proximity sensors in smartphones, and motion detection in security systems. The other 
applications of light sensors are healthcare and medical devices, gesture recognition, automotive 
lighting applications, flame detection, solar light tracking, daylight harvesting, etc. [43].
Photodiodes are used in various imaging applications, both as primary imaging sensors and as 
components within imaging systems. The ability to convert light into electrical current makes them 
valuable in capturing visual information. Photodiodes are at the heart of image sensors in digital 
cameras, including charge-coupled device (CCD) and complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor 
(CMOS) sensors. These sensors capture light to form digital images with various resolutions and 
qualities. In medical applications, photodiodes are used in imaging systems like X-ray detectors and 
endoscopes to capture images of the human body for diagnostic and surgical purposes. Photodiodes 
are used in astronomical cameras and space applications to capture images of celestial objects. 
These are just a few examples of the diverse imaging applications of photodiodes. The choice of 
photodiode and imaging system design depends on factors such as the desired spectral range, sensi­
tivity, resolution, speed, and environmental conditions specific to each application [3].
Photodiodes are used in various monitoring applications to detect some signals by measuring 
light levels, changes in illumination time, or detectivity of specific wavelengths. Monitoring appli­
cations typically involve real-time or periodic measurement and data recording for analysis, control, 
or safety purposes. These applications can be widened from environmental and automation moni­
toring in the industry for waste and pollution. Photodiodes are applied to monitor changes in natural 
light levels for weather forecasting, climate research, and environmental studies. Furthermore, they 
are employed in air quality sensors to measure pollutant levels, such as particulate matter and gas 
concentrations in the case of environmental monitoring. They are utilized in pulse oximeters to 
monitor blood oxygen levels and heart rate by measuring light absorption through body tissues in 
medical applications [44]. These diverse applications highlight the significance and versatility of 
photodiodes in modern technology across various industries.
FIGURE 15.4  General applications of photodiodes.

204
Handbook of Semiconductors
15.7  EMERGING TRENDS IN PHOTODIODE TECHNOLOGY
Photodiode technology continues to develop, driven by the demand for higher performance, improved 
efficiency, and various new applications. The need for faster data transmission rates in optical com­
munication has led to the development of high-speed photodiodes. These devices can operate at 
extremely high frequencies, enabling faster internet speeds [45]. Quantum dot photodiodes offer 
tunable absorption wavelengths, high sensitivity, and reduced noise, making them promising for 
applications in quantum optics, imaging, and sensing [46]. Advancements in single-photon avalanche 
diodes (SPADs) and other single-photon detectors have driven breakthroughs in quantum sensing, 
quantum information processing, and quantum cryptography [47]. Short-wave infrared (SWIR) pho­
todiodes are gaining popularity for applications in night vision, surveillance, and imaging. They can 
detect light in the 1.0 to 2.6 μm wavelength range, allowing for improved visibility in low-light con­
ditions [48]. Reducing the noise in photodiodes is an important attention, especially in applications 
requiring high sensitivity. Lower-noise photodiodes are critical for improving signal-to-noise ratios 
in low-light-level applications such as spectroscopy and fluorescence measurements [49]. Flexible 
and organic photodiodes are being developed for applications like wearable technology, flexible dis­
plays, and conformable image sensors. The integration of photodiode arrays on-chip for signal pro­
cessing and readout circuits is becoming more common. These integrated solutions simplify system 
design and reduce noise, making them ideal for portable and miniaturized applications [44].
Photodiodes are increasingly being customized for specific applications. This includes tailor­
ing the spectral response, sensitivity, and packaging to meet the exact requirements of industries 
such as aerospace, medical, and automotive. In space and nuclear applications, radiation-hardened 
photodiodes are essential. These devices are designed to withstand the harsh radiation environ­
ments encountered in space missions and nuclear facilities. Photodiodes are being used in energy 
harvesting applications, where they convert ambient light into electrical energy to power low-
power devices, sensors, and IoT nodes. Photodiode-based sensors are increasingly being inte­
grated with artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms for advanced data processing, 
pattern recognition, and autonomous decision-making in various applications, including robotics 
and autonomous vehicles [4]. These emerging trends in photodiode technology reflect the ongo­
ing efforts to improve performance, expand the range of applications, and meet the evolving 
needs of industries ranging from telecommunications and healthcare to aerospace and beyond. As 
technology continues to advance, photodiodes will play an increasingly critical role in enabling 
innovative solutions.
REFERENCES	
1.	 N.R. Council, Harnessing Light, National Academies Press, 1998. https://doi.org/10.17226/5954.	
2.	 J. Liu, S. Cristoloveanu, J. Wan, A review on the recent progress of silicon-on-insulator-based photode­
tectors, Phys. Status Solidi A. 218 (2021) 2000751. https://doi.org/10.1002/pssa.202000751.	
3.	 T. Shan, X. Hou, X. Yin, X. Guo, Organic photodiodes: Device engineering and applications, Front.
Optoelectron. 2022 15:1. 15 (2022) 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/S12200-022-00049-W.	
4.	 R. Douhan, K. Lozovoy, A. Kokhanenko, H. Deeb, V. Dirko, K. Khomyakova, Recent advances in
Si-compatible nanostructured photodetectors, Technologies (Basel). 11 (2023) 17. https://doi.org/10.3390/
technologies11010017.	
5.	 R.F. Pires, V.D.B. Bonifácio, Photodiodes : Principles and recent advances, J. Mat. NanoSci. 6 (2019)
38–46.	
6.	 W. Yang, J. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J.H. He, X. Fang, Silicon-compatible photodetectors: Trends
to monolithically integrate photosensors with chip technology, Adv. Funct. Mater. 29 (2019) 1808182.
https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.201808182.	
7.	 A. Ferron, O. Boulade, O. Gravrand, G. Destefanis, C. Cervera, J.P. Zanatta, N. Baier, Discussion
about photodiode architectures for space applications, in: Proceedings Volume 10563, International
Conference on Space Optics — ICSO 2014, SPIE, 2017: p. 206. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2304266.	
8.	 S.M. Sze, Physics of Semiconductor Devices, 2. edition, Wiley, New York, 1981.

205
Semiconductor-based Photodiodes	
9.	 H. Lin, A. Jiang, S. Xing, L. Li, W. Cheng, J. Li, W. Miao, X. Zhou, L. Tian, Advances in self-powered
ultraviolet photodetectors based on P-N heterojunction low-dimensional nanostructures, Nanomaterials. 
12 (2022). https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12060910.	
10.	 D.A. Neamen, Semiconductor Physics and Devices : Basic Principles, McGraw-Hill, New York, 2012.	
11.	 P. Martyniuk, P. Wang, A. Rogalski, Y. Gu, R. Jiang, F. Wang, W. Hu, Infrared avalanche photodiodes
from bulk to 2D materials, Light Sci. Appl. 12 (2023) 1–26. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41377-023-01259-3.	
12.	 Q. Durlin, A. Aliane, L. André, H. Kaya, M. Le Cocq, V. Goudon, C. Vialle, M. Veillerot, J.M.
Hartmann, Fabrication and characterisation of the PiN Ge photodiode with poly-crystalline Si:P as
n-type region, Opto-Electronics Rev. 31 (2023) 1–7. https://doi.org/10.24425/opelre.2023.144550.	
13.	 T.H. Kim, J.-K. Lee, J. Park, I.-S. Kang, G. Sim, Broadband responsivity enhancement of Si photodi­
odes by a plasmonic antireflection bilayer, Optics Express. 29(17), (2021) 26634–26644. https://doi.
org/10.1364/OE.432689.	
14.	 X. Chen, Y. Gu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Gu, Y. Zhang, Epitaxy and Device Properties of InGaAs
Photodetectors with Relatively High Lattice Mismatch, Epitaxy. (2017). https://doi.org/10.5772/
INTECHOPEN.70259.	
15.	 M. Malik, M.A. Iqbal, J.R. Choi, P.V. Pham, 2D materials for efficient photodetection: Overview,
mechanisms, performance and UV-IR range applications, Front. Chem. 10 (2022) 905404. https://doi.
org/10.3389/FCHEM.2022.905404/BIBTEX.	
16.	 F. Luo, M. Zhu, Y. tan, H. Sun, W. Luo, G. Peng, Z. Zhu, X.-A. Zhang, S. Qin, High responsivity gra­
phene photodetectors from visible to near-infrared by photogating effect, AIP Adv. 8 (2018) 115106.
https://doi.org/10.1063/1.5054760.	
17.	 F. Özel, E. Arkan, H. Coskun, İ. Deveci, M. Yıldırım, M. Yıldırım, İ Orak, M.O. Erdal, A.
Sarılmaz, T.T. Ersöz, A. Koçyiğit, A. Karabulut, A. Özen, A. Aljabour, M. Kus, M. Ersöz, Refractory-
metal-based chalcogenides for energy, Adv. Funct. Mater. 32 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.
202207705.	
18.	 X. Chen, X. Lu, B. Deng, O. Sinai, Y. Shao, C. Li, S. Yuan, V. Tran, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D.
Naveh, L. Yang, F. Xia, Widely tunable black phosphorus mid-infrared photodetector, Nat. Commun. 8
(2017) 1672. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-01978-3.	
19.	 D.H. Shin, S.H. Choi, Graphene-based semiconductor heterostructures for photodetectors,
Micromachines (Basel). 9 (2018) 350. https://doi.org/10.3390/mi9070350.	
20.	 J. Yao, G. Yang, Flexible and high-performance All-2D photodetector for wearable devices, Small. 14
(2018). https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201704524.	
21.	 S. Donati, Photodetectors: Devices, Circuits and Applications, Wiley, 2020. https://doi.org/10.1002/
9781119769958.	
22.	 R. Peng, S. Jiao, D. Jiang, H. Li, L. Zhao, Dark current mechanisms and spectral response of SiO2-
passivated photodiodes based on InAs/GaSb superlattice, Thin Solid Films. 629 (2017) 55–59. https://
doi.org/10.1016/J.TSF.2017.03.045.	
23.	 A. Kocyigit, D.E. Yıldız, A.A. Hussaini, D.A. Kose, M. Yıldırım, Cu and Mn centered nicotinamide/
nicotinic acid complexes for interlayer of Schottky photodiode, Curr. Appl. Phys. 45 (2023) 53–63.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cap.2022.11.001.	
24.	 E. Brachmann, M. Seifert, S. Oswald, S. Menzel, T. Gemming, Evaluation of surface cleaning pro­
cedures for CTGS substrates for SAW technology with XPS, Materials. 10 (2017) 1373. https://doi.
org/10.3390/ma10121373.	
25.	 H. Kum, D. Lee, W. Kong, H. Kim, Y. Park, Y. Kim, Y. Baek, S.-H. Bae, K. Lee, J. Kim, Epitaxial
growth and layer-transfer techniques for heterogeneous integration of materials for electronic and pho­
tonic devices, Nat. Electron. 2 (2019) 439–450. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-019-0314-2.	
26.	 Z. Bielecki, K. Achtenberg, M. Kopytko, J. Mikołajczyk, J. Wojtas, A. Rogalski, Review of photode­
tectors characterization methods, Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci. Tech. Sci. 70 (2022). https://doi.org/10.24425/
BPASTS.2022.140534.	
27.	 I.S. Amiri, F.M.A.M. Houssien, A.N.Z. Rashed, A.E.-N.A. Mohammed, Temperature effects on char­
acteristics and performance of near-infrared wide bandwidth for different avalanche photodiodes struc­
tures, Results Phys. 14 (2019) 102399. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rinp.2019.102399.	
28.	 A. Chetia, J. Bera, A. Betal, S. Sahu, A brief review on photodetector performance based on zero dimen­
sional and two dimensional materials and their hybrid structures, Mater Today Commun. 30 (2022)
103224. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.MTCOMM.2022.103224.	
29.	 A. Rogalski, Z. Bielecki, J. Mikołajczyk, J. Wojtas, Ultraviolet photodetectors: From photocathodes to
low-dimensional solids, Sensors. 23 (2023) 4452. https://doi.org/10.3390/s23094452.

206
Handbook of Semiconductors	
30.	 J. Kublitski, A. Hofacker, B.K. Boroujeni, J. Benduhn, V.C. Nikolis, C. Kaiser, D. Spoltore, H.
Kleemann, A. Fischer, F. Ellinger, K. Vandewal, K. Leo, Reverse dark current in organic photodetec­
tors and the major role of traps as source of noise, Nat. Commun. 12 (2021) 551. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-020-20856-z.	
31.	 W. Ran, L. Wang, S. Zhao, D. Wang, R. Yin, Z. Lou, G. Shen, An integrated flexible all-nanowire
infrared sensing system with record photosensitivity, Adv. Mater. 32 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.201908419.	
32.	 S. Veeralingam, L. Durai, P. Yadav, S. Badhulika, Record-high responsivity and detectivity of a flexible
deep-ultraviolet photodetector based on solid state-assisted synthesized hBN nanosheets, ACS Appl.
Electron. Mater. 3 (2021) 1162–1169. https://doi.org/10.1021/acsaelm.0c01021.	
33.	 H.T.D.S. Madusanka, H.M.A.M.C. Herath, C.A.N. Fernando, High photoresponse performance of self-
powered n-Cu2O/p-CuI heterojunction based UV-visible photodetector, Sens. Actuators A Phys. 296
(2019) 61–69. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2019.07.008.	
34.	 R. Nie, X. Deng, L. Feng, G. Hu, Y. Wang, G. Yu, J. Xu, Highly sensitive and broadband organic pho­
todetectors with fast speed gain and large linear dynamic range at low forward bias, Small. 13 (2017)
1603260. https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201603260.	
35.	 H. Lin, A. Jiang, S. Xing, L. Li, W. Cheng, J. Li, W. Miao, X. Zhou, L. Tian, Advances in self-powered
ultraviolet photodetectors based on P-N heterojunction low-dimensional nanostructures, Nanomaterials. 
12 (2022) 910. https://doi.org/10.3390/nano12060910.	
36.	 A. Mousazadeh, M. Kafaee, M. Ashraf, Ranking of commercial photodiodes in radiation detection
using multiple-attribute decision making approach, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res. A. 987 (2021)
164839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nima.2020.164839.	
37.	 A.H. Jones, S.D. March, S.R. Bank, J.C. Campbell, Low-noise high-temperature AlInAsSb/GaSb ava­
lanche photodiodes for 2-μm applications, Nat. Photonics. 14 (2020) 559–563. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41566-020-0637-6.	
38.	 N. Biyikli, I. Kimukin, B. Butun, O. Aytür, E. Ozbay, ITO-schottky photodiodes for high-performance
detection in the UV-IR spectrum, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 10 (2004) 759–765. https://doi.
org/10.1109/JSTQE.2004.833977.	
39.	 J. Liu, P. Liu, T. Shi, M. Ke, K. Xiong, Y. Liu, L. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Liang, H. Li, S. Lu, X. Lan, G. Niu, 
J. Zhang, P. Fei, L. Gao, J. Tang, Flexible and broadband colloidal quantum dots photodiode array for
pixel-level X-ray to near-infrared image fusion, Nat. Commun. 14 (2023) 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41467-023-40620-3.	
40.	 S. Schidl, M. Hofbauer, K. Schneider-Hornstein, H. Zimmermann, Advances in triple junction photo
diodes, in: 2014 Microelectronic Systems Symposium, MESS 2014 - Conference Proceedings, Institute
of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2015. https://doi.org/10.1109/MESS.2014.7010251.	
41.	 O.F. Chukwujekwu, O.I. Nkemdilim, Technical report: Comparative analysis of photodetectors for
appropriate usage in optical communication applications, Int. J. Trend Sci. Res. Dev. 5 (2021) 569–582.
https://doi.org/10.5281/ZENODO.5518079.	
42.	 C. He, C. Chen, A review of advanced transceiver technologies in visible light communications,
Photonics. 10 (2023) 648. https://doi.org/10.3390/photonics10060648.	
43.	 J.M. López-Higuera, Sensing using light: A key area of sensors, Sensors. 21 (2021) 6562. https://doi.
org/10.3390/s21196562.	
44.	 S. Cai, X. Xu, W. Yang, J. Chen, X. Fang, Materials and designs for wearable photodetectors, Adv.
Mater. 31 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201808138.	
45.	 S. Lischke, A. Peczek, J.S. Morgan, K. Sun, D. Steckler, Y. Yamamoto, F. Korndörfer, C. Mai, S.
Marschmeyer, M. Fraschke, A. Krüger, A. Beling, L. Zimmermann, Ultra-fast germanium photo­
diode with 3-dB bandwidth of 265 GHz, Nat. Photonics. 15 (2021) 925–931. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41566-021-00893-w.	
46.	 R. Guo, M. Zhang, J. Ding, A. Liu, F. Huang, M. Sheng, Advances in colloidal quantum dot-based pho­
todetectors, J. Mater. Chem. C Mater. 10 (2022) 7404–7422. https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00219a.	
47.	 F. Ceccarelli, G. Acconcia, A. Gulinatti, M. Ghioni, I. Rech, R. Osellame, Recent advances and future
perspectives of single-photon avalanche diodes for quantum photonics applications, Adv. Quantum
Technol. 4 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/qute.202000102.	
48.	 F. Cao, L. Liu, L. Li, Short-wave infrared photodetector, Mater. Today. 62 (2023) 327–349. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.mattod.2022.11.003.	
49.	 K. Zhu, N. Solmeyer, D.S. Weiss, A low noise, nonmagnetic fluorescence detector for precision mea­
surements, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 83 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4765745.

207
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-16
Semiconductors for 
Solar Cells
Santosh V. Patil and Kshitij Bhargava
16.1  INTRODUCTION
The sun is an abundant source of renewable energy in terms of thermal and electromagnetic 
radiation and is also pollution-free, noiseless, and freely available on the earth. Renewable 
energy resources can be used for the compensation of diminutive non-renewable energy derived 
from natural resources such as natural gas, crude oil, coal, etc. Such an abundant and clean 
energy source should be fully utilized for the development of humanity. The sunlight can be 
directly harvested into electrical energy using semiconductor-based miniaturized solar cells. In 
1839 the French physicist Alexandre Edmund Becquerel experimentally demonstrated for the 
first time the photovoltaic (PV) effect in liquid electrolytes [1], and therefore solar cell has been 
well-known as a PV cell. Thus, by receiving light or photons from sunlight, solar cells produce 
electrical direct current (DC) and voltage. The phenomena of electrical power generation con­
tinue till light is shined on the front glass of the solar cell and it stops under dark conditions. 
Later in 1954, C. S. Fuller et al. reported the first practical 6% efficient Si-based solar cell fab­
ricated by Bell Laboratory, US. In 1959, Hoffman Electronics from the United States reported 
a conversion efficiency of 10% for Si solar cells. Alferov et. al. reported the development of 
the first heterojunction GaAs solar cells in 1970 [2]. In the previous five decades, the first gen­
eration of silicon-based thick-film solar cells dominated the PV market. However, the limited 
power conversion efficiency and expensive film growth techniques have attracted great research 
interests worldwide. In 1980, IEC developed the first thin-film solar cell using Cu2S and CdZnS 
with more than 10% efficiency [3]. However, the problems related to encapsulation and stability 
of these devices have acquired greater attention toward the second-generation technology that 
comprised hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si H), cadmium telluride (CdTe), and chalcopy­
rite copper indium di-selenide (CuInSe2), which often require chemical vapor deposition for 
thin-film growth at high energy. Meanwhile, in 1985, a crucial breakthrough was achieved as 
power conversion coefficient efficiency (PCE) for Si solar cells exceeded 20% under standard 
sunlight conditions. In 1998, National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) reported 19% effi­
cient Cu(In, Ga)S e2 solar cells [4]. Third-generation PV technology includes polymer or organic 
solar cells (OSC) and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) as solution-processed solar cells. Lastly, 
the fourth generation includes the organic-inorganic-metal-halide perovskite solar cells, which 
have become more popular than any other generation solar cell in a very short period as they 
offer high PCE at low manufacturing cost. Perovskite is a quaternary compound semiconductor 
material incorporated in perovskite solar cells with a low density of bulk defects, low interfacial 
defects, excellent absorption coefficient, and large carrier diffusion length [5]. Semiconductor-
based solar cells offer the advantage of operating at ambient temperatures with no fire hazards 
or safety issues. No air and noise pollution, no radioactive waste generation, and the ability to 
be installed at load centers with ease are the advantages of PV systems. They have a lifetime of 
more than 20 to 25 years [5], and the energy source is abundant and free of cost. However, PV 
systems face challenges such as high installation costs, power reliability that depends on the 
reliability of other peripherals, and low power conversion efficiency. Additionally, stability, reli­
ability, and toxicity are significant concerns with thin-film solar cells.
16

208
Handbook of Semiconductors
16.2  OPERATING PRINCIPLE OF SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC CELLS
The typical solar irradiance spectrum received on the earth’s surface consists of ultraviolet, vis­
ible, and infrared regions measured under typical test conditions i.e., AM 1.5G, total irradiance 
ESTC = 1000 W/m2, which is more than useful to extract maximum power output of a PV module 
[6]. The PV conversion in the solar cell takes place mainly in two steps (1) creation of excitons and 
(2) separation of charged free carriers. The device shows poor power conversion efficiency when 
any one of the processes gets impeded. Therefore, a proper selection of absorber and transport layer 
materials in solar cells becomes an important as well as a challenging task. Figure 16.1 shows the 
band gap alignment of the heterojunction architecture of a solar cell used to produce the depletion 
region. Doping concentrations of p- and n-type layers determine the width of the depletion region. 
Low doping concentration causes a wide depletion region as compared to heavy concentration. 
For thin-film solar cells to perform optimally, the depletion region typically has a width of 2 µm. 
Therefore, to control the doping, heterostructures facilitate the absorption of different regions of 
the solar spectrum due to the stacking of materials of distinct bandgap values. For this, a hetero­
structure consists of the inverted planar (p-i-n) and planar type (n-i-p) structured solar cells with 
an intrinsic “i” layer that is sandwiched between the electron transport and hole transport layers. 
Therefore, by controlling the doping concentration, a strong diffusion length and electric field can 
be developed across the heterojunction.
16.2.1  Carrier Generation Post Photon Absorption
The electron-hole pairs will be generated as the light incident on a solar cell and absorption of pho­
tons inside the absorber material. However, photons are being absorbed only when photon energy 
(Eph = hν) would be larger than or equal to the bandgap energy Eg of the absorber layer where 
“h” represents Planck’s constant and “ν” is the frequency of light. The band gap is the difference 
between energy levels, viz. conduction band (EC) and valence band (EV) [7]. The following three 
cases are possible depending upon the photon energy and band gap energy of the absorber layer.
i.	If Eph = Eg, the absorption of photons will take place and electron-hole pairs will be gener­
ated without any loss of photon energy.
FIGURE 16.1  Structural representation of thick film and thin film semiconductor-based solar cells with p-n 
type and conventional n-i-p type layers, respectively.

209
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
ii.	If Eph > Eg, the photons will be generated when photon energy is equal to band gap energy, 
and the remaining excessive energy will be lost in terms of heat (thermalization loss).
iii.	If Eph < Eg, the photon energy is insufficient to enable the transition of electrons from 
valence to conduction band, resulting in the majority of photons being either reflected or 
lost.
16.2.2  Separation of Charge Carriers
Post exciton generation, the electron-hole pairs get separated into free carriers which get pushed 
toward the respective electrodes due to the presence of built-in voltage (Vbi) across the depletion 
region and are always smaller than (Eg/q). Figure 16.2 demonstrates the flow of charge carriers at the 
time of charge separation in single-junction silicon thick- and thin-film solar cells. Typically, under 
appropriate doping conditions, silicon solar cells exhibit a built-in voltage of around 1 V. Figure 16.3 
shows the variations of space charge density represented by ND
+ and NA
– and electric field strength 
to position (x) associated with homojunction solar cells and heterojunction-based solar cells. The 
charge separation process is more efficient in thin-film solar cells as the electron transport layers or 
buffer layers perform a significant role in charge transportation. The large value of material band 
gap energy “Eg” produces a strong electric field and built-in voltage. Also, the charge transportation 
becomes very smooth when a strong electric field is established within the space charge region as 
the proper bandgap alignment is maintained.
FIGURE 16.2  Energy band diagram for p-n junction or homojunction and p-i-n heterojunction-based solar cell.
FIGURE 16.3  Band energy € versus crystal momentum (p) diagram at T > 0 K for direct bandgap and indi­
rect bandgap semiconductor.

210
Handbook of Semiconductors
16.3  FUNDAMENTALS OF SEMICONDUCTORS USED IN SOLAR CELLS
The physical properties of the semiconductor materials used in the solar cells have been described 
here. Some of the semiconductor materials like Si, CdTe, GaAs, GaInP, and Cu(InGa)Se2 are com­
monly used in the fabrication of solar cells based on their high absorption capability and affordable 
cost. Some important terms related to the performance of solar cells are explained as follows.
16.3.1  Crystal Structure
The crystallinity of an electronic-grade semiconductor is distinguished by the periodic arrange­
ment of atoms in an array. The periodicity of atoms governs the electronic properties of semicon­
ductor thin films. Moreover, silicon is an element that lies in Group 14, possessing four electrons 
in the valance band that can be shared with neighboring Si atoms. In this way, the covalent bonds 
form inside the silicon crystal. In silicon crystals, the atoms are positioned in a diamond lattice 
with tetrahedral bonding. The angle made by the bonds with each Si atom is 109.5°. Two face-
centered cubic (FCC) unit cells can describe this arrangement. Besides this, the second FCC cell is 
relocated at a quarter of the distance along the diagonal of the first FCC cell along the body. This 
displacement along the body diagonal results in a one-of-a-kind configuration within the crystal 
lattice. To completely grasp the concept, it’s useful to look at the use of Miller indices and the 
definition of the lattice constant. Miller indices are a set of three metrics (hkl) that describe the 
orientation of a crystallographic plane within a crystal lattice. They are used to uniquely identify 
and characterize distinct planes in a crystal structure. In the context of FCC unit cells, they assist 
us in locating certain planes and orientations inside the cubic lattice [8]. The stacking of these unit 
cells is responsible for the entire component lattice structure. Similarly, in the case of zinc blende 
lattice, different semiconductors from columns III-V and II-VI are incorporated such as CdTe (II-
VI compound) and GaAs (III-V compound). For example, in CdTe, one face-centered cubic (FCC) 
unit cell is occupied by cadmium atoms, while the rest are filled entirely with tellurium atoms. As 
a result, CdTe has an average valency of four for each compound, thus forming four covalent bonds 
with neighboring atoms.
16.3.2  Energy Band Alignment
Generally, the physics of charge transport in solar cells is well understood by studying the electronic 
properties of crystalline semiconductor layers. Considering the semiconductor crystal as a 3D box, 
each crystal has a multifaceted interior structure that accommodates an electron as a particle. There 
exists a potential field surrounding an atom’s nucleus. The time-independent Schrodinger equation 
was used to determine the electron wave function, ψ as,
	
where m denotes electronic mass, E indicates the energy of an electron, h symbolizes Planck’s con­
stant, and U(r) represents the potential energy of the semiconductor film that exhibits periodicity. 
The electron wave function, ψ, establishes the dynamics of an electron. The band structure of the 
semiconductor can be defined with the solution of the above equation. Using this band structure, the 
approximation for the motion of an electron in a crystal and an electron moving in the free space can 
be estimated. When the effective mass, m*, is substituted for the mass, m, of an electron, Newton's 
law of motion dictates that the speed remains constant. The formula relates the applied force (F) 
and the acceleration (a) of an electron that yields F = m × a. The band structure can be realized by 
a plot between allowed electron energies and the crystal momentum, p = hk, where the wave func­
tion solution is correlated by the wave vector designated by k. Here, Figure 16.3 shows the band gap 
 
( )
∇ψ +
−

ψ =
2m
h
E
U r
0
2 
2
 
(16.1)

211
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
energy diagram that represents the valence band and conduction energy bands of a direct band gap 
semiconductor material in which electrons are fully occupied in the energy bands below the valence 
band, while electrons are empty (o) in those above the conduction band. The effective mass, m* can 
be depicted by
	
≡



= 



−
−
m
d E
dp
1
h
d E
dk
*
2
2
1
2
2
2
1
	
(16.2)
The effective mass varies within each band and in particular, the effective mass is negative near 
the peak point of the valence band. Thermal energy causes valence band electrons (*) to jump to 
the conduction band, creating empty states (o) at the top of the valence band. An empty state can be 
described as a positively charged carrier of a current, also known as a hole. These holes have a posi­
tive effective mass and classically positively charged particles. As a result of their parabolic shape, 
the electron and hole effective masses mn
*, mp
* remain constant at the bottommost of the conduction 
band and the topmost of the valence band.
In direct band gap semiconductors, the conduction band minima and valence band maxima 
occur simultaneously at the same crystal momentum, whereas if the minimum energy level of 
the conduction band and maximum energy level of the valence band occur at different values 
of the crystal momentum, then the semiconductor is referred to as an indirect band gap semi­
conductor. In a semiconductor material, the concept of indirect band gap means a lot for the 
absorption of light.
16.3.3  Light Absorption
The absorption of sunlight is essential for the operation of solar cells as they generate electron-hole 
pairs. A fundamental absorption occurs when an electron moves from the valence band to the con­
duction band, resulting in a hole left behind. The momentum of all charge carriers and the photon 
energy should be conserved during the process of absorption. It has been evident that the range of 
crystal momentum
/
=
p
h l is comparatively higher than the photon momentum, pλ = h/λ during the 
photon absorption process and ensures the concept of energy conservation. The absorption coef­
ficient α in terms of the photon energy, hν, is proportional to the transition of an electron from the 
initial state E1 to the final state E2, the probability, P12, the density of electrons in the initial state 
gv(E1), and the density of available final states, and is then summed over all possible transitions 
between states where E2 − E1 = hν.
	
12
1
2
∑
α (
)
(
)
(
)
∝
hv
P g
E
g
E
v
c
	
(16.3)
Assume that initially, the valance band is filled with electrons and the conduction band is 
filled with holes. After the photon absorption, electrons are excited to the conduction band and 
leave behind the positively charged holes, which results in the generation of electron-hole pairs. 
The photon absorption process is shown in Figure 16.3 for an indirect bandgap semiconductor, 
such as GaInP, GaAs, Cu(In, Ga)Se2, and CdTe. There must be a conservation of energy and 
crystal momentum during all transitions in the crystal. As a result of E1 energy and p1 crystal 
momentum in the valence band, each initial electronic state can be associated with energy E2 and 
crystal momentum p2 in the conduction band of the final state. Due to the conservation of electron 
momentum, the net momentum of the crystal in the initial state and the final state remains the 
same, p1 ≈ p2 = p.
As a result of energy conservation, the photon energy is determined by the following equation:
	
2
1
=
−
hv
E
E 	
(16.4)

212
Handbook of Semiconductors
By assuming the parabolic bands,
	
2
1
2
*
−
=
Ev
E
p
mp
	
(16.5)
	
2
2
2
*
−
=
E
E
p
m
c
n
	
(16.6)
Combining Equations (16.4), (16.5) and (16.6) produces
	
2
1
1
2
*
*
−
=
+




hv
E
p
m
m
G
n
p
	
(16.7)
An absorption coefficient characterizes direct transitions as
	
*
1/2
α
(
)
(
) ≈
−
hv
A
hv
EG
	
(16.8)
where A* is a constant. A quantum selection rule in some semiconductor materials does not permit 
transitions at p = 0, but permits them if p = 0 in the case
	
*
3/2
α
(
)
(
) ≈
−
hv
B
hv hv
EG
	
(16.9)
where B* is a constant.
Figure 16.3 shows the E vs. p graph for the indirect bandgap semiconductors such as Si and Ge, 
where the maxima of the valence band occur at a different minimum of the crystal momentum (p) of the 
conduction band. There is an extra particle that retains the electron momentum in the photon absorption 
process. The low energy particles having high momentum cause lattice vibrations in the semiconductor. 
Keep in consideration that phonon absorption or phonon emission constitutes light absorption. During 
the phonon absorption, it is associated with an absorption coefficient, which is defined by
	
1
2
α
(
)
(
) =
−
+
−
hv
A hv
E
E
e
a
G
ph
E
kT
Ph
	
(16.10)
	
1
2
α
(
)
(
) =
−
−
−
hv
A hv
E
E
e
e
G
ph
E
kT
Ph
	
(16.11)
When a phonon is emitted the absorption coefficient is
	
α
α
α
(
)
(
)
(
)
=
+
hv
hv
hv
a
e
	
(16.12)
Therefore, it is concluded that in the case of direct band gap semiconductor materials, the absorp­
tion process is quite convenient as the maxima of valance band momentum are the same as that of 
the minima of crystal momentum of the conduction band. Consequently, absorption happens easily 
with less energy required for the electron transition from E1 to E2. Conversely, in the case of indirect 
semiconductor materials, photon absorption is less as the maxima of crystal momentum does not 
interact with the minima of crystal momentum of the conduction band [9].

213
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
16.3.4  Charge Recombination
Recombination is a process in which electrons fall back from the conduction band to the valence 
band when a material is taken out of the thermal equilibrium (occurs due to illumination or injecting 
the current into the semiconductor material). There are three important recombination mechanisms 
observed in semiconductor-based solar cells, viz. single-level trap recombination, radiative recom­
bination, and Auger recombination.
16.3.4.1  Single-level Trap Recombination (RSTL)
Single-level trap recombination is also known as trap-assisted recombination or Shockley-Read-
Hall (SRH) recombination. In this case, a charge carrier encounters an occupied trap state of immo­
bile charge of the opposite sign [1]. The recombination centers produced by foreign atoms are also 
known as traps. Such type of recombination occurs due to the presence of a material defect or lattice 
structure defect or the presence of foreign atoms, which produces an additional defect energy level 
within the forbidden zone, as shown in Figure 16.4. The general expression of the SRH recombina­
tion can be given by [10]
	
,
,
2
/
/
τ
τ
(
)
(
)
=
−
+
+
+
(
)
(
)
−
−
R
pn
n
n p
n e
p n
n e
SLT
i
SLT
i
E
E
kT
SLT
i
E
E
kT
i
T
i
T
	
(16.13)
and
	
1
τ
σ
=
×
×
N
v
t
th
 
where Nt is trap density; D is the diffusion coefficient, Et refers to defect energy level, and σ and 
vth denote the capture cross-section and thermal velocity of electrons and holes, respectively. 
Additionally, the relationship between the carrier lifetime (τ) and diffusion length is 
τ
=
×
L
D
. 
From Equation (16.13), it is obvious that the SRH recombination is dependent upon the density 
FIGURE 16.4  Illustration of different types of recombination processes inside a semiconductor film.

214
Handbook of Semiconductors
of trap states, the density of trapped electrons and holes, and the lifetime of trap states (τe and τh). 
The rate of recombination is inversely proportional to the defect density or trap density. The rate of 
recombination increases with an increased value of trap density in semiconductor materials.
16.3.4.2  Radiative Recombination
In this mechanism, rather than being trapped at some intermediate trap, electrons present in the 
conduction band fall directly back into the valence band (Figure 16.4), and due to this reason, it is 
referred to as the band-to-band recombination. Meanwhile, the radiative recombination results in 
the emission of photons yielding applications such as light-emitting diodes and laser devices. The 
general equation for the net radiative recombination process is given by,
	
2
(
)
=
−
λ
R
B pn
ni 	
(16.14)
16.3.4.3  Auger Recombination
In Auger recombination, the excess energy is given to other electrons or holes, and again these car­
riers get relaxed by losing their energy in the form of heat and photons (as illustrated in Figure 16.4). 
According to calculations involving Auger processes for recombination rates, as described by
	
2
(
)
(
)
= ∧
+ ∧
−
R
n
p
pn
n
Auger
n
p
i 	
(16.15)
Thus, each of these recombination processes is responsible for the reduction in generation or car­
rier transport in solar cells. Thus, the total recombination rate is
	
,
∑
=








+
+
λ
R
R
R
R
trapsi
SLT i
Auger	
(16.16)
16.3.5  Equations Related to Solar Cells
In numerical modeling, equivalent mathematical equations like Poisson’s and continuity equations 
for holes and electrons are solved iteratively to evaluate the performance of the solar cell. Poisson’s 
equation is mathematically expressed by [11],
	
1
,
0
ε
ψ
ε
ρ
(
)
( )
∂
∂
∂
∂



= −
−+
−
+




−
x
x
x
q
n
p
N
q
def n p
D
	
(16.17)
where ψ denotes electrostatic potential in volts (V), q the electronic charge in coulombs (Q), p and n 
refer to hole and electron concentrations (cm−3), NA and ND are acceptors and donor doping concen­
trations in cm−3, ρdef(n, p) denote the defect distribution in cm−3, and ε denotes effective dielectric 
permittivity. Equation (16.18) and (16.19) represent the carrier continuity equation iteratively for the 
two types of charge carriers, holes and electrons [11],
	
,
(
)
−∂
∂
+
−
= ∂
∂
Jn
x
G
Un n p
n
t 	
(16.18)
	
,
(
)
−∂
∂
+
−
= ∂
∂
Jp
x
G
Un n p
p
t 	
(16.19)
where, Jn and Jp denote the current density of the electron and hole in mA/cm2, respectively; Un 
refers to the total rate of recombination, which is expressed in cm−3s−1, and G is the rate of generation 

215
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
which is expressed in cm−3 s−1. The carrier density gradient produces the diffusion current flowing 
through the semiconductor. Equations (16.20) and (16.21) show that electric field (E) yields drift 
current density attributed to the drift velocity of the charge carriers, viz. electrons and holes,
	
µ
=
∂
∂
+
J
qD
n
x
qn
E
nd
n
n 	
(16.20)
	
µ
= −
∂
∂
+
J
qD
p
x
qp
E
pd
p
p 	
(16.21)
Jnd and Jpd denote the current density due to the majority and minority electrons and holes in the n 
and p-type regions, respectively; Dn and Dp denote the diffusion constant of the electron and hole, 
and µn and µp refer to electron and hole mobility. Equation (16.22) shows that the net current density 
is equal to the addition of Jnd, and Jpd, concerning the diffusion length limits (Xn and Xp) in the n and 
p regions, respectively.
	
(
)
(
)
=
+
J
J
X
J
X
nd
n
pd
p 	
(16.22)
16.4  TFSC MATERIALS REVIEW
A thin-film solar cell (TFSC) is comprised of many layers of various semiconductor materials whose 
thickness varies from 50 nm to 3000 nm [12]. For a thin-film solar cell to operate, there are several 
components necessary, including a substrate, a transparent conducting oxide layer, a window layer 
(p- or n-type), a layer of active intrinsic material or absorber (i-type), and metal connections. Each 
semiconductor layer possesses different chemical and physical properties. Thus, the overall per­
formance of a solar cell is influenced by the semiconductor properties, and it becomes essential to 
understand the typical behavior of these layers while designing a cell. The involved layers in a solar 
cell possess different diffusion coefficients, lattice constant, electron affinity or work function, crys­
tal structure, chemical affinity and mobility, thermal expansion coefficient, mechanical adhesion, 
carrier mobility, microstructure, etc. Moreover, each layer produces bulk and interfacial defects, 
light reflection, transmission, and scattering, which also prove to be critical in the context of PV 
performance of the cells. Figure 16.5. shows the different layers inside a thin-film solar cell structure.
16.4.1  Substrate
There are two types of structures generally meant for fabricating thin-film solar cells, viz. super­
strate structure and substrate structure. In a superstrate structure, a transparent conducting oxide is 
used as the substrate and contact. In substrate configuration, a metal coating is used on a glass sub­
strate where metal coating acts as the contact. A substrate is an inert, passive layer with mechanical 
FIGURE 16.5  Schematic diagram of a cross-section view of a thin-film solar cell.

216
Handbook of Semiconductors
stability and is insensitive to thermal expansion. The substrate can be electrically conducting for 
front or rear contacts. Polymer materials are preferred for the fabrication of flexible substrates which 
can be used in flexible solar cells. A substrate is chosen such that it should be sustained during the 
high-temperature deposition process up to 600°C. The commonly utilized substrates include stain­
less steel, molybdenum (Mo), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu), and others.
16.4.2  Transparent Conducting Oxide (TCO)
According to the solar spectrum, transparent conducting oxide (TCO) is generally regarded as one of 
the most effective n-type semiconductors due to its high conductivity and transparency. TCO has a low 
sheet resistance and allows the complete transmission of most of the photons to the intrinsic absorber 
layer. It is important to note that the conductivity of TCO depends on the carrier concentration and 
carrier mobility. The transparency of the TCO layer is reduced if the charge carrier concentration is 
increased beyond a certain level. This means that, without affecting the carrier concentration, the 
carrier mobility can be adjusted to control the conductivity and transparency of the TCO. Thus, to 
increase the quality of the TCO layer, the only good solution is to increase its crystalline carrier mobil­
ity. Apart from these, the mechanical, thermal, and chemical stability and passivity of TCO are some 
other important considerations in the context of TCO. The typical examples of transparent conducting 
oxide materials are indium oxide (In2O3), zinc oxide (ZnO), tin oxide (SnO3), etc.
16.4.3  Window Layer
Most of the incident radiation passes through the window layer, which is generally made up of a 
heavily doped n-type semiconductor. No charge carriers are generated inside the window layer 
while it admits the maximum amount of light to an absorber layer. With the high value of the band 
gap energy of the window and possibly keeping the low value of thickness, low series resistance has 
been ensured. Commonly used window layer materials are CdS, CdZnS, a-SiC: H, etc.
16.4.4  Absorber
An absorber layer is an intrinsic layer that creates a strong electric field or built-in potential in the 
depletion region. Absorber materials should have a good absorption coefficient, i.e., absorber mate­
rial should absorb the photons corresponding to the wide range of solar spectrum in UV, visible, 
and IR regions, large carrier diffusion length, and high carrier mobility. The bandgap energy of 
the absorber should be such that it absorbs the maximum photon energy corresponding to the wide 
range of the solar spectrum. A typical value of the absorber bandgap energy varies from 1.1 eV to 
4 eV. The popular absorber layer materials are Cu(Ga, In)Se2, CdTe, a-Si: H, CH3NH3PbI3, etc.
16.5  CLASSIFICATION OF THE SOLAR CELL TECHNOLOGIES
The classification of technologies that have been in the practice of solar cells is shown in Figure 16.6, 
which has been made based on the type of semiconductor material and processing methods used. 
The highly efficient, cost-effective, and environment-friendly solar cells can be fabricated through 
the proper selection of materials and processing technology. Based on it, there are four generations 
of PV technological evolutions called the first-generation, second-generation, third-generation, and 
fourth-generation solar cells, which are briefly described as follows.
16.5.1  First-generation Solar Cells
The first generation of solar cells was manufactured with crystalline silicon, which had ruled the 
PV market for the previous 50 years. The silicon solar cell processing cost is too expensive for an 

217
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
efficiency of less than 24%. Again, there are two subtypes of silicon solar cells, viz. monocrystalline 
or single-crystal and polycrystalline. Monocrystalline types are costly since they utilize the silicon 
wafer that has a regular lattice structure, continuous, unbroken, homogeneous, and pure form than 
polysilicon. These single crystals are grown using the Czochralski technique, and their power con­
version efficiency varies between 17% to 24%. Polycrystalline solar cells or panels are composed 
of several small silicon crystals. Polysilicon is made from metallurgical grade silicon using a high-
temperature chemical purification process. It has less purity as compared to single-crystal silicon. 
Hence, due to this the grain boundaries and defect concentration are very high. Therefore, their 
power conversion efficiency is also limited from 13% to 17%. Si wafer releases poisonous gases 
during the processing of the single crystal, so it is environmentally unfriendly [13].
16.5.2  Second Generation of Solar Cells
The CdTe, CIGS-based, and a-Si: H, thin-film solar cells are regarded as the second generation 
of solar cells. In 1980, the first Cu2S/CdS-based thin-film solar cell was developed to yield >10% 
(USA) efficiency value. In 1986, the first a-Si G4000-based commercial thin-film power module 
was developed by Arco Solar (USA). CIGS solar cells are efficient inorganic thin-film solar cells. 
A CIGS cell is manufactured by depositing copper, indium, gallium, and sulfide on a soda-lime 
glass or polymer substrate. CuInGaSe2 solar cells have a wide absorption coefficient in the range 
of 105 cm−1 with a bandgap value of 1.5 eV. In 2014, the National Renewable Energy Laboratory 
(NERL) recorded the highest efficiency of 21.4%. The a-Si: H solar cell has an amorphous absorber 
semiconductor thin-film material for a solar cell that provides an efficiency lower than that of a 
c-Si cell. However, it has a low manufacturing cost due to the roll-to-roll deposition technique, and 
the a-Si: H solar cells have been fabricated on the lime soda glass as well as on a plastic substrate 
[14]. Till 2019, the efficiency of a-Si: H cells reached up to 14.2%. CdTe, CIGS, and a-Si: H-based 
solar cells often require chemical vapor deposition methods during film growth that consumes 
high energy.
FIGURE 16.6  Classification of the solar cell technologies.

218
Handbook of Semiconductors
16.5.3  Third Generation of Solar Cells
The third generation of solar cells remains to be popularly discovered as solution-processable thin-
film PV cells, which are fabricated using organic/polymer materials at a drastically reduced cost. 
These include quantum dot solar cells (QDSCs), organic or polymer PV cells (OPVs), and organic 
dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). In DSSCs, organic dyes are used as photosensitizers or absorber 
materials. The charges are produced similarly to the process of photosynthesis in plants, although at 
high temperature electrolyte gets expanded and vaporizes. Also, at low temperature, the electrolyte 
freezes. Hence, the efficiency of DSSC is very low and also presents stability issues. In QDSCs, 
PbS2-based quantum dots are used as absorber material. Quantum dots have tunable band gap 
energy throughout an extensive range of energy levels, which is regulated by the size of the Q-dot. 
Till 2019, the maximum efficiency of QDSCs achieved exceeded 16.5%. However, the QDSCs suf­
fer from weak absorption ability at room temperature. Organic solar cells use organic or polymer 
materials for thin-film growth. OPVs are also used for fabricating flexible solar cells. Generally, 
solution-based deposition methods are used, which have very low cost and stability. OPVs are under 
the research phase due to the limited range of power conversion efficiency varying from 1% to 13% 
achieved experimentally. The QDSCs, DSSCs, and OPVs offer a low power conversion efficiency, 
PCE < 20% due to the low light absorption and charge collection [14].
16.5.4  Fourth Generation of Solar Cells
The fourth generation of solar cells consists of halide-based perovskite solar cells which are specially 
designed to improve the power conversion efficiency and intended to reduce the cost of the solution 
processing methods. The chemical formula commonly used for metal halide perovskite materi­
als is ABX3, where A represents a monovalent or organic cation such as CH3NH3
+ or CH(NH2)+ 
and B represents a divalent metal cation (such as Pb2+ or Sn2+). X represents a halide anion (Cl−, 
Br−, I−) [15]. In 2009, Kojima and Miyasaka et al testified the primary perovskite solar cells were 
made using iodide or bromide-based electrolytes with the sensitizers being CH3NH3PbBr3 and 
CH3NH3PbI3. They tailored an improved PCE of 3.81% for the CH3NH3PbBr3 and the CH3NH3PbI3-
based perovskite devices at 3.13% [16]. Organometal perovskite solar cells became very popular in 
a short period because of their high spectral absorption, large diffusion length, and low trap density, 
which results in a high percentage of power conversion efficiency. In 2019, Shuyan Shao, et al. 
reported the highest power conversion efficiency of 25.2% [15].
16.6  PERFORMANCE PARAMETERS OF THE SOLAR CELLS
To determine the performance parameters of solar cells, the J-V characteristic is generally utilized. 
The importance and equations of performance metrics are explained as follows.
16.6.1  Short Circuit Current (ISC)
Short circuit current (ISC) can be defined as the maximum value of the current that flows in its 
external part of the circuit when metal contact, viz. anode and cathode of a solar cell has been short-
circuited, i.e., V = 0. Short-circuit current depends upon the following factors,
1.	Photon flux incidence (solar radiation): The standard solar radiation on the earth is 
1000 W/m2 at AM1.5G, i.e., 
=
I
I
SC
Ph which is proportional to the solar radiation intensity.
2.	When sunlight falls on the surface area of the solar cell, it causes the rise of Isc. As the 
surface area of the solar cell increases, more electron-hole pairs will be generated when 
the solar cell is exposed to light.

219
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
Ideally, the maximum value of the short-circuit current flow through a crystalline silicon solar 
cell is 46 mA/m2. However, the experimentally obtained value of ISC in a solar cell is 35 mA/m2 [17]
16.6.2  Open Circuit Voltage
Open circuit voltage (VOC) is the voltage that is attained at the solar cell terminal when the current 
is zero through the external load circuit.
	
ln
1
0
=
+




V
nK T
q
I
I
OC
B
Ph
	
(16.23)
i.e.,
	
ln
When 
0
0
=




>>
V
nK T
q
I
I
I
I
OC
B
Ph
Ph
	
(16.24)
Generally, VOC is dependent upon IPh and I0, where I0 is a dark current reverse saturation cur­
rent and Iph is a photocurrent. I0 is dependent upon the rate of recombination in the device and the 
temperature. As the temperature of the device increases, I0 increases and VOC will be decreased. In 
addition, the temperature of the cells is inversely proportional to the VOC. Due to the charge carriers’ 
rapid movement, the open-circuit voltage rises as the temperature drops.
16.6.3  Fill Factor
The fill factor (FF) is the ratio of maximum power generated by the solar cell to the product of VOC 
and ISC.
	
*
*
*
=
=
FF
P
V
I
V
I
V
I
MPP
OC
SC
MPP
MPP
OC
SC
	
(16.25)
Operating a solar cell at its maximum power point (MPP) can optimize its performance. The FF 
can frequently be reduced due to unwanted resistive losses. Consider that the solar cell behaves like 
an ideal diode, with the FF being a function of the open-circuit voltages VOC [6].
	
0.72
1
(
)
=
−
+
+
FF
V
In V
V
OC
OC
OC
	
(16.26)
Here, VOC is the normalized voltage (approximately VOC >10) for an ideal value of the FF. FF for the 
GaAs solar cell is 0.89 and for Si, FF is 0.85.
16.6.4  Power Conversion Efficiency (ƞ)
The ratio of the maximum generated power to the optical incident power (Pi) is known as the power 
conversion efficiency (PCE). Corresponding to the AM1.5G spectrum, 1000 w/m2 is the solar cell 
irradiance on the solar surface, i.e., Pin = 1000 w/m2
.
	
*
*
*
max
η =
=
=
P
P
I
V
P
I
V
FF
P
in
MPP
MPP
in
SC
OC
in
	
(16.27)
Here, Pin = (Solar constant) × (Area of the solar cell’s surface [W/m2]).

220
Handbook of Semiconductors
16.7  FUTURE OF EMERGING SOLAR TECHNOLOGIES
Most of the sunlight falling on the earth’s surface gets diffused or dispersed in the atmosphere. 
Due to this fact, the complete utilization of the solar cell performance is not being accomplished. 
However, we can significantly improve solar cell efficiency at a lower cost. The maximum amount 
of power that may be obtained through a single junction PV cell is 33%, following the Shockley-
Queisser limit [18]. NREL, a part of the US Department of Energy (DOE), has improved solar cell 
efficiency through meticulous material design in the cell stack. Their study in Cell Reports Physical 
Science details the growth of a gallium arsenide (GaAs) heterojunction solar cell using dynamic 
hydride vapor phase epitaxy (D-HVPE), setting a new record with a certified efficiency of 27% for 
a single-junction GaAs cell produced with this method [19].However, the capability of solar cells 
can be enhanced through two approaches, viz. using the multi-junction structure and structure with 
different band gap semiconductor materials (tandem solar cells). In tandem solar cells, each layer of 
the cell is band gap graded to absorb the wide range of solar energy spectrum. A tandem solar cell 
involving GaInP/GaAs/Ge layers has been designed with 32% conversion efficiency [20], which is 
very close to the Shockley-Quissier efficiency limit.
16.8  CONCLUSION
Nowadays, more communities are using thin-film solar cells than their conventional thick-film sil­
icon-based counterparts. However, thin-film solar cells have lower fabrication cost as it involves a 
lesser amount of material consumption and economical solution processing fabrication methods. 
Since 2009, the PV market share of thin-film solar cells has risen from 17% to 38%. Currently, 
organometal halide solar cells are becoming more popular and on the verge of commercializa­
tion. Researchers have designed perovskite solar cells intending to maximize efficiency at a much-
reduced cost; however, the main problem with perovskite solar cell technology is their long-term 
stability. Apart from the rigid PV technology, flexible solar cells are also fast catching up due to 
their ability to be folded or rolled. Therefore, a lot of research activities are going on toward the 
improvement of substrate material quality by improving their durability, mechanical breakdown 
strength, and high-temperature processing ability. The flexible solar panels offer novel applications 
such as wall shades, window shades, wallpapers, curved roofs, etc.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 S. Hegedus, and A. Luque, Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering, vol. 129. WILEY 
Online Library (2003).
	
2.	 Z. I. Alferov, “The double heterostructure: Concept and its applications in physics, electronics, and 
technology,” Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, vol. 16, (2002) pp. 647–675.
	
3.	 D. Frey, Vanilla vehicles, Mach. Des., vol. 74, no. 21, (2002) p. 18.
	
4.	 K. Ramanathan, J. Keane, and R. Noufi, “Properties of high-efficiency CIGS thin-film solar cells,” 
Paper presented at The IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, February, 2005, pp. 195–198.
	
5.	 S. A. Olaleru, J. K. Kirui, D. Wamwangi, K. T. Roro, and B. Mwakikunga, “Perovskite solar cells: The 
new epoch in photovoltaics,” Sol. Energy, vol. 196, (2020) pp. 295–309.
	
6.	 K. Mertens, Photovoltaics Fundamentals, Technology and Practice. John Wiley & Sons (2018).
	
7.	 A. Shah, Thin-Film Silicon Solar Cells. CRC Press (2010).
	
8.	 I. M. Dharmadasa, Advances in Thin-Film Solar Cells. CRC Press (2012).
	
9.	 A. Luque, and S. Hegedus, Photovoltaic Science Handbook of Photovoltaic Science. WILEY Online 
Library (2011).
	 10.	 S. Abdelaziz, A. Zekry, A. Shaker, and M. Abouelatta, “Investigating the performance of formamidinium 
tin-based perovskite solar cell by SCAPS device simulation,” Opt. Mater, vol. 101, (2020), pp. 109738(1-8).
	 11.	 S. Bhattarai, and T. D. Das, “Optimization of carrier transport materials for the performance enhance­
ment of the MAGeI3 based perovskite solar cell optimization of carrier transport materials for the 
performance enhancement of the MAGeI 3 based perovskite solar cell,” Sol. Energy, vol. 217, (2021) 
pp. 200–207.

221
Semiconductors for Solar Cells 
	 12.	 K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson, and V. Dutta, “Thin-film solar cells: An overview,” Prog. Photovoltaics 
Res. Appl., vol. 12, (2004) pp. 69–92.
	 13.	 P. Tonui, S. O. Oseni, G. Sharma, Q. Yan, and G. Tessema Mola, “Perovskites photovoltaic solar cells: 
An overview of current status,” Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., vol. 91, (2018) pp. 1025–1044.
	 14.	 G. Han, S. Zhang, P. P. Boix, L. H. Wong, L. Sun, and S. Y. Lien, “Towards high-efficiency thin film 
solar cells,” Prog. Mater. Sci., vol. 87, (2017) pp. 246–291.
	 15.	 S. Shao, and M. A. Loi, “The role of the interfaces in perovskite solar cells,” Adv. Mater. Interfaces, vol. 
7, (2020), pp. 1901469 (1-31).
	 16.	 A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai, and T. Miyasaka, “Organometal halide perovskites as visible-light 
sensitizers for photovoltaic,” Journal of the American Chemical Society vol. 131 (2009) pp. 6050–6051,
	 17.	 E. S. Han, A. Goleman, D. Boyatzis, and R. McKee, “Basic photovoltaic principles and methods,” J. 
Chem. Inf. Model, vol. 53, (1982) pp. 1689–1699.
	 18.	 W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen, and W. C. H. Choy, “The efficiency limit of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar 
cells,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 106, (2015), pp. 221104(1-5).
	 19.	 Kevin L. Schulte et. al., “Modeling and design of III-V heterojunction solar cells for enhanced perfor­
mance,” Cell Reports Physical Science, vol. 4, Issue 9, (2023), 101541.
	 20.	 H. Cotal et al., “III-V multijunction solar cells for concentrating photovoltaics,” Energy Environ. Sci., 
vol. 2, (2009) pp. 174–192.

222
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-17
Semiconductor Lasers
Shaoteng Wu and Haizhong Weng
17.1  INTRODUCTION
17.1.1  The Birth of Lasers
The origin of laser theory can be traced back to 1916 when Einstein proposed, based on quantum 
theory, that when matter interacts with the electromagnetic field of light, there is not only stimu­
lated absorption but also stimulated radiation. In 1917, he cleverly employed the concept of an 
equilibrium state to elucidate the phenomenon of spontaneous emission. Einstein’s theory also 
gave a necessary condition for the realization of lasers: particle population inversion. This condi­
tion implies that there must be surplus atoms at high energy levels compared to those at low energy 
levels, as only these excess atoms at high energy levels can prompt the dominance of stimulated 
emission over stimulated absorption. In a state of thermal equilibrium, particle population inver­
sion cannot occur naturally. Hence, an external energy source, often referred to as the “pump,” 
is required to continually excite atoms to higher energy levels, hereby fulfilling the prerequisite 
condition for laser operation.
In the early 1950s, there arose a need to transition from radio technology to shorter wavelengths, 
prompting scientists to explore the practical implementation of lasers. For example, Charles H. 
Townes from the United States, and Nikolai G. Basov and Aleksander M. Prokhorov from the Soviet 
Union proposed leveraging Einstein’s theory to amplify electromagnetic waves through stimulated 
radiation from atoms and molecules [1]. Later, Townes et al. introduced the concept of substituting 
the traditional closed resonator with an open resonator, while Nicolaas Bloembergen advocated for 
using a three-level atom or molecule system pumped by light to achieve particle population inver­
sion [2]. The culmination of these efforts occurred in 1960 when the world witnessed the creation of 
the first ruby laser [3]. Numerous experimental results have demonstrated that lasers have excellent 
properties that ordinary light does not have, including excellent brightness, high monochromaticity, 
high directivity, and strong coherence [4].
17.1.2  Semiconductor Lasers
Following the invention of the laser, researchers promptly initiated studies into semiconductor 
lasers due to the small size, high efficiency, and long lifespan. Nonetheless, early homogeneous 
junction semiconductor lasers, as shown in Figure 17.1a, commonly referred to as laser diodes, faced 
a limitation in that they could only operate in a pulsed mode at low temperatures. Overcoming this 
limitation was a critical focus of research and development in this area. Zhores Alferov and Rudolf 
Kazarinov pioneered the development of the first single-heterojunction laser [5, 6], as shown in 
Figure 17.1b. Then H. Kressel and Z. I. Alferov [7] proposed the structure of a double-heterojunc­
tion semiconductor laser, achieving continuous operation at room temperature with the structure 
depicted in Figure 17.1c. As the research and development of heterojunction lasers progressed, there 
was a strategy to use ultra-thin semiconductor layers in the laser’s source region to induce quan­
tum effects. Bolstered by advanced thin-film growth technologies such as molecular beam epitaxy 
(MBE) and metalorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) [8], this concept led to the produc­
tion of quantum well (QW) lasers, as illustrated in Figure 17.1d. QW lasers are distinguished by the 
formation of potential wells in the source region that are smaller than the de Broglie wavelength 
of electrons in the material. This results in the continuous band splitting into sub-energy levels, 
thereby enhancing the effective carrier density.
17

223
Semiconductor Lasers
The application of semiconductor lasers in various aspects has spurred the development of a 
range of new semiconductor lasers, which can be broadly categorized based on their structural 
characteristics. These categories include the vertical-cavity surface-emitting laser (VCSEL), micro-
cavity semiconductor lasers, quantum cascade lasers (QCLs), integrated semiconductor lasers, and 
so on. Below we will provide detailed descriptions of these lasers.
17.2  VCSEL
Traditional semiconductor edge-emitting lasers (EELs) are a type of laser diode that emits coherent 
light from the edge of a thin, planar semiconductor wafer, as illustrated in Figure 17.1a. These lasers 
typically comprise a semiconductor chip with multiple layers, including an active region where light 
generation occurs and two reflective facets on opposite sides of the chip. In contrast, the VCSEL 
has emerged as a semiconductor laser design with distinct advantages, which was proposed by 
Professor Kenichi Iga at Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1977 [9]. The output direction of VCSEL 
is perpendicular to the substrate surface, as illustrated in Figure 17.2a. VCSEL has a wide range 
of applications, including optical fiber communication, laser printing, sensing and pumping light 
sources, etc [10, 11].
As shown in Figure 17.2a, the VCSEL structure comprises p-type and n-type distributed Bragg 
reflectors (DBRs), a multi-quantum well (MQW) active region, an oxidation limiting layer, the 
substrate, and electrode contacts. The DBR in the VCSEL is constructed using a periodic layer 
structure consisting of alternating high and low refractive index layers, each having a thickness 
FIGURE 17.1  (a) Schematic illustration of laser diode structure; (b) Single-heterojunction laser; (c) Double-
heterojunction laser; (d) Multi-quantum well (MQW) laser.

224
Handbook of Semiconductors
of 1/4 optical wavelength. Due to the half-wave loss from the optically sparse medium to the 
optically dense medium, the reflected light at the two interfaces can form interference-enhanced 
reflection, and the reflectivity can exceed 99% [11]. The reflectivity and reflection bandwidth are 
related to the ratio of the two refractive indices. A greater difference in refractive indices leads 
to higher reflectivity and a wider bandwidth. The number of layers in the DBRs also influences 
reflectivity, with a higher number of layers resulting in greater reflectivity. Taking VCSELs based 
on GaAs as an example, AlGaAs with different doping concentrations and different Al compo­
nents are commonly employed in DBR manufacturing to maximize the contrast in refractive 
indices. This tailored construction enhances the performance of the VCSEL by optimizing its 
reflective properties.
In addition, the active region consisting of MQW serves for both constraining carriers and acting 
as an optical cavity. The active region is placed in the middle of p- and n-DBR, forming a Fabry–
Pérot (FP) cavity where the thickness is an integer multiple of half the wavelength, meeting the 
standing wave condition. The oxidation limiting layer plays a crucial role in controlling the single 
transverse mode of VCSEL [12]. Since the number of transverse modes is directly related to the 
transverse size, a primary method to achieve single-mode operation is filtering out the high-order 
modes by reducing the oxidation layer aperture. Reports suggest that achieving single-mode opera­
tion can be realized by limiting the size of the oxidation layer aperture to 3 μm [13]. However, pre­
cise control of the aperture size poses challenges, making this approach less common. To address 
this challenge, various alternative methods have been developed, including conical oxidation aper­
ture VCSEL, ion implantation VCSEL, metal aperture VCSEL, Zn diffusion VCSEL, photonic 
crystal VCSEL, surface relief VCSEL, etc.
In addition to the convenient realization of two-dimensional arrays, VCSEL also boasts many 
other advantages. These include a circular beam profile (Figure 17.2b), facilitating easy coupling 
FIGURE 17.2  (a) Structure diagram of the VCSEL; (b) Comparison beween the beam shapes of different 
light sources; (c) Face recognition for iPhones.

225
Semiconductor Lasers
with optical fibers. VCSELs also exhibit small threshold currents, high power conversion efficiency, 
and low power consumption. Achieving single longitudinal mode operation is straightforward due 
to the short cavity length and large frequency spacing of longitudinal modes. Moreover, VCSELs 
offer a wide operating temperature range, are suitable for LED processes, facilitate commercial 
production, and demonstrate high reliability such as high power conversion efficiency, low power 
consumption, wide operating temperature range, and high reliability [14]. It has been applied in the 
face recognition module of the mobile phone, as depicted in Figure 17.2c. In summary, VCSELs 
have many advantages and applications, making them of significant value for both research and 
practical use.
17.3  SEMICONDUCTOR WGM MICROCAVITY LASER
Semiconductor whispering gallery mode (WGM) microcavity lasers offer promising prospects for 
on-chip interconnection and sensing, thanks to their advantages of a compact footprint, low thresh­
old, and in-plane light emission. The WGM phenomenon, originally described by Lord Rayleigh to 
explain the sound wave behavior of sound observed in St. Paul’s Cathedral [15], signifies the con­
finement and propagation of waves around a concave surface. Research in WGM optical microcavi­
ties occupies a prominent position in both fundamental physics investigations and the development 
of practical optoelectronic devices, including filters, modulators, and lasers [16]. Within an optical 
microresonator, the light field is strongly confined in an WGM pattern through total internal reflec­
tion at the high refractive index microcavity interface [17]. Figures 17.3a and 17.3b illustrate the ray-
optics depiction of light propagation in a microring resonator and the electric field distribution of a 
fundamental mode near the surface and along the equatorial plane of the microring. Figures 17.3c 
and 17.3d present scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of a 10-μm-radius ring resonator, 
viewed from the top and side angles. In such a microring resonator, the resonant WGM wavelength 
approximately counts as:
	
2π
λ
⋅
=
⋅
R n
m
	
(17.1)
where n is the refractive index, m is the integer number of wavelengths that fit around the perimeter 
of the resonator 2πR, λ is wavelength.
We will commence by introducing the low-threshold characteristics. Following that, we will 
describe various semiconductor materials for the emission of diverse wavelengths in WGM microla­
sers. Subsequently, we will introduce the methods employed for light output coupling and achieving 
directional emission.
Within a WGM cavity, the spontaneous emission characteristics of excited atoms undergo sig­
nificant changes. This transformation primarily arises from the presence of the optical microcavity, 
which modifies the spatial and spectral distribution of optical modes. When the wavelength of spon­
taneous emission from excited atoms aligns with the resonance wavelength of the optical cavity, 
spontaneous emission becomes intensified. This phenomenon was initially described by Purcell in 
1946, and the degree of enhancement is quantified by the Purcell factor [21].
	
P
n
Q
V
π
λ
=




3
4
2
3
	
(17.2)
where the Q is the quality factor and V is the mode volume of the cavity modes. λ is the wavelength 
and n is the refractive index. In cases where Q/V of an optical microcavity is extremely high, it can 
profoundly influence the characteristics of spontaneous emission within the cavity. Consequently, 
there is a strong expectation to enhance the spontaneous emission factor and significantly lower the 

226
Handbook of Semiconductors
laser’s threshold with the WGM microcavity. These microcavities can assume various shapes, 
including disks, spheres, cylindricals, toroids and polygons [17]. To enable lasing within a WGM 
cavity, it is crucial to integrate an active layer into the cavity’s structure to provide the optical gain. 
Our primary focus will be on the III-V semiconductors with direct band gap, making them ideal 
candidates for gain materials. Additionally, the refractive index of a resonator significantly differs 
from that of the surrounding material. In III-V semiconductor lasers, vertical optical confinement is 
typically achieved by exploiting the disparities in refractive indices among epitaxial layers in a 
sandwich-like structure. In the lateral direction, the light can be effectively limited by the low-index 
material such as silicon dioxide (SiO2) or air.
The earliest demonstration of semiconductor WGM lasers can be traced back to 1992 when Bell 
Labs first reported an optically pumped laser utilizing a 5-μm-diameter InP/InGaAsP microdisk, 
as depicted in Figure 17.4a. Benefiting from the ample gain supplied by the InGaAs QW under 
cooling conditions, they achieved single-mode lasing at 1.3 and 1.5 μm with pump thresholds of 
less than 100 μW [18]. In that same year, they also reported electrically injected microdisk lasers 
operating with sub-milliampere threshold currents at room temperature [22]. Due to the distribu­
tion of WGMs near the boundaries of the microcavity, any surface roughness that occurs through 
fabrication can lead to strong light scattering. There is a pressing need for smooth cavity sidewalls 
to minimize non-radiative recombination at the surface and enhance the Q factors. Using SiO2 as 
a hard mask and employing an optimized dry etching recipe with Cl2-based gas can ensure the 
FIGURE 17.3  The light field propagation and distribution in the view of (a) geometrical optics and (b) wave 
optics; (c) and (d) are the top-view and side-view SEM images of a microring resonator.

227
Semiconductor Lasers
creation of smooth etched sidewalls. In 1998, T. Baba et al. achieved the first room-temperature 
continuous-wave (CW) laser operation in a 3-μm-diameter InGaAsP/InP microdisk, which was 
created using reactive-ion etching [23]. Through the reduction of cavity sidewall roughness and the 
achievement of a Q factor of ~3,300, they obtained a threshold current of 150 μA. Subsequently, 
they demonstrated CW lasing at 1563 nm, further reducing the threshold current to just 40 μA [24]. 
The notable improvement was achieved by employing inductively coupled plasma (ICP) etching to 
form a steep microcavity profile and optimizing cavity dimensions to align the lasing mode with 
the peak of the gain spectrum.
By carefully manipulating alloy compositions, the emission wavelength of semiconductor WGM 
microlasers can be flexibly adjusted to cover broad laser spectra, spanning from the visible light to 
the mid-infrared region. The first WGM lasers designed for the mid-infrared range (3–4 μm) were 
achieved in 2005 using sub-millimeter InAsSb microrings at temperatures between 70–120 K [25]. 
With the optimized fabrication processes, the CW room-temperature lasing at 428 nm was success­
fully accomplished in a GaN microdisk, with a threshold pump power of 300 W/cm2 [26].
Achieving high emission efficiency is crucial for microcavity lasers. However, the high-Q fac­
tor of the WGMs and circular symmetry pose challenges in achieving the directional light output. 
Previous efforts involved deformed cavities or introducing various scatterers to break this sym­
metry. Another widely employed approach leverages evanescent wave coupling between WGM 
output and optical waveguides, offering seamless integration with various optoelectronic devices. 
Depending on the specific coupling methods employed, this approach can be categorized into 
two main types: vertical coupling and horizontal coupling. In 2012, Cao’s research group at Yale 
University employed electron beam exposure technology to achieve lateral coupling output between 
the deformed InAs quantum dot (QD) microdisk laser and the waveguide, as depicted in Figure 
17.4b [19]. As shown in Figure 17.4c, researchers from Ghent University achieved directional light 
emission by vertically coupling evanescent waves into a waveguide on the Si substrate [20]. They 
first bonded the III-V material to the silicon-on-insulator (SOI) and then etched a thin InP-based 
microdisk laser. Recently, microdisk/microring lasers with direct-connect waveguides have also 
been proposed and demonstrated. This scheme effectively enhanced the directional emission effi­
ciency while maintaining the high-Q coupled modes [27]. Additionally, square microcavities with 
direct-connect waveguide at one corner can support high-Q WGMs and excellent coupling effi­
ciency, enabling high-power dual-wavelength lasing for sub-THz wave generation [28].
Recently, there have been significant advancements in the development of high-speed directly 
modulated WGM microlasers, including their heterogeneous integration with silicon platforms. 
These achievements hold great promise for enhancing their utility as on-chip laser sources in pho­
tonic integrated circuits [29]. Microcavity lasers have also found diverse applications in fields such 
as sensing, microwave photonics, all-optical flip-flop memory, random number generation, cavity-
quantum electrodynamics, and nonlinear dynamics. Given the maturity of III-V planar photonics 
FIGURE 17.4  (a) SEM image depicting the first optically pumped microdisk laser as reported by Bell Labs. 
(Adapted with permission [18], Copyright [1992], AIP Publishing). (b) SEM image showcasing lateral cou­
pling with a deformed microdisk cavity. (Adapted with permission [19], Copyright [2012], AIP Publishing). (c) 
Schematic illustration of a heterogeneous microdisk laser with SOI platform, facilitating vertical evanescent 
coupling from the laser to the silicon (Si) waveguide. (Adapted with permission [20], Copyright [2007], Optica 
Publishing Group).

228
Handbook of Semiconductors
fabrication techniques, future research efforts should prioritize further enhancing the performance 
and yield of semiconductor WGM microlasers. This includes improving factors like internal effi­
ciency, fiber collection efficiency, response speed, and energy efficiency under direct modulation.
17.4  QUANTUM CASCADE LASER
The invention of the quantum cascade laser (QCL, also known as a unipolar laser) is an important 
milestone in the history of semiconductor laser development. It was first born at Bell Labs in 1994 
and is capable of emitting light in the mid-infrared, far-infrared, and terahertz spectral range [31]. 
This capability addresses a significant need for light sources in these spectral regions, where natural 
materials are often lacking. In recent years, with the continuous advancement of technology, the 
applications of QCL are becoming increasingly diverse.
The working principle of QCLs is fundamentally different from traditional semiconductor lasers. 
For traditional semiconductor lasers, their luminescence relies on the recombination of electrons in 
the conduction band and holes in the valence band. Each electron can only generate one photon, and 
the wavelength of the light is related to the band gap of the material. For QCLs, their luminescence 
relies on the transitions of electrons between the subbands in the conduction band in semiconduc­
tor quantum wells, as shown in Figure 17.5a. Each electron can generate multiple photons, and the 
wavelength of light can be controlled regardless of the material. Due to different structures, QCLs 
can be divided into three kinds: FP QCL, distributed feedback (DFB) QCL, and external cavity 
QCL. The basic working principles of QCLs with different structures are the same.
QCLs are made up of a series of semiconductor layers arranged in a periodic fashion. Each 
period typically contains an injector layer and an active layer, as illustrated in Figure 17.5b. The 
active layer has a structure of coupled three quantum wells, which can form three energy levels 
[32]. Among them, the energy difference between the upper energy level and the middle energy 
level is larger, and that between the lower energy level and the middle energy level is smaller. When 
the semiconductor thin layers have the appropriate thickness, particle population inversion can be 
achieved by exploiting the quantum confinement effect within the semiconductor heterojunction 
FIGURE 17.5  (a) Schematic of the conduction band structure for quantum cascade laser (QCL); (b) The 
dark-field transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the one cascade of InGaAs/AlInAs QCL het­
erostructure. (Figure 17.5b adapted with permission from [30]. Copyright A.V. Babichev, A.G. Gladyshev, 
E.S. Kolodeznyi, A.S. Kurochkin, G.S. Sokolovskii, V.E. Bougrov, L.Y. Karachinsky, I.I. Novikov, V.V. 
Dudelev, V.N. Nevedomsky, S.O. Slipchenko, A.V. Lutetskiy, A.N. Sofronov, D.A. Firsov, L.E. Vorobjev, N.A. 
Pikhtin, and A.Y. Egorov, some rights reserved; exclusive license IOP Publishing. Distributed under a Creative 
Commons Attribution License 3.0 [CC BY] https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/.)

229
Semiconductor Lasers
thin layer. Then, the electron transitions from the upper energy level to the middle energy level 
through spontaneous or stimulated emission, generating a photon and emitting light of the cor­
responding wavelength. After that, the electron on the middle energy level releases a phonon and 
relaxes to the lower energy level through resonance transport. Since the energy level difference in 
the active layer is related to the thickness of the semiconductor thin layers, the thickness can be 
adjusted for tuneable and highly specific wavelength emissions.
Compared with traditional semiconductor lasers, the advantage of QCLs lies in their cascade 
process. The application of an external electric field leads to the formation of minibands. When the 
electron descends to the lower energy level within the active layer, aided by the mentioned phonons, 
it has the capability to tunnel to the upper energy level of the active layer in the subsequent period 
through the miniband in the injector. This tunneling phenomenon aligns with the quantum tunnel­
ing effect. After that, the electron transitions again and emits photons with the same energy. The 
described process iterates continuously within both the injector and active region of each period. 
In this way, the utilization efficiency of electrons is greatly increased, and the number of photons 
generated by one electron is equal to the number of stages of the QCL. Since the number of periods 
can reach tens or even hundreds, the optical gain of QCLs can be very high with the requirement of 
higher external voltages.
Currently, QCLs utilizing various material systems can be manufactured through MBE and 
MOCVD. Since the short-wavelength limit of QCL emission is connected with the depth of the 
quantum well, different types of materials can be selected for various wavelength spectral ranges. 
The earliest QCLs in history were made of InP-based GaInAs/AlInAs materials and had very good 
performance in the mid-infrared spectral range [31, 33]. In addition, QCLs made of GaAs-based 
GaAs/AlGaAs have been proven to have excellent performance in the terahertz spectral range [34], 
and material systems such as InAs/AlSb/GaSb can provide shorter wavelength lasers in the mid-
infrared spectral range [35].
Due to its unique design principles, QCLs offer several distinct advantages. Firstly, QCLs cover 
wide spectra, from mid-infrared to terahertz; secondly, QCLs have excellent wavelength tunability; 
thirdly, QCLs can provide high output power; and finally yet importantly, QCLs are able to work at 
room temperature. These advantages enable the widespread application of QCLs in various fields, 
such as gas detection, air pollutant monitoring [36], security, and automobile industry.
17.5  INTEGRATED SEMICONDUCTOR LASER
The Si photonics platform, represented by SOI technology, is playing an increasingly central role 
in data communication and high-performance computing, driven by its cost-effectiveness and 
compatibility with complementary metal-oxide-semiconductor (CMOS) technology. Mature SOI 
devices encompass a wide range of passive components like arrayed waveguide grating, optical 
couplers, and microring filters. Additionally, active elements like photodetectors have been suc­
cessfully developed through doping. However, silicon does have a notable limitation due to its poor 
luminescence efficiency, stemming from its indirect band gap. To overcome this challenge and 
advance integrated photonic technology, there is a pressing need to incorporate laser sources onto 
Si platforms. Recognizing that III-V materials excel as gain mediums for laser development, inte­
grating III-V semiconductor lasers onto group IV materials such as Si or germanium (Ge) emerges 
as an effective solution. These integrated III-V/Si lasers offer several crucial advantages, including 
narrow-linewidth lasing and seamless integration with other photonic devices manufactured with 
SOI, silicon nitride (Si3N4), and lithium niobate (LiNbO3) technologies. Such capabilities are indis­
pensable in various applications like sensing and the development of large-scale photonic circuits.
As III-V semiconductors are not compatible with CMOS technology, several methods have been 
proposed to enable the integration of III-V gain materials on a Si substrate. These methods include 
heterogeneous integration, monolithic integration, hybrid integration, and transfer printing. Among 
these techniques, hybrid integration, represented by flip-chip bonding, butt coupling, and photonics 

230
Handbook of Semiconductors
wire bonding, can be regarded as a micro-packing technique that eliminates the need for optical 
components such as lenses. This not only reduces the device’s footprint but also simplifies the man­
ufacturing process. However, it is important to note that achieving precise alignment, with an error 
of less than 1 μm, between the two platforms demands considerable effort, and realizing large-scale 
integration remains a formidable challenge. In this section, we will introduce two widely adopted 
integration techniques and their recent advancements in III-V/Si lasers, with a particular focus on 
the communication wavelength regimes.
17.5.1  Epitaxial Growth
Integrated laser through direct epitaxial growth of III-V materials on the Si substrate is the optimal 
solution due to the benefits of monolithic integration, low cost, and scalability. Epitaxy allows the 
selective growth of wafer-scale III-V material on Si without the complexities associated with align­
ment in hybrid integration approaches. However, there are certain challenges in achieving high 
growth quality in this process. Firstly, the mismatch in lattice constant and polarity between the two 
platforms can introduce various defects, including threading dislocations and antiphase boundaries. 
Additionally, the differing thermal expansion coefficients can lead to strain relaxation and thermal 
cracking during the cooling-down progress from the high growth temperature. These issues can 
significantly degrade the internal efficiency and lifetime of the laser, impacting both yield and cost 
[37]. To address these challenges, researchers have proposed innovative strategies. One approach 
for reducing the dislocation defect density from 1010 cm−2 to lower than 105 cm−2 involves the inser­
tion of III-V QDs into the active region as defect filter layers. Another technique entails using Si 
substrates oriented from (100) to (110) or (111) with specific angles, which can mitigate antiphase 
boundaries problems. However, this introduces a new challenge of incompatibility with current 
CMOS technology. To reconcile this, many researchers have turned to the utilization of GaAs or 
GaP intermediate buffer layers grown on patterned Si (100) substrates. This approach ensures com­
patibility with CMOS fabrication processes while minimizing threading dislocation-related chal­
lenges. To control the stain relaxation, selective-area epitaxy was proposed to restrict the epitaxial 
growth in a predefined region. These combined endeavours have led to significant breakthroughs 
in heterogeneous epitaxial integrated lasers in recent years. So far, the performance of QD lasers 
grown directly on silicon substrates has seen remarkable enhancements.
Building upon extensive prior research, in 2016, Liu’s research group at University College 
London achieved a significant milestone by successfully demonstrating a CW InAs/GaAs QD laser 
operating at 1.3 μm wavelength on an offcut Si substrate [38]. The integration of III-V materials onto 
Si was accomplished using MBE. This process involved the incorporation of a 6-nm-thick AlAs 
nucleation layer, a 1-µm-thick GaAs buffer layer, InGaAs/GaAs dislocation filter layers (DFLs), 
and five layers of InAs/GaAs dot-in-well active regions. The nucleation layer fulfills an important 
function in reducing the density of threading dislocations and defects. Notably, this laser exhibited 
an impressive 105 mW output power, a low threshold current density of 62.5 A/cm2, and a remark­
able operational lifetime exceeding 100,000 hours. These outstanding performance metrics can be 
attributed to the low dislocation density achieved with the DFL and the buffer layer.
Then the focus shifted from FP lasers to other variants with single-frequency lasing, expanding 
from the O-band to the C-band. In 2017, the researchers from Hong Kong University of Science and 
Technology (HKUST) and the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB), developed a WGM 
microlaser on industry-standard (001) substrate [39]. This achievement involved the growth of an 
InAs/InGaAs quantum dot-in-a-well active region on a Si substrate with nanometer-thick V-shaped 
grooves, as depicted in Figures 17.6a and 17.6b. These grooves accommodate a low lattice mis­
match between GaAs and silicon. The laser demonstrated continuous-wave operation at an elevated 
temperature of 100°C, with an impressively low threshold of 0.6 mA for a 5-μm-radius microdisk 
laser. In a more recent development, Lau’s research team at HKUST achieved a notable milestone. 
They utilized a modified InAs/InGaAs/InAlGaAs dash-in-well structure grown through MOCVD. 

231
Semiconductor Lasers
This achievement marked the demonstration of the first electrically pumped continuous-wave laser 
directly grown on an on-axis (001) Si substrate, operating at 1.55 µm wavelength [41]. During that 
same year, Wan and colleagues at UCSB effectively presented a DFB QD laser, which was also 
grown on a GaAs/Si substrate. This laser featured an external modulation speed of 30 GHz, indicat­
ing significant potential for on-chip interconnect applications [42].
While the most advanced III-V/Si QD lasers grown on Si substrates have successfully met the 
criteria for extended operational lifetimes and high-temperature performance, it is essential to 
acknowledge that a persistent challenge lies in the relatively low optical coupling efficiency from 
III-V lasers to Si waveguides. This problem is primarily associated with thick buffer layers and 
V-grooved structures, and resolving it is crucial for practical applications.
17.5.2  Wafer Bonding 
The bonding technique refers to the interfacial connection between different photonics platforms, 
facilitating enhanced integration capabilities for specific applications. In contrast to flip-chip bond­
ing, which integrates prefabricated lasers onto Si devices, the wafer bonding does not necessitate 
accurate alignment and enables waver-scale processing. This direct connection enables effective 
evanescent wave coupling between the laser sources and Si waveguides. In the following discussion, 
we will explore two frequently employed bonding techniques: adhesive bonding and direct bonding.
Adhesive bonding utilizes the polymers like divinylsiloxane-bis-benzocyclobutene (DVS-
BCB), and photoresist Su-8. BCB bonding offers benefits in terms of bonding strength, tolerance 
FIGURE 17.6  (a) and (b) 1.3 µm sub-mA threshold QD microring laser directly grown on (001) Si with the 
schematic of the GaAs-on-Si substrate and the lasing spectrum. (Adapted with permission [39], Copyright 
[2017], Optica Publishing Group.) (c) and (d) Hybrid DFB laser fabricated with BCB bonding technique, 
with the structure diagram and lasing spectrum. (Adapted with permission [40], Copyright [2013], Optica 
Publishing Group.)

232
Handbook of Semiconductors
of roughness, and wafer surface cleanliness. In 2006, researchers from Ghent University pio­
neered BCB bonding between the InP/InGaAsP layer and an SOI waveguide circuit. Tapers at 
both layers were designed to modify the hybrid active mode, allowing it to couple into a passive 
Si waveguide mode through evanescent coupling. The following year, they successfully demon­
strated a microdisk laser that integrated into an Si waveguide using this technique [20]. Taking 
advantage of III-V for its gain properties and Si for optical waveguides to create a feedback 
reflector, a series of innovative hybrid lasers with DFB and DBR functionalities have been suc­
cessfully developed. In 2013, as shown in Figure 17.6c and 17.6d, S. Keyvaninia et al. reported an 
integrated DFB laser with performance comparable to native lasers, boasting a single-side output 
power of 14 mW and a side-mode-suppression-ratio (SMSR) exceeding 50 dB [40]. It should be 
mentioned that the grating was located on the Si waveguide underneath, with the III-V waveguide 
on top providing optical gain only. In 2016, S. Sui et al. demonstrated unidirectional emission 
from a BCB-bonded InP/SOI laser with a deformed WGM ring microcavity [43]. However, it is 
essential to keep the bonding layer as thin as possible to address challenges related to low cou­
pling efficiency from III-V to Si and poor heat dissipation in the bonding layer owing to the low 
thermal conductivity of BCB.
To date, direct bonding has emerged as the most frequently employed method, whereby two mate­
rial surfaces are bonded together through the robust intermolecular forces. A series of surface treat­
ments like polishing and plasma cleaning are perquisites before initiating the bonding process. In 
2006, John Bowers’s group at UCSB successfully demonstrated an electrically pumped AlGaAs/
SOI laser by transferring the III-V material to Si waveguides through oxygen plasma-assisted direct 
bonding [44]. This achievement indicates an important step toward the integration of large-scale 
integration of lasers on Si. Similarly, recognizing the low-loss and cost-effective nature of SOI and 
Si3N4 circuits, researchers have pioneered the development of novel lasers by designing external 
cavities within these passive platforms, with III-V materials providing gain. For instance, the UCSB 
researchers from the same group presented a hybrid widely tunable laser with a narrow linewidth of 
100 kHz [45]. This was achieved by integrating a III-V semiconductor optical amplifier (SOA) on to 
a long-cavity loop-mirrors structure formed in SOI. The SOI external cavity not only selected the 
oscillation mode but also reduced the laser linewidth by increasing the photon lifetime within the 
whole laser cavity. More recently, they also demonstrated a heterogeneous III-V/Si/Si3N4 laser with 
a linewidth at the 1-Hz level, employing the ultra-low loss Si3N4 extended DBR [46]. These lasers, 
with ultra-narrow linewidth and ultra-low relative intensity noise, are crucial for the applications 
scenarios like coherent communication and sensing. Additionally, the CMOS-ready Si3N4 waveguide 
platform hints at scalable production capabilities with high yields, leveraging foundry-based tech­
nologies. Recent results displayed large-scale integrated Kerr frequency comb sources, accomplished 
by researchers from UCSB and Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne. This achievement 
involved bonding InP-based QW lasers into ultra-high-Q Si3N4 microring resonators [47].
The heterogeneously integrated lasers with the wafer bonding technique have been massively 
manufactured by Intel for high-speed transceivers. Notably, in 2022 they made a significant 
announcement regarding the development of an eight-wavelength integrated laser sources array 
with consistent wavelength separation using this technique, meeting a key requirement for optical 
compute interconnects and dense wavelength division multiplexing communication.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J.P. Gordon, H.J. Zeiger, and C.H. Townes, The maser—New type of microwave amplifier, frequency 
standard, and spectrometer, Phys. Rev. 99(1955) 1264–1274
	
2.	 A.L. Schawlow, and C.H. Townes, Infrared and optical masers, Phys. Rev. 112(1958) 1940–1949
	
3.	 T.H. Maiman, Stimulated optical radiation in ruby, Nature 187(1960) 493–494
	
4.	 J. Hecht, Short history of laser development, Opt. Eng. 49(2010) 091002
	
5.	 H. Kroemer, A proposed class of hetero-junction injection lasers, Proc. IEEE 51(1963) 1782–1783

233
Semiconductor Lasers
	
6.	 Z.I. Alferov, V. Andreev, V. Korol’kov, D. Trat’yakov, and V. Tuchkevich, High-voltage p-n junctions in 
Ga x Al 1− x As crystals, Fiz. Tekh. Poluprovodn. 1(1967) 0015–3222
	
7.	 Z.I. Alferov, V. Andreev, D. Garbuzov, Y.V. Zhilyaev, E. Morozov, E. Portnoi, and V. Trofim, Effect of 
heterostructure parameters on the laser threshold current and the realization of continuous generation 
at room temperature, Sov. Phys. Semicond. 4(1970) 1573–1575
	
8.	 P.M. Petroff, and S.P. DenBaars, MBE and MOCVD growth and properties of self-assembling quantum 
dot arrays in III-V semiconductor structures, Superlattices Microstruct. 15(1994) 15
	
9.	 F. Koyama, Recent advances of VCSEL photonics, J. Light. Technol. 24(2006) 4502–4513
	 10.	 R. Michalzik, VCSEL Fundamentals, in VCSELs: Fundamentals, Technology and Applications of 
Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting Lasers, R. Michalzik, Editor. 2013, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg
	 11.	 R. Michalzik, and K.J. Ebeling, Operating Principles of VCSELs, in Vertical-Cavity Surface-Emitting 
Laser Devices, H.E. Li and K. Iga, Editors. 2003, Berlin, Heidelberg, Springer Berlin Heidelberg
	 12.	 B. Weigl, M. Grabherr, C. Jung, R. Jager, G. Reiner, R. Michalzik, D. Sowada, and K.J. Ebeling, High-
performance oxide-confined GaAs VCSELs, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron. 3(1997) 409–415
	 13.	 C. Jung, R. Jäger, M. Grabherr, P. Schnitzer, R. Michalzik, B. Weigl, S. Müller, and K.J. Ebeling, 
4.8 mW singlemode oxide confined top-surface emitting vertical-cavity laser diodes, Electron. Lett. 
33(1997) 1790–1791
	 14.	 J. Pozo, and E. Beletkaia, VCSEL technology in the data communication industry, PhotonicsViews. 
16(2019) 21–23
	 15.	 L. Rayleigh, CXII. The problem of the whispering gallery, Lond. Edinb. Dublin Philos. Mag. J. Sci. 
20(1910) 1001–1004
	 16.	 K.J. Vahala, Optical microcavities, Nature 424(2003) 839–846
	 17.	 L. He, ŞK. Özdemir, and L. Yang, Whispering gallery microcavity lasers, Laser Photonics Rev. 7(2013) 
60–82
	 18.	 S. McCall, A. Levi, R. Slusher, S. Pearton, and R. Logan, Whispering-gallery mode microdisk lasers, 
Appl. Phys. Lett. 60(1992) 289–291
	 19.	 B. Redding, L. Ge, G.S. Solomon, and H. Cao, Directional waveguide coupling from a wavelength-
scale deformed microdisk laser, Appl. Phys. Lett. 100(2012) 061125
	 20.	 J. Van Campenhout, P. Rojo-Romeo, P. Regreny, C. Seassal, D. Van Thourhout, S. Verstuyft, L. Di 
Cioccio, J.M. Fedeli, C. Lagahe, and R. Baets, Electrically pumped InP-based microdisk lasers inte­
grated with a nanophotonic silicon-on-insulator waveguide circuit, Opt. Express. 15(2007) 6744–6749
	 21.	 E.M. Purcell, Spontaneous Emission Probabilities at Radio Frequencies, in Confined Electrons and 
Photons: New Physics and Applications, E. Burstein and C. Weisbuch, Editors. 1995, Boston, MA, 
Springer US
	 22.	 A. Levi, R. Slusher, S. McCall, T. Tanbun-Ek, D. Coblentz, and S. Pearton, Room temperature opera­
tion of microdisc lasers with submilliamp threshold current, Electron. Lett. 11(1992) 1010–1012
	 23.	 M. Fujita, K. Inoshita, and T. Baba, Room temperature continuous wave lasing characteristics of 
GaInAsP/InP microdisk injection laser, Electron. Lett. 34(1998) 278–279
	 24.	 M. Fujita, R. Ushigome, and T. Baba, Continuous wave lasing in GaInAsP microdisk injection laser 
with threshold current of 40µA, Electron. Lett. 36(2000) 1
	 25.	 V.V. Sherstnev, A.M. Monakhov, A.P. Astakhova, A.Y. Kislyakova, Y.P. Yakovlev, N.S. Averkiev, 
A. Krier, and G. Hill, Semiconductor WGM lasers for the mid-IR spectral range, Semiconductors. 
39(2005) 1087–1092
	 26.	 A.C. Tamboli, E.D. Haberer, R. Sharma, K.H. Lee, S. Nakamura, and E.L. Hu, Room-temperature 
continuous-wave lasing in GaN/InGaN microdisks, Nat. Photonics. 1(2007) 61–64
	 27.	 Y.-D. Yang, S.-J. Wang, and Y.-Z. Huang, Investigation of mode coupling in a microdisk resonator for 
realizing directional emission, Opt. Express. 17(2009) 23010–23015
	 28.	 H.-Z. Weng, O. Wada, J.-Y. Han, J.-L. Xiao, Y.-D. Yang, Y.-Z. Huang, J. Li, B. Xiong, C.-Z. Sun, and Y. 
Luo, Sub-THz wave generation based on a dual wavelength microsquare laser, Electron. Lett. 53(2017) 
939–941
	 29.	 X.M. Lv, Y.Z. Huang, L.X. Zou, H. Long, and Y. Du, Optimization of direct modulation rate for circu­
lar microlasers by adjusting mode Q factor, Laser Photonics Rev. 7(2013) 818–829
	 30.	 A.V. Babichev, A.G. Gladyshev, E.S. Kolodeznyi, A.S. Kurochkin, G.S. Sokolovskii, V.E. Bougrov, 
L.Y. Karachinsky, I.I. Novikov, V.V. Dudelev, V.N. Nevedomsky, S.O. Slipchenko, A.V. Lutetskiy, A.N. 
Sofronov, D.A. Firsov, L.E. Vorobjev, N.A. Pikhtin, and A.Y. Egorov, Growth and optical characteriza­
tion of 7.5 μm quantum-cascade laser heterostructures grown by MBE, J. Phys. Conf. Ser. 1124(2018) 
041029

234
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 31.	 J. Faist, F. Capasso, D.L. Sivco, C. Sirtori, A.L. Hutchinson, and A.Y. Cho, Quantum Cascade laser, 
Science. 264(1994) 553–556
	 32.	 J. Faist, F. Capasso, C. Sirtori, D.L. Sivco, A.L. Hutchinson, and A.Y. Cho, Vertical transition quantum 
cascade laser with Bragg confined excited state, Appl. Phys. Lett. 66(1995) 538–540
	 33.	 M. Razeghi, High-performance InP-based mid-IR quantum Cascade lasers, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum 
Electron. 15(2009) 941–951
	 34.	 B.S. Williams, Terahertz quantum-cascade lasers, Nat. Photonics. 1(2007) 517–525
	 35.	 L.J. Olafsen, E.H. Aifer, I. Vurgaftman, W.W. Bewley, C.L. Felix, J.R. Meyer, D. Zhang, C.-H. Lin, 
and S.S. Pei, Near-room-temperature mid-infrared interband cascade laser, Appl. Phys. Lett. 72(1998) 
2370–2372
	 36.	 E.L. Normand, and I. Howieson, Quantum-cascade lasers enable gas-sensing technology, Laser Focus 
World. 43(2007) 90–92
	 37.	 S. Pan, V. Cao, M. Liao, Y. Lu, Z. Liu, M. Tang, S. Chen, A. Seeds, and H. Liu, Recent progress in epi­
taxial growth of III–V quantum-dot lasers on silicon substrate, J. Semicond. 40(2019) 101302
	 38.	 S. Chen, W. Li, J. Wu, Q. Jiang, M. Tang, S. Shutts, S.N. Elliott, A. Sobiesierski, A.J. Seeds, I. Ross, P.M. 
Smowton, and H. Liu, Electrically pumped continuous-wave III–V quantum dot lasers on silicon, Nat. 
Photonics. 10(2016) 307–311
	 39.	 Y. Wan, J. Norman, Q. Li, M.J. Kennedy, D. Liang, C. Zhang, D. Huang, Z. Zhang, A.Y. Liu, A. Torres, 
D. Jung, A.C. Gossard, E.L. Hu, K.M. Lau, and J.E. Bowers, 1.3 μm submilliamp threshold quantum dot 
micro-lasers on Si, Optica. 4(2017) 940–944
	 40.	 S. Keyvaninia, S. Verstuyft, L. Van Landschoot, F. Lelarge, G.H. Duan, S. Messaoudene, J.M. Fedeli, 
T. De Vries, B. Smalbrugge, E.J. Geluk, J. Bolk, M. Smit, G. Morthier, D. Van Thourhout, and G. 
Roelkens, Heterogeneously integrated III-V/silicon distributed feedback lasers, Opt. Lett. 38(2013) 
5434–5437
	 41.	 Y. Xue, W. Luo, S. Zhu, L. Lin, B. Shi, and K.M. Lau, 1.55 µm electrically pumped continuous wave 
lasing of quantum dash lasers grown on silicon, Opt. Express. 28(2020) 18172–18179
	 42.	 Y. Wan, J.C. Norman, Y. Tong, M.J. Kennedy, W. He, J. Selvidge, C. Shang, M. Dumont, A. Malik, H.K. 
Tsang, A.C. Gossard, and J.E. Bowers, 1.3 µm quantum dot-distributed feedback lasers directly grown 
on (001) Si, Laser Photonics Rev. 14(2020) 2000037
	 43.	 S.-S. Sui, Y.-Z. Huang, M.-Y. Tang, H.-Z. Weng, Y.-D. Yang, J.-L. Xiao, and Y. Du, Locally deformed-
ring hybrid microlasers exhibiting stable unidirectional emission from a Si waveguide, Opt. Lett. 
41(2016) 3928–3931
	 44.	 A.W. Fang, H. Park, O. Cohen, R. Jones, M.J. Paniccia, and J.E. Bowers, Electrically pumped hybrid 
AlGaInAs-silicon evanescent laser, Opt. Express. 14(2006) 9203–9210
	 45.	 T. Komljenovic, S. Srinivasan, E. Norberg, M. Davenport, G. Fish, and J.E. Bowers, Widely tunable 
narrow-linewidth monolithically integrated external-cavity semiconductor lasers, IEEE J. Sel. Top. 
Quantum Electron. 21(2015) 214–222
	 46.	 J. Guo, C.A. McLemore, C. Xiang, D. Lee, L. Wu, W. Jin, M. Kelleher, N. Jin, D. Mason, L. Chang, A. 
Feshali, M. Paniccia, P.T. Rakich, K.J. Vahala, S.A. Diddams, F. Quinlan, and J.E. Bowers, Chip-based 
laser with 1-hertz integrated linewidth, Sci. Adv. 8(2022) eabp9006
	 47.	 C. Xiang, J. Liu, J. Guo, L. Chang, R.N. Wang, W. Weng, J. Peters, W. Xie, Z. Zhang, J. Riemensberger, 
J. Selvidge, T.J. Kippenberg, and J.E. Bowers, Laser soliton microcombs heterogeneously integrated on 
silicon, Science. 373(2021) 99–103

235
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-18
Light-Emitting Diode
Asmita Poddar, Madhab Roy, 
and Sanjib Bhattacharya
18.1  BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
Light is the foundation of each and every form of life. Thus, continuous efforts haves been made to 
use light as an efficient and user-friendly source from the very beginning of human civilization. It 
is customary that scientists and engineers have to work together for the growth of research work on 
light sources in a more efficient way. To continue this journey, light-emitting diodes (LEDs) were 
introduced in the early 1950s. Development of BLUE LED in the year 1990 has been marked as 
commencement of a new era in the field of illumination. After that, the popularity of LEDs in the 
fields of medical science [1], engineering, etc., increased like no other.
LED-based lighting sources possess high luminous efficacy, which is the key reason for their 
popularity in the modern age. Nowadays white LEDs have surpassed the efficacy of standard incan­
descent lighting systems and thus have gradually replaced conventional lighting systems. For  exam­
ple, it can readily be observed that a 5-watt LED owns a luminous efficacy of 18–22 lumens per watt 
(l m/W), whereas a conventional incandescent light bulb of 60–100 watts emits around 15l m/W, 
and standard fluorescent lights emit up to 100 lm/W.
The invention of a novel blue LED in September 2003, which delivered 24 mW at 20 mA, has 
been marked as a significant occurrence in the sector of illumination. It produced commercially 
packaged brightest white light during that period, which delivered 65 lm/W at 20 mA and started 
a new era in the commercial sector. That LED provided more than four times efficiency than any 
standard incandescent.
Primarily LEDs were used as indicator lamps for electronic devices as a replacement for small 
incandescent bulbs. Further advancements in research and development have permitted LEDs to be 
used in different sectors of illumination, which includes aviation lighting, automotive headlamps, 
advertising, general lighting, traffic signals, camera flashes, and even LED wallpaper.
18.2  HISTORY AND INVENTION OF LED
The phenomenon of electroluminescence was first discovered by the British scientist H.J. Round of 
Marconi Labs in 1907 while working with a crystal of silicon carbide and a cat’s- whisker detector 
[2, 3].
Decades later, a Soviet inventor, Oleg Losev, have stated foundation of the first LED [4] in 1927 
but no such practical implementation was discovered for several decades due to the very inefficient 
light-producing properties of silicon carbide, the semiconductor Losev used [5].
Kurt Lehovec, Carl Accardo, and Edward Jamgochian presented the first application in an 
instrument in 1951, utilizing a device using SiC crystals with a current source of a battery or a pulse 
generator and with a comparison to a different, pure crystal in 1953 [6, 7].
Indium phosphide (InP), silicon-germanium (SiGe), gallium antimonide (GaSb), and gadolinium 
(GaAs) alloys were used in a simple diode structure to generate infrared emission in 1955 [8], accord­
ing to a remarkable discovery made by Rubin Braunstein of the Radio Corporation of America.
James R. Biard and Gary Pittman observed near-infrared (900 nm) light emission from a tunnel 
diode they had built on a GaAs substrate in September 1961 while working at Texas Instruments 
(TI) in Dallas, Texas [9].
18

236
Handbook of Semiconductors
By October 1961, they had successfully shown signal coupling and efficient light emission 
between a GaAs p-n junction light emitter and a semiconductor photodetector [10]. Based on these 
discoveries, Biard and Pittman submitted a patent application titled “Semiconductor Radiant Diode” 
on August 8, 1962. It specified a zinc-diffused p-n junction LED with a spaced cathode contact to 
enable effective infrared light emission under forward bias. The SNX-100, the first commercial 
LED device introduced by TI in October 1962, used a pure GaAs crystal to emit light with an 
890 nm wavelength [9].
18.3  FUNCTION OF LED
When current passes through an LED, a semiconductor device, light is released. In essence, LEDs 
are PN junctions that only permit current to flow in one direction. While the N side has excess 
electrons on it, the P side has excess positive charge in the form of “holes,” which show that there 
aren’t any. When the PN junction is subjected to a forward voltage, holes travel toward the N area 
and electrons flow from the N area toward the P area. As seen in Figure 18.1, when the electrons 
and holes recombine close to the junction, some energy is released in the form of light. This is the 
basic purpose of an LED. The energy needed for electrons to bridge the semiconductor’s band gap 
determines the hue of the light, which corresponds to the energy of the photons [11].
18.4  FACTORS OF CONSIDERATION FOR USAGE
18.4.1  Power Sources
A minor change in voltage can result in a big change in current since the current in an LED or other 
diode increases exponentially with the voltage that is applied. To avoid damage, the LED’s current 
flow must be controlled by an external circuit, such as a constant current source. LED fixtures must 
have a power converter or at the very least a current-limiting resistor, because the majority of con­
ventional power supplies are (almost) constant-voltage sources. Small batteries’ intrinsic resistance 
may be adequate in some applications to maintain current below the LED rating.
FIGURE 18.1  Schematics of a light emitting diode (LED).

237
Light-Emitting Diode
18.4.2  Electrical Polarity
An LED will only illuminate when voltage is applied in the diode’s forward direction, unlike a con­
ventional incandescent lamp. In the event that voltage is supplied in the opposite direction, neither 
current nor light are produced. The LED will be harmed if the reverse voltage is higher than the 
breakdown value, which is normally around five volts. The reverse-conducting LED is a beneficial 
noise diode if the reverse current is suitably constrained to prevent harm.
18.4.3  Safety and Health
Specifications for eye safety state that certain cool-white and blue LEDs may exceed the safe 
thresholds for the so-called blue-light hazard [12]. According to one study, there is no risk in rou­
tine use at household illuminance, and caution is only necessary in specific occupational contexts 
or for select groups.
18.5  TYPES
LEDs are made in different packages for different applications.
18.5.1  Miniature
These single-die LED indicators are typically available in both through-hole and surface mount 
packages and range in size from 2 to 8 mm. The typical current ratings are between 1 mA and 
20 mA or more. Ordinary tiny LEDs with a series resistor for the direct connection to a 5 V or 12 V 
supply are known as 5 V and 12 V LEDs.
18.5.2  High-power
Unlike ordinary LEDs, which can only be driven at currents of tens of mA, high-power LEDs 
(HP-LEDs) or high-output LEDs (HO-LEDs) [13] can be powered at currents of hundreds of mA to 
more than an ampere. Studies have shown that some of them have a 1,000+ lumen output.
Up to 300 W/cm2 LED power densities have been attained. The HP-LEDs must be installed 
atop a heat sink, which allows for heat dissipation because overheating is harmful. An HP-LED 
fails in a matter of seconds if the heat it produces is not dissipated. In flashlights, one HP-LED can 
frequently take the place of an incandescent bulb. It can also be arranged in an array to create a 
potent LED lamp.
18.5.3  AC-driven
LEDs developed by some specific semiconductors can operate on AC power without a DC con­
verter. For each half-cycle, part of the LED emits light and part is dark, and this is reversed during 
the next half-cycle. The efficiency of this type of HP-LED is typically 40 lm/W. A large number of 
LED elements in series may be able to operate directly from the line voltage. They are being driven 
from AC power with a simple controlling circuit. The low-power dissipation of these LEDs affords 
them more flexibility than the original AC LED design.
18.6  ADVANTAGES
18.6.1  Efficiency
When compared to incandescent light bulbs, LEDs produce more lumens per watt [12]. In contrast 
to fluorescent light bulbs or tubes, the effectiveness of LED lighting fixtures is unaffected by shape 
and size.

238
Handbook of Semiconductors
18.6.2  Color
Unlike conventional lighting techniques, LEDs may emit light of the desired color without the need 
for any color filters. This can result in cheaper initial expenses and is more effective.
18.6.3  Size
LEDs may be easily mounted to printed circuit boards and can be made to be very small, less than 
2 mm2 [12].
18.6.4  Switch on Time
A common red indicator LED reaches full brightness in less than a microsecond [12], and LEDs 
used in communications devices can respond much more swiftly.
18.6.5  Cycling
In contrast to incandescent and fluorescent lamps, which break down more quickly when cycled 
frequently, and high-intensity discharge (HID) lamps, which take a while to restart, LEDs are suited 
for purposes subject to frequent on-off cycling.
18.6.6  Dimming
Either reducing the forward current or pulse-width modulating are extremely simple ways to 
dim LEDs [14]. When seen on camera or by certain individuals, LED lights, especially car 
headlights, appear to flicker or flash because of this pulse-width modulation. This kind of stro­
boscopic effect exists.
18.6.7  Cool Light
Compared with the majority of light sources, LEDs emit very little amount of heat in the form of 
infrared (IR), which might harm delicate items or fabrics. Wasted energy is released through the 
LED’s base as heat.
18.6.8  Slow Failure
Unlike incandescent bulbs, which typically fail suddenly, LEDs typically degrade by gradually 
dimming over time [12].
18.6.9  Lifetime
LEDs have a potential for a lengthy useful life. One study puts the useful life at 35,000 to 
50,000 hours, while the period to complete failure may be either shorter or longer [12]. According 
to the conditions of usage, fluorescent tubes are normally rated for 10,000 to 25,000 hours of use, 
while incandescent light bulbs are rated for 1,000 to 2,000 hours. The payback period for an LED 
device is mostly influenced by decreased maintenance expenses from this increased lifetime, not 
energy savings, according to a number of design of experiments (DOE) demonstrations.
18.6.10  Shock Resistance
Unlike delicate fluorescent and incandescent bulbs, LEDs can withstand external trauma, since they 
are solid-state components.

239
Light-Emitting Diode
18.6.11  Focus
The LED’s sturdy packaging can be made for focusing its light. To gather light and direct it in a use­
ful direction from incandescent and fluorescent sources, an external reflector is frequently needed. 
Total internal reflection (TIR) lenses are frequently utilized to achieve the same result for larger 
LED packages. When a lot of light is required, a lot of light sources are typically used, which some­
times may create a problem for focusing them on the same object.
18.7  DISADVANTAGES
18.7.1  High Initial Price
On a capital cost basis, LEDs are now more expensive per lumen than the majority of conventional 
lighting solutions.
18.7.2  Temperature Dependence 
The operational environment’s ambient temperatures, or “thermal management” features, have a 
significant impact on LED performance. When an LED is overdriven in a hot environment, the 
LED package may become overheated, which could eventually cause the device to malfunction. 
To maintain a long life, an appropriate heat sink is required. This is crucial for applications in the 
automotive, medical, and military industries where equipment must function in a variety of tem­
peratures and have low failure rates.
18.7.3  Voltage Sensitivity 
LEDs require a voltage supply with voltage above the threshold and current below the rating. With 
even a little variation in applied voltage, current and lifespan alter significantly. Therefore, they 
need a source with controlled current.
18.7.4  Area Light Source
Single LEDs provide a lamebrain dispersion of light instead of a spherical light distribution that 
comes from a point source of light. Consequently, it is challenging to apply LEDs to applications 
that require a spherical light field; nevertheless, diverse light fields can be adjusted by the use of 
various optics or “lenses.” Divergence below a few degrees cannot be produced using LEDs [15]. In 
comparison, lasers may produce beams that diverge by little more than 0.2 degrees.
18.7.5  Electrical Polarity
Unlike incandescent light bulbs, which illuminate regardless of the electrical polarity, LEDs will 
only light with correct electrical polarity [15]. To automatically match source polarity to LED 
devices, rectifiers can be used.
18.7.6  Blue Hazard
There is a concern that blue LEDs and cool-white LEDs are now capable of exceeding safe limits of 
the so-called blue-light hazard as defined in eye safety specifications.

240
Handbook of Semiconductors
18.7.7  Efficiency Droop
As the electric current rises, LED efficiency declines. Higher currents also result in more heating, 
which reduces the lifetime of LEDs [16]. In high power applications, these effects place practical 
restrictions on the current through an LED.
18.7.8  Light Pollution
Given that scotopic vision is more sensitive to the blue and green colors, white LEDs used for out­
door illumination produce far more sky glow than sources like high-pressure sodium vapor lamps.
18.7.9  Impact on Wildlife
Since LEDs are so much more enticing to insects than sodium-vapor lights, there has been some 
speculation regarding the likelihood of food chain disruption [17].
18.8  APPLICATIONS OF LED
18.8.1  Indicators and Signs
LEDs are used as status indicators and displays on a range of equipment and installations because 
of their small size, low maintenance requirements, and low energy consumption. Stadium displays, 
dynamic ornamental displays, and dynamic message signs on motorways are among the applica­
tions for large-area LED displays. As destination displays for trains, buses, trams, and ferries, thin, 
lightweight message displays are utilized in airports and train stations. For traffic lights and signals, 
exit signs, emergency vehicle lighting, ships’ navigation lights, and LED-based Christmas lights, 
one-color light is ideal. LEDs have been utilized in automobile brake lights and turn signals because 
of their extended lifespan, quick switching times, and visibility in broad daylight due to their high 
brightness and focus.
18.8.2  Lighting
The ability to employ LEDs for lighting and illumination has been made possible by the develop­
ment of high-efficiency and high-power LEDs. The US Department of Energy established the L 
Prize competition in 2008 to promote the use of LED lamps and other high-efficiency lighting. On 
August 3, 2011, the Philips Lighting North America LED bulb won the first competition. This was 
the culmination of 18 months of rigorous field, laboratory, and product testing.
Automotive lighting is utilized in the headlights of automobiles, motorcycles, and bicycles due to 
its mechanical durability and long lifespan. In parking garages and on poles, LED streetlights are 
used. Torraca, Italy was the first community to switch to LED street lighting [18] in 2007.
In mining operations, LEDs are employed as cap lamps to illuminate the workers. There has 
been research done to enhance LEDs for mining, to lessen glare and increase illumination, lowering 
the danger of injury to the miners [12].
LEDs are increasingly being used in educational and medical settings [19], for example, to improve 
mood. Even research on using LEDs to improve astronauts’ health has been funded by NASA [12].
18.8.3  Data Communication and Other Signaling
Both digital and analog signals can be transmitted using light. White LED illumination, for instance, 
can be utilized in systems that help individuals navigate through enclosed places while looking for 
important rooms or objects [20].

241
Light-Emitting Diode
In many theaters and other similar settings, assistive listening devices transmit sound to listen­
ers’ receivers using arrays of IR LEDs. The transmission of data via many varieties of fiberoptic 
cable is accomplished using light-emitting diodes and semiconductor lasers [21]. LEDs can cycle on 
and off millions of times per second, allowing for very high data bandwidth.
Visible light communication (VLC) [22] has been suggested as a substitute for the increasingly 
constrained radio bandwidth. Because of this, data transmission is possible without using radio 
frequencies by operating in the visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
The indoor positioning system (IPS), a GPS analog designed to function in enclosed locations 
where the satellite signals necessary for the GPS to function are difficult to reach, is one promising 
application of VLC [22].
VLC can also be used to communicate among devices in a smart office or home. There may be 
interference when using standard radio waves for connectivity as the number of Internet of Things 
(IoT)-capable devices rises. Data and commands for such devices can be transmitted by lightbulbs 
having VLC capabilities.
18.8.4  Machine Vision Systems
Bright, uniform lighting is frequently needed for machine vision systems so that processing of inter­
esting features is made simpler. It’s common to use LEDs.
Machine vision applications most frequently include barcode scanners, and many of these scan­
ners employ red LEDs rather than lasers. LEDs serve as the light source for the tiny camera inside 
optical computer mice.
For machine vision, LEDs are advantageous since they offer a portable, dependable source of 
light. The brightness and beam form of LED lamps can be adjusted to meet the needs of the vision 
system. LED lamps can be turned on and off as needed.
18.8.5  Biological Detection
The US Army Research Laboratory (ARL)’s discovery of radiative recombination in aluminum 
gallium nitride (AlGaN) alloys inspired the development of ultraviolet (UV) LEDs for inclusion in 
light-induced fluorescence sensors used for biological agent identification [23].
One of the most reliable methods for the quick, real-time detection of biological aerosols is 
UV-induced fluorescence. Under a UV light beam, biological aerosols glow and scatter light. The 
applied wavelength and the biochemical fluorophores present in the biological agent affect the 
observed fluorescence. A quick, precise, effective, and logistically feasible method of finding bio­
logical agents is UV-induced fluorescence. This is due to the fact that UV fluorescence is reagent 
less, meaning it doesn’t need any additional chemicals to initiate a reaction, doesn’t utilize any 
consumables, and doesn’t result in any chemical by-products.
18.8.6  Other Applications
Since LEDs’ light can be rapidly manipulated, they are widely employed in optical fiber and free 
space optics communications. This applies to remote controls for devices like televisions, which 
frequently include infrared LEDs. An LED and a photodiode or phototransistor are used in opto-
isolators to create a signal route with electrical isolation between two circuits. This is particularly 
helpful in medical equipment where the signals from a low-voltage sensor circuit in contact with a 
living organism must be electrically isolated from any potential electrical failure in a recording or 
monitoring device operating at potentially hazardous voltages. These sensor circuits are typically 
battery-powered.
Light is frequently used as the signal source in sensor systems. Due to the specifications of the sen­
sors, LEDs are frequently the best choice for a light source. IR LEDs are used in the sensor bar of the 

242
Handbook of Semiconductors
Nintendo Wii. They are used by pulse oximeters to gauge oxygen saturation. Instead of the standard 
cold-cathode fluorescent lamp as the light source, some flatbed scanners use arrays of RGB LEDs 
[24]. The scanner can calibrate itself for a more accurate color balance without the need for warm-up, 
thanks to the independent control of the three lighted colors. Furthermore, since only one color of light 
is ever used to illuminate the page being scanned at once, its sensors just need to be monochromatic.
LEDs can be utilized for both photo emission and detection because they can also be employed 
as photodiodes. For instance, a touchscreen that measures reflected light from a finger or stylus may 
take advantage of this [25].
Light sensitivity dependence is seen in a wide range of substances and biological systems. LEDs 
are used in grow lamps to boost plants’ photosynthesis [26].
The bacteria and viruses can be removed from water and other substances using UV LEDs for 
sterilization [27].
LEDs of certain wavelengths have also been used for light therapy treatment of neonatal jaundice 
and acne [28].
Other uses for UV LEDs [29], which have a spectrum from 220 nanometers to 395 nanome­
ters, include water/air purification, surface disinfection, glue curing, free-space non-line-of-sight 
communication, high performance liquid chromatography, UV curing dye printing, phototherapy 
(295 nanometer Vitamin D, 308 nanometer Excimer lamp, or laser replacement), medical/analytical 
instrumentation, and DNA absorption.
In electronic circuits, LEDs have also been utilized to serve as a medium-quality voltage refer­
ence. In low-voltage regulators, the forward voltage drop (about 1.7 V for a red LED and 1.2V for 
an IR) can be employed in place of a Zener diode. Above the knee, the I/V curve of red LEDs is 
the flattest. Nitride-based LEDs are ineffective for this because of their rather steep I/V curve [30].
The exploration with fusing light sources and wall-covering surfaces for interior walls in the 
form of LED wallpaper has been encouraged by the progressive shrinking of low-voltage lighting 
technology, such as LEDs and organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), appropriate to include into 
low-thickness materials.
18.9  RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
18.9.1  Organic Light-Emitting Diodes
An organic compound makes up the electroluminescent substance that makes up the emissive layer 
of an organic light-emitting diode (OLED). Due to the pi electrons’ delocalization upon conjugation 
throughout all or a portion of the molecule, the organic substance is electrically conductive and 
serves as an organic semiconductor [31]. The organic materials can be small organic molecules in 
a crystalline phase or polymers.
OLEDs provide a variety of potential benefits, such as thin, inexpensive displays with excellent 
contrast and color spectrum, low driving voltage, and a broad viewing angle. Mobile electronic 
gadgets, including cellphones, digital cameras, lights, and televisions, have visual displays made 
from OLEDs [32, 33].
18.9.2  Perovskite LEDs
Perovskite LEDs (PLEDs) are the newest members of LED family. PLEDs are established on the 
semiconductors called perovskites. The capacity of producing light from PLEDs is already equaled 
to those of the best-performing OLEDs [34]. The most lucrative feature of these PLEDs is their cost-
effectiveness. This can be achieved, as it is possible to process them from solution. This low-cost, 
low-tech technique makes it possible to produce large-area perovskite-based devices at a very cheap 
cost. Due to the elimination of non-radiative losses, their efficiency is increased. It implies that the 
recombination mechanisms that don’t result in photons are blocked. The coupling issue, which is 

243
Light-Emitting Diode
common for thin-film LEDs, is resolved, as is the issue of balancing charge carrier injection, which 
raises the external quantum efficiency (EQE). By raising the EQE above 20%, the most recent 
PLED devices have surpassed the performance barrier [35].
18.10  CONCLUSION
In conclusion, this book chapter has illuminated the captivating world of LEDs and their profound 
impact on various aspects of our lives and industries. The journey through the realm of LEDs has 
revealed several key takeaways.
18.10.1  Fundamental Principles
LEDs operate on the fascinating principles of quantum mechanics, where the emission of light is 
a result of electron transitions within semiconductor materials. This fundamental understanding 
underpins the remarkable efficiency and reliability of LEDs.
18.10.2  Evolution and Ubiquity
LEDs have evolved from their early days as indicator lights to become ubiquitous in modern soci­
ety. They have transformed lighting, displays, and countless applications, thanks to their energy 
efficiency, longevity, and versatility.
18.10.3  Energy Efficiency and Sustainability
LEDs have emerged as champions of energy-efficient lighting, contributing significantly to global 
sustainability efforts by reducing energy consumption and carbon emissions. The transition to LED 
lighting has had a substantial environmental impact.
18.10.4  Diverse Applications
LEDs have found applications in a wide array of fields, from general illumination to specialized 
areas like horticulture lighting, medical devices, and automotive lighting. Their flexibility and 
adaptability have driven innovation across industries.
18.10.5  Advancements
Ongoing advancements in LED technology continue to reshape the landscape. Innovations in mate­
rials, epitaxy techniques, and phosphor technology have improved color quality and spectral char­
acteristics. Integration with smart control systems and the IoT is paving the way for intelligent 
lighting solutions.
18.10.6  The Future of Illumination
LEDs are not just lighting technology; they represent a paradigm shift in how we perceive and 
interact with light. As researchers and engineers push the boundaries of what LEDs can achieve, the 
future promises even more exciting developments in terms of efficiency, aesthetics, and functionality.
In essence, LEDs have not only revolutionized the way we light up our world but have also cata­
lyzed innovation across various disciplines. Their journey from a simple indicator to a transforma­
tive technology is a testament to human ingenuity and the ever-evolving quest for more sustainable, 
efficient, and dynamic lighting solutions. As we look ahead, the possibilities for LEDs seem bound­
less, promising to continue brightening our lives in ways we can only imagine.

244
Handbook of Semiconductors
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J. Dong, D. Xiong, Applications of light emitting diodes in health care, Annals of Biomedical 
Engineering, 45 (11) (2017), 2509–2523.
	
2.	 D. Misra, J. Brewer, Crystal radio detector [cat’s whisker]: The first wireless device, IEEE Circuits and 
Devices Magazine, 17 (2) (2001), 12–24.
	
3.	 O.V. Losev, Luminous carborundum detector and detection effect and oscillations with crystals, 
Philosophical Magazine, 7th Series, 5 (39) (1928), 1024–1044.
	
4.	 H. Toktamiş, P.O. Hama, Thermoluminescencedosimetric properties of silicon carbide (SiC) used in 
industrial applications, Applied Radiation and Isotopes, 148 (2019), 138–146.
	
5.	 N. Zheludev, The life and times of the LED: A 100-year history, Nature Photonics, 1 (4) (2007), 189–192.
	
6.	 K. Lehovec, C. AAccardo, E. Jamgochian, Injected light emission of silicon carbide crystals, Physical 
Review, 83 (3) (1951), 603–607.
	
7.	 K. Lehovec, C.A. Accardo, E. Jamgochian, Injected light emission of silicon carbide crystals, Physical 
Review, 89 (1) (1953), 20–25.
	
8.	 R. Braunstein, Radiative transitions in semiconductors, Physical Review, 99 (6) (1955), 1892–1893.
	
9.	 S. Sadeghi, G.O. Eren, S. Nizamoglu, Strategies for improving performance, lifetime, and stability in 
light-emitting diodes using liquid medium, Chemical Physics Reviews, 2(041302) (2021), 1–43.
	 10.	 N. Dharmarasu, P.O. Vaccaro, S. Saravanan, J. Zanardi, K. Kubota, N. Saito, High-density light-emitting 
diodes using A lateral p-n junction on patterned (311)A GaAs substrates, IEICE Electronics Express, 1 
(5) (2004), 86–91.
	 11.	 D. Yuan, Q. Liu, Photon energy and photon behavior discussions, Energy Reports, 8 (2) (2022), 22–42.
	 12.	 M. Barar, Organic light emitting diodes: The need of future, International Journal of Chemical Concepts, 
01 (2015), 168–174.
	 13.	 S. Bierhuizen, M.R. Krames, G. Harbers, G. Weijers, Performance and trends of high power light emit­
ting diodes, Proceedings of SPIE, 6669 (2007), 66690B (1–12).
	 14.	 P. Narra, D.S. Zinger, An effective LED dimming approach, conference record of the 2004 IEEE indus­
try applications conference, 2004, 39th IAS Annual Meeting, 3 (2004), 1671–1676.
	 15.	 M.S. Hossen, M.T. Islam, S. Hossain, Design & fabrication of a gravity powered light, ICMERE, 02 
(254) (2015), 1–5.
	 16.	 R. Abbasinejad, D. Kacprzak, A comprehensive detailed formula for LED degradation and lifetime esti­
mation leading to reduce CO2 emissions, Cleaner Engineering and Technology, 9 (100518) (2022), 1–17.
	 17.	 S.M. Pawson, M.K.-F. Bader, LED lighting increases the ecological impact of light pollution irrespec­
tive of color temperature, Ecological Applications, 24 (7) (2014), 1561–1568.
	 18.	 A. Balachandran, M. Siva, V. Parthasarathi, S.K. Vasudevan, S.K. Vasudevan, An innovation in the field 
of Street lighting system with cost and energy efficiency, Indian Journal of Science and Technology, 8 
(17) (2015), 1–5.
	 19.	 J. Dong, D. Xiong, Applications of light emitting diodes in health care, Annals of Biomedical 
Engineering, 45 (11) (2017), 2509–2523.
	 20.	 M.S. Fudin, K.D. Mynbaev, K.E. Aifantis, H. Lipsanen, V.E. Bougrov, A.E. Romanov, Frequency 
characteristics of modern LED phosphor materials, Scientific and Technical Journal of Information 
Technologies, Mechanics and Optics, 14 (6) (2014), 71–76.
	 21.	 T. Numai, Fundamentals of semiconductor lasers, Springer Series in Optical Sciences, 93 (2004), 
89–186.
	 22.	 L.E.M. Matheus, A.B. Vieira, L.F.M. Vieira, M.A.M. Vieira, O. Gnawali, Visible light communica­
tion: Concepts, applications and challenges, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 21 (4) (2019), 
3204–3237.
	 23.	 A.V. Sampath, M.L. Reed, C. Moe, G.A. Garrett, E.D. Readinger, W.L. Sarney, H. Shen, M. Wraback, 
C. Chua, N.M. Johnson, The effects of increasing AlNMole fraction on the performance of AlGaNActive 
regions containing nanometer scale compositionally inhomogeneities, International Journal of High 
Speed Electronics and Systems, 19 (01) (2009), 69–76.
	 24.	 F.C. Wang, C.W. Tang, B.J. Huang, Multivariable robust control for a Red–Green–Blue LED lighting 
system, IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics, 25 (2) (2010), 417–428.
	 25.	 P.H. Dietz, W.S. Yerazunis, D.L. Leigh, Very low-cost sensing and communication using bidirectional 
LEDs, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2864 (2004), 175–191.
	 26.	 G.D. Goins, N.C. Yorio, M.M. Sanwo, C.S. Brown, Photomorphogenesis, photosynthesis, and seed yield 
of wheat plants grown under red light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with and without supplemental blue light­
ing, Journal of Experimental Botany, 48 (7) (1997), 1407–1413.

245
Light-Emitting Diode
	 27.	 M. Mori, A. Hamamoto, A. Takahashi, M. Nakano, N. Wakikawa, S. Tachibana, T. Ikehara, Y. Nakaya, 
M. Akutagawa, Y. Kinouchi, Development of a new water sterilization device with a 365 nm UV-LED, 
Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 45 (12) (2007), 1237–1241.
	 28.	 R.M.L. Savedra, A.M.T. Fonseca, M.M. Silva, R.F. Bianchi, M.F. Siqueira, White LED phototherapy 
as an improved treatment for neonatal jaundice, The Review of Scientific Instruments, 92 (6) (2021), 
064101 (1–3).
	 29.	 K. Song, M. Mohseni, F. Taghipour, Application of ultraviolet light-emitting diodes (UV-LEDs) for 
water disinfection: A review, Water Research, 94 (2016), 341–349.
	 30.	 C.K. Wang, Y.Z. Chiou, H.J. Chang, Investigating the efficiency droop of nitride-based blue LEDs with 
different quantum barrier growth rates, Crystals, 9 (12) (2019), 677 (1–9).
	 31.	 J.H. Burroughes, D.D.C. Bradley, A.R. Brown, R.N. Marks, K. MacKay, R.H. Friend, P.L. Burns, A.B. 
Holmes, Light-emitting diodes based on conjugated polymers, Nature, 347 (6293) (1990), 539–541.
	 32.	 T.R. Hebner, C.C. Wu, D. Marcy, M.H. Lu, J.C. Sturm, Ink-jet printing of doped polymers for organic 
light emitting devices, Applied Physics Letters, 72 (5) (1998), 519–521.
	 33.	 J.N. Bardsley, International OLED technology roadmap, IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Quantum 
Electronics, 10 (1) (2004), 3–4.
	 34.	 D. Di, A.S. Romanov, L. Yang, J.M. Richter, J.P.H. Rivett, S. Jones, T.H. Thomas, M. Abdi Jalebi, R.H. 
Friend, M. Linnolahti, M. Bochmann, High-performance light-emitting diodes based on carbene-metal-
amides, Science, 356 (6334) (2017), 159–163.
	 35.	 A. Armin, P. Meredith, LED technology breaks performance barrier, Nature, 562 (7726) (2018), 
197–198.

246
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-19
Transistors
Advanced Logic Devices 
(RAM, Memristors, Gate)
Arpita Roy, Karuna Kumari, and Soumya J. Ray
19.1  INTRODUCTION TO MEMORY AND COMPUTING 
BEYOND MOORE’S LAW
The world has undergone a revolution in recent years due to the exponential rise of computing 
devices, which has paved the way for the era of the Internet of Things (IoT) and big data. Nowadays, 
the enormous expansion of internet data requires increasingly quick and scalable memory tech­
nology to increase portable device storage data centers and computers. To address these issues, 
new technical approaches are being investigated. Since the 1960s, the remarkable advancements in 
computing and information technology have been prepared by the miniaturization of metal-oxide-
semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs) by Moore’s law, which states that the number 
of integrated transistors in a microprocessor chip doubles roughly every two years [1] as shown in 
Figure 19.1(a). This has led to an exponential rise in the number of devices per square inch on the 
chip, which leads to the development of digital complementary metal oxide-semiconductor micro­
processors (CMOS).
There are some fundamental problems. First, as leakage currents increase, further lowering of 
the threshold voltages of the MOSFET device is not possible, which makes it difficult to reduce 
supply voltage and transistor size in digital circuits [2]. As a result of the excessive heating on the 
chip known as the “heat wall,” which varies from 50 to 100 W per cm2 [2, 3], the huge power con­
sumption of today’s CMOS-based microprocessors has also imposed a strict limit on the maximum 
clock frequency.
In addition to the heat wall, Moore’s law is also being tested by a second hard barrier known as the 
memory wall [4]. In conventional processors, the central processing unit (CPU) operates at a speed 
that is much faster than that required to reach the memory where the data are stored [3, 5]. The physi­
cal separation of CPU and memory in the von Neumann architecture of modern digital computers, 
sometimes known as the von Neumann bottleneck, is the root of this basic problem [6–9].
On the one hand, transistors are being redesigned to improve their channel electrostatic con­
trol and sub-threshold slope, to address scaling challenges taken by an increase in sub-threshold 
leakage. Besides that, multiple processing cores were combined on the same chip to improve the 
performance continuously [2, 10]. The great advantage of this parallel computation approach is 
that although each core on the chip is operated at a frequency lower than the maximum clock rate 
not to hit the power barrier, the use of multiple cores at the same time enables increased the overall 
performance. As a result, the systems on chip (SoC) based on the co-integration of CPU, and graph­
ics processing unit (GPU), which typically uses hundreds of cores running in parallel with high 
memory bandwidths [5], have been prompted by the requirement of higher energy efficiency.
In addition to this, novel concepts have also been explored to overcome memory wall. Figure 
19.1(b) shows the memory hierarchy of conventional processors based on von Neumann architec­
ture. The memory in the processor core is fabricated using registers and flip-flops, which are ultra-
high-speed components with low density. SRAM acts as a cache memory and DRAM acts as a main 
memory which is used to store instructions and to process data also. Both instruction/programs 
19

247
Transistors
and data are stored in mass storage components like hard disc drives (HDDs). When the memory 
is further away from the CPU, high density activities are required, but high-speed operations are 
needed from devices located close to the processors.
Major problems in today’s data-intensive applications could be summarized as follow:
•	 Exponentially growing gap between processor and memory in terms of capacity and speed.
•	 Speed gap between cache memory and main memory.
•	 Speed gap between main memory and storage memory.
•	 High-power consumption of the core, the cache, and the main memory, because they are 
based on volatile memory technologies [11–13].
19.1.1  Storage Class Memory (SCM)
Storage class memory (SCM) has been introduced as a solution to mitigate the memory bottleneck 
by filling the performance gap that currently exists between the main memory and storage in the 
memory hierarchy (Figure 19.1[b]). Yet, there is still a performance difference between memory and 
storage in addition to flash memory’s inherent constraints (such as its poor endurance and scaling 
potential) [11]. On the one hand, emerging SCM classes will be used to match the characteristics 
of storage types (such as NAND flash) with much better performances; similarly, SCM will also 
be used to match the characteristics of fast memory types (e.g. DRAM) with non-volatility and low 
cost. SCMs normally have non-volatile memories, giving them the benefit of zero standby power 
consumption while preserving the data [14, 15]. The SCM is likely the most significant market for 
the development of new memory technologies.
19.2  RANDOM ACCESS MEMORY (RAM)
19.2.1  Introduction to RAM
Random access memory, commonly known as RAM [16], stands as the dynamic powerhouse of 
data manipulation within a computing system. It is the ephemeral canvas where active programs 
and data reside, providing the dynamic workspace required for a wide range of applications. Unlike 
long-term storage devices such as hard drives or solid state drives (SSDs), RAM offers a form of vol­
atile memory. This means that data stored in RAM is volatile and is lost when the power is turned 
FIGURE 19.1  (a) Scaling trend of the number of transistors per chip and processor operating frequency over 
the past 50 years and (b) memory hierarchy in computer systems. (Adapted with permission [11]. Copyright 
[2018].)

248
Handbook of Semiconductors
off. At its essence, RAM acts as a high-speed bridge between the CPU and the storage devices, 
enabling swift retrieval and modification of data. This fluidity of access is fundamental for tasks 
that require real-time processing, such as running applications, browsing the internet, or playing 
video games. In essence, RAM is the arena where active computations occur, and its significance is 
initial to the functioning of modern computing systems.
19.2.2  Types of RAM
The types of RAM are shaped by the underlying technology and their suitability for different appli­
cations. The schematic diagram of the different types of RAM are shown in Figure 19.2(a-f). Below 
are some of the prominent types of RAM:
1.	Dynamic RAM (DRAM): Dynamic RAM, or DRAM, is the most prevalent type of RAM in 
modern computing systems. It operates on the principle of capacitive charge storage within 
integrated circuits. Each memory cell consists of a capacitor and a transistor, representing 
a binary state. The presence or absence of charge in the capacitor represents the “1” or “0” 
state, respectively. However, due to the inherent leakage of charge over time, DRAM requires 
periodic refreshing to maintain data integrity. While DRAM offers high storage density at a 
relatively low cost, it is characterized by slower access times compared to other types of RAM. 
This makes it ideal for applications where density is a priority, but speed is less critical.
2.	Static RAM (SRAM): Static RAM, or SRAM, operates on a different principle compared 
to DRAM. It uses bistable flip-flop circuits, which means it retains data as long as power is 
supplied. This eliminates the need for constant refreshing, resulting in significantly faster 
access times compared to DRAM. However, SRAM is more expensive to produce and 
consumes more power, which limits its application in large-scale memory systems. It is 
often used in cache memory and as registers within the CPU.
FIGURE 19.2  (a) SRAM architecture, (b) basic Schematic of DRAM, (c) schematic of the flash memory 
cell, (d) SDRAM architecture, (e) basic architecture of DDR RAM, and (f) basic structure of FeRAM cell. 
(Adapted with permission from [14]. Copyright [2018].)

249
Transistors
3.	Synchronous Dynamic RAM (SDRAM): Synchronous dynamic RAM, or SDRAM, rep­
resents an evolution of DRAM technology. It synchronizes its operations with the com­
puter’s clock speed, allowing for more efficient data access. This synchronous coordination 
enhances the speed at which data is transferred between the RAM and the CPU. SDRAM 
has become a standard in many computing systems, including desktops, laptops, and serv­
ers, where high-speed data transfer is critical.
4.	Double Data Rate (DDR) RAM: Double data rate RAM, or DDR RAM, builds upon the 
foundation of SDRAM. It improves data transfer rates by transmitting data on both the 
rising and falling edges of the clock signal. This effectively doubles the data transfer rate 
compared to earlier SDRAM versions. DDR RAM is widely used in modern comput­
ing systems, including laptops, desktops, and graphics cards, where high-speed memory 
access is essential for tasks like gaming and multimedia processing.
5.	Non-Volatile RAM (NVRAM): Non-volatile RAM, or NVRAM, represents a departure 
from traditional RAM in that it retains data even when the system is powered off. This is 
achieved through various technologies, such as ferroelectric RAM (FeRAM) and magne­
toresistive RAM (MRAM). NVRAM combines the speed of RAM with the non- volatility 
of storage, making it suitable for applications like cache memory and in scenarios where 
instant data availability is critical, even after a system reboot.
19.2.3  Advancements in RAM Technology
As technology marches forward, RAM has not remained stagnant. Recent years have witnessed 
remarkable advancements that push the boundaries of speed, capacity, and energy efficiency:
19.2.3.1  D-Stacked RAM
This innovation involves stacking multiple layers of RAM cells on top of each other. This increases 
storage capacity within a smaller physical footprint. Additionally, it enhances data transfer rates, 
as signals can traverse shorter distances within the stacked structure. This technology holds the 
promise of more powerful and efficient memory solutions.
19.2.3.2  Non-Volatile RAM (NVRAM)
NVRAM [17] technologies have garnered significant attention. They retain data even when the 
power is turned off, blurring the line between traditional volatile RAM and non-volatile storage. 
Technologies like MRAM and phase change RAM (PCRAM) hold particular promise, offering 
potential applications in scenarios where instant data availability is crucial.
19.2.3.3  Hybrid Memory Cube (HMC)
The hybrid memory cube (HMC) represents a leap forward in RAM architecture. It involves verti­
cally stacking memory chips, enabling significantly faster data transfer rates and reduced power 
consumption compared to traditional DRAM. HMC is a promising solution for high-performance 
computing applications, where data throughput and energy efficiency are critical considerations. 
These advancements in RAM technology pave the way for more powerful, energy-efficient, and 
versatile computing systems, enhancing the capabilities of a wide range of electronic devices.
19.2.3.4  Resistive RAM (ReRAM)
Resistive RAM, or ReRAM, is an emerging technology that shows great interest. It operates on the 
principle of resistive switching, where the resistance of a material can be altered by applying volt­
age. This enables ReRAM to function as a non-volatile memory, with the potential for high storage 
density and fast access times. Researchers are actively exploring ReRAM for applications in both 
main memory and non-volatile memory.

250
Handbook of Semiconductors
19.2.4  Recent Research Developments
In recent years, the field of RAM technology has seen a surge of research and innovation. One of the 
most notable areas of advancement is in the development of novel materials for RAM. Researchers 
are exploring materials with unique electrical properties, such as ferroelectric materials and 2D 
materials like graphene, to push the boundaries of RAM performance. Additionally, there is a grow­
ing focus on energy efficiency in RAM design. Techniques like near-threshold computing, which 
operates electronic devices at voltages very close to their threshold voltage, are being investigated to 
reduce power consumption in RAM modules. Moreover, research efforts are aimed at overcoming 
the limitations of traditional silicon-based RAM. Emerging technologies like spin-transfer torque 
RAM (STT-RAM) and domain wall memory are being explored for their potential to offer higher 
storage densities and lower power consumption compared to conventional RAM technologies.
Furthermore, advancements in memory management algorithms and architectures are optimiz­
ing the utilization of RAM in modern computing systems. Techniques like memory compression 
and intelligent caching strategies are being employed to enhance overall system performance.
19.3  MEMRISTORS
19.3.1  Memristor Fundamentals
The advent of memristors, a term coined from “memory resistor,” marks a paradigm shift in elec­
tronic components. Conceptualized by Leon Chua in 1971, memristors represent the fourth funda­
mental two-terminal passive circuit element, alongside resistors, capacitors, and inductors. These 
devices exhibit a dynamic relationship between resistance and applied voltage, enabling them to 
“remember” their resistance state based on the history of the electric charge that has passed through 
them. This unique characteristic grants memristors the ability to retain their resistance state even 
when the power is turned off. Such a property is invaluable for applications in non-volatile memory 
storage and neuromorphic computing, where the persistence of information is critical.
19.3.2  Memristor Characteristics and Applications
19.3.2.1  Resistive Switching Behavior
Central to memristor functionality is resistive switching, a phenomenon where the device’s resis­
tance state can be altered in response to an applied voltage. This behavior arises from the movement 
of ions within the memristor’s material, leading to a physical change in resistance. Resistive switch­
ing [18–23] is the cornerstone of memristor operation, allowing them to function as non-volatile 
memory elements. By applying specific voltage pulses with defined amplitudes and durations, mem­
ristors can transition between low and high resistance states, effectively encoding binary informa­
tion. The basic schematic diagram of the RRAM device and its corresponding schematic diagram 
of I-V curve is shown in Figure 19.3(a) and (b) respectively.
19.3.2.2  Applications in Memory
One of the most promising domains for memristor applications is memory technology. Given their 
non-volatile nature, memristors hold the potential to revolutionize memory storage by offering 
high-density, energy-efficient, and fast-access memory solutions [24]. Technologies like ReRAM 
and conductive bridge RAM (CBRAM) are currently under scrutiny for their suitability in various 
computing applications. In recent years, research has focused on refining memristor materials and 
device architectures to elevate memory performance. Techniques such as exploring different metal 
oxides and investigating novel switching mechanisms have shown promise in enhancing the reli­
ability and endurance of memristor-based memory devices.

251
Transistors
19.3.2.2.1  Materials Used for RRAM
A wide array of materials has been explored for resistive switching (RS) applications, encompassing 
binary oxides, complex metal oxides, carrier-doped manganites with perovskite structure, chalco­
genides, polymers, and 2D materials. The pursuit of RS materials has been underway since the 1960s. 
The development of the RS materials with time is shown in Figure 19.4 [25]. In 1962, Hickmott first 
FIGURE 19.3  (a) Schematic diagram of RRAM device in which an insulator is sandwiched between the two 
metal electrodes. (b) The schematic of the I-V curve obtained in a RRAM device.
FIGURE 19.4  The development of the RRAM devices and materials in chronological order onwards. 
(Adapted with permission from [25]. Copyright [2020].)

252
Handbook of Semiconductors
demonstrated negative resistance in metal-insulator-metal (MIM) structures composed of thin films 
of SiO2, Ta2O5, Al2O3, TiO2, and ZrO2. Following this, in-depth investigations into the properties 
of Al2O3, SiO2, and Ta2O5 were conducted, along with the observation of switching properties 
in NiO. Subsequently, complex oxide materials like pervoskite oxides (e.g., Pr0.7Ca0.3MnO3 or 
PCMO), Cr-doped SrTi(Zr)O3, and PbZr0.5Ti04 emerged in the 1990s, although their stability for 
memory-based devices was limited. A significant development occurred in 2004 with the introduc­
tion of binary transition metal oxide resistive memory (OxRAM), characterized by stability and 
compatibility with CMOS technology. Notably, it operated at very low voltages (less than 3 V), 
marking a pivotal advancement in the field of RS. This breakthrough served as a catalyst for further 
research into RRAM devices and materials. Subsequently, a range of binary metal oxides, includ­
ing ZnO, MgO, TiO2, HfO2, Cu2O, Fe2O3, CeO2, Nb2O5, WOx, and MoOx, were investigated as 
RS materials. Beyond these, materials like ternary metal oxides (e.g., LaAlO3, BiFeO3, SrZrO3), 
chalcogenides (e.g., GeSx, Ag2S), nitrides (e.g., SiN), polymers (e.g., poly(3,4- ethylenedioxythio­
phene) polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), poly(o-anthranilic acid) (PARA), and manganites (e.g., 
Nd0:7Ca0:3MnO3) have been explored for their potential as RS materials. Additionally, the advent 
of 2D materials, such as MoS2, hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), and graphene derivatives (GO, 
rGO), has offered distinct advantages over traditional binary oxide materials, including high ther­
mal dissipation, enhanced flexibility, transparency, and chemical stability compared to transition 
metal oxides.
Apart from these, many nanocomposite materials have been utilized as resistive switch­
ing materials. For instance, combinations like ZnO/TiO2 can manifest intriguing RS properties. 
Additionally, nanocomposites consisting of metal oxide nanoparticles (e.g., TiO2, ZnO) embedded 
in a conductive metal matrix (e.g., copper) have shown promise. The incorporation of materials 
like graphene oxide (GO) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) in conjunction with metal nanopar­
ticles further enhances the RS behavior. The introduction of small nanofillers, such as rGO, aug­
ments the resistive switching characteristics of manganites. Similarly, the insertion of a thin layer 
of LSMO between the ZnO and the top electrode amplifies the RS behavior of the ZnO as shown 
in Figure 19.5(a-c) [26]. Consequently, this approach encompasses various strategies to enhance the 
performance of oxide-based RRAM devices.
19.3.2.3  Neuromorphic Computing
Memristors play a pivotal role in the advancement of neuromorphic computing [15, 27], a field dedi­
cated to mimic the structure and functionality of the human brain. Their ability to mimic synapse-
like behavior positions them as ideal building blocks for artificial neural networks. Memristor-based 
FIGURE 19.5  (a) Schematic diagram of the Ag/LSMO/ZnO device deposited on the ITO substrate. (b) I-V 
characteristics curve of Ag/ZnO/ITO device for 1st and 10th cycle in semi-logarithmic scale. (c) I-V curve of 
the Ag/LSMO/ZnO/ITO device for 1st, 50th, and 100th cycle in semi-logarithmic scale. The arrow represents 
the direction of the current. (Adapted with permission from [26]. (Copyright [2020] Current Applied Physics.)

253
Transistors
neuromorphic systems offer the potential for highly efficient and adaptable computing architec­
tures, capable of tasks like pattern recognition and machine learning. Recent research in this area 
has focused on designing memristor-based synapses with tunable plasticity, allowing for dynamic 
adjustments of synaptic weights. Additionally, efforts are underway to integrate memristor-based 
synapses with spiking neural network architectures, aiming to create more biologically realistic and 
energy-efficient computing systems.
Neuromorphic computing has been researched over the decades, and recently, there have been 
significant advancements. As illustrated in Figure 19.6, the most recent improvement can be divided 
into three main phases. A GPU-centric system, which is primarily used for learning and supports 
artificial intelligence by using a GPU, is the initial phase. An application-specific integrated circuit 
(ASIC)-centric system, which is the next stage, is a hot topic of research. An effective and low-
power ASIC for machine learning is anticipated to be created by this trend. As a result, numerous 
semiconductor firms are creating ASIC chips. However, it is anticipated that neuromorphic com­
puting will develop into neuromorphic hardware, enabling ultra-low-power and ultra-high-speed 
computation to support general-purpose artificial intelligence.
The neuromorphic-centric hardware must be able to handle massive amounts of data in parallel 
while using incredibly little power. Furthermore, compared to current technology that uses ordinary 
CMOS components, the neuromorphic semiconductor chip demands a quicker rate of computing. 
This suggests that creating a novel synaptic device is essential to the development of neuromorphic-
centric hardware.
19.3.3  Memristor-Based Logic and Computing
In addition to their applications in memory and neuromorphic computing, memristors can also 
serve as fundamental elements in logic operations. This convergence of memory and logic opens up 
new vistas for highly efficient and adaptive computing systems. By incorporating memristors into 
logic gates, researchers are exploring the potential for memristor-based computing architectures 
that could outperform traditional CMOS-based systems in specific applications.
Recent strides in memristor-based logic circuits have focused on minimizing power consump­
tion and enhancing computational speed. Strategies such as designing memristor-based logic gates 
with lower switching energy and exploring new materials with faster switching speeds have demon­
strated significant potential in advancing the capabilities of memristor-based computing.
19.3.4  Challenges and Future Directions
Despite the immense potential of memristors, several challenges need to be addressed. Notably, 
variability poses a significant concern, as ensuring consistent behavior across a large number of 
FIGURE 19.6  Evolution of neuromorphic hardware.

254
Handbook of Semiconductors
memristors can be intricate. Additionally, scalability and fabrication techniques require further 
research and development to make memristor-based technologies economically viable on a large 
scale. In the coming years, research in memristor technology is expected to center around overcom­
ing these challenges. Efforts to develop reliable fabrication processes, explore novel materials, and 
refine memristor-based architectures will be pivotal in realizing the full potential of memristors in 
memory computing, and neuromorphic applications.
19.3.5  Recent Research Developments in Memristors
In recent years, the field of memristor technology has witnessed a surge of research and innovation, 
driving advancements in several key areas.
19.3.5.1  Multifunctional Memristors
Researchers have made significant strides in developing memristors with multifunctional capa­
bilities. These devices can perform a range of functions beyond memory storage, including logic 
operations and signal processing. By harnessing the versatile properties of memristors, scientists 
are working towards creating highly integrated and adaptable computing systems that can excel in 
diverse applications.
19.3.5.2  Memristor-Based Synaptic Plasticity
Advancements in understanding synaptic plasticity, the ability of synapses to strengthen or weaken 
over time, have led to the development of memristor-based synapses with tunable plasticity. This 
enables the creation of artificial neural networks that can undergo dynamic adjustments in synaptic 
weights, mimicking the learning processes observed in biological systems. Figure 19.7 depicts the 
behavior of organic memristors with synaptic plasticity for the application of neuromorphic com­
puting [27].
FIGURE 19.7  (a) Electrical parameters of the memristor. (a) Multistate I-V characteristic curve of mem­
ristor. (b) The device endurance and (c) retention at room temperature. (d) Long-term synaptic plasticity of 
the Ta/EV(ClO4)2/BTPA-F/Pt memristor. (e) Schematic illustration of the spike-timing-dependent plasticity 
properties of the device. (f) Synaptic weight retention performance of the device in response to temperature 
change. (Adapted with permission from [27]. Copyright [2023] Nanomaterials.)

255
Transistors
19.3.5.3  Three-Dimensional Memristor Integration
Recent developments have focused on stacking multiple layers of memristor cells in three-
dimensional architectures. This approach increases memory density while minimizing the physi­
cal footprint, leading to more compact and energy-efficient memory solutions. Three-dimensional 
memristor integration holds promise for addressing the growing demand for high-capacity memory 
in modern computing systems.
Thus, the emergence of memristors has ushered in a new era of possibilities in electronic compo­
nentry. With their unique resistive switching behavior, memristors are poised to revolutionize memory 
technology, neuromorphic computing, and logic operations. Ongoing research efforts are tackling 
challenges related to variability, scalability, and fabrication techniques, paving the way for memristor-
based technologies to become integral components of future computing systems. Recent research 
developments in memristor technology are expanding the boundaries of what is possible. From mul­
tifunctional memristors to non-volatile neuromorphic memory, these advancements are driving inno­
vation in a wide range of applications. As researchers continue to push the boundaries of memristor 
technology, we can anticipate even more transformative developments in the years to come.
19.4  GATE TRANSISTORS
19.4.1  Overview of Gates in Logic Circuits
In digital electronics, logic gates are fundamental building blocks that process binary information, 
performing logical operations based on Boolean algebra. These operations include AND, OR, and 
NOT, and they form the backbone of all computational tasks, from basic arithmetic to complex algo­
rithms. Gate transistors are pivotal components in modern semiconductor technology, serving as the 
building blocks of digital integrated circuits. They play a fundamental role in controlling the flow 
of electronic signals and executing logic operations. Over the years, gate transistors have evolved to 
meet the demands of miniaturization and power efficiency, from the conventional CMOS transistors 
to cutting-edge fin field-effect transistors (FinFETs) and tunnel field-effect transistors (TFETs).
19.4.2  Advanced Gate Technologies
Traditional CMOS technology has long been the workhorse of digital electronics. However, with the 
increasing demand for faster and more energy-efficient devices, advanced gate technologies have 
emerged.
19.4.2.1  FinFETs (Fin Field-Effect Transistors)
FinFETs represent a significant advancement over traditional planar CMOS transistors. Instead of 
a flat channel, FinFETs use a three-dimensional “fin” structure that extends above the substrate. 
This design provides better control over current flow and reduces leakage, resulting in improved 
performance and energy efficiency.
19.4.2.2  Tunnel Field-Effect Transistors (TFETs)
TFETs operate based on a different principle compared to conventional transistors. Instead of rely­
ing solely on the electric field to control current flow, TFETs utilize quantum tunneling through a 
barrier. This enables them to achieve lower sub-threshold swing, making them highly suitable for 
low-power applications.
19.4.3  Quantum Gates
In the realm of quantum computing, gate operations take on a whole new level of complexity. 
Quantum gates manipulate quantum bits (qubits), which can exist in multiple states simultaneously 

256
Handbook of Semiconductors
(superposition) and become entangled, allowing for computations that classical logic gates cannot 
perform.
19.4.3.1  Quantum Logic Gates
Quantum logic gates, such as Controlled NOT (CNOT) and Hadamard gates, form the basis of 
quantum algorithms. They enable operations on qubits, allowing for the creation and manipulation 
of quantum states.
19.4.3.2  Quantum Supremacy
The concept of quantum supremacy refers to the point at which quantum computers can perform 
tasks that are fundamentally impossible for classical computers, signaling a major milestone in the 
field of quantum computing.
19.4.4  Gate Transistor Architecture and Operation
Gate transistors typically comprise a gate, source, drain, and channel region. The gate electrode 
plays a pivotal role in controlling the flow of current between the source and drain regions. By 
applying a voltage to the gate, an electric field is induced, either attracting or repelling charge carri­
ers in the channel, thereby allowing or blocking current flow between the source and drain.
19.4.5  Recent Research Developments in Gate Transistors
In recent years, gate transistor technology has experienced a surge in research and development 
efforts, leading to several notable advancements.
19.4.5.1  Gate-All-Around (GAA) Transistors
Gate-all-around (GAA) transistors represent a monumental leap in transistor architecture. In GAA 
transistors, the gate completely surrounds the channel, offering even greater control over current 
flow. This design allows for increased transistor density and improved electrostatic control, paving 
the way for continued miniaturization and enhanced performance. Recent studies have focused on 
refining fabrication techniques to maximize the benefits of GAA transistors, aiming for unprec­
edented levels of integration and energy efficiency.
19.4.5.2  Low-Power Variants
Researchers have made substantial progress in developing low-power gate transistors to address the 
burgeoning demand for energy-efficient electronics. Novel materials and fabrication techniques are 
being explored to reduce leakage currents and enhance overall power efficiency. Techniques such 
as high-K metal gate (HKMG) technology and advanced dielectric materials have emerged as key 
enablers for achieving these objectives. Recent studies have shown promising results in significantly 
reducing power consumption without compromising performance.
19.4.5.3  Beyond Silicon: Alternative Materials
As the limitations of silicon-based transistors become more apparent, researchers are venturing into 
the realm of alternative materials for transistor fabrication. Compound semiconductors like gallium 
nitride (GaN) and silicon carbide (SiC) offer unique electrical properties that can enable higher-
speed operation and higher breakdown voltages. Additionally, 2D materials such as graphene and 
transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) hold tremendous promise for future transistor technology. 
Recent experiments with these materials have demonstrated encouraging results, opening up new 
avenues for next-generation transistors.

257
Transistors
19.4.5.4  Quantum Tunneling Transistors
Quantum tunneling transistors leverage the principles of quantum mechanics to achieve unprec­
edented levels of energy efficiency. By exploiting the quantum tunneling effect, these transistors can 
operate at extremely low voltages, reducing power consumption significantly. This technology holds 
immense potential for applications in ultra-low-power integrated circuits and energy-efficient com­
puting systems. Recent breakthroughs in the design and fabrication of quantum tunneling transistors 
have shown promising results, indicating a potential paradigm shift in semiconductor technology.
19.4.6  Future Directions and Challenges
While recent research developments in gate transistors have propelled the field forward, several chal­
lenges remain. Ensuring reliability and consistency in the fabrication of advanced transistor tech­
nologies, especially those involving alternative materials, is a critical consideration. Additionally, 
addressing the thermal challenges associated with high transistor densities is paramount to prevent 
overheating in densely packed integrated circuits.
In the years ahead, research in gate transistor technology is poised to focus on overcoming 
these challenges. Continued exploration of novel materials, innovative transistor architectures, and 
advanced fabrication techniques will drive further advancements in semiconductor technology. 
Additionally, the integration of gate transistors into emerging fields such as quantum computing 
and neuromorphic computing holds the potential to revolutionize computing paradigms.
19.5  CONCLUSION
In the ever-evolving landscape of electronics, this chapter has taken us on a journey through the 
heart of cutting-edge technology. We began with the foundational transistor, a device that revolu­
tionized computing and catalyzed the digital age. From its early iterations as a bipolar junction tran­
sistor (BJT) to the contemporary era of field-effect transistors (FETs), we witnessed the relentless 
march of miniaturization, fueled by the prescient vision encapsulated in Moore’s law. Transistors, 
these minuscule sentinels, have indelibly shaped our world. They have empowered us to harness 
computational power beyond the wildest dreams of their progenitors. Moore’s law, that prophetic 
roadmap, has been the compass guiding us through decades of exponential growth, ushering in an 
era where processing power once deemed fantastical now resides in our pockets. Yet, our explora­
tion did not end with transistors alone. We ventured into a realm of advanced logic devices, each 
bearing its own distinct imprint on the technological tapestry. RAM, the dynamic powerhouse of 
data manipulation, emerged as the fulcrum of real-time computation. Memristors, with their capac­
ity to remember resistance states, beckon us toward a future where memory storage transcends the 
confines of volatility. The promise of non-volatile memory, coupled with its potential in neuromor­
phic computing, stands as a testament to the transformative power of this nascent technology. Gate 
transistors, from the conventional CMOS to the vanguard of FinFETs and TFETs, herald a new era 
of speed, power efficiency, and integration. As we confront the challenges posed by diminishing 
transistor sizes, these innovations rise to the occasion, offering solutions that bridge the gap between 
theoretical limits and real-world applications. Central to this journey has been an acknowledgment 
of the materials that constitute this electronic tapestry. Silicon, with its exceptional semiconductive 
properties, remains the cornerstone of modern semiconductor technology. However, as we approach 
the limits of miniaturization, alternative materials such as compound semiconductors and inno­
vative fabrication techniques have risen to prominence. They offer not just incremental improve­
ments, but the potential for paradigm-shifting advances in performance and energy efficiency. In 
this epoch of ceaseless innovation, we find ourselves on the cusp of a new frontier. The convergence 
of transistors, RAM, memristors, and advanced gate technologies propels us toward a future bound 
only by the horizons of imagination.

258
Handbook of Semiconductors
Together, these components herald a new age of computing prowess, where memory and logic 
intertwine seamlessly, and where quantum leaps in speed, efficiency, and functionality become the 
new norm. As we look to the future, challenges such as reliability in fabrication processes, thermal 
management, and the integration of emerging technologies like quantum computing and neuromor­
phic computing remain at the forefront. However, the dynamism and ingenuity of the semiconductor 
community continue to propel us forward. In conclusion, this chapter underscores the pivotal role 
that RAM, memristors, and gate transistors play in shaping the future of computing. Their evolu­
tion, marked by relentless innovation and interdisciplinary collaboration, heralds a future where 
computing capabilities are limited only by our imagination. It is through the continued exploration 
and advancement of these advanced logic devices that we embark on a journey towards more power­
ful, efficient, and versatile computing systems.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 G. E. Moore. “Cramming more components onto integrated circuits.” Electronics, vol. 38, pp. 114–117, 
1965.
	
2.	 M. Horowitz. “Computing’s energy problem (and what we can do about it).” IEEE Int. SolidState Circuits 
Conference (ISSCC), pp. 10–14, 2014.
	
3.	 P. A. Merolla, J. V. Arthur, R. Alvarez-Icaza, A. S. Cassidy, J. Sawada, F. Akopyan, B. L. Jackson, 
N. Imam, C. Guo, Y. Nakamura, B. Brezzo, I. Vo, S. K. Esser, R. Appuswamy, B. Taba, A. Amir, 
M. D. Flickner, W. P. Risk, R. Manohar, and D. S. Modha. “A million spiking- neuron integrated circuit 
with a scalable communication network and interface.” Science, vol. 345, no. 6197, pp. 668–673, 2014.
	
4.	 W. A. Wulf, and S. A. McKee. “Hitting the memory wall: Implications of the obvious.” ACM SIGARCH 
Computer Architecture News, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 20–24, 1995.
	
5.	 G. Indiveri, and S.-C. Liu. “Memory and information processing in neuromorphic systems.” Proceedings 
of IEEE, vol. 103, no. 8, pp. 1379–1397, 2015.
	
6.	 R. S. Williams. “What’s next?” Computing in Science and Engineering, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 7–13, 2017.
	
7.	 S. Salahuddin, K. Ni, and S. Datta. “The era of hyper-scaling in electronics.” Nature Electronics, vol. 1, 
pp. 442–450, 2018.
	
8.	 J. M. Shalf, and R. Leland. “Computing beyond Moore’s law.” Computer, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 14–23, 
2015.
	
9.	 M. Di Ventra, and Y. V. Pershin. “The parallel approach.” Nature Physics, vol. 9, pp. 200–202, 2013.
	 10.	 M. M. Waldrop. “The chips are down for Moore’s law.” Nature, vol. 530, no. 7589, pp. 144–147, 2016.
	 11.	 M. Alayan. “Investigation of HfO2 based Resistive Random Access Memory (RRAM): Characterization 
and modeling of cell reliability and novel access device.” Diss. Université Grenoble Alpes, 2018.
	 12.	 T. Endoh. “Nonvolatile logic and memory devices based on spintronics.” Proceedings IEEE International 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems, vol. 2015–July, pp. 13–16, 2015.
	 13.	 T. Endoh, T. Ohsawa, H. Koike, T. Hanyu, and H. Ohno. “Restructuring of memory hierarchy in com­
puting system with spintronics-based technologies.” Dig. Tech. Pap. – Symp. VLSI Technol., pp. 89–90, 
2012.
	 14.	 S. S. Ulhas. “Defect engineering in HfO2/TiN-based resistive random access memory (RRAM) devices 
by reactive molecular beam epitaxy.” Diss. Universitäts-und Landesbibliothek Darmstadt, 2018.
	 15.	 J. Park. “Neuromorphic computing using emerging synaptic devices: A retrospective summary and an 
outlook.” Electronics, vol. 9, no. 9, p. 1414, 2020.
	 16.	 K. Kumari, A. Kumar, D. Kotnees, J. Balakrishnan, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “Structural and resis­
tive switching behaviour in lanthanum strontium manganite-reduced graphene oxide nanocomposite 
system.” Journal of Alloys and Compounds, vol. 815, p. 152213, 2020.
	 17.	 A. Kumar, K. Kumari, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “Graphene mediated resistive switching and ther­
moelectric behavior in lanthanum cobaltate.” Journal of Applied Physics, vol. 127, p. 235103, 2020.
	 18.	 K. Kumari, A. Kumar, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “Charge transport and resistive switching in a 2D 
hybrid interface.” Materials Research Bulletin, vol. 139, p. 111195, 2021.
	 19.	 K. Karuna, S. Majumder, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “Temperature-dependent resistive switching 
behaviour of an oxide memristor.” Materials Letters, vol. 303, p. 130451, 2021.
	 20.	 K. Kumari, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “The effect of graphene and reduced graphene oxide on the resis­
tive switching behavior of La0.7Ba0.3MnO3.” Materials Today Communications, vol. 26, p. 102040, 
2021.

259
Transistors
	 21.	 S. Majumder, K. Kumari, and S. J. Ray. “Pulsed voltage induced resistive switching behavior of copper 
iodide and La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 nanocomposites.” Materials Letters, vol. 302, p. 130339, 2021.
	 22.	 K. Kumari, A. D. Thakur, and S. J Ray. “Structural, resistive switching and charge transport behaviour 
of (1-x) La0.7Sr0.3MnO3(x)ZnO composite system.” Applied Physics A, vol. 128, no. 11, p. 992, 2022.
	 23.	 K. Kumari, S. J. Ray, and A. D. Thakur. “Resistive switching phenomena: A probe for the tracing of 
secondary phase in manganite.” Applied Physics A, vol. 128, no. 5, p. 430, 2022.
	 24.	 K. Karmakar, A. Roy, S. Dhibar, S. J. Ray, and B. Saha. “Instantaneous gelation of a self-healable wide 
band gap semiconducting supramolecular mg(II) metallohydrogel: An efficient nonvolatile memory 
design with supreme endurance.” ACS Applied Electronic Materials, vol. 5, pp. 3340–3349, 2023.
	 25.	 V. Gupta, S. Kapur, S. Saurabh, and A. Grover. “Resistive random access memory: A review of device 
challenges.” IETE Technical Review, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 377–390, 2020.
	 26.	 K. Kumari, S. Kar, A. D. Thakur, and S. J. Ray. “Role of an oxide interface in a resistive switch.” Current 
Applied Physics, vol. 35, pp. 16–23, 2022.
	 27.	 J. Zeng, X. Chen, S. Liu, Q. Chen, and G. Liu. “Organic memristor with synaptic plasticity for neuro­
morphic computing applications.” Nanomaterials, vol. 13, no. 5, p. 803, 2023.

260
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-20
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
Neeraj Mehta
20.1  INTRODUCTION
The two types of conventional mainstream semiconductor memory are volatile and non-volatile. 
The random access memory (RAM) can be either volatile or non-volatile [1–4]. However, static 
and dynamic RAM are examples of volatile memories that lose their saved data when the power 
is turned off. Although they are user-friendly and efficient, data loss is a significant drawback. 
Non-volatile memory (NVM) will continue to contain the previously recorded data even when 
the power source is turned off. Thus, in the event of a power outage, NVM does not lose any 
stored data since read-only memory (ROM) technology serves as the foundation for all com­
monly used NVMs.
They can save the information in either memory. However, both memories differ greatly from 
one another (Table 20.1).
The emphasis of computer system development and research has recently switched to semi­
conductor memory advances that blur the distinction between memory (slow, expensive, volatile) 
and storage (quick, affordable, non-volatile), as well as complete the hierarchical arrangement of 
memory and storage currently in place.
20
TABLE 20.1
Differences between VMs and NVMs
S. No.
Volatile Memory (VM)
Non-Volatile Memory (NVM)
i
Volatile memory only retains its information when 
the system is turned on. The content deletes itself 
when the system is turned off.
Another type of memory that retains data even when 
the system is powered down is non-volatile memory.
ii
Data and information are temporarily stored in 
volatile memory. Random access memory (RAM) 
is the ideal instance of volatile memory.
The data is permanently stored in non-volatile 
memory. Read-only memory (ROM) is the best 
instance of non-volatile memory.
iii
This memory performs better than non-volatile 
memory in terms of speed.
The performance of this memory is slower than 
volatile memory.
iv
Volatile memory transmits data more easily than 
non-volatile memory.
In this memory, data transport is challenging.
v
In volatile memory, read and write operations are 
carried out simultaneously.
In non-volatile memory, only read operations are 
carried out.
vi
Storage capacity is lower than that of non-volatile 
memory.
Storing capacity is higher than that of volatile memory.
vii
The cost per unit size is high for this type of 
memory.
The cost per unit size is low for this type of memory 
compared to volatile memory.
viii
The functioning of the computer system is affected 
by volatile memory.
ROM does not affect the system’s performance. But it 
significantly affects the computers’ storage capacity.
ix
Data in the volatile memory is directly accessible to 
the processor.
The non-volatile memory is not directly accessible by 
the processor.
x
The information related to the actions that the CPU 
is currently carrying out is stored in volatile 
memory, or RAM.
Any type of data is permanently stored in non-volatile 
memory.

261
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
The persistent storage of certain data is a requirement for almost every electronic device. The 
advent of flash memory and the rise in popularity of battery-powered electronic appliances, pri­
marily mobile phones, have been two important developments that have fueled the remarkable 
expansion of the NVM market. With the growing use of new data-centered devices like digital still 
cameras, MP3 players, and other personal digital assistants, a distinct trend in the NVM industry 
started to emerge in the early years of the new century.
The non-volatile memory devices (NVMDs) are read/write electronic data storage components that 
retain data even after being powered off [1–5]. They typically consist of magnetic disc drives and cer­
tain semiconductor chips. The semiconductor-based NVM devices are essential pieces of every aspect 
of the information age, from storage units in massive cloud databases to portable personal devices, and 
they account for one of the largest portions of the $400 billion semiconductor market today [6, 7]. NVM 
is growing more and more in demand as computer technology advances, and consumers’ demands for 
higher read and write speeds and decreasing power usage are driving these changes.
The floating gate MOS transistor has served as the main building block for the development of 
NVMs for more than 40 years [8]. Non-volatile semiconductor memory has continuously grown in 
importance in our daily lives [9]. For instance, the railway exploits millions of commuters each day, 
having electronically erasable and programmable read-only memory at railway passes to expand the 
reliability of processing components for railway electronic security arrangements. In addition, non-
volatile semiconductor memories are utilized in the majority of household electronics (e.g., cellular 
phones, digital cameras, audio players, universal-serial-bus [USB] memories) as well as in cars with 
large-capacity flash memories.
The need for data storage and retrieval has increased dramatically in the digital era. Data-
intensive applications have permeated every aspect of our daily lives, from personal computers 
to cell phones. The creation of NVMDs has been essential in meeting this growing demand for 
storage. NVM, in contrast to conventional volatile memory, offers permanent and dependable stor­
age solutions by maintaining data even when the power is switched off. This chapter explores the 
significance of NVM devices, their types, and their applications.
20.2  EVOLUTION OF NON-VOLATILE MEMORY 
DEVICES: HISTORICAL OVERVIEW
NVMDs have undergone significant historical evolution, progressing from early technologies such 
as magnetic core memory to modern flash memory and emerging technologies like resistive ran­
dom-access memory (RRAM) and phase-change memory (PCM) [10]. In this section, we will dis­
cuss only the major milestones in the historical evolution of semiconductor-based NVMDs.
C.T. (Tom) Sah played a significant role as a pioneer in the development of semiconductor NVM 
memory. During the late 1960s and early 1970s, Sah conducted groundbreaking research on the 
fundamental principles of charge trapping and retention in semiconductor materials [10, 11]. It was 
Sah [10, 11] who noticed the floating gate memory effects in 1961 but did not publish his findings at 
that time. The discovery of the floating gate memory effects by Sah was an important observation 
in the development of NVM technologies.
Beginning in the 1960s, two fundamental strategies for designing semiconductor NVM cells 
were first studied and reported in the 1960s. For the first time, the potential for NVM in semicon­
ductors was acknowledged at Bell Labs when Kahng and Sze demonstrated a prototype electrically 
erasable-programmable read-only memory by proposing a design of a floating gate to create an 
NVMD [12]. Initially, a floating gate cell was designed that stores charges on an electrode without 
being wired into an external circuit, to put it as simply as possible. The potentiality of NVMDs 
based on metal-oxide semiconductors was also recognized during this period. Since then, semicon­
ductor memory has contributed greatly to the revolutionary development of digital electronics. This 
was the basis of the floating gate avalanche-injection metal-oxide-semiconductor (FAMOS). The 
invention of FAMOS was a significant milestone in NVM technology.

262
Handbook of Semiconductors
Dov Frohman-Bentchkowsky was an engineer and executive who made significant contributions 
during his time at Intel Corporation. Frohman-Bentchkowsky joined Intel in 1969 and became 
one of the early employees of the company [13, 14]. He is credited with inventing the concept of 
erasable programmable read-only memory (EPROM) while working at Intel. In 1971, Frohman-
Bentchkowsky [13, 14] was part of the team of engineers at Intel Corporation who created it. In 
order to produce a dense, quick-access NVM, he developed the Intel 2708 N-MOS EPROM in 1974 
using a novel method that used channel injection and a single dual-layer polysilicon cell. The device 
could be quickly erased for reprogramming by shining UV light through a window on the box, and 
it didn’t need power to keep its contents.
NVM technology significantly advanced with the creation of EPROM. The advanced version of 
EPROM was electrically erasable programmable read-only memory (EEPROM). It was invented in 
1978. It was developed by a team of engineers at Intel Corporation, including G. Perlegos [15, 16]. 
EEPROM was used as an innovative alternative to EPROM and programmable read-only memory 
(PROM).
The development of flash memory is attributed to Dr. Fujio Masuoka [17, 18], who created it 
while working for Toshiba in the 1980s. He was a gifted student who excelled in maths and had 
outstanding abilities at the elementary and high school levels by the age of three. As a result, he 
had a very inquisitive nature and was willing to experiment by going down unknown roads. He 
worked on DRAM as a development engineer and salesman early in his career at Toshiba. He devel­
oped the concept of flash memory while working at Toshiba Corporation in the early 1980s. In 1984, 
Masuoka et al. filed a patent for his invention, called “Semiconductor memory device and method 
for manufacturing the same,” which described the basic principles and structure of flash memory 
[18]. According to reports, Shoji Ariizumi, a coworker of Masuoka’s, came up with the term “flash” 
because the act of deleting all the information from a chip made of semiconductors reminded him of 
a camera’s flash. At the IEEE 1984 Integrated Electronics Devices Meeting in San Jose, California, 
Dr. Masuoka presented the innovation [19]. In the early 1980s, Toshiba created a one-terabyte flash 
memory using EEPROM, and in 1985, it was released on the market. The details of the pioneers of 
NVM for the first few decades are illustrated in Figure 20.1.
In 1984, Masuoka and associates introduced NOT-OR (NOR) flash, and then in 1987, at the 
IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM) in San Francisco, they introduced NOT-
AND (NAND) flash [20, 21]. In 1987, Toshiba introduced NAND flash memory on a commercial 
scale [22]. In 1988, Intel Corporation unveiled the first NOR-type flash chip for commercial use 
1988 after realizing the invention’s enormous potential. In 1989, Samsung and Toshiba introduced 
FIGURE 20.1  Schematic showing the historical growth of the NVM technology by different scientists mak­
ing noteworthy contributions to its development. 

263
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
the NAND flash. In comparison to NOR flash, it boasted ten times the endurance, faster erase and 
write speeds, higher density, and lower cost per bit.
Later, in 1997, Intel developed a multi-level cell (MLC) flash, which was a new type of NAND 
flash memory. More than one bit could be stored in each cell of this two-bit MLC NOR flash. 
MLC NAND flash memory was first introduced by Toshiba Corporation in 2005. MLC is a type of 
NAND flash memory that allows multiple bits to be stored in a single memory cell, typically two 
bits per cell. Triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory was introduced by Samsung in 2012. 
TLC NAND is a type of NAND flash memory that allows storing three bits of data per cell, hence 
the “triple-level” designation. It builds upon the MLC technology, which stores two bits per cell. 
Samsung created 3D NAND memory, sometimes referred to as vertical NAND or V-NAND, in 
2014. An important turning point in the development of NVM technology was the creation of 3D 
NAND. The historical evolution of NVM devices is shown in Figure 20.2.
20.3  TYPES OF NON-VOLATILE MEMORY DEVICES
In the present time, there are various types of NVM devices based on the technology used and the 
nature of the semiconducting materials. We will discuss some widely used NVMDs in this section.
20.3.1  Flash Memory
The most popular NVM technology is flash memory [23–26]. It uses floating gate transistors to 
store data, making it possible to maintain knowledge even in the absence of power. NAND flash and 
NOR flash are just two types of flash memory. NAND flash is frequently used in consumer devices 
like USB drives, SSDs, and memory cards due to its great density and inexpensive price. Contrarily, 
NOR memory provides quicker read and write rates and is frequently utilized in devices like micro­
controllers and firmware storage. Although NOR-based flash has slow write and erase speeds, it 
features a complete address/data (memory) interface that permits arbitrary access to any location. It 
can therefore be used to store program code that only has to be updated occasionally.
The construction of flash memory is shown in Figure 20.3. An array of memory that is stacked 
with many flash cells is part of flash memory architecture. A memory cell serves as the funda­
mental building block of flash memory. Typically, metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transis­
tor (MOSFET) technology is used to build flash memory cells. A fundamental flash memory cell 
FIGURE 20.2  Timeline showing the evolution of different NVM devices.

264
Handbook of Semiconductors
is made up of a storage transistor having a floating gate and a control gate. The floating gate is an 
electrically isolated component within the memory cell. It is made of a conductive material, usually 
polysilicon, and is surrounded by a thin insulating layer known as tunnel oxide. A further insulat­
ing layer separates the control gate from the floating gate, which is located above it. The passage 
of electrical charge to and from the floating gate is managed by the control gate. These gates are 
separated from other components of the transistor by using a fine sheet of dielectric substance. This 
separating sheet prevents current from routinely passing through it.
The memory cells must be programmed in order to write data to flash memory. An electric field 
is produced when a voltage is delivered to the control gate to program a cell. Electrons can tunnel 
through the tunnel oxide and onto the floating gate thanks to the strong electric field. The floating 
gate is being charged to represent the binary “1” state. When necessary, flash memory also allows 
for data erasure. A block, which is a collection of memory cells, gets erased. Usually, a whole block 
is deleted all at once. The erasing procedure renders the floating gate neutral by removing its charge 
by putting a greater voltage between the control gate and the substrate. Consequently, the electrons 
tunnel out of the floating gate and return to their initial state, thus erasing operation is accom­
plished. Flash memory can be read for data by applying an electrical signal to the control gate and 
seeing the resulting current flow through the memory cell. The threshold voltage of the transistor is 
impacted by the existence or absence of charge on the floating gate. The state of the cell (0 or 1) can 
be ascertained by measuring the current.
Flash memory is organized into pages that are then broken up into blocks. Memory cells often 
come in groups of many per page. The block structure makes programming and wiping operations 
efficient. Flash memory, in contrast to RAM, necessitates wiping complete blocks before rewriting 
them, which might slow down write operations.
The entire flash memory is connected with the word line and bit line. These lines are essential 
components that enable the reading and writing of data. In a flash memory array, the word line is 
a control line that is used to choose a particular row, or “word,” of memory cells. It is connected to 
the gates of a row of memory cells [27]. The memory cells in that row become accessible for read­
ing or writing operations when a certain word line is triggered. The bit line, often referred to as the 
FIGURE 20.3  Basic construction of a typical flash memory.

265
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
column line, is in charge of transporting the information kept in the memory cells of a particular 
column. It attaches to the source or drain terminals of a column of memory cells. The bit line reads 
the voltage or current level from the chosen memory cells during a read operation, revealing the 
data contained there.
Flash memory has a limited number of write/erase cycles before it starts to degrade. To mitigate 
this, wear-leveling algorithms are employed to distribute write cycle consistently across the memory 
cells, ensuring that no individual cells wear out prematurely [28]. Error correction techniques are 
also employed to identify and accurate errors that may arise during reading and writing operations.
20.3.2  Phase Change Memory (PCM)
An innovative NVM technique called phase change memory (PCM) uses the special qualities of 
some materials to store data [29, 30]. Ovshinsky [31] made the initial discovery of PCM in the late 
1960s when he saw that a device made of chalcogenide glass layer would flip to a highly conductive 
mode when a threshold voltage was achieved and would remain in a conductive state until a hold­
ing voltage was provided. Binary data is represented by PCM through reversible phase transitions 
between amorphous and crystalline states [32]. This technology has several benefits, such as quick 
read and write speeds, high endurance, and scalability. In a variety of fields, including embedded 
devices and high-performance computing, PCM has the potential to replace or supplement current 
memory technologies.
The main component of a memory cell is PCM. It is a chalcogenide glass [33], commonly made 
of the elements germanium, antimony, and tellurium (Ge-Sb-Te) [34]. Amorphous and crystalline 
are the two distinct phases in which this substance can exist. Data storage is made possible by the 
change between these phases. The substrate, on which the PCM device is typically constructed, acts 
as the framework of the entire structure [32, 35]. On the substrate, there is a coating of a bottom 
electrode layer. This electrode offers electrical contact to the PCM material and helps in the passage 
of current during read and write operations. The PCM material is deposited on top of the bottom 
electrode. Above the PCM material is a heater element. The heat source during the PCM’s phase 
transition is often a thin strip of conductive material. Generally, tungsten or titanium nitride is used 
as conductive material. The heating element is electrically isolated from the higher components by 
having an insulating layer placed on top of it. Heat dissipation and inappropriate electrical contact 
are prevented by this layer. Above the layer of insulating material, the top electrode is located. It acts 
as the device’s electrical contact and permits the flow of current during read-and-write operations.
Between the top electrode and the heater, the phase-change material is traversed by the electri­
cal current. A programmed zone is produced by current crowding at the heater to phase-change 
material contact, as seen by the mushroom-shaped borderline. Electrical pulses are used to train 
and read PCM cells, and as a result, the temperature of the phase-change layer changes. The PCM 
is amorphized into the high-resistance reset state using a short high-temperature pulse, and it is 
crystallized into the low-resistance set state using a long-duration pulse of a medium temperature. 
The construction of PCM is shown in Figure 20.4.
The mushroom-shaped design of PCM devices has many benefits [36]. The form and placement 
of the heater element help to concentrate the heat produced during the phase transition in a small 
area, minimizing the effect on surrounding cells and consuming less power. The architecture makes 
it easier to integrate more memory cells in a given area, which enhances scalability.
20.3.3  Resistive Random-Access Memory (ReRAM)
Another favorable NVM technology is resistive random access memory (ReRAM), also referred to 
as memristor-based memory [37, 38]. To store information, its working  principle is based on vary­
ing the resistance of a solid-state substance, often a metal oxide. Fast access times, great endurance, 
low power consumption, and scalability are all characteristics of ReRAM. These features make 

266
Handbook of Semiconductors
ReRAM suitable for use in sophisticated data storage systems, edge computing, and artificial intel­
ligence [2].
The working of ReRAM and PCM are comparable in certain ways. PCM entails producing 
enough Joule heating to cause phase transformation between amorphous and crystalline phases. 
ReRAM, on the other hand, makes use of oxygen vacancies, which are the defects created in a 
thin oxide layer. These oxygen vacancies represent the sites of the oxygen-free oxide bonds. The 
charging and drifting of them is possible by applying an external electric field. The construction of 
ReRAM is shown in Figure 20.5.
FIGURE 20.4  Basic construction of a typical PCM.
FIGURE 20.5  Basic construction of a typical ReRAM.

267
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
Typically, a substrate serves as the base upon which the ReRAM device is constructed. On 
the substrate, a bottom electrode layer is deposited that allows the flow of current during read 
and write operations and acts as the ReRAM device’s electrical contact. Titanium nitride (TiN), 
and platinum (Pt) are often-used materials for bottom electrodes. The main element of a metal-
oxide-based ReRAM is the metal-oxide layer. It is a metal-oxide thin layer that demonstrates 
resistive switching behavior, which is frequently made of titanium dioxide (TiO2). The thin layer 
of TiO2 consists of two regions. The lower region is highly resistive, since it is made of undoped 
TiO2 with no oxygen vacancy. The upper region is conductive, and it consists of doped TiO2 with 
plentiful oxygen vacancies. When the applied voltage is positive, the charged oxygen vacancies 
in the doped layer are attracted to the pure TiO2 layer by the electric field. Due to this, there 
is a variation in the length of the doped region followed by a change in the overall resistivity. 
The low resistivity ions predominate in this situation. Consequently, the device offers minimal 
resistance because of the extension of the doped zone to its entire length. In contrast, when the 
applied voltage is negative, it exhibits the maximum resistance when the undoped area covers 
the entire length.
20.4  APPLICATIONS
NVM devices have revolutionized data storage and computing in numerous ways [2, 39]. In this sec­
tion, we will discuss some potential applications of NVMDs. NVMs are widely used in consumer 
electronics and enterprise storage. Flash memory has established itself as the main component of 
portable electronics like smartphones, tablets, and digital cameras because it provides great storage 
capacity in a small package [40]. The most outstanding instances of enterprise storage are NVMDs 
[41]. Although their performance is steadily improving, the changes are significant and useful. For 
instance, due to their superior performance, lower power consumption, and less danger of mechani­
cal failure, conventional hard disc drives (HDDs) have been replaced by SSDs that utilize flash 
memory technology in many data centers.
Many cloud-based analytics and artificial intelligence applications require rapid data process­
ing and analysis [42]. NVM’s low latency and high bandwidth characteristics enable faster data 
ingestion and real-time processing, enabling more efficient and timely insights. Embedded systems, 
including Internet of Things (IoT) devices, automotive electronics, and industrial automation, uti­
lize NVM technologies like PCM and RRAM. They offer dependable and affordable storage solu­
tions. NVM can be used as a cache for frequently accessed data. This is known as “storage-class 
memory” or “persistent memory.” By using NVM as a cache, embedded systems can dramatically 
accelerate data access, leading to improved overall system performance.
By facilitating effective virtual machine migration, accelerating data access speed, and 
lowering latency, NVMDs play a crucial part in cloud computing architecture. NVM has a 
noteworthy role in enhancing the efficiency, performance, and reliability of cloud computing 
environments. NVM provides much quicker read and write speeds compared to traditional 
spinning hard drives. This results in quicker data access, reducing latency in cloud applica­
tions. This is especially useful for applications like securities trading platforms, entertainment 
servers, and media delivery networks that need real-time data processing. In cloud environ­
ments, virtualization is a key technology that enables the efficient sharing of physical resources 
among multiple virtual machines. NVM can enhance the performance of virtualization by 
providing VMs with quicker access to their data and reduced I/O latency (i.e., waiting time), 
providing more responsive and efficient virtualized workloads. NVM provides data persis­
tence, meaning that data stored in NVM is not lost when power is turned off. This attribute is 
crucial for cloud services that require high levels of data availability, such as databases, file 
systems, and distributed storage systems.
Figure 20.6 summarizes the unique applications of NVMs in different devices and related 
fields.

268
Handbook of Semiconductors
20.5  PRESENT STATUS AND FUTURE ASPECTS
Compared to volatile memory, NVM uses user-configurable tools and does not need to be refreshed 
on a regular basis. Thus, consumer electronics employ NVM extensively due to its inexpensive cost 
and low power requirements [43]. NVM is, therefore, frequently employed for long-term consistent 
storage or secondary storage, and it is quite common in the digital media industry. In the race to 
produce universal memory, NVM technologies are receiving a lot of interest from the semiconduc­
tor industry.
The development of very dense storage media, such as HDDs, digital video discs (DVDs), Blu-
ray, and flash memories, is being driven by the high demand for digital data storage. For instance, 
flash memory SSDs have replaced several HDDs with smaller capacities due to the rapid reduction 
of flash memories [44].
Most non-volatile memories are expected to be based on standard flash technologies for many 
years to come, which utilize multi-level cells and transistor-based charge storage memory cells to 
store multiple logic bits in a single physical cell.
According to expectations, the current floating gate, flash technology-based NVM mainstream 
will serve as the standard technology for the foreseeable future [45]. NVM systems have completely 
changed the way that data is stored since they provide enduring and dependable solutions. Continuous 
reductions in the price and electrical power demand of integrated circuits have fueled the market’s 
spectacular growth for electronic portables. The way people interact with digital information has 
changed as a result of advancements in technologies like flash memory, magnetic storage, PCM, and 
RRAM, which provide quicker access, larger capacity, and better energy efficiency [46].
The North American, Asia-Pacific, Latin American, European, Middle Eastern, and African 
regions make up the majority of the NVM market worldwide. The Asia-Pacific region is predicted 
to dominate the worldwide NVM market. Presently, North America and Asia-Pacific are the two 
largest NVM markets. The Middle East, Africa, and Latin America could be some of the market’s 
other significant geographical areas. Over the course of the next five to seven years, the presence of 
FIGURE 20.6  A glimpse of exclusive applications of NVMs in diverse fields.

269
Non-Volatile Memory Devices
major market players in nations like China, India, Japan, and South Korea is also expected to have 
a favorable effect on the local market. The market is expected to increase as next generation NVMs 
are being used in different electronic items (e.g., laptops, AI gadgets, mobile phones) to improve the 
consumer experience. According to a global assessment of the NVM market trend, its market value 
is anticipated to expand at a compound annual growth rate of around 8.7 between the mid-2010s 
and the mid-2020s, with starting and final market values of USD 120 billion and USD 52.3 billion, 
respectively (see Figure 20.7).
The future of NVM holds several exciting possibilities as technology continues to advance [47]. 
There are various key future aspects and trends to consider. Storage-class memory is a category 
of memory that falls between conventional volatile memory (such as DRAM) and NVM (such as 
NAND flash). Samsung’s Z-NAND and Intel’s Optane are two examples of SCM. SCM provides 
persistence, low latency, and high-speed access. It might make it possible to create databases and 
applications in innovative ways and speed up different cloud computing workloads. As these tech­
nologies develop, they may alter the NVM market and provide even better cloud computing and data 
storage solutions [48]. In-memory computing eliminates the need to fetch data from slower storage 
tiers by storing and processing data directly in high-speed, NVM. Workloads involving analytics, 
AI, and data-intensive applications are all considerably accelerated by this method.
PCM was successfully introduced to the market as Storage Class Memory in 2017 by Intel and 
Micron Technologies [49]. The GeSbTe alloy has a structural phase transition, which results in a 
significant difference in electric resistance between the amorphous and crystalline phases, and it 
is the basis for the switching process used by PCM. An outlook on the atomic layer deposition of 
chalcogenides for next-generation phase change memory was put forth by Lee et al. [50]. Their find­
ings on atomic layer deposition (ALD) of GeSbTe (GST) alloys represent a current research effort to 
broaden the application of the ALD technology beyond the usual GST alloys.
In memory devices, computing is anticipated to increase in popularity in cloud environments as 
a result of developments in NVM technology, resulting in even faster data processing and analysis. 
Instead of processing data in a centralized cloud data center, edge computing processes data closer to 
the data source. NVM is the best option for edge computing scenarios because of its speed and persis­
tence combination, where low latency and data robustness are essential. Real-time decision-making 
is facilitated by NVM, which also enables IoT devices, driverless vehicles, and industrial automation. 
With their heavy reliance on data processing, AI and machine learning workloads greatly benefit 
from NVM’s quick read and write rates. Large dataset support and task acceleration provided by 
NVM could result in more effective AI model deployment in cloud environments in the near future.
FIGURE 20.7  Plot showing the market size of NVM devices between 2016 to 2026.

270
Handbook of Semiconductors
The persistent nature of NVM can also contribute to increased security. Sensitive information 
might be safely stored on encrypted NVM, and as the memory is non-volatile, the encryption will 
hold even after the power is turned off. Better data protection and adherence to privacy laws may 
result from this. Future systems might employ hybrid memory architectures that combine different 
memory technologies, such as DRAM, SCM, and traditional NAND flash, to optimize performance 
and cost. Adaptive memory architectures that intelligently allocate data to the most appropriate 
memory tier could become more prevalent.
The properties of NVM can influence how hardware and software are created. To fully utilize 
the advantages of NVM, cross-stack interaction between software, operating systems, and hardware 
platforms may become more crucial, allowing developers to construct applications that are more 
effective and responsive.
With the rise in popularity of several consumer gadgets, like computers, flash drives, and opti­
cal discs, it is anticipated that the demand for NVMs will increase dramatically. NVM devices will 
become even more important as technology advances, opening the door for groundbreaking uses in 
fields like edge computing and artificial intelligence, among others. Deep neural networks can be 
trained using enterprise data centers, flash storage, and cloud storage thanks to the rising popularity 
of machine learning applications, IoT devices, and artificial intelligence that need high throughput 
and low latency. Thus, the market trend of NVM devices indicates that demand will increase even 
more as a result of the expanding size and quantity of data centers.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Neeraj Mehta is thankful to his university for providing an incentive grant under Institutes of 
Eminence (IOE) scheme (Dev. Scheme No. 6031).
REFERENCES	
1.	 P. Cappelletti, (2015), Non-volatile memory evolution and revolution. IEEE International Electron
Devices Meeting (IEDM), Washington, DC, USA, pp. 10.1.1–10.1.4, https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEDM.2015.7409666	
2.	 R. Waser, Resistive non-volatile memory devices. Microelectronic Engineering, 86 (2009) 1925–1928.	
3.	 J. S. Meena, S. M. Sze, U. Chand, T.-Y. Tseng, Overview of emerging nonvolatile memory technologies.
Nanoscale Research Letters, 9 (2014) 526. https://doi.org/10.1186/1556-276X-9-526	
4.	 Y. Fujisaki, Review of emerging new solid-state non-volatile memories. Japanese Journal of Applied
Physics, 52 (2013) 040001.	
5.	 J.-S. Lee, Progress in non-volatile memory devices based on nanostructured materials and nanofabrica­
tion. Journal of Materials Chemistry, 21 (2011) 14097–14112. https://doi.org/10.1039/C1JM11050K	
6.	 E. A. Sack, D. A. Laws, Westinghouse: Microcircuit Pioneer from molecular electronics to ICs. IEEE
Annals of the History of Computing, 34 (2012) 74–82.	
7.	 M. T. Ghoneim, M. M. Hussain, Review on physically flexible nonvolatile memory for internet of every­
thing electronics. Electronics, 4 (2015) 424–479.	
8.	 A. Fazio, Flash memory scaling. MRS Bulletin, 29 (2004) 814–817. https://doi.org/10.1557/mrs2004.233	
9.	 W. Banerjee, Challenges and applications of emerging nonvolatile memory devices. Electronics, 9
(2020) 1029. https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics9061029	
10.	 C. T. Sah, A new semiconductor tetrode, the surface-potential controlled transistor. Proceedings of the
IRE, 49 (1961) 1625. https://doi.org/10.1109/JRPROC.1961.287763	
11.	 C. T. Sah, Evolution of the MOS transistor:  From conception to VLSI. Proceedings of the IEEE, 76
(1988) 1295. https://doi.org/10.1109/5.16328	
12.	 D. Kahng, S. M. Sze, A floating gate and its application to memory devices. Bell System Technical
Journal, 46 (1967) 1288–1295. https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1967.tb01738.x	
13.	 D. Frohman-Bentchkowsky, (1972), Integrated MNOS memory organization, US Patent 3641512A.	
14.	 D. Frohman-Bentchkowsky, A fully decoded 2048-bit electrically programmable FAMOS read-
only memory. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 6 (1971) 301–306. https://doi.org/10.1109/
JSSC.1971.1050191

271
Non-Volatile Memory Devices	
15.	 A. Gupta, T.-L. Chiu, M. Chang, A. Renninger, G. Perlegos, (1982), A 5V-only 16K EEPROM uti­
lizing oxynitride dielectrics and EPROM redundancy. IEEE International Solid-State Circuits
Conference. Digest of Technical Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 184–185, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ISSCC.1982.1156369	
16.	 G. Perlegos, S. Pathak, A. Renninger, W. Johnson, M. Holler, J. Skupnak, M. Reitsma, G. Kuhn, (1980), A 
64K EPROM using scaled MOS technology. EEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference. Digest
of Technical Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 142–143, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSCC.1980.1156041	
17.	 F. Masuoka, Field effect semiconductor memory apparatus with a floating gate, US Patent, 3825945 (1974).	
18.	 F. Masuoka, S. Horii, T. Tanigami, T. Yokoyama, Semiconductor memory device and manufacturing
method for the same, US Patent, 7304343B2 (1984).	
19.	 F. Masuoka, M. Asano, H. Iwahashi, T. Komuro, S. Tanaka, (1984), A new Flash EEPROM cell
using triple polysilicon technology. IEEE Tech. Dig. IEDM, pp. 464–467, https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEDM.1984.190752	
20.	 F. Masuoka, M. Asano, H. Iwahashi, T. Komuro, S. Tanaka, (1985), A 256K Flash EEPROM using triple 
polysilicon technology. IEEE ISSCC. pp. 168–169, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSCC.1985.1156798	
21.	 H. Takato, K. Sunouchi, N. Okabe, A. Nitayama, K. Hieda, F. Horiguchi, F. Masuoka, (1988), High-
performance CMOS surrounding gate transistor (SGT) for ultra high-density LSIs,” Technical Digest.,
International Electron Devices Meeting, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 222–225, https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEDM.1988.32796	
22.	 F. Masuoka, M. Momodomi, Y. Iwata, R. Shirota, (1987), New ultra high-density EPROM and flash
EEPROM with NAND structure cell. International Electron Devices Meeting, Washington, DC, USA,
pp. 552–555, https://doi.org/10.1109/IEDM.1987.191485	
23.	 M. Gill, (1996), Flash memories: A review. Proceedings of Nonvolatile Memory Technology Conference, 
Albuquerque, NM, USA, p. 142, https://doi.org/10.1109/NVMT.1996.534690	
24.	 F. Masuoka, T. Endoh, (1995), Flash memories, their status and trends. Proceedings of 4th International
Conference on Solid-State and IC Technology, Beijing, China, pp. 128–132, https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICSICT.1995.499651	
25.	 K. Rajkanan, (1996), Flash memory technology: A review. IEEE International Workshop on Memory
Technology, Design, and Testing, Singapore, pp. 47–48, https://doi.org/10.1109/MTDT.1996.782491.	
26.	 P. Olivo, E. Zanoni, (1999). Flash Memories: An Overview. In: Flash Memories. Springer, Boston, MA.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4615-5015-0_1	
27.	 P. Pavan, R. Bez, P. Olivo, E. Zanoni, (1997), Flash memory cells-an overview. Proceedings of the
IEEE, 85 (1997) 1248–1271. https://doi.org/10.1109/5.622505	
28.	 J. Ranaweera, I. Kalastirsky, E. Gulersen, W. T. Ng, C. A. T. Salama, A novel programming method
for high speed, low voltage flash E2PROM cells. Solid-State Electronics, 39 (1996) 981–89. https://doi.
org/10.1016/0038-1101(96)00002-0	
29.	 J. C. Bernede, Materials for erasable optical disks. Materials Chemistry and Physics, 32 (1992) 189–195. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0254-0584(92)90276-E	
30.	 N. Akahira, N. Yamada, K. Kimura, M. Takao, (1988), Recent advances in erasable phase-change optical 
disks. Proc. SPIE 0899, Optical Storage Technology and Applications, https://doi.org/10.1117/12.944624	
31.	 R. Ovshinsky, Reversible electrical switching phenomena in disordered structures. Physical Review
Letters, 21 (1968) 1450–1453. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.21.1450	
32.	 O. Zilberberg, S. Weiss, S. Toledo, Phase-change memory: An architectural perspective. ACM
Computing Surveys, 45 (2013) 1–33. https://doi.org/10.1145/2480741.2480746	
33.	 K. Tanaka, Photoinduced processes in chalcogenide glasses. Current Opinion in Solid State and
Materials Science, 1 (1996) 567–571. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1359-0286(96)80074-X	
34.	 A. L. Lacaita, Phase change memories: State-of-the-art, challenges and perspectives. Solid-State
Electronics, 50 (2006) 24–31. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sse.2005.10.046	
35.	 W. Zhang, R. Mazzarello, M. Wuttig, E. Ma, Designing crystallization in phase-change materials for
universal memory and neuro-inspired computing. Nature Reviews Materials, 4 (2019) 150–168. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41578-018-0076-x	
36.	 D. Ielmini, A. L. Lacaita, Phase change materials in non-volatile storage. Materials Today, 14 (2011)
600–607. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1369-7021(11)70301-7	
37.	 Y. T. Li, S. B. Long, Q. Liu, H. B. Lu, S. Liu, M. Liu, An overview of resistive random access memory
devices. Chinese Science Bulletin, 56 (2011) 3072. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11434-011-4671-0	
38.	 S. Hamdioui, H. Aziza, G. C. Sirakoulis, (2014), Memristor based memories: Technology, design and
test. 9th IEEE International Conference on Design & Technology of Integrated Systems in Nanoscale
Era (DTIS), Santorini, Greece, pp. 1–7, https://doi.org/10.1109/DTIS.2014.6850647

272
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 39.	 A. Chen, A review of emerging non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies and applications. Solid-State 
Electronics, 125 (2016) 25–38. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sse.2016.07.006
	 40.	 G. Haas, V. Leis, What modern NVMe storage can do, and how to exploit it: High-performance I/O 
for high-performance storage engines. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 16 (2023) 2090–2102. 
https://doi.org/10.14778/3598581.3598584
	 41.	 S.-W. Lee, B. Moon, C. Park, J.-M. Kim, S.-W. Kim, (2009), Advances in flash memory SSD tech­
nology for enterprise database applications. SIGMOD ‘09: Proceedings of the 2009 ACM SIGMOD 
International Conference on Management of data, pp. 863–870, https://doi.org/10.1145/1559845.1559937
	 42.	 I. Awoyelu, T. Omodunb, J. Udo, Bridging the gap in modern computing infrastructures: Issues and 
challenges of data warehousing and cloud computing. Computer and Information Science, 7 (2014) 
33–40. http://dx.doi.org/10.5539/cis.v7n1p33
	 43.	 R. Bez, A. Pirovano, Non-volatile memory technologies: Emerging concepts and new materials. Materials 
Science in Semiconductor Processing, 7 (2004) 349–355. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mssp.2004.09.127
	 44.	 N. R. Mielke, R. E. Frickey, I. Kalastirsky, M. Quan, D. Ustinov, V. J. Vasudevan, Reliability of solid-
state drives based on NAND flash memory. Reliability of solid-state drives based on NAND flash mem­
ory. Proceedings of the IEEE, 105 (2017) 1725–1750. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2017.2725738
	 45.	 S. Kargar, F. Nawab, Challenges and future directions for energy, latency, and lifetime improvements in 
NVMs. Distrib Parallel Databases, (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10619-022-07421-x
	 46.	 S. Agarwal, H. K. Kapoor, Improving the lifetime of non-volatile cache by write restriction. IEEE 
Transactions on Computers, 68 (2019) 1297–1312. https://doi.org/10.1109/TC.2019.2892424
	 47.	 K. Ishimaru, (2019), Future of non-volatile memory from storage to computing, IEEE International 
Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 1.3.1–1.3.6, https://doi.org/10.1109/
IEDM19573.2019.8993609
	 48.	 M. Si, H.-Y. Cheng, T. Ando, G. Hu, P. Ye, Overview and outlook of emerging non-volatile memories. 
MRS Bulletin, 46 (2021) 946–958. https://doi.org/10.1557/s43577-021-00204-2
	 49.	 W. Zhang, E. Ma, Unveiling the structural origin to control resistance drift in phase-change memory 
materials. Materials Today, 41 (2020) 156–176. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mattod.2020.07.016
	 50.	 Y. K. Lee, C. Yoo, W. Kim, J. Jeon, C. Hwang, Atomic layer deposition of chalcogenides for next-
generation phase change memory. Journal of Materials Chemistry C, 9 (2021) 3708–3725. https://doi.
org/10.1039/D1TC00186H

273
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-21
Sensors Based on 
Semiconductors
Alper Durmaz, İbrahim M. Kahyaoğlu, 
Erdi C. Aytar, and Selcan Karakuş
21.1  INTRODUCTION
The size-dependent properties (optical, electrical, thermal, and catalytic) of nanoparticles, which 
are highly valued in nanotechnology, serve as electrochemical labels. Their size is described by a 
variety of techniques and is controlled by synthesis; however, because of their high surface energy, 
instability may occur. Applications in environmental engineering, biomedicine, IT, aviation, and 
food analysis are among them. Electrochemical sensors with metal and semiconductor nanopar­
ticles (SNPs) exhibit tremendous promise. For detection, metal and SNPs can be bonded to elec­
trodes by electropolymerization, covalent bonding, electrodeposition, or physical adsorption. By 
adding conductive nanoparticles to composite electrodes, adsorption is improved and interactions 
with substrates are made possible. Nanoparticles (NPs) can be arranged to produce controllable 
active regions in nanoelectrode assemblies. The irreversibility of redox processes is aided by the 
catalytic qualities of metal and SNPs, which lower potential needs in electrochemical analysis. 
These NPs are used in electrochemical sensors and nanodevices for investigation of bacteria and 
cells, protein interactions, DNA hybridization, and small molecule detection. Medical diagnosis 
is revolutionized by DNA analysis, and metal and SNPs have great promise to improve chemical 
and biological detection in this domain. Electrochemical DNA sensors take advantage of these 
NPs’ large surface area to optimize DNA immobilization and detection capabilities. These develop­
ments boost the effectiveness and dependability of DNA analysis by improving sequence-specific 
DNA detection. Further investigation is necessary to investigate more potent surface immobiliza­
tion strategies. SNPs and metal are essential for improving DNA immobilization and advancing the 
creation of sensitive DNA sensors. Colloidal gold enhances DNA immobilization and lowers detec­
tion limits. Effective DNA labels that strengthen electrical detection signals are metal and SNPs. 
Electrochemical DNA sensors are a prominent use for NPs of gold and silver. Using actual saliva 
samples, a recently created portable, label-free photoelectrochemical gene sensor effectively detects 
SARS-CoV-2 infection. Utilizing Arduino and 3D printing to reduce in size, it offers a practical and 
economical substitute for conventional RT-PCR and electrochemical methods. Nazari-Vanani et al. 
developed a DNA-based genosensor for detecting Leishmania infantum genomic DNA. This geno­
sensor utilizes cadmium sulfide nanolayers and specific single-stranded DNA sequences, eliminat­
ing the need for PCR or labeling. Impedance measurements during DNA target hybridization with 
cadmium sulfide nanolayer-attached probes are conducted without external stimuli. The genosen­
sor can detect complementary DNA strands in the concentration range of 1.0 × 10−14 to 1.0 × 10−6 
mol L−1. They successfully detected Leishmania infantum DNA at concentrations ranging from 
5–50 ng μL−1, with a detection limit of 1.2 ng μL−1 [1]. An essential part of electrochemical stud­
ies is the electrocatalysis of organic molecule detection by metal and SNPs. Zinc oxide (ZnO), tin 
oxide (SnO2), tungsten trioxide (WO3), titanium dioxide (TiO2), and niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5) are 
examples of semiconductor-based gas sensors that are easy to produce, affordable, and have excel­
lent performance. They have strong sensitivity, quick response, and recuperation times. Metal sul­
fides such as bismuth sulfide (Bi2S3) and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) are common semiconductor 
hydrogen sensors. Because an electrochemical gas sensor needs a solid electrode to be in contact 
21

274
Handbook of Semiconductors
with a liquid electrolyte phase, its design is difficult. These sensors typically use metal and SNPs 
as conductive materials, with the expectation that SMOs’ detecting capabilities will be improved 
by the addition of small-sized quantum dots (QDs). Plant communication is greatly aided by vola­
tile organic compounds (VOCs), which are released by crops for a variety of reasons. Electronic 
noses that use SMOs gas sensors are frequently used to identify VOCs quickly and accurately in 
crops, which helps with disease and insect pest analysis. MOS E-noses, like SnO2 and WO3, address 
sensitivity and selectivity challenges using a “selective odor measurement using a multisensory 
array” approach [2]. MOS gas sensors find extensive use across diverse scientific research domains, 
offering several advantages, including affordability, high reliability, lightweight design, stability, 
ease of integration, sensitivity, and rapid response times. In nature, insects receive information 
through their antennae. MOS E-noses, when combined with enrichment and analysis techniques, 
are capable of detecting insect pheromones. Some studies have utilized MOS E-noses to detect key 
components of European grapevine moth (Lobesia botrana) pheromones. However, the sensitivity 
and selectivity of MOS gas sensors alone for insect pheromone detection are relatively limited. 
Nevertheless, the “selective odor measurement using a multisensory array” approach, employing 
MOS gas sensors like SnO2 and WO3, effectively addresses this limitation. This system combines 
various sensors to enhance selectivity against different gases and VOCs. [3]. Sensors offer pre­
cise gas detection with unique response patterns, enhancing odor perception and recognition. MOS 
gas sensors find diverse applications in agriculture, food industry, environmental monitoring, and 
medical diagnostics. In agriculture, they aid in plant variety selection, insecticide testing, and plant 
health analysis. In the food industry, they assess flavor, aroma, and quality. Their rapid response and 
high sensitivity enable early pathogen detection and spoilage signs [4]. In Table 21.1, some examples 
of 2D materials and their applications in VOCs sensors are presented.
Mohamed et al. synthesized undoped and Fe-doped TiO2 nanostructures using the VLS growth 
technique in an alumina tube furnace with Pt-coated Si and quartz substrates. Undoped TiO2 nano­
structures featured densely grown nanowires (200–400 nm diameter, >12 μm length), indicating 
VLS growth. In contrast, Fe-doped TiO2 exhibited agglomerated NPs (160–450 nm). Both materials 
demonstrated enhanced photocatalytic activity, suggesting potential applications in optical devices 
and organic pollutant degradation [7]. Lan et al. proposed a Schottky-contacted single ZnO micro/
nanowire sensor for protein kinase activity detection. ZnO, combined with functional molecules, forms 
planar van der Waals heterojunctions, enabling the study of phosphorylated peptide sensors through 
the piezotronic effect. These sensors can specifically identify phosphorylated peptides. Experimental 
results showed significant relative current changes with increasing compressive strain under positive 
bias for different phosphorylated peptide concentrations. This study highlights a promising protein 
kinase sensor using a Schottky-contacted single ZnO micro/nanowire enhanced by the piezotronic 
effect. Understanding electrostatic impacts on charge transfer in nanowire/molecule heterojunctions 
TABLE 21.1
Some Examples of 2D Materials and Their Applications 
in VOC Sensors
Material
Analyte
References
SnO2/LaFeO3
Formic acid gas
[5]
SMOs
Methane
[6]
TiO2 nanostructures
Organic pollutants
[7]
ZnO micro/nanowire
Protein kinase activity
[8]
PANI/ Ti3C2Tx
Ethanol
[9]
rGO-SnO2
Ethanol
[10]
Graphene/ZnO
Acetone and formaldehyde
[11]

275
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
will aid future van der Waals heterojunction detector and transistor designs [8]. Butturini et al. moni­
tored dissolved methane in aquatic ecosystems to enhance carbon cycle understanding. They evalu­
ated a MOS methane sensor encapsulated in a hydrophobic membrane for gas diffusion. Results 
showed a detection limit of 0.1–0.2 μmol/L and stable response (18.5–28°C). Elevated sulfur con­
centrations affected sensor response at low methane levels, suggesting the monitoring of dissolved 
sulfite levels could mitigate these effects [6]. In another study, Xia et al. developed a method to detect 
formic acid gas (HCOOH) using SnO2 QDs combined with LaFeO3. SnO2 QDs improved the porous 
structure of LaFeO3, aiding gas diffusion. LaFeO3’s detection properties were studied with varying 
SnO2 QD doping levels, increasing sensitivity to HCOOH. A LaFeO3-based sensor with 2.5% SnO2 
QD doping achieved a low 1 ppm detection limit and a strong response (31.5–100 ppm at 210°C). 
Hetero-connections between SnO2 QDs and LaFeO3 enhanced HCOOH detection, showcasing the 
advantages of QD sensitization in semiconductor gas sensors [5].
In another study, Li et al. discovered that lung cancer patients and healthy people had simi­
lar breath patterns. Principal component analysis (PCA) and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) 
worked together to improve the diagnosis and separate the two groups. With their ability to detect 
numerous gases, MOS sensor arrays show potential, pending improvements in manufacturing pro­
cesses, novel materials, and environmental conditions. Gas recognition rates are improved by opti­
mized algorithms beyond PCA and LDA, highlighting the promise of MOS gas sensor arrays in 
lung cancer diagnosis [12].
21.2  GAS SENSORS BASED ON METAL-ORGANIC 
FRAMEWORK DERIVED SEMICONDUCTORS
Metal-organic frameworks, or MOFs, are adaptable structures with modifiable void spaces that find 
use in biomedical applications. Strong fluorescence characteristics allow them to improve sensing 
capacities and enable tracking in living things. In recent years, MOFs have drawn a lot of interest 
as cutting-edge materials.
21.2.1  Synthesis of MOFs/Semiconductors
For rapid, on-site ion measurement and molecular detection, MOFs and semiconductors are com­
bined in ion-sensitive field-effect transistors (ISFETs) (Figure 21.1). Motivated by their extraordi­
nary features as third-generation materials, researchers are examining the expanding uses of MOFs 
in numerous domains, despite their huge band gaps, particularly in sensing [13].
FIGURE 21.1  Schematic diagram of an ISFET sensor.

276
Handbook of Semiconductors
Several methods are available for synthesizing MOF/semiconductor composites. Shi et al. 
created a selective daylight CO2 sensor by synthesizing sulfide semiconductors within a tita­
nium-based MOF using ultrasonication and thermal treatment [14]. Wang et al. achieved strong 
antibacterial properties against E. coli and S. aureus bacteria under visible light by encapsulating 
semiconductor QDs within MOF structures through ultrasonication [15]. Montañez et al. incorpo­
rated copper-based MOF films into thermally grown silica layers, using a layer-by-layer synthesis 
approach up to 10 nm in size, to produce highly efficient capacitors operating at low voltages [16].
21.2.2  MOF-Derived Semiconductor Sensors
MOF-supported semiconductor sensors, leveraging MOFs’ large surface area, find applications in 
fields like food, cosmetics, environment, and pharmaceuticals. Chen et al. synthesized a Ni-MOF 
to create a semiconductor dopamine sensor [17]. This sensor, labeled as 0.7–310.2 μM, offers high 
sensitivity over a wide range and a low detection limit. Yang et al. developed a Ti-MOF for NO2 gas 
detection [18], and their Ti-MOF semiconductor sensor responded well in the 50–200 ppm NO2 con­
centration range. Zhang et al. used Cu-MOFs to create semiconductor-enhanced luminescent sen­
sors for KRAS gene detection [19]. This Cu-MOF sensor demonstrates exceptional sensitivity from 
0.1 pM to 1 nM. MOF-derived semiconductor sensors, harnessing MOFs’ porous structure, large 
surface area, and semiconductor properties, are expanding their applications. Future target com­
pounds are well-suited to MOFs’ adaptable pore structure. MOF-based sensors are being researched 
further, offering faster, more advanced, molecule-specific, extremely sensitive, recyclable, and por­
table sensors with improved features.
21.3  NANOSTRUCTURED SEMICONDUCTORS SENSORS
Nanostructured semiconductors, designed at the nanoscale, exhibit unique physical, chemical, and 
electrical characteristics, enabling exceptional sensitivity in sensing applications. With precise 
control over size, shape, and composition, they detect analytes at low concentrations, maximiz­
ing performance. The increased surface area excels in ultrasensitive sensing platforms, respond­
ing to minute variations in surroundings. Enhanced surface chemistry improves selective sensing, 
ensuring preferential interaction with target analytes for reduced interference. Intrinsic quantum 
confinement guarantees quick reaction and recovery times, facilitating rapid analyte detection and 
baseline restoration. The small size allows effective analyte adsorption and diffusion, ensuring 
swift response kinetics. These sensors offer the benefits of portability and energy efficiency with 
reduced power requirements.
Running at room temperature lowers power requirements and makes tiny, low-power sensor 
devices possible by doing away with the need for energy-intensive thermal control systems. The 
cost-effectiveness, lightweight design, and high sensitivity of nanostructured MO gas sensors are 
highly appreciated; methods such as particle size reduction are used to improve sensing capabilities. 
Due to their large bandgaps and chemical stability, semiconductor MOs have drawn interest in the 
field of gas detection. For effective harmful gas detection, nanostructured semiconductors are being 
actively researched and used in a variety of industries. These semiconductors have high conductiv­
ity, customizable surface termination groups, and diverse operational functionalities. A new era of 
extremely sensitive, selective, and efficient sensing technologies is ushered in by their amazing sens­
ing properties. Future research could lead to innovative tools that tackle many scientific, industrial, 
and biomedical problems [20].
21.3.1  Fabrication for Nanostructured Semiconductor Sensors
Fabrication techniques for nanostructured semiconductor sensors are crucial for precise synthesis 
and assembly of semiconductor materials at the nanoscale. These techniques allow customization 

277
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
of size, shape, composition, and surface properties, which are vital for sensing performance. Novel 
fabrication approaches for these sensors include various methods (Table 21.2)
Through regulated precursor gas reactions, chemical vapor method (CVD) is frequently used to 
precisely generate semiconductor films or nanowires layer by layer on substrates. It creates a variety 
of nanostructures in the semiconductor industry (0D, 1D, and 2D). It is difficult to achieve efficiency 
in air pressure CVD; different growth parameters must be carefully considered since they affect the 
final nanomaterials. It is difficult to design an effective atmospheric pressure CVD system; factors 
including reactor size, substrate alignment, gas flow, precursors, temperature, duration, and flow 
rate must be taken into consideration [21].
Physical vapor method (PVD) allows semiconductor material to be deposited using physical 
processes, similar to sputtering and evaporation. This makes it perfect for producing thin films or 
nanostructures with outstanding uniformity and adherence. The ideal PVD technique for thin film 
sensing layers is electron beam evaporation, which has benefits for batch production, well-made 
layered structures, and reasonably priced, uniformly doped alternatives. Electron beam evaporation 
is a preferred method for accurate and dependable thin film sensor layer deposition in photovoltaic 
diode technology due to its uniform doping and flexibility [22].
The sol-gel method synthesizes nanostructured materials by converting a precursor solution 
(sol) into a solid gel and then heat-treating it to form the desired semiconductor structure. In a 
study by Zhang et al. (2023), zinc oxide nanocrystals (ZnO NCs) were synthesized on a foam-
like gallium nitride (F-GaN) substrate using this method to create a gas-sensitive material for an 
H2S gas sensor. The composite structure of ZnO NCs/F-GaN, when used for detecting 50 ppm of 
H2S at 220°C, showed remarkably fast response and recovery times of 78 and 31 seconds, respec­
tively. This improved sensing response is mainly attributed to the synergistic effect of combining 
ZnO NCs and F-GaN. The researchers proposed a new catalytic mechanism involving F-GaN in 
gas sensing, expanding the applications of GaN-based SMOs. The gas-sensitive material created 
using the sol-gel method with F-GaN has clear advantages, making it suitable for practical use. 
This approach also enhances our understanding of gas sensing. Combining the sol-gel method with 
F-GaN not only improves sensing but also opens the door to oxide/GaN-based sensors, offering 
a promising approach for gas sensor fabrication [23]. By cultivating semiconductor nanoparticles 
in hot, pressured water, hydrothermal techniques yield well-defined nanostructures. The synthe­
sis process affects the quality and properties of nanomaterials and is essential for crystal growth. 
Microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis (MAH) is a technique used by Ortega and associates 
[24] that yields high-quality nanostructures with exact control over size, composition, phase, and 
form. When ZnO concentration hits supersaturation in MAH synthesis, crystal nucleation begins 
because Zn(OH)4
2−, a growth unit for ZnO nanoparticles, has been dehydrated. ZnO nanocrystals 
TABLE 21.2
Synthesis Method for Nanostructured Semiconductor Sensors
Methods
Description
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method
Produces nanostructures with the aid of various gas mixtures on 
a heated substrate.
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) method
Deposition of semiconductor using sputtering and evaporation.
Sol-gel method
Polycondensation and hydrolysis reactions.
Hydrothermal method
Crystallizing substances from hot, high-pressure solutions.
Electrochemical deposition method
To deposit metal layer by layer on selected conductive substrates.
Template-assisted method
To make nanofibers within a porous membrane or layer.
Laser ablation method
Process of removing atoms from a solid using an intense laser 
beam, either thermally or non-thermally.
Lithography method
Using an electron beam or light.

278
Handbook of Semiconductors
develop more quickly thanks to the MAH technique, which also reduces certain surface areas and 
facet shapes. Chemical leakage into the surrounding environment is avoided when operating inside 
a sealed autoclave. This approach provides quick heating, quick reaction times, and high yields for 
the synthesis of ceramic nanostructures while being economical, ecologically benign, and energy 
efficient. In conclusion, the MAH process provides a productive and ecologically sustainable way to 
create superior ceramic nanostructures with exact control over their properties [24].
Electrochemical deposition method, including electrodeposition and electroless deposition, con­
trols the growth of semiconductor nanostructures on conductive substrates through electrochemical 
reactions. Çepni and Öznülüer Özer used electrodeposition to synthesize In(OH)3 films in their 2022 
study. They achieved this through a two-step electrochemical process that increases pH near the 
electrode and prompts the deposition of indium hydroxide from reduced indium ions. This method 
is cost-effective, simple, and applicable under ambient conditions, making it a green and convenient 
alternative to harsh chemical processes. It eliminates the need for high temperature/pressure envi­
ronments, enabling direct material formation on the substrate surface [25].
Template-assisted method utilizes templates with predefined nanopores to guide the growth 
of semiconductor nanostructures. Alinauskas et al. employed this method in their 2017 study for 
SnO2 nanomaterial. They used polycarbonate membranes as templates, subjecting them to a ten-
step immersion process in a sol, with gentle wiping between steps to aid solution ingress into the 
pores. The impregnated membranes were placed on various substrates and left to mature for five 
hours, followed by annealing at 550°C for five hours. In some cases, an additional annealing step 
at 800°C for five hours was carried out. The high porosity of these materials makes them suit­
able for sensing ions or molecules, and this method holds promise for creating various functional 
nanomaterials [26].
Laser ablation method uses a laser beam to create SNPs or nanowires. In 2023, Dikovska et al. 
produced ZnO/Zn2TiO4 composite nanostructures through laser ablation in air. They used pulsed 
laser deposition (PLD) with different ZnO-TiO2 targets. A nanosecond Nd:YAG laser operating at 
1064 nm with specific parameters was employed. The ablated material was deposited onto SiO2 sub­
strates. This research introduces a laser-based method for controlled nanoscale material deposition. 
It successfully fabricated high-purity ZnO/Zn2TiO4 composites without chemicals, offering cost-
effectiveness and conventional technology use without requiring a high vacuum environment [27].
Photolithography, electron beam lithography, and nanoimprint lithography create precise nano­
structures in semiconductor materials on substrates. In a 2023 study, Rani et al. used two-photon 
polymerization (TPL) with a femto-second laser integrated with an inverted microscope. They 
drop-casted two-photon active functional (TPAF) resin on a glass coverslip, spin-coated it, and 
exposed it to the laser while systematically moving it on a motorized stage to create micro/nano­
structures. This demonstrates a laser-based method for micro/nanostructure fabrication with preci­
sion. This study utilized an internally developed TPL system to create precise micro/nanostructures 
within a TPAF resin. It involved precise laser focusing, controlled substrate traversal, and removal 
of unexposed resin using dimethylformamide (DMF) [28].
In recent years, enhancing the sensitivity of nanostructured semiconductor sensors has become 
essential for applications in chemical analysis, environmental monitoring, and gas sensing, utiliz­
ing materials like MOs (e.g., ZnO, SnO2) or semiconducting nanoparticles. Several techniques are 
employed to improve their performance:
•	 By increasing interactions with target analytes, surface functionalization—achieved by 
adding chemical groups or molecules to the sensor’s surface—enhances sensitivity and 
selectivity. The addition of alterations such as organic ligands or metal nanoparticles 
enhances the sensor’s sensitivity to substances even further.
•	 Doping is a useful technique that modifies the electrical structure of a material to increase 
its receptivity to analytes. It involves inserting intentional impurities, or dopants, into the 
semiconductor lattice [10].

279
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
•	 Careful temperature control maximizes sensing performance.
•	 Signal-to-noise ratio and accuracy improve with machine learning and noise reduction.
•	 Selective coatings filter unwanted interferents for precise analyte targeting.
•	 Energy band engineering enhances semiconductor sensor performance by modifying the 
material’s energy band structure, increasing charge carrier mobility and sensitivity to 
chemicals.
•	 Optical enhancement techniques like surface plasmon resonance and photonic crystal 
structures improve sensor optical characteristics, enhancing overall detection capabilities.
21.3.2  Nanostructured Semiconductor Sensors in Clinical 
Diagnosis and Environmental Monitoring
The identification of biomarkers for diseases such as prostate cancer and heart disease has been 
revolutionized by high-sensitivity nanostructured semiconductor sensors, which are crucial for 
medical diagnostics. Early disease identification is made possible by these sensors, which is essen­
tial for raising survival rates, especially in cases of infectious diseases. Their quick on-site tests 
are helpful in scenarios when resources are few since they guarantee accurate and timely disease 
detection for appropriate treatment. Lahcen et al.’s 2021 study developed a POC nanostructured 
molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) sensor for breast cancer biomarker monitoring. By optimiz­
ing parameters and incorporating gold nanoparticles (AuNS), they increased the sensor’s surface 
area, enhancing Her-2 protein adsorption. This led to the successful LSG-AuNS-MIP sensor, dem­
onstrating high sensitivity and selectivity in detecting Her-2 in human serum samples. Integrated 
into a compact POC device, it showcases promise for extended disease detection applications due 
to its stability, flexibility, and ease of production and modification as a diagnostic tool [29]. In 2021, 
Foroughi et al. successfully synthesized three-dimensional cubic europium (Eu3+) and cuprous 
oxide (Cu2O) nanostructures resembling clover-like face-centered patterns (Eu3+/Cu2O CLFNs). 
The study aimed to create an effective electrochemical sensor for nevirapine (C15H14N4O) detec­
tion. The hydrothermal process yielded a significant quantity of high-quality 3D cubic Eu3+/Cu2O 
CLFNs, extensively characterized for electrochemical properties. The modified electrode exhib­
ited enhanced nevirapine oxidation peak currents, improved electron transfer, effective catalytic 
activity in nevirapine detection, and reduced oxidation overpotential. Under optimized conditions, 
it demonstrated excellent reproducibility, a low LOD, and high sensitivity, providing an innova­
tive approach for sensitive nevirapine determination and monitoring using a modified electrode 
configuration [30].
Nanostructured semiconductor sensors are essential equipment for monitoring the quality of the 
air and water since they are capable of accurately detecting contaminants in the water as well as 
dangerous gases including carbon dioxide (CO2), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and 
nitrogen oxides (NOx). It is impossible to exaggerate how important they are in determining the 
extent of environmental pollution and supporting mitigation measures. The atmosphere has recently 
been severely contaminated by a variety of toxic gases, including SO2, NH3, NO2, N2O, and H2S, 
among others. Especially, NO2, primarily emitted from activities like fossil fuel combustion and 
nuclear power plants, is one of the most hazardous environmental gases. Even at trace levels in the 
air, NO2 can cause serious health issues, including throat irritation, asthma, cardiac problems, head­
aches, pulmonary edema, and, in extreme cases, death. Mathankumar developed novel Ag-doped 
WO3 for gas sensing, with exceptional sensitivity to NO2 at an optimal temperature of 150°C. The 
Ag-2 sample showed a remarkable fivefold increase in gas response compared to pure WO3. First-
principal simulations revealed a 60% stronger binding between NO2 and Ag-doped WO3 compared 
to H2S and NH3. Highly sensitive NO2 sensors are essential for tracking and reducing health risks 
associated with NO2 pollution. Theoretical predictions that match actual results present a promis­
ing direction in this regard [31]. To protect the safety of water sources, nanostructured sensors are 
essential for monitoring water quality and detecting contaminants such as organic pollutants, heavy 

280
Handbook of Semiconductors
metals, and microbiological diseases. Magro et al. created extremely sensitive gold-interdigitated 
electrode-based nanostructured thin film sensors in mineral water by employing ZnO and TiO2. At 
a precision of 1 × 10−16 M, these sensors demonstrated potential as dependable monitoring tools 
in a variety of water matrices by reliably differentiating antibiotic concentrations in river water 
[32]. To prevent foodborne illnesses, nanostructured semiconductor sensors are crucial for detecting 
infections and deterioration signs in food. For instance, Ahmadian-Fard-Fini et al. mixed ethylene 
diamine with extracts of lemon, grapefruit, or turmeric to make extremely luminous carbon dots. 
These carbon dots offered simplicity, sensitivity, and specificity in bacterial detection, making them 
an effective and sensitive approach for quantitatively detecting E. coli germs [33]. In conclusion, 
these sensors, essential for identifying biomarkers, supporting early disease diagnosis, guaranteeing 
accurate drug monitoring, and aiding in pollution reduction and environmental evaluation, prove 
indispensable in crucial sectors due to their adaptability and exceptional performance.
21.4  APPLICATIONS OF INORGANIC SEMICONDUCTORS 
IN PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL SENSORS
In vitro diagnostics and medical research depend heavily on biochemical sensors, and there is grow­
ing demand for better performance. Utilizing heterogeneous nanostructures, photoelectrochemical 
sensors are effective tools for detecting chemical and biochemical molecules because they excel 
at light absorption and electron transmission. This section thoroughly examines how they can be 
used to diagnose both inorganic and organic molecules in vitro, assisting in the early detection and 
management of diseases. It offers advances in this developing discipline by revealing new directions 
for experts.
One-dimensional (1D) semiconductor nanomaterials have garnered significant attention due 
to their unique structural characteristics, expansive specific surface areas, remarkable electronic, 
optical, and thermal properties, and exceptional conductivity, making them ideal for photoelectric 
applications. Among various fabrication methods, electrospinning stands out for its ability to pre­
cisely control morphologies, such as nanofibers, nanotubes, and more. It also allows for aligned 
structures, high porosity, and tunable mechanical properties. These qualities hold promise across 
fields like photoelectric devices, catalysis, energy storage, sensors, and capacitors. Ultraviolet pho­
todetectors (UV PDs), capable of converting light into electrical signals, find extensive use in envi­
ronmental monitoring, optical communication, and biological sensing, driving advancements in 
nanoelectronics and nano-optoelectronics. The exceptional properties of 1D semiconductor nano­
materials, combined with versatile techniques like electrospinning, contribute to their potential in 
various applications, including their role in UV PDs and the broader field of nano-optoelectronics 
[34]. A molecularly imprinted photoelectrochemical (PEC) sensor for chlortetracycline (CTC) 
detection was presented in 2023 by Zhang et al. on a ZnO-MWCNTs-NH2 substrate; they used a 
special mixture of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxylphenyl) porphyrin (TCPP) and poly(o-phenylene­
diamine) (PoPD). With a linear detection range from 0.5 nmol/L to 10 mol/L and an impressively 
low detection limit of 0.17 nmol/L, this sensor demonstrated exceptional sensitivity. Furthermore, it 
successfully identified CTC in genuine samples, such as milk, pork, and lake water, with recoveries 
varying from 86.4% to 112.0%. This useful instrument shows creativity in improving conventional 
photoactive materials and potential for identifying a range of environmental toxins [35].
21.5  APPLICATIONS OF NANOWIRES AND 2D SEMICONDUCTOR SENSORS
Nanotubes are ultra-thin structures with diameters in the range of tens of nanometers or less and lim­
itless length. When these tubes reach scales where quantum mechanical effects come into play, they 
are often referred to as quantum wires. Various types of nanotubes exist, including superconduct­
ing, metallic, semiconductor, and insulating varieties. Molecular nanotubes are built from repeated 
organic or inorganic molecular units. Several techniques, such as chemical etching, chemical vapor 

281
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
deposition, and electrospinning, have been developed to synthesize nanotubes. These materials are 
categorized as 1 D due to their extremely high aspect ratio, often exceeding 1000. Nanotubes exhibit 
unique properties not found in bulk or three-dimensional materials because the confinement of elec­
trons within them leads to distinct energy levels, differing from traditional energy levels. 1D semi­
conductor nanowires have gained significant attention in chemical sensing applications, particularly 
MOs nanowires, renowned for their stability and high surface-to-volume ratio. Increased surface 
area enhances gas molecule adsorption, improving sensing responses. Nanowire size influences 
electronic properties, influenced by analyte molecule adsorption and desorption processes. Ongoing 
research explores alternative materials and structures. Advances in 2D nanomaterial preparation 
have facilitated functional devices with varying thicknesses. Integrating 2D structures like MOFs, 
graphene, and transition metal dichalcogenides into chemical sensors shows promise, with their large 
surface area, electronic properties, defects, and surface states significantly impacting sensing capa­
bilities. Novel semiconductor nanostructures offer opportunities for enhanced gas sensing systems, 
addressing traditional sensor limitations, enabling miniaturization, and enhancing functionality. 
Recent efforts have focused on developing complex structures based on both 1D and 2D materials.
Si nanowires form utilizing CVD through the vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) mechanism in the “bot­
tom-up” procedure. They are deposited onto a silicon substrate while suspended in an ethanol solu­
tion. After applying a photoresist and patterning metal electrodes using the lift-off technique, the 
procedure is finished with passivation and surface modification procedures. The “top-down” strat­
egy, in contrast, enables exquisite nanowire control and is CMOS compatible. It entails defining 
terminals and patterning microscale electrodes on a silicon-on-insulator (SOI) wafer by low-density 
boron or phosphorus doping. With the aid of electron beam lithography, nanoscale Si nanowires are 
created, and metal contact terminals are created. Larger diameter nanowires with regulated orienta­
tion are made possible by the top-down technique, which is excellent for quick, mass production that 
is compatible with CMOS technology. The bottom-up strategy, albeit more popular, might produce 
nanowires with a lower diameter and a random orientation. Although alignment steps cannot be 
used with CMOS, they can improve orientation. Regarding the characteristics of nanowires, each 
approach has specific benefits and drawbacks.
Monitoring and diagnosing diabetes through breath acetone levels offers a convenient and 
non-invasive approach. Effective materials for this purpose should exhibit high acetone response, 
selectivity, low sensitivity to humidity, and the ability to work at room temperature. Chemical-
resistant gas sensors, known for their simplicity, hold potential for breath acetone detection. Some 
semiconductor materials respond to airborne acetone, causing resistance changes. However, many 
require high operating temperatures, leading to issues like increased power consumption and com­
plex design. In a study by Rudie et al. (2022), 2D MXene-based nanocomposites were investigated 
for their potential in chemical-resistant sensors. Most showed high sensitivity and selectivity to 
acetone. Among them, the 1D/2D CrWO/Ti3C2 nanocomposite exhibited the best acetone detection 
response, with sensitivity nine times higher than KWO nanowires. The sensor also demonstrated 
excellent selectivity for acetone over other common breath vapors, suggesting its potential in diabe­
tes management devices [36].
Using a CVD reactor and PbI2 precursor growth, Ghoshal et al. (2019) produced (C4H9NH3)2PbI4 
perovskite nanowires and nanoplatelets. SEM (ZEISS SUPRA 55) and AFM (multi-mode) were 
used to characterize the structures, and optical measurements were made with the use of lasers 
and a confocal microscope setup. It is a noteworthy accomplishment that this study used Low-
temperature vacuum-assisted chemical vapor deposition (LTCVD) to demonstrate regulated 
and template-free development of 2D perovskite nanowires. Outstanding optical characteristics, 
homogeneous thickness, and compositions were all present in the nanowires. They displayed one 
of the greatest polarization ratios for perovskites, 0.73. With a photo-current anisotropy ratio 
of 3.62, a hybrid device made of (C4H9NH3)2PbI4/graphene/hybrid also served as a polarization 
photodetector. These results highlight perovskite nanowires’ potential for use in optoelectronic 
systems [37].

282
Handbook of Semiconductors
21.6  APPLICATIONS OF SEMICONDUCTOR-BASED HEAVY METAL SENSORS
Detecting heavy metal pollution is crucial for the environment and human health. Methods for 
this purpose fall into traditional techniques (gravimetry, volumetry, colorimetry), instrumental 
methods (atomic absorption spectroscopy, inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectros­
copy, inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry), and electrochemical methods (voltammetry, 
amperometry, impedance). Despite their pros and cons, they all share a common limitation: the 
need for laboratory-based measurements [38]. Modern sensor technology allows for accurate on-
site measurements, including analysis of heavy metals. A very sensitive arsenic sensor with a 1 nM 
detection limit was created by Zhou et al. employing semiconductor black phosphorus functional­
ized with dithiothreitol and gold nanoparticles [39]. With a sensitivity of 40 mV/100 ppm, César 
et al. created an electrolyte-insulator-semiconductor (EIS) structure for Pb+ ion detection in water 
[40]. A thymine-Hg2+-thymine base pair with MoS2 nanolayers was used by Wang et al. to build 
an electrochemical sensor for Hg detection that operates in the range of 0.01–4 g/L in the presence 
of Hg2+ ions [41]. The electrical activity of metals has led to an increase in the usage of electro­
chemical sensors for the detection of heavy metals. In order to improve sensor electrochemical 
properties, semiconductors are essential, and this role will probably continue to be played until 
other high-tech materials overtake them. The possibility of increasingly more sensitive sensors 
becoming available as semiconductor technology develops highlights the significance of semicon­
ductor research in this area.
21.7  APPLICATIONS OF POLYMER SEMICONDUCTOR-
BASED FLEXIBLE SENSORS
Throughout history, clothing has been essential for human survival, adapting to changing needs 
and technology. It helps individuals cope with climate and is vital for social reasons. As technology 
advances, the clothing industry evolves, integrating conductive fabrics and sensors into textiles. 
These textile innovations have applications in healthcare, communication, security, transportation, 
energy, and more.
Conductive polymers have greatly impacted the development of conductive textile products 
due to their flexibility and reasonable conductivity. Polymers like polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole 
(PPy), polythiophene (PTh), and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) are commonly used 
and can be chemically modified to enhance their conductivity [42]. Semiconductor sensors using 
conductive polymers have a wide range of applications. For example, a CH/PVP sensor with a ZnO 
film showed high sensitivity to hydrogen gas [43], and perovskite nanocrystals integrated into a con­
ductive polymeric matrix resulted in a semiconductor NO2 gas sensor with a strong response [44]. 
These studies highlight the significance of polymer semiconductor sensors in wearable technology 
and gas sensor applications. As industry advances and environmental concerns grow, the demand 
for these sensors is expected to increase.
21.8  ULTRA-SENSIVITE AND SELECTIVE 2D HYBRID 
SEMICONDUCTOR BIOSENSOR
Nanoelectronic developments are addressing issues with semiconductor devices and material 
technology. Organic electronic transistors (OCTs) perform best at low frequencies and poorly at 
high frequencies. There are few organic semiconductor possibilities for entirely organic circuits, 
and incorporating them into tiny devices is challenging. Surface effects, stiffness, and limited ion 
permeability are problems that inorganic semiconductors must deal with. Graphene and other 1D 
and 2D layered semiconductors are suitable for bioelectronics because of their mobility, flexibility, 
and inertness. The carrier transfer and analytical capabilities of hybrid transistors, which combine 
organic and inorganic semiconductors, are improved. Utilizing the compatibility of organic and 

283
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
inorganic elements, their production is simple. The development of high-performance biosensors 
using hybrid organic-inorganic materials is made possible by these developments in nanoelectron­
ics. Some sensors used in the biomedical field are shown in Figure 21.2.
Li et al. developed a BiVO4/2D-C3N4/DNA aptamer PEC sensor for microcystin-LR (MC-LR) 
detection, achieving record-breaking sensitivity. The 2D-C3N4 material enhanced performance 
by shortening hole transfer distances and immobilizing DNA aptamers [45]. Ji et al. (2023) 
designed an InSe-FET biosensor for rapid CA125 antigen detection in clinical samples. It exhib­
ited high sensitivity and selectivity without interference from other molecules, making it a prom­
ising tool for medical diagnostics [46]. In conclusion, the development of ultra-sensitive and 
selective 2D hybrid semiconductor biosensors represents a remarkable advancement in the field 
of bioelectronics.
21.9  FUTURE BIOMEDICAL APPLICATIONS OF SEMICONDUCTOR SENSORS
Future biomedical applications of semiconductor sensors will revolutionize healthcare by facilitat­
ing rapid, accurate diagnosis and individualized therapy. In point-of-care devices, these sensors 
will be widely utilized to provide fast analyses and lessen the need of centralized laboratories. 
Remote patient monitoring will be made possible by implantable sensors that track vital signs and 
recurring conditions. Wearables with semiconductor sensors will monitor health parameters con­
tinually, assisting in the early diagnosis and treatment of ailments. These sensors will be essential 
for early cancer detection, neurological research, the tracking of infectious diseases, and intel­
ligent medication delivery systems. When paired with artificial intelligence, they will produce 
FIGURE 21.2  The biomedical applications of semiconductor sensors.

284
Handbook of Semiconductors
massive amounts of healthcare data for more precise diagnostics and treatment recommendations, 
ushering in a new era of precision healthcare excellence. They will also promote regenerative 
medicine and genomics research.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 R. Nazari-Vanani, H. Heli, and N. Sattarahmady, “An impedimetric genosensor for Leishmania infan­
tum based on electrodeposited cadmium sulfide nanosheets,” Talanta 217, 121080 (2020).
	
2.	 L. Cheng, Q. H. Meng, A. J. Lilienthal, and P. F. Qi, “Development of compact electronic noses: a 
review,” Meas Sci Technol 32, 062002 (2021).
	
3.	 C. Wehrenfennig, M. Schott, T. Gasch, D. Meixner, R. A. Düring, A. Vilcinskas, and C. D. Kohl, 
“An approach to sense pheromone concentration by pre-concentration and gas sensors,” Physica Status 
Solidi (a) 210, 932 (2013).
	
4.	 Z. Zheng, and C. Zhang, “Electronic noses based on metal oxide semiconductor sensors for detecting 
crop diseases and insect pests,” Comput Electron Agric 197, 106988 (2022).
	
5.	 Z. Xia, C. Zheng, J. Hu, Q. Yuan, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, L. He, H. Gao, L. Jin, X. Chu, and F. Meng, 
“Synthesis of SnO2 quantum dot sensitized LaFeO3 for conductometric formic acid gas sensors,” Sens 
Actuators B Chem 379, 133198 (2023).
	
6.	 A. Butturini, and J. Fonollosa, “Use of metal oxide semiconductor sensors to measure methane in 
aquatic ecosystems in the presence of cross-interfering compounds,” Limnol Oceanogr Methods 20, 
710 (2022).
	
7.	 S. H. Mohamed, M. El-Hagary, and S. Althoyaib, “Growth of undoped and Fe doped TiO2 nano­
structures and their optical and photocatalytic properties,” Appl Phys A Mater Sci Process 111, 1207 
(2013).
	
8.	 F. Lan, Y. Chen, J. Zhu, Q. Lu, C. Jiang, S. Hao, X. Cao, N. Wang, and Z. L. Wang, “Piezotronically 
enhanced detection of protein kinases at ZnO micro/nanowire heterojunctions,” Nano Energy 69, 
104330 (2020).
	
9.	 L. Zhao, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. Wang, and W. Han, “High-performance flexible sensing devices based on 
polyaniline/MXene nanocomposites,” InfoMat 1, 407 (2019).
	 10.	 X. Xu, W. Liu, S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Zhang, S. Ma, and S. Pei, “Design of high-sensitivity 
ethanol sensor based on Pr-doped SnO2 hollow beaded tubular nanostructure,” Vacuum 189, 110244 
(2021).
	 11.	 L. Liu, D. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Xu, Y. Lu, and Q. Liu, Liu et al., “Smartphone-based sensing 
system using ZnO and graphene modified electrodes for VOCs detection,” Biosens Bioelectron 93, 94 
(2017).
	 12.	 G. Li, X. Zhu, J. Liu, S. Li, and X. Liu, “Metal oxide semiconductor gas sensors for lung cancer diagno­
sis,” Chemosensors 11, 251 (2023).
	 13.	 N. Liu, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Zhu, C. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Duan, B. Hou, and J. Sheng, “Combination of 
metal-organic framework with Ag-based semiconductor enhanced photocatalytic antibacterial perfor­
mance under visible-light,” Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp 644, 128813 (2022).
	 14.	 H. Shi, J. Du, H. Wang, Z. Jia, D. Jin, J. Cao, J. Hou, and X. Guo, “Engineering unsaturated coordina­
tion of conductive TiOx clusters derived from Metal–Organic–Framework incorporated into hollow 
semiconductor for highly selective CO2 photoreduction,” Chem Eng J 440, 135735 (2022).
	 15.	 M. Wang, L. Nian, Y. Cheng, B. Yuan, S. Cheng, and C. Cao, “Encapsulation of colloidal semiconduc­
tor quantum dots into metal-organic frameworks for enhanced antibacterial activity through interfacial 
electron transfer,” Chem Eng J 426, 130832 (2021).
	 16.	 L. M. Montañez, K. Müller, L. Heinke, and H. J. Osten, “Integration of thin film of metal-organic 
frameworks in metal-insulator-semiconductor capacitor structures,” Microporous Mesoporous Mater 
265, 185 (2018).
	 17.	 C. Chen, J. Ren, P. Zhao, J. Zhang, Y. Hu, and J. Fei, “A novel dopamine electrochemical sensor based 
on a β-cyclodextrin/Ni-MOF/glassy carbon electrode,” Microchem J 194, 109328 (2023).
	 18.	 C. R. Yang, P. W. Cheng, and S. F. Tseng, “Highly responsive and selective NO2 gas sensors based 
on titanium metal organic framework (Ti-MOF) with pyromellitic acid,” Sens Actuators A Phys 354, 
114301 (2023).
	 19.	 X. Zhang, P. Wang, Z. Liang, W. Zhong, and Q. Ma, “A novel Cu-MOFs nanosheet/BiVO4 nanorod-
based ECL sensor for colorectal cancer diagnosis,” Talanta 266, 124952 (2024).

285
Sensors Based on Semiconductors
	 20.	 N. P. Zaretskiy, L. I. Menshikov, and A. A. Vasiliev, “On the origin of sensing properties of the nano­
structured layers of semiconducting metal oxide materials,” Sens Actuators B Chem 170, 148 (2012).
	 21.	 I. A. Ahmad, and Y. H. Mohammed, “Synthesis of ZnO nanowires by thermal chemical vapor deposi­
tion technique: Role of oxygen flow rate,” Micro Nanostructures 181, 207628 (2023).
	 22.	 K. GangaReddy, and M. V. R. Reddy, “Physical vapour deposition of Zn2+ doped NiO nanostructured 
thin films for enhanced selective and sensitive ammonia sensing,” Mater Sci Semicond Process 154, 
107198 (2023).
	 23.	 Z. Zhang, L. Nie, Q. Zhou, Z. D. Song, and G. bo Pan, “Chemiresistive H2S gas sensors based on 
composites of ZnO nanocrystals and foam-like GaN fabricated by photoelectrochemical etching and a 
sol-gel method,” Sens Actuators B Chem 393, 134148 (2023).
	 24.	 P. P. Ortega, C. C. Silva, M. A. Ramirez, G. Biasotto, C. R. Foschini, and A. Z. Simões, “Multifunctional 
environmental applications of ZnO nanostructures synthesized by the microwave-assisted hydrothermal 
technique,” Appl Surf Sci 542, 148723 (2021).
	 25.	 E. Çepni, and T. Öznülüer Özer, “Electrochemical deposition of Indium(III) hydroxide nanostructures 
for novel battery-like capacitive materials,” J Energy Storage 45, 103678 (2022).
	 26.	 L. Alinauskas, E. Brooke, A. Regoutz, A. Katelnikovas, R. Raudonis, S. Yitzchaik, D. J. Payne, and E. 
Garskaite, “Nanostructuring of SnO2 via solution-based and hard template assisted method,” Thin Solid 
Films 626, 38 (2017).
	 27.	 A. O. Dikovska, R. G. Nikov, G. V. Avdeev, G. B. Atanasova, T. Dilova, D. B. Karashanova, and N. N. 
Nedyalkov, “ZnO/Zn2TiO4 composite nanostructures produced by laser ablation in air,” Physica E Low 
Dimens Syst Nanostruct 150, 115707 (2023).
	 28.	 S. Rani, R. K. Das, A. Jaiswal, G. P. Singh, A. Palwe, S. Saxena, and S. Shukla, “4D nanoprinted sen­
sor for facile organo-arsenic detection: A two-photon lithography-based approach,” Chem Eng J 454, 
140130 (2023).
	 29.	 A. Lahcen, S. Rauf, A. Aljedaibi, J. I. de Oliveira Filho, T. Beduk, V. Mani, H. N. Alshareef, and 
K. N. Salama, “Laser-scribed graphene sensor based on gold nanostructures and molecularly 
imprinted polymers: Application for Her-2 cancer biomarker detection,” Sens Actuators B Chem 347, 
130556 (2021).
	 30.	 M. M. Foroughi, S. Jahani, Z. Aramesh-Boroujeni, M. Rostaminasab Dolatabad, and K. Shahbazkhani, 
“Synthesis of 3D cubic of Eu3+/Cu2O with clover-like faces nanostructures and their application as an 
electrochemical sensor for determination of antiretroviral drug nevirapine,” Ceram Int 47, 19727 (2021).
	 31.	 G. Mathankumar, S. Harish, M. K. Mohan, P. Bharathi, S. K. Kannan, J. Archana, and M. Navaneethan, 
“Enhanced selectivity and ultra-fast detection of NO2 gas sensor via Ag modified WO3 nanostructures 
for gas sensing applications,” Sens Actuators B Chem 381, 133374 (2023).
	 32.	 C. Magro, T. Moura, J. Dionísio, P. A. Ribeiro, M. Raposo, and S. Sério, “Nanostructured metal oxide 
sensors for antibiotic monitoring in mineral and river water,” Nanomaterials 12, 1858 (2022).
	 33.	 S. Ahmadian-Fard-Fini, M. Salavati-Niasari, and D. Ghanbari, “Hydrothermal green synthesis of mag­
netic Fe3O4-carbon dots by lemon and grape fruit extracts and as a photoluminescence sensor for 
detecting of E. coli bacteria,” Spectrochim Acta A Mol Biomol Spectrosc 203, 481 (2018).
	 34.	 Z. Li, Y. Hou, Y. Ma, F. Zhai, and M. K. Joshi, “Recent advances in one-dimensional electrospun semi­
conductor nanostructures for UV photodetector applications: A review,” J Alloys Compd 948, 169718 
(2023).
	 35.	 X. Zhang, T. Li, X. Gao, J. Lin, B. Zeng, C. Gong, and F. Zhao, “Porphyrin and molecularly imprinted 
polymer double sensitized cathode photoelectrochemical sensor for chlortetracycline,” Microchem J 
193, 109094 (2023).
	 36.	 A. Rudie, A. M. Schornack, Q. Wu, Q. Zhang, and D. Wang, “Two-dimensional Ti3C2 MXene-based 
novel nanocomposites for breath sensors for early detection of diabetes mellitus,” Biosensors 12, 332 
(2022).
	 37.	 D. Ghoshal, T. Wang, H.-Z. Tsai, S.-W. Chang, M. Crommie, N. Koratkar, S.-F. Shi, D. Ghoshal, 
T. Wang, S. Shi, H. Tsai, S. Chang, M. Crommie, and N. Koratkar, “Catalyst-free and morphology-
controlled growth of 2D perovskite nanowires for polarized light detection,” Adv Opt Mater 7, 1900039 
(2019).
	 38.	 A. Nigam, N. Sharma, S. Tripathy, and M. Kumar, “Development of semiconductor based heavy metal 
ion sensors for water analysis: A review,” Sens Actuators A Phys 330, 112879 (2021).
	 39.	 G. Zhou, H. Pu, J. Chang, X. Sui, S. Mao, and J. Chen, “Real-time electronic sensor based on black 
phosphorus/Au NPs/DTT hybrid structure: Application in arsenic detection,” Sens Actuators B Chem 
257, 214 (2018).

286
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 40.	 R. R. César, A. D. Barros, R. O. Nascimento, O. L. Alves, I. Doi, J. A. Diniz, and J. W. Swart, 
“Electrolyte-Insulator-Semiconductor Structure for Pb+ Detecting,” Procedia Eng 87, 188 (2014).
	 41.	 R. Wang, C. Y. Xiong, Y. Xie, M. J. Han, Y. H. Xu, C. Bian, and S. H. Xia, “Electrochemical sensor 
based on MoS2 nanosheets and DNA hybridization for trace mercury detection,” Chin J Anal Chem 50, 
100066 (2022).
	 42.	 D. Lv, W. Shen, W. Chen, Y. Wang, R. Tan, M. Zhao, and W. Song, “Emerging poly(aniline co-pyrrole) 
nanocomposites by in-situ polymerized for high-performance flexible ammonia sensor,” Sens Actuators 
A Phys 349, 114078 (2023).
	 43.	 R. Kumar, H. Rahman, S. Ranwa, A. Kumar, and G. Kumar, “Development of cost effective metal oxide 
semiconductor based gas sensor over flexible chitosan/PVP blended polymeric substrate,” Carbohydr 
Polym 239, 116213 (2020).
	 44.	 D. Jang, H. Jin, M. Kim, and Y. Don Park, “Polymeric interfacial engineering approach to perovskite-
functionalized organic transistor-type gas sensors,” Chem Eng J 473, 145482 (2023).
	 45.	 Y. Li, Y. Bu, F. Jiang, X. Dai, and J. P. Ao, “Fabrication of ultra-sensitive photoelectrochemical aptamer 
biosensor: Based on semiconductor/DNA interfacial multifunctional reconciliation via 2D-C3N4,” 
Biosens Bioelectron 150, 111903 (2020).
	 46.	 H. Ji, Z. Wang, S. Wang, C. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, and L. Han, “Highly stable InSe-FET biosensor 
for ultra-sensitive detection of breast cancer biomarker CA125,” Biosensors (Basel) 13, 193 (2023).

287
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-22
Semiconductor-based 
Ferroelectrics
Rijith Sreenivasan, Akhila Muhammed, 
and Sumi V. Sasidharan Nair
22.1  INTRODUCTION
22.1.1  Ferroelectrics–Definition
The switching behavior of polarizations in a material, known as ferroelectricity, has been a sig­
nificant subject in the field of material science. The history of ferroelectrics can be traced back to 
the discovery of ferroelectricity in Rochelle salt by Valasek in 1920, despite the initial report of 
Rochelle salt occurring almost three centuries earlier [1]. Valasek’s observation of a polarization-
electric field hysteresis loop in Rochelle salt crystal when subjected to an external electric field 
unveiled the defining characteristic of ferroelectrics, marking the beginning of a new era in this 
field [2]. For a material to be considered ferroelectric, it must possess a crystalline structure fall­
ing within one of the ten polar point groups: (C1), (C2), (Cs), (C2v), (C4), (C4v), (C3), (C3v), 6(C6), or 
(C6v). Additionally, its spontaneous polarizations’ orientation must be changeable or reversible in 
reaction to an external electric field, provided the temperature is below the Curie temperature (Tc). 
As depicted in Figure 22.1, Rochelle salt demonstrates a monoclinic polar space group (C2, 2) 
within the temperature range of 255 K to 296 K. During this specific temperature range, a hyster­
esis loop between polarization (P) and electric field (E), confirming the presence of ferroelectric­
ity in Rochelle salt, can be observed [3]. This hysteresis loop signifies the occurrence of a phase 
transition. A ferroelectric material is typically characterized as having an intrinsic lattice polar­
ization, denoted as P, which can be reversed by applying an external electric field, represented 
by E, greater than the coercive field, Ec. In other words, a ferroelectric material must exhibit 
a hysteresis loop between polarization (P) and electric field (E) when subjected to an applied 
electric field. Ferroelectrics usually exhibit a phase-transition temperature, T0, above which they 
become paraelectric, although some may not follow this pattern and instead melt before reaching 
that state. It’s worth noting that all ferroelectrics are also pyroelectric, and conversely, all pyro­
electrics are piezoelectric. However, the reverse is not true, as pyroelectric ZnO does not possess 
ferroelectric properties. Therefore, ferroelectric materials lack a center of symmetry and cannot 
exist in glasses. Some ferroelectrics exhibit center of symmetry during their paraelectric phase, 
such as BaTiO3, while others, like KH2PO4, do not possess this property. It is worth noting that 
most ferroelectric families are composed of non-oxide materials, although oxides are the most 
extensively studied due to their durability and wide range of practical applications.
22.2  CLASSIFICATIONS OF FERROELECTRICS
Ferroelectrics can be classified into two distinct categories based on their phenomenological 
properties. The first category encompasses ferroelectrics that have the ability to polarize along a 
single axis, either in the up or down direction. They are piezoelectric even in the non-polar state. 
The remarkable characteristic exhibited by ferroelectrics belonging to this class is the reversible 
alteration of their spontaneous polarization in response to mechanical stress, specifically shear 
stress. Additionally, these ferroelectrics demonstrate a highly significant dependency on both 
22

288
Handbook of Semiconductors
the electrical boundary conditions and temperature when it comes to their electromechanical 
behavior.
The second classification of ferroelectrics pertains to a group of substances referred to as 
perovskites, named after one of its members, CaTiO3. These ferroelectrics share a common chemi­
cal formula, ABO3, where A represents a divalent or monovalent metal, and B represents a tetrava­
lent or pentavalent metal. In a state of complete cubic symmetry, the A atoms occupy the corners of 
the cube, the B atoms reside at the body-centers, and the O atoms are situated at the face-centers. 
Among the various perovskites, BaTiO3 has received the most extensive research attention. As the 
temperature decreases, BaTiO3 undergoes a sequential transition, traversing through all these struc­
tural phases. Since the discovery of Rochelle salt, research on ferroelectrics has predominantly 
focused on ferroelectric ceramics such as BaTiO3 (BTO) and Pb (Zr, Ti) O3 (PZT) [5, 6]. These 
inorganic ferroelectrics are widely recognized for their exceptional performance characteristics, 
including high polarization (Ps) and a high piezoelectric coefficient (d33).
Molecular ferroelectrics possess distinct properties compared to conventional inorganic ferro­
electrics. These properties include being environmentally friendly, lightweight, easy to process, and 
exhibiting structural diversity, mechanical flexibility, low acoustical impedance, and occasionally 
homochirality [7–9]. These advantages position molecular ferroelectrics as promising alternatives 
to traditional inorganic ferroelectrics.
22.3  THE PHENOMENOLOGICAL BEHAVIOR OF FERROELECTRICS–
THEORY OF MOLECULAR FERROELECTRICS
These design theories are developed based on a chemical perspective. In essence, by employing 
specific chemical concepts and methodologies, it becomes possible to systematically convert cen­
trosymmetric materials into multifunctional ferroelectric materials. Furthermore, these theories 
enable the initial establishment of effective approaches to control and enhance ferroelectricity and 
FIGURE 22.1  The P-E curves depicting the conceptual relationship between polarization and electric 
field for the ferroelectric and paraelectric phases of Rochelle salt. Polarizations are visually represented by 
dark-blue arrows. The point group of each phase is indicated through the use of Schönflies and international 
symbols, which are presented in parentheses. (Adapted with permission from [4], Copyright [2020], American 
Chemical Society.)

289
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
piezoelectricity within molecular systems. From this point of view three chemical design approaches 
offer valuable insights into the purposeful design of molecular ferroelectrics. These approaches 
encompass modifications applied to spherical molecules, the incorporation of homochirality, and 
the substitution of hydrogen (H) or fluorine (F). These strategies, discussed in previous studies 
[10, 11], enable the attainment of five enantiomorphic point groups (C1, C2, C4, C3, C6) through the 
introduction of homochirality. Additionally, other polar point groups (Cs, C2v, C4v, C3v, C6v) can be 
achieved by tailoring the molecular structure. This concept focuses on the intentional design and 
optimization of molecular ferroelectrics, guided by phenomenological theories (as illustrated in 
Figure 22.2), with the objective of enhancing their performance.
22.3.1  Quasi-spherical Theory
Spherical molecules, including [Me4N] +, dabco (1,4-diazabicyclo [2.2.2] octane), and quinuclidine, 
possessing low rotational energy barriers, hold great promise for constructing structural phase tran­
sitions. For instance, [Me4N]FeCl4 exhibits four phase transitions at temperatures of 295 K, 309 K, 
344 K, and 384 K, sequentially transitioning from the space groups Pbcm, Pma2, Amm2, Cmcm to 
Pm3 ̅m [12] and this was reported as an example of utilizing spherical molecules. Furthermore, the 
family of spherical molecules has been expanded to include phosphonium-based [Me4P]+ cation. 
An example, [(CH3)4P]CdCl3, displays a paraelectric-to-ferroelectric phase transition at 348 K 
with Aizu notation 6/mF6 [13]. It not only exhibits high-Tc ferroelectricity but also demonstrates 
luminescence upon doping Sb3+ into its structure. Additionally, materials incorporating 3-pyrro­
lidinium as the organic component, such as (3-pyrrolidinium) CdBr3 and (3-pyrrolidinium) MnCl3, 
FIGURE 22.2  An illustrative diagram depicting the concept of ferroelectrochemistry is presented, which 
focuses on the purposeful design and optimization of molecular ferroelectrics using phenomenological theo­
ries. (Adapted with permission [4], Copyright [2020], American Chemical Society.)

290
Handbook of Semiconductors
have been reported to showcase intriguing ferroelectric properties. Nevertheless, the occurrence 
of ferroelectric-type phase transitions is not always observed in spherical molecules due to their 
inherent high symmetry, which often favors the formation of centrosymmetric structures that are 
incompatible with ferroelectricity [14–16]. Recognizing this challenge, significant efforts have been 
dedicated to developing targeted design approaches over the years. Eventually, a breakthrough was 
achieved with the introduction of the quasi-spherical theory.
The quasi-spherical theory is a phenomenological approach based on the Curie symmetry 
principle that involves making subtle modifications to spherical molecules [10]. By introducing a 
dipole moment, this theory aims to achieve lower-symmetric ferroelectric phases. By decreasing 
the molecular symmetry while maintaining the quasi-spherical shape, a ferroelectric phase transi­
tion can still occur. This transition leads to an increase in the symmetry of the paraelectric phase. 
The enhancement in polarization is beneficial for data storage in a ceramic-like form [17]. At high 
temperatures, tetrahedral or octahedral anions with high symmetry may appear spherical due to 
their rotational motion. However, as the temperature decreases, these anions undergo a transition to 
a non-spherical shape. According to the Landau theory, the symmetry of the ordered ferroelectric 
phase is a subset of the higher-symmetry paraelectric phase in the setting of ferroelectric materials. 
This suggests that the symmetries of the disordered paraelectric phase and the ordered ferroelectric 
phase have a “group-subgroup relationship” or a “parent-child relationship.” The ferroelectric mate­
rial exhibits uniaxial ferroelectricity when the symmetry of the ordered ferroelectric phase is the 
greatest non-isomorphic subgroup of the parent symmetry.
22.3.2  Chemical Strategies for Achieving Homochirality in Ferroelectrics
The identification of ferroelectricity in Rochelle salt marked a significant milestone in the develop­
ment of ferroelectrics. While the association between homochirality and ferroelectricity originated 
from Rochelle salt, the significance of homochirality in the generation and utilization of ferroelec­
tricity went unnoticed. In 2010, the discovery of two homochiral organic molecules, namely (R)-2-
methylpiperazine-1,4-diamine [18] and (R)-2-methylpiperazinium bis(dichloroiodate) [19], brought 
forth the possibility of them being potential ferroelectrics. This breakthrough introduced a novel 
approach for the purposeful design of molecular ferroelectrics [20]. For a material to exhibit fer­
roelectricity, it needs to have a crystalline structure belonging to one of the polar point groups. Out 
of the 11 chiral point groups, five of them (C1, C2, C3, C4, and C6) possess the necessary polarity that 
allows for ferroelectric behavior [21]. Based on the group-subgroup relationship between the low-
temperature ferroelectric phase and the high-temperature paraelectric phase, Aizu [21] identified 
22 out of the 88 different types of full ferroelectric phase transitions as chiral-to-chiral transition 
(Table 22.1).
TABLE 22.1
Variations of Full Ferroelectric Phase Transitions that 
Exhibit Chiral-to-Chiral Transformation
Crystal System
Aizu Notation of Phase Transition
Monoclinic
2F1
Orthorhombic
222F1; 222F2
Tetragonal
4F1; 422F1; 422F2; 422F4
Trigonal
3F1; 32F1; 32F2; 32F3
Hexagonal
6F1; 622F1; 622F2; 622F6
Cubic
23F1; 23F2; 23F3; 432F1; 432F2; 432F4; 432F

291
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
22.3.2.1  Incorporating Homochirality in the Fabrication 
of Single-Component Ferroelectrics
The question has emerged whether it is possible to achieve ferroelectricity by simultaneously 
introducing homochirality and leveraging its spherical geometry. A remarkable study on this 
subject reveal that the addition of a hydroxyl group to the quinuclidine molecule successfully 
yields quasi-spherical molecules, specifically (R)-and (S)-3-quinuclidinol [22], by reducing sym­
metry. This introduction of homochirality in the molecule results in the acquisition of ferroelec­
tric properties. The presence of homochirality facilitates the crystallization of molecules into 
polar-chiral point groups, satisfying the fundamental prerequisite for ferroelectricity. In both 
homochiral materials, ferroelectric-type phase transitions occur at a relatively high temperature 
of approximately 400 K, leading to the formation of chiral-nonpolar space groups. Specifically, 
the materials transition to space groups P6122 (D6, 622) and P6522 (D6, 622) in their respec­
tive paraelectric phases, as denoted by the Aizu notation 622F6. As depicted in Figure 22.3, 
the homochiral crystals exhibit crystallization in the anticipated enantiomorphic space groups. 
Specifically, they crystallize in the ferroelectric phase as P61 (C6, 6) and P65 (C6, 6) for the 
respective materials [23]. In contrast, the crystal of (Rac)-3-quinuclidinol [24] exhibits crystal­
lization in the centrosymmetric space group P21/n (C2h, 2/m). This observation implies that the 
presence of homochirality facilitates the easier crystallization of molecules in polar-chiral point 
groups, meeting the fundamental requirement for ferroelectricity. Another example of a single-
component system is the homochiral compound (4aR,8aR)-2,3-di(thiophen-2-yl)-decahydroqui­
noxaline. Although there were no indications of phase transitions, its potential ferroelectricity 
was confirmed through the observation of a P-E hysteresis loop. In the historical context, the 
discoveries of homochiral ferroelectrics have primarily involved multi-component organic amine 
and metal coordination compounds [25]. Single-component homochiral ferroelectrics with high 
curie temperature (Tc) are extremely uncommon.
22.4  2D FERROELECTRICS
The key characteristic of ferroelectrics is their ability to maintain two or more stable polar states 
with a moderate energy gap. These states can be interchanged by applying an electric field. Thanks 
to dedicated research efforts, significant advancements have been made in comprehending the 
FIGURE 22.3  (a) Scheme of acquiring 3-quinuclidional by introducing homochirality. (b) Packing views 
of crystal structures of 22, with H atoms omitted for clarity. (Adapted with permission [4], Copyright [2020], 
American Chemical Society.)

292
Handbook of Semiconductors
underlying mechanisms of ferroelectricity, accurately quantifying ferroelectric performance, and 
successfully implementing diverse applications based on ferroelectric materials. The advancements 
in quantum-mechanics-based first-principles calculations have empowered researchers to delve into 
the fundamental factors driving ferroelectric polarization. Furthermore, these calculations have 
provided insights into the impact of ferroelectric polarization on crucial properties like electronic 
structures and phonon dispersion [26]. Based on symmetry considerations, the Landau-Ginzburg-
Devonshire (LGD) theory provides a useful approach to characterize and understand the ferroelec­
tric performances exhibited by materials [27]. Through the utilization of these theoretical tools, it 
becomes feasible to determine the underlying source of ferroelectric polarization. One such exam­
ple is the soft phonon-mode theory, which suggests that the phonon frequency is directly related to 
the disparity between long-range forces (e.g., dipole-dipole interaction) and short-range forces (e.g., 
Pauli repulsion). This theory provides valuable insights into the mechanisms governing ferroelectric 
polarization [28].
Over the past few decades, there has been a rapid advancement in micro/nanoelectromechanical 
systems (M/NEMS) driven by the need for intelligent components with micro/nano-scale dimen­
sions and low energy consumption. These systems have created a demand for the development of 
diverse components, including sensors, transducers, and actuators, that can operate efficiently in 
the micro/nano-scale domain [29]. 2D ferroelectrics are emerging as a prominent area of research, 
particularly due to their potential as functional materials for M/NEMS. Their unique properties and 
characteristics make them an attractive research focus in the field. As a result, 2D ferroelectrics are 
gaining significant attention as a promising area of study (Figure 22.4).
After extensive research, numerous 2D ferroelectrics have been discovered, each exhibiting 
unique and notable properties. For instance, 2D In2Se3 demonstrates the phenomenon of locking 
between in-plane and out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization [31]. In addition, the odd-even layer 
effect has been observed in few-layer SnS [32]. These distinctive properties are rarely observed in 
3D ferroelectric materials. Furthermore, 2D ferroelectrics have a diverse set of material properties, 
FIGURE 22.4  The number of publications on 2D ferroelectrics per year. (Data from database “webofknowl­
edge.com, “2D ferroelectric/two-dimensional ferroelectric.” Adapted with permission [30], Copyright [2021], 
Wiley-VCH GmbH.)

293
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
including well-known phenomena such as the piezoelectric effect, pyroelectric effect, and bulk 
photovoltaic effect (BPVE), as well as newly found phenomena such as valley polarization and spin 
polarization. These distinct features enable the creation of intelligent structures with a wide range of 
functions, such as 2D ferroelectric-based energy harvesters [33], tunnel junctions [34], field-effect 
transistors [35], and photodetectors [36]. Many of these nanodevices based on 2D ferroelectrics are 
expected to operate exceptionally well. The ferroelectric field-effect transistor, based on the 2D 
semiconductor In2Se3, demonstrates a substantial memory window, with an on/off ratio surpassing 
108, achieving a peak on-current of 862 µA µm−1, all while operating at a low supply voltage.
22.4.1  Theory of 2D Ferroelectrics
First-principles calculations have indeed been widely employed in the field of materials science to 
gain insights into the fundamental microscopic mechanisms governing material behavior. These 
calculations are based on the principles of quantum mechanics and provide a detailed understand­
ing of the electronic structure and properties of materials. When it comes to 2D ferroelectrics, 
first-principles calculations play a crucial role in several aspects. One important application is the 
determination of stable crystal structures. By calculating the total energy of different crystal struc­
tures, researchers can identify the most energetically favorable configuration, which corresponds to 
the stable crystal structure. This information is essential for predicting the behavior and properties 
of 2D ferroelectrics.
Another significant application is quantifying the ferroelectric polarization. Ferroelectric materi­
als exhibit a spontaneous electric polarization that can be reversed by the application of an exter­
nal electric field. First-principles calculations can provide accurate calculations of the polarization, 
allowing researchers to quantify and understand this important property in 2D ferroelectrics. 
Furthermore, first-principles calculations aid in exploring the underlying ferroelectric mechanisms 
in 2D materials.
22.4.1.1  Determining Stable Crystal Structures
Non-centrosymmetry is indeed a crucial condition for ferroelectric polarization, and identifying the 
stable crystal structures is a key step in studying these materials. In the context of first-principles 
calculations for 2D ferroelectrics, there are several methods used to determine stable crystal struc­
tures. These include: (1) Experimental verification: In some cases, the stable crystal structure of a 
2D ferroelectric material is determined through experimental techniques, such as in the case of 2D 
SnTe [37]. (2) Analogy to homologous 2D compounds: Homologous 2D compounds with known 
crystal structures can serve as a reference to predict the stable crystal structure of a new 2D fer­
roelectric material. For example, the crystal structure of an SbN monolayer can be inferred based 
on the crystal structure of related compounds. (3) Structural optimization algorithms: Optimization 
algorithms, often based on energy minimization techniques, can be employed to determine the 
stable crystal structure of a 2D ferroelectric material. These algorithms search for the configura­
tion that minimizes the total energy of the system, considering various structural parameters. The 
LiAlTe2 monolayer is an example where structural optimization was used to determine the stable 
crystal structure [38]. (4) Analogy to stable 3D counterparts: In some cases, the stable crystal struc­
ture of a 2D ferroelectric material can be inferred by analogy to its stable 3D counterpart, especially 
if the 3D structure has a small cleavage energy. The WO2Cl2 monolayer is an example where the 
stable crystal structure is derived from its stable 3D counterpart [39].
It is worthwhile to noted that 2D materials can have multiple stable states, and each of these 
states could potentially exhibit ferroelectric behavior. The ground state and other stable states can 
correspond to local energy minima. For example, in the case of MoS2 monolayer, the ground state 
2H-MoS2 is non-ferroelectric, while the stable d1T-MoS2 phase is predicted to be ferroelectric [40]. 
Considering the existence of multiple stable states in various 2D materials, there is still a vast 
potential for the discovery of new 2D ferroelectrics. Exploring different stable states and their 

294
Handbook of Semiconductors
ferroelectric properties can lead to the identification of novel 2D materials with desirable character­
istics. To assess the dynamic stability of a 2D crystal structure, phonon spectrum analysis based on 
first-principles calculations can be employed. Dynamically unstable crystal structures often exhibit 
one or more phonon branches with negative frequencies. Analyzing the phonon spectrum provides 
valuable information about the stability and vibrational properties of the crystal structure.
22.4.1.2  Measuring the Magnitude of Ferroelectric Polarization
Ferroelectric polarization can be understood as the concentration of electric dipole moments. 
However, for a long time, there was no clear and universally accepted definition for the polarization 
of bulk materials [41]. The simplest model, known as the Clausius-Mossotti (CM) model, defined 
polarization as the average density of dipole moments within a given unit cell, assuming localized 
point charges without any overlap. However, this definition was limited to pure ionic crystals and 
was not applicable to most materials, as the charge density in real materials changes continuously 
in a periodic manner. To address the oversimplification of the CM model, several definitions based 
on the continuous charge density, ρ(r) have been established. These definitions encompass both 
differential and integral forms. The integral form of polarization within a chosen unit cell (Vcell) is 
expressed as P = (1/Vcell) ∫ ρ(r)P(r) dr, where ρ(r) represents the charge density and P(r) represents 
the local polarization at position r. The most reliable definition of polarization, which addresses the 
limitations of static charge distribution, was proposed. It introduces the concept of effective polar­
ization (∆P), which is associated with the flow of charge (j(r, t)). This definition is expressed as ∆P = 
(1/Vcell) ∫ ∫ j(r, t) dr dt, where the integral is taken over the volume (Vcell) and time (t). This definition 
has overcome the inherent shortcomings of static charge distribution and has become the foundation 
of modern polarization theory. In the framework of quantum mechanics, this definition has been 
further developed and expanded [42]. In the case of 2D ferroelectric materials, the accurate quanti­
fication of in-plane polarization typically relies on the modern theory of polarization. However, for 
the out-of-plane polarization, especially in monolayer samples, the integral form based on charge 
density is usually accurate enough. This is because the absence of periodic structures in the out-of-
plane direction eliminates the uncertainty associated with polarization calculations.
22.4.1.3  Ferroelectric Polarization Mechanisms
The mechanism behind ferroelectric polarization is often complex, involving the interplay of mul­
tiple factors. One widely used approach to investigate the driving force for ferroelectric polariza­
tion is the soft-mode theory [43]. This theory assumes that the frequency of an optical phonon is 
determined by the difference between short-range repulsion and long-range forces. The short-range 
repulsion tends to favor a non-polar lattice with high symmetry, while the long-range force favors 
a polar lattice with low symmetry. When these forces balance each other, the phonon frequency 
becomes zero, resulting in the stabilization of the corresponding phonon mode known as the “soft 
mode.” The occurrence of the soft phonon mode at the center or edges of the momentum space is 
often associated with polar or non-polar modes, respectively. The soft-mode theory provides valu­
able insights into the driving force and behavior of ferroelectric polarization. Studying the phonon 
spectrum can enhance our comprehension of how atomic displacement contributes to ferroelectric 
polarization. Nevertheless, additional computations are necessary to determine the underlying fac­
tors that induce these atom displacements. Various methods have been validated as effective for 
this objective. In this context, we provide a concise overview of the calculations involving projected 
density of states (PDOS), interatomic force constants, and born effective charges.
22.4.1.4  Phase Transition
First-principles calculations, which do not rely on any prior information, have certain limitations. 
Due to the extensive computational requirements, they are best suited for structures with fewer than 
hundreds of atoms and are most effective at absolute zero temperature. However, during phase tran­
sitions, it is crucial to consider heat fluctuations. Therefore, more practical methods or theories need 

295
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
to be employed, such as ab initio molecular dynamics, first-principles effective Hamiltonians, and 
the LGD theory. Among these methods and theories, the LGD theory has been successfully utilized 
to examine the phase transition in bulk ferroelectrics from a phenomenological perspective [44]. 
The LGD theory operates on the principle that a system with different symmetries cannot undergo 
a smooth transition between two phases. Consequently, the potential energy of the system can be 
expressed as a Taylor expansion using order parameters, where only terms that satisfy the higher 
symmetry are retained. Within the framework of the LGD theory, the potential energy of a proper 
ferroelectric at the phase transition is represented as a power series expansion of polarization.
	
∑
∑
(
)
=
−
+
+



+
−
E
2
4
6
6
(
)
1
2
4
6
,
2
T
Tc A P
B P
C P
C
P
P
i
i
i
i
i j
i
j
where A, B, and C represent material parameters, T is the temperature, and the summations are 
performed over all unit cells (i) and their nearest neighbor unit cells (j).
The LGD theory can be extended to incorporate electronic polarization, allowing for the inter­
pretation of the electronic origin within its framework [45] Furthermore, the LGD theory can also 
consider the influence of external fields, providing insights into their effects on ferroelectric perfor­
mance. In the case of bulk materials, the extended LGD theory has successfully revealed the impacts 
of piezoelectric, flexoelectric, and electric effects on ferroelectric phase transitions and the forma­
tion of domain walls. Investigating these effects is crucial for understanding 2D ferroelectrics. For 
instance, by including the electric effect in the potential energy, it becomes possible to elucidate the 
electronic improper ferroelectric origin in monolayer MoTe2. To determine the unknown parameters 
in the LGD theory, fitting the results of first-principles calculations with an effective Hamiltonian 
can be employed. This approach establishes a link between theoretical methods and enables the 
investigation of 2D ferroelectrics on a larger scale. While theoretical calculations can make predic­
tions, experimental verification remains essential for confirming the existence of 2D ferroelectricity. 
Although accurately measuring or detecting ferroelectric polarization in 2D materials is challenging 
due to their weak response and reduced dimensions, a few studies have successfully measured and 
detected ferroelectric polarization using both direct and indirect measurement techniques.
22.5  APPLICATIONS
22.5.1  Capacitors
Ferroelectric capacitors differ from conventional capacitors in that they utilize ferroelectric materials 
instead of dielectrics. The polarization and direction of the ferroelectric material within the capaci­
tor play a crucial role. With their remarkable ability to retain charge, ferroelectric capacitors have 
proven to be highly valuable in applications such as ferroelectric random access memory (FeRAM) 
and other non-volatile memory technologies. In electronics, these capacitors are used in integrated 
circuits and microelectronic devices, offering efficient energy storage and enabling high-density data 
storage capabilities. Perovskite materials, known for their exceptional dielectric constants of up to 
30,000, have emerged as powerful components in ferroelectric capacitors. This unique characteristic 
enhances their capacitance and makes them suitable for various applications. In memory applications, 
ferroelectric capacitors serve as data storage elements. They store the logical value of the data, which 
can be read by applying an electric field. During the read operation, an electric field is employed to 
measure the amount of charge required to switch the memory cell to its opposite state. This reveals 
its previous state. However, it is imperative to note that the application of an electric field during the 
read operation erases the current memory state. This requires an additional write operation to restore 
the desired bit value. Consequently, this constraint poses a limitation to using single ferroelectrics as 
memory elements, as each read cycle must be followed by a write cycle. Additionally, ferroelectric 
capacitors have a high write cycle limit, though not infinite [46].

296
Handbook of Semiconductors
22.5.2  Nonvolatile Memory
Nonvolatile memory in ferroelectrics has revolutionized technologies for data storage and memory. 
As an alternative to conventional nonvolatile memory technologies, ferroelectric materials provide 
enhanced performance, low power consumption, and excellent data retention. Ferroelectric RAM 
(FeRAM) is random access memory similar in construction to DRAM, but it uses a ferroelectric 
layer instead of a dielectric layer. FeRAM surpasses traditional memory technologies by exploiting 
ferroelectric materials’ inherent polarization characteristics. Within a FeRAM cell, the polariza­
tion state of the ferroelectric capacitor represents stored data, providing a high-density, nonvolatile 
memory solution. FeRAM is an emerging alternative to nonvolatile random access memory tech­
nologies, which offers advantages over flash memory. FeRAM’s advantages over flash include lower 
power usage, faster write performance, and a much-increased maximum number of write-erase 
cycles (exceeding 1016 for 3.3V devices). It also exhibits low power consumption due to the nonvola­
tile nature of ferroelectric capacitors, eliminating the need for constant power supply during data 
retention. FeRAM is ideal for portable and energy-efficient electronic devices [47].
Ferroelectric RAM was proposed by an MIT graduate student, Dudley Allen Buck, in his mas­
ter’s thesis, titled “Ferroelectrics for Digital Information Storage and Switching,” published in 1952 
[48]. FeRAM development began in the late 1980s. In the early 1990s, development was based at 
NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory to improve readout methods, such as introduction of a non­
destructive readout using UV pulses. A fabless semiconductor company, Ramtron, has developed 
much of the current FeRAM technology, and one of the major licensees is Fujitsu. Fujitsu operates 
the largest semiconductor foundry production line with FeRAM capabilities. They manufactured 
stand-alone FeRAMs and embedded FeRAMs based on Ramtron’s technology between 1999 and 
2010. Texas Instruments collaborated with Ramtron to develop FeRAM test chips in a modified 
130-nm process.
22.5.3  Thermistor
The thermistor is a temperature sensor achieved by calibrating the material resistance as a function 
of temperature. Ferroelectric materials that undergo the ferroelectric-paraelectric transition exhibit 
variation in electrical conductivity as a function of temperature. This electrical behavior allows fer­
roelectric materials to be applied not only as a positive temperature coefficient thermistor but also 
as a negative temperature coefficient thermistor. Ferroelectric oxides with a perovskite structure 
are applied as thermistors. The thermistors’ resistivity is modulated by metal cations distributed 
in different interstices or oxygen vacancies. For example, polycrystalline n-type BaTiO3 exhibits a 
positive temperature coefficient of resistivity behavior that results from a temperature dependent, 
Schottky-type grain boundary potential barrier due to adsorbed oxygen at the grain boundaries. 
When the BaTiO3 is sintered in air, a defect reaction occurs at the grain boundary and produces a 
neutral Ba vacancy. Then, it may be ionized by an electron introduced by the donor dopant. In other 
words, this capturing of a free electron by the neutral Ba vacancy at the grain boundary during the 
ferroelectric phase transition is responsible for the positive temperature coefficient of resistivity 
behavior [49].
22.5.4  Ferroelectric Thin Films in Electronics
Ferroelectric thin films have opened up new possibilities in electronics. By depositing ferroelectric 
materials as thin films on substrates, ferroelectricity integration into existing technologies becomes 
feasible. Ferroelectric thin films have been employed in non-volatile memory devices, such as 
FeFETs and ferroelectric capacitors, offering high-density data storage, low power consumption, 
and improved performance. This integration has the potential to revolutionize electronics, enabling 
advanced devices with enhanced functionalities.

297
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
22.5.5  Ferroelectric Tunnel Junctions
Ferroelectric tunnel junctions (FTJs) have emerged as a cutting-edge area of research in the field of 
nanoelectronics. These structures combine the unique properties of ferroelectric materials with tun­
nel barriers, enabling precise control over electrical conductivity through polarization switching. FTJs 
offer exciting opportunities for the development of innovative electronic devices, such as non-volatile 
memories, logic devices, and spintronics. The engineering of FTJs involves optimizing ferroelectric 
materials, interface properties, and tunnel barrier characteristics to achieve high-performance, low-
power devices. Ongoing research in this field aims to unlock the full potential of FTJs and pave the 
way for advanced electronic technologies with enhanced functionality and efficiency.
22.5.6  Ferroelectric Photovoltaics
Ferroelectric photovoltaics represent a compelling frontier in renewable energy research. These 
photovoltaic devices leverage ferroelectric materials’ unique properties to convert solar energy 
into electrical power. Ferroelectric materials offer advantages such as high dielectric constants and 
excellent photovoltaic response, enabling efficient energy conversion. By harnessing ferroelectrics’ 
inherent polarization and band gap engineering capabilities, researchers strive to enhance solar cell 
efficiency and stability. Ferroelectric photovoltaics hold promises for sustainable energy generation, 
offering a pathway toward environmentally friendly power sources. Ongoing research aims to fur­
ther optimize and advance the performance of ferroelectric photovoltaic devices to realize their full 
potential in the renewable energy landscape [50].
22.5.7  Ferroelectric-based Energy Storage
Ferroelectric-based energy storage has emerged as a promising field, addressing the growing 
demand for efficient and sustainable energy storage solutions. By harnessing the unique proper­
ties of ferroelectric materials, such as their piezoelectric and pyroelectric characteristics, energy 
can be harvested from mechanical vibrations and temperature gradients. The utilization of ferro­
electrics in energy storage offers several advantages. These materials provide high energy density, 
fast charge-discharge rates, and long cycle life, making them attractive for various applications. 
Ferroelectric capacitors and devices store electrical energy electrostatically, offering potential for 
compact and high-performance energy storage systems. In the future, ferroelectric-based energy 
storage holds immense scope. As research progresses, efforts are focused on enhancing ferroelec­
tric materials’ performance, improving their energy storage capacity, and optimizing device engi­
neering. Furthermore, advancements in nanoscale fabrication techniques and the exploration of 
novel ferroelectric materials are expected to unlock new opportunities in energy storage.
22.6  CONCLUSION AND PROSPECTIVE
To conclude, we summarized the advances in molecular ferroelectrics in terms of the targeted 
chemical design approaches. Meanwhile, detailed information of phase transitions and symmetry 
breaking are also included. In this perspective, we first reviewed the chemical design idea of sym­
metry lowering, namely the quasi-spherical theory, to modulate ferroelectricity at the molecular 
level of shape, symmetry, and specific interactions by tailoring the high symmetric cations. This 
strategy has been successfully applied to [Me4N]+, dabco, and quinuclidine. The reveal of the con­
nection between ferroelectricity and homochirality is also an important step in the development of 
molecular ferroelectrics. As mentioned above, the introduction of homochirality is a unique design 
strategy when constructing molecular ferroelectrics.
Ferroelectric materials are widely known for their electronic, optical, thermal, mechanical, and 
magnetic properties, as well as the complex interplay between these properties. However, our under­
standing of 2D ferroelectrics is still limited. While extensive research has been conducted on the 

298
Handbook of Semiconductors
flexoelectric effect in 3D ferroelectrics over the past decades, the potential enhancement of this effect 
at the nanoscale due to increased strain gradient remains largely unexplored in 2D ferroelectrics. 
Therefore, 2D ferroelectrics present an ideal platform for investigating the significant flexoelectric 
effect and its influence on other properties like the bulk photovoltaic effect. Nevertheless, detecting 
and quantifying the small ferroelectric responses in 2D ferroelectrics pose significant challenges. It 
may be necessary to introduce additional direct or indirect precision measurements and employ a 
combination of multiple methods to ensure accurate characterization. The ultimate goal of exploring 
2D ferroelectrics is to design intelligent components for nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS). 
Consequently, it is crucial to continuously explore and discover more 2D ferroelectric materials with 
desirable properties. Simultaneously, the study of novel structures based on 2D ferroelectrics, such as 
sensors, actuators, transducers, and energy harvesters, is of utmost importance.
In summary, research on 2D ferroelectrics is still in its early stages. Further exploration is required 
not only to unravel the diverse underlying mechanisms but also to investigate numerous material 
properties. This endeavor necessitates interdisciplinary collaboration spanning physics, chemistry, 
mechanics, engineering, materials science, and mathematics. Significant progress in the exploration 
of 2D ferroelectrics can be achieved by concurrently conducting research studies in all these areas.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J. Valasek, Piezo-electric and allied phenomena in Rochelle salt, Phys. Rev. 17 (1921) 475.
	
2.	 J. Valasek, Properties of Rochelle salt related to the piezo-electric effect, Phys. Rev. 20 (1922) 639.
	
3.	 F. Mo, R.H. Mathiesen, J.A. Beukes, K.M. Vu, Rochelle salt–a structural reinvestigation with improved 
tools. I. The high-temperature paraelectric phase at 308 K, IUCrJ. 2 (2015) 19–28.
	
4.	 H.-Y. Liu, H.-Y. Zhang, X.-G. Chen, R.-G. Xiong, Molecular design principles for ferroelectrics: 
Ferroelectrochemistry, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 142 (2020) 15205–15218.
	
5.	 R. Clarke, A.M. Glazer, Critical phenomena in ferroelectric crystals of lead zirconate titanate, 
Ferroelectrics. 14 (1976) 695–697.
	
6.	 H.D. Chen, K.R. Udayakumar, L.E. Cross, J.J. Bernstein, L.C. Niles, Dielectric, ferroelectric, and 
piezoelectric properties of lead zirconate titanate thick films on silicon substrates, J. Appl. Phys. 77 
(1995) 3349–3353.
	
7.	 S. Horiuchi, Y. Tokura, Organic ferroelectrics, Nat. Mater. 7 (2008) 357–366.
	
8.	 W. Zhang, R.-G. Xiong, Ferroelectric metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Rev. 112 (2012) 1163–1195.
	
9.	 W. Li, Z. Wang, F. Deschler, S. Gao, R.H. Friend, A.K. Cheetham, Chemically diverse and multifunc­
tional hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites, Nat. Rev. Mater. 2 (2017) 1–18.
	 10.	 H.-Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-P. Shi, R.-G. Xiong, Toward the targeted design of molecular ferroelectrics: 
Modifying molecular symmetries and homochirality, Acc. Chem. Res. 52 (2019) 1928–1938.
	 11.	 Y.-L. Liu, S.-Q. Lu, Y.-Y. Tang, X.-G. Chen, J.-X. Gao, H.-J. Li, R.-G. Xiong, Fluorination observed T 
c increase of 110 K is challenging the hydrogen–deuterium isotope effect, Chem. Commun. 55 (2019) 
10007–10010.
	 12.	 J. Harada, N. Yoneyama, S. Yokokura, Y. Takahashi, A. Miura, N. Kitamura, T. Inabe, Ferroelectricity 
and piezoelectricity in free-standing polycrystalline films of plastic crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 140 
(2018) 346–354.
	 13.	 L. Zhou, P.-P. Shi, X.-M. Liu, J.-C. Feng, Q. Ye, Y.-F. Yao, D.-W. Fu, P.-F. Li, Y.-M. You, Y. Zhang, 
An above-room-temperature phosphonium-based molecular ferroelectric perovskite,[(CH3) 4P] CdCl3, 
with Sb3+-doped luminescence, NPG Asia Mater. 11 (2019) 15.
	 14.	 M. Paściak, M. Wołcyrz, A. Pietraszko, Structural origin of the x-ray diffuse scattering in (CH 3) 
4 NCdCl 3 and related compounds, Phys. Rev. B. 78 (2008) 24114.
	 15.	 B. Morosin, Crystal structure of tetramethylammonium cadmium chloride, acta, Crystallogr. Sect. B 
Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem. 28 (1972) 2303–2305.
	 16.	 B. Morosin, E.J. Graber, Crystal structure of tetramethylammonium manganese (II) chloride, Acta 
Crystallogr. 23 (1967) 766–770.
	 17.	 P.-P. Shi, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, H.-Y. Ye, R.-G. Xiong, De novo discovery of [Hdabco] BF4 molecular fer­
roelectric thin film for nonvolatile low-voltage memories, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 139 (2017) 1319–1324.
	 18.	 P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, Y.-Y. Tang, W. Qiao, D. Zhao, Y. Ai, Y.-F. Yao, R.-G. Xiong, Organic enantiomeric 
high-T c ferroelectrics, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 116 (2019) 5878–5885.

299
Semiconductor-based Ferroelectrics
	 19.	 L. Chen, G. Han, H. Ye, R. Xiong, A new chiral quinoxaline derivative with ferroelectric property, 
Chinese J. Chem. 28 (2010) 1799–1802.
	 20.	 T. Zhang, L.-Z. Chen, M. Gou, Y.-H. Li, D.-W. Fu, R.-G. Xiong, Ferroelectric homochiral organic 
molecular Crystals, Cryst, Growth Des. 10 (2010) 1025–1027.
	 21.	 K. Aizu, Possible species of “ferroelastic” crystals and of simultaneously ferroelectric and ferroelastic 
crystals, J. Phys. Soc. Japan. 27 (1969) 387–396.
	 22.	 P.-F. Li, Y.-Y. Tang, Z.-X. Wang, H.-Y. Ye, Y.-M. You, R.-G. Xiong, Anomalously rotary polarization 
discovered in homochiral organic ferroelectrics, Nat. Commun. 7 (2016) 13635.
	 23.	 C. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Ding, J. Wang, Y. Rao, W. Liao, Y. Tang, P. Li, Z. Wang, R. Xiong, The first 2D 
homochiral lead iodide perovskite ferroelectrics:[R-and S-1-(4-chlorophenyl) ethylammonium] 2PbI4, 
Adv. Mater. 31 (2019) 1808088.
	 24.	 H.-Y. Ye, Y.-Y. Tang, P.-F. Li, W.-Q. Liao, J.-X. Gao, X.-N. Hua, H. Cai, P.-P. Shi, Y.-M. You, R.-G. 
Xiong, Metal-free three-dimensional perovskite ferroelectrics, Science. 361 (2018) 151–155.
	 25.	 E. Bousquet, J. Junquera, P. Ghosez, First-principles study of competing ferroelectric and antiferroelec­
tric instabilities in BaTiO 3/BaO superlattices, Phys. Rev. B. 82 (2010) 45426.
	 26.	 J. Zhu, X. Yao, Y. Bai, C. Jin, X. Zhang, Q. Zheng, Z. Xu, L. Chen, S. Wang, Y. Liu, Anomalous polar­
ization enhancement in a vdW ferroelectric material under pressure. 14 (2023) 4301.
	 27.	 W. Cochran, Crystal stability and the theory of ferroelectricity, Adv. Phys. 9 (1960) 387–423.
	 28.	 R. Frisenda, E. Navarro-Moratalla, P. Gant, D. PÚrez De Lara, P. Jarillo-Herrero, R.V. Gorbachev, 
A. Castellanos-Gomez, Recent progress in the assembly of nanodevices and van der Waals heterostruc­
tures by deterministic placement of 2D materials, Chem. Soc. Rev. 47 (2018) 53.
	 29.	 J. Xiao, H. Zhu, Y. Wang, W. Feng, Y. Hu, A. Dasgupta, Y. Han, Y. Wang, D.A. Muller, L.W. Martin, 
Intrinsic two-dimensional ferroelectricity with dipole locking, Phys. Rev. Lett. 120 (2018) 227601.
	 30.	 L. Qi, S. Ruan, Y. Zeng, Review on recent developments in 2D ferroelectrics: Theories and applications, 
Adv. Mater. 33 (2021) 2005098.
	 31.	 Y. Bao, P. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu, I. Abdelwahab, J. Su, W. Fu, X. Chi, W. Yu, Gate-tunable 
in-plane ferroelectricity in few-layer SnS, Nano Lett. 19 (2019) 5109–5117.
	 32.	 F. Xue, J. Zhang, W. Hu, W.-T. Hsu, A. Han, S.-F. Leung, J.-K. Huang, Y. Wan, S. Liu, J. Zhang, 
Multidirection piezoelectricity in mono-and multilayered hexagonal α-In2Se3, ACS Nano. 12 (2018) 
4976–4983.
	 33.	 L. Kang, P. Jiang, H. Hao, Y. Zhou, X. Zheng, L. Zhang, Z. Zeng, Giant tunneling electroresistance in 
two-dimensional ferroelectric tunnel junctions with out-of-plane ferroelectric polarization, Phys. Rev. 
B. 101 (2020) 14105.
	 34.	 M. Si, A.K. Saha, S. Gao, G. Qiu, J. Qin, Y. Duan, J. Jian, C. Niu, H. Wang, W. Wu, A ferroelectric 
semiconductor field-effect transistor, Nat. Electron. 2 (2019) 580–586.
	 35.	 C. Chang, W. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, F. Ding, C. Fan, H.J. Fan, Z. Fan, C. Gong, Recent 
progress on two-dimensional materials, Acta Phys. Chim. Sin. 37 (2021) 2108017.
	 36.	 K. Liu, J. Lu, S. Picozzi, L. Bellaiche, H. Xiang, Intrinsic origin of enhancement of ferroelectricity in 
SnTe ultrathin films, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121 (2018) 27601.
	 37.	 C. Liu, W. Wan, J. Ma, W. Guo, Y. Yao, Robust ferroelectricity in two-dimensional SbN and BiP, 
Nanoscale. 10 (2018) 7984–7990.
	 38.	 Z. Liu, Y. Sun, D.J. Singh, L. Zhang, Switchable out-of-plane polarization in 2D LiAlTe2, Adv. Electron. 
Mater. 5 (2019) 1900089.
	 39.	 L.-F. Lin, Y. Zhang, A. Moreo, E. Dagotto, S. Dong, Frustrated dipole order induces noncollinear proper 
ferrielectricity in two dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 (2019) 67601.
	 40.	 G.-B. Liu, D. Xiao, Y. Yao, X. Xu, W. Yao, Electronic structures and theoretical modelling of two-
dimensional group-VIB transition metal dichalcogenides, Chem. Soc. Rev. 44 (2015) 2643–2663.
	 41.	 K.M. Rabe, P. Ghosez, First-principles studies of ferroelectric oxides, in: Phys. Ferroelectr. A Mod. 
Perspect., Springer, 2007: pp. 117–174.
	 42.	 R. Resta, M. Posternak, A. Baldereschi, Towards a quantum theory of polarization in ferroelectrics: The 
case of KNbO 3, Phys. Rev. Lett. 70 (1993) 1010.
	 43.	 A.A. Sirenko, C. Bernhard, A. Golnik, A.M. Clark, J. Hao, W. Si, X.X. Xi, Soft-mode hardening in 
SrTiO3 thin films, Nature. 404 (2000) 373–376.
	 44.	 P. Chandra, P.B. Littlewood, A Landau primer for ferroelectrics, in: Phys. Ferroelectr. A Mod. Perspect., 
Springer, 2007: pp. 69–116.
	 45.	 A. Chanana, U.V. Waghmare, Prediction of coupled electronic and phononic ferroelectricity in strained 
2D h-NbN: First-principles theoretical analysis, Phys. Rev. Lett. 123 (2019) 37601.

300
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 46.	 J.P.B. Silva, M.B. Silva, M.J.S. Oliveira, T. Weingärtner, K.C. Sekhar, M. Pereira, M. Gomes, High-
performance Ferroelectric–Dielectric multilayered thin films for energy storage capacitors, Adv. Funct. 
Mater. 29 (2019) 1–8.
	 47.	 H. Li, R. Wang, S. Han, Y. Zhou, Ferroelectric polymers for non-volatile memory devices: A review, 
Polym. Int. 69 (2020) 533–544.
	 48.	 D.A. Buck, Ferroelectrics for digital information storage and switching. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts 
Inst of Tech, Report R212 (1952).
	 49.	 H.K. Muchenedi, M.L.N.M. Mohan, Fabrication of ferroelectric liquid crystal thermistor, IEEE Trans. 
Electron Devices. 67 (2020) 5063–5068.
	 50.	 X. Han, Y. Ji, Y. Yang, Ferroelectric photovoltaic materials and devices, Adv. Funct. Mater. 32 (2022) 
2109625.

301
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-23
Role of Semiconductors 
in Energy Devices
Navid Nasajpour Esfahani, Amir Koohbor, 
Hamid Garmestani, and Steven Y. Liang
23.1  INTRODUCTION
The history of semiconductors dates back to the late 19th and 20th centuries, when many devices 
such as radios, radars, televisions, and telephones were developed using the concept of electronic 
vacuum tubes. This technology was then referred to as solid-state semiconductors. During these 
years, researchers made significant progress in making semiconductors less expensive, more reli­
able, lighter, and smaller. Since silicon is neither a good conductor nor a good insulator, it has been 
considered one of the main semiconductor materials due to its availability. Silicon possesses a 
face-centered cubic crystal structure. The energy diagram of an intrinsic semiconductor, like ideal 
silicon, is explained by the band gap concept, which is based on the Fermi level. The Fermi level 
is an energy level situated between the conduction band and the valence band and is also known 
as the forbidden region. The crystal lattice remains stable without an additional energy source, but 
when external energy is applied to the lattice, electrons tend to move from the valence band to the 
conduction band. In contrast to intrinsic semiconductors, extrinsic semiconductors contain impuri­
ties or dopants that can modify specific properties depending on the dopants used. In general, there 
are two main types of semiconductors known as n-type and p-type. In p-type semiconductors, “p” 
stands for positive, and these materials are created by adding trivalent impurities or donors, such 
as boron, indium, and gallium. For n-type materials, which have a negative charge, they contain 
pentavalent impurities or acceptors, such as arsenic, phosphorus, and antimony. Various solid-state 
semiconductors can be created by connecting an n-zone material to a p-zone material, a configu­
ration known as p-n junctions. P-N junctions can be found in different semiconductor devices, 
including junction field-effect transistors (JFETs), bipolar junction transistors (BJTs), and diodes. 
The difference between p-type and n-type materials is illustrated in Figure 23.1 [1], providing a 
fundamental understanding of semiconductors. In this chapter, we will describe the applications of 
semiconductor materials in the field of energy based on current research.
23.2  ELECTRICAL POWER GENERATION
The basic device that can be created by the p-n junction is called a diode. Within the p-n junction, 
there is a region where the p and n materials meet, and this region lacks electrons and electron holes. 
This area is referred to as the depletion region, as depicted in Figure 23.2 [1].
As a result, the p and n materials should adjust their energy levels at the p-n junction 
(Figure 23.3) [1].
Diodes are known as the simplest p-n junctions. They permit current to flow easily in one direc­
tion but prevent current flow in the opposite direction [1]. The behavior of the p-n junction can be 
quantify by using Shockey equation as:
	
(
1)
=
−
I
I e
s
V q
nkT
D
	
(23.1)
where I is a diode current, Is reverse saturation current, VD voltage (across the diode), q charge of 
electron, (1.6
10
),
19
×
−
 n is quality factor (between 1-2), k Boltzmann constant, and T is temperature 
23

302
Handbook of Semiconductors
[1]. The orientation of a p-n junction can occur in only two ways based on the voltage source. The 
first way is called forward bias, in which electrons are transferred from the negative terminal of the 
battery into the n-type material. When they enter the depletion region, the supplied potential must 
be high enough to facilitate the diffusion of electrons into the p-type material. Finally, they move 
to the positive terminal of the battery from the p-type material. The second way is called reverse 
bias. In reverse bias, the voltage source is reversed, resulting in a change in the behavior of the p-n 
junction. Different types of diodes can be observed in Figure 23.4 [1].
The behavior of Zener diodes is similar to that of ordinary diodes when they are forward-biased. 
However, Zener diodes are typically used in a reverse-bias situation. The advantage of these diodes 
is to provide stable voltage to prevent breakdown. Another type of diode is called a light-emitting 
diode (LED), which can produce light based on the received electrical input. This is quite different 
from photodiodes, as exposure to light can generate a current in photodiodes. However, both types of 
these devices can operate in the visible spectrum of humans but can also be used outside this range 
in ultraviolet (UV) and infrared (IR). Filament-based light sources have been replaced by LEDs in 
various applications due to their high efficiency, physical robustness, availability in different colors, 
and small size. The design of energy transition in LEDs is intended to emit radiation at short wave­
lengths, and the color of the LED depends on the materials used and the voltage drop. The operation 
of photodiodes can be divided into two modes: photovoltaic and photoconductive. In the photovoltaic 
mode, the photodiode acts as a source of voltage, and this mode is used in solar cells. In the second 
mode, which is the photoconductive mode, the photodiode acts like a current source. Next is the 
FIGURE 23.2  The schematic of the p-n junction and depletion region. (Adapted with permission [1], 
Copyright (2022), Springer.)
FIGURE 23.1  The difference between the p-type and n-type materials. (Adapted with permission [2], 
Copyright [2023], Elsevier.)

303
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
Schottky diode, which relies on semiconductor-to-metal contact, unlike traditional diodes. It offers 
two advantages compared to traditional diodes: fast switching times and low turn-on voltages.
Finally, there’s the Varactor diode, a special diode used for controlling capacitance. Next, the 
conversion mechanism of sunlight into electricity is explained. In photovoltaic systems, the elec­
tric potential between two materials is harnessed by exposing a proton to the electron-hole pair. 
This technology in solar cells involves the use of p-n junctions. In both cases, the main goal is to 
collect the charge carriers as electric current [3]. Cadmium sulfide (CdS) is one of the most impor­
tant common materials in the application of solar cells. CdS nanowires are formed on gold-coated 
substrates through the thermal decomposition of Cd(S2CNProp2)2 and Cd(S2CNEt2)2 in a chemical 
vapor deposition (CVD) process at low pressure [4, 5]. Tin oxide is also another important material 
in the application of solar cells. Tin oxide is an n-type semiconductor and has been used in solar 
cell application by many researchers [3]. In addition to these materials, researchers have developed 
tandem axial silicon nanowires for photovoltaic applications. The voltage values of p-i-n axial and 
radial structures are similar to each other, even though their junction geometries are different. This 
surprising comparison exists between coaxial and p-i-n axial silicon nanowires. The Fermi level in 
silicon nanowires is equal to the electrochemical potential of the redox pair, causing a bending of the 
FIGURE 23.3  The energy bonds of p-n junction. (Adapted with permission from Reference [1], Copyright 
(2022), Springer.)
FIGURE 23.4  Different types of diodes. (Adapted with permission from Reference [1], Copyright (2022), 
Springer.)

304
Handbook of Semiconductors
energy bands and creating an imbalanced charge region where the segregation of photogenerated 
holes and electrons occurs [6].
23.3  ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEMS
Supercapacitors, like batteries, are well-known electrochemical energy storage devices. This tech­
nology typically stores electrical energy, which is gathered from the movement of electrons within 
conductive materials such as gold, copper, aluminum, etc., and converts it from its chemical form 
into energy when needed. Since the late 1800s, the storage of electrical energy at the interface 
between an electrolyte and a solid has been known. This phenomenon is known as an electrical 
double layer. In the 1950s, the development of supercapacitors (SCs) began, and Standard Oil of 
Ohio was reported to have invented the first electronic device that used double layer charge storage 
in 1966. The company patented it in 1971 [7]. In electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs), no 
reduction-oxidation reaction is required; in other words, no substances gain or lose electrons. 
Energy is stored in such a manner that charge storage is achieved through the dissociation (the 
breaking of molecules or compounds into smaller pieces such as ions and atoms) and adsorption 
(the transfer of molecules from a fluid bulk to a solid surface) of the electrolyte ions on the surface 
of the metal-based electrode materials. Because of this characteristic, EDLCs exhibit very good 
resilience and cycling performance over millions of cycles. To achieve the high capacitance required 
for EDLCs, the electrode surface area and the thickness of the Helmholtz layer (double layer) are 
significant determining factors. Porous carbon materials, due to their large surface area, are often 
used as electrode materials for ion adsorption. Using the model of double-layer capacitance, it can 
be concluded that when polarization affects the interface between the electrode and electrolyte, the 
division of charges is observed [8]. In addition to the use of semiconductors in these devices, 
researchers have investigated various materials for semiconductors in energy storage applications. 
Silicon carbide (SiC) is one of the most well-known semiconductor materials and a primary silicon 
compound. This material has a highly adjustable and wide bandgap, very high electron mobility, 
and stable chemical properties, which has led to significant interest among researchers [9]. Silicon-
based SCs have a very high energy density. Not only that, but they are also known to be very prom­
ising energy storage devices because they are compatible with modern devices [10]. Since the 
semiconductor properties are very compatible and the technology to process silicon has advanced, 
not only do the SiC-based electrodes benefit, but the method for preparation of high-performance 
silicon carbide-based electrodes resembles that of only silicon-based electrodes. Additionally, sili­
con itself is very reactive compared to SiC, which doesn’t react with other chemicals as much, so 
using SiC in capacitors is a better option because it has benefits such as working very well in a broad 
range of temperatures. SiC is known to have many different structures, high compatibility, which 
makes it easier to work with other chemicals, and a relatively large surface area. Due to these char­
acteristics, when SiC is in different shapes, it becomes very good for making electrodes in devices, 
batteries, and catalysts [11]. To ensure that SiC performs at its best, extensive research has been 
conducted, and many researchers are enthusiastic about its utilization. This text briefly discusses 
the research that has been conducted and the applications of SiC as electrodes in supercapacitors. 
John P. Alper and his colleagues utilized CVD, a technique that others also employ, to grow SiC 
nanowire (3C-SiC) films doped with nitrogen. These small wires, which are excellent for storing 
electrical energy, exhibited a capacitance of 240 mFcm−2. Furthermore, when these wires were 
submerged in water, they could be used as components in a supercapacitor. Despite being used 
approximately 20,000 times, they retained 95% of their performance. However, it was discovered 
that if these wires were used to store and release electricity at rates exceeding 200 millivolts per 
second, the wires began to resist the flow of electricity, resulting in reduced performance. 
Researchers are currently seeking solutions to this issue and believe that improving the connection 
between these tiny wires and their substrate will enhance performance when used at high speeds 
[12]. Utilizing a unique method that involves a chemical process and low temperature to carve out 

305
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
these tiny wires, Roya and her team also produced SiC nanowires. When these nanowires, which 
are highly stretched and thin structures with nanoscale diameters, undergo passivation to reduce 
their reactivity and enhance their stability, their capacitance value reaches 1.7 mFcm−2. This can be 
compared to electrode materials composed of carbon-based materials in micro-supercapacitor elec­
trodes. Furthermore, they maintain a retention rate of 95% or higher after undergoing 1000 charge/
discharge cycles. Moreover, these created wires can connect with the surface beneath them through 
physical contact, eliminating the need for additional components to collect electricity. This is 
another reason why SiC is highly suitable for manufacturing energy storage devices. Carbides serve 
as a base upon which electrodes can grow and reform. This uniqueness lies in the fact that nothing 
is required to hold the electrode together and keep it intact. Additionally, SiC is an excellent con­
ductor of electricity [13]. Carbon fiber fabrics have a surface capacitance of 23 mFcm−2, on which 
Gu and the rest of the researchers fabricated the SiC nanowires. The capacitance did not increase 
significantly even after about 100,000 cycles were conducted at room temperature. The SiC nanow­
ires exhibit excellent thermal stability, as evidenced by the fact that even when the experiment was 
conducted at approximately 60°C, both the carbon fabric bases and the shape of the SiC nanowires 
remained largely unchanged [14]. Chen and his team produced thin layers of 3C-SiC nanowire films 
on special graphite-based paper using an extraordinary method that reduces specific materials. 
These wires are not only very thin and long but also braided together to form a net-like structure. 
This structure is highly advantageous in applications such as batteries due to its large surface area. 
The optimal capacitance is 25.6 mFcm−2, and as a result, even after 2000 cycles, it maintains 100% 
capacity retention [15]. By altering the ratio of silicon and SiO2, commonly known as silica, Liang 
and other researchers employed a catalyst CVD-free method to produce a large quantity of SiC 
nanowires with various shapes, structures, and sizes on carbon fiber fabrics. This particular mate­
rial can hold a substantial amount of electrical energy, approximately 46.7 mFcm−2, on its surface. 
Even the best carbon-based supercapacitor electrodes cannot match this capacity. Remarkably, even 
after more than 1000 uses, the material continues to function exceptionally well and does not lose 
its ability to store energy. Therefore, to maintain its long-term performance, using SiC nanowires 
on carbon fiber fabrics is an excellent choice [16]. Furthermore, a team of researchers led by Sanger 
closely examined how well SiC nanocauliflower, a tiny structure, functions as a material for elec­
trodes in supercapacitors. They utilized a unique technique called DC magnetron co-sputtering to 
deposit SiC nanocrystals onto a surface composed of porous alumina and covered with silver. As a 
result of this process, the SiC nanocrystals were capable of holding up to 300 Fg−1. The supercapaci­
tor they created is an excellent device for storing electrical charges, with a capacity of up to 188 
Fg−1. Remarkably, even after approximately 30,000 cycles of use, the supercapacitor still retains 
slightly more than 97% of its performance, demonstrating its durability [17]. SiC nanocrystal based 
devices exhibit excellent electrochemical performance and effectiveness, making them highly 
promising for energy storage applications as supercapacitor electrodes. The studies mentioned 
above have revealed that to achieve a high surface capacitance of 46.7 mFcm−2, these silicon elec­
trodes need to be constructed and produced on carbon cloth. However, directly integrating these 
carbon-based electrodes with current silicon-based electronic components, such as transistors and 
computer chips, can be quite challenging. This could lead to unsatisfactory results, as observed in 
attempts to use nanocrystalline SiC films, which achieved a lower surface capacitance of 0.07 
mFcm−2 on the silicon electrodes compared to SiC films [16]. The capacitive performance of the 
SiC electrode can be further enhanced by increasing the electrode’s surface area. Liu and his col­
leagues employed a very special process known as laser chemical vapor deposition, which created 
highly precise patterns of graphene mixed with SiC on flat silicon surfaces and very small silicon 
wires. These patterns exhibited a very strong crystal structure. The graphene mixed with SiC and 
silicon nanowire nanomatrix can also store a significant amount of electric charge on its surface, 
approximately 3.2 mFcm−2. Furthermore, its charge storage capacity improved even further after 
10,000 cycles of use, increasing to 115%. This demonstrates its long-term stability and effectiveness 
[18]. In summary, supercapacitors are vital in electrochemical energy storage, and SiC-based 

306
Handbook of Semiconductors
electrodes show great promise in advancing the performance and applicability of these energy stor­
age devices. Researchers continue to explore methods to optimize SiC electrodes for various appli­
cations, contributing to the development of efficient and durable energy storage solutions.
23.4  ELECTRONIC AND OPTOELECTRICAL DEVICES
The use of 2D materials has emerged as a highly promising choice for channel materials in transis­
tors. Additionally, the short conduction channels in 2D semiconductors result from their natural 
atomic thickness, leading to rapid switching performance, while their good flexibility ensures suit­
ability for wearable devices. Although many researchers have made significant efforts to develop 
transistors based on 2D materials for electronic applications, it remains challenging to bridge the 
gaps between theoretical and practical considerations. For instance, the theoretical room tempera­
ture electron mobility of MoS2 as a 2D semiconductor exceeds 400 cm2V−1s−1, while experimen­
tally it is below 200 cm2V−1s−1 [19]. By using a technique called the real-space projector-augmented 
wave (PAW), the calculations were simplified. By doing this, the size of the hexagonal unit that’s 
making up the material was found to be 3.14 Å. Also, to confirm that the layers did not meddle 
with each other during the computer simulation, a large distance of 10 Å was kept between them. 
Moreover, another unique method, which involves a 11 × 11 K-point sampling of the Brillouin 
zone, was used in order to map and plot the material’s properties. The size of the band gaps is very 
important in semiconductors, but typically the density functional theory within the local density 
approximation (DFT-LDA) downplays it. Even though it downplays the size, it still gives a very 
accurate description of, for example, the scattering of individual bands, the effective masses, and 
the differences in energy between valleys. It is good to know that the lowest point in the conduc­
tion band is actually along the way between the K points in the Brillouin zone and not the K or 
K’ points. This is suggested by the most up-to-date calculations using a technique called GW 
quasiparticle calculations. The reason for this method is because it is better at explaining band 
structures in semiconductors. In Figure 23.5, you can see the results of our calculations with DFT-
LDA. These results indicate that the material has a direct gap, which means that it requires 1.8 eV 
of energy to move an electron from one state to another at a specific point called the K point. The 
FIGURE 23.5  Band structure of single-layer MoS2. The conduction band valley at The K point, within the 
energy range pertinent to low-field mobility, is accurately represented by a parabolic band (indicated by the 
dashed line) with an effective mass of 0.48 times the electron rest mass (me). (Adapted with permission [19], 
Copyright (2012), Arxiv.)

307
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
small picture in the graph shows a close look of the conduction band, the bottom part of the energy 
levels, along the Γ-K-M path [19].
The conduction band looks like a perfect curve, almost like a parabola in the K valley. Although 
there’s a point of about 200 milli-electron volts (meV) between the and the K points, it is not rel­
evant for the behavior of the material when applying a low-electric field. On the right side in Figure 
23.6, there’s a plot that displays the lowest part of the conduction band’s shape in the 2D Brillouin 
zone. In this zone, the K and K’ valleys can be found, and they are filled with electrons in n-type 
MoS2. They can be located at the corner of the hexagonal region of the zone. These parts of the 
band consist of specific natures which are parabolic and isotropic. So therefore, if an interest takes 
place in the movement of electrons in a low-electric field, by describing these parts of the band thor­
oughly while thinking of them as simple parabolic shapes, one could achieve their answer, and also 
by using 
h k
m
k
2
2 2
*
ε
=
, with an electron mass (m*) of 0.48 me, and k being measured with respect to the 
points K and K’ in the Brillouin zone. The carriers with their 2D nature have a consistent measure 
of the number of states they can occupy, which is revealed as 
.
0
0
ρ
ρ  is decided by two factors, one 
being the spin of the particles, which gs is 2, and the other being the K, K’–valley degeneracy, gv = 2. 
The overall formula is given by 
g g m
h
s v
0
2
*
2
ρ =
π
 [19].
Here are many states that are available, which emerge from the conduction band’s mass in the 
K and K’ valleys. These masses are very effective, and they cause distribution of carriers which do 
not overlap. This takes place only if the density of the carrier is not extremely high. In a single layer 
of MoS2, three phonon branches are associated with the physical movement of the material. These 
are the acoustic branches. Another six branches are associated with its optical properties. These are 
the optimal branches. Together, nine branches can occur. Between the three acoustic branches, the 
behavior of the branch that involves out-of-plane flexural motion is in such a way that the frequency 
is raised quadratically as q, which is the size of the vibration, approaches zero. As for the remain­
ing two acoustic branches, also known as transverse acoustic (TA) and longitudinal acoustic (LA), 
they have a frequency that is dependent on the speed of the vibrations inside the material (Cλ), also 
known as the in-plane sound velocity. The equation 
 
ω
=
λ
λ
C q
q
explains this. In this case, Cλ is 6.5 × 
103 m/s for the LA and 4.4 × 103 m/s for the TA. There is a gap in the vibrations, which completely 
separates the optical and acoustic branches, even at visually similar points at the zone boundary. 
The two lowest optical branches are unique and do not significantly interact with electric charges. 
Consequently, they are not relevant for this study. The transverse optical (TO) and longitudinal opti­
cal (LO) branches that follow have an energy level of 48 meV. In these two branches, the atoms of 
FIGURE 23.6  The atomic arrangement and conduction band characteristics of a single-layer MoS2. On 
the left, you can see the primitive unit cell and the arrangement of molybdenum and sulfur atoms in shifted 
hexagonal layers. On the right, there’s a contour plot illustrating the conduction band’s lowest-lying valleys, 
as computed using DFT-LDA within the hexagonal Brillouin zone of single-layer MoS2. In the case of n-type 
MoS2, the low-field mobility is influenced by the properties of carriers within the K and K’ valleys, which are 
energetically distinct from the secondary valleys inside the Brillouin zone. (Adapted with permission [19], 
Copyright [2012], Arxiv.)

308
Handbook of Semiconductors
sulfur (S) and molybdenum (Mo) move in opposite directions. In materials exhibiting observable 
polarization, the LO-TO splitting between these two modes occurs due to an interaction between the 
polarization and the atomic structure resulting from vibrations, particularly when considering super 
long-wavelength vibrations. A comprehensive understanding of Born effective charges is crucial to 
explain this phenomenon based on fundamental principles [19, 20]. Nonetheless, there is no regu­
lar pattern in the 2D materials in the vertical direction through the layers. As a result, the LO-TO 
splitting effect is not observable. Therefore, for the purposes of this study, the interaction with the 
extensive polarization caused by the LO mode will not be considered. The almost flat phonon at 
around 50 meV is referred to as the homopolar mode. It is commonly found in layered materials. 
In the homopolar mode, the thickness of the layers changes due to vibration. Unlike the Mo layer, 
which remains stationary, the sulfur layers move in opposite directions. This vibration results in a 
change in the potential energy (PE) stored in the material and has been shown to cause significant 
deformation in bulk MoS2 [21]. The quality of a metal-semiconductor junction is assessed by the 
Schottky barrier height (SBH), where the energy barrier is higher when the SBH is higher. The SBH 
is described as the energy difference between the semiconductor’s band edge and the metal’s work 
function, a concept known as the Schottky-Mott rule. This implies that altering the contact can be 
achieved by using different metals with an appropriate work function. However, the selection of a 
different metal for a typical top contact may have a limited impact due to an unavoidable Fermi-
level pinning effect (FLPE). This phenomenon can be attributed to the poor interface states between 
the semiconductor and the metal electrode [22].
23.5  SENSORS
While sensors are not typically categorized as energy devices, they have the capability to directly 
measure important parameters of energy devices. Furthermore, they can be used in various other 
applications. For example, at the center of the nervous system, the human brain constantly receives 
external information, processes it, and initiates body movements, whether they are chemically or 
physically based [23]. We can’t naturally sense UV rays and ultrasound, which are pieces of infor­
mation in our environment. Therefore, special tools such as sensors and detectors have been created 
to help us better understand our surroundings in a more precise way. This section focuses on semi­
conducting polymers, which are a unique type of material used in devices for sensing. It explores 
objects like humidity sensors, photoelectric detectors (PDs), and gas sensors, which can help gather 
important information to ensure the safety and comfort of our living spaces. Visible light is the 
portion of the light spectrum that is visible to the human eye. It constitutes only a small fraction 
(0.036%) of the entire range of light wavelengths, which extends from 10 to 106 nm. Photoelectric 
Detection refers to unique devices that function somewhat like human eyes but for electronics. 
These are small instruments made of semiconductor materials capable of detecting light through 
the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect occurs when light excites electrons, generating 
an electric signal [24]. PDs are used in many fields such as environmental monitoring, aerospace, 
health care, information technology, and industrial manufacturing [25]. Gas sensors detect gases 
that include explosive and toxic analytes, monitor air quality, and oversee the operation of indus­
trial processes. These factors underscore the importance of gas sensors in human society [26]. 
Chemiresistor sensors are straightforward to operate, cost-effective, easy to produce, and compact. 
The majority of fiber-based gas sensors fall into this category. In a gas sensor, the active sensing 
layer exhibits high sensitivity to the gas molecules in its vicinity. Changes in conductivity occur 
when certain semiconductor polymers undergo reversible reactions with the gas molecules [27]. 
This makes them perfect candidates for use as active layers in gas sensors. Specifically, polyaniline 
(PANI) can transition among three different states of oxidation in various chemical vapors: partially 
oxidized emeraldine form, fully reduced leucoemeraldine form, and fully oxidized pernigraniline 
form [28]. Many harmful chemical acids can lead to the protonation of the PANI structure (adding a 
proton to a molecule to form a conjugate acid), which enhances its ability to conduct electricity. On 

309
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
the other hand, NH3, which is an alkaline gas, or amines that are organic in nature, can facilitate and 
accelerate the process of removing protons from PANI, known as deprotonation, thereby reducing 
its conductivity [29]. Furthermore, chemicals like C12, N2H4, NOx, SOx, and F2, which can readily 
exchange electrons with PANI, have the ability to alter the charge of PANI. This results in signifi­
cant changes in how effectively PANI can conduct electricity [30]. When humidity levels change, 
certain semiconducting polymers exhibit variations in their electrical conductivity. This property 
makes them suitable for use as specialized layers in humidity-detecting sensors. The operation of 
these humidity sensors depends on the interaction between water molecules and the active layers, 
as well as physical adsorption and minor chemical interactions in real-time humidity monitoring 
systems [31]. Therefore, active materials need to interact with and attract water so that the sensors 
work well [32]. Initially, water molecules on the outermost layer adhere to these active materials by 
forming chemical bonds. As air humidity increases, the heightened moisture causes additional lay­
ers of water molecules to adhere to the sensitive layer through physical attraction [33]. In summary, 
while sensors are not typically considered energy devices, they play a crucial role in measuring key 
parameters of energy devices and finding applications in various other fields. They enhance our 
understanding of the environment and enable precise monitoring. Semiconducting polymers, such 
as PANI, are valuable materials in sensors, including humidity sensors, PDs, and gas sensors. These 
sensors detect and respond to changes in environmental factors, from light to gas concentrations and 
humidity levels. The conductivity of these polymers can be modified by various chemical interac­
tions, making them versatile components in sensor technology. This understanding of how sensors 
operate and interact with their surroundings is essential for developing effective energy devices and 
improving our overall quality of life.
23.6  INTERNET OF THINGS APPLICATIONS
With the advancement of information technology, people have found themselves increasingly 
immersed in the world of computers, the internet, and other digital technologies driven by algo­
rithms and data. These technologies heavily rely on the logical operations of hardware. Just as 
humans have a natural inclination to understand things, they also seek to connect and interact with 
digital worlds and information in a way that feels intuitive and comprehensible. Textiles serve as 
a link between people and the world around them. It’s more accurate to describe them as a bridge 
that endures, provides comfort, and offers flexibility [34]. Furthermore, these smart textiles can 
be employed for information sharing, representing a novel, innovative, and resourceful concept. 
These distinctive textiles, often referred to as the “second layer” of human skin, possess the ability 
to mimic an integral part of the human body, comprehending and responding to the needs of both 
the body and its surrounding environment [34]. Interactive interfaces work like magic. They are 
capable of performing various tasks, including comprehending signals, translating them into com­
puter language, processing real-time information, retaining that information, providing feedback, 
and ultimately facilitating our interaction with others [35]. In this section, we discuss four things 
that these unique fibers can do with information. They can compute, communicate, sense, and dis­
play. Semiconducting polymers are the special materials that make up these unique fibers. These 
textiles and smart fibers produce a vast amount of data very quickly because, as their name sug­
gests, they are very smart and can rapidly detect changes in the surrounding environment and our 
body [36]. Forwarding signals to another computer and then receiving the processed information 
can be very frustrating and complex. There are many challenges to address, such as the accuracy 
and sensitivity of the signals, the speed at which computers perform calculations, and the amount 
of bandwidth available for data transmission. When fabrics and textiles are capable of processing 
information like computers, they can rapidly process information in real-time. By integrating small 
computers into these e-textiles, the need for physical connections and one-way data transfers will 
no longer be necessary. This creates new possibilities for using textiles to perform a wide range of 
tasks and communicate with the world in entirely new ways [37]. While there is a fantastic way to 

310
Handbook of Semiconductors
connect machines and humans using extended reality technology, incorporating small electronic 
components like transistors and memristors into these fabrics could enhance creativity, expand 
imagination, and foster the generation of new ideas [38]. “By integrating fiber electronics into tex­
tiles, we can create wearable sensors, displays, and various other electronic components, offering 
enhanced functionality while maintaining comfort and versatility.” In conclusion, the integration 
of smart textiles and advanced materials into our daily lives has the potential to revolutionize how 
we interact with the digital world. These textiles, often referred to as the “second layer” of human 
skin, have the remarkable capability to compute, communicate, sense, and display information, 
making them versatile tools for various applications. By processing information like computers, 
these textiles can rapidly respond to changes in our environment and body, eliminating the need 
for complex data-forwarding processes. While the primary focus of these innovations has been 
on enhancing human-machine interactions and creativity, they also have significant implications 
for energy devices. The ability to incorporate small electronic components into textiles creates 
new possibilities for energy-efficient wearable technologies, energy harvesting from clothing, and 
improved interfaces for controlling energy devices. These developments not only provide comfort 
and flexibility but also contribute to the advancement of energy-related applications, bridging the 
gap between smart textiles and the world of energy devices.
23.7  MEDICINE AND BIOLOGICAL SYSTEMS
In recent years, there has been a growing demand for medical gadgets that can be worn seamlessly 
in everyday routines. These medical devices offer immediate, personalized healthcare solutions that 
are cost-effective and provide real-time advice for maintaining a healthy life. To fulfill this crucial 
role, textiles have emerged as the preferred choice. Thanks to advancements in organic electron­
ics, smart textiles can now collect valuable information. This information can be used to monitor 
various aspects such as calories burned, posture, sleep quality, stress levels, and cognitive abilities 
related to thinking, understanding, and learning. Subsequently, this data is transmitted back to 
individuals through their clothing, assisting them in maintaining overall health, well-being, and 
even preventing diseases [39]. Semiconducting polymer-based wearable devices possess a unique 
ability that sets them apart. They are capable of performing electrophysiological sensing and photo­
detection in a manner that is compatible with living organisms. Furthermore, they can easily detect 
physiological and chemical changes, which can be quite challenging when using inorganic semi­
conductors and metals. In this section, we explore how semiconducting polymer-based textiles and 
fibers are utilized to detect health-related information and aid in medical recovery through wear­
able technologies. Biopotentials, which refer to the electrical signals in the human body generated 
by chemical processes at the cellular level, are characterized by their low voltage. The examination 
and study of these biopotentials are of utmost importance for biological research and biomedical 
monitoring [40]. An example would be an electromyogram (EMG), which measures muscle activ­
ity, and an electrocardiogram (ECG), which records the heart’s electrical activity. Both are com­
monly used to detect issues with the heart’s rhythm and muscle problems [41]. Electrocorticography 
(ECoG) and the electroencephalogram (EEG) are also unique electrical signals in the body. These 
signals are used to create brain-computer interfaces, which are technologies that enable communi­
cation between external devices and the brain. They spread across the skin, since the body conducts 
the signals, allowing them to be recorded [42]. The complicated link between the neurons that form 
brain networks (nervous system), is responsible for how humans move, act, and see things [43]. 
To create computers that can match the speed of the human brain, it’s essential to continuously 
adjust and monitor the brain signals produced. By doing so, we can gain a better understanding 
of the brain and develop computers that function similarly to the human brain [44]. Furthermore, 
it is believed that understanding and collecting signals from both the inner and outer parts of the 
brain can be beneficial in addressing certain diseases, including Parkinson’s disease, paralysis, 
and muscle stiffness [45]. Therefore, clear and detailed methods are necessary to accurately cap­
ture signals in terms of both time and location. In other words, advanced electrodes are required 

311
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
[46]. In summary, recent years have witnessed a growing demand for wearable medical devices 
that seamlessly integrate into daily life, providing cost-effective, personalized healthcare solutions 
with real-time advice. Textiles have emerged as a preferred platform for these devices, enabled by 
advancements in organic electronics. Smart textiles can now gather valuable health-related data, 
including metrics like calories burned, posture, sleep quality, stress levels, and cognitive abilities. 
This data is transmitted through clothing, assisting individuals in maintaining overall health and 
preventing diseases. Semiconducting polymer-based wearable devices possess unique capabilities, 
excelling in electrophysiological sensing and photodetection compatible with living organisms. 
They outperform inorganic counterparts in detecting physiological and chemical changes. These 
innovations in wearable technology and advanced sensors hold promise for energy devices. By 
integrating health and activity data, energy devices can adapt and optimize energy consumption 
patterns. This can lead to more efficient and personalized energy management, contributing to a 
sustainable and efficient energy ecosystem.
23.8  ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION
Recently, the world population has been growing very rapidly, and industries have experienced sig­
nificant development, resulting in environmental pollution and an energy crisis. This has not only 
impacted human health, potentially putting it in jeopardy, but has also raised concerns about the 
sustainability of the environment. Consequently, people have shifted their focus towards invent­
ing technologies aimed at removing pollutants and protecting the environment. Fujishima and his 
team were the first to introduce the concept of heterogeneous photocatalysis [47]. It was intro­
duced in 1972 when utilizing a photoelectrochemical cell with a single crystal TiO2 electrode 
to attempt to split water (H2O). Heterogeneous photocatalysis is an advanced oxidation process 
(AOP) and has gradually laid the foundation for environmental remediation [48]. There are several 
advantages to heterogeneous photocatalytic reactions. Firstly, they utilize sustainable sunlight. 
Secondly, they operate under less harsh conditions compared to older methods such as membrane 
separation, adsorption, bioprocesses, and chemical sedimentation. Lastly, they are highly efficient 
and require minimal energy. To protect the environment and conserve energy, it is essential to 
use solar energy for pollutant remediation. Due to these advantages, numerous studies on photo­
catalytic pollutant treatment have been conducted, with many research papers published on this 
topic in the last 20 years. For instance, in 2020 alone, over 9000 papers on photocatalytic pollut­
ant degradation were published. It’s worth noting that in addition to treating pollutants in water, 
photocatalysis also addresses pollutants in the atmosphere and soil. These pollutants encompass 
heavy metals, plastic waste, NOx, persistent organic pollutants (POPs), sulfur-containing fossil 
fuels, and harmful bacteria. In recent years, researchers have developed various semiconductors, 
including silver-based or bismuth-based semiconductors, metal oxide semiconductors, metal-free 
semiconductors, semiconductors made from metal sulfides, unique polymers, and metal-organic 
frameworks (MOFs). These materials are specifically designed to target different types of envi­
ronmental pollution. Researchers have also explored ways to enhance the performance of these 
materials, such as repairing defects, creating heterojunction systems, and incorporating specific 
substances. Furthermore, researchers have proposed the use of environmental photocatalysis as a 
process to remediate a wide range of pollutants [49]. However, several challenges hinder the wide­
spread environmental application of this technology. These challenges include inefficient utiliza­
tion of solar energy, semiconductor costs, and rapid energy loss in photogenerated electron-hole 
pairs (e–h+). The thermodynamics and kinetics of photocatalysis remain insufficiently understood, 
a topic often overlooked in previous reviews. Therefore, it is crucial to explore ways to enhance 
semiconductor materials for environmental remediation, focusing on changing the materials in 
use. The review begins by discussing the fundamentals of environmental photocatalysis, including 
its underlying principles, operational mechanisms, associated challenges, and the role of reac­
tive oxidation species (ROS). It further examines various semiconductor materials and techniques 
that can enhance their effectiveness in environmental cleanup. Ultimately, the review proposes 

312
Handbook of Semiconductors
different perspectives and ideas for improving the utilization of these heterogeneous photocata­
lysts for environmental purposes, with the hope of providing valuable guidance. It’s important to 
note that the efficiency of photocatalysts can be influenced by various factors beyond the migration 
of electrons and holes (e–h+). These factors include the reactivity of ROS, the specific environmen­
tal conditions, the dimensional structures and shapes of the semiconductors used, the migration 
of other carriers and electrons, the band gap structure, and different kinetic and thermodynamic 
processes [50]. Environmental pollutants are typically classified into two main groups. The first 
group comprises pollutants found in water, such as heavy metals, persistent organic pollutants, dis­
ease-causing microorganisms, and fossil fuels containing sulfur. The second group consists of pol­
lutants found in the air, including sulfur dioxide, nitrogen oxides, ammonia, and volatile organic 
compounds. However, disease-causing microorganisms can also be present in various locations, 
such as laboratory surfaces and operating tables. In addition to these categories, the most common 
type of solid waste, namely plastic waste, contains microplastics that are often found in bodies of 
water and the natural environment. These microplastics can be considered a distinct type of pollut­
ant. Consequently, scientists are actively researching ways to efficiently utilize heterogeneous pho­
tocatalysis to address pollution-related issues [51]. A lot of research has been conducted in recent 
decades to explore eco-friendly techniques for removing natural pollutants. One promising method 
is heterogeneous photocatalysis, which has the potential to harness a significant amount of solar 
energy. This method relies on photocatalytic reactions triggered by light to break down and remove 
various pollutants found in nature, including toxic substances, harmful gases, and heavy metals. 
What’s particularly intriguing is that the photocatalysis process can occur in both gases and liq­
uids, making environmental cleanup more straightforward with semiconductor-based technology 
[52]. The recent growth in global population and industrial development has led to environmen­
tal pollution and an energy crisis, raising concerns about both human health and environmental 
sustainability. In response, innovative technologies like heterogeneous photocatalysis have been 
developed to address these challenges. Heterogeneous photocatalysis, introduced by Fujishima and 
his team in 1972, harnesses solar energy for environmental remediation. This technology offers 
several advantages, such as utilizing sustainable sunlight, operating under less harsh conditions 
compared to older methods, and being highly efficient while conserving energy. It has been exten­
sively studied, with thousands of research papers published in recent years, highlighting its poten­
tial for addressing various pollutants in water, air, and soil. Researchers have developed a range 
of semiconductor materials tailored to specific environmental pollution challenges, and strategies 
for enhancing their performance have been explored. However, challenges remain, including inef­
ficient solar energy utilization, semiconductor costs, and rapid energy loss in photocatalytic reac­
tions. The understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics of photocatalysis is still evolving. To 
overcome these challenges and advance the application of photocatalysis, changing the materials 
used is a key focus. Environmental pollutants are typically categorized into waterborne and air­
borne pollutants, including heavy metals, organic pollutants, microorganisms, and plastic waste. 
Heterogeneous photocatalysis offers promise for addressing these pollutants efficiently, breaking 
them down through photocatalytic reactions triggered by light. This versatile technology can be 
applied in both gas and liquid phases, simplifying environmental cleanup efforts. In summary, 
heterogeneous photocatalysis represents a promising solution to environmental pollution and sus­
tainability challenges. By harnessing solar energy and utilizing semiconductor materials, it offers 
a path toward a cleaner and more sustainable future, aligning with the broader goals of energy 
device development and environmental protection.
23.9  CONCLUSION
In summary, the influence of semiconductor materials and associated technologies reaches far and 
wide, touching upon numerous critical fields and sectors. Their impact can be observed across 
energy storage, electronic devices, sensors, Internet of Things (IoT) applications, medicine and 

313
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices
biology, and environmental remediation, heralding a new era of possibilities and improvements. 
Starting with energy storage, semiconductor materials have revolutionized this sector by enhanc­
ing the efficiency and performance of energy storage systems. Lithium-ion batteries, for example, 
have benefited immensely from advances in semiconductor technology, resulting in longer-lasting, 
more reliable power sources. This has not only improved the reliability of portable electronic 
devices but also has significant implications for the adoption of renewable energy sources, contrib­
uting to a more sustainable energy landscape. In the realm of electronic devices, semiconductor 
materials have been instrumental in miniaturization, allowing for the creation of smaller, more 
powerful, and energy-efficient electronic components. This has led to the proliferation of smart­
phones, tablets, and other compact devices that have become an integral part of our daily lives. 
Semiconductor advancements continue to drive innovation in this space, promising even more 
compact and efficient electronics in the future. Sensors, a crucial component of IoT applications, 
have also benefited from semiconductor materials. These materials have enabled the development 
of highly sensitive and responsive sensors, facilitating the seamless connection of devices and 
data sharing in IoT ecosystems. This, in turn, has led to smart homes, cities, and industries, with 
applications ranging from remote monitoring of health conditions to optimizing energy consump­
tion. In the field of medicine and biology, semiconductor materials have played a pivotal role 
in the development of cutting-edge diagnostic and therapeutic tools. From semiconductor-based 
imaging technologies like MRI and CT scans to the miniaturization of medical devices for remote 
patient monitoring, these materials have improved healthcare outcomes and patient experiences. 
Additionally, advancements in semiconductor-based lab-on-a-chip technologies have accelerated 
research in genomics, proteomics, and drug discovery, offering new avenues for understanding and 
treating diseases. Environmental remediation has also benefited from semiconductor materials. 
These materials have been harnessed to create efficient and cost-effective solutions for purifying 
water, air, and soil. Semiconductor-based photocatalysis, for instance, can break down pollutants 
and contaminants, contributing to cleaner and healthier environments. As we look to the future, 
the relentless pursuit of semiconductor technology advancement promises to bring even more 
transformative innovations. These innovations will address the challenges of our rapidly evolv­
ing world, from powering electric vehicles with longer-lasting batteries to creating wearables that 
monitor health in real-time. Furthermore, semiconductor materials will continue to contribute to 
a brighter and more sustainable future by enabling renewable energy solutions, improving health­
care outcomes, and protecting our environment. Their pervasive influence across various sectors 
underscores their importance in shaping the modern world and driving progress toward a more 
technologically advanced and sustainable global society.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 V. K. Jain, Semiconductor Devices, in Solid State Physics, Springer International Publishing, 2022: pp. 
505–533. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-96017-9_17.
	
2.	 N. Nasajpour-Esfahani, A critical review on intrinsic conducting polymers and their applications, J Ind 
Eng Chem. 125 (2023) 14–37. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jiec.2023.05.013
	
3.	 M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature. 414 (2001) 338–344. https://doi.org/10.1038/35104607
	
4.	 Y.J. Hsu, S.Y. Lu, Low temperature growth and dimension- dependent photoluminescence efficiency of 
semiconductor nanowires, Appl Phys A Mater Sci Process. 81 (2005) 573–578. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00339-004-2714-y
	
5.	 C.J. Barrelet, Y. Wu, D.C. Bell, C.M. Lieber, Synthesis of CdS and ZnS nanowires using single-source 
molecular precursors, J Am Chem Soc. 125 (2003) 11498–11499. https://doi.org/10.1021/ja036990g
	
6.	 A.J. Bard, A.B. Bocarsly, F.R.F. Fan, E.G. Walton, M.S. Wrighton, The concept of Fermi level pinning 
at semiconductor/liquid junctions. Consequences for energy conversion efficiency and selection of use­
ful solution redox couples in solar devices, J Am Chem Soc. 102(11) (1980) 3671–3677. doi: 10.1021/
ja00531a001
	
7.	 M.J. Penn, R. Baer, D. Walter, Z.Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, H.B. Cao, Electrochemical Capacitors: Challenges 
and Opportunities for Real-World Applications, John R. Miller and Andrew Burke  Electrochem. Soc. 
Interface 17 (2008) 53. doi: 10.1149/2.F08081IF.

314
Handbook of Semiconductors	
8.	 H. Helmholtz, Studien über electrische Grenzschichten, Annalen Der Physik Und Chemie. 243 (1879)
337–382. https://doi.org/10.1002/andp.18792430702	
9.	 H. Morkoç, S. Strite, G.B. Gao, M.E. Lin, B. Sverdlov, M. Burns, Large-band-gap SiC, III-V nitride,
and II-VI ZnSe-based semiconductor device technologies, J Appl Phys. 76 (1994) 1363–1398. https://doi.
org/10.1063/1.358463	
10.	 Z. Liu, Y. Cai, R. Tu, Q. Xu, M. Hu, C. Wang, Q. Sun, B.-W. Li, S. Zhang, C. Wang, T. Goto, L.
Zhang, Laser CVD growth of graphene/SiC/Si nano-matrix heterostructure with improved electro­
chemical capacitance and cycle stability, Carbon N Y. 175 (2021) 377–386. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
carbon.2021.01.004	
11.	 N. Yang, H. Zhuang, R. Hoffmann, W. Smirnov, J. Hees, X. Jiang, C.E. Nebel, Electrochemistry of
nanocrystalline 3C silicon carbide films, Chem Eur J. 18 (2012) 6514–6519. https://doi.org/10.1002/
chem.201103765	
12.	 J.P. Alper, M.S. Kim, M. Vincent, B. Hsia, V. Radmilovic, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, Silicon carbide
nanowires as highly robust electrodes for micro-supercapacitors, J Power Sources. 230 (2013) 298–302.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpowsour.2012.12.085	
13.	 J.P. Alper, M. Vincent, C. Carraro, R. Maboudian, Silicon carbide coated silicon nanowires as robust
electrode material for aqueous micro-supercapacitor, Appl Phys Lett. 100(16) (2012) 163901. doi:
10.1063/1.4704187	
14.	 L. Gu, Y. Wang, Y. Fang, R. Lu, J. Sha, Performance characteristics of supercapacitor electrodes made of 
silicon carbide nanowires grown on carbon fabric, J Power Sources. 243 (2013) 648–653. doi: 10.1016/j.
jpowsour.2013.06.050	
15.	 J. Chen, J. Zhang, M. Wang, L. Gao, Y. Li, SiC nanowire film grown on the surface of graphite paper and 
its electrochemical performance, J Alloys Compd. 605 (2014) 168–172. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2014.03.155	
16.	 J. Liang, J. Lu, P. Gao, W. Guo, H. Xiao, The crystallization and growth of SiC nanowires converted
from self-assembly Si nanorods on carbon fabric and their electrochemical capacitance property, J
Alloys Compd. 827 (2020) 154168. doi: 10.1016/j.jallcom.2020.154168	
17.	 A. Sanger, A. Kumar, A. Kumar, P.K. Jain, Y.K. Mishra, R. Chandra, Silicon carbide nanocauliflowers
for symmetric supercapacitor devices, Ind Eng Chem Res. 55(35) (2016) 9452–9458. doi: 10.1021/acs.
iecr.6b02243	
18.	 Z. Liu et al., Laser CVD growth of graphene/SiC/Si nano-matrix heterostructure with improved
electrochemical capacitance and cycle stability, Carbon N Y. 175 (2021) 377–386. doi: 10.1016/j.
carbon.2021.01.004	
19.	 K. Kaasbjerg, K.S. Thygesen, K.W. Jacobsen, Phonon-limited mobility in n-type single-layer MoS2
from first principles, Phys Rev B Condens Matter Mater Phys. 85 (2012). https://doi.org/10.1103/
PhysRevB.85.115317	
20.	 X. Gonze, C. Lee, Dynamical matrices, born effective charges, dielectric permittivity tensors, and
interatomic force constants from density-functional perturbation theory, Phys Rev B. 55 (1997) 10355–
10368. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevB.55.10355	
21.	 R. Fivaz, E. Mooser, Mobility of charge carriers in semiconducting layer structures, Phys Rev. 163(3)
(1967) 743–755. doi: 10.1103/PhysRev.163.743	
22.	 H. Hasegawa, T. Sawada, On the electrical properties of compound semiconductor interfaces in metal/
insulator/ semiconductor structures and the possible origin of interface states, Thin Solid Films.103
(1983) 119–140.	
23.	 W. Bialek, Physical limits to sensation and perception, Annu Rev Biophys Chem. 16 (1987) 455–478.
https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.bb.16.060187.002323	
24.	 W. Ouyang, F. Teng, J. He, X. Fang, Enhancing the photoelectric performance of photodetectors based
on metal oxide semiconductors by charge-carrier engineering, Adv Funct Mater. 29 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1002/adfm.201807672	
25.	 Y. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Xu, J. Cai, W. Yang, X. Fang, Self-powered dual-color UV–green photodetectors
based on SnO2 millimeter wire and microwires/CsPbBr3 particle heterojunctions, J Phys Chem Lett. 10 
(2019) 836–841. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b00154	
26.	 D. Bonardo, N.L.W. Septiani, F. Amri, S. Humaidi, B. Yuliarto, Review—Recent development of WO 3 for 
toxic gas sensors applications, J Electrochem Soc. 168 (2021) 107502. https://doi.org/10.1149/1945-7111/
ac0172	
27.	 G.E. Collins, L.J. Buckley, Conductive polymer-coated fabrics for chemical sensing, Synth Met. 78
(1996) 93–101. https://doi.org/10.1016/0379-6779(96)80108-1	
28.	 X.-R. Zeng, T.-M. Ko, Structures and properties of chemically reduced polyanilines, Polymer (Guildf).
39(5) (1998) 1187–1195. doi: 10.1016/S0032-3861(97)00381-9

315
Role of Semiconductors in Energy Devices	
29.	 Y. Zhang, J.J. Kim, D. Chen, H.L. Tuller, G.C. Rutledge, Electrospun polyaniline fibers as highly sen­
sitive room temperature chemiresistive sensors for ammonia and nitrogen dioxide gases, Adv Funct
Mater. 24(25) (2014) 4005–4014. doi: 10.1002/adfm.201400185	
30.	 D. Li, J. Huang, R.B. Kaner, Polyaniline nanofibers: A unique polymer nanostructure for versatile appli­
cations, Acc Chem Res. 42(1) (2009) 135–145. doi: 10.1021/ar800080n	
31.	 S.-J. Park, J.-Y. Jeon, T.-J. Ha, Wearable humidity sensors based on bar-printed poly(ionic liquid) for
real-time humidity monitoring systems, Sens Actuators B Chem. 354 (2022) 131248. doi: 10.1016/j.
snb.2021.131248	
32.	 Y. Lu, G. Yang, Y. Shen, H. Yang, K. Xu, Multifunctional flexible humidity sensor systems towards
noncontact wearable electronics, Nanomicro Lett. 14(1) (2022) 150. doi: 10.1007/s40820-022-00895-5	
33.	 A. Tripathy et al., Design and development for capacitive humidity sensor applications of lead-free Ca,
Mg, Fe, Ti-oxides-based electro-ceramics with improved sensing properties via physisorption, Sensors.
16(7) (2016) 1135. doi: 10.3390/s16071135	
34.	 G. Chen, X. Xiao, X. Zhao, T. Tat, M. Bick, J. Chen, Electronic textiles for wearable point-of-care sys­
tems, Chem Rev. 122 (2022) 3259–3291. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00502	
35.	 T. Fernández-Caramés, P. Fraga-Lamas, Towards the internet-of-smart-clothing: A review on IoT
wearables and garments for creating intelligent connected e-textiles, Electronics (Basel). 7 (2018) 405.
https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics7120405	
36.	 A. Libanori, G. Chen, X. Zhao, Y. Zhou, J. Chen, Smart textiles for personalized healthcare, Nat
Electron. 5 (2022) 142–156. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41928-022-00723-z	
37.	 A. Satharasinghe, T. Hughes-Riley, T. Dias, Photodiodes embedded within electronic textiles, Sci Rep.
8 (2018) 16205. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-34483-8	
38.	 S. Liu, K. Ma, B. Yang, H. Li, X. Tao, Textile electronics for VR/AR applications, Adv Funct Mater. 31
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202007254	
39.	 Y. Yamada, Textile-integrated polymer optical fibers for healthcare and medical applications, Biomed
Phys Eng Express. 6 (2020) 062001. https://doi.org/10.1088/2057-1976/abbf5f	
40.	 J. Oreggioni, A.A. Caputi, F. Silveira, Biopotential Monitoring, in: Encyclopedia of Biomedical
Engineering, Elsevier, 2019: pp. 296–304. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-801238-3.64161-2	
41.	 W.G. Stevenson, K. Soejima, Recording techniques for clinical electrophysiology, J Cardiovasc
Electrophysiol. 16 (2005) 1017–1022. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1540-8167.2005.50155.x	
42.	 T. Buchner, On the physical nature of biopotentials, their propagation and measurement, Physica A Stat
Mech Appl. 525 (2019) 85–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2019.03.056	
43.	 I.B. Dimov, M. Moser, G.G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch, Semiconducting polymers for neural applications, 
Chem Rev. 122 (2022) 4356–4396. https://doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.1c00685	
44.	 R. Bawa, Advances in Clinical Immunology, Medical Microbiology, COVID-19, and Big Data, Jenny
Stanford Publishing, New York, 2021. https://doi.org/10.1201/9781003180432	
45.	 P. Fattahi, G. Yang, G. Kim, M.R. Abidian, A review of organic and inorganic biomaterials for neural
interfaces, Adv Mater. 26 (2014) 1846–1885. https://doi.org/10.1002/adma.201304496	
46.	 G. Buzsáki, C.A. Anastassiou, C. Koch, The origin of extracellular fields and currents-EEG, ECoG,
LFP and spikes, Nat Rev Neurosci. 13 (2012) 407–420. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3241	
47.	 A. Fujishima, K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature. 238
(1972) 37–38. https://doi.org/10.1038/238037a0	
48.	 B.P. Mishra, K. Parida, Orienting Z scheme charge transfer in graphitic carbon nitride-based systems
for photocatalytic energy and environmental applications, J Mater Chem A Mater. 9 (2021) 10039–
10080. https://doi.org/10.1039/D1TA00704A	
49.	 Y. Ren, D. Zeng, W.-J. Ong, Interfacial engineering of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)-based metal
sulfide heterojunction photocatalysts for energy conversion: A review, Chinese J Catal. 40 (2019) 289–
319. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1872-2067(19)63293-6	
50.	 Q. Tian et al., Synergetic effects of the interfacial dyadic structure on the interfacial charge transfer
between surface-complex and TiO2, Appl Surf Sci. 496 (2019) 143711. doi: 10.1016/j.apsusc.2019.143711	
51.	 X. Jiao et al., Photocatalytic conversion of waste plastics into C2 fuels under simulated natural environ­
ment conditions, Angewandte Chemie International Edition, 59(36) (2020) 15497–15501. doi: 10.1002/
anie.201915766	
52.	 C. Gao, J. Low, R. Long, T. Kong, J. Zhu, Y. Xiong, Heterogeneous single-atom photocata­
lysts: Fundamentals and applications, Chem Rev. 120(21) (2020) 12175–12216. doi: 10.1021/acs.
chemrev.9b00840

316
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-24
Role of Semiconductors 
in Future Flexible Batteries
Joseph C. M., Vinuth Raj T. N., and Priya A. Hoskeri
24.1  INTRODUCTION
A battery is an electrochemical device designed to store energy and deliver electrical power to 
electronic devices. The appeal of wearable electronics is enhanced by the mechanical flexibility, 
rollability, and stretchability of these devices. In order to facilitate the seamless integration and 
self-sufficiency of systems, it is imperative that the devices are equipped with batteries pos­
sessing comparable physical attributes. The current redesign efforts are focused on the bulk 
battery structure, which includes the active materials, electrodes, electrolytes, separators, and 
packaging. The current need necessitates the adoption of an interdisciplinary approach, wherein 
chemists, materials scientists, and engineers collaborate closely to address the challenges at 
hand. Based on the findings of the literature review, it has been identified that there exist two 
potential methodologies for the development of flexible batteries. The first technique involves 
substituting inherently rigid materials with pliable and malleable compounds. The second way 
entails transforming rigid materials into flexible structures [1–5]. In both the scenarios, it is 
imperative to ensure the consistent functioning of the connections between the components 
of the battery, even when subjected to repeated deformation. Lithium ion batteries (LIBs) are 
distinguished in the current state of the art of portable energy storage due to their exceptional 
attributes, including high energy density, power density, and longevity. However, in the case of 
flexible electronics, the electrode designs in LIBs experience significant degradation in perfor­
mance when subjected to physical bending [6]. Flexible LIBs have been successfully developed 
by meticulous use of structural engineering techniques. In all the futuristic flexible devices, the 
organic semiconductor is one of the inevitable components for the fabrication of devices with a 
storing facility.
24.2  SEMICONDUCTOR MATERIALS IN BATTERY TECHNOLOGY
Semiconductors play a significant role in the realm of batteries, notably in advanced battery 
technologies like LIBs. While semiconductors do not function as a primary energy storage com­
ponent in batteries, they do play a vital role in improving the performance, safety, and efficiency 
of various aspects of battery technology. Semiconductors are involved in several mechanisms 
that contribute to the operation of the batteries. Battery management systems (BMSs) rely on 
semiconductors that are crucial elements for the purpose of overseeing and regulating the condi­
tion, charge level, health status, and general efficacy of batteries. BMSs employ mainly semicon­
ductor devices for the purpose of voltage, current, and temperature measurements. Additionally, 
these systems regulate the charging and discharging procedures to guarantee the battery’s safe 
and efficient functioning. Semiconductor materials are also employed in the implementation of 
protection circuits in batteries, with the purpose of averting instances of overcharging, over-
discharging, and short circuiting. The functionality of these circuits is dependent on the utili­
zation of semiconductor components such as voltage regulators, voltage detectors, and current 
sensors. These components serve the purpose of monitoring and regulating the voltage and 
current levels of the battery, thereby contributing to the overall safety of the battery system. 
24

317
Role of Semiconductors in Future Flexible Batteries
The utilization of semiconductors in power electronics plays a crucial role in the conversion and 
inversion of electrical energy in sophisticated battery applications, particularly in hybrid and 
electric vehicles. This process facilitates the efficient transfer of electrical energy between the 
battery and the propulsion system. Insulated gate bipolar transistors and metal oxide semicon­
ductor field effect transistors are commonly employed in the realm of energy conversion for bet­
ter efficiency. Semiconductors play a crucial role in charging and discharging control circuits by 
effectively managing the current flow throughout the process of charging and discharging a bat­
tery. This practice aids in sustaining ideal charging rates and mitigating potential harm caused 
by excessive charging or discharging. The investigation of specific semiconductor materials for 
energy storage purposes, such as supercapacitors, is an area of interest in the field of energy 
storage and conversion. Supercapacitors are known for their high power density and ability to 
rapidly charge and discharge energy. These have the potential to enhance conventional battery 
technologies in specific applications.
Semiconductors play a crucial role in the thermal management of batteries, as they are employed 
to effectively monitor and regulate temperature levels. The use of temperature sensors and control 
circuits serve the purpose of mitigating the occurrence of overheating, a phenomenon that can result 
in the deterioration of battery performance and pose potential safety risks. Semiconductors have a 
significant impact on enhancing the performance, safety, and efficiency of batteries, hence facilitat­
ing the advancement of important battery technologies essential for a wide range of applications, 
including portable devices, electric cars, and renewable energy storage systems.
24.3  ORGANIC SEMICONDUCTING MATERIALS 
IN BATTERY TECHNOLOGY
The present chapter focuses on the analysis of contemporary and prospective flex circuit batter­
ies, which are expected to contribute significantly to the advancement of energy conservation. 
The issues associated with enhancing conductivity, cycle life, charge and discharge rates, and 
improving power ratings are also matters of interest. Electronic devices have been fabricated 
using organic semiconductors derived from polymers, small molecules, aromatic compounds, 
and phthalocyanines. The enhancement of the electrical, thermal, mechanical, and optical prop­
erties of these materials can be achieved through the use of novel functional organic groups. 
These materials offer several benefits, including cost effectiveness and simplified preparation 
methods for use in various devices. Different coating processes such as spin coating and dip coat­
ing are employed to fabricate films of organic semiconductors. The simplified preparation proce­
dure of these materials facilitates cost effective device fabrication. In order to accommodate the 
advancements in new and contemporary technology, there is a pressing need for the development 
of novel electric energy storage devices, specifically for low-cost batteries. Organic semiconduc­
tors have shown great potential as materials for organic batteries. Certain metal phthalocyanines 
(MPCs) and their doped combinations have exhibited encouraging results in the realm of micro-
power energy applications. The incorporation of embedded MPCs into nanostructures holds sig­
nificant potential for researchers to advance in the field of flexible electronics by enabling energy 
conservation.
In the studies done by Oh et al. [7], the use of carbon nanotube-decorated α-iron oxide par­
ticles acting as the anode and lithium iron phosphate acting as the cathode was introduced for the 
first time, showing potential use as freestanding anodes in flexible lithium polymer batteries. The 
utilization of fibrous mats composed of these materials as both electrodes and a gel polymer elec­
trolyte enabled the achievement of reduced stress during the bending of the electrochemical pouch 
cell. The incorporation of bendability, demonstrated via 5000 cycles, has been implemented inside 
a widely recognized LIB chemical system utilizing lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2) and graphite. 
Zinc ion batteries represent a promising technological advancement due to their comparatively 

318
Handbook of Semiconductors
high capacity. The active materials utilized in this particular battery configuration include several 
advantageous characteristics. These include affordability, plentiful availability, enhanced safety 
measures, environmental friendliness, and long-term sustainability [8, 9]. According to the find­
ings of Zamarayeva et al. [10], the utilization of a zinc metal anode in conjunction with a man­
ganese oxide cathode, as well as the incorporation of flexible binders such polyvinyl alcohol and 
polyacrylic acid, has demonstrated the ability to maintain performance even after undergoing 
bending. Furthermore, interesting results have been reported in recent studies on flexible energy 
storage with Li/S batteries [11].
LIBs commonly consist of four essential components: a cathode, an anode, an electrolyte, and 
a separator. The cathode materials encompass lithium iron phosphate (LiFePO4), lithium man­
ganese oxide (LiMn2O4), LiCoO2, lithium nickel cobalt manganese oxide (often referred to as 
NMC) (LiNiMnCoO2), lithium nickel cobalt aluminum oxide (LiNiCoAlO2), and lithium titanate. 
Graphite is the predominant choice for anode materials in the majority of cases. The materials com­
monly employed as separators in this context are typically microporous films made of polypropyl­
ene or polyethylene. The electrolytes commonly employed consist of lithium hexafluorophosphate 
(LiPF6) dissolved in ethylene carbonate (EC). However, efforts are being made to enhance safety 
and capacity retention by modifying the electrolytes using additives and developing novel electro­
lyte materials. Silanes are employed for the purpose of enhancing the stability of the electrolyte. 
Silyl phosphates, such as tris (trimethylsilyl) phosphate, have been employed as supplementary sub­
stances in the ethylene carbonate electrolyte to enhance stability and maintain capacity. Improved 
electrolytes have been developed in the form of polyether functionalized silanes [12]. Electrolyte 
additives, specifically aminoalkylsilanes with oligo (ethylene oxide) unit, have been developed for 
the purpose of enhancing stability and capacity retention [13]. In recent years, several advancements 
have been made in the field of battery technology, leading to the emergence of various novel bat­
teries. These include conventional batteries, dual ion batteries, mixed ion batteries, aluminum ion/ 
chloroaluminate batteries, and mixed ion batteries [14].
Flexible batteries are commonly designed with planar structures that exhibit many forms such 
as paper, thin film, and spinel-like structures. The assembly process involves the layer-by-layer 
arrangement of battery electrode layers, which encompass current collectors and the supported 
cathode/anode materials, as well as electrolytes, separators, and packaging. Different types of bat­
teries include paper-based (flexible), graphene, laminated thin-film-structured, sodium ion, belt 
type, lithium, and organic batteries like pyrene-4,5,9,10 and tetraone/Zn batteries. They have exhib­
ited notable characteristics, including high flexibility, lightweight construction, exceptional chemi­
cal and electrochemical stability, and a large surface area [15–17]. In recent years, there has been 
a growing interest in research focused on the utilization of MPCs as electrodes in flexible batter­
ies. The deactivation of MPCs has been observed to exhibit catalytic activity in lithium batteries. 
Specifically, the discharge energy of Li/SOCl2 batteries, when catalyzed by MPCs, surpassed the 
performance of the same battery in the absence of these compounds. Therefore, MPCs represent a 
highly promising category of catalysts, exhibiting certain advantages in comparison to metal and 
metal oxide catalysts due to their cost effectiveness. The impact of the central metal atom in Li/
SOCl2 batteries was investigated through a comprehensive examination of MPCs, where M repre­
sents Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Cu2+ [18].
Pertaining to organic semiconductors and compounds, scholars have identified several notable 
benefits, including a highly theoretical specific capacity, ample availability of raw materials, envi­
ronmentally favorable characteristics, and robust structural design capabilities. Several studies 
have indicated that the incorporation of nanostructures such as graphene into organic carbonyl 
electrode materials leads to a notable increase in surface area, resulting in a greater number of 
active sites and enhanced battery conductivity. In a study conducted by Mengqian Xu et al. [19], it 
was observed that the combination of 3,4, 9,10 Perylene Tetra Carboxylic Dianhydride (PTCDA) 
and sodium salt in an aqueous solution, followed by hydrolysis and ethanol anti-solvent treatment, 

319
Role of Semiconductors in Future Flexible Batteries
resulted in the formation metal substituted precursor. The subsequent addition of graphene to this 
mixture exhibited remarkable electrochemical energy storage properties. This enhancement can 
be attributed to the increased specific surface area, improved dispersion, greater exposure of the 
active site, and enhanced electrical conductivity of the composite material. These findings have 
significant implications for the advancement of high-performance organic electrode materials in 
LIBs. There is a greater abundance of cathode materials available for LIBs as compared to the 
anode materials. The researchers are currently investigating the anode materials for future LIBs. 
Due to their substantial theoretical capacity, large reserves of raw materials and distinctive physi­
cochemical qualities, compounds including zinc (Zn) and manganese (Mn) with selenium (Se) 
have emerged as prominent anode materials for LIBs. In a study conducted by Jiaoyu Xiao et al. 
[20], Zn-Mn PTCDA was successfully synthesized using a straightforward hydrothermal reac­
tion. The synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) elliptical leaf-shaped Zn0⋅697Mn0⋅303Se/C composites 
was achieved through direct selenization, using Zn-Mn PTCDA as the precursor. This composite 
exhibited a significantly high specific surface area of 213.9 m2g−1. After 110 cycles at a current 
density of 100 mAg−1, the reversible capacity of the system is measured to be 1005.14 mAhg−1. 
Following 1000 cycles under a high current density of 1 Ag−1, the observed capacity remains favor­
able at 653.79 mAhg−1. The combination of Zn-Mn PTCDA shows potential for further develop­
ment in the realm of LIBs [20].
A novel organic battery was developed for micro-power energy applications by incorporating a 
PTCDA organic semiconductor with varying compositions of black carbon (BC) and copper chlo­
ride as the electrolyte. The addition of different ratios of BC was performed, and the obtained 
results were thoroughly examined to identify the optimal composites for PTCDA-BC batteries. 
The voltage of the battery exhibits an increase from an initial value of 0.17 V to a final value of 
0.45 V. Concurrently, the short circuit current, denoted as Isc, undergoes a transition from 12 mA 
to 25 mA. The battery, which had a PTCDA:BC ratio of 80:20, demonstrated the highest maximum 
power output, denoted as Pmax, measuring 3.08 mW. The results obtained from the study suggest 
that batteries utilizing PTCDA:BC composites have potential for application in micro-power energy 
systems [21].
The ternary composite (PTCDA/CNT/MPc) was utilized as the positive electrode material by 
Fan et al. [22], while sodium metal served as the negative electrode. The findings indicate that 
the electrochemical performance of the PTCDA/CNT/MPc composite surpasses that of the pure 
PTCDA. One notable finding was the congruence between the experimental and theoretical values 
of the specific capacity of the batteries. At a current density of 10 Ag−1, the PTCDA/CNT/MPc 
electrode material demonstrates a remarkable capacity of 90.1 mAhg−1. The increased conductivity 
of the CNT/MPc composite carbon material contributes to the enhanced conductivity of PTCDA. 
Additionally, it expands the transport pathway for ions, hence promoting the adsorption of sodium 
ions into the composite positive electrode. Hence, the composite electrode demonstrates a notable 
enhancement in reversible capacity and cycle life. This improvement is attributed to its exceptional 
intercalation and deintercalation performance for sodium ions, as well as its charge discharge rate 
performance [22].
24.4  ORGANIC ELECTROCHROMIC MATERIALS
Energy storage devices with a smart function of changing color obtained by incorporating electro­
chromic materials into battery or supercapacitors electrodes were discussed in an earlier review 
[23]. In this work, the working principles of supercapacitors, batteries, and electrochromic (EC) 
devices with a focus on the material candidates for electrochromic energy storages were discussed. 
The challenges of the integration of EC energy systems for simultaneous realization of electrochro­
mism and energy storage were also discussed [23].

320
Handbook of Semiconductors
In the literature survey on metal oxides and inorganic EC materials, the achievable EC color is 
limited to bluish and brownish [24, 25] during the oxidation and reduction phases. Exploring the 
organic EC semiconductors, which have shown multiple coloration phases for variation in the input 
voltage in the range of 1–3 V, are gaining importance because of their lower basing voltages and 
variety of coloration during the forward and reverse bias voltages. In this direction, few MPC thin 
films have been explored to understand the electrochromic properties. MPCs have a good chemi­
cal stability and a visible color change during the oxidation or reduction due to their rich colors. 
Further, a detailed literature survey indicated that the annealed EC thin films had better stability 
compared to the non-annealed ones.
In an earlier report, organic semiconductor-doped rechargeable zinc air batteries (RZABs) were 
prepared and studied for power storage applications [26] and preparation of cobalt- and nitrogen-
doped porous carbon derived from phloroglucinol-formaldehyde polymer networks with 2-methyl 
imidazole and cobalt phthalocyanine as precursors was reported. The CoN-PC-2 catalyst prepared 
in this study exhibited commendable electro catalytic activity for both oxygen reduction reaction 
(ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), evidenced by a half-wave potential of 0.81 V. Moreover, 
the catalyst demonstrated an outstanding performance in zinc-air batteries, achieving a peak power 
density of 158 mWcm−2 and displaying excellent stability during charge-discharge cycles. The find­
ings from this study aimed to provide valuable insights and guidelines for further research and the 
development of hierarchical micro-mesoporous carbon materials from polymer networks, facilitating 
their potential commercialization and widespread deployment in energy storage applications [26].
In one of the works [27] on the study of EC properties of vacuum-evaporated manganese phtha­
locyanine (MnPc) thin films, MnPc thin films annealed at 423 K showed a good electrochemi­
cal reversibility of 84%. Cyclic voltammograms of MnPc thin films deposited at RT and vacuum 
annealed at different temperatures are shown in Figure 24.1. Optical density (OD) was calculated at 
FIGURE 24.1  Cyclic voltammograms of MnPc thin films deposited at RT and vacuum annealed at different 
temperatures. (Adapted with permission [27]. Copyright (2021) Elsevier Publishers.)

321
Role of Semiconductors in Future Flexible Batteries
a wavelength of 550 nm for MnPc thin films vacuum annealed at different temperatures. OD gives 
the extent of transmission of electromagnetic radiation through a substance. The change in optical 
density, delta OD (∆OD), for MnPc thin films during intercalation and deintercalation increased with 
the increase in annealing temperature. ∆OD was a maximum for the MnPc thin film annealed at 
423 K, as shown in Table 24.1. It was observed that the diffusion coefficient for Ipc (cathode peak 
current density) was a maximum with a value of 2.24 × 10− 16 cm2/s for the MnPc thin film annealed 
at 423 K. This can be due to the increase in the crystallinity of the MnPc thin films annealed 
at 423 K, which led to the free movement of K+ ions between the voids in the crystal lattice. 
Chowdhury et al. [28] have also reported that the diffusivity of the ions in the crystal increases with 
the increase in the crystallinity. MnPc thin film annealed at 473K showed a notable decrease in 
its diffusion coefficient as attributed to the presence of grains of different sizes, which might have 
hindered the free movement of ions in the lattice. Hence an extension of this work on optimizing 
the methods of increasing the charge holding capacity of these films might make them eligible can­
didates as electrodes in battery technology.
24.5  ORGANIC INORGANIC COMPOSITES FOR SUPERCAPACITORS
Recently supercapacitors emerged as one of the promising devices for charge storage due to their 
high energy and power densities. Supercapacitors store energy through electrochemical reaction, 
and a study on graphene-doped lanthanum aluminate nanocomposite done using cyclic voltamme­
try technique was reported [29].
Cyclic Voltammetry studies were done for reduced graphene oxide (RGO)-LaAlO3 nanocom­
posites at different voltage sweeps on pure RGO and pure LaAlO3 as electrode materials. CV pro­
files of an RGO-LaAlO3 nanocomposite electrode sample at various scan rates ranging from 2 to 
100 mVs−1 and a potential window of −0.3 V to 1.2 V were reported [29]. The consistency of these 
results demonstrates the outstanding capacitive behavior of this nanocomposite electrode. During 
the negative scan, aluminum oxide is reduced from Al+3 to Al+2 and regains its +3 state in the pres­
ence of electrolytes during the positive scan, which explains its faradaic behavior. At high scanning 
rates, the oxidation and reduction peaks of CV curves continuously shifted to higher and lower 
potentials, causing polarization effect and ohmic resistance of the electrode materials. This suggests 
that the electrochemical reaction is quasi-reversible and the degree of irreversibility increases as the 
scan rate of the potential increases.
Figure 24.2 shows a plot of capacitance retention of an asymmetric supercapacitor device (ASD) 
fabricated using RGO-LaAlO3 nanocomposites. The capacitance retention of ASD fabricated using 
RGO-LaAlO3 nanocomposites showed a reasonably good storing capacity for a large number of 
cycles with this combination of organic-inorganic composite materials.
TABLE 24.1
Electrochromic Parameters of MnPc Thin Films for Different Vacuum Annealing 
Temperatures 
Annealing 
Temperature 
(K)
Peak Current Density 
(mA/cm2)
Diffusion Coefficient 
(× 10−16 cm2/s)
Electrochemical 
Reversibility (%)
Optical Density 
Change (ΔOD)
η (cm2/C)
Ipc
Ipa
for Ipc
for Ipa
RT
0.69
−0.19
1.31
0.100
50
0.103
37
323
0.70
−0.05
1.33
0.0066
56
0.206
57
373
0.89
−0.15
2.16
0.0657
70
0.223
68
423
0.91
−0.20
2.24
0.1136
84
0.249
82
473
0.56
−0.14
0.86
0.0584
79
0.151
45

322
Handbook of Semiconductors
24.6  CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the importance of integration of organic/inorganic semiconductors for electrochro­
mic and supercapacitor devices for charge storage applications was discussed. In conclusion, the 
doping of supercapacitors with organic semiconductors could enhance the specific capacitance, 
resulting in a high charging discharging rate, a long life cycle, and outstanding power density, mak­
ing these devices among the most promising candidates for future storage devices.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 D. Shavit, The developments of LEDs and SMD Electronics on transparent conductive Polyester film, 
Vac. Int. 1 (2007) 34–36.
	
2.	 S. Mahmud, M. Rahman, Md. Kamruzzaman, O. Md. Ali, S. A. Md. Emon, H. Khatun, R. Md. Ali, 
Recent advances in lithium-ion battery materials for improved electrochemical performance, a review, 
Res. Eng. 15 (2022) 100472–100491.
	
3.	 G. Qian, X. Liao, Y. Zhu, F. Pan, X. Chen, Y. Yang, Designing flexible lithium-ion batteries by struc­
tural engineering, ACS Energy. Lett. 4 (2019) 690–701.
	
4.	 J. Ryu, W.-J. Song, S. Lee, S. Choi, S. Park, A game changer: Functional nano/micro materials for smart 
rechargeable batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (2020) 1902499.
	
5.	 E. Pomerantseva, F. Bonaccorso, X. Feng, Y. Cui, Y. Gogotsi, Energy storage: The future enabled by 
nanomaterials, Sci. 366 (2019) 8285.
	
6.	 L. de Biasi, B. Schwarz, T. Brezesinski, P. Hartmann, J. Janek, H. Ehrenberg, Chemical, structural and 
electronic aspects of formation and degradation behavior on different length scales of Ni-rich NCM and 
Li-rich HE-NCM cathode materials in Li-ion batteries, Adv. Mater. 31 (2022) 1900985.
	
7.	 S.H. Oh, O.H. Kwon, Y.C. Kang, J.K. Kim, J.S. Cho, Highly integrated and interconnected CNT hybrid 
nano fibers decorated with α-iron oxide as freestanding anodes for flexible lithium polymer batteries, 
J. Mater. Chem. A. 7 (2019) 12480–12488.
	
8.	 F. Mo, G. Liang, Q. Meng, Z. Liu, H. Li, J. Fan, C. Zhi, A flexible rechargeable aqueous zinc manga­
nese-dioxide battery working at −20°C, Energy Environ. Sci. 12 (2019) 706–715.
	
9.	 H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, H. Yang, H. Yan, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, B. Li, C. Zhi, 
Waterproof and tailorable elastic rechargeable yarn zinc ion batteries by a cross linked polyacrylamide, 
electrolyte, ACS Nano. 12 (2018) 3140–3148.
FIGURE 24.2  Plot of capacitance retention of an asymmetric super capacitor device (ASD) fabricated using 
RGO-LaAlO3 nanocomposites. (Adapted with permission from [29]. Copyright (2020) Elsevier Publishers.)

323
Role of Semiconductors in Future Flexible Batteries
	 10.	 A.M. Zamarayeva, A. Jegraj, A. Toor, V.I. Pister, C. Chang, A. Chou, J.W. Evans, A.C. Arias, Electrode 
composite for flexible zinc−manganese dioxide batteries through in situ polymerization of polymer, 
hydrogel, Energy Technol. 8 (2020) 1901165.
	 11.	 J.H. Kim, Y.H. Lee, S.J. Cho, J.G. Gwon, H.J. Cho, M. Jang, S.Y. Lee, S.Y. Lee, Nanomat Li−S batteries 
based on all-fibrous cathode/separator assemblies and reinforced Li metal anodes: Towards ultrahigh 
energy density and flexibility, Energy Environ. Sci. 12 (2019) 177–186.
	 12.	 X. Chen, M. Usrey, P.H. Adrian, R. West, R.J. Hamers, Thermal and electrochemical stability of organo­
silicon electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources. 241 (2013) 311–319.
	 13.	 J.L. Wang, H. Luo, Y.J. Mai, X.Y. Zhao, L.Z. Zhang, Synthesis of amino alkyl silanes with oligo (eth­
ylene oxide) unit as multifunctional electrolyte additives for lithium-ion batteries, Sci. Chi. Chem. 56 
(2013) 739–745.
	 14.	 R. Borah, F.R. Hughson, J. Johnston, T. Nann T, On battery materials and methods, Mater. Today Adv. 
6 (2020) 100046.
	 15.	 X. Dong, L. Chen, X. Su, Y. Wang, Y. Xia, Flexible aqueous lithium-ion battery with high safety and 
large volumetric energy density, Angew. Chem. 55 (2016) 7474–7477.
	 16.	 Z. Guo, J. Li, Y. Xia, C. Chen, F. Wang, A.G. Tamirat, Y. Wang, Y. Xia, L. Wang, S. Feng, A flexible 
polymer based Li–air battery using a reduced graphene oxide/Li composite anode, J. Mater. Chem. A. 
6 (2018) 6022–6032.
	 17.	 Z. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Dong, J. Huang, Y. Wang, Y. Xia, An environmentally friendly and flexible aqueous 
zinc battery using an organic cathode, Angew. Chem. 57 (2018) 11737–11741.
	 18.	 Z. Xu, G. Zhang, Z. Cao, J. Zhao, H. Li, Effect of N atoms in the backbone of metal phthalocyanine 
derivatives on their catalytic activity to lithium battery, J. Mol. Catalysis A: Chem. 318 (2010) 101–105.
	 19.	 M. Xu, J. Zhao, J. Chen, K. Chen, Q. Zhang, S. Zhong, Graphene composite 3,4,9,10- perylenetetracar­
boxylic sodium salts with a honeycomb structure as a high performance anode material for lithium ion 
batteries, Nanoscale Adv. 3 (2021) 4561–4571.
	 20.	 J. Xiao, H. Liu, Y. Lu, L. Zhang, J. Huang, Zn–Mn-PTCDA derived two-dimensional leaf-like 
Zn0·697Mn0·303Se/C composites as anode materials for high-capacity li-ion batteries, Ceram. Int. B. 47 
(2021) 7438–7447.
	 21.	 A. Dere, Perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA) based composites organic battery, 
Phys. B: Cond. Matter. 547 (2018) 127–133.
	 22.	 W. Fan, R. Chua, C. Wang, H. Song, Y. Ding, X. Li, M. Jiang, Q. Li, L. Liu, A. He, Synthesis and 
characteristic of the ternary composite electrode material PTCDA/CNT@MPc and its electrochemical 
performance in sodium ion battery, Comp. Part B: Eng. 226 (2021) 109329.
	 23.	 P. Yang, P. Sun, W. Mai, Electrochromic energy storage devices, Mater. Tod. 19 (2016) 394–402.
	 24.	 T.Y. Yun, X. Li, J. Bae, S.H. Kim, H.C. Moon, Non-volatile li-doped ion gel electrolytes for flexible WO3 
based electrochromic devices, Mater. Des. 162 (2019) 45–51.
	 25.	 R. Kumar, D.K. Pathak, A. Chaudhary, Current status of some electrochromic materials and devices: A 
brief review, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 54 (2021) 503002.
	 26.	 Y. Kumar, S. Akula, K.P. Elo, M. Käärik, J. Kozlova, A. Kikas, J. Aruväli, V. Kisand, J. Leis, A. Tamm, 
K. Tammeveski, Cobalt phthalocyanine doped polymer based electrocatalyst for rechargeable zinc-air 
batteries, Mater. 16 (2023) 510.
	 27.	 B.R. Sridevi, A.H. Priya, C.M. Joseph, Effect of annealing on the optical, structural and electrochromic 
properties of vacuum evaporated manganese phthalocyanine thin films, Thin Solid Films. 723 (2021) 
138584.
	 28.	 M. Chowdhury, M.T. Sajjad, V. Savikhin, V. Hergue´, K.B. Sutija, S.D. Oosterhout, M.F. Toney, P. 
Dubois, A. Ruseckas, I.D.W. Samuel, Tuning crystalline ordering by annealing and additives to study 
its effect on exciton diffusion in a polyalkylthiophene copolymer, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 19 (2017) 
12441–12451.
	 29.	 T.N. Vinuth Raj, A.H. Priya, H.B. Muralidhara, C.R. Manjunatha, K. Yogesh Kumar, M.S. Raghu, 
Facile synthesis of perovskite lanthanum aluminate and its green reduced graphene oxide composite for 
high performance supercapacitors, J. Electroanalyt. Chem. 858 (2020) 113830.

324
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-25
Semiconductor-based 
Materials for Water-Splitting 
Applications
Arnet Maria Antony, R. Geetha Balakrishna, 
K. Pramoda, and Siddappa A. Patil
25.1  INTRODUCTION
The rise in world population has proportionally led to copious energy demand. The exhaustible 
sources of fossil fuels are lacking and unable to cope with the escalating energy crisis. The exten­
sive usage of the non-renewable resources in comparison to their formation has drastically depleted 
these resources. On the other hand, the burning of fossil fuels produces large amounts of carbon 
dioxide (CO2), adding to environmental pollution. These concerns fuel the urge for the exploration 
of new technologies to harness renewable and sustainable resources. One such energy with absolute 
efficiency and zero residual carbon print is hydrogen (H2) fuel. The one and only byproduct formed 
on combustion of H2 is water, making it the cleanest energy. This drives the interest of researchers 
in producing H2 fuel more proficiently. Conventionally, H2 is produced by methane reformation 
leading to large amounts of CO2 emission, impacting the environment. It was Fujishima and Honda 
who first demonstrated the possibility of water splitting by photo-electrocatalysis for the generation 
of H2. They employed an n-type TiO2 semiconductor as a photoelectrode in an electrochemical cell 
coupled with a platinum black electrode [1]. This finding was followed by a widespread exploration 
in the photo-electrocatalytic water splitting. Additionally, the vast availability of water terrestrially 
and the regeneration of the same on combustion of the H2 fuel makes water splitting convenient. 
The process of water splitting can be denoted by two simple half electrode reactions, the hydrogen 
evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the cathodic and anodic sites, 
respectively. In general, these electrode reactions can be provided as	
→
+
+
°
=−
+
−
2H O
O
4H
4e
E
1.23V
2
2
ox	
(25.1)	
+
→
°
=
+
4H
 4e
2H E
0.00V
–
2
red	
(25.2)	
→
+
2H O
O
2H
2
2
2	
(25.3)
The simplicity of the electrocatalytic reaction for water splitting as seen in the above equations, 
however, does not simplify the process. The electrolysis of water requires an energy of 237 kJmol−1 
and a potential of minimum 1.23 V under standard conditions [2]. These threshold values have been 
achieved by the implementation of the photo-electrochemical approach, replacing the direct elec­
trochemical method by employing the inexhaustive solar energy, promising an eco-friendly method 
in producing H2 fuel. The schematic representation of the photo-electrolysis set-up is shown in 
Figure 25.1. The process kicks off with the absorption of the photons by the semiconductor material, 
which results in the excitation of the electrons present in the valence band into the conduction band, 
leading to separation of electrons and holes in the electrode. While some of these electrons and 
holes, on their way to the surface of the electrode, are lost due to recombination, the others are trans­
ferred into the electrolyte system. The H+ ions present take the electrons from the semiconductor 
25

325
Semiconductor-based Materials for Water-Splitting Applications
surface to bring about the HER at the cathode. Likewise, the anode oxidizes water to bring about 
the OER generating O2 [3].
Besides, the H2 generation depends on the pH of the electrolyte. Both theoretical and experi­
mental analyses indicate that the rate of the HER is boosted under acidic medium. The presence 
of a higher concentration of protons energetically favors the reduction process. The reduction in an 
acidic medium can be described as occurring in the following three steps.	
(
)
+
→
+
H
 e
H
Volmer step
(aq)
–
ads	
(25.4)	
(
)
+
+
→
+
H
 H
 e
H
Heyrovsky step
ads
(aq)
–
2(g)	
(25.5)	
(
)
+
→
H
 H
H
Tafel step
ads
ads
2(g)	
(25.6)
In the initial step (Equation 25.4), the proton undergoes reduction and gets adsorbed onto the 
surface of the electrocatalyst. This step is known as the Volmer step. The adsorbed Hads undergoes 
competition between the Heyrovsky (Equation 25.5) and Tafel (Equation 25.6) steps to form the H2 
molecule. According to the Sabatier’s principle, the closer the value of ∆GH to zero, the better the
electrocatalytic activity for HER [4]. To date, the Pt electrode still stands as the best electrode for 
HER activity in an acidic medium.
Annually, the power of sunlight reaching the surface of the earth is estimated to be 8.6 × 104 TW,
which is much greater than the energy requirements [5]. The unavailability of suitable techniques 
to harvest this renewable energy is the reason for our inability to utilize solar energy productively. 
Tapping of this solar energy to some extent has been achieved by using suitable semiconductor 
photoelectrodes to convert the solar energy into H2 fuel. The ability of the photoelectrode to utilize 
the light source in yielding high solar to hydrogen efficiency depends on the typical optoelectronic 
properties of the semiconductor material [6]. Although semiconductor photoelectrodes have been 
investigated for nearly half a century, there is still a wide berth for improving their efficiency [7–9]. 
The benchmark for the photoconversion efficiency for water splitting is about 10%, which is the 
minimum efficiency required for commercialization of the semiconductor photoelectrode. The Pt/C 
electrode for HER and RuO2 electrode for OER are the reference standards for analyzing the effi­
ciency of other semiconductor materials [10, 11]. To achieve this threshold value or higher, ideally, 
the energy level of the conduction band should be higher than the H+/H2 redox potential (0.0 V), 
FIGURE 25.1  Schematic representation of a photo-electrochemical cell set-up for the photo-electrolysis of 
water using a semiconductor electrode. (Image credit, Author.)

326
Handbook of Semiconductors
while the valence band should be lower than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V) [6]. This 
implies that the semiconductor electrode should at least provide a hole potential and photocurrent 
density of ~1.6 V and 8.2 mAcm−2, respectively [2]. Also, the photocatalytic efficiency of the pho­
toelectrode depends on the semiconductor band gap, spectrum range of absorption, intensity of the 
light absorbed, the charge transport through the semiconductor, and the applied bias voltage [12]. 
Another major factor influencing the activity of the semiconductor is the pH of the electrolytes uti­
lized. The HER prefers an acidic medium, while the OER is accelerated by an alkaline medium. In 
line with this background understanding, various semiconductor materials have been designed and 
appropriate modification incorporated to attain the satisfactory optoelectronic properties facilitat­
ing the adequate harnessing of light energy to yield electrical energy, while preserving the chemical 
stability and catalytic function in the acceptable range.
25.2  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
25.2.1  Metal Oxide-based Semiconductor Materials
As understood, the electrodes used in photoelectrochemical cells for photo-electrolysis are 
semiconductors with the inherent ability to trap solar photons for water splitting reactions. These 
semiconductor electrodes are required to sustain for long periods of time with substantially fast 
reaction rates without any considerable kinetic loss. The fundamental material properties of the 
photo-electrolytic semiconductors must be tuned to enable said properties for their application in 
commercial devices. Nevertheless, satisfying the thermodynamic as well as the kinetic requirements 
of the 4-electron water splitting is a real challenge. The limitation of TiO2 as a useful semiconductor 
electrode was its narrow range of the light absorbed in the solar spectrum and its photo-corrosive 
property [1]. This paved the way to explore other semiconductor materials of the III-V transition 
metal systems.
The remarkable stability and ease of synthesis of economical metal oxides and the tunability of 
the band gap with respect to the transition metal character drew the attention of many researchers 
for their use in photo-electronics [13, 14]. The electronic character of the conduction band of the 
transition metal monitors the band gap of the semiconductor. In metal oxides, the O 2p constitutes 
the valence band, while the metal (s, d, or p) forms the conduction band. Metal oxides with metal 
s character have large band gaps (Al2O3 – 8.8 eV, Ga2O3 – 4.5 eV), while it is lower for those with 
metal d character (Fe2O3 – 2.2 eV, Cu2O – 2.1 eV). Moreover, the presence of defects in the metal 
oxides, like oxygen vacancy, can lead to intrinsic n- or p-type semiconductors enabling their use 
as photoanodes (TiO2, WO3, Fe2O3, ZnO) or photocathodes (NiO, CuO, Cu2O) respectively [15]. 
Likewise, the mixing of two metals to form ternary metal oxides improves the band structure and 
optoelectronic properties. The additional metal introduced into the oxide undergoes hybridiza­
tion with the O 2p orbital, resulting in a slight rise in the energy of the valance band, thereby 
decreasing the band gap compared to their binary metal oxide counterpart (Figure 25.2) [14]. 
The extension of this characteristic property to multifunctional photo-electrocatalysts revealed 
dynamic activity and stability in HER as well as OER [16]. Furthermore, considerable research 
work has been carried out to design semiconductor materials with anti-corrosive property under 
milder pH [17].
Although metal oxide semiconductors have potential as photoelectrodes, their photo-corrosive 
nature, narrow absorption window, rapid recombination of the electron and the hole, electrical resis­
tivity, sluggish performance, and reduced carrier mobility make the use of metal oxides (binary and 
ternary) in photo-electrolysis limited [18, 19].
The distinctive properties associated with the nanosize exhibited better photoactivity com­
pared to their bulk equivalents. The large surface area of the nanoparticles enables the prompt 
diffusion of the charge carriers onto the surface with better charge separation, thus facilitat­
ing higher photocatalytic activity [20]. Modeling heterojunction with various combinations of 

327
Semiconductor-based Materials for Water-Splitting Applications
nanostructured metal oxides of Ti, Bi, Zn, W, Fe, and Cu has been exhaustively studied for 
photo-electrocatalytic water splitting owing to the synergistic enhancement of the optoelectronic 
properties [21, 22]. These heterojunction semiconductors work in broader solar spectrum with 
improved charge separation amplifying their water splitting ability [23]. Alternatively, doping of 
the metal oxide with suitable elements like the non-metals C, N, O, and S or the transition metals 
V, W, and Sn are found to enhance the optical activity and electronic properties when compared 
to their pure semiconductor materials [24–26]. On doping, additional energy levels are introduced 
by the dopant assisting in the reduction of the band gap, thereby improving the photocatalytic 
activity. From Table 25.1, it is evident that the doping of the metal oxides or forming their het­
erojunction exhibited better photo-electrochemical activity and stability than that of the bare 
metal oxide irrespective of HER or OER [23]. However, stability of the semiconductor was still a 
reasonable concern to be dealt with.
FIGURE 25.2  Illustration of the band gaps in binary and ternary metal oxides. (Image credit, Author.)
TABLE 25.1
Comparison of Selected Metal Oxides as Photocathodes/Photoanodes with Respect to 
Their Photoelectrochemical Activity and Stability
Photocathode
Electrolyte
Photocurrent Density
Stability (Photocurrent 
Retention Rate)
Bare Cu2O thin film
1.0 M Na2SO4
5 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs RHE
≈0% after 20 min
Cu2O/C nanowire
0.5 M Na2SO4
2.7 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs RHE
61.3% after 1000 s
Co3O4 nanosheet
0.5 M Na2S
33.6 µA cm−2 at zero bias
–
Co3O4/CuO nanosheet
0.5 M Na2SO4
6.5 mA cm−2 vs SCE at −0.3 V
–
CuRhO2 thin film
1.0 M NaOH
1.0 mA cm−2 at −0.9 V vs SCE
70% after 8 h
Rh-doped SrTiO3 thin film
0.1 M K2SO4
140 µA cm−2 at −0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl
29% after 16 h
Photoanode
Electrolyte
Photocurrent Density
Stability (Photocurrent 
Retention Rate)
TiO2 nanowire
0.25 M Na2S/0.35 M Na2SO3
0.5 mA cm−2 at −0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl
–
Ni(OH)2/H-TiO2 nanowire
1 M KOH &1.5 M urea
1.97 mA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs Ag/AgCl
97% after 72 h
Bare ZnO nanowire
0.5 M NaClO4
17 µA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs Ag/AgCl
–
CN co-doped ZnO nanorod
0.1 M Na2SO4
520 µA cm−2 at 0.6 V vs Ag/AgCl
–
ZnWO4/WO3 thin film
0.1 M Na2SO4
0.52 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs Ag/AgCl
–
CuWO4 thin film
0.1 M PBS
0.16 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V vs Ag/AgCl
90% after 12 h

328
Handbook of Semiconductors
25.2.2  Organic Semiconductors
In succession to the thriving exploitation of organic semiconductors in organic photovoltaic 
devices, these organic semiconductors were investigated for their advantages in water splitting 
[27–29]. A boost in the photoelectrochemical performance of the inorganic semiconductor resulted 
in fabricating the former with an organic moiety [30, 31]. This can be attributed to the strong bond­
ing interaction between the transition metal and the organic ligand which passivates the metal 
oxide layer. Passivation contributed towards the elevation in the durability of the semiconductors 
when compared to the bare metal oxide. These organic semiconductors exhibit certain advantages 
such as high charge-transfer transport, tunable band gaps, economical, additional passivation, 
and solubility in organic solvents [27, 28, 32]. Majorly polymeric compounds with conjugated 
π-systems, such as poly(p-phenylene), polypyrole, polyaniline (PANI), poly(3-hexylthiophene), 
etc. (Figure 25.3) are being utilized for water splitting [33, 34]. The extended π-system easily 
interacts with the photons to initiate the photo-electrocatalysis. Correspondingly, they maintain 
the charge separation for longer time, decreasing the chances of charge recombination and thereby 
increasing the catalytic activity.
Following the substantial performance of polymers and copolymers as photocathodes, their perfor­
mance as photoanodes were investigated. However, they displayed slow kinetics for the oxidation reac­
tion. The retarded activity may be attributed to the low oxidation potential of the organic semiconductors 
at higher pH [35, 36] and need further venturing into the mechanism. On the other side, carbon nitride 
was found to have the properties ideal for photoanodes with the ability to achieve the appropriate highest 
occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels for the oxidation of water [37, 38]. Further, the doping of the 
carbon nitride system substantially enhanced the photocatalytic activity [39].
Likewise, metal organic frames (MOFs), covalent organic frameworks (COFs), and covalent 
triazine frameworks (CTFs) have also been investigated for their photocatalytic performance 
(Figure 25.4) [40–42]. Although the organic network easily undergoes electron excitation on irra­
diation, their poor conductivity restricts the catalytic reaction by the rapid charge recombination. To 
overcome this bottleneck of a very low carrier mobility, these frameworks can be fabricated into a 
heterojunction with other moieties like metal nanoparticles, inorganic materials, etc. [43].
25.2.3  Theoretical Calculations and Simulations
Great advancement has been achieved in the theoretical understanding of semiconductor-electrolyte 
interfaces. Studies have also extended to understand the semiconductor-catalyst-electrolyte inter­
faces. Conversely, mathematical calculations for the catalyst potential (Ecat), current density (J), 
and potential drop (V), as well as simulations based on first-principles quantum mechanics help to 
fathom the electronic states, band gap, possible electronic transitions, optical properties, effects of 
size, and influence of dopants and additives, giving a view into a nearly realistic impression of the 
mechanistic pathway [44–46]. For instance, Gai et al. [47], analyzed the photoelectrochemical activ­
ity of TiO2 (in the anatase phase) with its mono- and passivated co-doped analogues. The change in 
the band gap was studied for the pure and doped TiO2 by performing the calculations for band struc­
ture and energy using the frozen-core projector-augmented-wave (PAW) method. The local density 
FIGURE 25.3  Structures of selected polymer compounds used in organic semiconductors. (Image credit, 
Author.)

329
Semiconductor-based Materials for Water-Splitting Applications
approximation (LDA) was implemented as per the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP) 
codes. The calculated shift of the band edges and changes in the band gaps from the donor-acceptor 
pairs of the co-doped TiO2 are provided in Table 25.2. From the various co-dopants examined (N, 
C, V, Nb, Cr, and Mo), the (Mo + C) co-dopant passivated TiO2 with its reduced band gap to match
the visible light region, stood out be the best candidate for the water splitting.
The studies reveal that the evaluation of the theoretical knowledge acquired from simulations 
can help in understanding the interface physics and mechanistic pathways between the semiconduc­
tor electrode, electrocatalyst, and electrolyte. This greatly aids in the design and development of 
optimal semiconductor materials, providing a guide for an appropriate evaluation of a variety of 
combinations and permutations of semiconductor materials. Nevertheless, the agreement between 
the predicted photo-electrocatalytic activity must be assessed in practice for comprehending the 
semiconductor electrode for real-time applications.
FIGURE 25.4  An example of (a) a COF and (b) a CTF used for the light-driven photocatalytic water split­
ting. (Image credit, Author.)
TABLE 25.2
The Effect of Doping with Respect to Pure 
Anatase TiO2
Systems
∆Eυ
∆Ec
∆Eg
TiO2 (N + V)
0.38
−0.11
−0.49
TiO2 (N + Nb)
0.42
0.05
−0.37
TiO2 (C + Cr)
1.05
−0.31
−1.36
TiO2 (C + Mo)
1.04
−0.08
−1.12
The values are calculated using the frozen-core PAW method [47]. 
Positive value is indicative of increase in energy. Adapted with per­
mission [47], Copyright (2023), American Physical Society.

330
Handbook of Semiconductors
25.3  CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
Semiconductor materials for the optimal reaping of the light energy to efficiently convert into H2 
fuel has traveled a long way. Starting off from simple conventional metal oxides, a variety of mate­
rials irrespective of inorganic systems (binary, ternary oxides, and multifunctional), organic multi­
functional systems (MOFs, COFs, and CTFs), nanoparticles, and a range of their permutations and 
combinations have been immensely explored for the development of semiconductor photoelectrodes 
for efficient water splitting. Additionally, the synergistic effect on incorporation of electrocatalytic 
activity coupled with the photoelectrode heightens the efficiency and durability of the semiconduc­
tor material. On the other hand, the advancement of computation to realize the mechanistic interac­
tion between the semiconductor, catalyst, and electrolyte interface opens up a new perspective in 
designing materials with enhanced optoelectronic property. The enlightenment from the existing 
knowledge and the insights from simulations can lead us in designing and developing promising 
semiconductor photoelectrodes with exceptional activity.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 A. Fujishima, K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature 238 
(1972) 37–38.
	
2.	 M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori, N. S. Lewis, Solar 
water splitting cells, Chem. Rev 110 (2010) 6446–6473.
	
3.	 A. Kudo, Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev 38 
(2009) 253–278.
	
4.	 T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets, D. G. Nocera, Solar energy supply 
and storage for the legacy and nonlegacy worlds, Chem. Rev 110 (2010) 6474–6502.
	
5.	 I. E. Agency, Energy statistics, 2017, International Energy Agency Paris.
	
6.	 L. Peter, Fundamental aspects of photoelectrochemical water splitting at semiconductor electrodes, 
Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem 31 (2021) 100505.
	
7.	 S. Chang, X. Huang, C. Y. A. Ong, L. Zhao, L. Li, X. Wang, J. Ding, High loading accessible active sites 
via designable 3D-printed metal architecture towards promoting electrocatalytic performance, J. Mater. 
Chem. A 7 (2019) 18338–18347.
	
8.	 S. D. Adhikary, A. Tiwari, T. C. Nagaiah, D. Mandal, Stabilization of cobalt-polyoxometalate over poly 
(ionic liquid) composites for efficient electrocatalytic water oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 
(2018) 38872–38879.
	
9.	 X. Du, H. Su, X. Zhang, Metal-organic framework-derived M (M = Fe, Ni, Zn and Mo) doped Co9S8 
nanoarrays as efficient electrocatalyst for water splitting: The combination of theoretical calculation and 
experiment, J. Catal 383 (2020) 103–116.
	 10.	 A. Kafle, M. Kumar, D. Gupta, T. C. Nagaiah, The activation-free electroless deposition of NiFe over 
carbon cloth as a self-standing flexible electrode towards overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A 9 
(2021) 24299–24307.
	 11.	 A. J. Bard, M. A. Fox, Artificial photosynthesis: Solar splitting of water to hydrogen and oxygen, Acc. 
Chem. Res 28 (1995) 141–145.
	 12.	 A. B. Murphy, P. R. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne, J. A. Glasscock, 
Efficiency of solar water splitting using semiconductor electrodes, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 31 (2006) 
1999–2017.
	 13.	 R. Marschall, L. Wang, Non-metal doping of transition metal oxides for visible-light photocatalysis, 
Catal. Today 225 (2014) 111–135.
	 14.	 A. Walsh, Y. Yan, M. N. Huda, M. M. Al-Jassim, S.-H. Wei, Band edge electronic structure of BiVO4: 
Elucidating the role of the Bi s and V d orbitals, Chem. Mater 21 (2009) 547–551.
	 15.	 Y. Ling, Y. Li, Review of Sn-doped hematite nanostructures for photoelectrochemical water splitting, 
Part. Part. Syst. Charact 31 (2014) 1113–1121.
	 16.	 N. Kumar, K. Naveen, M. Kumar, T. C. Nagaiah, R. Sakla, A. Ghosh, V. Siruguri, S. Sadhukhan, S. 
Kanungo, A. K. Paul, Multifunctionality exploration of Ca2FeRuO6: An efficient trifunctional elec­
trocatalyst toward OER/ORR/HER and photocatalyst for water splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater 4 
(2021) 1323–1334.

331
Semiconductor-based Materials for Water-Splitting Applications
	 17.	 B. Kim, T. Kim, K. Lee, J. Li, Recent advances in transition metal phosphide electrocatalysts for water 
splitting under neutral pH conditions, ChemElectroChem 7 (2020) 3578–3589.
	 18.	 M. Forster, R. J. Potter, Y. Ling, Y. Yang, D. R. Klug, Y. Li, A. J. Cowan, Oxygen deficient α-Fe2O3 
photoelectrodes: A balance between enhanced electrical properties and trap-mediated losses, Chem. Sci 
6 (2015) 4009–4016.
	 19.	 M. Ziwritsch, n Müller, H. Hempel, T. Unold, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol, D. Friedrich, R. Eichberger, 
Direct time-resolved observation of carrier trapping and polaron conductivity in BiVO4, ACS Energy 
Lett 1 (2016) 888–894.
	 20.	 Z. Zhang, M. F. Hossain, T. Takahashi, Photoelectrochemical water splitting on highly smooth and 
ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays for hydrogen generation, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 35 (2010) 8528–8535.
	 21.	 G. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Ling, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y.-C. Pu, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Tong, Y. Li, An electrochemical 
method to enhance the performance of metal oxides for photoelectrochemical water oxidation, J. Mater. 
Chem. A 4 (2016) 2849–2855.
	 22.	 J. Luo, L. Steier, M.-K. Son, M. Schreier, M. T. Mayer, M. Grätzel, Cu2O nanowire photocathodes for 
efficient and durable solar water splitting, Nano Lett 16 (2016) 1848–1857.
	 23.	 Y. Yang, S. Niu, D. Han, T. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Li, Progress in developing metal oxide nanomaterials for 
photoelectrochemical water splitting, Adv. Energy Mater 7 (2017) 1700555.
	 24.	 X. Yang, A. Wolcott, G. Wang, A. Sobo, R. C. Fitzmorris, F. Qian, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Nitrogen-doped 
ZnO nanowire arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Nano Lett 9 (2009) 2331–2336.
	 25.	 M. Xu, P. Da, H. Wu, D. Zhao, G. Zheng, Controlled Sn-doping in TiO2 nanowire photoanodes with 
enhanced photoelectrochemical conversion, Nano Lett 12 (2012) 1503–1508.
	 26.	 X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu, S. S. Mao, Increasing solar absorption for photocatalysis with black hydroge­
nated titanium dioxide nanocrystals, Science 331 (2011) 746–750.
	 27.	 L. Dou, Y. Liu, Z. Hong, G. Li, Y. Yang, Low-bandgap near-IR conjugated polymers/molecules for 
organic electronics, Chem. Rev 115 (2015) 12633–12665.
	 28.	 S. Xiao, Q. Zhang, W. You, Molecular engineering of conjugated polymers for solar cells: An updated 
report, Adv. Mater 29 (2017) 1601391.
	 29.	 J. Hou, O. Inganäs, R. H. Friend, F. Gao, Organic solar cells based on non-fullerene acceptors, Nat. Mater 
17 (2018) 119–128.
	 30.	 D. Jeon, N. Kim, S. Bae, Y. Han, J. Ryu, WO3/conducting polymer heterojunction photoanodes for effi­
cient and stable photoelectrochemical water splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 10 (2018) 8036–8044.
	 31.	 S. Sharma, S. Singh, N. Khare, Enhanced photosensitization of zinc oxide nanorods using polyaniline 
for efficient photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy 41 (2016) 
21088–21098.
	 32.	 H. Yao, L. Ye, H. Zhang, S. Li, S. Zhang, J. Hou, Molecular design of benzodithiophene-based organic 
photovoltaic materials, Chem. Rev 116 (2016) 7397–7457.
	 33.	 S. Yanagida, A. Kabumoto, K. Mizumoto, C. Pac, K. Yoshino, Poly(p-phenylene)-catalysed photoreduc­
tion of water to hydrogen, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun. (1985) 474–475.
	 34.	 J. M. Yu, J.-W. Jang, Organic semiconductor-based photoelectrochemical cells for efficient solar-to-
chemical conversion, Catalysts 13 (2023) 814.
	 35.	 N. S. Lewis, Research opportunities to advance solar energy utilization, Science 351 (2016) aad1920.
	 36.	 C. Dai, T. He, L. Zhong, X. Liu, W. Zhen, C. Xue, S. Li, D. Jiang, B. Liu, 2,4,6-Triphenyl-1,3,5-Triazine 
based covalent organic frameworks for photoelectrochemical H2 evolution, Adv. Mater. Interfaces 8 
(2021) 2002191.
	 37.	 Y. Fang, X. Li, X. Wang, Synthesis of polymeric carbon nitride films with adhesive interfaces for solar 
water splitting devices, ACS Catal 8 (2018) 8774–8780.
	 38.	 J. Bian, Q. Li, C. Huang, J. Li, Y. Guo, M. Zaw, R.-Q. Zhang, Thermal vapor condensation of uniform 
graphitic carbon nitride films with remarkable photocurrent density for photoelectrochemical applica­
tions, Nano Energy 15 (2015) 353–361.
	 39.	 A. M. Antony, V. Kandathil, M. Kempasiddaiah, R. Shwetharani, R. G. Balakrishna, S. M. El-Bahy, 
M. M. Hessien, G. A. Mersal, M. M. Ibrahim, S. A. Patil, Graphitic carbon nitride supported palladium 
nanocatalyst as an efficient and sustainable catalyst for treating environmental contaminants and hydro­
gen evolution reaction, Colloids Surf. A Physicochem. Eng. Asp 647 (2022) 129116.
	 40.	 G. Wang, Y. Liu, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, A novel metal–organic framework based on bis­
muth and trimesic acid: Synthesis, structure and properties, Dalton Trans 44 (2015) 16238–16241.
	 41.	 S. Zhang, G. Cheng, L. Guo, N. Wang, B. Tan, S. Jin, Strong-base-assisted synthesis of a crystalline 
covalent triazine framework with high hydrophilicity via benzylamine monomer for photocatalytic 
water splitting, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 59 (2020) 6007–6014.

332
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 42.	 Y. Wan, L. Wang, H. Xu, X. Wu, J. Yang, A simple molecular design strategy for two-dimensional 
covalent organic framework capable of visible-light-driven water splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc 142 (2020) 
4508–4516.
	 43.	 T. Zhang, W. Lin, Metal–organic frameworks for artificial photosynthesis and photocatalysis, Chem. 
Soc. Rev 43 (2014) 5982–5993.
	 44.	 T. J. Mills, F. Lin, S. W. Boettcher, Theory and simulations of electrocatalyst-coated semiconductor 
electrodes for solar water splitting, Phys. Rev. Lett 112 (2014) 148304.
	 45.	 R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki, Y. Taga, Visible-light photocatalysis in nitrogen-doped 
titanium oxides, Science 293 (2001) 269–271.
	 46.	 A. Govind Rajan, J. M. P. Martirez, E. A. Carter, Why do we use the materials and operating conditions 
we use for heterogeneous (photo)electrochemical water splitting? ACS Catal 10 (2020) 11177–11234.
	 47.	 Y. Gai, J. Li, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia, S.-H. Wei, Design of narrow-gap TiO2: A passivated codoping approach 
for enhanced photoelectrochemical activity, Phys. Rev. Lett 102 (2009) 036402.

333
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-26
Copper Oxide-based 
Semiconductors for Photo-
Assisted Water Splitting
Himanshu S. Sahoo, Debasish Ray, 
Sangeeta Ghosh, and Chinmoy Bhattacharya
26.1  INTRODUCTION
The evolutionary growth in modern technology and the enhanced global population extract huge 
amounts of limited conventional resources such as coal, oils, wood, etc., to meet their energy 
requirements, damaging the limited stock. The consumption of carbon-based fuels for daily 
activities causes numerous difficult situations, such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and other toxic gas 
emissions into the environment that cause global warming, water pollution, and the destruction of 
the ecosystem. To avoid such problems, novel advanced technologies for energy generation must 
be followed. There are many carbon-free energy sources, such as sunlight, biological wastes, 
hydropower, wind, and nuclear, which have the ability to fulfill energy needs by conserving 
natural resources. Among the various green energy generation methods, the photoelectrochemi­
cal (PEC) splitting of water into H2 and O2 is much simpler and more environmentally friendly 
than the catalytic reformation of hydrocarbons [1, 2]. For the conversion of limitless solar energy 
into green fuel, PEC solar water splitting is considered a potential technology for sustainable 
development.
26.1.1  Fundamental Concepts Involved in PEC Water Splitting
Green plants have the capacity to synthesize sugars and oxygen molecules from CO2 and water mol­
ecules utilizing sunlight by a process called photosynthesis. In artificial photosynthesis, hydrogen 
(H2) and oxygen (O2) molecules are produced using a semiconducting material following a similar 
procedure. PEC devices convert solar energy to chemical energy, the most popular approach com­
bining the electro-catalytic and light-absorbing functions. The process occurs in sunlight through 
photosensitive materials such as semiconductors. The water splitting experiment using TiO2 pho­
tocatalysts in the presence of ultraviolet irradiation was first explained by Fujishima and Honda in 
1972 [3]. In principle, a PEC cell consists of an anode and a cathode immersed in an electrolyte 
and connected by an external circuit. The key feature is that at least one of the two electrodes 
should be a semiconductor that can absorb photons and generate e–-h+ pairs. A p-type semicon­
ductor photocathode reduces the proton (H+) to H2, while molecular O2 is evolved at the counter 
electrode. On the other hand, the n-type semiconductor photoanode oxidizes water to O2, and H2 is 
produced at the counter electrode. If both electrodes are made up of light-absorbing materials, the 
cell is called a tandem cell.
When the semiconducting material absorbs light having energy equal to or higher than the band 
gap, e–-h+ pairs are generated. The excited electrons in the conduction band (CB) are responsible for 
the reduction of water (2H+ + 2e−→ H2). In contrast, the holes in the valence band (VB) are involved
in the four-electron water oxidation process (2H2O +4h+→ 4H+ + O2). It is also noted that the posi­
tion of VB must be more positive compared to the oxygen evolution potential.
26

334
Handbook of Semiconductors
In summary, the photo-electrolysis of water takes place in three steps;
1.	The semiconducting material absorbs the photons with energies higher than the band gap 
energy, and electron (e−) and hole (h+) pairs are formed.
2.	The generated electron and hole pairs are separated and migrate to the surface reaction 
sites.
3.	Surface chemical reaction occurs between these carriers with various compounds (e.g., 
H2O) to generate H2 and O2.
At high pH, the redox reactions can be described as:
	
4OH
4h
2H O
O
–
2
2
+
→
+
+
	
(26.1)
	
4H O
4e
2H
4OH
2
–
2
–
+
→
+
	
(26.2)
The overall water-splitting reaction can be written as;
	
H O
O
H
E
1.23V
2
1
2
2
2
0
(
)
→
+
∆
=+
	
(26.3)
where ΔE0 is the standard reduction potential and is independent of the pH.
Since the oxygen and hydrogen molecules generated in a PEC cell are in gaseous form in two 
different terminals, there is no chance for the reverse reaction between H2 and O2 to form water. It 
is to be noted that the water-splitting reaction is endothermic and deals with positive free energy 
changes (ΔG0: +237 kJ/mol), so this is a non-spontaneous reaction associated with a standard 
potential difference of 1.23 V. The conversion efficiency and stability of the PEC water splitting 
process depend on photoelectrodes composed of light-sensitive semiconductor material. Therefore, 
the selection of suitable photocatalytic materials for PEC water splitting generating H2 and O2 as 
fuel is a primary concern.
26.2  JUSTIFICATION OF CHOOSING CUPROUS OXIDES
Cuprous oxide (Cu2O)-based semiconductor devices are considered as an alternative to Si-based solar 
cells. The qualities such as earth abundance, low cost, non- toxicity, and environment-friendly nature 
of Cu2O have acquired much interest as photoactive materials in PEC devices. Cu2O absorbs sunlight 
in the 300–620 nm range and has direct band gap energy (1.8–2.2 eV) [4]. It has received significant 
attention as a promising photocatalyst for PEC hydrogen production, although photo-corrosion is the 
major challenge for regular applications of Cu2O [5, 6]. The theoretical photocurrent obtainable from 
the water splitting using Cu2O as photo-electrode is reported as –14.7 mA/cm2 under 1 sun illumina­
tion (AM 1.5G) [7]. Experiments show that photo-corrosion is somehow controlled by adding the 
selective passivation layer on the Cu2O surface, which limits the direct contact between the photo-
electrode and the electrolyte [8]. The best PEC performances of Cu2O were measured using TiO2 as 
a protective layer prepared by the reduction of lactate-stabilized Cu2+ ions at pH ~12 [9, 10]. A maxi­
mum photocurrent of −7.6 mA/cm2 at 0V vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) was recorded. The 
position of the Fermi level indicates that it is possible to fabricate an efficient PEC device by coupling 
with n-type photoelectrodes [11]. The CB of Cu2O lies 0.7V negative to the HER potential, and the 
VB lies positive to the oxygen evolution reaction [OER] potential. The flat band potential of Cu2O was 
calculated as 0.7 V vs. RHE using the Mott-Schottky (MS) equation [12]. Cu2O can be used as a prom­
ising candidate to fulfill all the requirements as a catalyst for PEC reactions. Due to the small indirect 
band gap energy (1.2–1.8 eV), the p-type cupric oxide (CuO) is achieving more photocurrent than 
Cu2O [13]. It has attracted less attention than Cu2O because its CB lies more positive than Cu2O. The 
CuO can reduce water to molecular hydrogen by forming composites [14]. However, photo-corrosion 

335
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
is the major drawback for both CuO and Cu2O. Among the different phases of copper oxides, cuprite 
exhibits the most stable phase with CuO and Cu3O4. The Cu2O unit cell contains a total of six atoms; 
the copper atoms are arranged in a face centered cubic (fcc) lattice pattern, and the oxygen atoms are 
occupied at the body-centered cubic lattice. The coordination number of copper in Cu2O is four.
26.3  COMMON SYNTHESIS METHODS TO PREPARE 
COPPER OXIDE SEMICONDUCTORS
Researchers are adopting newly developed technologies to synthesize cuprous oxide to improve 
PEC performances by modulating its properties. Chemical deposition, sputtering, thermal oxida­
tion, anodic oxidation, sol-gel chemistry, radical oxidation, electrodeposition, and solvothermal 
methods are used to fabricate the p-type Cu2O thin films [15]. The electrodeposition technique is 
the most preferred method for depositing Cu2O on the conducting substrates due to its versatility, 
low cost, low-temperature requirements, etc. [16].
The photo-corrosion is the major drawback of Cu2O, so bare Cu2O is not considered as a pro­
ductive photo-catalyst for PEC water splitting. The stability and photocurrent density of the Cu2O 
semiconductor can be boosted by changing crystal faceting and structure. The crystal facet mainly 
depends upon the pH of the electrolytic solution. The {111} facet orientation of Cu2O is dominant 
at a high pH, whereas the other orientations like {200} are dominant at pH below 10. The orienta­
tions, crystal faceting, pH of the bath solution, and temperature should be optimized to enhance the 
photocurrent and photo-stability [17]. By optimizing the electrochemical solution conditions like pH 
of the bath, temperature, concentrations, additive reagents, etc., the size, shape, and orientations of 
the deposited thin films on different substrates can be monitored [18]. The optimized surface area 
and charge transfer properties with well-formed branched orientations and morphology of Cu2O thin 
films can be developed efficiently, leading to solar energy conversion [19, 20]. Tang et al. followed the 
hydrothermal oxidation route to synthesize strong {110} texture Cu2O [21]. Maruyama et al. depos­
ited copper (II) oxide thin film by the chemical vapor deposition method [22]. Choi et al. fabricated 
the Cu2O thin films on an aluminum substrate via an electrodeposition technique [23]. DC magne­
tron sputtering method was followed by Reddy et al. for the single-phase Cu2O thin films with {111} 
and {200} orientations on the glass substrates [24]. Richardson et al. synthesized Cu2O thin films on 
fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) by anodic oxidation methods [25]. Zhai et al. and his research group 
demonstrated an improved electrodeposition method for the deposition of highly crystallized Cu2O 
thin films in the presence of citric acid at high pH and medium temperatures [26]. By optimizing the 
deposition time, the shape of the Cu2O changes from cubical to tetrahedral to truncated cube and 
from truncated cube to truncated octahedron. This is ascribed to the interaction of citric ions with 
{111} facet of Cu2O. The band gap energies were obtained in the range of 2.21–2.43 eV for the various 
cuprous oxide thin films, employing UV-Vis absorption spectra. An in situ redox reaction between 
the metallic copper foil and Cu2+ ion can be employed by modifying the copper precursors and 
anionic groups via hydrothermal strategy for the successful fabrication of rod-shaped arrays, cross-
linked octahedra, and truncated octahedra-shaped Cu2O thin films [27]. The {111} facet rod arrays 
of Cu2O possess a large number of copper vacancies, showing the best photocatalytic performances 
followed by truncated octahedra-shaped {111} and {100} oriented and octahedral {111} facet. Surface 
reformations occur in rod-shaped arrays, improving photocatalytic activity, while truncated and 
cross-linked octahedra follow photo-corrosion via oxidation. The most stable photoactivity exhibited 
by the octahedral and rod-shaped arrays is minimal in the case of truncated octahedra.
26.4  STRATEGIES FOR ENHANCING PEC PERFORMANCES
The formation of a hybrid structure is an alternative way to enhance the PEC performance 
of copper oxide-based semiconductors. The Cu2O is made of a hybrid structure with various 
metal oxide semiconductors, carbon nanostructures, etc. The Schottky barrier formed at the 

336
Handbook of Semiconductors
electrode-electrolyte interface suppresses the recombination of charge carriers to increase the 
photocatalytic efficiency. Different strategies, such as the formation of heterostructures, doping 
with elements, protective layer formation, and incorporation of co-catalysts, are employed to 
improve the PEC efficiency.
26.4.1  Heterostructure
Nickel oxide/cuprous oxide nanocomposite was developed by Liu et al. via low-temperature solid 
reaction method [28, 29]. The NiO/Cu2O composite suspension was spin-coated on the FTO sub­
strate. The presence of Ni, O, and Cu elements is confirmed from the X-ray photoelectron spectra 
(XPS) analysis of the NiO/Cu2O-6 sample (6% wt. of Cu2O in the sample). The binding energy 
peaks of the Ni2+, Ni3+, and Cu+ and their satellite peaks confirmed the formation of the Cu2O-
modified NiO nanocomposite. The band gap energy of the NiO sample is 3.8 eV, calculated from 
the Tauc plot. The vacant third ‘d’ states of Ni present above the valence band is responsible for the 
absorption in the visible region of the NiO sample. The relative amount of Cu2O present in NiO/
Cu2O is directly proportional to the absorption intensity. This indicates that the composite is more 
favorable for the conversion of solar energy. The bare NiO sample demonstrates a cathodic pho­
tocurrent density of –0.3 μA/cm2. It is noticed that the photocurrent increases after the formation 
of the NiO/Cu2O junction. The highest photocurrent density reported for the NiO/Cu2O-6 sample 
(–3 μA/cm2) is almost ten times that of the bare sample. This increase in photocurrent suggests NiO/
Cu2O composite formation, which triggers the charge partition and charge transfer at the electrode/
electrolyte interface. The NiO/Cu2O-9 sample exhibited less photocurrent density (–2.25 μA/cm2), 
which shows that the excess Cu2O may block the active sites available for reaction. The MS analysis 
confirmed that the NiO/Cu2O composite shows p-type semi-conductivity. No hydrogen evolution 
was detected in the case of a bare NiO electrode at –0.0455V vs. RHE. The highest amount of 
17.6 μmol hydrogen gas was evolved when a NiO/Cu2O-6 composite was taken as the photocathode. 
The further Cu2O loading to the NiO composite introduces the recombination sites, which decrease 
the photoconversion efficiency.
Dubale et al. and his co-workers checked the PEC performance of graphene-modified Cu2O [30]. 
Cu(OH)2 nanostructures were initially prepared on a Cu mesh electrode by anodization technique in 
galvanostatic mode. The Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays/Cu mesh were dipped in GO solution followed 
by annealing at 500°C in the N2 atmosphere to prepare the graphene/Cu2O nanowires arrays/Cu 
mesh composite electrode. The Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh electrode dipped in 1.0 mg/mL of GO is denoted 
as the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode. A twisted and fractured image was noticed from the scan­
ning electron microscope (SEM) image of Cu(OH)2NWAs (nanowire arrays). However, after gra­
phene incorporation, no fracture was observed. The Cu2O was swaddled into the thin graphene film, 
confirmed by transmission electron microscope (TEM) images, which suppressed the degradation 
of the material and enhanced the charge carrier partition with an increase in the PEC activity. The 
band gap energy of both pure Cu2O/Cu and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode was 2.03 eV, which was 
found by extrapolating (α hν)2 vs. hν plot. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) under chopped 
condition of the graphene-modified Cu2O/Cu mesh sample generated a photocurrent density of 
–4.8 mA/cm2, which is two-fold higher than the naked Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode (–2.3 mA/cm2) 
at 0 V vs. RHE. The photostability of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu sample is 83.3% after 20 minutes under 
light illumination, which is five times more stable than the Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode (14.5%). This 
indicates that graphene provides excellent behavior in suppressing photo-corrosion of Cu2O and 
performs as a fast transfer of the charge carriers and high separation rate of electron-hole pairs. The 
charge transfer is more facile under light illumination due to photoexcitation. The modified G-1.0/
Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode possesses lower charge transfer resistance (Rct) than the pure Cu2O elec­
trode under dark and light illumination. This indicates that the incorporation of graphene into Cu2O 
improves the conduction of the photoexcited carriers and hence achieves a better photo-response. 
This facilitates the electron-hole recombination for better PEC performances. The MS analysis was 

337
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
performed at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz, which is a plot of 1/C2 vs. V (potential). The flat-band 
potential (Vfb) carrier density can be calculated by using the MS equation given below:	
1
C
2
eN A
V
V
T
e
2
0
A
2
fb
B
ε ε
=
−
−




k	
(26.4)
Where, C = Differential capacitance
ε0 = Permittivity of free space
ε = Dielectric constant of semiconductor
e = Electronic charge
NA = Avogadro’s number
A = Cross-sectional area of semiconductor
B
k  = Boltzmann constant
T = Absolute temperature
The negative slope of the MS plot indicates that the sample is showing p-type semi-conductivity.
Sharma et al. [31] reported a junction of p-type Cu2O, deposited spray pyrolytically with n-type 
SrTiO3 for modification in PEC water splitting. The heterojunction composite exhibited remarkable 
stability and photocorrosion resistivity at applied potentials for constant illumination without any 
significant loss. The band position of the heterojunction semiconductor, as shown in Figure 26.1, 
energetically favored the charge separation process and the PEC performance of the materials. The 
influence of SrTiO3 on Cu2O was suggested as a blue shift occurred in the absorption edge when 
thickness increased. The slope of the MS curves determines the value of flat band potential, which 
is crucial to determine how well the photoelectrode performs in PEC water splitting. The decrease 
in band bending implied by the positive shift in the Vfb relative to Cu2O improves electron transport.
FIGURE 26.1  Energy band diagram of Cu2O and SrTiO3 before and after the formation of p-n junction. 
(Adapted with permission [31], Copyright (2014), The Journal of Physical Chemistry C.)

338
Handbook of Semiconductors
A tandem cell of p-type C-modified Cu2O nanoneedles and n-type TiO2–x nanorods (NRs) is 
configured for solar-driven water splitting reaction using a Z-scheme by Kaneza et al. [32]. The 
carbon-modified Cu2O (C/Cu2O nano-needles, NNs) electrodes were prepared via the anodization 
method from KOH solution in galvanostatic mode, followed by soaking in dextrose solution and 
annealing in an N2 atmosphere. The n-type TiO2–x nanorods were synthesized via the hydrothermal 
method. A single cubic Cu2O phase with a preferred orientation along the {111} orientation was 
obtained from the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, and the elemental Cu peaks were assigned to 
the Cu foil substrate. The estimated band gap energy is 2.18 eV for C/Cu2O NNs and 3.26 eV for 
TiO2–xNRs, which was confirmed by diffuse reflectance spectra (DRS) analysis. The PEC analyses 
were performed in a three-electrode setup, taking 0.5 M Na2SO4 in 0.1 M KH2PO4 at pH 5.0 under 
light illumination at 1 sun (A.M 1.5, 100 mW/cm2) in N2-purging. The C/Cu2O NNs electrode 
generated a stable photocurrent density of ~0.3 mA/cm2 at 0 V vs. RHE (–0.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl), 
whereas TiO2 showed only a photocurrent density of 0.06 mA/cm2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (0.8 V vs. 
Ag/AgCl). In the absence of any redox mediator or any external bias, the PEC performance of C/
Cu2O nanoneedles, when coupled with TiO2–x nanorods in a tandem cell configuration, exhibited 
a photocurrent density of 0.65 mA/cm2. The electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) analysis 
revealed that after incorporating carbon in the anodized Cu2O, the Rct value decreases, implying 
the facile charge transfer process of charge carriers. The MS analysis generated the positive slope 
for TiO2–x and the negative slope for C/Cu2O, confirming the samples’ n-type and p-type semi-
conductivity, respectively.
Jamali et al. [33] reported that the chemical stability of electrodeposited Cu2O was improved by 
surface modification with WO3 and CuWO4. The same synthetic route was explored to carry out 
these two alterations with different annealing temperatures. After the deposition of CuWO4 on the 
Cu2O substrate, the heterostructure sample achieved maximum photocurrent density, i.e., −2.8 mA/
cm2, which is ~4 times greater than the pure one. Due to the facile charge transportation of bulk 
Cu2O to the electrolyte, the composite was exceptionally stable for application in photoelectrochem­
istry. It was demonstrated that increased light absorption and subsequent photocurrent production in 
the modified samples, as well as facile charge transfer at the photocathode/electrolyte interface, are 
mainly responsible for the improved photo-response of the modified composite.
26.4.2  Doping
Doping with heteroatom is an impressive technique to modulate the electronic structure of the 
photocatalyst. In tailoring the sample with doping, the query lies in introducing heteroatom with 
the Cu2O lattice without hampering its primary growing pattern. This required curbing the in situ 
growth of hetero nano-composites. Additionally, doping has fascinated the researcher as it has spe­
cific qualities for enhancing the PEC application of Cu2O lattice.
Shyamal et al. employed the electrodeposition technique to fabricate Cu2O photoelectrodes and 
lead the modification by introducing Cd2+ ions to the same electrolytic bath [34]. For the doping of 
Cd2+ ion in the pure Cu2O photocathode, the n-type Cd(OH)2 buffer layer was chosen. The Cd+2 ion 
incorporation elevates the PEC activity of the photoelectrode by altering various parameters such 
as the crystallinity of the synthesized semiconductor, the particle size of the nanomaterials, and 
facile charge transfer kinetics by preventing the recombination rate of photogenerated charge car­
riers. The metal deficiency inside the Cu2O lattice evident by the energy dispersive spectra (EDS) 
analysis is responsible for the origination of p-type semiconductivity of the Cu2O photoelectrode, 
as confirmed by the MS experiment. This deficiency in the metal inside the pure matrix serves as 
a hole that leads to the p-type property. However, introducing Cd into the semiconductor enhances 
the copper content along with the enlarged stoichiometric difference between the copper-to-oxygen 
ratio. The presence of the Cd(OH)2 lattice in the modified samples was demonstrated through the 
small angle XRD analysis of the optimized 33% Cd-Cu2O photocatalyst. The analysis revealed the 

339
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
appearance of two new small diffraction peaks at an angle of 29.4° and 35.2° in accordance with 
the hexagonal Cd(OH)2 with {hkl} plane corresponding to {100} and {101}. The average crystallite 
size of the photocatalysts was calculated by employing the Debye Scherrer equation: D = (0.9)/
(λ × βcosθ), where β: full width at half maxima (FWHM, measured in degree), λ: X-ray wave­
length (15.41 nm) and diffraction angle depicted by θ, measured in degrees. The crystalline size 
of the Cu2O matrices gradually decreases with the progressive introduction of Cd2+ ions into the 
deposition bath, and optimization has been achieved with about 33% Cd ion introduction to the 
bath. The successive reduction in crystalline size suggests an enhanced active surface area for 
the modified thin film photocatalyst, and consequently, it modifies the PEC performance of the 
samples with the same trend. XPS analysis revealed the simultaneous presence of Cu2O and Cd2+ 
ions for the optimized photocatalyst. For the bare cuprous oxide Cu2O (Cu+1), the peaks were 
reported at the binding energy level of 932.2 eV, whereas the secondary peak appeared at 952.1 eV, 
corresponding to Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2, respectively. In comparison, the same peaks were shifted to 
higher binding energy levels upon the addition of Cd2+-ion. For modified photocatalysts, the peaks 
were reported at 932.8 eV and 952.7 eV for the Cu level, as mentioned above. Moreover, two new 
peaks at 405 and 411 eV were reported to correspond to the Cd 3d5/2 and Cd 3d3/2, respectively. The 
PEC activities of the pure and Cd2+-modified Cu2O matrix were evaluated under periodical illumi­
nation of UV-visible light in pH 4.9, using acetate buffer solution in the presence of 0.1(M) Na2SO4 
as the supporting electrolyte. The photocurrent was reported to be –4.0 mA/cm2 for the pure Cu2O 
photocatalyst over the metallic copper substrate at an applied external bias of 0.4 V against a 
normal hydrogen electrode (NHE). Moreover, the photocurrent gradually improved with the suc­
cessive inclusion of Cd2+-ions into the deposition bath and attained a maximum value for the 33% 
Cd incorporation in the Cu2O deposition bath. Further addition of cadmium into the electrolytic 
bath leads to the suppression of photocurrent generation. The highest photocurrent of –6.1 mA/
cm2 was reported for 33% Cd2+-incorporated Cu2O matrix at an applied external bias of 0.4 V vs. 
NHE, which is ~1.5-fold higher than that of pure Cu2O matrix. The suppression in the photocur­
rent for the higher level addition of Cd2+ (>35%) was considered due to the excessive distribution 
of Cd-particles to the vacant site present in the p-type Cu2O thin film, causing the reduction in the 
carrier concentration. Furthermore, aggregation of too much Cd(OH)2 layer into the matrix leads 
to the generation of defects in the crystal lattice, reducing the lifetime of photogenerated charge 
carriers through recombination at the interfacial region prior to the arrival at the depletion layer. 
The utmost photo-conversion efficacy of about 2.8% was reported for the pure Cu2O photocatalyst 
over the Cu substrate, while the efficiency advances up to 5.8% for the optimized 33% Cd-Cu2O. 
The photo-conversion efficiency was obtained using the formula: %η = (Vmax × I max)/Pinput. The 
amount of H2 evolved by the pure and optimized photocatalyst via photocatalytic water reduction 
was carried out at an applied external bias of 0.0 V against NHE under constant visible light (λ ≥ 
390 nm) illumination. The H2 production rate for a pure Cu2O photoelectrode was recorded to be 
2.0 µmol, which is extended by ~1.5 fold (2.9 µmol) for the 33% Cd incorporated Cu2O matrix. 
The amount of H2 generation and the chronoamperometric (photocurrent vs. time) plots are useful 
to evaluate the faradaic efficiency. The faradaic efficiency was reported to be 45% and 36% for 
the optimized (33% Cd) and pure Cu2O thin films. The incident photon to current conversion effi­
ciency (IPCE) was also documented to be 44% for the bare Cu2O thin film, which was enhanced 
almost two times (~87%) for the optimized sample. The impedance spectra were recorded to study 
the charge transfer kinetics of the thin films at an applied external bias of 0.4 V against NHE. The 
Rct was significantly reduced by adding a cadmium ion into the electrolytic bath and reaching the 
lowest value for the 33% Cd-included photocatalyst, resulting in superior charge transfer kinetics 
at the interfacial region. The p-type nature of these photocatalysts was confirmed by the negative 
slope of the MS plot.
Hosseini et al. synthesized the C-doped CuO/g-C3N4 composite via the microwave-assisted 
method for PEC water splitting applications [35]. A weak diffraction peak of 2
27.7
θ =
° is assigned 
for the {002} plane of g C3N4. The mean crystallite size of CuO in C-CuO/CN, CuO/CN, and 

340
Handbook of Semiconductors
CuO was calculated to be 40.9, 16.1, and 20.4 nm, respectively, by applying the Scherrer equa­
tion. The XPS scan study of C-CuO/CN shows no elements except carbon, copper, oxygen, and 
nitrogen. The band gap of the sample is calculated as 1.5 eV from the absorption spectra. Enlarging 
the crystalline size and carbon content in CuO influences light absorption at higher wavelengths. 
The photocurrent density exhibited by the CuO/CN was more than two times higher compared 
to the bare CuO, mainly due to the heterojunction formation. It is also observed that the carbon-
doped CuO/CN (C-CuO/CN) demonstrates a photocurrent density of –2.38 mA/cm2 at an applied 
bias of 0 V vs. RHE. The photocurrent response of the prepared samples was recorded in the span 
of 180 seconds at a constant applied bias of 0.125 V against RHE. Anyway, C-CuO/CN exhibited 
superior PEC performances.
The EIS indicates that the Rct for the photoelectrodes is in the order of 3.48, 7.69, and 18.53 kΩ/
cm2 for the C-CuO/CN composite, CuO/CN, and pure CuO, respectively. The lowest Rct for the 
C-CuO/CN composite over pure matrix indicates facile charge transfer kinetics at the interfacial
region owing to the halting charge recombination rate. The scanty durability of copper-based metal
oxides in an aqueous medium limits the potential utilization of these photoelectrodes. The better
durability of the C-CuO/CN composite over the other synthesized semiconductors was confirmed
by chronoamperometric analysis. The amount of hydrogen evolved by the various photocathodes is
determined as 3.91, 2.67, and 2.35 μmol/h-cm2 for the optimized C-CuO/CN composite, CuO/CN,
and pure CuO, respectively.
Shyamal et al. documented the role of Bi introduction into the Cu2O thin film prepared by elec­
trodeposition for the PEC hydrogen generation [36]. The surface morphology as well as the crystal­
line pattern was influenced by the incorporation of Bi into the Cu2O matrix when the sample was 
developed either in the presence of the Bi+3 ion in the electrolytic bath or previously deposited Bi 
nanoparticles (NPs) onto the substrate, or the same nanoparticles suspended in the bath. The cubic 
crystallinity of all the photocathodes was confirmed by XRD analysis. The addition of Bi does not 
alter the crystalline nature of the materials but instead leads to the broadness of the peak; addition­
ally, the ratio of two major peaks was changed. Consequently, the particle size of the modified 
sample was in the order of 45 nm, 25 nm, 26 nm, and 18 nm for the pure Cu2O matrix; the Bi ion 
included Cu2O thin film, Bi nanoparticle-suspended Cu2O photocatalyst, and Bi nanoparticle film/
Cu2O semiconductor, respectively. The highest photocurrent of –5.21 mA/cm2 at an applied exter­
nal bias of 0.4 V against NHE was reported for the Bi nanoparticle film/Cu2O thin film, followed 
by –4.9 mA/cm2 for the Bi nanoparticle-suspended Cu2O photocatalyst, –3.7 mA/cm2 for the Bi+3 
ion suspended Cu2O photocatalyst, and –2.6 mA/cm2 for the pure Cu2O matrix over ITO substrate 
(ITO/Cu2O), respectively. The band gap energy was reported to vary from 2.1 eV for pure ITO/
Cu2O to 1.9 eV for the semiconductor developed on the Bi nanoparticle film, whereas the thickness 
of the film increases from 2.3 µm for a pure sample to 2.6 µm for ITO/Bi-NPs/Cu2O. The charge 
transfer kinetics at the electrode/electrolyte interface were evaluated by EIS analysis and reported 
the lowest Rct of 30.61 Ω for the Bi nanoparticle film/Cu2O, followed by 56.68 Ω for the Bi nanopar­
ticle suspension/Cu2O, 78.84 Ω for the Bi ion/Cu2O, and 128.7 Ω for the pure Cu2O photocatalyst, 
respectively, as demonstrated in Figure 26.2, The enhancement in photocatalytic activity was due to 
the combined modification of small crystalline size, high carrier concentration, low charge transfer 
kinetics, and lower band gap energy upon bismuth inclusion.
Li et al. fabricated the copper oxide thin film over the FTO substrate by employing the electro­
deposition technique under constant potentials conditions [37]. To improve the stability of Cu2O, 
they protected the thin film by covering the Cu2O surface with polyimide (PI) through a simple spin 
coating method with various levels of PI loading and designated as Cu2O-PI-n, where n stands for 
the volume of PI loaded. It was reported that the progressive increment in PI loading favors the light 
absorption capacity of the semiconductors and acquires the maxima for the Cu2O-PI-200 sample. 
Further increments in PI concentration suppress the light intake, considering the strong light reflec­
tion by the dense and glassy surface of the Cu2O-PI-300 thin film. The PI-coated thin films mani­
fest better photo-response than the pure Cu2O. The highest photocurrent density was reported for 

341
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
the Cu2O-PI-200 sample. The reduction in PEC activity of higher loaded (> 200 µl) PI samples
resulted from the sluggish conductivity of organic polyimide moiety. To evaluate the durability 
of the synthesized semiconductors, chronoamperometry was carried out at an applied bias of 0V 
vs. NHE. From the durability experiment, it was evident that the stability of the optimized sample 
(Cu2O-PI-200) has enhanced dramatically with the highest photocurrent of –1.8 mA/cm2 even after 
1200 sec. illumination, whereas the pure semiconductor shows 0.04 mA/cm2 photocurrent density 
within the same duration. They also reported that other PI-loaded samples had better photocur­
rent durability over pure Cu2O. The protective thin layer leads to inhibition of the photo-corrosion 
supported by the improved capacitance of the space charge layer and charge recombination of the 
modified photoelectrodes.
Shyamal et al., for the first time, documented the rare earth Europium (Eu)-modified Cu2O thin 
film for the application of the PEC water reduction reaction [38]. They employed a conventional 
galvanostatic technique to electrodeposit Cu(I)-based metal oxide semiconductors. It was reported 
that the SEM images of synthesized Cu2O show the growth of variable-sized cubic lattices upon 
introducing Eu into the deposition bath. The EDS technique verified the existence of Eu deposits. 
It was demonstrated that the rare earth introduction does not lead to any primary alteration to the 
original cubic crystallinity of Cu2O but only controls the grain size of the particle. This enlargement 
of the grain size tends to suppress the grain-boundary recombination as it conceals the conducting 
substrate before the small-grained pure Cu2O. The photocurrent density progressively improved 
through the gradual introduction of Eu(III) to the electrodeposition bath and achieved a maximum 
photocurrent density of –3.2 mA/cm2 for Cu2O thin films containing 2.5% Eu3+-ion, while the pure 
Cu2O matrix shows only –2.6 mA/cm2. Beyond the 2.5% Eu3+ ion concentration in the electrolytic 
bath, the PEC performance of the semiconductor again decreases. The reported higher carrier con­
centration and lower Rct via EIS analysis for the modified sample over the pure one indicates that the 
cubic Eu nanoparticle acts as a retrieving core for inconvenient impurities, leading to the purifica­
tion of the Cu2O crystallite matrix. The higher lifetime of the charge carrier observed through the 
time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) analysis supports the reduction of recombination 
rate for the photo-generated charge carriers for the doped sample. The enhanced lifetime of the 
excitons set the right circumstance for electrons in the conduction band to interact with water for 
the reduction reaction to generate H2.
FIGURE 26.2  (a) Nyquist plot of the different Cu2O thin film electrodes in the presence of 0.1 M Na2SO4 
electrolytes (pH 4.9) under continuous illumination of 35 mW cm−2 at an applied potential of 0.4 V vs. RHE. 
(b) Equivalent circuit model to analyze the Nyquist plot. (Adapted with permission [36], Copyright (2016),
Journal of Materials Chemistry A.)

342
Handbook of Semiconductors
26.4.3  Co-catalyst
Dubale et al. synthesized a stable CuS-modified CuO/Cu2O with the addition of Pt as a co-
catalyst. The Cu2O sample was prepared on the FTO substrate via the potentiostatic method. The 
CuS nanoparticles were deposited by the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) 
technique, while the Pt co-catalyst was deposited via sputtering [39]. The emerged XRD dif­
fraction peaks at 36.40 and 38.90 could be indexed to the {111} crystal planes of Cu2O and CuO, 
respectively. A maximum photocurrent of −5.4mA/cm2 was achieved at 0 V vs. RHE in the pres­
ence of 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte (pH 5) for the Cu2O/CuO/CuS heterostructure developed with an 
optimized nine SILAR cycles for CuS nanoparticles. The photocurrent density of the optimized 
material is 2.5 times higher than the bare one (−2.2 mA/cm2). The recombination rate is sup­
pressed due to rapid electron transfer at the surface of the material toward the electrolyte; as a 
result, the PEC performance is also increased. With a further increase in the number of deposition 
cycles for the SILAR method, the activity of the material decreases due to the formation of excess 
CuS over the Cu2O/CuO surface. The chronoamperometric analysis confirmed that the material 
was relatively stable, and almost 85% of the initial photocurrent was retained after 1 h, as shown 
in Figure 26.3a2. The co-catalytic activity of CuS for hydrogen evolution was demonstrated as 
its redox potential is more negative than H+/H2. The incorporation of Pt to CuS, which behaves 
as a co-catalyst, suggested the facile electron transfer from the photocathode to the electrolyte. 
As a result, the PEC performance of the materials improves with better stability, as presented in 
Figure 26.3b2.
Li et al. [40] prepared Cu2O to solve the issues of e–-h+ recombination and photo-corrosion in 
the presence of any aqueous electrolyte. Amorphous SiOx was introduced through the dip-coating 
FIGURE 26.3  PEC performances and stability measurement of Cu2O/CuO/CuS-9 (a1 and a2), and Cu2O/CuO/
CuS-9/Pt (b1 and b2). (Adapted with permission [39], Copyright (2016), Journal of Materials Chemistry A.)

343
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
technique as a protective layer on the electrodeposited Cu2O surface. The PEC water splitting reac­
tion is facilitated for the material compared to the bare Cu2O, as photocurrent density is three 
times higher than the pure one. The stability of the compound was also ~3.5 folds higher than pure 
Cu2O. Pt catalyst has been decorated to boost the reaction and achieved the maximum photocur­
rent density to 2.9 mA/cm2 at 0 V vs. RHE with improved stability, indicating the synergic effect 
between SiOx and Pt catalyst. The EIS analysis revealed that the loading of Pt reduced the Rct due 
to the higher catalytic activity toward the HER. The surface capacitance CPE is increased because 
of the high charge carrier concentration trapped by the platinum (Pt) catalyst. Cu2O/SiOx has a 
higher charge separation efficiency, confirmed by time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), which 
showed a steeper decay curve and smaller time constants.
26.4.4  Protective Layer Formation
Paracchino et al. [9] successfully prepared Cu2O thin films on FTO substrates via an electrode­
position technique using lactate as a stabilizer with copper sulfate solution at pH12, i.e., in the 
alkaline medium. An electrodeposited Cu2O was introduced for solar hydrogen production and was 
protected from the photocathodic decomposition of water through the formation of a nanolayer of 
Al:ZnO and TiO2. The maximum photocurrent of –7.6 mA/cm2 at 0 V vs. RHE was recorded for 
the photoelectrode through incorporation of Pt nanoparticles at mild pH, which was almost three 
times higher than the pure one (−2.4 mA/cm2 at 0.25 V). The modified protected layers of cuprous 
oxide (Cu2O/ZnO/Al2O3)/TiO2/Pt) electrode was stable for 20 minutes; however, the bare FTO/
Cu2O sample was degraded within two minutes. The faradic efficiency was calculated at ~100% for 
the water reduction reaction based on volumetric measurements.
Paracchino et al. also synthesized copper (I) oxide on gold-coated FTO from the basic lactate-
stabilized copper sulfate solution, followed by the application of protective layers of n-type oxides 
(Al-ZnO and TiO2) on the semiconductor surface by atomic layer deposition (ALD) methods [10]. 
The Pt co-catalysts were electrodeposited galvanostatically from the aqueous solution containing 
H2PtCl6. The temperature-dependent ALD technique favors a better crystalline structure and proper 
band alignment, which leads to improved photoactivity. The electrode prepared at 120°C exhibited 
a photocurrent density of 6.5mA/cm2at 0 V/RHE (Figure 26.4a), which was down to 2 mA/cm2 after 
1 hour under the illumination of light, whereas the photoelectrode at 150°C generated 4.5 mA/cm2at 
0 V/RHE (Figure 26.4a) and that is stable up to 1 hour without any significant change in photocur­
rent, as demonstrated in Figure 26.4b.
26.4.5  Substrate Modification
Shyamal et al. studied the PEC performances of the p-type cuprous oxide thin films electrode­
posited on different substrates, i.e., indium doped tin oxide (ITO), Cu-foil, and Al foil from the 
lactate-stabilized copper sulfate solution in alkaline media by applying a fixed current density of 
–0.1mA/cm2 [41]. The Cu2O adhered better to the Cu and Al substrates than ITO-coated glass due 
to the better ohmic conductivity. The band gap energy of the Cu2O was 2.1eV, determined from the 
UV-visible absorption spectrum analysis. The peak intensity ratio of {111} and {200} peaks is maxi­
mum for the Cu substrate, which decreased for Al and ITO substrates, respectively. The photocur­
rent density measured through the LSV analysis using the Cu2O deposited on ITO, Al, and Cu foil 
was –2.6 mA/cm2, –3.7 mA/cm2, and –4.6 mA/cm2, respectively. The electrochemical impedance 
spectroscopic Nyquist analysis revealed that the diameter of the semicircle follows the order Cu < 
Al ≪ ITO, indicating the highest Rct value of Cu2O thin film on ITO, i.e., the least favorable charge 
transfer process over the surface. The facile charge transfer reaction that occurred on the Cu instead 
of Al or ITO substrates was explained by the better electronic conductivity of the Cu2O film matrix 
on the metallic substrates compared to the ITO-coated glass.

344
Handbook of Semiconductors
26.5  CONCLUSION
In conclusion, copper-based oxide semiconductors are a good photocatalyst candidate for solar 
energy conversion; still, the limited photostability is a significant drawback for the photocatalytic 
and PEC properties under solar light illumination. This report discusses different advanced syn­
thetic strategies, such as the formation of heterostructures, doping with different elements, incor­
porating co-catalysts, etc., to improve the PEC properties and photo-stability of copper-based 
oxide semiconductor devices. The growth of the protective thin film layers on the Cu2O effectively 
enhances the stability by decreasing charge carriers trapping within the film. The primary criterion 
for incrementing photoactivity is to reduce the recombination of electron and hole pairs. It has been 
observed that the photo-response is boosted due to the facile transfer of charges at the photoelec­
trode/electrolyte interfaces by forming the heterostructures with Cu2O.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Y.K. Hsu, Y.G. Lin, Y.C. Chen, Polarity-dependent photoelectrochemical activity in ZnO nanostruc­
tures for solar water splitting, Electrochem. Commun. 13 (2011) 1383–1386.
	
2.	 Y.K. Hsu, Y.C. Chen, Y.G. Lin, L.C. Chen, K.H. Chen, Birnessite-type manganese oxides nanosheets 
with hole acceptor assisted photoelectrochemical activity in response to visible light, J. Mater. Chem. 22 
(2012) 2733–2739.
	
3.	 A. Fujishima, K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature. 238 
(1972) 37–38.
	
4.	 C.C. Hu, J.N. Nian, H. Teng, Electrodeposited p-type Cu2O as photocatalyst for H2 evolution from water 
reduction in the presence of WO3, Sol. Energy Mater Sol. Cells. 92 (2008) 1071–1076.
	
5.	 P.E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh, J.J. Kelly, Cu2O: A catalyst for the photochemical decomposition of 
water? Chem. Commun. (1999) 1069–1070. https://doi.org/10.1039/A901232J
FIGURE 26.4  (a) Cathodic potential sweep under chopped AM 1.5 illumination in Na2SO4 0.5 M buffered 
at pH 5 for Cu2O/AZO (20 nm)/TiO2 (10 nm)/Pt photocathodes with TiO2 top layers deposited at 120°C and 
150°C. (b) Stability test at 0 V/RHE in the same electrolyte. Adapted with permission [10], Copyright (2012), 
Energy & Environmental Science.

345
Copper Oxide-based Semiconductors for Photo-Assisted Water Splitting
	
6.	 T. Wang, Z. Luo, C. Li, J. Gong, Controllable fabrication of nanostructured materials for photoelectro­
chemical water splitting via atomic layer deposition, Chem. Soc. Rev. 43 (2014) 7469–7484.
	
7.	 J.N. Nian, C.C. Hu, H. Teng, Electrodeposited p-type Cu2O for H2 evolution from photoelectrolysis of 
water under visible light illumination, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy. 33 (2008) 2897–2903.
	
8.	 D. Kang, T.W. Kim, S.R. Kubota, A.C. Cardiel, H.G. Cha, Electrochemical synthesis of photoelectrodes 
and catalysts for use in solar water splitting, Chem. Rev. 115 (2015) 12839–12887.
	
9.	 A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, E. Thimsen, Highly active oxide photocathode for 
photoelectrochemical water reduction, Nat. Mater. 10 (2011) 456–461.
	 10.	 A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S.D. Tilley, M. Graetzel, Ultrathin films on 
copper(I) oxide water splitting photocathodes: A study on performance and stability, Energy Environ. 
Sci. 5 (2012) 8673.
	 11.	 P.E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh, J.J. Kelly, Photoelectrochemistry of electrodeposited Cu2O, J. 
Electrochem. Soc. 147 (2000) 486–489.
	 12.	 Q. Xu, X. Qian, Y. Qu, T. Hang, P. Zhang, M. Li, L. Gao, Electrodeposition of Cu2O nanostructure on 
3D Cu micro-cone arrays as photocathode for photoelectrochemical water reduction, J. Electrochem. 
Soc. 163 (2016) H976–H981.
	 13.	 C.Y. Chiang, Y. Shin, K. Aroh, S. Ehrman, Copper oxide photocathodes prepared by a solution based 
process, Int. J. Hydrog. Energy. 37 (2012) 8232–8239.
	 14.	 L. Zhang, Y.N. Liu, M. Zhou, J. Yan, Improving photocatalytic hydrogen evolution over CuO/Al2O3 by 
platinum-depositing and CuS-loading, Appl. Surf. Sci. 282 (2013) 531–537.
	 15.	 Z. Zang, A. Nakamura, J. Temmyo, Single cuprous oxide films synthesized by radical oxidation at low 
temperature for PV application, Opt. Express. 27 (2019) 30449.
	 16.	 I.S. Brandt, M.A. Tumelero, S. Pelegrini, G. Zangari, A.A. Pasa, Electrodeposition of Cu2O: Growth, 
properties, and applications, J. Solid State Electrochem. 21 (2017) 1999–2020.
	 17.	 I.V. Bagal, N.R. Chodankar, M.A. Hassan, A. Waseem, M.A. Johar, D.H. Kim, S.W. Ryu, Cu2O as an 
emerging photocathode for solar water splitting - A status review, International Journal of Hydrogen 
Energy. 44 (2019) 21351–21378.
	 18.	 C.G. Read, E.M.P. Steinmiller, K.S. Choi, Atomic plane-selective deposition of gold nanoparticles on metal 
oxide crystals exploiting preferential adsorption of additives, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 131 (2009) 12040–12041.
	 19.	 I. Sullivan, B. Zoellner, P.A. Maggard, Copper(I)-based p-type oxides for photoelectrochemical and 
photovoltaic solar energy conversion, Chem. Mater. 28 (2016) 5999–6016.
	 20.	 X.S. Jiang, M. Zhang, S.W. Shi, G. He, X.P. Song, Z.Q. Sun, Microstructure and optical properties of 
nanocrystalline Cu2O thin films prepared by electrodeposition, Nanoscale Res. Lett. 9 (2014) 219.
	 21.	 Q. Tang, T. Li, X. Chen, D. Yu, Y. Qian, Efficient field emission from well-oriented Cu2O film, Solid 
State Commun. 134 (2005) 229–231.
	 22.	 T. Maruyama, Copper oxide thin films prepared from copper dipivaloylmethanate and oxygen by chem­
ical vapor deposition, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys. 37 (1998) 4099–4102.
	 23.	 J. Choi, S.J. Kim, J. Lee, S.C. Nam, J. Kang, J.H. Chang, Controlled growth of Cu2O particles on a 
hexagonally nanopatterned aluminium substrate, Nanotechnol. 18 (2007) 215303.
	 24.	 A.S. Reddy, S. Uthanna, P.S. Reddy, Properties of dc magnetron sputtered Cu2O films prepared at dif­
ferent sputtering pressures, Appl. Surf. Sci. 253 (2007) 5287–5292.
	 25.	 T.J. Richardson, J.L. Slack, M.D. Rubin, Electrochromism in copper oxide thin films, Electrochim. 
Acta. 46 (2001) 2281–2284.
	 26.	 Y.C. Zhai, H.Q. Fan, Q. Li, W. Yan, Morphology evolutions and optical properties of Cu2O films by an 
electrochemical deposition on flexible substrate, Appl. Surf. Sci. 258 (2012) 3232–3236.
	 27.	 L. Pan, J.J. Zou, T.R. Zhang, S.B. Wang, Z. Li, L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C. 118 (2014) 16335–16343.
	 28.	 A. Liu, Y. Zhu, K. Li, D. Chu, J. Huang, X. Li, C. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Du, A high-performance p-type 
nickel oxide/cuprous oxide nanocomposite with heterojunction as the photocathodic catalyst for water 
splitting to produce hydrogen, Chem. Phys. Lett. 703 (2018) 56–62.
	 29.	 H. Adamu, A.J. McCue, R.S.F. Taylor, H.G. Manyar, J.A. Anderson, Simultaneous photocatalytic 
removal of nitrate and oxalic acid over Cu2O/TiO2 and Cu2O/TiO2-AC composites, Appl. Catal. B: 
Environ. 217 (2017) 181–191.
	 30.	 A.A. Dubale, W.N. Su, A.G. Tamirat, C.J. Pan, B.A. Aragaw, H.M. Chen, C.H. Chen, B.J. Hwang, The 
synergetic effect of graphene on Cu2O nanowire arrays as a highly efficient hydrogen evolution photo­
cathode in water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A. 2 (2014) 18383–18397.
	 31.	 D. Sharma, S. Upadhyay, V.R. Satsangi, R. Shrivastav, U.V. Waghmare, S. Dass, Improved photoelec­
trochemical water splitting performance of Cu2O/SrTiO3 heterojunction photoelectrode, J. Phys. Chem. 
C. 118 (2014) 25320–25329.

346
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 32.	 N. Kaneza, P.S. Shinde, Y. Ma, S. Pan, Photoelectrochemical study of carbon-modified p-type Cu2O 
nanoneedles and n-type TiO2−x nanorods for Z-scheme solar water splitting in a tandem cell configura­
tion, RSC Adv. 9 (2019) 13576–13585.
	 33.	 S. Jamali, A. Moshaii, Improving photo-stability and charge transport properties of Cu2O/CuO for 
photo-electrochemical water splitting using alternate layers of WO3 or CuWO4 produced by the same 
route, Appl. Surf. Sci. 419 (2017) 269–276.
	 34.	 S. Shyamal, A. Maity, A.K. Satpati, C. Bhattacharya, Amplification of PEC hydrogen production 
through synergistic modification of Cu2O using cadmium as buffer layer and dopant, Appl. Catal. B. 
246 (2019) 111–119.
	 35.	 S.M. Hosseini, R.S. Moakhar, F. Soleimani, S.K. Sadrnezhaad, S.M. Panah, R. Katal, A. Seza, N. 
Ghane, S. Ramakrishna, One-pot microwave synthesis of hierarchical C-doped CuO dandelions/g-C3N4 
nanocomposite with enhanced photostability for photoelectrochemical water splitting, Appl. Surf. Sci. 
530 (2020) 147271.
	 36.	 S. Shyamal, P. Hajra, H. Mandal, A. Bera, D. Sariket, A.K. Satpati, S. Kundu, C. Bhattacharya, Benign 
role of bi on an electrodeposited Cu2O semiconductor towards photo-assisted H2 generation from water, 
J. Mater. Chem. A. 4 (2016) 9244–9252.
	 37.	 J. Li, W. Li, G. Deng, Y. Qin, H. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Xue, Polyimide stabilized Cu2O photocathode for 
efficient PEC water reduction, Ionics. 29 (2023) 685–693.
	 38.	 S. Shyamal, P. Hajra, H. Mandal, A. Bera, D. Sariket, A.K. Satpati, M.V. Malashchonak, A.V. Mazanik, 
O.V. Korolik, A.I. Kulak, E.V. Skorb, A. Maity, E.A. Streltsov, C. Bhattacharya, Eu modified Cu2O thin 
films: Significant enhancement in efficiency of photoelectrochemical processes through suppression of 
charge carrier recombination, J. Chem. Eng. 335 (2018) 676–684.
	 39.	 A.A. Dubale, A.G. Tamirat, H.M. Chen, T.A. Berhe, C.J. Pan, W.N. Su, B.J. Hwang, A highly stable CuS 
and CuS-Pt modified Cu2O/CuO heterostructure as an efficient photocathode for the hydrogen evolution 
reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A. 4 (2016) 2205–2216.
	 40.	 W. Li, H. Wang, Z. Sun, Q. Wu, S. Xue, Si-doped Cu2O/SiOx composites for efficient photoelectro­
chemical water reduction, J. Power Sources. 492 (2021) 229667.
	 41.	 S. Shyamal, P. Hajra, H. Mandal, J.K. Singh, A.K. Satpati, S. Pande, C. Bhattacharya, Effect of sub­
strates on the photoelectrochemical reduction of water over cathodically electrodeposited p-type Cu2O 
thin films, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces. 7 (2015) 18344–18352.

347
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-27
Role of Semiconductor 
Materials in Wastewater 
Treatment
Arpita Paul Chowdhury, K. S. Anantharaju, 
Subhajit Das, and K. Keshavamurthy
27.1  INTRODUCTION
The main key component among natural resources for living beings on earth is water. The contam­
ination in water bodies is due to pollutants from chemical waste, herbicides, insecticides, heavy 
metals, food industries, volatile organic compounds, etc. Organic and inorganic pollutants are 
mainly discharged from industrial effluents and sewage into the water bodies. The pollutant con­
centration is measured in terms of milligrams of the substance per liter of water (mg/L) or parts 
per million (ppm) [1]. The toxic inorganic and organic molecules are endangering the health of 
humans and the environment, and the quality of fresh water has been severely affected, which 
indirectly leads to a modification and alteration of all the components of freshwater. The serious 
impact on environment is soil degradation, leading to lower crop yields, marine life destruction, 
and heavy metals consumption through food chains, causing adverse consequences to humans and 
animals [2]. These emerging contaminants possess very complex molecular structures and are 
very hard to detect and remove. The available wastewater treatment is inefficiently designed and 
so complete removal of contaminants is not possible. For this purpose, different technologies such 
as physical, chemical, and biological methods are employed [3]. New water remediation technolo­
gies are increasing. The remediation techniques, such as adsorption, advanced oxidations, chemi­
cal precipitation, membrane process, and ion exchange processes, have drawbacks. For example, 
the use of membrane technology is costly and energy-intensive, which limits its use in industry. 
The chemical precipitation requires more chemicals and produces more sludge and secondary 
product formation [4]. So, the scientific community is focused on alternative solutions which are 
sustainable and eco-friendly water purification methods. In this context, semiconductor photo­
catalysts have been a promising emerging method for wastewater treatment. The process is con­
sidered eco-friendly and operates under mild reaction conditions. Amazing reactivity is observed 
for decomposing the pollutants even with trace quantity and no secondary byproduct generation 
[5]. Fujishima and Honda in 1972 reported TiO2 electrodes that can produce hydrogen in aqueous 
medium under sunlight [6]. Since then, this research area has been intensively pursued over the 
past decades and some significant advancements have been achieved. As the central component of 
the photocatalytic system, semiconductor photocatalysts have been attracting most of the research 
focus. In the wastewater treatment process, the photocatalytic process is an attractive method due 
to the attainment of complete mineralization of the pollutant under mild conditions of tempera­
ture and pressure. This is due to the generation of photogenerated electrons/holes in semiconduc­
tor materials, which provides efficient oxidation/reduction performance for pollutant degradation. 
However, some drawbacks exist in single semiconductor photocatalysts; for example, fast recom­
bination rate of electron/hole, quantum yield decrease, and low visible light absorption. Thus, the 
photocatalytic properties of a semiconductor can be controlled through the design of the new band 
gap structure to improve the efficiency of these nanomaterials. In this chapter, recent advances 
in the application of doped semiconductor catalysts and heterostructures that have been recently 
27

348
Handbook of Semiconductors
developed for wastewater treatment are reviewed. Also, mechanistic insight into photocatalytic 
reaction is discussed.
27.2  SEMICONDUCTOR PHOTOCATALYST
27.2.1  Mechanism of Semiconductor Photocatalysts
Mostly, semiconductors are used as a model photocatalyst for the essential methods of photocataly­
sis, owed to its simple accessibility, low cost, high stability, non-toxic nature, and suitable band posi­
tions. The major advantages of semiconductor photocatalysis are that it offers a good substitute for 
energy-intensive treatment methods and can use renewable and pollution-free solar energy [7]. In a 
semiconductor, firstly, on the illumination of light, an electron is excited from the valence band (VB) 
into the conduction band (CB), leaving a hole behind. Then the excited electrons/holes migrate to 
the surface of the catalyst. The chemical potential of +0.5 to 1.5 V versus the normal hydrogen elec­
trode (NHE) should be possessed by the electrons in the CB to exhibit a strong reduction capacity. 
Similarly, the holes in the VB should have a chemical potential of +1.0 to +3.5 to exhibit a strong oxi­
dative potential. The mechanism of photocatalysis (Figure 27.1) by a semiconductor is represented as:
	
Photocatalysts
h
e
h
–
ν
+
→
+
+
	
+
→
+
+
+
•
h
 H O
H
 OH
2
	
+
→
+
•
h
 OH
OH
–
	
+
→
e
O
O
–
2
2
–
	
2e
O
2H
H O
–
2
2
2
+
+
→
+
	
+
→
+
•
e
H O
OH
OH
–
2
2
–
	
+
+
→
+
+
•
Organic
OH
O
CO
H O other degradationproduct
2
2
2
The major challenges for the pure semiconductor photocatalysts are their large band gap and 
insufficient sunlight utilization. Yongquan Quab et al. [8] in their research stated that for a stable 
FIGURE 27.1  Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic process. (Adapted with permission [7], Copyright 
[2022], Elsevier.)

349
Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment
semiconductor catalyst, the semiconductor must first have sufficient band gap to allow effec­
tive absorption of light under the visible region. Second, there should be an efficient charge 
separation. Hence, the band gap engineering of semiconductors is one of the most important 
targets in photocatalyst design. The efforts on the design and fabrication of heterojunctions are 
still ongoing. Based on the interface of the different materials, the heterojunction photocatalysts 
are categorized into four types: (1) semiconductor–semiconductor heterojunction; (2) semicon­
ductor–metal heterojunction; (3) semiconductor–carbon heterojunction; and (4) multicomponent 
heterojunction.
Among these, in semiconductor/semiconductor heterojunction, the synergistic effect among the 
semiconductors enhances the photocatalytic activity, thus showing superior new characteristics and 
performance. The charge may migrate from one component, typically the semiconductor absorb­
ing irradiation, to the other component, with proper band-edge positions in semiconductor-based 
composites. Reasonably, a composite photocatalyst system, composed of one semiconductor as the 
light absorber and other components to enhance the photocatalytic processes, is supposed to be an 
effective prototype to overcome the above shortcomings. Moreover, the second or third component 
in the composites may also provide active centers for the activation of reactants or the subsequent 
reduction/oxidation reactions, working as a co-catalyst.
Doping is another alternative and effective way to extend the light absorption to the visible light 
region of a single semiconductor. The doped ions introduce an additional energy level into the band 
structure, which can be used to trap electrons or holes in separate carriers from the bands, thus 
allowing more carriers to successfully diffuse to the surface. Thus, doping modifies the large band­
gap of semiconductor and extends the optical property for visible light harvesting and improving 
the catalytic activity.
27.2.2  Basics of Heterojunction
The heterojunction is defined as the interface between two different semiconductors with unequal 
band structure. The internal structure of semiconductors comprises some band alignments which 
act as the basis for the formation of heterostructures. Based on the alignment of energy levels, het­
erostructures/heterojunction can be categorized into four types: (1) straddling type, (2) staggered 
type, (3) those with a broken gap, and (4) direct Z scheme (Figure 27.2) [9].
In straddling type heterojunctions (type I), semiconductor A has a wider energy band gap than 
B. This results in the separation of charge carriers, but recombination is still possible since both 
electrons and holes are accumulated on the same semiconductor. The type II heterojunction stag­
gered types are formed when the VB and CB of semiconductor A are higher and lower than those 
of B. The spatial separation formed prevents the charge. The broken gap (type-III heterojunction) is 
FIGURE 27.2  Schematic illustration of types of heterojunction: (a) straddling gap, (b) staggered gap, 
(c) broken gap, and (d) Z-Scheme. (Adapted with permission [9]. Copyright [2022], MDPI, Basel, Switzerland, 
distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License 4.0 [CC BY].)

350
Handbook of Semiconductors
similar to the staggered type. The direct Z-scheme heterojunction and type-II heterojunction have 
similar band structures, but their charge-carrier migration mechanism is different.
27.3  SYNTHESIS TECHNIQUE
27.3.1  Hydrothermal and Solvothermal Method
Hydrothermal synthesis is a method where single crystals depend on the solubility of minerals in 
hot water under high pressure. Here, a steel pressure vessel called an autoclave is used [10]. High 
temperature (130–250°C) and high vapor pressure (0.3–4 MPa) are controlled. Generally, hydro­
thermal treatment is followed to prepare iron oxide nanostructures. The solvothermal method is 
also similar to the hydrothermal method where instead of using aqueous solvent, the nonaqueous 
solution is preferred.
Recently, Shahzadi et al. [11] synthesized Fe-Doped cadmium oxide (CdO) by hydrothermal 
method. The catalysts were evaluated toward the photodegradation aqueous solution of methylene 
blue under 400 W mercury lamp. The cubic structure of Fe and CdO as obtained from XRD with 
the crystallite size on doping varied from 31 to 45 nm. Azmoon et al. [12] fabricated binary com­
posite MIL 101(Cr)/Fe3O4-SiO2 for the removal of oil contaminants from oilfields. Regmi et al. [13] 
fabricated Ni-doped BiVO4 semiconductors in a Teflon-lined vessel by microwave hydrothermal 
treatment. Here, Ni-doping in the V sites is confirmed by the XRD. The researcher observed effi­
cient degradation of ibuprofen with 80% degradation within 90 minutes. Kumar et al. [14] reported 
a KPCN/GO/ZnFe2O4 heterostructured photocatalyst. The dye degradation efficiency for rhoda­
mine B, methylene blue, and tetracycline was examined. Around 96% efficiency for rhodamine 
B was observed under visible light within 30 minutes and 87% for tetracycline within 60 minutes 
irradiation. Thus, heterojunctions formed improved charge separation and degradation efficiency. 
Boron-doped graphene oxide/copper sulfide nanocomposite was reported by Farhan and his group 
[15]. The solutions in the autoclave were kept for 24 hours at 180°C in an oven resulting in a black 
precipitate. The catalyst can effectively degrade methylene blue under sunlight. Meanwhile, Farid 
et al. [16] synthesized Ce-doped MoO3 photoreduction of rhodamine B. Around 91.83% degra­
dation was achieved. Bi3NbO7/Bi2MoO6 (BNO/BMO) heterojunction was prepared by Cui et al. 
[17] for photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline and also found that crystallinity increases with 
BMO content, which indicates the enhanced crystal stability. Figure 27.3 illustrates the formation 
of Bi3NbO7/Bi2MoO6 heterojunction.
27.3.2  Coprecipitation Method
The coprecipitation method is one of the widely used techniques for the preparation of semicon­
ducting material. Here, metal ions are precipitated together by stirring the mixture. Finally wash­
ing and drying leads to a high-quality product [18]. Recently, co-doped ZnO/CN nanocomposite 
and single component (g-C3N4 and ZnO) were synthesized by coprecipitation technique. The SEM 
image revealed a 3D flower-like structure. The optical band gap value of the co-doped ZnO/CN 
catalyst decreased to 2.23 eV, and this might be due to the synergistic effects among the hetero­
junction formed in between the co-doped ZnO and CN samples. The photocatalytic treatment for 
reactive red 120 (RR 120) was studied. Around 250 mL of 20 mg/L RR 120 effectively degraded 
with 100% efficiency under to solar light irradiation [19]. Meanwhile., Gogoi et al. [20] fabricated 
ternary quaternary heterojunction Ag/Ag3PO4-BiOBr-C3N4 photocatalyst for the remediation for 
RR 120 dye from aqueous medium. The visible light absorption was enhanced in the compos­
ite due to the surface plasmon resonance effect of Ag nanoparticles. The degradation efficiency 
(92.6%) was achieved with the removal rate 0.042 min−1
. The charge transfer mechanism and fast 
interfacial charge transport was further confirmed by the EIS Nyquist plot. Tho et al. [21] fabri­
cated a p-n heterojunction Bi2S3/ZnCo2O4 composite. Here, by varying the weights of the Bi(NO3)3 

351
Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment
and Na2S precursor, different heterogeneous xBi2S3/ZnCo2O4 were synthesized by coprecipitation 
method. The heterojunction photocatalyst for decoloration of indigo carmine was evaluated. Mott-
Schottky plots proved a heterojunction formed between n-Bi2S3 and p-ZnCo2O4. Furthermore, the 
investigation of the photocurrent response indicated that the Bi2S3/ZnCo2O4 composite displayed 
an enhanced response, which was respectively 4.6 and 7.3 times (4.76 μA cm−2) greater than that 
of the pure Bi2S3 and ZnCo2O4 samples. Highest photocatalyst efficacy (92.1%) was observed with 
12 wt% Bi2S3 loading for 40 mg L−1 indigo carmine dye solution under visible light illumination 
within 90 minutes. Further FESEM images showed that Bi2S3 are precipitated and wrapped on 
the surface of ZnCo2O4. The composite proved good recyclability for environmental application. 
Ahmed and his group prepared CdS/AgI binary composite. The AgI were well incorporated in CdS 
structure as indicated in XRD spectra. In the precipitation procedure the raw materials structure 
was unaffected. The organic pollutants, methyl orange and tetracycline hydrochloride were evalu­
ated [22]. Bi3.64Mo0.36O6.55 nanospheres fabricated and then nitrogen-doped carbon dots (NCDs) 
were anchored. The binary composite then enhances the photocatalytic activity for the rhodamine 
B and bisphenol A degradation. The composite with 0.25% exhibited excellent catalytic activ­
ity. This can be attributed to the synergistic effect between the NCDs and Bi3.64Mo0.36O6.55 and 
improved light harvesting efficiency [23]. Chowdhury et al. [24] fabricated a ternary heterojunction 
of a BiOCl-Cu2CoSnS4-TiO2 photocatalyst. The Cu2CoSnS4 and TiO2 nanoparticles are well dis­
persed on the BiOCl surface. The ternary heterojunction exhibits excellent photocatalytic activity 
for direct blue 71 degradation. The kinetic constants for the photocatalytic activity showed that the 
BiOCl-Cu2CoSnS4-TiO2-1 photocatalyst is three times higher than that of bare BiOCl, Cu2CoSnS4, 
and TiO2 particles.
27.3.3  Sol-Gel Method
The sol-gel process is a bottom-up synthesis method where after a number of irreversible chemi­
cal reactions, a final product is obtained. During the reaction, the homogeneous starting molecules 
called “sol” become an infinite, heavy, three-dimensional molecule called “gel.” Figure 27.4 illus­
trates the sol-gel process from precursor to aerogel and products derived from them [25].
FIGURE 27.3  Heterojunction formed between Bi3NbO7 and Bi2MoO6 samples after light illumination. 
(Adapted with permission from reference [17], Copyright [2023], Elsevier.)

352
Handbook of Semiconductors
Sohaib et al. [26] in their study synthesized pure and doped Mo ZnO-NPs by a facile chemical 
sol-gel method. This is a solid indication that the Mo3+ ions have completely penetrated the wurtz­
ite crystalline lattice of ZnO to create a solid solution and have a high-grade crystalline structure. 
Hakimi-Tehrani et al. [27] reported a Z-scheme g-C3N4/WO3 nano-photocatalyst. Here, 15 wt% 
of WO3 showed photodegradation around four times higher than that of pure g-C3N4. The g- C3N4 
peak from XRD data revealed interlayer structure with a plane filling. So, the interplanar distance 
of g-C3N4 layers increased, as there is a shift in angle observed in the g-C3N4/WO3 nanocomposite. 
Therefore, it can affirmed that WO3 nanoparticles are diffused in the g- C3N4 interlayer. Alsolami 
et al. [28] fabricated a two-dimensional (2D) CeO2 and further synthesized NiS/CeO2 heterojunc­
tions. The obtained 2D CeO2 was coupled with narrow band gap NiS for heterojunctions formation. 
Mixed-phase of NiS/CeO2 was obtained by the sol-gel synthesis technique as confirmed by XRD, 
TEM, and XPS characterization. The estimated band gap of the formed heterojunction is 2.07 eV 
with 9% NiS loading. Ciprofloxacin (CIPF), a model pollutant, photooxidation was performed with 
the prepared samples. The 12% NiS/CeO2 showed the best catalytic activity with complete miner­
alization. The CIPF degradation showed a photoreaction rate of 0.0554 min−1. The superior NiS/
CeO2 catalyst performance is due to surface structure, good light harvesting ability, and charge 
carrier separation of the heterojunction formed. The, recyclability experiments proved that the 
material is photostable, and after five cycles 96.5% photoactivity is achieved. Meanwhile, Belghiti 
and his group reported the synthesis of a series of ZnO partially coated with different nonmetric 
layers based on CeO2, Y2O3, or PdO for remediation of charged organic contaminants treatment, 
using a photocatalysis process. Here, the photodegradation of two organic pollutants was evalu­
ated, which are sulfamethazine (SMZ) and basic yellow 28 (BY28). The photodegradation under 
UV light for BY28 and SMZ is obtained with complete degradation efficiency. Also, the photo­
catalyst under visible light degraded BY28 (94%) in 120 minutes and SMZ (60%) in 180 minutes 
[29]. Recently, Alfryyan et al. [30] synthesized Cd-substituted NiCoPrFe2O4@CNTs by sol-gel 
method and investigated the photocatalytic property. The degradation percentage obtained with 
different composites for methyl violet degradation are 55.46%, 78.29%, and 85.96%. Among all 
the prepared catalysts, composition 3 showed the rate constant of 0.012 min−1. This was higher 
compared to other synthesized photocatalysts. CuAl2O4-modified BaSnO3 nanoplatelets were syn­
thesized by Tashkandi et al. [31]. The authors claimed CuAl2O4/BaSnO3 heterostructure forma­
tion by sol-gel-based technique. Mesostructured surfaces and narrow pore diameters of 7.94 nm 
FIGURE 27.4  Overview of a sol-gel technique. (Adapted with permission [25], Copyright @Dmitry Bokov 
et al. [2021], Hindawi, distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution License.)

353
Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment
are obtained. The CuAl2O4 impregnation facilitated the light absorption capacity. This is due to a 
decrease in band gap to 2.66 eV with 15.0–20.0 wt% CuAl2O4. The catalyst promoted the visible-
light mineralization of atrazine herbicide. The 2.0 gL−1 dose within 40 minutes degraded atrazine 
herbicide. Basaleh and his group studied the photoreduction of Hg (II) ions under visible illumina­
tion. The 1.5wt% PtO/Bi2WO6 catalyst proved to be efficient in degrading Hg (II) ions. Around 
100% reduction is achieved within 60 minutes of light illumination. The kinetic rate obtained is 
0.062 min−1, and approximately six times higher compared to pristine Bi2WO6 (0.012 min−1). The 
incorporation of 1.5wt% PtO enhanced the efficiency of the catalyst with the developed heterojunc­
tions for efficient removal of Hg(II) ions. Also increased light harvesting and decrease in the band 
gap boosted the charge carrier separation and mobility of the photoexcited carriers [32].
27.3.4  Microwave-assisted Method
Microwave assisted synthesis is considered a rapid and facile technique and uses an alternative 
energy input source. Currently, preparation of organic/inorganic nanostructured materials is of great 
importance and significance for future rapid development [33]. Vishnu et al. reported Ni-doped 
magnesium ferrite nanoparticles. The catalyst was prepared using fuel as Tamarindus indica seeds 
extract by microwave. The elements nitrogen, carbon, and oxygen present in seed extract act as strong 
fuel/reducing agent’s essential during the reaction process [34]. The synthesized nanoparticles as 
confirmed by XRD are spinel cubic with average crystalline size of 17–18 nm. Photodegradation 
of the two dyes, methylene blue (MB) and rhodamine B (RB), were evaluated. Around 98.1% of 
MB dye and 97.9% of RB dye were degraded in 0–120 min. In this work initial catalyst dosage was 
50 mg with initial dye concentration of 5 ppm. The pH studies further showed that photodegrada­
tion efficiency was higher in neutral condition and basic condition. Meanwhile Gorli et al. [35] 
synthesized Zr-doped TiO2 as a benign photocatalyst for Bismark brown red dye pollutant. In the 
experimental setup for photocatalytic degradation, a high pressure 400 W (35000 lumen) metal 
halide lamp (Osram, India) is utilized as the visible radiation source and the distance between 
the beaker and radiation source with the UV blocking was maintained at 20 centimeters (Oriel, 
No. 51472). The results demonstrated that the anatase phase of TiO2 is not influenced by the pres­
ence of dopant. The photocatalyst exhibited a remarkable degradation rate of 99% in 50 minutes. 
Meanwhile, Zr-doped CeO2 and activated carbon (AC)–zirconium-doped CeO2 were reported by 
Sivakumari and his group [36]. The XRD data revealed that small crystalline size obtained in the 
present work confirms the good quality and crystallinity. The XRD pattern of bare CeO2, Zr-doped 
CeO2, and AC-Zr-doped CeO2 clearly showed good crystalline structure, and crystalline phases 
of composites exhibit good photocatalytic activity toward rhodamine 6G dye in an aqueous solu­
tion in the presence of bare UV irradiation. Cortaza et al. [37] fabricated a type II ZnSe/ZnO het­
erostructure. Rhodamine B and methylene blue dyes of 10 ppm concentration, and 4-Nitrophenol 
(4-NP) of 18 ppm concentration were degraded and compared using bare ZnO particles and ZnSe/
ZnO heterostructures. Initially 100 ml of the dye solution is taken in the presence of 32 mg of the 
catalyst. Before irradiation, the adsorption-desorption experiment was ensured for maintaining the 
equilibrium between the surface of the materials and the contaminant solution. In the photocatalytic 
degradation process, 500W fully reflective solar simulator was used for 240 minutes where the reac­
tor was placed 10 cm below the light source. Meanwhile Gafry et al. [38] prepared Ag-doped ZnO 
nanostructures. The doped catalyst improved the band gap energy due to the silver doping (Ag). 
Phenol was chosen as a model pollutant for the catalytic study. The photocatalytic performance 
showed that the 0.5% Ag-doped ZnO NRs are effective in removing phenol from the contaminated 
water under solar light irradiation. Further, the photocatalytic kinetics showed that 0.5% Ag–ZnO 
catalyst is seven times higher compared to 0% Ag-ZnO NRs. The degradation rate reached 98.5% 
after 5 hours for phenol removal under solar light irradiation. The photocatalytic degradation of 
tetracycline hydrochloride was carried out in Cheng et al. [39] by a MoS2/BiVO4 heterojunction 
synthesized by assisted microwave. The synthesized MoS2/BiVO4 heterojunction as proved by the 

354
Handbook of Semiconductors
characterization analysis was found spherical structure with dimensions in the nano range. The 
degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride was investigated under visible light irradiation. The pho­
tocatalyst MoS2/BiVO4 heterojunction improved the photocatalytic performance. When compared 
with bare BiVO4 and MoS2, the degradation rate achieved is 93.7% in 90 minutes. The tetracycline 
of 5 mg/L concentration was degraded effectively with MoS2/BiVO4 at 5 wt% (MB5) mass ratio. 
Ucker et al. [40] simultaneously reported CaTiO3–ZnS heterostructure. The photodegradation tests 
on rhodamine B dye were investigated in the presence of the prepared samples. The data revealed 
that the heterostructure which formed led to effective photocatalytic degradation. The degradation 
efficiency for CaTiO3 achieved is 50.5% within 30 minutes of irradiation. However, the degradation 
efficiency reached 95.7% over the binary CaTiO3–ZnS photocatalyst after 180 minutes of irradiation. 
This clearly indicates that ZnS coating serves in increasing the degree of discoloration over time. 
Further active radicals responsible for catalytic process are confirmed by the scavenger tests, which 
revealed that holes were the main active species in the catalytic process. Recently, microwave syn­
thesis was adopted by Li et al. [41] for the synthesis of Ag/CNQDs/g-C3N4. The XRD data revealed 
that the introduction of CNQDs and Ag NPs in the matrix of g-C3N4, did not destroy the chemical 
structure of the g-C3N4. The surface plasmon resonance effect of Ag NPs, and g-C3N4 showed the 
excellent photocatalytic property. As a result, the optimized Ag/CNQDs/g-C3N4 composites exhibit 
excellent photocatalytic degradation of norfloxacin under visible light irradiation. The norfloxacin 
removal rate was reached almost 100% within 120 min, and the quasi-first-order kinetic constant (k) 
value was 0.04233 min−1, which was more than 4 times higher than that of g-C3N4.
27.3.5  Ultrasonication and Microemulsion Technique
The ultrasonication method is based on sonication, and sonication time varies depending on the 
chemical constituent used. This method is a highly influential approach for the nanoparticle synthe­
sis. In the ultrasonication method, the ultrasonic sound wave frequency (>20 kHz) is applied to the 
solution for homogeneous dispersion of nanoparticles into the base fluid as it decreases the cluster 
formation of nanoparticles by disturbing the intermolecular force. Recently, Murugalakshmi et al. 
[42] synthesized In2S3/Nd2O3 heterojunction for sulfasalazine degradation under visible light and 
for Cr reduction. The Cr (VI) reduction efficiency was 95.23%, and SSZ degradation was 96.19% 
within 35 and 80 minutes, respectively. The catalyst showed greater efficiency compared to pristine 
In2S3 and Nd2O3. The enhanced efficiency of the In2S3/10 wt% Nd2O3 p-n heterojunction may be due 
to intimate interfacial contact and proper band that facilitates the better charge carrier separation 
and also transfer between In2S3 and Nd2O3 photocatalyst. The catalyst was photostable and highly 
recyclable after the fifth cycle and only 4% reduction in degradation for Cr (VI) and 7% for SSZ 
is observed. Manikandan et al. [43] prepared a ternary composite WO3@g-C3N4@MWCNT for 
photocatalytic tetracycline degradation. The degradation achieved is 79.54% within 120 minutes. 
The percentage degradation observed is higher than the binary WO3@g-C3N4 composite and bare 
components. Another work reported by Chellanpandi et al. [44] is fabrication of NiO on MK30 
surface material using a Carrisa edulis fruit extract. Under visible light irradiation, the NiO/MK30 
composite was employed to study the photocatalytic degradation activity of methylene blue and 
tetracycline.
The microemulsions discovery attained an increase significance both in basic research and in 
different industrial fields. The unique properties, such as large interfacial area, thermodynamic 
stability, ultra-low interfacial tension, and the ability to solubilize otherwise immiscible liquids 
paved attention. Microemulsions are obtained by simple mixing of the constituents without the 
requirement of a specific requirement process. The three kinds of microemulsions are water dis­
persed in oil (w/o), oil dispersed in water (o/w), and bicontinuous. In 2013, Li and his group reported 
TiO2-coated carbon nanotubes prepared by a micro-emulsion method [45]. In the reaction process 
mixture of distilled water, cyclohexanol and hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium bromide were refluxed 
together at 25°C for 1 hour using a magnetic stirrer. For the photocatalytic investigation, methylene 

355
Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment
blue dye was evaluated in aqueous suspension. Maqbool et al. [46] prepared Co–La-doped dyspro­
sium chromite by microemulsion route. The prepared catalyst was used to evaluate crystal violet 
dye degradation. The experiments were performed under sunlight irradiation. The catalyst showed 
70% dye degradation in 90 minutes; this may be due to proper band alignment.
27.3.6  Chemical Vapor Deposition
The chemical vapor deposition is generally used for commercial powder and thin film manufactur­
ing. Recently, nitrogen-doped ZnO was prepared by Hanif and his coworkers for rhodamine B dye 
[47]. The efficiency achieved for doped ZnO is around 96.90% while for bare ZnO efficiency is 
62.95%. It is observed that nitrogen-doped ZnO is 154% times more efficient than undoped ZnO. 
The reaction took place under visible-light irradiation for 100 min. The average crystallite size is 
23.96 and 21.94 nm, for ZnO and nitrogen doped ZnO, respectively. The results showed successful 
incorporation of nitrogen in ZnO lattice. Iron-loaded carbon black was prepared via chemical vapor 
deposition by Ahmed et al. [48] for rhodamine elimination. The iron-loaded carbon black was syn­
thesized using chemical vapor deposition under N2 pyrolysis at a temperature of 800°C. The highest 
degradation efficiency of around 91.88% was observed at a slightly acidic pH of 4.8. The kinetic 
study showed the rate constant of 0.0294 min−1. MoS2 was vertically grown on g-C3N4 nanosheets 
by chemical vapor deposition to prepare nanocomposites by Wang et al. [49]. With a large surface 
area of 545.2 m2g−1 and a total pore volume of 1.7 cm3g−1, the sample revealed fast and large adsorp­
tion capacity for tetracycline hydrochloride.
27.4  CONCLUSION
In this chapter, the basics of semiconductor photocatalyst are highlighted. The different synthesis 
techniques and applications of doped semiconductors and heterostructured composites are discussed. 
The tuning of the band gap and the lattice mismatch between the components are important factors 
for designing a photocatalyst. The synthesis methods, mainly hydrothermal and solvothermal method, 
coprecipitation method, sol-gel method, microwave-assisted method, ultrasonication and microemul­
sion technique, and chemical vapor deposition method are elaborated. Despite the numerous achieve­
ments to date, many loopholes still need to be solved such as structural design and more controlled 
synthesis techniques. These will control the band gap energy of the system required for efficient and 
complete degradation of the organic pollutant present in water and can be further combined with the 
simulation predicting method. Thus, future studies are needed to focus on following areas:
1.	Alternate and optimized treatment systems for higher efficiency.
2.	Large scale testing system procedures should be enabled.
3.	The disposal of reused photocatalysts should be considered.
4.	Focus should be on low-level pollutant elimination.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 J.J. Peirce, R.F. Weiner, P.A. Vesilind, Measurement of Water Quality, in: Environmental Pollution and 
Control, Elsevier, 1998: pp. 57–76.
	
2.	 R. Sankaran, P.L. Show, C.-W. Ooi, T.C. Ling, C. Shu-Jen, S.-Y. Chen, Y.-K. Chang, Feasibility assess­
ment of removal of heavy metals and soluble microbial products from aqueous solutions using eggshell 
wastes, Clean Technol Environ Policy. 22 (2020) 773–786.
	
3.	 N.Y. Donkadokula, A.K. Kola, I. Naz, D. Saroj, A review on advanced physico-chemical and biological 
textile dye wastewater treatment techniques, Rev Environ Sci Biotechnol. 19 (2020) 543–560.
	
4.	 S.S. Imam, R. Adnan, N.H. Mohd Kaus, The photocatalytic potential of BiOBr for wastewater treat­
ment: A mini-review, J Environ Chem Eng. 9 (2021) 105404.
	
5.	 J. Hong, K.-H. Cho, V. Presser, X. Su, Recent advances in wastewater treatment using semiconductor 
photocatalysts, Curr Opin Green Sustain Chem. 36 (2022) 100644.

356
Handbook of Semiconductors
	
6.	 W. Wang, M.O. Tade, Z. Shao, Research progress of perovskite materials in photocatalysis- and pho­
tovoltaics-related energy conversion and environmental treatment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 44 (2015) 5371–
5402. https://doi.org/10.1039/C5CS00113G
	
7.	 Z. Hu, C. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Gu, Y. An, BiOCl-based photocatalysts: Synthesis methods, structure, 
property, application, and perspective, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 138 (2022) 109277.
	
8.	 Y. Qu, X. Duan, Progress, challenge and perspective of heterogeneous photocatalysts, Chem Soc Rev. 
42 (2013) 2568–2580.
	
9.	 X. Chen, C. Zhao, H. Wu, Y. Shi, C. Chen, X. Zhou, Two-dimensional ZnS/SnS2 heterojunction as a 
direct Z-scheme photocatalyst for overall water splitting: A DFT study, Materials. 15 (2022) 3786.
	 10.	 B.P. Kafle, Introduction to Nanomaterials and Application of UV–Visible Spectroscopy for Their 
Characterization, in: Chemical Analysis and Material Characterization by Spectrophotometry, Elsevier, 
2020: pp. 147–198.
	 11.	 I. Shahzadi, M. Aqeel, A. Haider, S. Naz, M. Imran, W. Nabgan, A. Al-Shanini, A. Shahzadi, T. 
Alshahrani, M. Ikram, Hydrothermal synthesis of Fe-doped cadmium oxide showed bactericidal behav­
ior and highly efficient visible light photocatalysis, ACS Omega. 8 (2023) 30681–30693.
	 12.	 P. Azmoon, M. Farhadian, A. Pendashteh, S. Tangestaninejad, Adsorption and photocatalytic degrada­
tion of oilfield produced water by visible-light driven superhydrophobic composite of MIL-101(Cr)/
Fe3O4-SiO2: Synthesis, characterization and optimization, Appl Surf Sci. 613 (2023) 155972.
	 13.	 C. Regmi, Y.K. Kshetri, T.-H. Kim, R.P. Pandey, S.K. Ray, S.W. Lee, Fabrication of Ni-doped BiVO4 
semiconductors with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic performances for wastewater treatment, 
Appl Surf Sci. 413 (2017) 253–265.
	 14.	 R. Kumar, A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, V.-H. Nguyen, Q. Van Le, T. Ahamad, S. Thakur, C.M. Hussain, 
P. Singh, Integrating K and P co-doped g-C3N4 with ZnFe2O4 and graphene oxide for S-scheme-based 
enhanced adsorption coupled photocatalytic real wastewater treatment, Chemosphere. 337 (2023) 
139267.
	 15.	 A. Farhan, M. Zahid, N. Tahir, A. Mansha, M. Yaseen, G. Mustafa, M.A. Alamir, I.M. Alarifi, I. shahid, 
Investigation of boron-doped graphene oxide anchored with copper sulphide flowers as visible light 
active photocatalyst for methylene blue degradation, Sci Rep. 13 (2023) 9497.
	 16.	 M.T. Farid, S. Aman, N. Ahmad, H.M. Abo-Dief, A.K. Alanazi, R.Y. Khosa, M.Z. Ansari, Z.M. 
El-Bahy, Ce-Doped MoO3 photocatalyst as an environmental purifier for removal of noxious rhodamine 
B organic pollutant in wastewater, Energy Technology. 11 (2023) 2300116
	 17.	 B. Cui, W. Leng, X. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Du, Enhanced visible-light photocatalytic 
activity of S-scheme Bi3NbO7/Bi2MoO6 heterojunction composite photocatalyst, Vacuum. 217 (2023) 
112589.
	 18.	 T. Athar, Smart Precursors for Smart Nanoparticles, in: Emerging Nanotechnologies for Manufacturing, 
Elsevier, 2015: pp. 444–538.
	 19.	 H. saed kariem Alawamleh, A.H. Amin, A.M. Ali, B.A. Alreda, A.A. Lagum, C. Pecho, N. Taqi, H.M. 
Salman, M. Fawzi Nassar, Solar light driven enhanced photocatalytic treatment of azo dye Contaminated 
water based on Co-doped ZnO/g-C3N4 nanocomposite, Chemosphere. 335 (2023) 139104.
	 20.	 H.P. Gogoi, G. Bisoi, P. Barman, A. Dehingia, S. Das, A.P. Chowdhury, Highly efficient and recyclable 
quaternary Ag/Ag3PO4–BiOBr–C3N4 composite fabrication for efficient solar-driven photocatalytic per­
formance for anionic pollutant in an aqueous medium and mechanism insights, Opt Mater (Amst). 138 
(2023) 113712.
	 21.	 N.T. Mai Tho, N. Van Cuong, V.H. Luu Thi, N.Q. Thang, P.H. Dang, A novel n–p heterojunction Bi2S3/
ZnCo2O4 photocatalyst for boosting visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance toward indigo car­
mine, RSC Adv. 13 (2023) 16248–16259.
	 22.	 I. Ahmad, M. Muneer, A.S. Khder, S.A. Ahmed, Novel type-II heterojunction binary composite (CdS/
AgI) with outstanding visible light-driven photocatalytic performances toward methyl Orange and tet­
racycline hydrochloride, ACS Omega. 8 (2023) 22708–22720.
	 23.	 W. Sun, S. Yang, Y. Liu, C. Shi, W. Shi, X. Lin, F. Guo, Y. Hong, Fabricating nitrogen-doped carbon 
dots (NCDs) on Bi3.64Mo0.36O6.55 nanospheres: A nanoheterostructure for enhanced photocatalytic 
performance for water purification, J Phys Chem Solids. 159 (2021) 110283.
	 24.	 A.P. Chowdhury, K.S. Anantharaju, S. Umare, S. Dhar, Facile fabrication of binary BiOCl-Cu2CoSnS4 and 
ternary BiOCl-Cu2CoSnS4-TiO2 heterojunction nano photocatalyst for efficient sunlight-driven removal of 
direct blue 71 in an aqueous medium, Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp. 652 (2022) 129841.
	 25.	 D. Bokov, A. Turki Jalil, S. Chupradit, W. Suksatan, M. Javed Ansari, I.H. Shewael, G.H. Valiev, E. 
Kianfar, Nanomaterial by sol-gel method: Synthesis and application, Adv Mater Sci Eng. 2021 (2021) 
1–21.

357
Role of Semiconductor Materials in Wastewater Treatment
	 26.	 M. Sohaib, T. Iqbal, S. Afsheen, M.B. Tahir, A. Masood, M. Rafique, K.N. Riaz, M.A. Sayed, 
A.F. Abd El-Rehim, A.M. Ali, Novel sol–gel synthesis of Mo-doped ZnO-NPs for photo-catalytic 
waste water treatment using the RhB dye as a Model pollutant, Environ Dev Sustain. 25 (2023) 
11583–11598.
	 27.	 M.J. Hakimi-Tehrani, S.A. Hassanzadeh-Tabrizi, N. Koupaei, A. Saffar, M. Rafiei, Synthesis of 
Z-scheme g-C3N4/WO3 nano-photocatalyst with superior antibacterial characteristics for wastewater 
treatment, J Solgel Sci Technol. 105 (2023) 212–219.
	 28.	 E.S. Alsolami, I.A. Mkhalid, A. Shawky, M.A. Hussein, Sol–gel assisted growth of nanostructured NiS/
CeO2 p-n heterojunctions for fast photooxidation of ciprofloxacin antibiotic under visible light, Appl 
Nanosci. 13 (2023). 6445–6455.
	 29.	 M. Belghiti, L. El Mersly, K. Tanji, K. Belkodia, I. Lamsayety, K. Ouzaouit, H. Faqir, I. Benzakour, S. 
Rafqah, A. Outzourhit, Sol-gel combined mechano-thermal synthesis of Y2O3, CeO2, and PdO partially 
coated ZnO for sulfamethazine and basic yellow 28 photodegradation under UV and visible light, Opt 
Mater (Amst). 136 (2023) 113458.
	 30.	 N. Alfryyan, M. Ikram, A. Manzoor, A. Jamil, Z.A. Alrowaili, M.S. Al-Buriahi, A. Irshad, M.I. Din, 
Synthesis of Cd-substituted NiCoPrFe2O4@CNTs via sol-gel method: Investigating the structural and 
photocatalytic properties, Physica B Condens Matter. 660 (2023) 414885.
	 31.	 N.Y. Tashkandi, A. Shawky, Enhanced visible-light photocatalytic remediation of atrazine over 
CuAl2O4-modified BaSnO3 nanoplatelets synthesized by sol-gel route, J Alloys Compd. 968 (2023) 
171826.
	 32.	 A.S. Basaleh, S.I. El-Hout, Sol-gel synthesis of photoactive PtO/Bi2WO6 nanocomposites for improved 
photoreduction of Hg (II) ions under visible illumination, Molecular Catalysis. 547 (2023) 113413.
	 33.	 R.K. Singh, R. Kumar, D.P. Singh, R. Savu, S.A. Moshkalev, Progress in microwave-assisted synthesis 
of quantum dots (graphene/carbon/semiconducting) for bioapplications: A review, Mater Today Chem. 
12 (2019) 282–314.
	 34.	 V.G.S. Singh, N. Kaul, P.C. Ramamurthy, T. Naik, R. Viswanath, V. Kumar, H.S. Bhojya Naik, P. A, 
A.K. H A, J. Singh, N.A. Khan, Green synthesis of nickel-doped magnesium ferrite nanoparticles via 
combustion for facile microwave-assisted optical and photocatalytic applications, Environ Res. 235 
(2023) 116598.
	 35.	 G. Divya, G. Jaishree, T. Sivarao, K.V.D. Lakshmi, Microwave assisted sol–gel approach for Zr doped 
TiO2 as a benign photocatalyst for Bismark brown red dye pollutant, RSC Adv. 13 (2023) 8692–8705.
	 36.	 G. Sivakumari, M. Rajarajan, S. Senthilvelan, Microwave-assisted synthesis and characterization of 
activated carbon–zirconium-incorporated CeO2 nanocomposites for photocatalytic and antimicrobial 
activity, Res Chem Intermed. 49 (2023) 3539–3561.
	 37.	 M. Arellano-Cortaza, E. Ramírez-Morales, S.J. Castillo, L. Lartundo-Rojas, I.Z.- Torres, E.M.L. 
Alejandro, L. Rojas-Blanco, Microwave-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of type II ZnSe/ZnO hetero­
structures as photocatalysts for wastewater treatment, Ceram Int. 49 (2023) 24027–24037.
	 38.	 S.S.A. Al Ghafry, H. Al Shidhani, B. Al Farsi, R.G.S. Sofin, A.S. Al-Hosni, Z. Alsharji, J. Al-Sabahi, 
M.Z. Al-Abri, The photocatalytic degradation of phenol under solar irradiation using microwave-
assisted Ag-doped ZnO nanostructures, Opt Mater (Amst). 135 (2023) 113272.
	 39.	 C. Cheng, Q. Shi, W. Zhu, Y. Zhang, W. Su, Z. Lu, J. Yan, K. Chen, Q. Wang, J. Li, Microwave-assisted 
synthesis of MoS2/BiVO4 heterojunction for photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline hydrochloride, 
Nanomaterials. 13 (2023) 1522.
	 40.	 C.L. Ücker, S.R. Almeida, R.G. Cantoneiro, L.O. Diehl, S. Cava, M.L. Moreira, E. Longo, C.W. Raubach, 
Study of CaTiO3–ZnS heterostructure obtained by microwave-assisted solvothermal synthesis and its 
application in photocatalysis, J Phys Chem Solids. 172 (2023) 111050.
	 41.	 C. Li, T. Sun, G. Yi, D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Lin, J. Liu, Z. Shi, Q. Lin, Microwave-assisted method syn­
thesis of Ag/CNQDs/g-C3N4 with excellent photocatalytic activity for the degradation of norfloxacin, 
Colloids Surf A Physicochem Eng Asp. 662 (2023) 131001.
	 42.	 M. Murugalakshmi, K. Saravanakumar, C.M. Park, V. Muthuraj, Efficient photocatalytic degradation 
of sulfasalazine and reduction of hexavalent chromium over robust In2S3/Nd2O3 heterojunction under 
visible light, J Water Process Eng. 45 (2022) 102492.
	 43.	 V.S. Manikandan, S. Harish, J. Archana, M. Navaneethan, Fabrication of novel hybrid Z-Scheme 
WO3@g-C3N4@MWCNT nanostructure for photocatalytic degradation of tetracycline and the evalua­
tion of antimicrobial activity, Chemosphere. 287 (2022) 132050.
	 44.	 T. Chellapandi, G. Madhumitha, Facile synthesis and characterization of Carrisa edulis fruit extract 
capped NiO on MK30 surface material for photocatalytic behavior against organic pollutants, Mater 
Lett. 330 (2023) 133215.

358
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 45.	 Y. Li, L. Li, C. Li, W. Chen, M. Zeng, Carbon nanotube/titania composites prepared by a micro-emulsion 
method exhibiting improved photocatalytic activity, Appl Catal A Gen. 427–428 (2012) 1–7.
	 46.	 H. Maqbool, I. Bibi, Z. Nazeer, F. Majid, S. Ata, Q. Raza, M. Iqbal, Y. Slimani, M.I. Khan, M. Fatima, 
Effect of dopant on ferroelectric, dielectric and photocatalytic properties of Co–La-doped dysprosium 
chromite prepared via microemulsion route, Ceram Int. 48 (2022) 31763–31772.
	 47.	 M. Hanif, Y. Kim, S. Ameen, H. Kim, L. Kwac, Boosting the visible light photocatalytic activity of ZnO 
through the incorporation of N-doped for wastewater treatment, Coatings. 12 (2022) 579.
	 48.	 H.R. Ahmed, K.H. Hama Aziz, N.N.M. Agha, F.S. Mustafa, S.J. Hinder, Iron-loaded carbon black 
prepared via chemical vapor deposition as an efficient peroxydisulfate activator for the removal of 
rhodamine B from water, RSC Adv. 13 (2023) 26252–26266.
	 49.	 C. Wang, W. Shi, K. Zhu, X. Luan, P. Yang, Chemical vapor deposition growth of MoS2 on g-C3N4 
nanosheets for efficient removal of tetracycline hydrochloride, Langmuir. 38 (2022) 5934–5942.

359
DOI: 10.1201/9781003450146-28
Future of the 
Semiconductor Industry
Sujit Mukherjee, Debmalya Pal, 
Arunava Bhattacharyya, and Subhasis Roy
28.1  INTRODUCTION
The semiconductor industry serves as a foundational pillar of modern technological progress, pro­
viding the backbone for a wide range of electronic devices that have revolutionized our lifestyles, 
work environments, and modes of communication [1]. From smartphones and laptops to artifi­
cial intelligence (AI) and renewable energy systems, semiconductors form the bedrock upon which 
these innovations are built. As we gaze into the future, it is evident that the semiconductor industry 
is poised to continue its impressive evolution, driven by a synergy of technological breakthroughs, 
market dynamics, and societal demands. In the present era of rapid technological advancement, 
the semiconductor sector encounters a dual landscape of unprecedented challenges and promising 
opportunities. The insatiable demand for electronic components that are smaller, faster, and more 
energy-efficient is spurred by emerging trends like the Internet of Things (IoT), 5G connectivity, 
augmented reality, and advanced AI [2]. To cater to these trends, the industry must forge innovative 
solutions that stretch existing manufacturing processes’ boundaries while fostering novel design, 
materials, and system integration approaches. However, as the pursuit of enhanced performance 
and efficiency intensifies, the semiconductor field also faces considerable hurdles. The miniaturiza­
tion of transistors, as envisioned by Moore’s law [3], is reaching tangible limits, making it progres­
sively difficult to sustain the historical pace of shrinking chip dimensions and escalating transistor 
counts. This prompts inquiries about the sustainability of the exponential computing power growth 
that characterizes the industry. Moreover, the industry must adeptly navigate intricate geopoliti­
cal dynamics, vulnerabilities within supply chains, and concerns about the environmental impact 
of semiconductor device production and disposal [4, 5]. Given the vital role of semiconductors 
in critical infrastructure and fundamental technologies, ensuring an uninterrupted supply chain 
and mitigating potential disruptions become critical responsibilities for industry stakeholders and 
policymakers. A convergence of factors will sculpt the trajectory for the semiconductor domain. 
These include pioneering advances in materials like carbon-based transistors, strides in quantum 
computing, the evolution of 3D integration techniques [6], and the creation of neuromorphic com­
puting models inspired by the human brain. Furthermore, an amplified emphasis on sustainability 
and ethically responsible manufacturing practices is poised to shape the trajectory of the industry, 
catalyzing the exploration of environmentally friendly fabrication methods and the development of 
more energy-efficient devices. In this exploration of the future course of the semiconductor sector, 
it becomes abundantly clear that the path ahead is one characterized by perpetual adaptation and 
innovation. As various stakeholders collaborate to surmount challenges and capitalize on oppor­
tunities, the semiconductor industry is positioned not just to mold the technological landscape 
but also to carve out the parameters of advancement in the digital age. The dawn of the Third 
Industrial Revolution, often called the digital revolution, has orchestrated today’s highly automated 
and processor-driven world [7]. This revolution, which commenced toward the close of the previous 
century, was distinguished by the emergence of electronics, telecommunications, and computa­
tional prowess [8]. Semiconductors constitute an integrated circuit or microchip [9]. Functionally, 
a semiconductor conducts energy between two materials while blocking the flow to others. 
28

360
Handbook of Semiconductors
Semiconductors play a pivotal role in electronics, exhibiting properties akin to conductors and insu­
lators. In the contemporary world, most electronic components encompass a semiconductor as their 
fundamental element. Common devices, from medical equipment and watches to cell phones, com­
puters, and laptops, rely on semiconductors. Integrating semiconductors in electronics contributes 
to heightened speed, efficiency, and affordability. This fundamental notion gave birth to the semi­
conductor chip, the powerhouse that fuels nearly all digital devices. Around the inception of the dig­
ital revolution, Gordon Moore emerged as a visionary who foresaw the ascent of computing power 
[10]. His prophetic insight, now known as Moore’s law, posited that the transistor count on a single 
microchip would double every two years, resulting in exponential increments in computing capac­
ity while concurrently halving energy costs. Consequently, transistors per microchip have surged 
from 10 to 30 billion US dollar, ushering in new technological progress [11]. In the present context, 
AI stands poised to act as the impetus for a fresh, decade-spanning surge within the semiconductor 
industry. Forecasts predict that the market for AI-enabled semiconductors will burgeon from its 
current $6 billion in revenue to exceed $30 billion by 2022, boasting a compound annual growth 
rate (CAGR) of approximately 50% [12]. The trajectory of investments in semiconductor technology 
will determine the industry’s dimensions, growth pace, and the accessibility and benefits it confers.
28.2  BRIEF ABOUT THE CURRENT SCENARIO OF 
THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
The semiconductor organization is currently in a state of flux. The international chip scarcity that 
began in 2020 is starting to ease, but the call for semiconductors stays sturdy.
Many elements contribute to this: the ongoing growth of IoT, the rise of electric cars (EVs), and 
the full-scale adoption of 5G generation. Due to this robust demand, the semiconductor industry 
is anticipated to develop similarly in the coming years. Market share of semiconductors in various 
sectors is shown in Figure 28.1. This semiconductor industry faced several significant developments 
and challenges, including supply chain constraints. The industry was grappling with supply chain 
disruptions caused by factors such as the COVID-19 pandemic, geopolitical tensions, and natural 
disasters. These disruptions led to shortages of critical components and increased lead times.
a.	Increased Demand: The growing demand for semiconductors was driven by various fac­
tors, including the expansion of 5G networks, the rise of AI and machine learning, IoT, and 
advancements in automotive technology.
FIGURE 28.1  Market share of semiconductors in various sectors.

361
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
b.	Technological Advancements: The industry continued to push the boundaries of technol­
ogy by developing smaller and more power-efficient chips and exploring new materials and 
manufacturing techniques, such as extreme ultraviolet (EUV) lithography.
c.	Geopolitical Considerations: Geopolitical tensions were impacting the semiconductor 
industry, with issues related to trade restrictions, export controls, and intellectual property 
rights affecting global supply chains and collaborations.
d.	Investments and Acquisitions: Various companies invested significantly in semiconduc­
tor research, development, and manufacturing capacity. Additionally, there were notable 
mergers and acquisitions within the industry.
e.	Environmental Concerns: The industry was also focusing on sustainability and reducing 
its environmental impact, with efforts to develop more energy-efficient technologies and 
reduce the use of hazardous materials.
28.2.1  Current Worldwide Semiconductor Marketplace
In 2021, the global semiconductor industry was expected to be worth $429.5 billion [13]. Asia 
Pacific dominates the worldwide semiconductor industry, retaining first-class market share in 2021. 
Broadcom Inc. (US), Intel Corporation (US), Qualcomm (US), Samsung Electronics (South Korea), 
SK Hynix (South Korea), Taiwan Semiconductors (Taiwan), Texas Instruments (US), Toshiba 
Corporation (Japan), Maxim Integrated Products, Inc. (US), Micron Technology (US), NVIDIA 
Corporation (US), and NXP Semiconductors N.V. (Netherlands) are prominent market leaders [14]. 
In the coming decade, we will almost certainly see many of the world’s tech behemoths added to 
this list, as companies like Apple, Google, and Amazon enter the market [15]. 
The global semiconductor device market is anticipated to reach USD 911.13 billion near future, 
exhibiting a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 8.19% [16]. Here is a pinnacle-level view of 
the modern country of the semiconductor employer. With reduced chip scarcity peaking in 2021, 
the global chip shortage is ultimately beginning to decrease. This is because of the improved poten­
tial of semiconductor manufacturers, easing COVID-19 guidelines, and decreased demand for sure 
electronic additives [17]. Demand for semiconductors remains robust. Despite efforts to mitigate the 
chip scarcity, the demand for semiconductors remains robust, fueled by factors such as the the ongo­
ing advancement of the Internet of Things (IoT), the proliferation of electric vehicles (EVs), and 
the widespread adoption of 5G technology. The semiconductor industry is anticipated to continue 
developing. This growth is expected to be propelled by the increasing demand for semiconductors 
across a wide variety of applications. However, the semiconductor industry is confronted with a 
myriad of challenging situations [18]. Also, the semiconductor industry faces some worrying situ­
ations, including the continued chip scarcity, the growing cost of producing semiconductors, the 
growing complexity of semiconductor designs, and the dearth of expert employees in the semicon­
ductor industry.
28.2.2  Current Technological Improvements
The semiconductor industry is constantly evolving, with new technology being developed continu­
ously. Some of the most promising technological upgrades inside the modern-day semiconductor 
enterprise include the following.
28.2.2.1  3-D Chip Stacking
This technology enables the stacking of multiple layers of transistors on the top of each other, poten­
tially resulting in enhanced performance and energy efficiency [19].

362
Handbook of Semiconductors
28.2.2.2  Gate-all-round Transistors
These transistors are more green than conventional transistors, and they can be used to create 
smaller and quicker chips, shifting toward superior manufacturing strategies together with 7 nm 
and 5 nm nodes [20].
28.2.2.3  New Substances
New materials, along with graphene and gallium arsenide, are being explored for semiconductors. 
These materials offer potential benefits over silicon, improving velocity and performance.
28.2.2.4  Artificial Intelligence
AI is being used to enhance the layout and manufacturing of semiconductors. AI can assist in opti­
mizing the layout of transistors and becoming aware of defects in chips. Additionally, there has been 
elevated emphasis on specialized chips like graphics processing units (GPUs) for AI and system 
getting-to-know programs.
28.2.3  Current Geopolitics in the  Semiconductor Industry
The semiconductor enterprise is increasingly becoming a geopolitical battleground. The United 
States, China, and other countries are competing to secure the right of entry to brand-new semi­
conductor technologies, as those chips are vital for various industries, including defense, telecom­
munications, and production. The United States has taken several steps to try to steady its very own 
semiconductor delivery chain. In 2021, the U.S. Congress passed the CHIPS Act, which affords 
$52 billion in investment for semiconductor studies and development [21]. The U.S. authorities have 
also imposed sanctions on Chinese semiconductor businesses, including SMIC, to restrict China’s 
admission to cutting-edge semiconductor technologies [22]. The geopolitical opposition over semi­
conductors is likely to hold in the future. The final results of this competition can have a massive 
impact on the global financial system and the safety of the U.S. and its allies. The key geopolitical 
trends that are shaping the semiconductor industry are as follows.
28.2.3.1  The Rise of China
China is the arena’s largest semiconductor marketplace, and it is also one of the main producers 
of semiconductors. The Chinese authorities intend to make China a global chief in semiconductor 
manufacturing by 2025. China has been constructing new semiconductor foundries and is investing 
in studies and improvement, and it is looking to become an international leader in semiconductor 
production.
28.2.3.2  The U.S.-China Competition
The U.S.-China opposition is likewise playing out within the semiconductor enterprise. The U.S. 
government has imposed sanctions on Chinese semiconductor companies and is attempting to 
encourage major U.S. corporations to manufacture semiconductors inside the United States and 
Taiwan.
28.2.3.3  The Worldwide Chip Scarcity
The worldwide chip shortage has moreover highlighted the significance of semiconductors. The 
scarcity has disrupted delivery chains and caused expenses to upward thrust. This has caused calls 
for governments to ensure a more consistent and resilient semiconductor delivery chain. The geopo­
litical panorama of the semiconductor enterprise is complicated and ever-converting. However, the 
above tendencies will likely shape the employer in the coming years.

363
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
28.2.4  Current Industry Consolidation
The semiconductor enterprise has seen enormous industry consolidation in recent years. This is 
because of the growing value of manufacturing semiconductors, the need to maintain economies 
of scale to be profitable, and the growing significance of semiconductors in various industries. In 
2011, Intel purchased Altera for $16.7 billion [23]. In 2015, Avago Technologies bought Broadcom 
for $37 billion [24]. 2016, Qualcomm bought NXP Semiconductors for $44 billion [25]. In 2020, 
AMD acquired Xilinx for $35 billion [26]. These are some examples of industry consolidation in 
the semiconductor enterprise.
28.2.5  Supply and Demand Dynamics
The Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA) is an organization representing the semiconductor 
industry. The SIA publishes many reports and research on the semiconductor industry, including 
delivery reports and calls for dynamics within the modern scenario. The World Semiconductor 
Trade Statistics (WSTS) is an international company that tracks the semiconductor industry. The 
WSTS publishes a monthly report on the worldwide semiconductor market, including statistics 
on delivery and demand within the current scenario. The International Technology Roadmap for 
Semiconductors (ITRS) is a roadmap that outlines the destiny of the semiconductor enterprise [27]. 
The ITRS consists of statistics on the expected call for semiconductors in the future, in addition to 
the delivery and demand dynamics inside the modern situation. The Semiconductor Engineering 
website is a complete resource for information, evaluation, and statements on the semiconduc­
tor industry. The website includes a segment on delivery and a call for dynamics, which presents 
updated facts on the present-day scenario. The chip scarcity is easing; however, calls for semicon­
ductors stay robust. The industry is predicted to keep growing within the coming years; however, it 
must overcome some challenges to meet this call.
28.3  RECENT ADVANCEMENTS IN THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
The semiconductor industry has witnessed remarkable advancements in recent years, transforming 
various aspects of technology and shaping our modern world. Semiconductors are the foundation 
of electronic devices, enabling the development of innovative products across industries such as 
telecommunications, computing, automotive, healthcare, and renewable energy.
28.3.1  Miniaturization
The continual miniaturization of electronic components is one of the most important themes in 
the semiconductor industry. Moore’s law, stating that the number of transistors on integrated cir­
cuits would double roughly every two years, has been true for many years. However, as transistor 
sizes approach atomic limits, researchers have faced significant challenges in further scaling down 
the size of semiconductor devices. The industry has investigated alternate strategies, including 
three-dimensional (3D) integration and new materials to tackle these difficulties. Multiple layers 
of transistors can be stacked thanks to 3D integration, boosting component density without further 
reducing their size. Additionally, the creation of novel materials holds promise for future miniatur­
ization because they have outstanding electrical and thermal properties at nanoscale scales, such as 
graphene and carbon nanotubes [28].
28.3.2  Advanced Materials
Creating and incorporating new materials has largely driven advancements in the semiconduc­
tor industry. Due to its superior electrical characteristics, silicon has been the most widely used 

364
Handbook of Semiconductors
material in the production of semiconductors. Alternative materials, however, have arisen to get 
around these restrictions as conventional silicon-based technologies approach their limits. One such 
substance is gallium nitride (GaN), which outperforms silicon in power efficiency, switching speed, 
and temperature tolerance. EVs, renewable energy systems, and power electronics increasingly 
employ GaN-based power devices. Indium gallium arsenide (InGaAs), which permits high-speed 
and low-noise operations in optical communications, is another substance that has attracted interest 
[29]. InGaAs-based photodetectors and lasers have revolutionized data transmission rates in fiber­
optic networks, enabling quicker and more dependable data transport over vast distances.
28.3.3  Artificial Intelligence Integration
New opportunities in numerous industries have emerged due to the combination of semiconductor tech­
nologies and AI. Due to the high computational demands of AI algorithms, semiconductor producers 
have created specialized AI processors, also called AI chips or accelerators. AI chips are made to effi­
ciently carry out tasks linked to AI, like inference and training of neural networks. These chips have 
cutting-edge architectures that are tailored for AI workloads, including GPUs and field-programmable 
gate arrays (FPGAs) [30]. Computer vision, natural language processing, autonomous cars, and robotics 
have all seen substantial advancements due to incorporating AI chips into products and systems.
28.3.4  Quantum Computing
The concepts of quantum mechanics are used in quantum computing, a paradigm shift that allows 
for computations that are impossible with conventional computers. Recent developments in the semi­
conductor sector have pushed quantum computing closer to being used in everyday life. Quantum 
computers use quantum bits, or qubits, with exponentially more processing capacity because they 
may exist simultaneously in several states [31]. In order to create scalable and trustworthy quantum 
systems, semiconductor-based techniques such as superconducting qubits and trapped ion qubits 
have shown promise. The development of quantum computers, which have the potential to revolu­
tionize industries, including materials science, optimization, drug discovery, and cryptography, is 
currently being intensively pursued by leading technology businesses and research organizations.
28.3.5  Preparation of Nano-heterojunction Photocatalysts 
Using Multifunctional Semiconductors
Burning conventional energy sources like coal, methane, and petrol emits several greenhouse gases, 
including CO, CO2, and N2O, a major danger to human health and the environment. As a result, 
there is a dire need for effective techniques for decreasing pollution and establishing clean, ecologi­
cally friendly energy sources.
Utilizing semiconductor photocatalysis to harness abundant solar energy presents a promis­
ing strategy for tackling the energy crisis and escalating environmental concerns. This approach 
entails producing hydrogen and detoxifying organic contaminants through solar energy. Recent 
years have witnessed extensive research endeavors to enhance the efficiency of semiconductor 
photocatalytic materials. A schematic of the photocatalytic process of a semiconductor is repre­
sented in Figure 28.2. To ensure an effective photocatalytic process, employing semiconductors 
characterized by a wide range of optical absorption, efficient separation of charge carriers, and 
robust chemical stability in wet environments is imperative. Originally, considerable attention was 
directed toward broad bandgap semiconductors like TiO2 as typical photocatalytic materials [33]. 
However, the limited optical absorption of such materials prompted the realization of the need for 
narrow band gap semiconductors. These materials can significantly expand the range of optical 
absorption effectiveness of solar energy. In parallel with the ongoing advancement of visible-light-
responsive semiconductor materials, the enhancement of their chemical stability and the reduction 

365
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
of photogenerated charge carrier recombination is of paramount importance. In recent studies, 
various functional semiconductors, including ferroelectric, ferromagnetic, and graphene-based 
photosensitizers, have emerged to address these challenges. For instance, ferroelectric materials 
offer the advantage of generating an internal electric field that aids the separation of photogen­
erated charge carriers efficiently.
Similarly, investigations into ferromagnetic semiconductors have unveiled heightened photocat­
alytic activity when subjected to external magnetic fields. Despite these promising developments, 
inherent limitations such as constrained solar spectrum absorption, limited carrier diffusion length, 
and heightened recombination rates have revealed the impracticality of achieving high efficiency 
and stability using a solitary semiconductor photocatalyst. To surmount these challenges, research­
ers have turned to the design of multicomponent semiconductor heterostructures. By combining two 
or more semiconductors with distinct functionalities, these heterostructures have demonstrated a 
remarkable capacity to enhance the efficiency and stability of photocatalytic materials.
Fascinating reviews have recently emerged in the realm of photocatalyst development, focusing 
on the utilization of organic semiconductor/semiconductor heterostructures, facet-dependent and 
interfacial plane-related photocatalytic heterostructures, heterostructure semiconductor nanowires, 
and graphitic carbon nitride-based metal sulfide heterojunctions [34–36]. Integrating ferroelectric 
and ferromagnetic materials into nano-heterostructures presents a promising avenue to enhance the 
efficiency of transferring charge through electrical and magnetic tunneling.
While significant strides have been taken in the realm of semiconductor heterostructure pro­
duction, there remains a need for more refined research endeavors aimed at creating heterostruc­
ture photocatalysts that are simultaneously efficient and stable. Band edge positions of different 
semiconductor heterostructures are shown in Figure 28.3. Establishing optimal interfacial contacts 
FIGURE 28.2  Photocatalytic process of a semiconductor. (Adapted with permission [32]. Copyright [2020] 
American Chemical Society.) 
FIGURE 28.3  Band edge positions of different types of semiconductor heterostructures. (Adapted with 
permission [32]. Copyright [2020] American Chemical Society.) 

366
Handbook of Semiconductors
among diverse constituent layers is pivotal in multicomponent heterostructure systems. Therefore, 
future progress in crafting heterojunction photocatalysts should emphasize interfacial engineer­
ing, a critical means to achieve favorable band alignment and proficient charge transport capa­
bilities. Furthermore, exploring novel photocatalytic materials with suitable band alignment for 
visible light activation holds potential as an effective avenue for advancing this field. Integrating 
multifunctional semiconductors, like ferroelectric and ferromagnetic materials, into heterostructure 
photocatalysts offers a promising strategy to attain heightened efficiency. Nevertheless, it is impera­
tive to undertake systematic investigations employing advanced spectroscopic techniques to gain 
a comprehensive understanding of photogenerated charge carrier migration pathways. Moreover, a 
comprehensive grasp of charge migration kinetics at the interface necessitates theoretical calcula­
tions and modeling approaches [37].
28.4  EFFICIENCY ENHANCEMENT TECHNIQUES OF SEMICONDUCTORS
Now let us explore various techniques used to enhance the efficiency of semiconductors and their 
impact on electronics.
28.4.1  Materials Engineering
Materials engineering is one of the primary methods to boost semiconductor efficiency. It is feasible 
to improve the qualities of the materials used in semiconductor production by carefully choosing 
and modifying them. For instance, scientists have created brand-new semiconductor materials with 
high carrier mobility, like silicon carbide (SiC) and gallium nitride (GaN). These materials enable 
semiconductors to operate at greater frequencies and power levels while reducing losses because of 
their improved thermal conductivity and higher breakdown voltages.
28.4.2  Band Gap Engineering
The energy band structure of semiconductors can be changed using band gap engineering to 
improve performance. Efficiency can be increased by modifying the band gap or the energy dif­
ference between the valence and conduction bands. In particular, superlattices and quantum wells 
can be used to build structures with different bandgaps. The absorption and emission properties of 
optoelectronic devices, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and solar cells, have been improved 
using this technology, leading to increased energy conversion efficiency.
28.4.3  Doping Techniques
To change the electrical characteristics of semiconductor materials, doping is adding impurities. The 
conductivity of semiconductors can be changed by deliberately adding dopant atoms. For instance, 
doping with impurities like boron or phosphorus can form p-type or n-type areas in silicon-based 
semiconductors. Due to its ability to precisely manage charge carriers and increase overall effi­
ciency, this method is essential for creating transistors and other electronic components.
28.4.4  Surface Passivation
Surface recombination in semiconductors, which can result in large efficiency losses, is reduced 
using the surface passivation approach. The surface flaws of the semiconductor can be efficiently 
passivated by coating them with a thin layer of a passivation substance, like silicon nitride or silicon 
dioxide. This enhances the device’s overall efficiency by preventing charge carrier recombination 
at the surface. Surface passivation techniques are commonly used to improve the performance of 
photovoltaics and integrated circuits.

367
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
28.4.5  Advanced Fabrication Processes
Developments have greatly aided the enhancement of efficiency in semiconductor production 
methods. Material deposition, etching, and patterning can be precisely controlled using methods 
including atomic layer deposition (ALD), plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), 
and reactive ion etching (RIE) [38–40]. These procedures make it possible to produce nanoscale 
structures with extreme accuracy, which lowers parasitic resistance and capacitance and enhances 
overall device performance.
28.4.6  Power Management
Power management strategy optimization is a part of improving semiconductor efficiency. Power 
management integrated circuits (PMICs) control voltage levels and distribute power to semicon­
ductor devices effectively. The power consumption of semiconductors can be reduced using meth­
ods like clock gating, power gating, and dynamic voltage scaling. As a result, portable electronic 
devices’ batteries last longer and are more energy efficient.
28.4.7  Advanced Packaging
Their packaging greatly influences the efficiency of semiconductors as a whole. To improve heat 
dissipation and reduce power losses, advanced packaging techniques are used, which enable semi­
conductors to function at higher power levels. Better electrical and thermal connections between 
the semiconductor chip and the package are made possible by flip-chip bonding, 3D integration, and 
wafer-level packaging, reducing parasitic resistance and capacitance. Higher operational efficiency 
and improved power supply result from this.
28.5  APPLICATIONS OF SEMICONDUCTORS
The wide range of applications of semiconductors across various industries and technologies has 
been very effective in the current situation. The common applications of semiconductors are briefly 
discussed here.
28.5.1  Manufacturing of Electronics
Semiconductors form the foundation of modern electronics. They are used to manufacture transis­
tors, diodes, and integrated circuits (ICs). Transistors are fundamental building blocks of electronic 
devices, serving as amplifiers and switches. Diodes are crucial for controlling the flow of cur­
rent in electronic circuits. Integrated circuits, which are miniature electronic circuits integrated 
onto a single chip, enable the creation of complex electronic systems, such as microprocessors and 
memory chips. Figure 28.4 shows the several applications of semiconductors in the manufacturing 
of electronic devices.
28.5.2  Computing and Information Technology
Semiconductors play a pivotal role in the computing and information technology sectors. They are 
used to design and produce computer processors, memory chips, and storage devices. The advance­
ments in semiconductor technology, particularly the miniaturization of transistors (as per Moore’s 
law), have led to the development of increasingly powerful and efficient computer systems.
28.5.3  Communication Systems
Semiconductors are extensively used in communication systems, including wired and wireless 
networks. They are vital for developing devices such as routers, switches, modems, and network 

368
Handbook of Semiconductors
interface cards. Semiconductors enable signal processing, amplification, and modulation/demodula­
tion, allowing efficient data transmission and communication between devices.
28.5.4  Optoelectronics and Photonics
Semiconductors find extensive application in optoelectronic and photonic devices. LEDs are semi­
conductors that emit light when electricity passes through them. LEDs are used in various appli­
cations, including lighting, display panels, signage, and indicators. Semiconductor lasers, such 
as diode lasers, are crucial in optical communication systems, laser printing, and laser cutting. 
Photodetectors, solar cells, and image sensors rely on semiconductors for efficient light detection 
and energy conversion.
28.5.5  Renewable Energy Generation
Semiconductors are important in renewable energy systems, especially solar energy genera­
tion. Solar cells, also known as photovoltaic cells, convert light (mainly sunlight) energy directly 
into electric energy using semiconductors. Silicon-based solar cells are the most prevalent, but 
other semiconductor materials, like gallium arsenide, are also used for specialized applications. 
Semiconductors are also employed in wind turbines and energy storage systems, contributing to the 
development of sustainable energy infrastructure.
FIGURE 28.4  A schematic diagram of the potential road of specific electrical applications for 2D semi­
conductors. (Adapted with permission [41]. Open Access licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License.)

369
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
28.5.6  Automotive Industry
Semiconductors have become increasingly important in the automotive industry. They are utilized 
in various applications, including engine control units (ECUs), navigation systems, advanced driver-
assistance systems (ADAS), airbag systems, anti-lock braking systems (ABS), and entertainment 
systems [42]. The growth of EVs has further heightened the demand for semiconductors in power 
electronics and battery management systems.
28.5.7  Medical Devices and Healthcare
Semiconductors are crucial in medical devices, where precision, miniaturization, and reliability 
are essential. They are used in devices like X-ray machines, MRI scanners, ultrasound systems, 
pacemakers, insulin pumps, and blood glucose monitors. Semiconductors enable precise sensing, 
imaging, signal processing, and control in medical equipment, contributing to better diagnostics, 
treatment, and patient care.
28.5.8  Aerospace and Defense
The aerospace and defense sectors heavily rely on semiconductors for various applications. 
Semiconductors are utilized in satellite communication, radar, guidance, avionics, and military 
systems.
These are just a few examples of the diverse applications of semiconductors. As technology 
advances, semiconductors will likely find new and innovative applications in various industries.
28.6  BARRIERS AND CHALLENGES OF THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
The semiconductor industry is a critical and complex sector foundational to modern technology. 
While it has driven incredible advancements, it also faces numerous barriers and challenges. Some 
of the key barriers and challenges faced by the semiconductor industry are:
a.	Technological Complexity and Miniaturization: The semiconductor industry constantly 
drives to increase the number of transistors on a single chip, following Moore’s law. As 
components shrink to nanoscale sizes, it becomes increasingly difficult to maintain per­
formance, power efficiency, and reliability, leading to challenges in manufacturing and 
design.
b.	Cost of Research and Development: Developing new semiconductor technologies requires 
substantial investments in research, development, and innovation. The cost of designing 
cutting-edge semiconductor processes and equipment can run into billions of dollars, mak­
ing it a barrier for smaller players to compete.
c.	Capital-Intensive Manufacturing: Establishing and maintaining semiconductor manufac­
turing facilities (fabs) is extremely capital-intensive. The costs associated with building, 
equipping, and maintaining these facilities can be overwhelming, limiting the number of 
companies that can enter the market.
d.	Global Supply Chain Vulnerabilities: The semiconductor industry relies on a global sup­
ply chain for raw materials, equipment, and manufacturing. Any disruption in the supply 
chain, such as geopolitical tensions, natural disasters, or pandemics (as witnessed with 
COVID-19), can lead to shortages and production delays.
e.	Geopolitical Challenges: The semiconductor industry operates across international bound­
aries, making it susceptible to geopolitical tensions and trade restrictions. Export controls 
and trade conflicts can disrupt the flow of materials, technologies, and products, affecting 
the entire industry.

370
Handbook of Semiconductors
f.	Intellectual Property Protection: Protecting intellectual property (IP) is a significant con­
cern in the semiconductor industry. Reverse engineering and counterfeiting can lead to the 
unauthorized replication of advanced technologies, undermining the competitive advan­
tage of companies that invest heavily in R&D.
g.	Talent Shortages: The semiconductor industry demands a highly skilled and specialized 
workforce. A shortage of qualified chip design, process engineering, and advanced manu­
facturing professionals can impede innovation and growth.
h.	Environmental Concerns: The semiconductor manufacturing process involves using haz­
ardous chemicals and producing large amounts of waste, raising environmental concerns. 
Stricter regulations and pressure to adopt more sustainable practices can increase opera­
tional costs and complexity.
i.	Complex Packaging and Integration: Integrating diverse components into a single chip 
package requires advanced packaging technologies. Packaging challenges increase as chip 
designs become more intricate, affecting performance, heat dissipation, and reliability.
j.	Quality Control and Yield Enhancement: Ensuring high yields (the proportion of func­
tional chips from a batch) is essential to maintain profitability. The smaller feature sizes 
and complex manufacturing processes make it challenging to control defects, leading to 
lower yields and increased costs.
k.	Cyclical Nature of the Industry: The semiconductor industry is known for its cyclical nature, 
characterized by periods of high demand and growth followed by downturns. This cyclical­
ity can lead to overcapacity during boom times and financial strain during downturns.
l.	Security Vulnerabilities: With the increasing connectivity of devices, cybersecurity is 
a significant concern. Malicious actors could exploit vulnerabilities in semiconductor 
designs to gain unauthorized access or control over systems, leading to data breaches and 
other security risks.
The semiconductor industry faces many barriers and challenges due to its technological com­
plexity, high costs, supply chain vulnerabilities, geopolitical factors, environmental concerns, and 
more. However, the industry’s ability to continuously innovate and adapt has historically allowed it 
to overcome these challenges and drive technological progress.
28.7  PROSPECTS OF THE SEMICONDUCTOR INDUSTRY
28.7.1  Continued Technological Advancements
The semiconductor industry has a history of pushing the boundaries of technology. While the tra­
ditional trends of shrinking transistor sizes and increasing chip density are becoming more chal­
lenging due to physical limitations, innovations in materials, 3D integration, and new architectures 
are expected to drive continued improvements in performance, power efficiency, and functionality.
28.7.2  Post-Moore’s Law Era
Moore’s law, which predicted the doubling of transistor density every couple of years, shows signs 
of slowing down due to fundamental physical limitations. The industry is entering an era where the 
focus has shifted from merely increasing transistor count to optimizing performance through vari­
ous architectural and design innovations. This might involve leveraging heterogeneous architectures, 
combining different processing elements on a single chip, and optimizing for specific workloads.
28.7.3  Specialized Chip Designs
As applications like AI, machine learning, data analytics, and cryptocurrency mining gain promi­
nence, there is a growing need for specialized hardware solutions to accelerate these workloads. 

371
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
Custom-designed application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs) and field-programmable gate 
arrays (FPGAs) are expected to play a crucial role in meeting the demand for efficient and high-
performance computing [43, 44].
28.7.4  More than Moore (MTM) Approach
The “More than Moore” (MTM) [45] approach involves developing technologies and functionalities 
beyond traditional scaling. This can include sensor innovations, power management, micro-electro-
mechanical systems (MEMS), and 3D integration techniques [46]. This approach allows for inte­
grating various functions onto a single chip, enabling more diverse and sophisticated applications.
28.7.5  Quantum Computing and Neuromorphic Computing
Quantum and neuromorphic computing represent radically different computing paradigms. 
Quantum computers can solve complex problems that normal computers cannot solve. At the same 
time, neuromorphic computing draws inspiration from the human brain’s architecture and can excel 
at tasks like pattern recognition and optimization.
28.7.6  Advanced Packaging and Interconnects
Innovations in packaging and interconnect technologies are crucial for improving chip perfor­
mance, power efficiency, and thermal management. Advanced packaging techniques like system-in-
package (SiP), chip-on-wafer-on-substrate (CoWoS), and 3D stacking allow for greater integration 
of multiple chips and functionalities within a single package [47].
28.7.7  Sustainability and Environmental Concerns
Environmental considerations are gaining prominence in the semiconductor industry. There’s a 
growing emphasis on developing more energy-efficient manufacturing processes, reducing the envi­
ronmental impact of electronic waste, and utilizing eco-friendly materials [48].
28.7.8  Supply Chain Diversification
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted vulnerabilities in global supply chains. Semiconductor com­
panies are likely to invest in diversifying their supply chains and exploring more localized manu­
facturing to mitigate future disruptions.
28.7.9  Geopolitical Factors and Trade Dynamics
Geopolitical tensions can impact global trade and technology flows. Companies might need to navi­
gate trade restrictions, export controls, and intellectual property concerns, which could influence 
their business strategies and global operations.
28.7.10  Skilled Workforce and Talent Acquisition
The semiconductor industry relies heavily on a skilled workforce for research, design, manufactur­
ing, and innovation. Companies must invest in education and training programs to ensure a steady 
supply of skilled professionals.

372
Handbook of Semiconductors
28.7.11  Regulatory and Ethical Considerations
Advancements in technology, such as AI and autonomous systems, raise ethical and regulatory 
questions. The semiconductor industry must collaborate with policymakers to establish appro­
priate regulations and standards to ensure these technologically responsible development and 
deployment.
28.8  CONCLUSIVE REMARKS
The future of the semiconductor industry holds significant promise and challenges. As technology 
advances, semiconductors will remain the bedrock of modern electronics, powering AI, IoT, 5G, and 
beyond innovations. However, the industry must navigate complexities such as miniaturization lim­
its, energy efficiency concerns, and geopolitical factors affecting supply chains. Continued invest­
ment in research, collaboration, and adaptation to new materials and manufacturing techniques 
will be crucial for sustaining growth and driving the next wave of technological breakthroughs. In 
conclusion, the future of the semiconductor industry appears to be characterized by a shift from 
traditional scaling to more specialized and diverse technological advancements. Innovations will 
likely focus on improving performance, efficiency, and functionality through various approaches 
while considering environmental, regulatory, and geopolitical factors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Author (S. Roy) would like to acknowledge “Scheme for Transformational and Advanced Research 
in Sciences (STARS)” (MoE-STARS/STARS-2/2023-0175) by the Ministry of Education, Govt. of 
India for promoting translational India-centric research in sciences implemented and managed by 
Indian Institute of Science (IISc), Bangalore, for their support.
REFERENCES
	
1.	 Irwin, D., & Klenow, P. (1994). Learning-by-doing spillovers in the semiconductor industry. Journal of 
Political Economy, 102(6), 1200–1227.
	
2.	 Rose, K., Eldridge, S., & Chapin, L. (2015). The internet of things: An overview. The Internet Society 
(ISOC), 80, 1–50.
	
3.	 Lundstrom, M. (2003). Moore’s law forever? Science, 299(5604), 210–211.
	
4.	 Dahlben, L., Eckelman, M., Hakimian, A., Somu, S., & Isaacs, J. (2013). Environmental life cycle 
assessment of a carbon nanotube-enabled semiconductor device. Environmental Science & Technology, 
47(15), 8471–8478.
	
5.	 Uryu, T., Yoshinaga, J., & Yanagisawa, Y. (2003). Environmental fate of gallium arsenide semiconduc­
tor disposal: A case study of mobile phones. Journal of Industrial Ecology, 7(2), 103–112.
	
6.	 Chanchani, R. (2009). 3D Integration Technologies–An Overview. Materials for Advanced Packaging, 
1–50.
	
7.	 Mowery, D. (2009). Plus ca change: Industrial R&D in the “third industrial revolution”. Industrial and 
Corporate Change, 18(1), 1–50.
	
8.	 Yeager, K. (2008). Striving for power perfection. IEEE Power and Energy Magazine, 6(6), 28–35.
	
9.	 Van Zant, P. (2014). Microchip Fabrication. McGraw-Hill Education.
	 10.	 Cusumano, M., & Yoffie, D. (2015). Extrapolating from Moore’s law. Communications of the ACM, 
59(1), 33–35.
	 11.	 Jordan, A. (2008). Frontiers of research and future directions in information and communication tech­
nology. Technology in Society, 30(3-4), 388–396.
	 12.	 De Alwis, C., Kalla, A., Pham, Q.V., Kumar, P., Dev, K., Hwang, W.J., & Liyanage, M. (2021). Survey on 
6G frontiers: Trends, applications, requirements, technologies and future research. IEEE Open Journal 
of the Communications Society, 2, 836–886.
	 13.	 Moore, S. (2022, October 19). The Current State of the Global Semiconductor Market. AZoM. Retrieved 
on August 09, 2023 from https://www.azom.com/article.aspx?ArticleID=22111.

373
Future of the Semiconductor Industry
	 14.	 Garrou, P., Koyanagi, M., & Ramm, P. (2014). Handbook of 3D Integration, Volume 3: 3D Process 
Technology. John Wiley & Sons.
	 15.	 Cusumano, M., Yoffie, D., & Gawer, A. (2020). The future of platforms. MIT Sloan Management 
Review, 61, 26–34.
	 16.	 Mordor Intelligence LLP. (2022). Global Semiconductor Device Market - Growth, Trends, COVID-19 
Impact, and Forecasts (2022–2027). Report ID: 6321515
	 17.	 Aboagye, A., Burkacky, O., Mahindroo, A., & Wiseman, B. (2022). When the chips are down: How the 
semiconductor industry is dealing with a worldwide shortage.
	 18.	 Infiniti Research Limited. (2022). Global Semiconductor Market in Military and Aerospace Industry 
2023-2027. Report ID:5483776.
	 19.	 Sakuma, K., Andry, P., Dang, B., Maria, J., Tsang, C., Patel, C., Wright, S., Webb, B., Sprogis, E., & 
Kang, S., & others (2007). 3D chip stacking technology with low-volume lead-free interconnections. In 
2007 Proceedings 57th Electronic Components and Technology Conference (pp. 627–632).
	 20.	 Thomas, S. (2020). Nature Electronics. Gate-all-around transistors stack up.
	 21.	 Capri, A., & Clark, R. (2022). Australia’s Semiconductor National Moonshot. Australian Strategic 
Policy Institute.
	 22.	 Bown, C. (2020). How the United States marched the semiconductor industry into its trade war with 
China. East Asian Economic Review, 24(4), 349–388.
	 23.	 Debter, L. (2015). Intel Buying Chipmaker Altera For $16.7 Billion.
	 24.	 Gara, A. (2015). Avago To Buy Broadcom For $37 Billion As Semiconductor Dealmaking Heats Up.
	 25.	 Subba, N. (2018). China just approved the $44 billion merger between Qualcomm and NXP 
Semiconductor.
	 26.	 Bloomberg, I.K. (2020). AMD to buy Xilinx in $35 billion all-stock deal.
	 27.	 Arden, W. (2002). The international technology roadmap for semiconductors—Perspectives and chal­
lenges for the next 15 years. Current Opinion in Solid State and Materials Science, 6(5), 371–377.
	 28.	 Saito, S. (1997). Carbon nanotubes for next-generation electronics devices. Science, 278(5335), 77–78.
	 29.	 Chan, P.Y., Gogna, M., Suarez, E., Karmakar, S., Al-Amoody, F., Miller, B., & Jain, F. (2011). Nonvolatile 
memory effect in indium gallium arsenide-based Metal–Oxide–Semiconductor devices using II–VI 
tunnel insulators. Journal of Electronic Materials, 40, 1685–1688.
	 30.	 Brown, S., Francis, R., Rose, J., & Vranesic, Z. (1992). Field-Programmable Gate Arrays. (Vol. 180) 
Springer Science & Business Media.
	 31.	 Brassard, G., Chuang, I., Lloyd, S., & Monroe, C. (1998). Quantum computing. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 95(19), 11032–11033.
	 32.	 Singh, S., Faraz, M., & Khare, N. (2020). Recent advances in Semiconductor–Graphene and 
Semiconductor–Ferroelectric/Ferromagnetic nanoheterostructures for efficient hydrogen generation 
and environmental remediation. ACS Omega, 5(21), 11874–11882.
	 33.	 Chiarello, G., Dozzi, M., & Selli, E. (2017). TiO2-based materials for photocatalytic hydrogen produc­
tion. Journal of Energy Chemistry, 26(2), 250–258.
	 34.	 Huang, M., & Madasu, M. (2019). Facet-dependent and interfacial plane-related photocatalytic behav­
iors of semiconductor nanocrystals and heterostructures. Nano today, 28, 100768.
	 35.	 Kavitha, R., Nithya, P., & Kumar, S. (2020). Noble metal deposited graphitic carbon nitride based het­
erojunction photocatalysts. Applied Surface Science, 508, 145142.
	 36.	 Maitra, S., Halder, S., Maitra, T., & Roy, S. (2021). Superior light absorbing CdS/vanadium sulphide 
nanowalls@TiO2 nanorod ternary heterojunction photoanodes for solar water splitting. New Journal of 
Chemistry, 45, 7353–7367.
	 37.	 Bai, S., Jiang, J., Zhang, Q., & Xiong, Y. (2015). Steering charge kinetics in photocatalysis: Intersection 
of materials syntheses, characterization techniques and theoretical simulations. Chemical Society 
Reviews, 44(10), 2893–2939.
	 38.	 George, S. (2010). Atomic layer deposition: An overview. Chemical Reviews, 110(1), 111–131.
	 39.	 Meyyappan, M. (2009). A review of plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition of carbon nanotubes. 
Journal of Physics D: Applied Physics, 42(21), 213001.
	 40.	 Jansen, H., Gardeniers, H., Boer, M., Elwenspoek, M., & Fluitman, J. (1996). A survey on the reac­
tive ion etching of silicon in microtechnology. Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, 
6(1), 14.
	 41.	 Huang, X., Liu, C., & Zhou, P. (2022). 2D semiconductors for specific electronic applications: From 
device to system. Npj 2D Materials Applications, 6, 51.
	 42.	 Ferre, A., & Fontanilles, J. (2005). Devices and microsystems in the automotive industry. In Conference 
on Electron Devices, 2005 Spanish (pp. 19–22).

374
Handbook of Semiconductors
	 43.	 Einspruch, N. (2012). Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) Technology. (Vol. 23) Academic 
Press.
	 44.	 Trimberger, S. (2012). Field-Programmable Gate Array Technology. Springer Science & Business 
Media.
	 45.	 Ramm, P., Klumpp, A., Weber, J., & Taklo, M. (2010). 3D system-on-chip technologies for more than 
Moore systems. Microsystem Technologies, 16, 1051–1055.
	 46.	 Gatzen, H. (2001). Dicing challenges in microelectronics and micro electro-mechanical systems 
(MEMS). Microsystem Technologies, 7, 151–154.
	 47.	 Lin, L., Yeh, T.C., Wu, J.L., Lu, G., Tsai, T.F., Chen, L., & Xu, A.T. (2013). Reliability characterization 
of chip-on-wafer-on-substrate (CoWoS) 3D IC integration technology. In 2013 IEEE 63rd Electronic 
Components and Technology Conference (pp. 366–371).
	 48.	 Ding, Y., Maitra, S., Wang, C., Halder, S., Zheng, R., Barakat, T., Roy, S., Chen, L.H., & Su, B.L. (2022). 
Vacancy defect engineering in semiconductors for solar light-driven environmental remediation and 
sustainable energy production. Interdisciplinary Materials, 1(2), 213–255.

375
Index
3D printing, 77, 104, 105, 273
4D printing, 77, 78
A
AFM, 70, 75, 78, 281
ALD, 62, 65, 66, 126, 269, 343, 367
Aluminum nitride, 20, 62
Antibacterial, 7, 40, 41, 45, 49, 50, 116, 276
Atomic force microscopy, 70, 104, 160
Atomic layer deposition, 60, 126, 197, 269, 343, 367
B
Batteries, 40, 49, 73, 94, 100, 101, 105, 110, 113, 236, 304, 
305, 313, 316, 317, 318, 319, 320
Biosensor, 7, 81, 86, 113, 283
Boron nitride, 20, 49, 50, 252
Bottom-up, 112, 133, 134, 281, 351
C
Carbon nanotubes, 27, 34, 74, 94, 97, 110, 113, 129, 161, 
354, 363
Catalysis, 1, 7, 94, 110, 111, 280
CBRAM, 250
Chemical vapor deposition, 45, 60, 77, 114, 115, 126, 
134, 183, 197, 207, 217, 222, 281, 303, 305, 
335, 355, 367
CNT, 129, 130, 161, 319, 352
Conduction band, 2, 22, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 56, 57, 
58, 81, 166, 168, 169, 182, 199, 208, 209, 211, 
212, 213, 214, 228, 301, 306, 307, 324, 325, 326, 
333, 341, 348, 366
Conductive bridge RAM, 250
CVD, 77, 78, 115, 126, 183, 277, 281, 303, 304, 305
D
Diluted magnetic semiconductor, 12, 20
DMS, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 20
DRAM, 12, 246, 247, 248, 249, 262, 269, 370, 296
Dynamic random access memory, 12
E
Electrocatalysis, 273
Electrochemical energy, 304, 305, 319
Electrodeposition, 12, 14, 273, 278, 335, 338, 340, 341, 343
Electroluminescent display, 179
Extrinsic, 3, 32, 34, 37, 185, 301
F
Fermi level, 2, 22, 56, 160, 170, 174, 182, 301, 303, 334
Ferroelectrics, 287, 288, 289, 290, 291, 292, 293, 295, 296, 
297, 298
Fin field-effect transistor, 255
FinFET, 54, 59, 61, 141, 255, 257
Fuel cells, 40, 49, 94, 101, 102, 103
G
GaAs, 1, 29, 68, 122, 123, 195, 196, 197, 207, 210, 211, 219, 
220, 224, 229, 230, 231, 235, 236
Gallium arsenide, 1, 68, 69, 78, 194, 195, 197, 220, 362, 
364, 368
Gallium nitride, 19, 27, 49, 50, 112, 256, 277, 364, 366
Gallium oxide, 123 
GaN, 13, 19, 20, 49, 73, 122, 123, 256, 364, 366
GaO, 123
Gas sensors, 40, 273, 274, 275, 276, 281, 308, 309
GNR, 130
Graphdiyne, 129, 130
Graphene, 7, 47, 48, 50, 68, 69, 73, 74, 75, 78, 94, 97, 98, 
113, 114, 117, 129, 130, 132, 133, 134, 159, 160, 
179, 196, 250, 252, 256, 281, 282, 305, 318, 319, 
321, 336, 350, 362, 363, 365
Graphene nanoribbon, 130
H
HER, 7, 324, 325, 326, 327, 334, 343
HMC, 249
Hybrid memory cube, 249
Hydrogen evolution reaction, 7, 324
Hydrothermal, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 18, 28, 277, 279, 319, 335, 
338, 350, 355
I
IC, 26, 61, 127, 367
Indium arsenide, 27
Indium phosphide, 235
InP, 122, 123, 226, 227, 229, 232, 235
Integrated circuits, 26, 32, 61, 69, 113, 142, 196, 198, 227, 
248, 255, 257, 268, 295, 363, 366, 367, 371
Intrinsic, 3, 19, 27, 30, 31, 32, 34, 36, 37, 74, 112, 152, 153, 
158, 160, 182, 184, 185, 196, 202, 208, 215, 216, 
236, 276, 287, 301, 326
Ion-sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET), 275
L
Laser technologies, 1
LCD, 179, 184
LED, 40, 69, 70, 71, 73, 76, 78, 225, 235, 236, 237, 238, 
239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 302, 368
Light-emitting diodes, 1, 20, 36, 85, 214, 235, 241, 
242, 366
Liquid crystal display, 179, 183
M
Magnetic-resistive, 12
Magnetization, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22

376
Index
Magnetoresistive random-access memories, 12
Magnetron sputtering, 15, 182, 184, 185, 186, 335
MBE, 77, 78, 115, 197, 222, 229, 230
Memory resistor, 250
Memristors, 250, 252, 253, 254, 255, 257, 258, 310
Metal-oxide semiconductor field-effect transistor, 246, 263
Microelectronics, 12, 54, 58
Microprocessors, 32, 137, 138, 139, 141, 143, 144, 146, 147, 
246, 367
Molecular beam epitaxy, 77, 115, 183, 197, 222
Moore’s law, 7, 54, 127, 129, 133, 137, 140, 141, 246, 257, 
359, 360, 363, 367, 369, 370
MOSFET, 54, 246, 263
MRAMs, 12
N
Nanoelectromechanical systems, 112, 292, 298
Nanotechnology, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 117, 194, 273
NEMS, 112, 192, 298
Non-volatile memory, 49, 140, 249, 250, 257, 260, 261, 
295, 296
Non-volatile RAM, 249
n-type semiconductor, 4, 6, 32, 34, 130, 168, 169, 170, 216, 
303, 333
NVM, 260, 261, 262, 263, 265, 267, 268, 269, 270
NVRAM, 249
O
OBS, 86, 90
OCT, 282
OER, 320, 324, 325, 326, 327
OFET, 81, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90
OLED, 85, 87, 88, 89, 91, 96, 179, 184, 242
OLET, 88, 89
OPD, 86, 90, 280
Optoelectronics, 19, 31, 69, 70, 73, 76, 86, 89, 91, 116, 152. 
162, 185, 280
OPV, 71, 81, 85, 86, 87, 218
Organic electronic transistor, 282
Organic field effect transistors, 81
Organic light emitting transistor, 88
Organic light-emitting diode, 85, 179, 242
Organic semiconductor laser, 89
Organic thin-film transistor, 71
OSD, 81, 91
OSL, 89
OTFT, 71
Oxygen evolution reaction, 320, 324, 334
P
PCM, 261, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269
PEALD, 60, 62
PECVD, 60, 115, 367
PEM, 101, 102
Phase change memory, 265, 269
Photocatalysis, 1, 31, 40, 112, 175, 191, 311, 312, 348, 
352, 364
Photocatalysts, 4, 7, 40, 113, 191, 312, 333, 339, 347, 349, 
352, 355, 365, 366
Photodetector, 152, 153, 154, 160, 162, 189, 196, 198, 200, 
203, 236
Photodetectors, 20, 70, 86, 123, 152, 155, 159, 161, 189, 
190, 196, 229, 280, 293, 364
Photodiodes, 36, 154, 155, 194, 195, 196, 197, 198, 199, 
200, 201, 202, 203, 204, 242, 302
Photo-electrocatalysis, 324, 328
Photolithography, 72, 73, 77, 113, 124, 134, 197, 198, 278
Photoluminescence spectroscopy, 70
Photonics, 40, 73, 116, 194, 227, 229, 231
Photovoltaic, 1, 12, 14, 31, 36, 49, 71, 76, 81, 91, 96, 103, 
104, 152, 155, 176, 185, 189, 277, 293, 297, 298, 
302, 303, 328, 366, 368
Photovoltaic cell, 91, 103, 368
Physical vapor deposition, 60, 77, 126, 197
PL, 70, 71, 78, 108
Plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition, 60
Plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition, 60, 
115, 367
p-n junction, 5, 6, 37, 170, 194, 195, 196, 202, 236, 301, 
302, 303
Poly (p-phenylene), 114 
Polyaniline, 96, 98, 282, 308, 328
Polypyrrole, 97, 98, 114, 282
Polythiophene, 97, 98, 99, 282
Proton-exchange membrane, 101
p-type semiconductor, 3, 32, 34, 130, 168, 169, 170, 301, 
326, 333
PVD, 60, 77, 78, 126, 277
Q
QD, 27, 28, 112, 227, 230, 231, 274, 275, 276, 354
Quantum dot, 7, 13, 27, 70, 77, 109, 111, 112, 116, 133, 152, 
158, 159, 199, 204, 218, 227, 230, 274
Quantum logic gates, 256
Quantum supremacy, 256
Quantum tunneling, 127, 129, 229, 255, 257
R
RAM, 247, 248, 249, 250, 260, 296, 112
Raman spectroscopy, 70, 78
Random access memory, 12, 247, 260, 265, 295, 296
Read-only memory, 260, 261, 262
Remanence, 16, 17, 19
ReRAM, 249, 250, 265, 266, 267
Resistive RAM, 249
Resistive random access memory, 265
Resistive switching, 249, 250, 251, 252, 255, 267
ROM, 260 
S
Scanning electron microscopy, 60, 70, 97, 225
SEM, 17, 19, 60, 70, 73, 97, 225, 281, 336, 341, 350
Sensors, 36, 40, 90, 110, 112, 113, 116, 146, 194, 196, 203, 
204, 241, 242, 273, 274, 275, 276, 277, 278, 279, 
280, 281, 282, 283, 308, 309, 311, 317, 368
SiC, 123, 235, 304, 305, 306
Silicon, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 36, 37, 49, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 
59, 63, 65, 68, 78, 96,105, 112, 113, 122, 123, 
124, 134, 140, 152, 194, 196, 197, 207, 209, 210, 
216, 217, 219, 226, 227, 229, 230, 235, 256, 281, 
301, 303, 304, 305, 364, 366
Silicon carbide, 27, 42, 49, 112, 123, 235, 256, 304, 366

377
Index
Solar cell, 1, 7, 20, 36, 40, 41, 48, 49, 50, 68. 69, 70, 76, 
78, 87, 103, 104, 105, 111, 113, 132, 155, 176, 
179, 184, 189, 191, 207, 208, 209, 210, 211, 213, 
214, 215, 216, 217, 218, 219, 220, 297, 302, 303, 
354, 368
Sol-gel, 12, 13, 15, 160, 277, 335, 351, 352, 355
Solid state drive, 247
Spintronics, 12, 14, 18, 40, 297
SSD, 140, 247, 263, 267, 268
Supercapacitors, 40, 73, 94, 97, 99, 100, 105, 110, 304, 
305, 317, 319, 321, 322
T
TEM, 18, 70, 336
TFET, 255, 257
Thermistor, 36, 296
TMD, 65, 66, 68, 122, 132, 196, 256
Top-down, 54, 112, 113, 133, 134, 281
Transition metal dichalcogenide, 7, 65, 68, 196, 256, 281
Transmission electron microscopy, 70
Tunnel field-effect transistor, 255
V
Valence band, 2, 22, 28, 29, 30, 32, 34, 35, 36, 37, 56, 
57, 58, 81, 166, 168, 169, 181, 182, 183, 199, 
208, 211, 212, 213, 214, 228, 301, 324, 326, 
333, 336, 348
W
Wastewater, 50, 113, 347, 348
Water splitting, 171, 324, 325, 326, 327, 328, 329, 330, 333, 
334, 335, 337, 338, 343
Wide band gap, 18, 19, 20, 30, 40, 41, 44, 45, 48, 49, 68, 
111, 168, 179, 181, 184
X
XPS, 15, 17, 70, 78, 101, 181, 336, 339, 340, 350
X-ray diffraction, 45, 70, 97, 115, 338
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, 70, 181
XRD, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 70, 78, 186, 338, 340, 342,
352, 353, 354

