
Noise Matters


Noise Matters
Towards an Ontology of Noise
GREG HAINGE

Bloomsbury Academic
An imprint of Bloomsbury Publishing Plc
175 Fifth Avenue
50 Bedford Square
New York 
London
NY 10010 
WC1B 3DP
USA
UK
www.bloomsbury.com
First published 2013
© Greg Hainge, 2013
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted 
in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, 
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior 
permission in writing from the publishers.
No responsibility for loss caused to any individual or organization acting on 
or refraining from action as a result of the material in this publication can be 
accepted by Bloomsbury Academic or the author.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Hainge, Greg, 1971-
Noise matters : towards an ontology of noise / by Greg Hainge.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4411-6046-1 (hardback : alk. paper) -- ISBN 978-1-4411-1148-7 (pbk. : 
alk. paper) 1. Noise (Philosophy) 2. Noise--Psychological aspects. 3. Noise in art. 
4. Noise music. I. Title.
B105.N64H35 2013
155.9'115--dc23
2012031990
5286-2
   ISBN: 978-1-4411-
Typeset by Fakenham Prepress Solutions, Fakenham, Norfolk NR21 8NN

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements  ix
	
Introduction  1
Manifesto  1
Turn it up  2
Noise matters  7
What noise has been  8
What noise might be: Towards an ontology of noise  11
Where noise will (and will not) be found  23
PART 1  35
1	 The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room  37
Sound  37
Fury  39
Signifying  45
Nothing  52
2	 Noisea  67
Haiku  67
Nausea and noise  67
Where Nausea’s noise is not  69
Black noise  71
Vinyl noise  74
Grey noise  77

vi	
Contents
3	 Noise, Horror, Death  85
Do you see what I see?  85
Scream  85
Poltergeist  88
Death  92
White Noise  95
The Ring  99
Abject?  104
PART 2  113
4	 On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise  115
On failing to see noise  115
On failing to get rid of noise  123
On failing to identify noise  128
On noise failing to remain noise  136
5	 On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise  145
Punctum  147
Grain  151
V/Nois/ce  157
Concrete  162
Against the grain  166
PART 3  175
6	 On Noise and Film. Planet, Rabbit, Lynch  177
Eraserhead  179
INLAND EMPIRE  184
Noisy interlude 1  190
Metarabbit  191
Digital noise  195

	
Contents	
vii
Plus ça change …  198
Noisy interlude 2  198
Resolution?  201
7	 On Noise and Photography. Forest, Fuzz, Ruff  209
nm 07.1  210
nm 07.2  214
nm 07.3  220
nm 07.4  224
nm 07.5  227
nm 07.6  231
8	 On Noise and Music. Concrete (reprise), Woolly 
Mammoth  241
Noise  241
Musique  247
Concrete (reprise)  252
Bridge  257
The woolly mammoth in the room  258
Noise music  260
Conclusion  273
Bibliography  279
Index  293


ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Without wanting to give my whole game away in advance, one of 
the major contentions of this book is that noise is medial, which 
is not only to say that it is related to a medium, but also that it 
arises in and as an artefact of the expression that takes place in the 
in-between of a communicative act passing between different poles, 
subjects or sites. In this respect, this book itself is excessively noisy, 
because it has arisen out of so many different conversations with 
so many different interlocutors. These conversations have often 
taken place through personal contact and been conducted both 
face to face and/or electronically, but not exclusively. For there are 
many interlocutors who have had a profound effect on this book in 
absentia thanks to their work, both creative and scholarly (which 
is not of course to say that these are mutually exclusive terms in 
either direction). 
	
Over the past decade or so, there have been a large number 
of excellent scholarly works that have appeared on the  
subject of noise and related matters; many of these seemed at the 
time of their publication like the book I was trying to write, but 
they always made me realise that their authors had done a much 
better job than I could have done and thus forced me to think 
differently about what it was that I wished to say. Many of these 
books are discussed in the pages to come, but in some cases these 
works have been so important, that regardless of whether I know 
their authors personally or not, I feel their scribes deserve to be 
acknowledged here. 
	
In addition to this, the ever-changing face of music production 
and distribution has provided a consistent source of inspiration 
and frustration simultaneously, more and more music that fired 
my neurones in increasingly challenging ways becoming more and 
more available with every passing year. In the end, this book has 
ended up being much less about music than I thought it would be, 

x	
Acknowledgements
but music has been my major inspiration for this whole project. 
Even if I have not been able to include discussion of all of those 
artists who could easily have provided rich source material for this 
book, therefore, I wish to thank those with whom I have had the 
privilege of exchanging ideas, as well as friends and colleagues who 
have provided all manner of help, advice and support throughout 
the life of this project. All of these people have helped to shape this 
project in important ways and I thank them all.
	
Masami Akita, Oren Ambarchi, Paul Attinello, Andrew 
Benjamin, Ronald Bogue, Ian Buchanan, Kim Cascone, Collin 
Chua, Marcel Cobussen, Nicolas Collins, Wayne Cristaudo, Jason 
Cullen, Lawrence English, Julian Enriques, Aden Evens, Kane 
X Faucher, Robin Fox, Michael Gendreau, Michael Goddard, 
Philippe Grandrieux, Haco, Vince Harrigan, Russell Haswell, 
CM von Hausswolff, Jason Jacobs, Philip Jeck, Douglas Kahn, 
Caleb Kelly, Thomas Köner, Brandon LaBelle, Francisco López, 
Kaffe Matthews, Akifumi Naikjima, Carsten Nicolai, KK Null, 
Peter Rehberg, Robin Rimbaud, Philip Samartzis, Torben Sangild, 
Larry Schehr (how I wish you were able to read this book), 
Davis Schneiderman, Robert Sinnerbrink, Nick Smith, Jonathan 
Sterne, Charles J Stivale, Marcel Swiboda, Clayton Thomas, Tony 
Thwaites, Graeme Turner, Darrin Verhagen, Mitchell Whitelaw. 
	
To be singled out for special thanks is Paul Hegarty, whose 
career, strangely, has often followed a parallel trajectory to my 
own, albeit at a great distance, and whose work has for many many 
years now provided a source of inspiration. In addition, I want 
to thank Elizabeth Stephens who read drafts of the entire book 
and provided sometimes challenging but always incisive feedback 
and then gently insisted that I listen to good advice rather than 
drowning it out by sticking on another Merzbow CD, knowing 
that the end result would be better for it. 
	
Without an approach from David Barker at Bloomsbury, I 
fear that this book may not ever have been completed and I am 
therefore grateful to him for being the necessary catalyst to finish 
something I started longer ago than I care to remember. 
	
In addition, I must thank the Centre for Critical and Cultural 
Studies and the Faculty of Arts at the University of Queensland 
for making available to me periods of concentrated research time 
without which this project would never have reached completion, 
and William Fryer and Shigemi Kurahashi who worked as research 

	
Acknowledgements	
xi
assistants at various points during this project and helped me with 
things beyond my linguistic abilities.
	
I am also grateful to Roger Richards from Extreme Music 
(http://xtr.com), the publisher of the 50 CD Merzbow retrospective 
box set Merzbox, for permission to use substantial sections of 
Brett Woodward’s descriptions of the set’s CDs in the ‘remix’ that 
appears at the start of Chapter 8.
	
I acknowledge also that sections of chapter four have been 
previously published in two different articles and appear here 
substantially reworked. I am grateful to the publishers of these 
journals for permission to rework this material. The articles in 
question are: Greg Hainge, ‘Of Glitch and Men: The Place of 
the Human in the Successful Integration of Failure and Noise in 
the Digital Realm’, Communication Theory, 17 (2007): 26–42, 
reprinted by permission of the publisher (John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 
http://www.wiley.com); and Greg Hainge, ‘No(i)stalgia: On the 
Impossibility of Recognising Noise in the Present’, Culture, Theory 
and Critique, 46, no.1 (2005): 1–10, reprinted by permission of the 
publisher (Taylor & Francis Ltd, http://www.tandfonline.com).
	
Finally, I want to thank my two wonderful kids Elize and James 
for making me realise things that they could not even imagine, and 
my incredible wife Jo who is, in a sense, my noise, since without 
her nothing would be possible.


Introduction
Manifesto
The highest expression of the conflict of things, as a sponta-
neous eruption of possibilities, as movement, as a simultaneous 
poem, as a symphony of cries, shots, commands, embodying an 
attempted solution of the problem of life in motion … Every 
movement naturally produces noise.1
So wrote Richard Huelsenbeck. But let us go further and write our 
own manifesto. Let us think about the problem of life in motion 
and movement to see, if we follow this line of thought, how far we 
can go.
The material world is one in which mechanical vibration is an 
unavoidable fact. Even at a subatomic level, matter moves around 
a central point situated at the average co-ordinate of the trajectory 
traced by the vibration of matter. When the material vibrating 
does so in an elastic medium – such as air or water – the vibration 
produced is termed acoustic, which is to say that it produces sound, 
regardless of whether or not the human ear is capable of perceiving 
the acoustic vibration as sound – as is the case with infrasounds 
and ultrasounds that lay outside of the realm of the human 
auditory sense. Since all matter naturally vibrates in an elastic 
medium – a vacuum not being a natural earthly phenomenon –, all 
matter produces sound, its vibrations propagating vibrations in the 
medium surrounding it, creating sound waves. Sonically speaking, 
then, there is no such thing as inanimate matter.
	
What is more, the interaction of any two material bodies will 
create further vibrations not only in the very matter of those bodies, 
but also in their surrounding medium, creating further sound waves. 
Just as matter creates sound, then, so does any process in which two 
or more material bodies come into contact with each other.

2	
NOISE MATTERS
	
But why stop here, why let matter have all the fun? Do ideas 
and concepts not also move and vibrate, resonate with and impact 
upon each other, vibrate in and beyond the time into which they 
are released?
	
Everything, then, is expressive, not only embodying a form but 
for ever forming an embodiment. Or rather, for this will be our 
contention, everything is in noise, and noise is in everything.
	
Let us then not attempt always to amputate that on which we 
depend, to struggle always and for ever to have done with noise, 
let us rather welcome it in and think through it. This will be a 
philopsophy.
* * *
Turn it up
The twentieth century is, among other things, the Age of 
Noise. Physical noise, mental noise and noise of desire – we 
hold history’s record for all of them. And no wonder; for all 
the resources of our almost miraculous technology have been 
thrown into the current assault against silence.2
Noise is everywhere and on the rise. Since the advent of the post-Indus-
trial society, the world has become louder and louder, and noise has 
invaded our lives more with every passing year. Its logic seems viral, 
the more noise there is, the more critics, philosophers, and (irony of 
ironies) anti-noise campaigners add to the hubbub, talking about noise 
incessantly as though the only response possible in the face of so much 
noise were to join forces with it. As if to prove the point and make it 
harder still to retreat from noise into the orderly harmony of music, 
for so long held to be the opposite of noise, the history of twentieth 
century Western music seems to have followed a similar trajectory, 
becoming noisier and noisier as time goes on. From Schoenberg to 
Stravinsky to Russolo to Cage to Hendrix to Merzbow, atonality, 
dissonance, explosions, coughs, splutters, feedback, distortion, glitch 
and various shades of noise have done their best to (dis)colour music 
and to make of it what we had thought it was not. Herein, however, 
lies a problem, for if noise can become what it is not, what exactly is it?

	
Introduction	
3
	
The question may seem absurd to many. After all, everyone 
knows what noise is. As Garret Keizer writes, ‘Like Justice Potter 
Stewart, who famously said that although he could not define 
obscenity, he knew it when he saw it, most of us feel confident in 
our ability to identify noise. We know it when we hear it’.3 Some, 
however, can be more categorical. For the physicist, noise can be 
defined as a non-periodic complex sound, in other words, a sound 
that can be decomposed into a large number of sound waves all of 
different frequencies that (according to Fourier’s theorem) are not 
multiples of one basic frequency and which do not therefore enter 
into harmonic relations with each other.4 This would not seem to 
be incompatible, and yet is significantly different from the very 
common and common sense definitions of noise outlined by Marie-
Claire Botte and René Chocholle in their book Le Bruit and which 
itself draws on an officially sanctioned standard.5 For them, noise is 
either ‘an erratic acoustic vibration which is intermittent or statisti-
cally aleatory’ or else (or hence?) ‘any auditory sensation which is 
disagreeable or uncomfortable’.6 To the physicist’s mathematical 
definition, they therefore add a subjective measure, a combi-
nation found also in the definition of noise enshrined in Shannon 
and Weaver’s The Mathematical Theory of Communication, the 
foundational work of traditional communications theory.
	
Defining communication ‘in a very broad sense to include all of 
the procedures by which one mind may affect another [including] 
not only written and oral speech, but also music, the pictorial arts, 
the theatre, the ballet, and in fact all human behaviour’,7 Weaver, 
in his summary of Shannon’s contributions to communications 
theory, notes that,
	
In the process of being transmitted, it is unfortunately charac-
teristic that certain things are added to the signal which were not 
intended by the information source. These unwanted additions 
may be distortions of sound (in telephony, for example) or 
static (in radio), or distortions in shape or shading of picture 
(television), or errors in transmission (telegraphy or facsimile), 
etc. All of these changes in the transmitted signal are called 
noise.8
Having ascertained that the transmission of all communicational 
signals contains noise, the problem becomes, for Shannon, to 

4	
NOISE MATTERS
discover the general characteristics of noise and to understand how 
it affects the accuracy of the message finally received at the desti-
nation so as to ascertain how to minimise the undesirable effects of 
noise and to discover to what extent it is possible to eliminate it. It 
would be a mistake to extrapolate from this desire to minimise the 
‘undesirable’ effects of noise, however, that noise harboured some 
desirable effects. For Shannon and Weaver, such a possibility is 
merely a semantic trap to be avoided. As Weaver explains:
	
If noise is introduced, then the received message contains 
certain distortions, certain errors, certain extraneous material, 
that would certainly lead one to say that the received message 
exhibits, because of the effects of the noise, an increased uncer-
tainty. But if the uncertainty is increased, the information is 
increased, and this sounds as though the noise were beneficial!
	
It is generally true that when there is noise, the received signal 
exhibits greater information – or better, the received signal is 
selected out of a more varied set than is the transmitted signal. 
This is a situation which beautifully illustrates the semantic 
trap into which one can fall if he does not remember that 
‘information’ is used here with a special meaning that measures 
freedom of choice and hence uncertainty as to what choice has 
been made. It is therefore possible for the word information 
to have either good or bad connotations. Uncertainty which 
arises by virtue of freedom of choice on the part of the sender is 
desirable uncertainty. Uncertainty which arises because of errors 
or because of the influence of noise, is undesirable uncertainty.
	
It is thus clear where the joker is in saying that the received 
signal has more information. Some of this information is 
spurious and undesirable and has been introduced via the noise. 
To get the useful information in the received signal we must 
subtract out this spurious portion.9
The problem, of course, as Shannon knew well, is that from 
an engineering perspective one cannot in fact subtract out this 
spurious portion, that noise is the ineluctable travelling companion 
of information.
	
Noise, then, increased at an exponential rate throughout the 
twentieth century and became more than ever both ineluctable 
and undesirable. When filtered through noise in this way, the 

	
Introduction	
5
history of the twentieth century, from both a social, artistic and 
scientific perspective, can then sometimes look like the story of a 
dog who, having become aware of its tail, tries to run away from 
it.
	
This is not to say that noise is a uniquely twentieth century 
phenomenon, far from it, but it is to suggest that the increase in 
certain forms of noise has brought it to our attention in a more 
insistent way in the twentieth century and beyond than was the 
case previously – which in turn has led to the self-generative logic 
mentioned above as more noise leads to more noise. This capacity 
to insist upon us once noticed would indeed seem to be one of 
the peculiar properties of noise. Prochnik proposes a definition of 
noise ‘as sound that you can’t get a distance on – sound that gets 
inside your head and won’t go away’,10 and this is the case even at 
relatively low decibel levels since once one notices a noise, it seems 
to preoccupy us disproportionately. Whilst this may then go some 
way towards explaining why it is that we might wish to attenuate 
or eradicate it, why the dog would wish to run away from its tail, 
the absurdity of that proposition in this allegory should be enough 
to indicate the folly of this course of action.
	
When one does turn one’s attention to noise, however, giving into 
its insistence, another problem quickly becomes apparent that may, 
once again, push us away from it. For whilst noise may seem like an 
eminently unproblematic term, concept or phenomenon when one 
does not really attend to it – and, as claimed here, we spend most 
of our time attempting not to attend to it – as soon as one does stop 
to think about what noise actually is, one quickly realises that its 
meanings and definitions are highly subjective and unstable. Even 
in Shannon’s mathematical theory of communication, whilst there 
may appear to be an objective certainty in the formulae that show 
how, given the ineradicability of noise, information can be trans-
mitted reliably through a noisy channel, the decision as to what 
constitutes noise in the signal and what constitutes its information is 
a necessarily subjective matter that assumes the absolute intention-
ality of the originary emitter to be the only defining characteristic 
of the information that needs to be considered. And if noise then 
becomes nothing but a matter of personal choice, it is hard to say 
precisely what it is and to what it might be applied as a descriptor.
	
This somewhat bipolar aspect of noise is apparent in many of 
the recent studies of noise, whether these are interested in noise 

6	
NOISE MATTERS
itself as an object of study or else as something to be eradicated. 
Bart Kosko puts it most succinctly when he writes, ‘Noise has 
two parts. The first has to do with the head and the second with 
the heart’.11 Garret Keizer, for his part, forms a title out of noise’s 
impossible contradictions and double binds, calling his book The 
Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want. What is more, in his 
chapter of that same name, he titles his subsections, respectively: 
‘Noise is Easy to Define’ and ‘Noise is Not so Easy to Define’; 
‘Noise is Objective and ‘Noise is Subjective’; ‘Noise is New’ and 
‘Noise is Old’; and finally, ‘Noise is Meaningless’ and ‘Noise is 
Seldom without Meaning’.12
	
Adopting the different strategy of all-inclusiveness, the sheer 
scale of Hillel Schwartz’s recent magnum opus Making Noise: 
From Babel to the Big Bang and Beyond is in itself testament to the 
vast range of meanings that have been attributed to noise and the 
number of sites that it has inhabited or that have produced it. His 
survey ultimately can bring no consensus as to what noise is in a 
definitive sense, however, and on the penultimate page of his book 
he writes:
	
Timeless and untimely, noise is the noisiest of concepts, 
abundantly self-contradictory. Profligate. It compels us at every 
stage to reorganize, take our lives up a notch; or it does us in, 
deafening us to our relations, obligations. Noise must be what 
we were waiting for all along, an encounter with the chaotic 
that loosens the lug-nuts of routine. Or, grating and incessant, it 
sends us over the edge. Sound and unsound, something or other.
	
Bound up with bone and tissue, with solids, liquids, gases, and 
plasmas, with the tactile and cortical, with the chthonic and the 
cosmic, all those vibrations that are soundmusicnoise have been 
historically re-cognized from era to era, within a cultural logic as 
nonlinear as the coils of the hairs of our inner ears. Distinctions 
between sound and noise, or noise and music, or music and 
sound, can only be provisional – not because they are matters of 
taste but because they are matters of history and histrionics: of 
what becomes audible through time and how the acoustics are 
staged, in auditoria or bedrooms, in laboratories or courtrooms.13
	
Whilst all of this might appear to be incontrovertible, and whilst 
it would seem that noise must for ever remain only ever a kind of 

	
Introduction	
7
portmanteau word on which we can hang the referent of our choice 
depending on temporal, geographical, cultural or disciplinary 
context, there nonetheless remains the possibility of finding across 
all of these contradictions and shifting meanings some consistency, 
of asserting, like Justice Potter Stewart on obscenity, that we 
recognise noise when we hear or (or, indeed, see it) but find it hard 
to say precisely what it is. This book is an attempt to do precisely 
that and to understand why it matters. 
Noise matters
One might of course ask why it matters, not noise itself (at least 
not yet), but why we would want to find this consistency, why, 
if the term noise can be used in many different ways that are 
mutually incompatible, we cannot allow that inconsistency to be 
maintained. The first reason is that, given the recent interest in 
noise as a phenomenon to be studied and not simply an annoyance 
to be eradicated, a form of pollution, it is important to investigate 
the possibility of arriving at any such consensus or, perhaps better, 
to see if there is a way to bring the various definitions that have 
been given of noise together in such a way as to lend them some 
consistency – which is not necessarily to say coherence. If this 
is not done, in spite of the amount of ink that has been spilled 
on the subject in recent years, it is hard to know how noise will 
be able to coalesce into a field of study whose individual parts 
reaffirm, build upon or differ from each other as opposed to merely 
offering yet another subjective point of view on the topic that 
can be seriously contested by every other such work. And whilst 
one might of course pretend that this stands in fact as a metadis-
cursive move that makes the field of noise studies itself a noisy 
discourse, nothing but a tale full of sound and fury, the danger of 
this approach is that the tale ends up signifying nothing.14 This is 
to say that if the unstated definitions of noise implicitly accepted 
are highly dependent on subjective variation and the perception of 
the individual, then those definitions are not in actuality definitions 
at all because the subjective variation in operation prohibits those 
definitions from being able to do as is their wont and point us 
towards a discrete object, phenomenon or concept, from signifying. 

8	
NOISE MATTERS
The result of this is similar to Deleuze and Guattari’s observation 
that ‘it’s nice to talk like everybody else, to say the sun rises, when 
everybody knows it’s only a manner of speaking’,15 because, just 
as here, no matter how commonplace it might be to use a term or 
phrase as shorthand in full knowledge of its falsity or insufficiency, 
the statement will always remain problematic and the enunciator 
guilty of a certain bad faith. This, however, is just how noise has 
been treated, as it has been used to apply to everything and nothing 
at the same time, subject to a whole host of mutually contradictory 
definitions and usages, its apparently ineffable nature the result of 
divergent agendas rather than something proper to noise itself.
	
This is not to say that I wish to tie noise down to an overly 
simplistic definition; as Kelly points out, ‘Noise […] eludes simple 
definition’.16 Indeed, it would be absurd to pretend that noise is an 
object towards which a signifier can point, in the way that the word 
giraffe signifies a spotty animal with an oversized neck and long 
spindly legs – although it should be noted here, as should be clear 
already from the book’s opening salvo, that it will be suggested that 
all objects, both animate and supposedly inanimate, are somehow 
noisy. Nor do I believe, however, that it is sufficient to state, as does 
Frances Dyson, that noise unites many different phenomena ‘in a 
single but ineffable term that is shared by all fields, and surfaces as 
a prima causa’,17 for to do so would be somewhat incongruous in a 
book that seeks precisely to talk about noise.18 Nor is it to say that I 
wish to survey the various definitions that have been given of noise 
and discount some in favour of others. Rather, my intention here 
is to see what commonality or consistency there may be across the 
various commonly accepted and common-sense definitions of noise 
so as to draw up what might be termed an operational taxonomy 
of noise. To put it more simply, since I will contend as have others 
before me that all ontology is necessarily relational, I will attempt 
to map an ontology of noise.19
What noise has been
In order to suggest what noise is by identifying the commonality 
of what it has been, it will, in the first instance, be necessary to 
enumerate some of these common sense definitions of noise. As 

	
Introduction	
9
commonsensical as these definitions might seem and as commonly 
accepted as they might be, I would like to contend that such defini-
tions are problematic in large part because, precisely, they are often 
mutually incompatible and, in themselves, subject to high degrees 
of subjective variation that can turn noise into its opposite (in the 
way, for instance, that one parent’s noise is another teenager’s 
music).
	
Firstly, and perhaps most obviously, noise is mostly, although by 
no means exclusively, considered to be an auditory phenomenon, 
something that we humans can hear. More specifically, as we have 
seen already, noise is often considered (by both the physicist and 
anti-noise lobby alike) to be ‘an erratic acoustic vibration which 
is intermittent or statistically aleatory’ – which is to say that it is 
random, unpredictable and unordered.
	
Many others, especially those belonging to the anti-noise lobby, 
qualify it as ‘any auditory sensation which is disagreeable or 
uncomfortable – and none hold this position more vehemently 
than Garret Keizer who documents the decibel levels at which noise 
actually causes physical harm and hearing loss but more generally 
suggests that noise is a question of power and domination and thus 
invokes an ethical problem since ‘anything amplified to a deafening 
volume or imposed on me against my will is noise no matter how 
“pure” its tone or “classic” its pedigree’.20 And yet, as if to prove 
the point that noise is in the ear of the beholder, another scholar 
fighting on the same side as Keizer, George Prochnik, tracing a 
lineage through Nietzsche and Theodor Lessing, suggests that 
the increase in noise in the modern world is in part the result of 
the subjugated masses refusing to be silenced, of the oppressed 
‘ ‘‘making a noise” about unjust power relationships’.21
	
Linked to its disagreeable and hence undesirable characteristics, 
noise is also often considered to be a by-product of an event or 
process, which is to say that it is produced by certain actions that 
are effected to achieve an outcome unrelated to the production of 
noise from the point of view of intentionality. (In other words, 
the primary function of a hammer – outside of the avant-garde 
practices of an Industrial group such as Einsturzende Neubäten, 
of course – is not to produce noise even though when it is put 
to use (or even, at the subatomic level, when it is not) it will do 
precisely this.) This definition of noise is linked, what is more, to 
the definition of noise in information theory already touched upon, 

10	
NOISE MATTERS
since here noise is considered to be a part of the signal that is not 
contained in the information emitted at the information source. In 
Shannon’s simplified diagram, this noise source seems always to 
come from outside or to the side of the communications channel, 
but there is no reason why it could not in fact originate also in the 
communications channel itself, akin to what Kittler would term the 
communication system’s mediality.22 These undesirable qualities of 
noise in communications systems often seem to arise at moments 
when the system is considered to fail and not transmit its infor-
mation as it should. As Kosko writes:
	
Noise is a nuisance. Noise is the hiss and pop of the static 
we hear when we listen to a radio station or a walkie-talkie or 
an old vinyl record album. It is the flickering snow that mars a 
cable TV image when someone bumps the cable or when the 
cable company scrambles the pay-per-view boxing match. It is 
the grainy streaks that flash across the screen when we watch an 
old print of a film. Noise is the background chatter of people in 
a restaurant when we ask the server to tell us about the dinner 
special. Noise is the Internet or telephone signal that interferes 
with our own.23
	
In a slightly different take on the term, noise is also credited 
with a politically resistant charge, serving to disrupt the status quo 
and thus bring about some kind of change in the system. This is 
the case particularly in the influential work of Jacques Attali who 
links changes in music that come about through some kind of noisy 
interference to changes in the mode of production in which that 
music is created. In this analysis, noise is considered in large part, 
if not exclusively, to be (oftentimes a politically charged) content, 
a message transmitted by musical content that is fundamentally 
contestatory and resistant to the status quo, a force that has the 
potential to bring about a change in the system into which it is 
released as that system attempts to negate its subversive power and 
make of what was previously considered to be noise merely another 
acceptable form – as though noise were like the force in Kojève’s 
reading of Hegel that renders change and thus history possible.24 For 
Attali, indeed, social progress comes about via an ‘aggression against 
the dominant code by noise destined to become a new dominant 
code’.25 This, then, is noise placed firmly on the side of content even 

	
Introduction	
11
if that content performs a catalytic function for a process of change, 
and the opposition between noise and music here is merely one of 
degree or aesthetics as opposed to a fundamental formal difference.
	
Attali’s work on noise has in turn been very important for 
theorists of the (often musical) avant-garde such as Russo and 
Warner26 and Paul Hegarty who writes:
What is of interest is the continual process opened up by [Attali’s 
perspective on noise], where music becomes an avant-garde, and 
in so doing is always, initially at least, identified as noise. Only 
later does the old noise come to be seen as legitimate music.27
Hegarty’s comments here once again point up the inconsistency 
of noise that has been noted previously. If before it has been said 
to be both new and old, subjective and objective, in Hegarty’s 
analysis, and indeed Attali’s, noise can be recuperated and brought 
into order as time progresses, made not-noise, and thus to fail as 
noise as Hegarty points out.28 In a similar manner to Schwartz, 
Hegarty writes: ‘Noise is not an objective fact. It occurs in relation 
to perception – both direct (sensory) and according to presump-
tions made by an individual. These are going to vary according to 
historical, geographical and cultural location’.29
	
Noise, then, has been and will no doubt continue to be many 
different things to many different people, and given the range of 
meanings and definitions it has generated, it is perhaps hard to see 
precisely how these parallel or divergent paths might be made to 
converge. That is precisely what I will attempt to do here, however, 
in part by making of the multiplicity of noise and its ability 
constantly to move across various categorical distinctions its virtue.
What noise might be: Towards an ontology 
of noise
Where better [than in noise] to imagine ontological riches in the 
raw?30
It is undoubtedly not insignificant that noise is imbued with a particular 
propensity for transgressing and destabilising fixed boundaries and 

12	
NOISE MATTERS
that it is, more often than not, associated with the auditory sense. For 
much recent critical literature has been concerned with an attempt 
to overthrow the dominant position of sight in our critical vocabu-
laries (a move Janus terms the ‘anti-ocular turn’31), in part because, 
by its very nature, sound makes us entertain a very different, far less 
Cartesian (and hence controllable) phenomenological relationship 
with the world around us. As Michael Bull and Les Back write,
by listening we may be able to perceive the relationship between 
subject and object, inside and outside, and the public and private 
altogether differently. In its engulfing multi-directionality sound 
blurs the above distinctions and enables us to re-think our 
relationship to them.32
This is precisely the intention of Jean-Luc Nancy’s Listening [À 
l’écoute], which encourages listening (écouter) over understanding 
(entendre, which has the double meaning in French of both to 
understand and to hear) because of the more open relationship 
with the world around us that it brings into the fray. He writes: ‘If 
“to hear” is to understand the sense […], to listen is to be straining 
toward a possible meaning, and consequently one that is not 
immediately accessible’.33
	
In a similar vein, Frances Dyson explains how sound is an 
immersive medium that transcends metaphysical boundaries and 
troubles Western epistemologies, ‘the phenomenal characteristics 
of sound and listening […] describing a flow or process rather than 
a thing, a mode of being in a constant state of flux, and a polymor-
phous subjectivity’.34 This is undoubtedly true of sound generally 
and of auditory noise particularly in some definitions of what such 
a phenomenon actually is. Indeed, Michel Serres writes that noise
settles in subjects as well as in objects, in hearing as well as 
in space, in the observers as well as in the observed, it moves 
through the means and the tools of observation, whether 
material or logical, hardware or software, constructed channels 
or languages; it is part of the in-itself, part of the for-itself; it cuts 
across the oldest and surest philosophical divisions.35
I wish to contend, however, that this is in fact true of noise more 
generally in an expanded definition, once the borders of this 

	
Introduction	
13
phenomenon or concept (for ultimately it is both) have themselves 
been destabilised in such a way as to bring them all together. This 
approach thus has much in common with Dyson’s ideas on sound 
which take their lead from Chion. Dyson, indeed, notes how Chion 
thought of sound:
as an event rather than an object, and in doing so [incorporated] 
a sense of organic process, of a multiple, mutating form found in 
a figure closely tied to sound – the figure of vibration. Vibration, 
figuratively and literally, fluctuates between particle and wave, 
object and event, being and becoming. Defying representation, it 
also gestures toward the immersive, undifferentiated, multiplic-
itous associations that aurality provokes, without committing to 
the (massive) representational and ontological ambiguities that 
aurality raises.36
	
Whilst the concept of vibration is of the utmost importance in 
the present study (as should be evident from its very first pages), 
noise, as it will be figured here, is not simply coterminous with 
vibration as it seems to be in much media theory, according to 
Dyson. She continues:
Used to reconcile the sound/object event dichotomy in sound 
studies, vibration appears again in new media theory – often in the 
guise of flux, or noise – as a unifying force, one that dissolves the 
distinction between the body and technology, nature, and culture 
and resolves the problem of representation and mediation.37
Noise, rather, will be figured here as the trace and index of a 
relation that itself speaks of ontology. If noise is then immersive, 
this is not because it is all-pervasive and seeps through walls as 
the anti-noise lobby would claim, nor because we cannot shut our 
ears as we can our eyes. Rather, noise is immersive because there is 
nothing outside of it and because it is in everything. Indeed, noise 
is not only multi-medial, arising in many different kinds of forms 
and media, engaging many different senses, sensations, responses 
and affects, it is medial insofar as it is always in-between, produced 
in the passing into actuality of everything, both animate and 
inanimate – a false dichotomy in any case as has been suggested. 
Noise, this is to say, is the trace of the virtual out of which all 

14	
NOISE MATTERS
expressive forms come to be, the mark of an ontology which is 
necessarily relational.
	
In order to conceptualise noise in this way and attempt to draw 
up a taxonomic description of the ontology of noise, it is necessary 
to reconfigure the way in which ontology is often thought about 
and to conceive of the world and everything in it as expressive, 
arising out of the movement or force of differentiation through 
which all being expresses itself in existence. In this, of course, 
we follow in the footsteps of Spinoza and particularly Deleuze’s 
reading of Spinoza.38 Having said that, just as one might contend 
that Deleuze’s reading of Spinoza is itself a noisy reading in which 
what is expressed is not so much the essence of Spinoza’s thought 
as the noise created by the channel instigated between Deleuze 
and Spinoza, so our reading here will never pretend to employ 
this notion of expression in the precise way it was intended by 
either of these philosophers. Rather, this work will generate a new 
expression which is drawn from and faithful only to the noise of 
the channel that it sets up with all of its various interlocutors.39
	
In essence, then, for it is indeed a question of essence, noise will be 
seen to constitute the nature or essence of the relation that is inimical 
to all expression when everything is conceived of as an expression.40 It 
is then through noise, I will suggest, that we are able to intuit the serial 
relations that link the heterogenetic modes through which everything 
comes to be in an ontology that does not believe in fixed identities, 
beings and transcendent essence, but only difference, becomings 
and relations. If noise inhabits everything because everything is in 
actuality formed out of noise, then what noise ultimately points us 
to is the relational ontology according to which the world comes 
to pass, the way in which there is nothing that falls outside of the 
event, of the realm of process, of an existence formed only through 
the heterogeneous assemblages of different forms of expression which 
inescapably and incessantly contract the virtual into the actual.
	
The point being made here is somewhat similar to something that 
Prochnik says, albeit from a very different ideological standpoint. 
Prochnik notes that ‘Every structure, organic and nonorganic, has a 
special frequency at which it naturally vibrates when energized into 
motion [and thus] there are specific speeds at which every structure 
is predestined to vibrate’.41 Every object then has its own funda-
mental frequency determined by its mass and tension. Therefore, 
he continues,

	
Introduction	
15
the core physical truth of every structure determines the way 
it dances and shimmies off sound waves into the universe. An 
object’s fundamental frequency is a kind of naked snapshot of 
identity. By definition, this snapshot also reveals the other struc-
tures that the object is most likely to mutually resonate with.42
For Prochnik, then, every object is necessarily acoustic or, in our 
terms, expressive of not only its own fundamental frequency but 
also what we might call its resonant frequency, the specificity 
that it brings to all of the relations instigated between it and the 
universe as it is contracted into existence – the dichotomy erected 
here between objects and the outside into which they are contracted 
into being in the context of a relational ontology is of course a false 
one, yet necessary to make my point. This resonant frequency, 
then, is similar to what is here termed noise, and it is this that 
we will listen out for. And it is here, of course, that we find the 
ideological difference between Prochnik’s study and this one, since 
he is interested, as his title indicates, in pursuing silence, not noise, 
a position that leads him to suppose something that, according to 
the present study, is not only untrue but fundamentally impossible, 
namely that ‘everything likes to be still – to be silent – as much as 
possible’.43 If, as Prochnik seems to claim, the universe is neces-
sarily expressive, this ‘perfect state of rest’44 can only ever be an 
idyll that will never be achieved, for noise is produced by the very 
expression of being.
	
Noise, then, in and of itself is nothing, for it arises only in the 
relational process through which the world and its objects express 
themselves in an infinite number of possible relations, assemblages or 
expressive forms. This position is close to Hegarty’s when he writes,
[noise] does not exist independently, as it exists only in relation 
to what it is not. In turn, it helps structure and defines its opposite 
(the world of meaning, law, regulation, goodness, beauty, and 
so on). Noise is something like a process, and whether it creates 
a result (positive in the form of avant-garde transformation, 
negative in the form of social restrictions) or remains process is 
one of the major issues in how music and noise relate.45
However, if Hegarty’s distinction here between result (form/
content) and process is crucial, it is because it describes the 

16	
NOISE MATTERS
difference between our two approaches. I wish here to analyse 
noise as a process, and thus need to modify Hegarty’s formulation 
slightly in order to generate the terms of my position: for me, 
noise does not exist independently either, for it arises only in an 
event or expression. Noise exists only in relation to what it is not, 
then, only to the extent that it is in and of itself nothing. This, of 
course, can be said of everything if all ontology is relational; the 
particularity of noise is its propensity to stress this relation. For 
noise is the artefact of the relation in which being expresses itself 
in its actualisation. It is the mark of an assemblage which pulls 
us away from the apparent fixity and transcendence of an expres-
sion’s identity (its manifest content) and reveals even the apparently 
inanimate to be an event. As such, of course, it cannot petrify into 
a result, a pseudo-object with a stable identity or program. Rather, 
as Brandon LaBelle suggests, discussing the work of Yasunao Tone, 
noise is
a meta-operation: it directs a certain understanding onto the 
field of the symbolic, onto the territory of code, without putting 
into practice that very code. It directs the ear not to escape 
routes or alternatives, to “complaints or suggestions”, but to 
the mechanics at work in the system. Here, a theory of noise is 
defined by its ability to remain an operation rather than a sign, 
to always remain a pure drive away from heralding anything.46 
	
Noise is then indeed oppositional, but the opposition that it 
presents is irrecuperable (contra Hegarty and Attali). It does indeed 
resist, but the resistance that it proffers is better conceived of not 
merely as political, as a ‘resistance toward the dominant ideals of 
music, and consequently, of the larger society’,47 but, rather, as the 
kind of resistance found in electrical circuits. An electrical circuit 
(read text) set up for the purposes of the transmission of current 
(read content) will itself necessarily resist the passage of that 
current due to its own material properties at the same time as that 
material system is crucial for the transmission of that current since 
without it no current could be transmitted (read expressed) in the 
first place. In a metal conductor, for instance, the outer electrons of 
the lattice of atoms are able to dissociate from their parent atoms 
and float in such a way that they form a fluid environment that 
makes of the metal a conductor since when a voltage is applied to 

	
Introduction	
17
the circuit the electrons in this fluid field travel from one end of the 
conductor to the other. What electrical resistance illustrates beauti-
fully, then, is the way in which any expression, which is to say 
any material entering into expressive relations (which is to say, of 
course, everything) necessarily enters into a systemic process with 
its own material ontology (read medium). This medium resists the 
transmission of the expression at the same time as the expression is 
entirely dependent on the system at the most fundamental level of 
base materiality, for its expressive potential can only be actualised 
in a material assemblage formed between the system and the 
expression that reconfigures both of them.48
	
Noise, then, expresses the nature of the relation and decon-
structs the binary oppositions that generally channel our attention 
towards a discrete and isolated aspect of an expression: form or 
content, for instance, or medium or message. This is not to say that 
I am merely proffering an alternative formulation of McLuhan’s 
famous dictum ‘the medium is the message’,49 for my point is 
quite different. For whilst it is undoubtedly the case, as McLuhan 
has suggested, that ‘it is only too typical that the “content” of 
any medium blinds us to the character of the medium’,50 I wish 
neither to concentrate solely on the content of expression, nor 
on its medium, for, as should be becoming clear, there can be 
no absolute separation between content and form in a relational 
ontology and it is precisely the deconstruction of such binaries to 
which noise points. If noise is often imagined to arise when the 
medium encroaches upon and disturbs the message – when we hear 
the vinyl hiss and pop or see the TV image break up, as we have 
seen Kosko suggest –, to be then simply an artefact of the media, 
this is only half of the story.51 For whilst noise will indeed become 
most apparent at times such as this, it is nonetheless not reducible 
to this; rather, what the incursion of the medium points us to is the 
necessarily mediated nature of all ontology, the fact that everything 
necessarily comes to be in media, in the in-between of the compo-
nents of a communications system or expressive assemblage.
	
Lest this all seem a little abstract, let us filter the argument 
through noise itself, the ‘pure or ideal noise’ that is white noise.52 
As Kosko explains:
	
White noise is noisy because it has a wide and flat band 
of frequencies if one looks at its spectrum. This reflects the 

18	
NOISE MATTERS
common working definition of noise as a so-called wideband 
signal. Good signals or wanted signals concentrate their energy 
on a comparatively narrow band of the frequency spectrum. 
Hence good signals tend to be so-called narrowband signals at 
least relative to the wide band of white noise. White noise is so 
noisy because its spectrum is as wide as possible – it runs the 
whole infinite length of the frequency spectrum itself. So pure or 
ideal white noise exists only as a mathematical abstraction. It 
cannot exist physically because it would require infinite energy.53
Let me put this another way. White noise is a plane (that does 
not exist in actuality) composed of the sum total of all possible 
sonic frequencies emitted simultaneously. Any sonic expression 
is then necessarily the contraction into actuality of a zone of this 
plane or the conjugation of different points on this plane. Every 
expression is therefore born out of noise and carries noise within 
it. As expression passes into actuality, however, it is all too easy 
to forget this and to imagine that that expression is a discrete 
and autonomous object that exists independently of a greater 
whole, to concentrate on its content or identity as opposed to the 
process by which that content or identity comes to be expressed. 
It is, however, impossible for the content of expression to separate 
itself from the immanent plane out of which it is formed and the 
differential process through which it comes to be – ‘meaningful’ 
expression becoming such only by contracting noise into a form 
that no longer seems noisy. When we attend to the noise of 
expression, such delusions are dispelled and the apparent matter 
of factness of existence fades away, matter itself being unveiled as 
expressive.54 This is how and why noise matters.55
	
Something similar is suggested by Michel Serres, for whom noise 
is also primordial and foundational. Indeed, Serres suggests that 
noise forms the cosmological and – we can infer from the title of 
his book Genesis – genetic background of our world and universe. 
As he writes:
Background noise is the background of the world, and the world 
began, it is said, with a big bang. A founding blow in which the 
universe is embryonic, it precedes the expansion in the universal, 
space has already received this before receiving the things 
themselves, it has already formed the space where the things are 

	
Introduction	
19
going to be lodged. I am assuming that there was no big bang, 
that original cosmological preconcept; I am assuming that there 
was and still is an inaccessible number of different noises.56
Serres does not then attribute the originary noise of the cosmos to 
a single, unitary event which would henceforth act as the catalyst 
for all life on our planet and the existence of the astral bodies that 
surround us, which would be to interpret the originary noise of 
the universe in a far too literal and somewhat simplistic manner. 
Rather, the name noise is reserved for the condition of infinite 
multiplicity that precedes even this event and that subsists in all of 
its products. Thus, for Serres:
The cosmos is not a structure, it is a pure multiplicity of ordered 
multiplicities and pure multiplicities. It is the global basis of all 
structures, it is the background noise of all form and information, it 
is the milky noise of the whole of our messages gathered together.57
	
For Serres, noise might thus also be said to be fundamentally 
philosophically oppositional insofar as it constantly undermines 
the possibility of a complete knowledge of any system, message or 
object. Indeed, by suggesting that all matter, meaning and messages 
are drawn from a ground of infinite multiplicity, Serres strips 
every aspect of or object in the world of fixity, transmogrifying all 
apparent stability into a state of flux and process and denying the 
possibility of any kind of taxonomic order. For Serres, however, 
noise seems always to remain only ever a potentiality, a kind of 
pre-ontology which would necessarily fade away in the act of 
expression. Indeed for Serres noise is:
a set of possible things, it may be the set of possible things. 
It is not potential, it is the very reverse of power, rather it is 
capaciousness. This noise is the opening.58
Serres thus draws a distinction between ontology and phenome-
nology and suggests that noise belongs only to the former (although 
this may be because of the distinction he makes in another work 
between the plenitude of white noise which would be ‘the heart 
[fond] of being’ and the parasite or ‘parasitism [which] is the heart 
of relation’).59 He writes:

20	
NOISE MATTERS
Background noise may well be the ground of our being. It 
may be that our being is not at rest, it may be that it is not 
motion, it may be that our being is disturbed. […] As soon as 
a phenomenon appears, it leaves the noise; as soon as a form 
looms up or pokes through, it reveals itself by veiling noise. 
So noise is not a matter of phenomenology, so it is a matter of 
being itself.60
	
Conceived of in this way, noise bears a striking resemblance 
to Deleuze and Guattari’s concept of the abstract machine – even 
though in their transcendental empiricism, there is obviously no 
such rejection of the phenomenological – and one might even go so 
far as to say that Serres is effectively describing here, through the 
figure of noise, the abstract machine of the world or cosmos. For 
Deleuze and Guattari’s abstract machine is that which has no form 
or fixed substance, only function and which is, as such, as Brian 
Massumi describes it, ‘a continually changing, turbulent pool of 
matter-energy’.61 The abstract machine is then pure virtuality and 
as such, as Massumi goes on to point out, is ‘outside our space 
of relatively stable matter and quantifiable energy’, it is ‘a pure 
outside, an outside so far out that it would have no “itself” of any 
kind to be “in”’.62 And this in turn means that,
If the virtual is a space of pure exteriority, then every point is 
adjacent to every other point in the actual world, regardless 
of whether those points are adjacent to each other (otherwise 
some actual points would separate the virtual from other actual 
points, and the virtual would be outside their outside – in other 
words, relative to it and mediated by it).63
	
Deleuze and Guattari never related the abstract machine or 
plane of immanence to the concept of noise, nor did they ever 
really address noise in depth in any of their single or joint-authored 
works.64 They were occasionally interested in music, and especially 
in the section of A Thousand Plateaus called ‘1837: Of the Refrain’, 
but whilst they praise Varèse’s creation of what they term ‘a sound 
machine’ and the very idea of the synthesiser which ‘makes audible 
the sound process itself’ and supplies them with a model for a new 
form of philosophy which functions in such a way as ‘to make 
thought travel, make it mobile, make it a force of the Cosmos (in 

	
Introduction	
21
the same way as one makes sound travel)’,65 this has nothing to do 
with something they would term noise. Indeed, if the synthesiser 
that they praise works by synthesising disparate elements, there lies 
in this process the danger of going too far, of producing noise – the 
term here being, of course, negatively inflected. They write:
	
This synthesis of disparate elements is not without ambiguity. 
It has the same ambiguity, perhaps, as the modern valorization 
of children’s drawings, texts by the mad, and concerts of noise. 
Sometimes one overdoes it, puts too much in, works with a 
jumble of lines and sounds; then instead of producing a cosmic 
machine capable of ‘rendering sonorous’, one lapses back to a 
machine of reproduction that ends up reproducing nothing but 
a scribble effacing all lines, a scramble effacing all sounds. The 
claim is that one is opening music to all events, all irruptions, but 
one ends up reproducing a scrambling that prevents any event 
from happening. All one has left is a resonance chamber well 
on the way to forming a black hole. A material that is too rich 
remains too ‘territorialized’: on noise sources, on the nature of 
the objects … (this applies even to Cage’s prepared piano).66 
Here, Deleuze and Guattari perhaps fall prey to a similar kind of 
misprision of noise to those already seen, however, or rather they 
limit noise to one of its common sense definitions. For in their 
reading noise arises out of cacophony, the result of the coexistence 
of too many disparate elements or an excessive materiality. Whilst 
perhaps unsurprising, this is nonetheless somewhat of a shame 
since the links to be made between their abstract machine and noise 
or, perhaps, between their pure outside and pure noise (or white 
noise) are striking – if, of course, one leaves behind common-sense 
definitions. For the abstract machine is a synthesiser, that which 
operationalises expression, traversing the plane of immanence and 
contracting the virtual into events, assemblages, flows, expressions 
and affects through differentiation, intensification and the infolding 
of various zones – expressions which are themselves perceived as 
objects, meanings, bodies or identities only in the mistaken appre-
hension of the secondary effects of these processes.
	
The plane of virtuality (or immanence) thus constantly deploys 
the powers of the unknown that are proper to heterogenetic 
creation, the articulations and conjugations between various zones, 

22	
NOISE MATTERS
partial objects or machinic-becomings taking place upon and 
within its surface only ever able to produce the new – even if force 
of habit may lead us to believe that this is not the case. As such, the 
plane of virtuality does indeed seem to share many characteristics 
with white Gaussian noise which, as J. R. Pierce notes, contains all 
frequencies and is thus, mathematically, ‘the epitome of the various 
and unexpected. It is the least predictable, the most original of 
sounds’.67 White noise, in other words, is the sound of the virtual: 
it is a continually changing pool of matter-energy, it is the pure 
outside of sound in which every point is adjacent to every other, it 
is the aleatory exterior from which any sonic expression is drawn 
from an infolding, intensification or differentiation of any point, 
zone or frequency of the limitless possible sonic spectrum.
	
And yet, perhaps it does not matter too much if Deleuze and 
Guattari did not turn their attention to noise, for in spite of the 
obvious points of contact and affinities here, there is nonetheless 
an important difference. True white noise, as we have seen, is 
bound always to remain only ever a mathematical abstraction, just 
as Deleuze and Guattari’s pure outside is condemned to remain 
for ever virtual. In order to pass from the virtual to the actual, 
to expression, however, Deleuze and Guattari need to mobilise a 
separate figure, that of the abstract machine. Whilst this machine, 
being merely an operational catalyst for an infinite number of 
possible expressions, is called abstract precisely because it is never 
able to take on a fixed form, this term’s etymology runs the risks of 
leading us to believe that the abstract machine is somehow drawn 
away from the plane in the process, taking place on top of it as 
opposed to from within it, as it were. The problem is undoubtedly 
less acute than with some of Serres’ formulations which make it 
hard to see how noise would ever be able to pass into expression, 
to be anything other than pre-evental, and yet I cannot help but feel 
that there is nonetheless a break in their thought. There is no such 
break if we think through this move via noise, precisely because 
white noise is simply modulated into different colours of noise as 
the virtual is contracted into the actual via expression.
	
In effect, what I want to suggest here, then, is that there need 
not be a split between the operations of noise as a philosophical 
concept and its manifestations in expression, that it is not necessary 
to separate out the ontological from the phenomenological. I want 
to suggest that noise is more than just a concept, a figure of pure 

	
Introduction	
23
potentiality, that it is produced in the actualisation of expression 
whilst never leaving behind the outside from which expression is 
drawn and thus reminding us of it. To put it crudely, noise is not 
only of the future (à-venir) but omnipresent. Noise straddles both 
the actual and the virtual, the realms of concept and matter, multi-
plicity and singularity; it is the by-product of the event taking place 
in the becomings situated across these poles, the very precondition 
for expressivity that is born only as an unintended yet inexorable 
consequence of expression itself.
	
Noise, then, makes us attend to how things come to exist, how 
they come to stand or be (sistere) outside of themselves (ex-). 
Noise, then, is fundamentally about ontology, and in order to 
sketch an operational taxonomy of noise, it is only fitting that each 
of the categories to be used should also address how things come 
to exist (-sistere). Let me then suggest the following:
1	 Noise resists – not (necessarily) politically but materially 
because it reconfigures matter in expression, conduction 
and conjugation.
2	 Noise subsists – insofar as it relates the event to the field 
from which expression is drawn and thus subtends all 
being.68
3	 Noise coexists – as its ontology is only relational and does 
not come into being by itself but only as the by-product of 
expression.
4	 Noise persists – because it cannot be reconfigured or 
recontained, cannot become thetic as it passes into 
expression, but remains indelibly noise.
5	 Noise obsists – since it is fundamentally anathema to stasis 
and thus opposes all illusions of fixity, pulling form beyond 
itself through expression and bringing about the collapse of 
meaning.
Where noise will (and will not) be found 
There is, of course, an alternative cultural history of (predomi-
nantly Western) civilisation that documents those moments when 

24	
NOISE MATTERS
noise has burst through the veil of respectability, bulldozed idle 
complacency, bawled in the face of tradition and blasted the status 
quo. This is a tale that has been told many times in the recent 
past, be it in an all-encompassing survey or in relation to specific 
instances of noise or arenas into which noise has been released. It 
is then resolutely not my intention here to add yet another voice 
to this this cacophony. Rather, in what follows I will expand 
upon this taxonomy directly through theoretical reflection as well 
as indirectly through analyses of the noise accompanying and/or 
constituting various expressions at those points when it becomes 
perceptible. For whilst it is my contention that noise necessarily 
inhabits all expression and therefore all cultural forms, this is not 
to say that noise is always easily identified or perceived. I will then 
seek out cultural forms where noise of some kind is foregrounded, 
entering the text or expression through that noise to see what it 
might tell us about that expression – and accordingly each of my 
chapters, like this introduction, will begin with a noisy prelude of 
some kind. Given that I am interested in cultural forms in which 
noise is brought to the fore, even though it is not my intention 
to double up on existing work in the field, my investigation 
may occasionally lead me, of course, to the same places as those 
scholars who have charted these territories before me. In these 
instances, however, it is hoped that the definition of noise used 
here will always produce a different reading when this occurs and 
that, true to the operations of noise, these readings will arise in an 
in-between that will speak to both my understanding of noise and 
those sites where it is found.
	
More often than not, however, I will not venture into those sites 
and texts that crop up with alarming frequency in studies that set 
out to examine the history or culture of noise. The methodology 
that results from this choice, as well as the decision resolutely not 
to restrict noise to the auditory realm, makes this an extremely 
diverse work that wanders across many disciplinary boundaries; in 
concert with the hypotheses formulated on the ontology of noise 
herein, it is hoped that each of the different chapters will display 
both a certain consistency yet, at the same time, something of 
the nature of the various objects under examination in each part. 
Nonetheless, it should not be thought that this diversity is the result 
merely of a polemical impulse or an idiosyncratic stylistic quirk. If I 
choose most of the time to examine noise through a different set of 

	
Introduction	
25
sites and texts to those that have provided such fertile ground for 
many studies of noise in the recent past, this is because, oftentimes, 
according to the understanding of noise outlined here, many of 
those sites and texts may not be all that noisy after all.
	
Consistent with the operations of noise itself that is deployed 
only through the workings of difference, I will thus begin to define 
noise by looking at what it is not – even if what it is not is often-
times what it has previously been said to be. Chapter One will 
examine some such figures and forms that have generally been 
considered paragons of noise. In particular, I will suggest that the 
Futurists, and particularly Luigi Russolo, widely proclaimed to 
have integrated noise into the realm of art, were in actuality not 
noisy at all. I will then turn my attention to the holy grail of noise 
studies, John Cage, whose ‘silent’ piece, 4’33”, is similarly talked 
of in elegiac terms as the work which more than any other brings 
noise into the realm of music/art. I will suggest, however, that 
whilst there is undoubtedly noise in Cage’s piece (just as there is in 
everything), the true noise to be found there has nothing to do with 
incidental sound, nor indeed with music.
	
Chapter Two will examine Jean-Paul Sartre’s novel Nausea 
which is linked to noise not only by etymology but also because 
the noise of a phonograph record plays an important role in the 
novel. More than this, however, I will suggest that we can find 
in the novel’s philosophical reflections (that are generated out of 
the main protagonist Roquentin’s nausea) many similarities to 
the philosophical insights that are produced by noise. Ultimately, 
however, I will suggest that the importance of his insights is not 
fully apprehended by Roquentin, neither in regards to the impor-
tance of the phonograph’s noise, nor in relation to the ramifications 
of his nauseous breakdown for an existential project. In this novel, 
in other words, noise will ultimately be elided and eradicated.
	
Following on from Roquentin’s rejection of the operations of noise, 
I will show that noise has often been explicitly figured as something 
that is threatening, a danger to the autonomy and integrity of the 
organism, and thus a site of horror. Examining three horror films 
where a form of noise acts as a threat to life and thus the autonomy 
of individual identity, and touching on the phenomenon of Electronic 
Voice Phenomenon, I will examine how, in the popular imagination, 
noise has once again been figured at times as a disruptive or, in these 
instances, evil force that must be attenuated.

26	
NOISE MATTERS
	
In these three chapters, the focus will thus be on cultural forms 
where there would seem to be a form of noise foregrounded yet 
where the operations of noise as understood here are either not 
present or else rejected. In the second Part of the book, I will move 
to an examination of some sites where noise would seem to be 
present or, conversely, entirely absent and suggest that, in actuality, 
noise is, respectively, absent and present. The chapters in this 
section will then suggest, through a number of case studies, why it 
is that noise is often so hard to identify or difficult to attend to.
	
Chapter Four begins with an examination of a series of ‘noisy’ 
computer fonts that simulate the print of early typewriters. I do this 
in order to instigate a reflection on the constant recoding that noise 
is subject to through time and technological change and suggest 
that noise is, perhaps understandably, very hard to recognise in 
its own time due to the dominant logic of technological progress. 
Turning explicitly to this logic by examining discourses of high-
fidelity audio reproduction across time, I will suggest, however, that 
the difficulty of recognising noise in its own time is not ultimately 
an indication that the technological ideal of high-fidelity is brought 
ever closer by each successive technological advancement and new 
recording format. On the contrary, I will show that the CD is full 
of noise and do so via an in-depth analysis of a specific musical 
form, namely glitch. Glitch music is widely accepted as being 
music crafted from the failures of the hardware system used for the 
reproduction of sound. Examining closely critiques of glitch music, 
however, I contend that whilst glitch does indeed open up a site in 
which we are able to find noise defined according to the ontological 
taxonomy drawn up here, most existing commentaries on glitch 
fail to apprehend how the noise of glitch operates.
	
Recognising that the noise of digital media may well only reveal 
itself to us under the kind of abnormal operating procedures that 
glitch forces upon its technological medium, in Chapter Five I 
will turn to the analogue realm and ask why it is that the kind of 
noise figured here seems to be so hard to hear. I will suggest that 
the problem is similar to that faced by Roland Barthes when he 
seeks to uncover the ontology of photography (in Camera Lucida) 
and to talk about grain in music (in ‘The Grain of the Voice’) and 
fails in both cases to make a necessary modal distinction. For 
noise, I will suggest, changes its nature depending on the specific 
assemblage out of which it arises and we must then be very careful 

	
Introduction	
27
about the kinds of claims that we make at an ontological level. The 
temptation to make grand sweeping claims for noise that do not 
take account of this differential deployment of noise, I will suggest, 
has often led to inconsistent and self-contradictory statements 
about noise that, in turn, leave critics unsure of what precisely they 
are looking for. I then attempt to listen to noise without falling 
into this trap by turning my attention to Alvin Lucier’s piece ‘I am 
Sitting in a Room’ and musique concrète, but find that some more 
work needs to be done to prepare the ground for this analysis since 
it is so hard to release music and sound from existing common 
sense definitions of what noise is in relation to them.
	
In the final part of the book, I thus turn my attention to various 
cultural expressions where we can find explicit, foregrounded 
instances of the kind of noise that I have set out to categorise. In 
the first two instances, sensitive to the difficulties of decoding noise 
in the auditory realm, I turn my attention away from the sonic to 
see what results are produced by an analysis of film and photog-
raphy that explicitly sets out to examine noise in those realms.
	
Noise is oftentimes figured as an interference, as a glitch in the 
clean transmission of information, a point at which something 
is not quite right. Bearing this in mind, Chapter Six looks at 
cinematic noise in two works by maverick American filmmaker 
David Lynch. Through a close analysis of his first and (to date) last 
feature films, Eraserhead and INLAND EMPIRE, I suggest that 
something is indeed not right here and that his films are extremely 
noisy, but that this has nothing (or little) to do with their ‘noise’-
filled soundtracks. Whilst this kind of literal or common sense 
‘noise’ may indeed point us towards the importance of noise as a 
fundamental principle for the construction and subsequent analysis 
of any Lynch film, I propose that a better understanding of the 
place of noise in his films forces us not only to reconsider many 
preconceptions about the meaning of his films, but also to rethink 
our critical strategies in the face of them. This is to say, then, 
that his films require us to attend to their noise and thus adopt a 
non-hermeneutic stance.
	
In Chapter Seven, meanwhile, I turn to photography and, 
specifically, the photographs of Thomas Ruff. Starting from an 
analysis of the series of photos that he has created in which the 
artefacts of the jpeg format are massively exaggerated, creating an 
indisputably noisy image, I will suggest that all of his photographic 

28	
NOISE MATTERS
work is in fact inhabited by this kind of noise. When we attend to 
this noise, however, what it reveals to us is not merely something 
about the artefacts of the technological medium of photography, its 
mediality, but something about the very ontology of photography 
that has nothing to do with the analogue/digital divide.
	
Having suggested how noise might operate in some other, 
non-musical realms, in chapter eight I finally turn my attention 
back to music in order to probe the eternally fraught relation 
between music and noise. Examining some of the most common 
assumptions made about the ontology of music, I suggest that 
certain ‘noisy’ works render the assumptions of many such 
philosophical investigations deeply problematic. Through an 
analysis of musique concrète and Merzbow, indeed, I propose 
a new ontological taxonomy of music that is related to 
the ontological definition of music provided by Deleuze and 
Guattari yet which rejects outright the privilege that they accord 
to the refrain.
	
It may seem somewhat ironic or contradictory that a book 
claiming to move towards the ontology of noise ends up positing 
a new ontology of music. It is not, however, for the simple reason 
that noise, as it is figured here, always and necessarily points us 
towards the ontology of other things. Noise, arising as the artefact 
of the specific relation instigated between partial objects in a 
relational ontology, is, as I have suggested, nothing in and of itself. 
So whilst in what follows I will always be talking about noise, in 
order to do this I will necessarily have to talk about many other 
things, listening to noise awry.
Notes
  1	  Richard Huelsenbeck, ‘En Avant Dada: A History of Dadaism’, in 
The Dada Painters and Poets: An Anthology, ed. Robert Motherwell 
(orig. German 1920; New York: Wittenborn, 1951; reprint, New 
York: G. K. Hall, 1981), 26. For a discussion of avant-garde noise 
in relation to Huelsenbeck, bruitism and the Cabaret Voltaire, see 
Douglas Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 44–53.
  2	  Aldous Huxley, The Perennial Philosophy (New York: Harper and 
Row Perennial Library, 1970), 218.

	
Introduction	
29
  3	  Garret Keizer, The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want: A 
Book About Noise (New York: Public Affairs, 2010), 24.
  4	  For an excellent and accessible account of the use of noise in many 
scientific disciplines and particularly of its importance in Einstein’s 
theories on Brownian motion, see Leon Cohen, ‘The History of Noise 
(On the 100th Anniversary of its Birth)’, Signal Processing Magazine, 
IEEE, 22, no. 6 (2005).
  5	  They quote from documents issuing from l’AFNOR (l’Association 
Française de Normalisation).
  6	  Marie-Claire Botte and René Chocholle, Le Bruit, 4th edn (Paris: 
PUF, 1984), 14; my translation. See also William Burns, Noise and 
Man (London: John Murray, 1968).
  7	  Warren Weaver, ‘Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory 
of Communication’, in Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, The 
Mathematical Theory of Communication (Urbana: The University of 
Illinois Press, 1949), 95.
  8	  Weaver, ‘Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of 
Communication’, 99.
  9	  Weaver, ‘Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory of 
Communication’, 109.
10	  George Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence: Listening for Meaning 
in a World of Noise (New York and London: Doubleday, 2010), 
112.
11	  Bart Kosko, Noise (London: Viking Penguin, 2006), 3.
12	 Keizer, The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want, 21–46.
13	  Hillel Schwartz, Making Noise: From Babel to the Big Bang and 
Beyond (New York: Zone Books, 2011), 858.
14	  It would of course be improper and unfair to go so far as to apply 
the epithet Macbeth uses to the authors of those already published 
studies on noise that fall into this category, for in spite of my 
frustrations with their refusal to probe seriously what it is that they 
are talking about, there are nonetheless some excellent scholarly 
works in the field already, many of which have explicitly informed 
the present study.
15	  Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism 
and Schizophrenia 2, trans. Brian Massumi (orig. French, 1980; 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 3.
16	  Caleb Kelly, Cracked Media: The Sound of Malfunction (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009), 61.

30	
NOISE MATTERS
17	  Frances Dyson, Sounding New Media: Immersion and Embodiment 
in the Arts and Culture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 
2009), 189.
18	  This should not be read as an outright dismissal of Dyson, whose 
study is an excellent and important work of scholarship in the field 
of noise studies. However, where we differ is in my suggestion that it 
is precisely the relational aspect of noise that enables us to talk of it 
as a quasi-material object/singular object, whilst for her it is precisely 
this aspect of it that makes of it an impossible and ineffable subject.
19	  This is said in the full knowledge to many that it may seem somewhat 
counterintuitive or patently absurd to assert that there could be any 
such thing as an ontology of noise. Indeed, Keith Moliné closes his 
review of Paul Hegarty’s book Noise/Music: A History by suggesting 
that ‘the central question of course, must remain unanswered: just 
what is noise?’, and he goes on to assure readers of The Wire, the 
magazine in which his review is published, that ‘in the unlikely event 
that someone comes up with an answer’, they will be the first to know 
(The Wire: Adventures in Modern Music, 285 (November 2007), 74.
20	  Keizer, The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want, 120. For a 
more objective survey of the power struggles occasioned by noise, 
see Karin Bijsterveld, ‘The Diabolical Symphony of the Mechanical 
Age: Technology and Symbolism of Sound in European and North 
American Noise Abatement Campaigns, 1900–40’, in The Auditory 
Culture Reader, ed. Michael Bull and Les Back (Oxford and New 
York: Berg, 2003), 165–89 [abridged from original published in 
Social Studies of Science 31, no. 1: 37–70].
21	  Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 128.
22	  See Friedrich A. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. 
Geoffrey Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz (orig. German, 1986; 
Palo Aldo, CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
23	  Kosko, Noise, 3.
24	  See Alexandre Kojève, Introduction to the Reading of Hegel: 
Lectures on the Phenomenology of Spirit, ed. Allan Bloom, trans. 
James Nichols (orig. French, 1947; Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1980).
25	  Jacques Attali, Noise: The Political Economy of Music, trans. Brian 
Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985), 34.
26	  Mary Russo and Daniel Warner, ‘Rough Music, Futurism, and 
Postpunk Industrial Noise Bands’, in Audio Culture: Readings in 
Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (New York 
and London: Continuum, 2004).

	
Introduction	
31
27	  Paul Hegarty, Noise/Music: A History (New York and London: 
Continuum, 2007), 10; see also 138.
28	  Hegarty, Noise/Music, ix.
29	  Hegarty, Noise/Music, 3. In a separate article, Hegarty suggests 
something far closer to the line that will be adopted here and writes: 
‘Is noise subjective? Could we not instead say that noise has to do 
with the subject: that which occurs as/at the limit of the subject; 
that which signals an immanence outside of the subject/object divide, 
however reclothed in phenomenology?’ (Paul Hegarty, ‘Full With 
Noise: Theory and Japanese Noise Music’, ctheory, a097 (2001), 
http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=314 [accessed 15 May 2012]).
30	  Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat, 21.
31	  Adrienne Janus, ‘Listening: Jean-Luc Nancy and the “Anti-Ocular” 
Turn in Continental Philosophy and Critical Theory’, Comparative 
Literature, 63, no. 2 (2011).
32	  Michael Bull and Les Back, ‘Introduction: Into Sound’, in The 
Auditory Culture Reader, ed. Michael Bull and Les Back (Oxford 
and New York: Berg, 2003), 5.
33	  Jean-Luc Nancy, Listening, trans. Charlotte Mandell (orig. French, 
2002; Bronx, NY: Fordham University Press, 2007), 6.
34	  Dyson, Sounding New Media, 4–5.
35	  Michel Serres, Genesis (orig. French, 1982; Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1995), 13.
36	  Dyson, Sounding New Media, 10–11; see also 188 where noise 
becomes, ‘like flux, vibration, pulse or signal […,] a good metaphor, 
its ceaseless movement between signal, music, rumor, and language 
unhing[ing] any dialectic with which it is engaged, or to which it is 
applied’.
37	  Dyson, Sounding New Media, 11.
38	  See Gilles Deleuze, Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza, trans. 
Martin Joughin (orig. French, 1968; New York: Zone Books, 1990).
39	  Similarly, much of the vocabulary to be used throughout this study 
will sound somewhat Deleuzean, which might lead one to ask why 
a Deleuzean term could not have been found to replace noise, so 
as not to have to struggle with a term anchored in a long, complex 
and contested history and in little need, one would have thought, 
of further complication. The reason is quite simply because noise 
as figured here, the kind of noise which can be talked of in terms 
of ontology, is not equivalent to any single term in Deleuze’s work, 
even if many of his concepts are conceptually sympathetic to what 

32	
NOISE MATTERS
is referred to here by the term noise – concepts such as, for instance, 
the Spinozist vocabulary of univocity, substance, attributes and 
modes, or, indeed, Deleuze’s own terms such as the plane of desire/
immanence/consistency and becoming. Another reason, of course, 
is quite simply because whilst the findings of this study will differ 
radically from what has been said of noise in the past, its reflections 
will always arise out of a consideration of various kinds of noise 
that have been termed precisely this. So whilst noise is figured 
here in philosophical terms as the (potentially) perceptible aspect 
and by-product of the events that constitute both phenomenal and 
noumenal reality, this formulation is arrived at only through contact 
with many different kind of works where noise seems to arise at first 
under a somewhat different guise.
40	  Whilst it may seem somewhat heretical to talk of essence in this way, 
I take my lead from Deleuze who writes: ‘No doubt, if one insists, 
the word “essence” might be preserved, but only on condition of 
saying that the essence is precisely the accident, the event, the sense; 
not simply the contrary of what is ordinarily called the essence but 
the contrary of the contrary: multiplicity is no more appearance 
than essence, no more multiple than one’ (Gilles Deleuze, Difference 
and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (orig. French, 1968; London: The 
Athlone Press, 1994; New York: Columbia University Press, 1994), 
191).
41	  Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 80–1.
42	  Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 81.
43	  Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 81.
44	  Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 81.
45	  Hegarty, Noise/Music, 5. 
46	  Brandon LaBelle, Background Noise: Perspectives on Sound Art 
(New York and London: Continuum, 2006), 224–5.
47	  Paul R. Kohl, ‘Reading Between the Lines: Music and Noise in 
Hegemony and Resistance’, Popular Music and Society, 21, no. 3 
(1997), 9.
48	  It should be noted that the notion of resistance also plays a role in 
Michel Serres’ work on noise, particularly in The Parasite, trans. 
Lawrence R. Schehr (orig. French, 1980; Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 2007). However, there is here a major difference 
insofar as in Serres’ work, the parasite that introduces noise into 
the system is always a third term (as in Shannon and Weaver’s 
communication theory) rather than the result of the operations of 
the system itself. He writes, for instance, ‘The parasite, nesting on 

	
Introduction	
33
the flow of the relation, is in third position’ (53). It must be noted, 
nonetheless, that this line is not always consistent in this work, 
since he takes a line with more in common with his writings in 
Genesis elsewhere in The Parasite. Indeed, well before the parasite is 
aligned with thirdness, he suggests that ‘[the rats] are, as the saying 
goes, always already there. Part of the building. Mistakes, wavy 
lines, confusion, obscurity are part of knowledge; noise is part of 
communication, part of the house’ (12), and that ‘The difference 
is part of the thing itself, and perhaps it even produces the thing. 
Maybe the radical origin of things is really that difference, even 
though classical rationalism damned it to hell. In the beginning was 
the noise’ (13). The seeming inconsistency of this line may well be 
due to the fact, as Cary Wolfe suggests in his introduction to this 
work, that this is an experimental work in many respects, designed to 
figure the changing and unstable operations of noise in its very style. 
As he writes, ‘it is noise that Serres’s writing doesn’t just talk about 
but generates’ (Cary Wolfe, ‘Introduction to the New Edition’, in 
Michael Serres, The Parasite, xiii). 
49	  Marshall McLuhan, Understanding Media: The Extensions of 
Man, 2nd edn. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964; New York: New 
American Library, 1964), 23–35.
50	  McLuhan, Understanding Media, 24.
51	  Frances Dyson suggests why this particular story has been complex 
and misleading when she writes ‘Establishing a credible, though 
unobtrusive, interface between reality and artifice, the real and the 
reproduced, has been a constant preoccupation of media technology. 
Like the speaking tube of deific transmission, it has been necessary 
to construct and then deny a mechanism that channels, delimits, 
transduces, and sanitizes the materiality it transports’ (Sounding New 
Media, 47).
52	  Kosko, Noise, 66.
53	  Kosko, Noise, 66.
54	  Note that one would be perfectly able in formulating this idea to 
take a detour through Henri Bergson’s Matter and Memory, trans. 
N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer (orig. French, 1896; New York: Zone 
Books, 1994), in which matter is always imbricated in a process of 
becoming and vibrating (208).
55	  In the light of these assertions, it is my hope that this study 
might be considered an instantiation of what Karen Barad terms 
a ‘posthumanist performativity’. See Karen Barad, ‘Posthumanist 
Performativity: Toward an Understanding of How Matter Comes 

34	
NOISE MATTERS
to Matter’, in Belief, Bodies, and Being: Feminist Reflections on 
Embodiment, ed. Deborah Orr, Linda Lopez McAlister, Eileen Kahl 
and Kathleen Earle (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2006).
56	  Serres, Genesis, 61.
57	  Serres, Genesis, 111.
58	  Serres, Genesis, 22.
59	  Serres, The Parasite, 52.
60	  Serres, Genesis, 13.
61	  Brian Massumi, A User’s Guide to Capitalism and Schizophrenia: 
Deviations from Deleuze and Guattari (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1992), 170.
62	  Massumi, A User’s Guide, 170. 
63	  Massumi, A User’s Guide, 170.
64	  It should be noted that noise plays a somewhat important role in 
Deleuze’s The Logic of Sense, but in this work it is generally figured 
as being opposed to meaning and language and is for the most part 
left behind in the passage from noise to its others, especially the 
passage from noise to voice. See, for instance, Gilles Deleuze, The 
Logic of Sense, trans. Mark Lester with Charles Stivale (orig. French, 
1969; New York: Columbia University Press, 1990), 194.
65	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 343.
66	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 343–4.
67	  J. R. Pierce, Symbols, Signals and Noise: The Nature and Process of 
Communication (London: Hutchinson, 1962), 251.
68	  It is interesting to note there is here a lexical affinity with Deleuze’s 
work The Logic of Sense in which great emphasis is placed on the 
effects of bodies in a relational ontology. He writes: ‘The effects are 
not bodies but, properly speaking, “incorporeal” entities. They are 
not physical qualities and properties, but rather logical or dialectical 
attributes. They are not things or facts but events. We cannot say 
that they exist, but rather that they subsist or inhere (having this 
minimum of being which is appropriate to that which is not a thing, 
a nonexisting entity)’ (Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, 4–5).

PART 1


CHAPTER ONE
The (Not So) Noisy 
Elephants in the Room
Sound
The most obvious starting point for noise in music is Luigi Russolo’s 
manifesto The Art of Noises written in 1913. In it Russolo, in an 
overtly futurist fashion, hails the modern noise of the industrialized 
urban environment, calling for these noises to enter music […]. 
	
Russolo’s manifesto and his book published in 1916 were highly 
influential on a number of composers of the time, including Claude 
Debussy, Igor Stravinsky, Darius Milhaud, Arthur Honegger, 
Edgard Varèse and Henry Cowell. He is also now recognized as a 
key precursor to much of the ‘noisy’ experimental music produced 
in the second half of the twentieth century.1
	
The most important single achievement in the early history of 
avant-garde noise was the Italian Futurist Luigi Russolo’s The Art of 
Noises. Included under this term were his manifesto of 1913, a book 
of 1916, the music he developed through the design of his new noise-
intoning instruments, the intonarumori, and a new form of notation.2
	
Futurist Luigi Russolo was one of the first in the early twentieth 
century to put the institutionalized division between music (Russolo 
mostly uses the term ‘sounds’ instead of ‘music’) and noises on the 
agenda.3
	
C’est surtout Luigi Russolo (1855–1947), qui vécut en Italie et 
en France, qui conçoit le «bruitisme». En 1913, il abandonne la 
peinture et se consacre à la construction et au perfectionnement de 
bruiteurs. Il pense qu’il faut écouter les bruits du monde et ceux des 
machines en marche pour faire une musique «concrète».4

38	
NOISE MATTERS
	
There was also the case of Luigi Russolo, who dreamt the dream 
of noise-music.5
	
The first intimations of a new attitude towards noise occurred 
well into the age of the phonograph but were strangely independent 
of it. The immediate inspiration for Russolo’s noise instruments, 
which he presented at concerts in Milan, Paris and London in 
1913, came from fellow Italian Futurists like Marinetti, for whom 
noise signalled the ascendancy of the modern age. Sound is defined 
(wrote Russolo) as the result of a succession of regular and periodic 
vibrations, while noise is caused by irregular motion.6
	
In 1913, Pratella introduced his music at a concert at the Teatro 
Costanzi in Rome. He conducted his piece called Musica Futurista 
for orchestra, much to the delight of his Futurist compatriots. One 
painter, Luigi Russolo (1855–1947), was so inspired that he quickly 
wrote his own manifesto, The Art of Noise (1913). Russolo’s ideas 
were more extreme than Pratella’s. Pratella’s objective was to 
develop new pitch and rhythm systems to expand the potential 
of existing instruments. Russolo envisioned entirely new ways of 
making music through the use of noise. He not only put his ideas 
on paper but immediately abandoned painting and devoted himself 
full-time to the design and invention of new mechanical noise-
makers to produce his music.7
	
Disappointed by Pratella’s dependence on traditional musical 
instruments to create untraditional music, Russolo began immedi-
ately to theorize, and then to build, new kinds of instruments that 
he called ‘noise-intoners’ (intonarumori). […] Machines, having 
sapped all vitality from the old music, would now become the basis 
for a vital new music.8
	
In Italy, where the Futurists were promoting an art of speed, 
struggle, aggression, and destruction, Luigi Russolo issued a 
manifesto for a ‘MUSIC OF NOISE’ and began to construct 
noise-instruments with which to produce the roaring, whistling, 
whispering, screeching, banging, and groaning sounds that he had 
predicted in his pamphlet.9
	
Russolo invented an orchestra of noise makers, consisting of 
buzzers, howlers and other gadgets calculated to advance his 
philosophy. The ‘pastorale’ and the ‘nocturne’ give way before 
machine-music like Honegger’s Pacific 231 (1924), an imitation of 
a locomotive, Antheil’s Ballet mécanique (1926), which employed 
a number of airplane propellers, Prokofioev’s Pas d’acier (Dance 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
39
of Steel), Mossolov’s Iron Foundry and Carlos Chavez’s HP 
(Horse-power) all dating from 1928. This blurring of the edges 
between music and environmental sounds is the most striking 
feature of twentieth-century music. Finally in the practices of 
musique concrète it became possible to insert any sound from the 
environment into a composition via tape; while in electronic music 
the hard-edge sound of the tone generator may be indistinguishable 
from the police siren or the electric tooth-brush.10
Fury
A notion of sonic warfare lies at the heart of modern experimental 
music and takes us back to the apex of the sonic avant-garde, 
to Luigi Russolo’s Futurist manifesto for music, The Art of 
Noises, which glorified explosions, rifle fire, and the dissonance 
of industrial machinery as an assault on the deadened sensorium 
of classical music and bourgeois aesthetics. The futurist art of 
war in the art of noise framed cultural innovation in the field 
of music as a sensory war in which the stakes were no less than 
the distribution and hierarchical stratification of the nervous 
system. A crystallization of the belligerent libidinal field of the 
early twentieth century, futurism processed the schizzed and shell-
shocked psyche of the battlefield, seeking a new synthesis – one 
claiming to break with the organic wholeness of the past in favor 
of a technical enhancement […], a rewiring of the body and its 
sonic sensations.11
	
Luigi Russolo, one of the early and most enthusiastic young 
followers of Marinetti, was a signatory of many of the most 
audacious and interesting futurist manifestos. Russolo seems to 
have endorsed all the major principles of Marinetti’s futurist 
program: radical and innovative interventions into the art forms; 
the glorification of the machine and the virile qualities of speed, 
volume, and power associated with it; the spectacularity of war; 
and the eternal exuberance of youth and cultural revolution. The 
old, the traditional, and the feminine were relegated to the ‘silence 
of the ancient world’; modernity in Futurist terms was noisy. The 
futurist project included not only the much-quoted manifestos 
(many of which were declaimed from theatre stages), but their 

40	
NOISE MATTERS
enactment in and intrusion into various political scenarios, trans-
forming and aestheticizing the tumultuous activities of modern 
life.12
	
A year later Russolo gave a concert in Milan featuring specially 
made and named instruments of his own invention, including a 
‘howler’, a ‘gurgler’, a ‘croaker’, and a ‘roarer’. Unimpressed, his 
audience began making some noise of its own. One might suppose 
this would have pleased the Futurists – why not a ‘cat-caller’ and 
a ‘boo-maker’ to add to the mix? – but instead Russolo’s artistic 
cronies jumped into the seats and began punching people, eleven of 
whom wound up in the hospital.13
	
The Intonarumori caused a sensation and were presented in 
salons, concert halls and theatres to riotous acclaim. The usual 
form of presentation was the Serata Futurista or Futurist Evening. 
This was a chaotic mixture of theatre, concert and political rally. 
The events were announced well in advance and the venues were 
always packed with an audience high on wild anticipation. The 
Futurists’ reputation went before them, thanks to Marinetti’s 
publicity skills, so the outcome of the evening was inevitable. 
Insults were hurled back and forth between the performers and 
the audience, fights broke out and riots ensued pouring out into 
the streets, bars and cafes. There were always indignant outcries 
in the following day’s press thus fuelling the publicity machine 
and ensuring maximum capacity audiences wherever the Futurists 
went. Violence, chaos and noise spoke of the irreversible changes 
in society’s hierarchical structures that would occur as a result of 
the cataclysm that would shortly engulf Europe.14
	
The first public performance of the noise orchestra took place 
on 21 April 1914 at the Teatro del Verme in Milan. […] As soon as 
the orchestra began to play, the crowd broke into a violent uproar. 
The musicians continued undaunted while fellow Futurists hurled 
themselves into the audience and defended the Art of Noises with 
their fists. In the end, eleven people were sent to the hospital, none 
of them Futurists, as belligerence was a central component of the 
Futurist approach to art and life, and many were talented boxers.15
	
Marinetti and a contingent of his rat-tat-tat pack climbed 
to the top of the clock tower in Venice’s Piazza San Marco. It 
was no accident that they’d chosen to launch their movement in 
one of the world’s most famously quiet cities. Leaning over the 
tower’s balcony, Marinetti’s disciples proceeded to dump 800,000 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
41
pamphlets titled ‘Against Past-loving Venice’ down onto the heads 
of the bewildered public below, while he howled through a 
megaphone: ‘Enough! Stop whispering obscene invitations to every 
mortal passerby, O Venice, old procuress!’16
* * *
The story of noise in the twentieth century has many different sides 
and they rarely align. As we have seen in our introduction, noise 
elicits impassioned responses from those who are fond of it and find 
in it all kinds of revolutionary or creative potential and, conversely, 
those who despise it and wish to have done with it in many or 
all of its various forms and guises. Whilst we find this divide in 
many of the disciplinary fields where noise is of concern, be this 
communications theory or electrical engineering, the debate seems 
to become most heated when noise is talked of as either a cultural 
expression – where it is oftentimes held in opposition to music – or 
else a by-product of our increasingly mechanised societies in a post-
Industrial age. What is more, these two distinct understandings of 
noise are often conflated together, these two essentially distinct 
narratives converging often, it would seem, because of a sense 
that the increased noise of the world resulting from its increased 
mechanisation could but lead to works of art that integrated noise 
into their palette in order better to reflect the world in which they 
were born.17 Such a move, of course, is condemned or lamented 
by some and praised by others. And yet, regardless of which side 
of the fence such commentators find themselves on, authors on 
both sides of this ideological divide seem to find some common 
ground in relation to the figures that they posit as foundational in 
the histories that they recount, even if, of course, these figures are 
mobilised for very different ends in each case. As the cacophony of 
quotations that opens this chapter should hopefully indicate all by 
itself, the figure invoked more than any other in these conflicting 
histories is without doubt Luigi Russolo, closely followed by John 
Cage.
	
R. Murray Schafer’s The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment 
and the Tuning of the World might be considered the ur-work of 
the anti-noise lobby. For Schafer, our soundscape, which is to say 
the sonic environment in which we unavoidably bathe at every 
moment, has become populated with more and more unpleasant 

42	
NOISE MATTERS
noises, in greater numbers and emitted at greater volume as the 
technological advances of post-Industrial society have frogmarched 
us ever onwards in the name of progress. For Schafer, however, as 
with any environmental pollution, what this represents for us as 
humans is not so much an ameliorated condition but, rather, an 
impoverished one, and he calls for us to retune our ears, to elevate 
ourselves out of noise in order to bring about a renewed recognition 
of the diversity of sounds, an appreciation of the beauty of certain 
sounds lost in the amplified maelstrom of the modern world. Only 
then, for Schafer, will we be able to distinguish between certain 
sounds and appreciate the ‘good’ ones whilst attenuating the others 
(read ‘noise’). Keen to construct such a hierarchical and value-laden 
taxonomy, Schafer is understandably resistant to the integration of 
all sounds into the realm of music that takes place in the twentieth 
century, and blames the noise pollution problems of our era largely 
on the shoulders of music educators who ‘have failed to give 
the public a total schooling in soundscape awareness’.18 Schafer, 
however, reserves special ire for John Cage for having ‘opened the 
doors of the concert hall to let the traffic noise mix with his own’,19 
and Russolo, about whom he writes the following:
Russolo’s experiments mark a flash-point in the history of aural 
perception, a reversal of figure and ground, a substitution of 
garbage for beauty.20
For Schafer, it is Russolo and the year 1913 that mark the tipping 
point, the moment of no return that led us to the mess we find 
ourselves and our soundscape in now. As he writes:
By 1913 Luigi Russolo was able to point out that the new 
sensibility of man depended on his appetite for noise. Today, 
as the machines whirl in the hearts of our cities day and night, 
destroying, erecting, destroying, the significant battleground of 
the modern world has become the neighbourhood Blitzkrieg. 
It is another reminder of the truth of Constantin Doxiadis’s 
statement that for the first time in history we are less safe inside 
the city gates than outside them.21 
	
Whilst many other volumes have continued the spirit of 
Schafer’s work since 1977 (which is perhaps my own watershed, 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
43
as 1913 is for Schafer) and railed against noise on purely aesthetic 
or subjective grounds, in recent times some more sober and 
considered responses to the intersection of urban/industrial and 
avant-garde artistic practices have appeared in which the authors 
chart how the increasing noise of post-industrial urban society has 
been integrated into art in a productive manner. Notable among 
such studies is Emily Thompson’s The Soundscape of Modernity: 
Architectural Acoustics and the Culture of Listening in America, 
1900–1933.22 In this work, Thompson charts the ways in which 
‘the constant sonic background that has always accompanied 
human civilization’23 was intensified through urbanisation, then 
transformed in early twentieth century America by the onset of 
industrialisation which introduced a whole new array of noises 
into the urban soundscape. Thompson not only provides a history 
of various noise abatement movements and the effects that the 
unprecedented levels of noise have had on architectural practice 
and on the development of building materials, however, but also 
tells the story of those inventors and artists who were excited by 
the noise of this new world and welcomed its din into their work.
	
Russolo is an important figure in Thompson’s study also 
(although, interestingly, she does not mention Cage), and she 
provides an excellent and much more nuanced account of Russolo’s 
attempts to create ‘music out of the noise of the modern world’ 
than does Schafer, placing his experiments in the broader context 
of the Futurists’ integration of noise into other kinds of artistic 
endeavours.24 More than this, however, she conducts a broad survey 
of the history of noise in modern music, from the integration of the 
sounds of the city in jazz, to Henry Cowell’s invocation to rethink 
the barrier between music and noise, to Charles Ives’ representations 
of city noises into his compositions, to Ferruccio Busoni’s desire 
to access every possible gradation of the octave and not merely 
those tones situated on the tempered system, to Edgar Varèse and 
George Antheil’s determination to transform noise into music, to 
Lev Termen’s (aka Leon Theremin) invention of a new instrument, 
the Etherophone, Theremin Vox or simply Theremin, via a creative 
reappropriation of the feedback squeal produced when an early 
radio listener’s hand approached the tuning dial, thereby entering 
the locally generated electromagnetic field surrounding the receiver.25
	
Whilst it would be churlish to claim that the artists that 
Thompson refers to and who explicitly invoke noise are not, in fact, 

44	
NOISE MATTERS
talking about noise at all, it is possible to suggest that the definition 
of noise in operation in the examples Thompson provides is what 
we have termed a common sense definition of noise and thus very 
different to that used here. What I would like to suggest, then, 
is that if we put into operation the definition of noise proposed 
herein that enables us to talk about noise from an ontological point 
of view, it may be the case that the apparent integration of noise 
into these various artistic palettes in fact performs an erasure or 
abnegation of the kind of noise posited in this study. In jazz and 
the work of Ives, for instance, the imitation of sounds of the city by 
conventional instruments merely enforces a rigid representational 
hierarchy in which there is a strict equivalence between original 
and copy, as music attempts to become a mimetic reproduction of 
an external reality. There is here no sense, then, in which noise is 
anything other than a sound that can be repeated or imitated in 
order to paint a quasi-faithful representation of an external reality, 
no sense in which noise resists the transmission of content because 
it is here merely content, a mode of signification. What is more, not 
only does such a conception of noise take it to be something that 
is fundamentally different to what noise actually is or might be, 
such uses of noise oftentimes result in another kind of abnegation 
of noise since, integrated into a ‘musical’ or organised structure 
in this way, noise itself becomes more acceptable, losing much of 
its oppositional nature and becoming then something else entirely. 
This is a movement that can be found again and again in the work 
of Jacques Attali and Paul Hegarty, but it is present in Thompson’s 
book also. Indeed, she notes how William Carlos Williams and 
Paul Rosenfeld were able, after listening to Antheil’s Ballet pour 
Instruments Mécaniques et Percussion and the music of Varèse, 
respectively, ‘to conquer noise, to transcend its offensive character, 
by hearing it in a new way’ and thus transform their own creative 
practice.26 And we might say something similar of Leon Theremin 
who effectively tamed noise, converting it into an ordered, control-
lable musical expression, since although the instrument to which 
he gave his name operated on the same principles as the radio 
feedback that had inspired its creation, the noise which had previ-
ously been a by-product became instead the primary product of the 
instrument. Whereas the feedback howl of the radio might then be 
considered properly noisy insofar as it is a parasitic element that 
interrupts the transmission of the message (the radio program 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
45
listened to), in (or rather near) Theremin’s hands it became the 
thing to be listened to and not an index of the relation by which 
that content came to be expressed or transmitted.
	
In brief, if we wish to talk of noise in such a way that it is 
no longer a purely arbitrary and subjective qualifier but, rather, 
something that expresses a consistency in and of itself, it may 
be that the history of noise in the twentieth century needs to 
be rewritten, for it may be that many of the last century’s most 
infamous noisemongers may not in actuality be all that noisy. I 
have (too) briefly suggested how this might be so in relation to 
some of the examples proffered by Thompson, and it would no 
doubt be possible to do this in more depth for all of her examples 
and many more besides. This is, however, not my primary concern 
in this book and I wish first and foremost to understand how works 
other than those that reappear so obsessively might be figured 
as noisy in this other way. Nonetheless, in what remains of this 
chapter I do want to show how it is possible to say that some of the 
most (apparently) indisputably noisy sites of cultural production 
are perhaps not all that noisy in an absolute sense. In order to do 
this, I will turn my attention to the two figures mobilised again 
and again in studies of noise, the paragons of noise in the histories 
written by noiseniks and Schaferians alike. I am talking, of course, 
about Luigi Russolo and John Cage.
Signifying
Luigi Russolo, futurist painter and later composer, created a series 
of noisemakers or intonarumori, instruments intended to introduce 
into music sounds and timbres which more faithfully represented 
the contemporary reality of the Futurists’ post-industrial machine 
age. This is not to say that his noisemakers were intended solely to 
mimic the sounds of industrial society and its machinery (although 
many thought they did, an accusation which rankled with Russolo 
and Marinetti so much because, no doubt, of its justness),27 for 
Russolo also wanted them to reflect the increasing complexity of 
the age and to express that complexity through other means than 
mere polyphony and harmonic dissonance – as had been the case 
increasingly in late nineteenth and early twentieth century music.28 

46	
NOISE MATTERS
	
In Marinetti’s account of the foundational moments of the 
Futurist movement, it is the noise of public transport and automo-
biles that provides the originary moment of inspiration and drive. 
He writes:
	
Suddenly we jumped, hearing the mighty noise of the huge 
double-decker trams that rumbled by outside, ablaze with 
colored lights, like villages on holiday suddenly struck and 
uprooted by the flooding Po and dragged over falls and through 
gorges to the sea.
	
Then the silence deepened. But, as we listened to the old canal 
muttering its feeble prayers and the creaking bones of sickly 
palaces above their damp green beards, under the windows we 
suddenly heard the famished roar of automobiles.
	
‘Let’s go!’ I said. ‘Friends, away! Let’s go! Mythology and 
the Mystic Ideal are defeated at last. We’re about to see the 
Centaur’s birth and, soon after, the first flight of Angels!’ …29
For Russolo also, noise was unmistakably associated with the new 
technological condition of his time, and was as such opposed to 
nature. As he writes:
	
Ancient life was all silence. In the 19th Century, with the 
invention of machines, Noise was born. Today, Noise is trium-
phant and reigns sovereign over the sensibility of men. Through 
many centuries life unfolded silently, or at least quietly. The 
loudest of noises that interrupted this silence was neither 
intense, nor prolonged nor varied. After all, if we overlook the 
exceptional movements of the earth’s crust, hurricanes, storms, 
avalanches, and waterfalls, nature is silent.30
For Russolo to posit such a mutually exclusive binary between 
music and nature may, of course, seem somewhat strange given 
his later pronouncement that ‘Every manifestation of life is accom-
panied by noise. Noise is thus familiar to our ear and has the 
power of immediately recalling life itself’,31 but this inconsistency 
ultimately matters little. For what mattered most about noise, 
and indeed what mattered most for the Futurists in general, 
was that noise could be theorised as oppositional in relation 
to the established order and thus capable of producing shock, 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
47
outrage and henceforth change. If Russolo then writes that ‘we 
delight much more in combining in our thoughts the noises of 
trams, of automobile engines, of carriages and brawling crowds, 
than in hearing again the “Eroica” or the “Pastorale’’ ’,32 this is 
quite simply because the former noises were so anathema to the 
traditions that created the latter pieces, were considered to be 
incommensurable with artistic expression. Noise was, this is to 
say, eminently capable of attacking the petrified, passéist attitudes 
of complacent bourgeois society that the Futurist Manifesto was 
explicitly formulated to combat, expose, struggle against or at 
least ridicule. Thus, the Futurist movement set out to ‘destroy the 
museums, libraries, academies of every kind, […] fight moralism, 
feminism, every opportunistic or utilitarian cowardice’.33
	
Yet its most oppositional and confrontational declaration of 
intent was even more extreme, stating in point seven of the 
manifesto:
Except in struggle, there is no more beauty. No work without 
an aggressive character can be a masterpiece. Poetry must be 
conceived as a violent attack on unknown forces, to reduce and 
prostrate them before man.34
Whilst statements such as this undoubtedly spring from the 
Futurists’ desire to provoke violent reactions and their apparent 
love of a good fight – both Russolo, Marinetti and the local press 
of the cities where Futurist events took place delighted in detailing 
the commotion, brouhaha and fisticuffs that often accompanied 
their performances – there is, perhaps especially in regards to noise, 
more than just a lively anarchism here. For Marinetti, noise was 
itself produced in violence, in a percussive act as different elements 
entered into conflict with each other. As he writes, ‘noise is the 
result of rubbing or striking rapidly moving solids, liquids, or 
gases’35; and elsewhere, ‘noise [is] the result of the rubbing together 
or the collision of solids, liquids, or gases in fast motion’.36 Whilst 
this account of the ontology of noise leaves much to be desired, it 
is nonetheless significant for an understanding of the significance of 
noise for the Futurists. For even though Marinetti does not make 
the link himself, conceived of as here, noise becomes that element 
best able to express the synaesthetic experience of tactilism since, 
produced through a physical, percussive action, it is able (like 

48	
NOISE MATTERS
sound more generally as Marinetti states) to express ‘the dynamism 
of objects’.37 Indeed, breaking through the rigid hierarchy of the 
senses when classified and separated in a rigid taxonomy (‘The 
distinction between the five senses is arbitrary’, writes Marinetti38), 
noise becomes that element, so desired by the Futurists, that would 
be capable of liberating the fixed form of matter itself in our 
perceptive field, of expressing the process inherent in all material 
essences before perception or usage petrifies them in a structure 
signalling death. As Marinetti writes of architecture:
	
The frame of a house in construction symbolizes our burning 
passion for the coming-into-being of things.
	
Things already built and finished, bivouacs of cowardice and 
sleep, disgust us!
	
We love only the immense, mobile, and impassioned 
framework that we can consolidate, always differently, at every 
moment, according to the ever-changing moods of the winds, 
with the red concrete of our bodies set firm by our wills.39
Whilst inextricably linked to matter, in Russolo’s conception of 
it, noise was able to resist this kind of petrification because of its 
inherent complexity. Indeed, drawing a clear distinction between 
sound and noise that once again highlights the oppositional, 
disruptive nature of the latter, Russolo writes:
Sound, estranged from life, always musical, something in itself, 
an occasional not a necessary element, has become for our ear 
what for the eye is a too familiar sight. Noise instead, arriving 
confused and irregular from the irregular confusion of life, is 
never revealed to us entirely and always holds innumerable 
surprises.40
	
As should be clear from this, in many of the Futurists’ writings, 
noise thus takes on many of the qualities that I wish to impute to 
it also. In Marinetti and Russolo’s view, indeed, noise appears to 
signal the irreducible expressivity of everything and the incom-
mensurability of identity, the fundamental internal oppositionality 
that, as argued here, is one of its (non-) defining characteristics. 
The sentiment expressed here, indeed, resonates deeply with 
Roquentin’s nauseous vision of the true nature of existence that 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
49
we will go on to examine in the next chapter. Just like Roquentin, 
however, as we will see, the Futurists did not follow through on the 
full implications of their insight. Indeed, noise for the Futurists is 
always ultimately recontained and limited, bounded by the will to 
dominate that was so prevalent in the extremely masculinist, virile, 
proto-Fascist Futurist mentality. Thus, Marinetti’s advocacy of a 
flowing, freeform architecture (a beautiful, fictional description 
of which can be found in his novel The Untamables) is ultimately 
cemented in place by ‘the red concrete of our bodies, set firm by 
our wills’,41 whilst Russolo, in spite of his adulation in praise of 
the uncontainable complexity of noise, ultimately desires only to 
control and contain noise completely, to harness it for musical 
(or aesthetic) ends with a strict taxonomic categorisation and his 
intonarumori, each of which would correspond to one of these 
categories.42 We thus find many contradictions in his proclamations 
and he states, for instance:
Stir the senses and you will also stir the brain! Stir the senses 
with the unexpected, the mysterious, the unknown, and you 
will truly move the soul, intensely and profoundly! Here lies 
the destined and absolute necessity of borrowing the timbres of 
sounds directly from the timbres of the noises of life.43
And yet he goes on to assert that ‘the ear must hear these noises 
mastered, servile, completely controlled conquered and constrained 
to become elements of art’.44
	
The very oppositional potential of noise that attracted the 
Futurists to it was, then, ultimately that which prevented them 
from retaining the noisiness of noise in their use of it. So while, 
as Russolo states, ‘Noise must become a prime element to mould 
into the work of art’, in order to do this it was necessary for it 
‘to lose its accidental character in order to become an element 
sufficiently abstract to achieve the necessary transformation of 
any prime element into [sic] abstract element of art’.45 In other 
words, it was necessary for noise no longer to be noise. It is surely 
for this reason also that noise in Russolo’s art always ultimately 
ended up being merely imitative of the industrial and mechanical 
sounds that spawned it in spite of his constant declamation that 
‘The Art of Noises would certainly not limit itself to an impres-
sionistic and fragmentary reproduction of the noises of life’.46 

50	
NOISE MATTERS
Indeed, as he states just before this, ‘As it comes to us from life, in 
fact, noise immediately reminds us of life itself, making us think of 
the things that produce the noises that we are hearing’,47 and noise 
thus always maintains a strictly referential or indexical relation 
to the matter or content of the world that it has the potential to 
destabilise.
	
The Futurists’ inability fully to exploit the potential of noise 
(or, we might say, to integrate noise into their aesthetic at all) can 
be easily explained by their progressivist and triumphalist mindset 
which abhorred ‘grotesque funeral of passéist Beauty (romantic, 
symbolist, and decadent)’ and praised instead ‘Geometric and 
Mechanical Splendor’,48 or even by their elaboration and embrace 
of the fundamental tenets of modernism critiqued by Bois and 
Krauss.49 What is more important for the purpose of the present 
study, however, is what the implications of this failure fully to 
integrate noise into the Futurist aesthetic means for a history 
of noise in the arts. For Russolo’s The Art of Noises is, in very 
many accounts of either noise in music or electronic music more 
generally, posited as the direct precursor for many different and 
diverse musical movements or individual composers throughout 
the twentieth century from musique concrète to Cage, Ruttman to 
industrial, Messiaen to minimalism, as though all of these disparate 
centres of expression were somehow situated on a continuum 
which was not merely historical. This is indeed what seems to be 
suggested by the inclusion of Luigi and Antonio Russolo’s Corale 
(1921) as the first track on the first disk of the first volume of 
the now five-volume set, An Anthology of Noise and Electronic 
Music. (And let me add that whilst not surprising in and of itself, 
since for Schafer and many others Russolo’s work is the watershed 
moment,50 it is a little surprising that this should be intimated by 
this compilation which is published on the sub rosa label which 
professes a Deleuzean heritage51 and thus rejects the very possibility 
of considering history to be a closed and stable field – each volume 
is subtitled an a-chronology –, preferring to talk of plateaus and 
strata and maintaining that the line drawn between movements 
and composers is curved and not straight.52) What is perhaps 
slightly odd about this is that the privileged position Russolo is 
accorded here might be seen to imply that he constitutes not only 
the first point in a lineage of ‘noise’ music, but also in a history of 
electronic music, even though Russolo’s instruments were primarily 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
51
not electronic but mechanical. I would suggest, however, that it 
is slightly odd not only for this reason but also because of the 
unproblematic acceptance of Russolo’s work as noise.
	
To suggest that The Art of Noises in both its written and musical 
forms is not actually all that noisy is not to deny that it would 
have been considered extremely noisy and oppositional by its first 
audience, nor indeed that it would still be considered relatively 
noisy and confrontational by many audiences today. It is rather to 
suggest that, in spite of Russolo and Marinetti’s intuitions regarding 
the disruptive power of noise and its ability to evoke or bring into 
being the mysterious and unknown, their subsequent theorisations 
and deployments of noise within the masculinist, progressivist 
rhetoric and discourse of the triumphalist modernism that was 
Futurism do not allow this potential fully to come to fruition 
and its disruption then remains purely contextual, an affront to 
existing discourses and paradigms. Indeed, given the industrial, 
technological and mechanical objects which served as the primary 
inspiration for Futurism’s whole aesthetic project, and which 
themselves marked a radical material historical break and subse-
quent paradigm shift in many areas of late nineteenth and early 
twentieth-century post-industrial society, it is entirely feasible that 
the Futurists’ ultimate desire and attempts to harness and control 
noise are indicative not only of their proto-Fascist tendencies, 
but of a more general malaise which, underneath the bravado, 
expresses an underlying insecurity or fear in front of such radical 
breaks, changes and new modes of production. Indeed, one could 
argue that the intuition of the Futurists regarding the incommen-
surability and thus ultimate meaninglessness that noise potentially 
augured was simply too much to bear or, more literally, that the 
massive proliferation of new technologies and the exponential 
increase in the speed of society that is commented on so frequently 
by Marinetti signalled an unknowable and thus threatening future. 
Given this possibility, is it not in fact possible that The Art of 
Noises might be in the final analysis not a radical confrontational, 
aggressive work but, rather, a defensive, reactionary move which 
wishes to contain phenomena perceived to be threatening within 
the strictly delimited and apprehensible bounds of representation 
and a coherent aesthetic? If this is indeed the case, then Russolo’s 
Art of Noises is far from the radical break that it is often assumed 
to be.53

52	
NOISE MATTERS
Nothing
If Russolo constitutes the earliest and seemingly obligatory case 
study for any scholarly work dealing with the conjunction of noise 
and art, the other unavoidable figure who must be attended to in all 
work of this kind is, of course, John Cage, and especially his now 
infamous piece 4’33”. Indeed, to write a book on noise and not 
confront Cage would be once again to tiptoe around the elephant 
in the room or, perhaps, to pretend it wasn’t there because it was 
so quiet. Let me explain.
	
The story hardly needs telling again, for it has been re-recounted 
so many times. Cage, in an anechoic chamber, expects to hear silence 
but is instead assaulted by the sounds of his own body. Realising 
that there is then no such thing as silence, he writes 4’33”, a piece 
which instructs the performer merely to mark off time in three 
movements during a period of four minutes and 33 seconds, and 
otherwise to sit motionless at his/her instrument, thereby allowing 
the ambient sounds of the performance space and its surroundings 
to invade the aural consciousness of the audience and become the 
musical text. In spite of its obvious radicality, however, the result 
of Cage’s attempts to erase entirely the boundary between music 
and sound, silence and noise is arguably no different from that 
of Russolo, which is to say that Cage might ultimately be said to 
eradicate noise entirely through this gesture. For, by sculpting his 
musical text from the incidental sounds and noises of the concert 
venue, it was Cage’s desire, as has been stated by many, to render 
all sound musical, converting noise into the primary, desired 
content of his piece and therefore leaving noise behind in the 
process. This point has been made very well by Douglas Kahn who, 
what is more, establishes the same link between Cage and Russolo 
as that made here. Kahn writes:
Even this century’s most noted radical attacks upon music – 
conducted, as they were, under the sign of noise and sound 
– ultimately returned to music. Luigi Russolo’s ‘art of noises’ 
was recuperated immediately into the goal of ‘a great renovation 
of music’; Edgar Varèse’s ‘liberation of sound’ was a motto of 
retreat when compared to Russolo’s position; and at the core of 
John Cage’s emancipatory project was a will to impose musical 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
53
precepts upon all sounds. The main avant-garde strategy in 
music from Russolo through Cage quite evidently relied upon 
notions of noise and worldly sound as ‘extra-musical’; what was 
outside musical materiality was then progressively brought back 
into the fold in order to rejuvenate musical practice.54
	
This, of course, is a movement that we have already observed 
often, noise becoming music and serving a political function in 
the process, its recuperation bringing about a necessary shift in a 
clearly demarcated field. I have suggested that this is problematic 
for an analysis of noise that wishes to speak of it ontologically 
because, whilst ontology may be conceptualised relationally, the 
transmogrification of noise observed here is closer to a transub-
stantiation. Kahn suggests another reason why such a move is 
problematic, however, arguing that the ground on which this trans-
formation takes place brings about a necessary separation between 
the musical text and the realpolitik which others claim this strategy 
engages. He suggests:
for a sound to be ‘musicalized’ in this strategy, it had to 
conform materially to ideas of sonicity, that is, ideas of a sound 
stripped of its associative attributes, a minimally coded sound 
existing in close proximity to ‘pure’ perception and distant from 
the contaminating effects of the world. This discursive block, 
bountiful in writings on Western art music, has inhibited the 
fusion of artistic ideas and activities with sociopolitical realities, 
with trenchant critiques and rapturous moments culled from 
aurality in general, with operations of the body and psyche, 
technological im/machinations, institutional workings – all that 
might be encountered beyond musical materiality.55
	
There are then good reasons why we should be cautious about 
accepting Cage’s 4’33” as an important work for thinking about 
noise. What is more, when we start to unpack these, we find 
even more reasons why it is problematic to construct noise as a 
figure with no consistency, as something that can, miraculously, 
be converted into something else entirely. In doing this, however, 
we are of course remaining within common sense definitions of 
noise that posit it as both auditory and either incidental, random, 
undesirable or opposed to music. If 4’33” effectively annuls all 

54	
NOISE MATTERS
noises of this kind in its very conceptualisation, this does not 
actually tell us whether it can be considered noisy according to the 
ontological taxonomy posited herein according to which noise is 
the artefact of expression itself, that which arises in the in-between 
of an expression passing between different poles and points us not 
towards the content (semiotic or otherwise) of that expression but, 
rather, its very expressivity and relationality. The problem when we 
pose this question of 4’33” is that it becomes incredibly difficult 
to ascertain what it is that would constitute the piece’s expression, 
what it is that would constitute the expressive assemblage.
	
According to nearly all accounts of the piece, 4’33” is of course 
a work about sound that admits into the musical work the sounds 
of the performance venue and its surrounds. Indeed, for Kyle 
Gann, the piece is resolutely not a joke or hoax as some have 
claimed but, rather, ‘a “thought experiment”, a kind of “meta-
music” that makes a statement about music itself’.56 As he goes on 
to note in his book which is about 4’33” and nothing else,
Through the conventional and well-understood acts of placing the 
title of a composition on a program and arranging the audience 
in chairs facing a pianist, Cage was framing the sounds that 
the audience heard in an experimental attempt to make people 
perceive as art sounds that were not usually so perceived. One of 
the most common effects of 4’33” – possibly the most important 
and widespread effect – was to seduce people into considering 
as art phenomena that were normally not associated with art. 
Perhaps even more, its effect was to drive home the point that the 
difference between ‘art’ and ‘non-art’ is merely one of perception, 
and that we can control how we organize our perceptions.57
In a view such as this, the art in question, of course, is music, a 
sonic art, since the framing conventions used are those of the musical 
performance as Gann notes. And it is at this point that we begin to 
see the problem. For if 4’33” is a sonic expression, that expression, 
sonically speaking, comes from a centre which is not so much 
indeterminate as entirely absent. This is to say, then, that the sounds 
Cage’s piece foregrounds are not noises that are instrumental to the 
musical assemblage but, rather, the noises of passing automobiles and 
creaking chairs and the splutterings of the audience, which is to say 
the sounds of the context into which musical content would normally 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
55
be emitted, noises, that is to say, that are outside of music. Whilst this 
statement would seem to accord perfectly with Cage’s stated aims, 
what it ultimately suggests is that he not only eradicates noise by 
bringing it within the fold of music, but that he concomitantly eradi-
cates music by making of it anything at all and, therefore, nothing, 
there being no possible fundamental or resonant frequency. This is 
to say, in effect, that music is not merely a question of context, that 
it is born of expression, and for this reason I cannot accept Andrew 
Bowie’s position even if I am delighted that he espouses a more 
sympathetic stance towards noise than most of his fellow philoso-
phers of music. Commenting on Ramberg’s comments on Donald 
Davidson’s notion of ‘radical interpretation’, Bowie writes,
	
The relevance of this view of language to music is apparent 
in the question of whether a series of acoustic phenomena is 
mere noise or is music: if it is the latter, it possesses a kind of 
‘meaning’ that noise does not. This is in part because we may 
inferentially relate it to other things which we have interpreted 
as music. Our understanding of music depends on correlations 
between hearing the production of noises and an awareness that 
what is produced is not merely arbitrary and so is susceptible to 
and worthy of interpretation and evaluation in the widest senses, 
which can, for example, include dancing to the noises. Any noise 
can become music if it occurs in the appropriate contexts, rather 
in the way that non-literary language can change its status when 
incorporated into a literary context, or an object becomes a 
work of art if put into the right context.58
	
Whilst Bowie is not actually talking about 4’33” here, his 
comments could no doubt be used to mount an argument that 
this work is indeed music. For reasons that will become clearer in 
Chapter Eight, however, I would contend that whilst music’s centre 
is necessarily indeterminate, it is nonetheless necessarily more deter-
minate than this. Indeed, the point I will make is somewhat similar 
to something Bowie says elsewhere in this same work, in a comment 
that seems somewhat to contradict his previous comment. Bowie 
writes: ‘Music is […] not simply a piece of an objectively charac-
terisable world, because it involves communicative intentions, of 
a kind related to those present in language, by the very fact of its 
being music rather than noise’.59 Whilst I shy away a little from 

56	
NOISE MATTERS
the notion of intentionality here and believe that intention is never 
absolute and, indeed, only one aspect of the resistant operation by 
which any expression comes into being via an assemblage, I agree 
with the general principle here that music emerges out of a singular 
communicative act that displays a relative degree of consistency. 
And, for this reason, I would also suggest that it is not the case, 
as Frances Dyson argues, that a piece such as 4’33” which aims 
to disrupt conventional modes of aesthetic appreciation through 
a reversal of figure and ground, can be considered ‘as much about 
systems of representation as about the nature of sound and music’, 
the rupturing of the very meaning of the concepts music, silence, 
sound and performance which are revealed ‘as metaphors only’,60 
since the systems of representation are here elided completely.
	
To put it another way, the supposed disruption of the represen-
tational system apparently taking place here is actualised outside 
of or, better, in the absence of that representational system, the 
piece unfolding through the intensification of an originary lack, 
this being the very antithesis of noise which can only assert itself as 
a primordial yet never fully present presence (or potentiality). It is 
then not the case, as Chua suggests, that 4’33” is a piece in which 
the sound content is undetermined, meaning that ‘the work begins 
to decompose into its “outside”, into noise’,61 for the outside (or 
noise) of a musical assemblage is never enfolded in the first place. 
This perhaps is somewhat similar to Attali’s comment (although 
obviously not applicable in the same way to the Rolling Stones as 
it seems to be for him) when he writes (in a comment intended as a 
positive critique and valorisation of these musical strategies): ‘Both 
Cage and the Rolling Stones, Silence and “Satisfaction”, announce 
a rupture in the process of musical creation, the end of music as 
an autonomous activity, due to an intensification of lack in the 
spectacle. They are not the new mode of musical production, but 
the liquidation of the old’.62
	
Noise, though, as I have already said repeatedly, need not be 
thought of only in musical/sonic/auditory terms, so if there is 
ultimately none of this kind of noise in 4’33”, the question still 
remains as to whether there is any other kind of noise in it. In 
order to think about this, I want to jump off Attali’s statement here 
somewhat obliquely and suggest that no matter what the condi-
tions of its birth and statements made by its creator, 4’33” is not 
about sound, music or noise at all, but that it is about time.

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
57
	
Indeed, what provides this piece with any kind of expressive 
centre is not, in fact, sound, music or noise at all but, rather, spati-
otemporal situation. The only constants that might provide us with 
the necessary tools to talk of an assemblage here are, for any given 
performance of the piece, space and time. This, on one count at least, 
may seem unsurprising given the piece’s title, yet given the proclama-
tions that are frequently made about it, this is patently not so.
	
The difference of opinion here may well stem from a funda-
mental philosophical disagreement. Gann, for instance, does a 
wonderful job of tracing the many different dramatis personae that 
were important to the very conceptualisation of 4’33” and makes a 
convincing link to Cage’s lecture ‘Defense of Satie’. In this lecture, 
as Gann notes, ‘Cage elaborated the fourfold division of music 
into structure, form, method, and materials, and credited Satie, 
along with Anton Webern (1933–45), with producing the only new 
idea of structure in modern music’.63 This was done, he argues, 
by placing the emphasis firmly on the structural element of time 
lengths, and Gann quotes Cage in order to explain the point fully:
It is very simple. If you consider that sound is characterized 
by its pitch, its loudness, its timbre, and its duration, and that 
silence, which is the opposite and, therefore, the necessary 
partner of sound, is characterized only by its duration, you 
will be drawn to the conclusion that of the four characteristics 
of the material of music, duration, that is, time length, is the 
most fundamental. Silence cannot be heard in terms of pitch 
or harmony: It is heard in terms of time length. It took a Satie 
and a Webern to rediscover this musical truth, which, by means 
of musicology, we learn was evident to some musicians in our 
Middle Ages, and to all musicians at all times … in the Orient.
	
There can be no right making of music that does not structure 
itself from the very roots of sound and silence – lengths of time.64
	
For Cage, then, 4’33” qualifies as music precisely because silence 
is the necessary partner of sound, but there is in fact no reason to 
suggest that this is actually the case (even if it is normally so) since 
it is perfectly possible for a piece of music to have no silence within 
it (think, for instance, of the drone music of Niblock or La Monte 
Young’s Theatre of Eternal Music).65 This is not to say that Cage 
was wrong in placing such emphasis on the structural element of 

58	
NOISE MATTERS
time lengths, but, rather, to claim that duration internal to the 
work of art can be conceptualised from within as a flow that can 
be modulated by relations between sound and silence but, equally, 
by relations between, for instance, tones or timbre. This is to say 
that when conceptualised as expressive, music does not require 
silence, even though silence may form part of its expressive assem-
blage. What it does require, however, is an expressive assemblage 
that would display some structural consistency. In saying this I 
am not falling into the old trap of claiming that music is always 
reducible to a score, but suggesting, rather, that music is the result 
of an expressive centre (a formulation which does not necessarily 
predicate a single composer) which puts various sonic bodies into 
relations with each other as an expression. So whilst it may be 
the case that for the audience the sounds inside and outside of the 
venue enter into relations with each other, the relations between 
them are entirely aleatory and can only be interpreted as otherwise 
in the perception of the individual listener. As with conflicting 
definitions of noise, then, it is hard to claim that 4’33” is musical 
from an ontological point of view, for it can only be interpreted 
as music at an individual level with absolutely no guarantees that 
it will be by all individuals – and 4’33” exemplifies this last point 
perhaps better than any other piece in the history of music.
	
Whilst 4’33” can thus be said to be ‘noisy’ in a common sense 
manner since it is nothing more than a random set of (perhaps) bangs, 
coughs, creaks, sneezes, distant car horns and the patter of rain on the 
venue roof, none of these sounds can be objectively qualified as noises 
in the sense given to this term here. This is not to say that there is no 
noise in 4’33”, since, as I have suggested, there is noise in everything. 
It is to suggest, however, that if we attend to the noise of 4’33”, to 
the specificity of the expressive assemblage that this piece deploys, 
this noise will tell us that on an ontological level, 4’33” has very little 
to do with music and sound and everything to do with space and 
time – a suggestion in line with yet no doubt exceeding the intent of 
Kim-Cohen’s comment that ‘the perceived sound of a performance of 
4’33” is secondary to the “noise” it creates in the circuits of music as 
a category’.66 To put this another way, 4’33” may well be a noisy piece 
but not for the reasons generally given. Cage’s piece does not in fact 
sound the noise of music via silence; rather, true to its title, the noise 
it generates is that of time, for ultimately the piece has far more to tell 
us about the deployment of existence in time than it does about music.

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
59
	
It would be unfair, however, to judge Cage on the basis of this 
piece alone, for his career is so vast and took so many different 
turns that it could not possibly be summed up by four minutes 
and 33 seconds. Yet the same problem for thinking about noise in 
Cage persists even when we move into the latter stages of Cage’s 
trajectory when he developed the concept of panaurality. This 
concept would seem to resonate strongly with the present study, 
for it is born of the recognition, invoked herein, that all matter is 
acoustic since vibrating at a submolecular level. As Douglas Kahn 
notes, in this stage of Cage’s career, sound ‘was no longer tied 
to events but existed as a continuous state as it resonated from 
each and every atom […]. Everything always made a sound, and 
everything could be heard; all sound and always sound paralleled 
panaurality’.67 Having abolished the barrier between sound and 
silence, asserting that silence was merely ‘all of the sound we don’t 
intend’ and, as such, could include loud sounds, the concept of 
panaurality provided Cage with his next step. This concept, indeed, 
would allow Cage, as Kahn explains, to
interpolate sound (and thereby music) back onto a seemingly 
intransigent silence of objects. If silence was actually sound, then 
all matter too must be audible, given the proper technology to 
detect the soundful activities at the level of subatomic vibra-
tions. Matter is dissolved as technology denies inaudibility and 
forbids silence.68
Implicit in Cage’s incorporation of all matter within the realm 
of sound, then, is the recuperation of all sound into the realm 
of music, a manoeuvre which once more, as was the case with 
Russolo, effectively eliminates noise by rendering all sound, even 
at the subatomic level, discursive, meaningful in such a way that 
noise passes fully into the level of content, entertaining a trans-
cendent relation to the medial plane on which and from which 
the discursive event or expression is drawn.69 We can then only 
agree wholeheartedly with Kahn when he suggests that ‘during the 
twentieth-century Age of Noise, the most noted promulgator of 
musical noise was involved in the business of noise abatement’,70 
for the recuperation of noise by music necessarily annuls noise. 
This is not to say that Cage is a noise-free zone, however, but, 
rather, that all of those who have spilled so much ink writing about 

60	
NOISE MATTERS
Cage and noise have been duped by common sense, believing that 
noise necessarily exists in a relation with music. So whilst I felt a 
compulsion to tackle head on the elephant in the room that Cage 
represents in the field of noise studies, it turns out that many others 
have been tiptoeing around him.
Notes
  1	  Caleb Kelly, Cracked Media: The Sound of Malfunction (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009), 66–7.
  2	  Douglas Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 56.
  3	  Marcel Cobussen, ‘Noise as Undifferentiated Sound’, http://
deconstruction-in-music.com/proefschrift/300_john_cage/313_noise_
undifferentiated/noise_undifferentiated.html [accessed April 18, 2012].
  4	  Jean-Pierre Gutton, Bruits et sons dans notre histoire: essai sur la 
reconstitution du paysage sonore (Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 2000), 139–40.
  5	  Michael Chanan, Musica Practica: The Social Practice of Western 
Music From Gregorian Chant to Postmodernism (London: Verso, 
1994), 243.
  6	  Michael Chanan, Repeated Takes: A Short History of Recording and 
its Effects on Music (London: Verso, 1995), 140.
  7	  Thom Holmes, Electronic and Experimental Music: Pioneers in 
Technology and Composition (New York and London: Routledge, 
2002), 38.
  8	  Emily Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity: Architectural 
Acoustics and the Culture of Listening in America, 1900–1933 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002), 136.
  9	  Alex Ross, The Rest is Noise: Listening to the Twentieth Century 
(London: Harper Perennial, 2009), 63.
10	  R. Murray Schafer, The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the 
Tuning of the World (New York: Knopf, 1977; rep. Rochester, VT: 
Destiny Books, 2009), 34.
11	  Steve Goodman, Sonic Warfare: Sound, Affect, and the Ecology of 
Fear (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010), 6.
12	  Mary Russo and Daniel Warner, ‘Rough Music, Futurism, and 
Postpunk Industrial Noise Bands’, in Audio Culture: Readings in 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
61
Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (New York 
and London: Continuum, 2004), 50.
13	  Garret Keizer, The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want: A 
Book About Noise (New York: Public Affairs, 2010), 119.
14	  Robert Worby, ‘Cacophony’, in Music, Electronic Media and 
Culture, ed. Simon Emmerson (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000), 147–8. 
15	  Emily Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity, 137.
16	  George Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence: Listening for Meaning in a 
World of Noise (New York and London: Doubleday, 2010), 127.
17	  This is of course not surprising because, as we will see, such is 
explicitly stated by many artists and is one of the fundamental aims 
of the Futurist manifesto. 
18	  Schafer, The Soundscape, 111.
19	  Schafer, The Soundscape, 111.
20	  Schafer, The Soundscape, 111.
21	  Schafer, The Soundscape, 185.
22	  See also Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat, especially Chapter 2, ‘Noises of 
the Avant-Garde’, 45–67. 
23	  Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity, 116–17.
24	  See Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity, 134–6.
25	  See Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity, 130–44, 152–4.
26	  Thompson, The Soundscape of Modernity, 143.
27	  Benjamin Thorn quotes Russolo in The Art of Noises saying 
‘Despite the fact that it is characteristic of sound to remind 
us brutally of life, the Art of Noises must not limit itself to 
reproductive imitation’ but goes on to suggest that ‘It was perhaps 
unfortunate that the practice could not match the theory. Russolo’s 
own works seem to have been somewhat clumsily constructed 
and too overtly imitative’ (Benjamin Thorn, ‘Luigi Russolo 
(1885–1947)’, in Music of the Twentieth-Century Avant-Garde: A 
Biocritical Sourcebook, ed. Larry Sitsky (Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press, 2002), 417–18).
28	  Russolo’s analysis of the physical properties of noise as opposed to 
sound is based on precisely this premise that noise is constituted of a 
greater number and thus complexity of harmonies. See Luigi Russolo, 
The Art of Noises, trans. Barclay Brown (orig. Italian, 1913; New 
York: Pendragon Press, 1986), 37–40.
29	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘The Founding and Manifesto of 
Futurism’, originally published in Le Figaro, 20 February 1909, 

62	
NOISE MATTERS
reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, ed. and trans. R. W. Flint 
and Arthur A. Coppotelli (London: Secker & Warburg, 1972), 
39–40.
30	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 23.
31	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 27.
32	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 25.
33	  Marinetti, ‘The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism’, 42.
34	  Marinetti, ‘The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism’, 41.
35	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘Geometric and Mechanical Splendor 
and the Numerical Sensibility’, original 1914, reprinted in Marinetti: 
Selected Writings, 101.
36	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘Manifesto of the Futurist Dance’, 
original 1917, reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, 138.
37	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘Technical Manifesto of Futurist 
Literature’, original 1912, reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, 
88.
38	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘Tactilism’, original 1924, reprinted in 
Marinetti: Selected Writings, 111.
39	  Filippo Tommaso Marinetti, ‘The Birth of a Futurist Aesthetic’, 
from War, the World’s Only Hygiene, original 1915, reprinted in 
Marinetti: Selected Writings, 82.
40	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 27.
41	  Marinetti, ‘The Birth of a Futurist Aesthetic’, 82.
42	  This is not necessarily to impute a concrete political agenda to 
Russolo, for, as Thorn suggests, Russolo demonstrated a lack of 
sympathy for fascism (‘Luigi Russolo’, 416).
43	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 86.
44	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 87.
45	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 87.
46	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 86–87.
47	  Russolo, The Art of Noises, 86.
48	  Marinetti, ‘Geometric and Mechanical Splendor and the Numerical 
Sensibility’, 97.
49	  In Bois and Krauss’ analysis, traditional analyses of modern art (such 
as Greenberg’s) require it ‘to justify its existence as the search for 
its own essence […,] to address itself uniquely to the sense of sight 
[…, to exclude] temporality within the visual and on the body of 
the perceiving subject […, to be] addressed to the subject as an erect 

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
63
being, far from the horizontal axis that governs the life of animals 
[… and] to have a beginning and an end [so that] all apparent 
disorder is necessarily reabsorbed in the very fact of being bounded’. 
Yve-Alain Bois and Rosalind Krauss, Formless: A User’s Guide 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997), 25.
50	  See, for instance, all of the commentators quoted in the prologue to 
this chapter as well as: Julian Henriques, ‘Sonic Dominance and the 
Reggae Sound System Session’, in The Auditory Culture Reader, ed. 
M. Bull and Les Back (Oxford: Berg, 2003), 457; Wikipedia entry 
on noise music; Jacques Attali, Noise: The Political Economy of 
Music, trans. Brian Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1985), 26; Theo Van Leeuwen, Speech, Music, Sound (London: 
Macmillan, 1999), 166; Phil Brophy, ‘Collapsing Image Into Noise 
Part 2: Noise, Noise, Noise’, The Wire: Adventures in Modern 
Music, 165 (November 1997); Doug Van Nort, ‘Noise/Music and 
Representation Systems’, Organised Sound, 11, no. 2 (2006).
51	  In the booklet to the first collection released by the label, explicitly 
articulated to Deleuze and Guattari’s philosophy, Folds and 
Rhizomes for Gilles Deleuze (sub rosa, 1995), one of the label’s 
founders, Guy Marc Hinant, explains that it was on the basis of the 
first sentence from Mille Plateaux that they conceived of sub rosa.
52	  Guy Marc Hinant in the booklet accompanying An Anthology of 
Noise & Electronic Music/First a-chronology 1921–2001 (sub rosa, 
2004).
53	  We should note that whilst this is not the commonly accepted line 
on Russolo, we are not entirely alone in suggesting this. For instance, 
talking of the new works of composers such as Satie, Russolo and 
Schoenberg, whilst admitting that they had caused a considerable 
and unprecedented shake up of the foundations of music theory, 
David Keane nonetheless contends that these early pioneers of 
electroacoustic instrumentation did not challenge the traditional 
concept of music as much as some later composers such as Schaeffer 
and Stockhausen and, indeed, that they ultimately relied on fairly 
classical notions of music (David Keane, ‘At the Threshold of an 
Aesthetic’, in The Language of Electroacoustic Music, ed. Simon 
Emmerson (New York: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1986)). 
Schaeffer also notes how, after his disavowal of musique concrète, 
many looked for other heroes and often turned to Russolo whose 
conception of music was still very traditional in essence, relying 
on score and interpretation (Pierre Schaeffer quoted in Michel 
Chion, L’Art des sons fixés ou La Musique Concrètement (Fontaine: 
Éditions Metamkine/Nota-Bene/Sono-Concept, 1991), 75–77). We 

64	
NOISE MATTERS
will see Douglas Kahn suggest something similar very shortly in 
relation to both Russolo and Cage, although he does not impute 
the same kind of intentional agency to Russolo himself (see Douglas 
Kahn, ‘Introduction’, in Wireless Imagination: Sound, Radio, 
and the Avant-Garde, ed. Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 3).
54	  Kahn, ‘Introduction’, 3.
55	  Kahn, ‘Introduction’, 3–4.
56	  Kyle Gann, No Such Thing as Silence: John Cage’s 4’33” (New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2010), 20.
57	  Gann, No Such Thing as Silence, 20.
58	  Andrew Bowie, Music, Philosophy and Modernity (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007), 6.
59	  Bowie, Music, Philosophy and Modernity, 110.
60	  Frances Dyson, ‘The Ear That Would Hear Sounds in Themselves: 
John Cage 1935-1965’, in Wireless Imagination: Sound, Radio, 
and the Avant-Garde, ed. Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 391.
61	  Eu Jin Chua, ‘The Film-Work Recomposed into Nature: From Art 
to Noise in Four Minutes and Thirty-Three Seconds’, Moving Image 
Review & Art Journal, 1, no. 1 (2012), 91. 
62	  Attali, Noise, 136–7.
63	  Gann, No Such Thing as Silence, 79.
64	  John Cage, quoted in Gann, No Such Thing as Silence, 80.
65	  Some might object that even with these examples, the pieces begin 
and end and are thus surrounded by silence, but this silence then 
serves as the framing mechanism, as that which signals the piece 
of music itself to be, precisely, no longer present. And some might 
object to this also that the challenge of Cage’s work is to make us 
think about the border between what is art and what is not art, and 
this is undoubtedly true as it is in a similar manner with Marcel 
Duchamp’s ready-mades. To believe, however, that everything 
becomes art following this questioning of the boundaries of art 
would be to claim that a urinal in a bar’s toilets is automatically 
art, whereas Duchamp’s point (and, indeed, Cage’s) had to do with 
the framing of objects within specific kinds of spaces such that they 
could be considered as art.
66	  Seth Kim-Cohen, In the Blink of an Ear: Toward a Non-Cochlear 
Sonic Art (New York and London: Continuum, 2009), 140.

	
The (Not So) Noisy Elephants in the Room	
65
67	  Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat, 159.
68	  Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat, 164.
69	  In spite of their seemingly divergent projects, the link drawn between 
Cage and Russolo here is not in fact all that surprising given that, 
as Gann notes, Cage mentioned The Art of Noises in a lecture and 
listed it as one of the ten books that influenced him the most (see 
Gann, No Such Thing as Silence, 82) – this being then very much 
an acknowledged debt and not an unacknowledged one as Schafer 
suggests (see The Soundscape, 111).
70	  Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat, 183.


CHAPTER TWO
Noisea
Haiku
When I see the root,
Existence unveils itself.
All is noisea.
* * *
Nausea and noise
The universe is noisy in all scales even if the universe itself is not 
noise. The fading noise of the ancient big bang explosion fills 
the cosmos. It still gently hisses and crackles all around us in 
the form of junk microwave radiation. Measurement and device 
noise attaches to all our measurements and devices. Our warm 
brains give off thermal noise while such thermal and other noise 
types infest the fine electrical circuitry of the neural networks that 
make up our brains. And peering down into the quantum world 
reveals noise fluctuations in the ultimate substrates of matter.1
From an etymological point of view, noise in both French and 
English is intimately related to nausea. Even though this may not 
be evident to the speaker of modern-day French, noise has its roots 
in the Old French ‘noise’, meaning uproar or brawl and found in 
modern-day French only in the phrase ‘chercher noise’ – to pick a 
quarrel.2 ‘Noise’ itself can be traced back to the Latin nausea which 
evokes disgust, annoyance or discomfort and in vernacular Latin 

68	
NOISE MATTERS
there exists a meaning of this word more directly linked to our own 
concerns here, namely, ‘unpleasant situation, noise or quarrel’.
	
Michel Serres makes much of the link between these two terms 
in his book Genesis [Genèse] where he employs the Old French 
‘noise’ in preference to its modern-day French equivalent ‘bruit’ 
in order to highlight the link to nausea and, indeed, the confron-
tational and contestatory nature of ‘noise’. As he writes, ‘In Old 
French it used to mean: noise, uproar and wrangling; English 
borrowed the sound from us; we keep only the fury’.3 And, as he 
continues in a section entitled ‘Sea Noise’, ‘There, precisely is the 
origin. Noise and nausea, noise and the nautical, noise and navy 
belong to the same family’.4
	
I have suggested in the introduction that noise is the artefact 
of an expressive ontology, signalling the necessary movement that 
subsists in all being, whether this be at a subatomic, existential, 
philosophical, quantum or individual level. Noise, then, is that 
which unmoors the world from the illusory fixity to which we tie 
it down in an attempt to keep it in place, to separate its elements 
out from each other and elevate ourselves above the ‘natural world’, 
subjecting it to our will and mastery as though we were somehow 
separated from nature. Noise makes the world pitch, roll, heave and 
swell, like a ship in rough seas whose movement is never entirely 
its own but only ever the result of a relation between it and its 
environment. Noise makes the world bleed, ooze and seep, turning 
it into an undifferentiated (because hyperdifferentiated) mass. Noise, 
from many points of view, is then intimately related to nausea.
	
Nobody perhaps knows this better than Antoine Roquentin, the 
diarist-narrator of Jean-Paul Sartre’s first novel Nausea.5 Indeed, I 
will suggest in this chapter that the conceptualisation of existence 
that unveils itself to Roquentin during his existential breakdown 
and ensuing nauseous episodes could almost be considered a philo-
sophical corollary of the scientific view of the universe as quantum 
noise espoused by Kosko in this chapter’s opening quotation. 
The philosophical insights into the mobile and expressive nature 
of existence that Roquentin’s nausea brings to him, however, are 
not fully followed through. Rather, somewhat strangely, explicit 
instances of noise in the novel actually serve to recontain and 
ground existence again, noise, when figured as noise, thus being 
elided as a means to reinstate an established and seemingly 
necessary order in the world.

	
Noisea	
69
Where Nausea’s noise is not
Given the etymological origins of noise traced by Serres, one 
might imagine that the noise to be found in Sartre’s Nausea 
would reside in the contestatory and combative nature of many 
of Roquentin’s diatribes against the bourgeois ‘salauds’ [bastards] 
in his hometown of Bouville. The ‘salauds’, of course, are those 
members of society who live in a constant state of bad faith, their 
behaviour regulated and dictated at all times not by any kind of 
authenticity, spontaneity or relation to events around them taking 
place in real time, but only in accordance with long-established 
protocols, axiomatics and social mores that determine how people 
of a certain standing should act, dress, walk and talk. Roquentin’s 
fulminations, however, do nothing to disturb the established order, 
to disabuse the ‘salauds’ of their mistaken belief in their own self-
importance that elevates them above not only the natural world 
that feeds their factories but also the lower classes who work in 
them. On the contrary, Roquentin’s decision at the end of the novel 
to write a novel that would justify his own existence places him in a 
somewhat analogous position to those against whom he previously 
riled, muting any possible noise that his words might previously 
have contained.
	
Given that Nausea opens with an inscription lifted from a 
work by Louis-Ferdinand Céline, an author famous at the time 
of this novel’s publication for having revolutionised the French 
literary landscape via a desecration that introduced both the 
smells (in his novels’ content) and sounds (in their spoken style) 
of the street into the sacred realm of les belles lettres,6 one might 
also perhaps imagine that Nausea’s noise might come from its 
style. For Serres claims that the sound and fury of the old French 
noise was lost from its modern-day usage because of a desire to 
make the French language ‘a prim and proper language of precise 
communication, a fair and measured pair of scales for jurists and 
diplomats, exact, draftsmanlike, unshaky, slightly frozen, a clear 
arterial unobstructed by embolus, through having chased away 
a great many belles noiseuses?’7 The noise-less French described 
here is precisely the kind of respectable language favoured by 
the ‘salauds’, and one would therefore have thought that Sartre/
Roquentin would vehemently resist any such linguistic forms or 

70	
NOISE MATTERS
corresponding literary style. For Denis Hollier, this is indeed the 
case since, for him, the key to an understanding of this novel lies 
in grasping its total transgression of genre.8 This transgression, 
however, relies on what Arnold calls ‘a sophisticated irony’ that 
enables the reader to understand the intention behind Sartre’s 
use of ‘the most hackneyed conventions’ of the epistolary/journal 
form and thus relies on that irony being apprehended as intended.9 
Ultimately, however, all of this matters little, for what is certain 
is that the über-conformity to generic literary conventions and 
deliberate inscription of the novel in a predominantly nineteenth-
century literary lineage is nowhere near as contestatory as the 
extreme individualism talked of in the Céline-penned inscription 
that this latter author embodied in his very style and language.
	
If there is then a link to be found between Nausea and noise that 
runs deeper than the etymological roots of Sartre’s eventual chosen 
title (which emerged out of a philosophical series of reflections 
referred to as a Factum sur la contingence and which was originally 
to be entitled Melancholia) this is not to be found, contrary to 
what one might be tempted to believe with the benefit of hindsight 
looking back over Sartre’s career, in the kind of politically or 
aesthetically resistant ends for which noise is often deployed. I will 
suggest, rather, that in the course of the novel, Roquentin’s whole 
world takes on a noisy aspect at those times when his nauseous 
existential breakdowns reveal a different facet of existence to him. 
This noisy/nauseous conception of the world colours the spati-
alities of the novel and opens up the possibility for Roquentin to 
entertain a very different kind of relation with the world around 
him. Ultimately, however, he rejects the extreme contingency of 
this noisy/nauseous existence and retreats back into order and 
necessity, very often by means of, significantly and ironically, 
various noises that are figured explicitly in the novel. Once again, 
therefore, in spite of his noisy/nauseous insights, the full potential 
and operations of noise are ultimately abnegated and recontained; 
noise is once more co-opted by a coherent aesthetic project that 
attenuates or eradicates entirely the ontological qualities particular 
to noise.

	
Noisea	
71
Black noise
Roquentin’s existential crisis comes, as is well known and hardly 
needs repeating here, as the apparently immutable contours of 
the objects around him become porous and seem to float and 
meld before his eyes in a nauseating movement that mirrors his 
realisation of the absolute contingency of his own existence as 
any shred of Cartesian certainty fades away. This unmooring of 
existence from fixed forms and identities is prepared gradually 
throughout the first half of the novel. At first, for instance, 
Roquentin seems unable to recognise the face of the Autodidact 
whom he seems almost daily in the library.10 Language seems 
suddenly insufficient for his needs, his thoughts remaining ‘misty 
and nebulous’ as words fail to fix them in place.11 Gradually he 
is unsettled by the uncanny feeling that the objects around him 
are capable of touching him, refusing to remain in their place 
of subordinate, passive objecthood and utilitarianism, becoming 
instead like ‘living animals’,12 his shirt, for instance, suddenly 
imbued with a troubling form of agency as it rubs his nipples.13 
Faced with sensations such as this, the entire world around him 
takes on a nebulous, mobile quality as all of the metaphysical 
certainty that had previously enabled him to effect a separation 
between his own identity and that of the things in the world 
outside him fades away in such a manner that the world seems able 
to enter into him. He writes:
I was surrounded, seized by a slow, coloured whirlpool, a 
whirlpool of fog, of lights in the smoke, in the mirrors, with the 
benches shining at the back, and I couldn’t see why it was there 
or why it was like that. I was on the doorstep, I was hesitating, 
and then there was a sudden eddy, a shadow passed across the 
ceiling, and I felt myself being pushed forward. I floated along, 
dazed by the luminous mists which were entering me from all 
directions at once.14
As Roquentin’s ability to keep the world around him in its place is 
further eroded, his perception of everything is washed out in tones 
of grey, distinct forms – himself included – bleeding into each other 
due to a lack of chromatic contrast. He writes:

72	
NOISE MATTERS
The grey thing has just appeared in the mirror. I go over and 
look at it, I can no longer move away.
	
It is the reflection of my face.15
	
Grey, of course, occupies a privileged place in the work of Walter 
Benjamin’s writings on Naples because of this colour’s relation to 
porosity and thus, as Andrew Benjamin notes, the way in which 
normally discrete objects or categories are defined ‘in terms of an 
already present sense of “interpenetration” (Durchdringung)’.16 
Whilst this kind of interpenetration of everything does indeed 
capture well the diaphanous, oozing and undifferentiated nature of 
existence as it appears to Roquentin during his nauseous episodes, 
what is important (as becomes clear during his most extreme 
episode) is not so much any specific colour, however, as a lack 
of chromatic contrast between an object and its environs, such 
as when, for instance, he beholds a black tree root in low light, 
which appears to him as a ‘black, knotty mass’ that scares him.17 
It is when faced with this spectacle that what Roquentin considers 
to be the true nature of existence is revealed to him. Already, in 
the days prior to this he tells us, words had lost their power for 
him, their ability to hold things in place and to indicate how to 
navigate the things around him.18 Already he has suggested that 
the normal order of the world is inverted such that he no longer 
occupies a privileged position in the hierarchy of existence and 
ordered distribution of objects in space, saying that ‘The Nausea 
isn’t inside me […]. It is one with the café, it is I who am inside it’.19 
Now, however, the interpenetration or common expressive nature 
of all existence is revealed to him in an almost hallucinatory and 
terrifying illumination:
Never, until these last few days, had I suspected what it meant 
to ‘exist’. I was like the others, like those who walk along the 
sea-shore in their spring clothes. I used to say like them: ‘The 
sea is green; that white speck up there is a seagull’, but I didn’t 
feel that it existed, that the seagull was an ‘existing seagull’; 
usually existence hides itself. It is there, around us, in us, it is 
us, you can’t say a couple of words without speaking of it, but 
finally you can’t touch it. […] Even when I looked at things, I 
was miles from thinking that they existed: they looked like stage 
scenery to me. I picked them up in my hands, they served me 

	
Noisea	
73
as tools, I foresaw their resistance. But all that happened on the 
surface. If anybody had asked me what existence was, I should 
have replied in good faith that it was nothing, just an empty 
form which added itself to external things, without changing 
anything in their nature. And then, all of a sudden, there it was, 
as clear as day: existence had suddenly unveiled itself. It had lost 
its harmless appearance as an abstract category: it was the very 
stuff of things, that root was steeped in existence. Or rather the 
root, the park gates, the bench, the sparse grass on the lawn, 
all that had vanished; the diversity of things, their individuality, 
was only an appearance, a veneer. This veneer had melted, 
leaving soft, monstrous masses, in disorder – naked, with a 
frightening, obscene nakedness.20
This, then, is a vision in which the noise of the world is revealed 
to Roquentin, in which he is able to glimpse the in-between of 
existence, to attend to the expressivity of being which comes to be 
always outside of itself. This, then, is a vision in which nausea is 
coterminous with noise.
	
And yet it is very much a vision, the descriptions here and 
throughout the novel of these foggy, misty, nauseous, diaphanous 
spaces being rendered in almost exclusively visual terms – as seen 
already with the lack of chromatic contrast and predominance of 
the colour grey in these moments. Far from increasing this sense 
of a fully immersive relation with the world, the auditory sense for 
Roquentin – and noise in particular, even more strangely – seem to 
serve as a means to orient himself, as a fixed point of localisation 
that attenuates his sense of visual disorientation. Noise, as it is more 
commonly understood, this is to say, serves not to disrupt but, rather, 
to provide a sense of fixity and stability that counters the contingency 
of the protagonist’s visual and tactile space, to furnish what appear to 
serve as anchoring points of reference – even if these auditory expres-
sions are ultimately just as non-localisable. Roquentin can thus write,
The fog was so thick … a wet light and it was impossible to 
know where the pavement finished. There were people around 
me; I could hear the noise of their footsteps or, occasionally, the 
slight hum of their words: but I couldn’t see anybody.21
Or, even more significantly,

74	
NOISE MATTERS
I wanted to hear the noise of his footsteps. The most I could 
hear was that of a little coal falling inside the stove. The fog 
had invaded the room: not a real fog, which had gone a long 
time before, but the other fog, the one the streets were still full 
of, which was coming out of the walls and pavements. A sort of 
inconsistency of things.22
That this is contrary to what one might expect can be seen in the 
following quotation from Serres’ Genèse where he writes, having 
noted that ‘the multiple is the object of this book [Genesis]’:
These are objects I seem to live through more than view. I 
think I pick up noises from them more than I see them, touch 
them, or conceive them. I hear without clear frontiers, without 
divining an isolated source, hearing is better at integrating than 
analyzing, the ear knows how to lose track.23
For Serres, then, hearing, much more readily than sight or touch, 
allows us access to the contingent, the aleatory, the multiple or, 
rather, the loss of the unitary that lies at the heart of Roquentin’s 
nausea.24 This, however, is resolutely not the case in Nausea where 
time and again the destabilising or, rather, operative relationality 
of noise is perceived only in the visual and tactile realms, whilst 
noise experienced via the auditory sense inspires no such troubling 
insights. Thus, when talking of the noise his fellow clients at the 
Café Mably make, even though he describes it as an ‘inconsistent 
noise’, it is nonetheless (in striking contrast to the troubling ‘incon-
sistency of things’ seen above) ‘an inconsistent noise which doesn’t 
bother me’, as he says.25 What is more, this (what is to my mind) 
misprision of noise is not simply confined to odd asides such as 
these but occupies an important place in the novel’s finale that 
leads to Roquentin’s formulation of a possible salvation in the face 
of the crushing contingency of existence.
Vinyl noise
Throughout the novel, Roquentin listens to a particular jazz song, 
‘Some of these days’, and is struck by its internal coherence and 

	
Noisea	
75
necessity. As he explains whilst listening to the song for the first 
time in the novel,
The refrain will be coming soon: that’s the part I like best and 
the abrupt way in which it flings itself forward, like a cliff 
against the sea. For the moment it’s the jazz that’s playing; 
there’s no melody, only notes, a host of little jolts. They know 
no rest, an unchanging order gives birth to them and destroys 
them, without ever giving them time to recover, to exist for 
themselves. They run, they hurry, they strike me with a sharp 
blow in passing and are obliterated. I should quite like to hold 
them back, but I know that if I managed to stop one, nothing 
would remain between my fingers but a vulgar, doleful sound. I 
must accept their death; I must even will it; I know few harsher 
or stronger impressions.26
	
Roquentin hears this song again towards the end of the novel, 
which is to say after his nauseous visions and illumination and 
before his decision to try and write a book which might justify 
his existence a little, ‘The sort of story, for example, which could 
never happen, an adventure […,] beautiful and hard as steel’.27 This 
time, however, he notes that the record has been scratched, which 
is to say that the song is accompanied by noise. Whilst we might 
expect Roquentin to be bothered by this noise, to be pulled out of 
his reverie as he loses himself in the melodic content of the song 
and made to attend to the mediated and thus contingent nature of 
the tune he loves so much, this is not the case in the slightest and 
he is able completely to elide this noise, to hear it, ultimately, as 
entirely separate from the recorded (and thus intentional) content 
of the disk. He writes:
Somebody must have scratched the record at that spot, because 
it makes a peculiar noise. And there is something that wrings 
the heart: it is that the melody is absolutely untouched by this 
little stuttering of the needle on the record. It is so far away – so 
far behind. I understand that too: the record is getting scratched 
and worn, the singer may be dead; I myself am going to leave, I 
am going to catch my train. But behind the existence which falls 
from one present to the next, without a past, without a future, 
behind these sounds which decompose from day to day, peels 

76	
NOISE MATTERS
away and slips towards death, the melody stays the same, young 
and firm, like a pitiless witness.28
	
We might think of this elision of noise as simply an instance of a 
quite common and unconscious form of cognitive noise reduction 
(and I will examine this in more depth in Chapter Four in relation 
to a different context). Indeed, it may well seem that Roquentin is 
here simply deploying a mechanism well known to anyone who 
has listened to a scratched record. For the hiss, pops and scratches 
of old vinyl, whilst in a sense undeniably present, are often, and 
as far as possible, ignored by the listener who wishes to attend to 
the recorded content of the disk as part of a willed yet ultimately 
instinctive process of auditory filtration. This is to say that, like the 
gallery visitor looking at a picture presented behind glass and who 
makes a conscious effort not to see the glass in order to contem-
plate the painting, the melody of a song on a scratched record 
is necessarily affected by the scratch and only appears not to be 
because of a tactic one adopts in order to achieve the result desired.
	
For Sartre (via Roquentin), however, something more significant 
is in play, for the split effected here between musical or aesthetic 
expression and the material support on which that expression is 
recorded is entirely in accordance with Sartre’s aesthetic theory 
as expounded in The Imaginary and in which the aesthetic object 
is ontologically separate from the rest of existence. His theory is 
formulated, once again, whilst listening to music, albeit Beethoven’s 
Seventh Symphony and not jazz. Sartre writes:
I am therefore confronted by the Seventh Symphony but on the 
express condition that I hear it nowhere, that I cease to think 
of the event as current and dated, and on the condition that I 
interpret the succession of themes as an absolute succession and 
not as a real succession that is unfurling while Pierre is, simulta-
neously, visiting one of his friends. To the extent that I grasp it, 
the symphony is not there, between those walls, at the tip of the 
violin bows. Nor is it ‘past’ as if I thought: this is the work that 
took shape on such a date in the mind of Beethoven. It is entirely 
outside the real. It has its own time, which is to say it possesses 
an internal time, which flows from the first note of the allegro to 
the last note of the finale, but this time does not follow another 
time that it continues and that happened ‘before’ the beginning 

	
Noisea	
77
of the allegro, nor is it followed by a time that would come 
‘after’ the finale. The Seventh Symphony is in no way in time. 
It therefore entirely escapes the real. It is given in person, but as 
absent, as being out of reach. It would be impossible for me to 
act on it, to change a single note of it, or to slow its movement.29
	
Whilst Sartre’s theory as expounded here may seem to make 
perfect sense in relation to music, if we resituate it in the context 
of Roquentin’s nauseous revelations about the true (noisy) nature 
of existence, it becomes problematic. Indeed, what nausea/noise 
reveals to Roquentin is precisely that, in effect, nothing is in 
actuality, nothing is fully present to itself, everything is only ever 
a relation that exists through the deployment of an expressive 
act. Whilst it may then seem that the melody of the Seventh 
Symphony or ‘Some of these days’ is ontologically far removed 
from the ontology of a tree root, let us say, a ‘real object’ in the 
world, Roquentin’s nauseous episodes reveal to us that this is 
resolutely not the case. Indeed, one can suggest that just like the 
Seventh Symphony which does not actually exist in time but only 
as an ‘absolute succession’ that can lead to an expressive event 
in which one recognises a familiar line, so the tree root appears 
to Roquentin as the expression of a transcendental principle that 
enfolds existence into that particular pseudo-form in time.
Grey noise
To put this in slightly different terms, borrowed once again from 
Deleuze and Guattari, we might suggest that the nauseous, noisy 
ontology discovered by Roquentin is one in which existence is 
conceived of in terms of haecceities. This is indeed perhaps unsur-
prising, for the exemplars used by Deleuze and Guattari to talk 
of haecceities are oftentimes phenomena found also throughout 
Roquentin’s nauseous descriptions of the world: fog, mist, smoke. 
More than this, however, as Deleuze and Guattari explain, a 
haecceity is a becoming that deploys a certain kind of affect at 
differing degrees of intensity, not a thing or substance or subject 
but a mode of individuation that has ‘a perfect individuality lacking 
nothing’ and that consists ‘entirely of relations of movement and 

78	
NOISE MATTERS
rest between molecules or particles, capacities to affect and be 
affected’.30 It is no accident, of course, that this idea resonates 
strongly with Sartre’s comment on Beethoven’s Seventh Symphony 
in L’Imaginaire, for music also according to Deleuze and Guattari 
is a haecceity and it is so primarily because of the double movement 
of deterritorialisation and reterritorialisation (which is to say, 
in Sartrean terms, existence both corporeal and incorporeal, the 
in-itself and the for-itself) that comes from the refrain which, for 
them, is the very content of music.31 Indeed, the refrain for them 
is ‘a creative, active operation that consists in deterritorializing the 
refrain’, which is to say, as they elaborate, ‘whereas the refrain is 
essentially territorial, territorializing, or reterritorializing, music 
makes it a deterritorialized content for a deterritorializing form of 
expression’.32 In other words, whilst music’s blocks of expression 
are dependent on the creation of forms, on a territory defined by 
the refrain, music only becomes music(al) by undoing these forms, 
by pushing them to their limit, submitting them to the diagonal or 
transversal as music reterritorialises upon itself qua music.33
	
The implication of this for Roquentin is of course devastating, 
for what it suggests is that there is no ontological separation 
between the mode of expression that inheres in the form of 
existence he intuits during his nauseous illumination and the mode 
of expression by which music comes to be. Music, then, is also 
subject to the same crushing sense of contingency, the same lack of 
necessity, the same absurdity as material existence. This is to say 
that the refrain cannot provide an escape from contingency, that 
it does not allow the pour-soi to justify its existence through an 
aesthetic creation that would not be subject to the extreme indif-
ference of the universe.
	
For Roquentin, however, and indeed for Sartre since, as we have 
seen, the same idea is formulated not only in his fictional work 
but his philosophical work also, the admission of this fact, of the 
idea that the nausea (or noise) of existence cannot be countered 
by music, by an expression that would arise from a necessary 
internal order, is impossible to bear. And so, rather than despair, 
Roquentin – and once again, of course, Sartre, as we find out 
from the autobiography he wrote at the end of his life in which 
he proclaimed ‘J’étais Roquentin’34 – chooses a different path and 
resolves to write ‘The sort of story, for example, which could never 
happen, an adventure […,] beautiful and hard as steel and [that 

	
Noisea	
79
would] make people ashamed of their existence’.35 This project 
is explicitly formulated as a means to counter the absurdity of 
his existence and thus to dissipate his nausea, to make of him a 
necessary and justified part of the universe, to absolve him of the 
‘sin of existing’.36 What should hopefully be clear by now, however, 
is that the very idea that there could exist such a story or, indeed, 
such a song is itself indicative of a certain bad faith, not because 
Roquentin has fundamentally mistaken the way in which music 
comes to be but because, just as throughout the novel he performs 
a misprision of noise, so here he chooses entirely to ignore his 
nausea as though it were a scratch on a record and to forget the 
insights gained during his illumination, namely, that even steel is 
not in fact solid and hard in an absolute sense, but also expressive.
	
As much as Roquentin may then claim to have become his 
nausea,37 ultimately he does not attend to it, or mishears it, as he 
does with noise throughout the novel. That he cannot ultimately 
accept the full ramifications of his nausea and chooses instead to 
write as a means to justify his existence and thus attain a form 
of immortality is perhaps not surprising, for, as Simon Critchley 
suggests, throughout almost its entire history philosophy has been 
obsessed with meaning and ‘the desire to master death and find 
fulfilment for human finitude’.38 Critchley argues, however, that 
it need not, indeed perhaps should not be this way since ‘Writing 
interrupts the dialectical labour of the negative, introducing into 
the Subject a certain impotence and passivity that escapes the 
movement of comprehension’.39 Citing the examples of Schlegel 
and Blanchot, Critchley suggests that it is possible to write ‘outside 
of philosophy […,] ceasing to be fascinated with the circular 
figure of the Book, the en-cyclo-paedia of philosophical science, 
itself dominated by the figures of unity and totality, which would 
attempt to master death and complete meaning by letting nothing 
fall outside of its closure’. In doing this and concentrating on 
writing, on the act of expression rather than the objects that are 
the end result of that event, ‘one is no longer attracted by the Book, 
but rather by the energy of exteriority that cannot be reduced to 
either the exteriority of Law – even the written Torah – or to the 
Aufhebung of the exteriority of Law in Christianity or dialectics: 
neither the Book of God nor the Book of Man’.40
	
Drawn towards the Book as a coherent artefact that would 
justify his existence, Roquentin ultimately turns away from this 

80	
NOISE MATTERS
energy of exteriority, abnegating his nausea as he does noise. For 
just as nausea reveals the greyness or porosity of the world to him, 
stripping him of the illusion of sovereign subjectivity, so noise is 
this very energy of exteriority at those moments when it becomes 
perceptible. To attend to noise is then to admit to the finitude of 
the contents of expression, which is to say to admit death or, after 
Blanchot, the absence of life. For noise pulls the contents of life 
and expression back to the plane from which they are enfolded 
and thus brings us to the edge of the abyss that would engulf all 
forms. It is for this reason that noise has the power to bring about 
in those who cling to a belief in sovereign individuality a feeling of 
nausea or, perhaps, abjection. Little wonder, then, that Roquentin 
ultimately turns away from nausea/noise. Not that Roquentin is 
alone, of course, for noise has often figured as a site of horror and 
a gateway to the absence of life.
Notes
  1	  Bart Kosko, Noise (London: Viking Penguin, 2006), 65.
  2	  A variant is found also, of course, in the nickname given to Balzac’s 
Catherine Lescault, ‘la Belle Noiseuse’, familiar to French ears 
nowadays mostly because of the Jacques Rivette film of this name 
that is loosely based on Balzac’s text Le Chef d’œuvre inconnu.
  3	  Michel Serres, Genesis (orig. French, 1982; Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 1995), 12.
  4	  Serres, Genesis, 13.
  5	  Jean-Paul Sartre, Nausea, trans. Robert Baldick (London: Penguin 
Books, 1965). Originally published in French as La Nausée (Paris: 
Gallimard, 1938).
  6	  Later in his career, Céline of course became famous for entirely 
different reasons, even if his stylistic innovations only increased as 
his career progressed. Indeed, if Céline is remembered for anything 
these days, it is mostly for the pseudo-fascist anti-Semitic pamphlets 
that he wrote. The inscription to Sartre’s novel comes from Céline’s 
play The Church [L’Église], written in 1933, which is to say before 
such controversies were to plague this author. It reads: ‘He is a fellow 
without any collective significance, barely an individual’.
  7	  Serres, Genesis, 12.

	
Noisea	
81
  8	  Denis Hollier, ‘La Nausée, en attendant’, in La Naissance du 
phénomène Sartre, raisons d’un success 1938–1945, ed. I Galster 
(Paris, Seuil, 2001), 95.
  9	  James Arnold, ‘La Nausée Revisited’, The French Review, 39, no. 2 
(1965), 209.
10	  See Sartre, Nausea, 14.
11	 Sartre, Nausea, 17.
12	  Sartre, Nausea, 22.
13	  Sartre, Nausea, 33.
14	  Sartre, Nausea, 33.
15	  Sartre, Nausea, 30. There are many instances of this grey colour 
palette. See also, for instance, 41, 179, 180. The use of colour and 
different kinds of light has been commented on by Woods who 
contends that the split between scenes in which there is a chiaroscuro 
effect and those in which there is a diffused, grey light corresponds to 
‘the difference between perceived phenomena and images summoned 
in the mind’, mental images being ‘conceived and understood instantly, 
as if light were evenly diffused throughout the landscape [… whilst] 
in the perceptive process, the gaze functions as the limited light source 
which allows only one or another aspect or profile of an object to be 
perceived – or illuminated – at one time’ (George Woods, ‘“Sounds, 
Smells, Degrees of Light”: Art and Illumination in Nausea’, in Sartre’s 
Nausea: Text, Context, Intertext, ed. Alistair Rolls and Elizabeth 
Rechniewski (Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, 2006), 54). I reject 
this view since the difference between these different light effects to my 
mind corresponds to different mental states when nausea/noise is either 
admitted into Roquentin’s perception of the world (both sensory and 
mental) or else elided in order to restore order and clarity.
16	  Andrew Benjamin, ‘Porosity At The Edge: Working Through Walter 
Benjamin’s “Naples”’, Architectural Theory Review, 10, no. 1 
(2005), 36.
17	  Sartre, Nausea, 182. 
18	  Sartre, Nausea, 181.
19	  Sartre, Nausea, 35.
20	  Sartre, Nausea, 182–3.
21	  Sartre, Nausea, 105, translation modified.
22	  Sartre, Nausea, 112, translation modified.
23	  Serres, Genesis, 7. One might of course object that binaurality 
and the concept of the ‘sound shadow’ cast by the head that helps 

82	
NOISE MATTERS
rather than hinders spatial localisation proves that this is not the 
case (see Prochnik, In Pursuit of Silence, 51–9 for a discussion of 
the anatomy of hearing; see also Barry Blesser and Lind-Ruth Salter, 
Spaces Speak, Are You Listening? (Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 
2007)). The point made by Serres and others like Nancy, however, is 
more phenomenological than technical. What is more, it is important 
to note the inconsistency found throughout Nausea according to 
which noises or sounds seem ‘mysterious’ or ‘suspicious’ (Nausea, 
14) yet able, when the narration turns more to a description of 
phenomenological experience rather than mere observation, to lose 
these disorienting qualities. 
24	  Much the same could be said of Jean-Luc Nancy’s work À l’écoute 
that we will encounter at various points through this book. See 
Jean-Luc Nancy, Listening, trans. Charlotte Mandell (orig. French, 
2002; Bronx, NY: Fordham University Press, 2007).
25	  Sartre, Nausea, 16, translation modified, my italics.
26	  Sartre, Nausea, 37.
27	  Sartre, Nausea, 252.
28	  Sartre, Nausea, 249. Schwartz also comments on this scene, but his 
interpretation is entirely at odds with the reading proposed here. 
For him, the jazz song is infused with noise rather than being used 
as a means to counter noise and nausea, the improvisatory nature of 
jazz meaning that the melodic line is itself contingent but attractively 
so, inspiring an almost dervish-like ecstasy in Roquentin (Hillel 
Schwartz, Making Noise: From Babel to the Big Bang and Beyond 
(New York: Zone Books, 2011), 652–3). He writes, ‘By way of jazz 
and its improvisatory “noise”, Roquentin feels himself to be dancing; 
across from him dip and spin his contingent partners, wave and 
quantum, unreachable’ (653). A close reading of the novel and the 
broader context of the ideas informing this scene, however, make 
this reading hard to sustain and counter to the philosophical position 
espoused by Sartre here.
29	  Jean-Paul Sartre, The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology 
of the Imagination, trans. Jonathan Webber (orig. French, 1940; 
London and New York: Routledge, 2004), 192. Arnold suggests that 
here, ‘we not only read a more technical description of the nature 
of the aesthetic object as conceived by Roquentin; we recognize a 
theory which Sartre claims to have formulated between the ages of 
eight and ten and which remains fundamentally unchanged through 
the writing of La Nausée some twenty years later’ (‘La Nausée 
Revisited’, 213). That there is a close correspondence between this 
idea in The Imaginary and Nausea becomes self-evident when one 

	
Noisea	
83
examines certain passages of the novel such as when, talking of the 
refrain, Roquentin says ‘It does not exist. It is even irritating in its 
non-existence; if I were to get up, if I were to snatch that record 
from the turn-table which is holding it and if I were to break it in 
two, I wouldn’t reach it. It is beyond – always beyond something, 
beyond a voice, beyond a violin note. Through layers and layers of 
existence, it unveils itself, slim and firm, and when you try to seize it 
you meet nothing but existents, you run up against existents devoid 
of meaning. It is behind them: I can’t even hear it, I hear sounds, 
vibrations in the air which unveil it. It does not exist, since it has 
nothing superfluous: it is all the rest which is superfluous in relation 
to it. It is’ (Nausea, 248).
30	  Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism 
and Schizophrenia 2, trans. Brian Massumi (orig. French, 1980; 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 261.
31	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 300. I will return at 
length to this definition of music in the final chapter of the book 
when I turn my attention towards the relation between noise and 
music.
32	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 300.
33	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 303. It should be noted 
that this analysis is not in line with Deleuze’s own conception of noise 
for in The Logic of Sense he traces the move towards sense between 
two points, from noise to voice (Gilles Deleuze, The Logic of Sense, 
trans. Mark Lester with Charles Stivale (orig. French, 1969; New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1990), 194), thereby implying 
that music (which would reside in the voice) necessitates the leaving 
behind of noise. It is important to note at this point also that I am 
not suggesting that noise is a haecceity, just as I have stressed and will 
continue to stress that noise is not coterminous with music. Rather, 
noise is the transcendental principle according to which a haecceity or 
relational ontology comes to be in the world via an expressive event. 
34	  Jean-Paul Sartre, Les Mots (Paris: Gallimard, 1964), 204.
35	  Sartre, Nausea, 252. 
36	  Sartre, Nausea, 251.
37	  See Sartre, Nausea, 182.
38	  Simon Critchley, Very Little … Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, 
Literature (London and New York: Routledge, 1997), 33.
39	  Critchley, Very Little … Almost Nothing, 33.
40	  Critchley, Very Little … Almost Nothing, 33–4.


CHAPTER THREE
Noise, Horror, Death
Do you see what I see?
* * *
Scream
Noise, in the collective imagination of Hollywood, seems to be 
indelibly associated with horror. I say this in part, of course, 
because horror movie soundtracks are often constituted almost 
entirely of noises of one kind or another: the creak of an old door 
blowing open in the wind (or being opened by an unwelcome 

86	
NOISE MATTERS
visitor); the noise of a twig snapping in a dark forest as an unseen 
presence unwittingly makes itself known sonically; the roar of a 
beast/demon/monster; the gasps of shock and screams of terror 
of a victim being pursued or devoured; the menacing orchestral 
rumbles of the soundtrack scored to build tension and menace 
and which is suddenly punctuated by the dissonant explosion of 
piercing, screeching violins as suspense gives way to action. It is not 
really noises such as this that interest me here, however, even if one 
might suggest that they often point towards the same oppositional 
order that has been attributed to noise thus far as they signal the 
presence (or approach) of a being-not-like-us, an alterity perceived 
of as threatening to the integrity of form, or life. Rather, these are 
noises because they are sounds that we do not want to hear (even 
though, of course, as horror movie spectators we do want to hear 
them, but only if they are enclosed in a safe diegetic universe on 
the silver screen where they are held at a distance and thus able 
merely to thrill and not kill). This kind of noise and the kind of 
thrill that it can engender, of course, is not particularly new and can 
be traced back to earlier cultural forms. The spooky noises from 
the soundtrack of horror movies, for instance, are closely related 
to the unexplained sounds that populate Gothic fiction commented 
on by Schwartz. He writes:
The Vampyre contributed to a definition of noise that was being 
refined in the darker recesses of the Gothic aesthetic: noise as 
sounds you do not want to identify, unforgettable sounds you 
try desperately to forget, sounds whose implications so repulse 
as to demand for sanity’s sake a generic masking – sounds that 
should be so unfamiliar as to be incomprehensible – sounds 
of cannibalism and necrophilia, of bloodsucking, of sex-unto-
death. Such noise was the acoustic underside of the sublime: if 
the sublime takes your words and breath away, at its most horri-
fying the sublime becomes noise, sounds you cannot dismiss but 
will not define, sounds you wish you had never heard.1
	
Noise emanates not only from the horrific site itself, though, 
but also from those who cross into that space and find themselves 
face to face with horror, as though noise were infectious. As Simon 
Reynolds has pointed out, noises and horror go hand in hand 
because when faced with the chaos and irrationality of horror, the 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
87
ordered forms of language crumble and leave only one possible 
noisy response. As he writes:
Noise is like an eruption within the material out of which 
language is shaped … This is why noise and horror go hand 
in hand – because madness and violence are senseless and 
arbitrary (violence is the refusal to argue) and the only response 
is wordless – to scream.2
	
In both of these cases, regardless of whether the noise is emitted 
from the horrific or the horrified, noise arises out of a troubling 
of taxonomies, it is the sound of that which does not fit within 
the bounds of an ordered and safe existence and the only possible 
response to that which cannot be contained within existing herme-
neutic categories. As Reynolds’ comments infer, however, the 
reason why horror is so troubling is perhaps precisely because it 
allows us to glimpse an alterity that is not absolute but that inhabits 
us. This is to say that if it is ‘like an eruption within the material 
out of which language is shaped’, then it is necessarily a sign of the 
formlessness out of which language struggles into existence, the 
noisy background of all expression to which language can return 
when words fail us, when we stutter, stammer or scream.3
	
In horror movies, though, this troubling of the taxonomic order 
is by no means restricted to language; on the contrary, this is the 
very essence of the operations of the horror genre that requires 
the natural order of things to be disturbed before, in most cases, 
the hero discovers the means to restore that order, always then 
maintaining the aesthetic distance necessary to send the viewer 
back into the real world. Horror movies are then filled with a more 
generalised form of noise that extends far beyond their soundtrack 
and operates as a fundamentally destabilising principle. In horror, 
this is to say, just as in communications systems, noise is that 
element which disrupts the harmony or desired configuration of the 
system from within the very materiality or expressive constraints of 
the system itself. So if the material properties of a communications 
system pre-determine to a certain extent some of the qualities of 
the content transmitted by that system, so the generic conventions 
of horror are always already imbricated in its content, pulling 
its individual expressions outwards in a move that parallels that 
taking place in the diegesis itself. What is perhaps surprising – or 

88	
NOISE MATTERS
perhaps it is not surprising at all given this double disturbance – is 
that this noise is very often explicitly figured as something that 
we recognise as noise, as something that interferes with the trans-
mission of information. What is more, in a number of films from 
the genre, this explicit figuration of noise serves also to perform a 
reflection on the material specificity of the media through which we 
make sense of the world, obviating the possibility of doing as we 
have seen Roquentin do and pretending that these mediated expres-
sions are somehow separate from reality.
Poltergeist
The 1982 Steven Spielberg-produced, Tobe Hopper-directed 
film Poltergeist begins with noise. Rather, it begins with the 
‘Star-Spangled Banner’ playing on the soundtrack, but this is 
accompanied by highly pixelated images whose subject matter 
or content is unrecognisable and which thus leaves us able only 
to discern the technological mediation at play rather than the 
content or meaning of the mediated images. It becomes clear, as the 
camera slowly tracks away from the object being filmed, that we 
are witness merely to a television set broadcasting those images of 
crude patriotic symbolism familiar to insomniacs and which play 
in the early hours of the morning in various countries around the 
world once the end of the night’s programmed schedule has been 
reached. However, being shot at first from so close as to be unrec-
ognisable, these clichéd, too well-known images do not instil in the 
viewer a comforting sense of familiarity as they are intended to but, 
rather, a certain disquiet. What is more, this disquiet is maintained 
even after the images become recognisable, classifiable within a 
semiotic order, the camera sufficiently distanced from the TV set 
for its medial noise (its pixels) to be elided in our perception as they 
coalesce into a recognisable image of something – thus allowing us 
access to the media content rather than the mechanics of the media 
itself. For no sooner does this happen than all recognisable content 
suddenly disappears to be replaced by televisual noise (or snow) 
and sonic white noise as the TV station stops broadcasting any 
meaningful content at all and thus leaves the interpretative media 
to express its pure mediality.

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
89
	
Into this shot of a television set broadcasting all that it can in the 
absence of signal – which is to say noise – wanders a dog scavenging 
for food. Its quest leads it upstairs into the kids’ bedroom where it 
wakes Carol Anne who gets up, goes downstairs, sits in front of the 
TV set and strikes up a conversation with the noise, asking what 
they look like, trying to hear them better, and responding to their 
questions by saying, finally, ‘I don’t know. I don’t know’.
	
A sudden cut takes us to more familiar territory as, over the 
opening credits, a sweeping panoramic establishing shot pans from 
an idyllic, apparently rural setting to a suburban housing devel-
opment nestled in a valley. Successive shots bring us closer and 
closer into this setting as we pass from panoramic vistas to views of 
a section of the development, to shots which follow an individual 
car making its way through these streets or show children playing. 
In contrast to the opening sequence of the film, then, here, as is 
normally the case with the establishing shots of a film, the closer we 
get to the objects we are observing, the more familiar and under-
standable they become, the more the viewer feels oriented in the 
diegetic space of the film.
	
The homely, safe, suburban condition depicted here is reinforced 
by the film’s subsequent shots which admit danger, death or 
monsters into this space in very controlled doses: mischievous kids 
with remote controlled cars conspire to bring a beer-carrying Dad 
on a bicycle crashing to the ground (but harm only the beer); a TV 
set that appears to be mysteriously changing channels of its own 
accord turns out to be merely affected by a neighbour’s remote 
control clicker which operates at the same frequency; an image 
of space aliens and monsters that fills the screen turns out to be 
nothing more than a Star Wars bedspread being fluffed by a Mom 
going about her domestic chores; a dead budgerigar is quickly 
buried and forgotten by its five-year-old owner in return for a 
goldfish; and a violent electrical storm is rendered unthreatening 
for young children firstly by counting the time between lightning 
and thunder for reassurance that it is indeed moving away and 
then, when that fails, by the safety, warmth and comfort of Mom 
and Dad’s bed.
	
It is once this calm has been restored, however, that a much 
more significant threat to order surfaces again. For in an almost 
exact replay of the film’s opening shot, as the family all sleep in 
bed together, the TV again plays the ‘Star-Spangled Banner’ and 

90	
NOISE MATTERS
accompanying patriotic images before cutting, as we now know 
it will, to visual and sonic noise. Carol Anne wakes up, crawls to 
the end of the bed, sits in front of the TV as before and watches 
intently. This time, however, in the midst of the noise, the film’s 
audience hears what sound like voices, and zones of visual noise 
are concentrated into bright star-like points. Carol Anne reaches 
out towards the TV and a smoke-like, wispy hand swirls out of 
the noise, wafts above the bed where the rest of the family still lie 
asleep and then slams into the wall above their heads in a roaring 
vortex. The entire house starts shaking, the rest of the family wake 
up, Carol Anne looks away from the noise-filled TV straight at her 
loved ones and proclaims, calmly, ‘They’re here’. From this point 
on, the poltergeists will merely do as is their nature, like the noise 
whence they issue, and disrupt the ‘right’ or desired order of things, 
sending everyday objects – including some markers of linguistic 
order, a dictionary and a record which, with the help of a compass, 
plays the ABC song – into a crazy orbit.
	
All that remains for this suburban family to do, then, is to 
restore order, to retrieve Carol Anne from the TV people who take 
her into the noise with them and, ultimately, to play out a fairly 
standard battle between good and evil – albeit it with a nerdy team 
of paranormal investigators in tow and a good dose of horror 
schlock along the way. Whilst much of this provides fairly standard 
horror fare, what is particularly interesting about Poltergeist is 
that in this struggle between good and evil or the known and the 
unknown – which in horror (and often in life) amounts to the same 
thing – the unknown (figured as noise) is seen always to subtend 
the known. The Other in whom horror resides, this is to say, is not 
an absolute alterity, a monster from a faraway place, an alien or an 
escaped madman; rather, as the film’s opening sequence analysed 
above shows us, the Other or the unknown from which horror 
issues is always present but revealed only when we look closely 
enough. For what is revealed progressively in the later stages of the 
film is that the poltergeists who inhabit this family’s home and who 
kidnap Carol Anne are not monstrous Others encroaching upon 
the suburban calm of Cuesta Verde but, rather, the rightful inhab-
itants of the land. For as we discover in the course of the film, this 
housing development has been built on top of an old graveyard, a 
plot twist which would again be fairly standard fare were it not for 
the conversations between Steve Freeling, the family Dad, and his 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
91
boss which reveal the underside of large-scale property develop-
ments such as this and which are always dependent on a great deal 
of noise, of information that people do not want to know and are 
thus deprived of or wilfully ignore. This, of course, is once again 
the very same movement witnessed in the opening shots of the film 
which show us that although the noise of the TV is most obvious 
when the broadcast signal is cut, there is always underlying any 
TV picture a great deal of noise. Indeed, every TV image is formed 
out of non-signifying elements that are markers of the material and 
technological specificities of the medium, that are necessary for the 
transmission of the broadcast content yet which cannot be read in 
the same way and which are thus generally elided entirely in order 
to concentrate on the meaningful content being broadcast, on what 
we want to see or hear.
	
Whilst Poltergeist thus situates itself squarely in the lineage of 
the horror genre in which, almost without fail, disruptive, foreign 
or monstrous elements are introduced into a familiar, ordered 
space, it puts a slight twist on this scenario by suggesting that the 
disruptive other is always present and not necessarily an outsider. 
And, whilst this is perhaps not unprecedented, what is inter-
esting for the purpose of the present study is that the ever-present 
disruptive threat to order is articulated to a parallel reflection on 
noise. Indeed, I believe that each successive iteration of the noise-
filled TV screen functions not only as a spooky event, but also 
extends the film’s horror out beyond the silver screen, indicating 
to us the audience that the message-bearing technologies of the 
information age always carry within them the potential to disrupt 
the messages they are intended faithfully to transmit. Noise of 
this kind has surely become such a common trope in horror films 
precisely because of this disruptive or contestatory potential, but 
not only because of this. Indeed, what is so horrific about noise 
in Poltergeist (and this is the case to an even greater degree in 
the other movies to be analysed subsequently) is that the possi-
bility for these apparently transparent and self-effacing media to 
assert themselves brings with it the potential for them to disrupt 
our messages, to make us passive and thus admit the possibility 
of our death. This is to say, then, that noise in the horror genre 
can become a gateway not merely to disruptive others (as it is in 
Poltergeist) but, more specifically, to death or, rather, to that which 
stands in opposition to life.

92	
NOISE MATTERS
Death
Whilst it would undoubtedly be somewhat far-fetched to suggest 
that the horror genre operates in precisely the same way as liter-
ature or writing outside philosophy in the analysis of Blanchot 
and Schlegel observed at the end of the previous chapter, there are 
nonetheless many similarities. For if, for them, literature ‘interrupts 
the dialectical labour of the negative, introducing into the subject 
a certain impotence and passivity that escapes the movement of 
comprehension, of philosophy’s obsession with meaning: the desire 
to master death and find a meaning for human finitude’,4 much of 
the time the operations of horror – and indeed noise – are ultimately 
no different. Indeed, the horror genre often relies upon an absolute 
passivity from its protagonists, a surrender to the monster or dark 
force which escapes comprehension and which ultimately leads 
to the possibility of death – a literal, sudden and gruesome death 
rather than the metaphorical deaths of Blanchot. This passivity 
(itself already a kind of death for the Cartesian subjects whose 
internal perception and agency are necessary for the constitution 
of both self and the world), this surrender to a force which escapes 
the subject’s transcendent structures of meaning is precisely the 
condition that is precipitated by noise. Noise then – and this is its 
function in Poltergeist – can act as a gateway or portal to death, 
its imposing and ineluctable presence only ever offering an absence 
of meaning, an incommensurability of interior and exterior, form 
and content and thus an absolute abnegation of the figures of unity 
and totality.
	
Given this, it should come as no surprise that, since the early days 
of the recording, communications or broadcasting technologies 
which inevitably produced noise as an unfortunate by-product of 
their primary process, people have believed that there are ghosts in 
these machines or that these machines would enable the living to 
communicate with the dead. Indeed, in the 1920s Thomas Edison 
(and Marconi similarly) conjectured that the machines he was so 
instrumental in creating might eventually enable personalities from 
a different sphere or existence to commune with those inhabiting 
our earthly world. These ideas were elaborated much further, 
however, by Friedrich Jürgenson and later by Konstantin Raudive, 
both of whose work forms the basis of the investigations of the 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
93
great number of enthusiasts (or believers?) who attempt to record 
and interpret Electronic Voice Phenomena (EVP) – as the presence 
of otherworldly voices heard in noise, static or recorded media 
more generally is now referred to.
	
The history of EVP has been briefly documented by Joe Banks 
and more fully in the context of spiritualist sound experiments by 
Anthony Enns.5 Banks, for his part, argues that there are perfectly 
rational explanations for the supposedly strange phenomenon of 
EVP, yet maintains that the practice or pseudo-science of EVP merits 
critical attention and that it is ‘of genuine anthropological interest, 
not least because the process entails the use of electronic technology 
to help construct, rationalize and validate a fundamentally anti-
scientific belief system’.6 Enns, meanwhile, links spiritualist sound 
experiments to psychoanalysis to suggest that ‘the spiritualists’ 
attempts to translate these noises into coherent ‘messages’ simply 
reveal the utter nonsense generated by the unconscious itself’ and 
that, therefore, ‘the voices of the dead represent noises that blur 
the differences between acoustic signals, psychic phenomena and 
schizophrenic hallucinations’.7 Whilst these two positions may 
appear to be fundamentally opposed to each other, Banks finding 
the phenomenon perfectly understandable and Enns maintaining 
that the practice in fact illustrates the resistance of noise to all 
forms of intellectual assimilation – be it via ‘conscious mediation 
or artistic representation’8 – both ultimately find common ground 
when talking of the impetus behind these experiments. For Banks, 
EVP experiments stem ‘from an instinct we all share – the desire to 
triumph over the tragedy of human mortality and to retain contact 
with lost friends’.9 For Enns, meanwhile, even if these experiments 
are doomed to fail because of the nonsense generated by the uncon-
scious, such practices point to a desire to recuperate the unity and 
totality of a subject perceived to have been fragmented by both the 
modern science of psychoanalysis and modern technology itself. As 
Enns writes:
Under media-technological conditions, the speaking subject is 
thus no longer able to speak for herself, as speech is no longer 
part of the self once it is recorded and broadcast. The notion of 
electrical noise as a repository for the disembodied voices of the 
dead seems to provide a vivid metaphor for the loss of the ‘self’ 
or the ‘soul’ within the electric media environment.10

94	
NOISE MATTERS
	
In both of these analyses, noise, for practitioners of EVP, seems 
to operate as a kind of suturing device, a signifier capable of sewing 
up lacks and absences – whether interpersonal as in Banks’ analysis 
or infrapersonal as in Enns’. To suggest that noise can act in this 
way is to enact a misprision of noise, however, not necessarily 
because of the fundamental meaninglessness of the unconscious in 
Enns’ analysis, but because to treat noise in this way is to imbue 
noise itself with a unifying power that it simply cannot have. 
Indeed, if the work of suture creates a falsely harmonious whole 
which appears to reconcile the various aspects of a multiple and 
contradictory reality, then noise is precisely incapable of this work 
since it refuses the very possibility of such a division between parts, 
inside and outside, form and content. This is indeed the way we 
have seen noise operating in Poltergeist, not in the slightest as a 
suturing device but, precisely, as that which confounds interior and 
exterior and which quite simply cannot be understood or assimi-
lated into an ordered system and must be gotten rid of. What is 
then particularly interesting about Poltergeist is that, ultimately, 
it actually proves Enns’ point that the dead or the other side 
to which noise can provide access is a powerful metaphor for a 
perceived loss of self or soul within the electric media environment. 
For having finally exorcised the demons from their house (which 
implodes on itself) and their life (the family leaving Cuesta Verde 
in the film’s final sequence), the film’s final shot shows the Father 
removing a television set from the motel room where they stay for 
a night en route towards a new life. However, whereas for Enns it 
is the electronic media environment generally that serves as such 
a metaphor for the loss of self in an electric media environment, 
I would contend that it is actually the noise of the media – and 
the threat of noise that constantly subtends all such media since 
they are dependent on it – that serves as a metaphor. This is to 
say, then, that in this scene it is not ultimately the TV set that is 
banished as much as its noise, the possibility that it might exceed 
human control and cease to efface itself in the transmission of 
content.11
	
Whilst the absolute incommensurability and resistance to 
containment of noise lead to its exclusion in Poltergeist, however, 
it is perfectly possible to argue that it is these very qualities which 
make others embrace it. Indeed, it is possible to extend the analyses 
of critics such as Banks and Ronell (for whom technologies such as 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
95
the telephone counter death by preserving ‘the lost “love object” 
[…] in a crypt like a mummy’12) and suggest that it is a refusal of 
the absolute posed by death that leads to a concomitant refusal of 
the absolute posed by noise and a desire to read meaning back into 
noise. For the subject who refuses the absolute meaninglessness of 
noise, noise can become simply a site in which there is an absence 
of meaning (which is not the same thing) and thus a blank space 
into which to cast one’s own projected desires – white noise as 
tabula rasa, in other words. Rather than constituting a site of the 
unhomely, noise apprehended in this manner can then become 
a haven of comfort and solace, an accessory to the process of 
mourning as the subject is able to project their own desire into 
that space.13 To embrace noise in this way, however, is to indulge 
in pareidolia, the attribution of meaning to an inherently complex 
and chaotic system lacking coherent meaning, a charge which is 
often levelled at EVP. In spite of its embrace of the phenomenon 
of EVP for its major plot line, the 2004 film White Noise (which 
begins with an inscription from Thomas Edison) occasionally 
appears to level this same charge at noise. As in Poltergeist, 
however, noise ultimately resists any containment or pareidolia 
of this kind, but rather than being merely banished as a conse-
quence and in the interests of a happy ending, noise here retains its 
disruptive potential right up until the end.
White Noise
Nobody knows whether our personalities pass on to another 
existence or sphere, but if we can evolve an instrument so 
delicate as to be manipulated by our personality as it survives 
in the next life such an instrument ought to record something.
THOMAS EDISON 1928
If the 2004 Geoffrey Sax-directed film White Noise ultimately 
does not allow noise to be integrated into a meaningful structure 
through pareidolia, at times it nonetheless suggests, somewhat 
cheekily, that EVP is nothing more than this. Indeed, early on in 
the film the main protagonist, Jonathan Rivers (played by Michael 
Keaton), goes to see EVP specialist Raymond Price (Ian McNeice) 

96	
NOISE MATTERS
following the death of the former’s wife. Price meets him and 
introduces him to another of his clients, Sarah Tate (Deborah Kara 
Unger). Sarah is in tears and having a hard time composing herself 
because, as Price explains to Rivers, they have finally, eight months 
after the death of Tate’s fiancé, had a breakthrough and understood 
what he was saying through the noise received and recorded by 
Price. As Sarah confides to Rivers, after a long period of time she 
and Price have finally made out what her fiancé was saying through 
the white noise: ‘Sarah, yes’. Sarah explains that Price thinks her 
fiancé probably will not return again and an obviously sceptical 
Rivers looks away, letting out an awkward laugh. Unperturbed, 
Sarah affirms that all is well since, as she explains: ‘I’ve heard 
what I wanted to hear’. And yet, in spite of her acceptance of this 
aspect of EVP at this time, as John Rivers becomes more and more 
obsessed by EVP and convinced that his dead wife is foretelling 
deaths in the local area before they have happened so that Rivers 
can prevent them, when he asks Sarah if she understands what he 
claims is happening she replies, ‘I can see how you’re putting it 
together, yes’.
	
For the most part, however, White Noise is far from a tongue-
in-cheek sideswipe at EVP: on the contrary, it relies for its effect on 
the audience’s suspension of disbelief and acceptance of the basic 
premise of this pseudo-science. Indeed, to lend credibility to the 
semi-‘factual’ or, rather, real-life basis of EVP, the DVD version 
of the film contains, as bonus features, a documentary on real-life 
EVP investigations, ‘actual EVP sessions’ and instructions on how 
to make EVP recordings at home.
	
If White Noise does not significantly undercut the science of 
the practice that gives the film its major plot line, however, nor is 
it content simply to allow noise to become a comforting resource, 
a medium through which to access the voices and images of lost 
loved ones, as it is for EVP practitioners (as evidenced by Banks’ 
analysis). So even though noise is at times imbued with meaning 
and thus serves to ward off the death or entropy that it represents – 
literally here since Anna Rivers communicates through noise from 
‘the other side’ in order to prevent others from passing over to that 
side – it also, as in Poltergeist, serves as a portal for a far more 
unsavoury and destructive form of behaviour. Indeed, it is through 
the noise generated for EVP sessions that the ‘men in the room’, or 
‘the ones who like damage’, as they are variously referred to in the 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
97
film, are able to pass into the ordered world of the everyday reality 
of human mortals. These ‘men in the room’ are three ghostly, 
evanescent, silhouetted figures who love to swear, scream, smash 
up apartments and schizophrenically command an earthly being to 
abduct, torture and kill women (including John’s wife, as we find 
out) and who ultimately kill John. As such, they represent not the 
homely aspect that noise can take on in pareidoliac illusions but, 
rather, its destructive potential, transgressing the ordered bounds of 
language through expletives,14 screams and pain.15 More than this, 
though, these ‘men in the room’ are able to appear as emanations 
of the noise of recorded media even though separated from that 
media and also to express themselves as the thoughts of an earthly 
servant, thus conflating interior and exterior realms, collapsing the 
strictly demarcated taxonomies of ordered human existence.
	
This is, of course, entirely understandable for a thriller-cum-
horror movie, for this genre, as suggested, is dependent upon the 
destabilisation of the homely, banal or everyday by an unhomely, 
disruptive, destructive, evil or monstrous alterity. However, White 
Noise articulates itself to another subgenre of the horror genre, 
that involving machinery out of control and that includes Pulse, 
Carrie and the Terminator series,16 and in doing this extends its 
reflection on noise out into a commentary on the very recording 
and broadcasting technologies that populate our contemporary, 
technology-filled everyday spaces. For instance, before Anna 
Rivers’ death at the very beginning of the film, the Rivers’ kitchen 
radio is heard to broadcast a mix of jumbled channels and between 
station white noise; when John asks his young son if he has been 
messing around with the radio, his son denies this. Similarly, later 
in the film John is unable to tune this same radio properly and at 
another point it turns itself on and scans through channels of its 
own free will. More technological devices start to misbehave after 
Anna’s death, of course: her cell phone inexplicably calls John’s 
even though switched off; an elevator with John in it breaks down 
between floors; and clocks seem to be forever stopping at 2:30 
a.m., presumably the time at which Anna died because it is at this 
time that she makes her attempts to contact John through noise.
	
More significantly, however, John’s own early EVP sessions 
using analogue audio and video tape technology are accompanied 
by close-up shots of the internal mechanics of these machines – tape 
spools turning, playback and recording heads coming into contact 

98	
NOISE MATTERS
with tape. Sequences showing John’s later recording sessions once 
he has made the move to digitised files and computer software for 
greater possibilities of data manipulation, meanwhile, are shot in 
such a way as to foreground the software interface and its opera-
tions with a much greater eye for detail than the exigencies of plot 
progression alone would warrant. These shots – especially those 
of the analogue equipment which, in any case, is always hooked 
up to the later, more sophisticated computer equipment – seem 
to echo the dual movement attributed to noise in the film which, 
as suggested, can act both as a homely site if used for pareidoliac 
fantasies and self-delusion, but which ultimately expresses a funda-
mentally unhomely and disruptive force. Indeed, the shots of the 
internal workings of tape equipment are in themselves somewhat 
unnerving because of the apparent automatism of technology that 
they display. Rather than serving as a positivist signifier of progress 
and modernity, then, technology in White Noise – as it was for the 
Futurists – is presented as an inherently noisy and disruptive force 
whose indifferent base materiality (when not elided in order for 
the desired content of the messages it transports to get through) 
threatens to exceed our control, to refuse complete assimilation 
into our ordered sphere. For the Futurists, unable to admit this 
lack of control, the task became to conquer noise regardless and 
to integrate it within a taxonomic, ordering system. In Poltergeist, 
technology is simply too disruptive and ultimately banished 
from the family’s life. But in White Noise, noise and technology 
ultimately prevail, for whilst John does indeed avert the death of 
the final victim of ‘the ones who like damage’, their henchman 
being shot by police alerted to their whereabouts by John, John 
himself is killed and his final appearances in the film present him 
as auditory noise.17 For after his own funeral, John turns on a car 
radio to say sorry to his son through broadcast noise and then, in 
the film’s final shot, he appears as a visual emanation emerging out 
of a noise-filled TV screen, no longer alone but reunited with his 
wife, the look on their faces indicating not eternal bliss, however, 
but, rather, continued unease and unhomeliness.
	
This final shot of White Noise articulates itself to the horror 
genre not only by introducing the crushing meaninglessness of death 
into the domestic sphere but also, as with Poltergeist, by figuring 
a cyborgian union of man and machine. For if the machines-gone-
mad horror subgenre consistently fascinates and terrifies audiences, 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
99
this fear comes not only from the potential physical damage that 
machines might do to us in that state but, far more powerfully, 
from the spectre of bodily possession, the threat of technological 
colonisation (as is made horrifyingly clear in the 1989 Shin’ya 
Tsukamoto-directed Tetsuo). Noise is, of course, particularly suited 
to this task, for it is by nature that which dissolves the clear-cut, 
sharply defined boundaries of any taxonomic order, the Aufhebung 
which brings about the dissolution of the binary. Thus, part of the 
unsettling feeling created by Carol Anne’s voice (which struggles 
to distinguish itself from the white noise of the detuned TV) and 
by the final fuzzy, noise-degraded image of John Rivers and his 
wife (who can only just be distinguished from the visual noise or 
television ‘snow’ around them) comes from the same sense of dread 
that has confronted audiences faced with those cyborgian conju-
gations that have provided horror (and science fiction) so much 
fertile ground to exploit in films such as Metropolis, Tetsuo, the 
Terminator films, Robocop, Videodrome, Event Horizon, Alien, 
Scanners …
	
This cyborgian horror subgenre is given a particularly inter-
esting twist in the last film to be examined here, Gore Verbinski’s 
The Ring (2002), the Hollywood remake of the Japanese Ringu 
(2000, directed by Hideo Nakata) and in which, once again, 
televisual noise acts both as a portal between the realms of the dead 
and the domestic spaces of the living, but in which the material 
logic of technology – which is akin to saying its noise – is seen to 
overtake the human entirely.18
The Ring
The Ring begins at a sleepover, as two teenage girls, Katie and 
Becca, try to scare each other by telling the story of a videotape 
containing nightmarish images that, so urban legend has it, kill. 
Indeed, it would appear that anyone who watches this tape – which 
starts with televisual white noise, of course – receives, as soon as it 
has finished, a telephone call from someone who says merely ‘seven 
days’, this being the number of days anyone who has watched the 
tape has left to live. Katie claims, however, that this is not merely 
an urban legend and that she saw the tape a week before with 

100	
NOISE MATTERS
four friends at a cabin in the woods. She explains that during a 
weekend away, her friends had tried to record a football game on a 
tape which, when played back, contained instead ‘something else’, 
nightmarish images from another place that they had attributed 
merely to a bad signal in the cabin. But as soon as the tape had 
finished, Katie continues, the phone rang. Sure enough, seven days 
later, which is to say later during the night of the sleepover, the TV 
in Katie’s house turns itself on to a detuned channel broadcasting 
noise and Katie – along with the three friends who have also seen 
the tape, as we later find out – dies, her heart simply stopping, 
inexplicably. Whilst we do not actually see her death, Becca, who 
does, is driven insane by what she has seen and is subsequently 
incapable of looking at a television.
	
Katie, as it happens, is the cousin of a young boy, Aidan, 
whose mother Rachel (Naomi Watts) is an investigative journalist. 
Rachel decides to discover precisely what happened to Katie 
and thus eventually comes across the tape, which she watches. 
The phone rings, the voice speaks, and Rachel, mysteriously, 
becomes not so much unphotogenic as unphotographable, her face 
appearing distended and blurred on any photograph taken of her. 
Understandably keener than ever to solve the mystery, she shows 
the tape to Noah, a friend (and father of her son as it turns out) 
who is a photographer and an expert in audio-visual technology. 
Noah is puzzled by the tape because it sends the counters of his 
professional video editing machines haywire, as does a copy of 
the tape that Rachel has made, a phenomenon that indicates to 
him that, inexplicably, there is no control track and thus no way 
of telling where, when or on what kind of equipment the tape 
was made. Whilst looking at the tape with Noah, Rachel thinks 
she sees something at the very edge of the frame and so they try 
manually to manipulate the playback head to stretch the alignment 
of the tracking out far enough to reveal the very outside portion 
of the image. The machine – whose automated mechanics do not 
take kindly to this kind of abuse – resists this manhandling, the 
recording head spinning wildly and cutting Rachel. Unperturbed, 
Rachel takes the tape to a professional video laboratory where 
the machines’ tracking capability is much greater. Examining the 
video frame by frame and pulling the tracking out as far as it will 
go, Rachel manages to see a lighthouse – a landmark which will 
eventually allow her to pinpoint this landscape geographically 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
101
and thus uncover the provenance of the tape. Whilst doing this, 
however, she also notices a fly on the screen which, strangely, does 
not seem to be pixelated like the rest of the image, and which seems 
to move very slightly even when the image is frozen. Puzzled by 
this, Rachel reaches for the fly and is able to pick it off the screen 
– our first indication that the noise of the TV (figured here as a 
pixelated video image) serves here once again as a portal to another 
realm.
	
Further investigations reveal a mysterious chain of events 
resulting in the deaths of many horses on the island where this 
lighthouse is to be found and Rachel, convinced that the tape is 
linked to these events and, more specifically, to Richard and Anna 
Morgan, the stable owners whose horses were dying, sets off to the 
island (keener than ever to solve this mystery now that her son has 
also watched the tape) whilst Noah goes to a psychiatric hospital 
to look up Anna Morgan’s medical records. In the end it transpires 
that Richard and Anna, after years of trying for a baby and 
numerous miscarriages, eventually left this island to return later 
with a daughter, Samara, whom they claimed to have adopted. 
Shortly after this, however, Anna started having nightmarish 
visions which came, she says, only when she was near Samara and 
which threatened to drive her insane. In order to separate Samara 
from her mother, therefore, Richard Morgan built a room for 
Samara in the attic of the stables where she had only a television 
set for company and where the whinnying of the horses prevented 
her from sleeping. Samara thus, we presume from the information 
given, projected mental images into the horses’ minds, images so 
terrible that the horses bolted from their stables, jumped through 
fences and ran straight into the sea in order to drown themselves. 
To try and put a stop to this, Anna and Samara visited the local 
doctor who referred them to a mental institution on the mainland 
where Samara was of great interest and the subject of great 
puzzlement to the doctors because of her ability to create images 
(similar to those on the videotape) directly onto photographic 
media, images that are called in the film projected thermographies 
and which resemble photograms.19
	
The various strands of this story are gradually pieced together 
by both Rachel (at the Morgan’s property on the island) and by 
Noah (in the mental institution’s record room), and both eventually 
end up in Samara’s stable room where they see a charred section 

102	
NOISE MATTERS
of wall through a gap in the wallpaper that turns out to be part of 
the silhouette of a tree, burnt into the wood by Samara’s projected 
thermic thoughts. Rachel recognises this tree as one she has seen 
near the cabin where the videotape was first seen by Katie and her 
friends, and so she and Noah return there.
	
Back at the cabin, a damp, mouldy patch on the floor alerts 
them to something mysterious below the cabin and they break 
through the floor to discover a well covered with a large circular 
stone. A flashback informs us, as Rachel puts the pieces of the 
puzzle together, that Samara’s mother partially suffocated her 
daughter before throwing her into this well where she survived for 
seven days, the last images she saw being the tree near the well and 
the stone cover being pushed over the well, eclipsing all light until 
only a ring of light remained (both of these images featuring promi-
nently on the videotape). Realising that this is Samara’s final resting 
place, Rachel considers how to climb down into the well. But 
Samara beats her to it: the television in the cabin above switches 
itself on to a channel of noise, Samara seeps out of the screen as 
water and unscrews the floorboard bolts in such a way as to send 
the noise-filled television careering down a slope, striking Rachel 
(who is already unbalanced by a swarm of flies that shot out of the 
well when they removed the cover) and knocking her into the well.
	
Down in the well, Rachel finally realises the full extent of 
Samara’s tragic end and cradles the intact body she finds which, at 
the moment of final revelation, quickly decomposes in her arms. 
For Rachel this is a sign that the nightmare is over and that her 
son is safe, but Aidan begs to differ and, indeed, the burn marks on 
his arm and the death of Noah seven days after he had originally 
seen the tape suggest that Aidan is right. Rachel thus tries to work 
out what she had done differently from Noah, why she has not 
died but he has, and she realises that the only difference is that she 
had made a copy of the tape and had shown it to Noah. Given her 
realisation that the images created by Samara were symptomatic 
only of a desire to be heard and not locked away and ignored, 
Rachel concludes that if Aidan makes a tape which is then seen by 
someone else, he too will be safe. The final sequence of the film thus 
shows Rachel and Aidan making another copy of the tape which 
ends (as does the film in its final images, except for one final accel-
erated rush of the nightmarish images on the tape) with a screen 
full of noise.

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
103
	
By ending in noise, the film of course naturally opens itself up to 
the possibility of a sequel – and, indeed, the Japanese original now 
has both a sequel (directed by Hideo Nakata again) and a prequel, 
whilst Ringu 2 was remade for American audiences in 2005 (the 
Hollywood remake also directed by Nakata) – since noise in these 
films acts in part as a portal to another place. But more than this, 
by ending in noise, The Ring, like White Noise, albeit in a different 
manner, also shows the ultimate triumph of technology in itself 
(and not technology as a self-effacing medium) over the human, 
and this in spite of the fact that Aidan’s death is averted.
	
To assert that it is technology that triumphs over the human 
mortals of The Ring may appear somewhat puzzling, since it is 
not so much the technology of the videotape and television which 
ultimately kills people in The Ring as much as the horror instilled 
in people at the sight of Samara, a ghost. However, it is important 
to remember that not only does Samara enter the earthly realm 
through the portal afforded by televisual noise, but that she is also 
effectively a technological recording mechanism. This is to say that 
it is Samara’s ability to thermographically project images on to 
various media (be it photographic plates, videotape, human flesh 
or barn walls) that instigates the process which ultimately ends in 
the death of those who watch this tape.
	
What is more, as Rachel deduces at the end of the film, the only 
way for an individual to save him/herself from this death is to make 
a copy of the tape and to show that copy to someone else, which 
is to say that the individual must submit to the duplicatory logic 
of recording media in the modern age of technological reproduc-
ibility.20 This very logic, of course, was horrendous for Walter 
Benjamin because it effectively banished the human (figured in the 
artwork through the concept of aura) from the artwork, and it is a 
site of horror for humankind in The Ring because the only way to 
achieve individual salvation is to propagate death as a reproducible 
or viral entity. This is also why we can say that The Ring ends 
with the triumph of technology or, more specifically, the triumph 
of the noise of technology: not only because the film literally ends 
with noise, but also because the ending that is left open promises 
a further proliferation of death – and therefore meaninglessness 
which we generally attempt to keep at bay – and the potential or 
necessity for the singular to become multiple, to become, then, 
following Serres, noise.

104	
NOISE MATTERS
Abject?
If Roquentin’s nauseous insights enable him to intuit the noise of 
existence that ultimately renders life meaningless, in the end he 
chooses to ignore this noise and to invent a meaning for himself, 
just as he ignores the noise of the vinyl record in order to transcend 
the materiality and thus entropy of existence. In the films examined 
here, noise is not so easily ignored and it comes to act as a force 
which is fundamentally opposed to the human and thus becomes 
a site of dread and horror which must be banished entirely if it is 
not to continue to haunt or terrorise us. That noise should come 
to occupy such a space in horror films is perhaps not surprising, 
for horror brings us face to face with what we do not want to see, 
just as common sense definitions of noise figure it as that part of a 
signal that we wish to eradicate or as that which we do not want to 
hear. The links between noise and horror, however, go deeper than 
this since, as we have seen, horror often performs a dramatization 
of the dissolution of order, whilst noise is that which reveals the 
processual nature of all being, which dissolves the (desired) clear-cut 
division between categories: animate and inanimate matter, self and 
other, subject and object, form and content, life and death. Pulling 
any illusory sense of sacrosanct interiority out of itself towards the 
outside in which it is situated and of which it is but a temporary 
infolding, noise has much in common with another common 
horror trope, the abject, and it can thus act as a similar site of 
repulsion for the subject concerned with the clear delimitation of 
its own borders – an instinctual, autoimmune response. The points 
of contact between noise and the abject as presented in the work of 
Julia Kristeva on this subject, indeed, are potentially so numerous 
that it is worth pausing for a moment to see if in fact her work 
already holds the key to understanding how something like noise 
can be embraced rather than rejected/attenuated.
	
For Kristeva, the abject describes a state much like that in which 
Roquentin finds himself before the tree root, since it is ‘Neither 
subject, nor object’, but, rather, a transgressive site. She writes:
	
There looms, within abjection, one of those violent, dark 
revolts of being, directed against a threat that seems to emanate 
from an exorbitant outside or inside, ejected beyond the scope 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
105
of the possible, the tolerable, the thinkable. It lies there, quite 
close, but it cannot be assimilated. […]
	
[…] The abject has only one quality of the object – that 
of being opposed to I. If the object, however, through its 
opposition, settles me within the fragile texture of a desire for 
meaning, which, as a matter of fact, makes me ceaselessly and 
infinitely homologous to it, what is abject, on the contrary, the 
jettisoned object, is radically excluded and draws me toward the 
place where meaning collapses.21
In this description can be found most of the elements of the 
taxonomy of the ontology of noise that we have proposed. What 
is more, if we look at other aspects of Kristeva’s work we might be 
tempted to think that the semiotics or sémanalyse that she proposes 
is ultimately little different from the approach to be taken here 
that sets out to examine the noise of texts and expression. Indeed, 
laying out her project as an affront or challenge to the prevailing 
norms of literary, linguistic and semiologic methods of the time, 
Kristeva begins her work Séméiotiké22 as follows: 
To make of language a work – ποιείν –, to work in the materiality 
of what is, for society, a means of contact and understanding, 
is this not already to make oneself a stranger to language? The 
so-called literary act, by not admitting an ideal distance in 
relation to that which signifies, introduces a radical alterity into 
the supposed function of language: to convey meaning.23
Working on the very materiality of language as opposed to its 
content, in the face of which language effaces itself entirely in the 
analytic methodologies critiqued in this passage, Kristeva proposes 
that language and knowledge be examined not as systems from 
which meaning can be extrapolated but, rather, through their 
systemic functionality. What is proposed, then, is ‘a materialist 
gnoseology, which is to say a scientific theory of signifying systems 
in history and of history as a signifying system’.24
	
The difference between what Kristeva sets out to analyse 
through this sémanalyse or gnoséologie matéraliste (as her very 
terminology indicates) and the operations of noise as understood 
here is that, even though she is at pains to ensure that the system 
itself never becomes petrified into a disposition but remains, 

106	
NOISE MATTERS
rather, only a series of articulations, and although she ensures 
that the influence of the system in the analysis of the enunciations 
emanating from it is never left aside, these enunciations are always 
thetic and, as such, always still a carrier of sense or signifiance, 
whereas noise is opposed to meaning. That this is the case for her 
becomes very clear in her second major work, La Révolution du 
langage poétique,25 but it is already apparent in Séméiotiké where 
she talks not of semiotics but, rather, ‘a semiotic level, which is that 
of the axiomatization, or formalization of signifying systems’.26
	
Another site of apparent similarity yet ultimate difference 
can be found in Kristeva’s use of Plato’s chora. Like noise, in 
Kristeva’s use of this concept, chora only arises in expression 
itself for she uses the term to denote ‘an essentially mobile and 
extremely provisional articulation constituted by movements and 
their ephemeral stases’.27 Similarly, it is both constitutive of yet 
resistant to expression since ‘discourse – all discourse – moves with 
and against the chora in the sense that it simultaneously depends 
upon and refuses it’.28 Like noise, it is possible to talk of a topology 
(or ontology) of chora for it can be situated, but because it is 
always mobile ‘one can never give it axiomatic form’.29 Once again, 
however, Kristeva ultimately wishes ‘to read in this rhythmic space, 
which has no thesis and no position, the process by which signi-
fiance is constituted’, considering it to be, then, if not a correlate of 
signifiance, then certainly subsumed under it.30 So even though the 
semiotic chora is the precondition of the thetic,31 it is figured also 
as but ‘a modality of signifiance in which the linguistic sign is not 
yet articulated as the absence of an object and as the distinction 
between real and symbolic’.32 The reason for this becomes clear 
later on when Kristeva writes:
	
Once the break instituting the symbolic has been established, 
what we have called the semiotic chora acquires a more precise 
status. Although originally a precondition of the symbolic, 
the semiotic functions within signifying practices as the result 
of a transgression of the symbolic. Therefore the semiotic 
that ‘precedes’ symbolization is only a theoretical supposition 
justified by the need for description.33
	
The chora can only stand as the precondition of the symbolic, 
then, in abstract theorisations (as we have suggested, perhaps, 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
107
of white noise), for as soon as it enters into the real it can do so 
only as part of a signifying regime. To point this out is not to 
attempt to invalidate Kristeva’s analyses, merely to indicate that 
her approach, situated firmly within psychoanalytic, gnostic and 
linguistic domains, is unable to move beyond a human disposition, 
and this is the move that an analysis of noise requires us to make. 
Thus, the only way for Kristeva to reconcile her promulgation of a 
non-axiomatic structure and open systems with the fixity of human 
perception (for the human subject is of fundamental importance 
in all of her work) is to establish her semiotics, as Toril Moi puts 
it, ‘as a science which seeks to represent that which per definition 
cannot be represented: the unconscious’.34
	
The abject, however, seems to occupy a somewhat different 
position in Kristeva’s work, for even though it is still used within 
a psychoanalytic enterprise (especially in the latter half of Powers 
of Horror in which she analyses the work of Louis-Ferdinand 
Céline), the abject has the potential to effect a far more radical 
negation than the reformulation of Hegel’s Negativät found in La 
Révolution du language poétique, to take us far further from the 
human. Indeed, the abject is said to bring about:
A massive and sudden emergence of uncanniness, which, 
familiar as it might have been in an opaque and forgotten 
life, now harries me as radically separate, loathsome. Not me. 
Not that. But not nothing, either. A ‘something’ that I do not 
recognize as a thing. A weight of meaninglessness, about which 
there is nothing insignificant, and which crushes me. On the 
edge of non-existence and hallucination, of a reality that, if I 
acknowledge it, annihilates me.35
Reading this description, one could be forgiven for thinking that it 
came from Sartre’s Nausea; if we are to attend to noise, however, 
we must not do as Roquentin or Kristeva’s subject faced with the 
abject, running away out of fear or turning away in disgust.36 
Rather, we must allow that which annihilates the interiority of the 
privileged term in any dialectic – self (other), life (death), content 
(form) – to do precisely this. We must, this is to say, open ourselves 
up to the abject, become nauseous. Far from returning us to a 
regime of signification, to do this will place us on a constantly 
shifting ground with no coordinates, for it will be to attend to the 

108	
NOISE MATTERS
plane of immanence as this becomes perceptible as it is contracted 
into expression. Neither plane nor contracted form, neither form 
nor content, medium nor message but, rather, the subsidiary result 
(not goal) of the assemblage formed between any such dialectical 
pair in the operation of Aufhebung, noise not only resists, subsists, 
persists, coexists and obsists but also intersists.
	
Ultimately, noise as I wish to engage with it here is not then 
synonymous with the abject, or rather, the abject does not hold the 
key to understanding how we might embrace noise, for the very 
nature of the abject ultimately forces us to reject its operations and 
to bring it back within some kind of seemingly ordered system. 
This is the very same movement that we find again and again in 
the horror genre, indeed it is perhaps the defining aspect of the 
classical horror movie. As Isabel Cristina Pinedo writes: ‘In horror, 
irrational forces disrupt the social order. The trajectory of the 
classical narrative is to deploy science and force […] to restore the 
rational, normative order’.37 As we have seen previously, then, in 
the horror genre noise is ultimately figured as a disruptive element 
only to be gotten rid of. Or is it? For whilst it is a fairly common 
trope in horror for the audience to be left with one final indication 
that the monster is not completely dead, that the threat to order 
remains even though calm seems to have been restored, all of the 
films examined here show in different ways that noise can never 
in fact be gotten rid of, and the best we can do is then to try and 
ignore it, like Roquentin.
	
This of course is easy to do in the horror movie genre, for 
even though the noise remains at the end of the film, we, the 
audience, turn our backs on it and return to our normal lives. It 
is not surprising that we do so, for we, like Roquentin, are under-
standably not keen to remain in the state of paranoia, uncertainty 
and fear that the threat of dissolution and irreducibility of noise 
represents for the characters in these films. As should be clear by 
now, however, I believe that it is important and necessary not to 
turn our backs on noise, not to figure it as that which we would 
prefer to elide, sublimate or ignore, not to perpetuate the bad faith 
of Roquentin. I believe, indeed, that it is precisely because of the 
meaninglessness that it brings to the heart of transcendent beliefs, 
because of the regime of multiplicity that it brings into being that 
we must figure noise not as a site of horror or that which we must 
eradicate but, on the contrary, as a site through which we are able to 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
109
entertain a more productive relation with the world. I believe, this 
is to say, that when the operations of noise that are figured in the 
horror movie are positively valorised, they can be apprehended not 
as threatening but, rather, able to resonate strongly with the kinds 
of politics of difference espoused by poststructuralist philosophers 
such as Deleuze and Guattari, Derrida and Cixous. These thinkers 
argue for an end to ‘meaningful’ metaphysics and human-centred 
perspectives not in order to usher in a new era of horror but, rather, 
as an eminently optimistic move intended to expand the bounds of 
human experience and possibility beyond the limiting confines that 
will constrain us for as long as belief in such transcendent structures 
endures. Thus, what I will attempt to do later in this book is to see 
how noise can be deployed or apprehended in such a way as to not 
strike fear or repulsion into the heart of those who hear it or see it.
	
This, though, will not always be an easy task, for if the abject 
does not resist (in the sense that we have given this term here), 
noise as I wish to understand it here, conversely, does not always 
insist as the abject seems to.38 Whilst the kinds of noise described 
by common sense definitions of noise do indeed insist, desecrating 
soundscapes or interfering with communications channels, the 
kind of noise that interests me, not without a little irony, does not 
generally insist or impose itself in this way. On the contrary, the 
kind of noise that I am listening for effaces itself all too easily in 
the service of the contents of expression – some obvious exceptions 
to this rule being found, of course, in the works to be analysed in 
later chapters and in which we find a noise that is foregrounded as 
an invitation to attend to it or a more generalised noisy principle. 
There are many ways in which this happens, but one of the most 
frequent comes about due to the ways in which noise takes on a 
different colour across time.
Notes
  1	  Hillel Schwartz, Making Noise: From Babel to the Big Bang and 
Beyond (New York: Zone Books, 2011), 165.
  2	  Simon Reynolds, Blissed Out (London: Serpent’s Tail, 1990), 60.
  3	  This is consistent with Elaine Scarry’s comments on screams of pain 
that bring about ‘an immediate reversion to a state anterior to language, 

110	
NOISE MATTERS
to the sounds and cries a human being makes before language is 
learned’ (Elaine Scarry, The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking 
of the World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985), 4).
  4	  Simon Critchley, Very Little … Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, 
Literature (London and New York: Routledge, 1997), 33.
  5	  Joe Banks, ‘Rorschach Audio: Ghost Voices and Perceptual 
Creativity’, Leonardo Music Journal, 11 (2001); Anthony Enns, 
‘Voices of the Dead: Transmission / Translation / Transgression’, 
Culture, Theory and Critique, 46, no. 1 (2005).
  6	  Banks, ‘Rorschach Audio’, 77.
  7	  Enns, ‘Voices of the Dead’, 12.
  8	  Enns, ‘Voices of the Dead’, 12.
  9	  Banks, ‘Rorschach Audio’, 82.
10	  Enns, ‘Voices of the Dead’, 26.
11	  This very idea itself, of course, is the subject of a whole separate horror 
subgenre populated with various kinds of cyborgian conjugations.
12	  Avital Ronell, The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, 
Electric Speech (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989), 341. 
13	  It is the phenomenon of projection which forms the basis of Banks’ 
analysis and which renders EVP an understandable phenomenon 
due to his contention that projection ‘underpins the whole process 
of perception’ (‘Rorschach Audio’, 78). For Ronell, rather than a 
projection it is more a case of a deferral of the process of mourning 
in which there is an attempt to negate death entirely (The Telephone 
Book, 59).
14	  For a discussion of this phenomenon, see Alphonso Lingis, ‘Contact 
and Communication’, in The Obsessions of Georges Bataille: 
Community and Communication, ed. Andrew J. Mitchell and Jason 
Kemp Winfree (New York: State University of New York Press, 
2009), 130.
15	  On the relationship between pain and language, see Scarry, The 
Body in Pain, 55.
16	  This is the case in Poltergeist only to a very limited extent, the 
loss of control of technology that televisual noise represents being 
prefigured by the humorous incident involving the neighbour’s duel 
with conflicting TV remotes.
17	  It should be remembered that, in all of these examples, I am referring 
to noise as it is explicitly figured, rather than noise as an operational 
and ontological principle. 

	
Noise, Horror, Death	
111
18	  Even though the plots of the Japanese original and the Hollywood 
remake are essentially the same, there being only minor variations, the 
analysis to follow cannot be applied to the Japanese original which does 
not employ noise as a trope nearly as consistently as the Hollywood 
version, nor does it contain the same level of reflection on the material 
ontology of the technology so integral to the plot development of the 
Hollywood remake, relying instead on more supernatural elements.
19	  The process termed in the film projected thermography is more 
usually known in English as thoughtography, itself an English 
equivalent of the Japanese nensha.
20	  See Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction’, in Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn (orig. German, 
1936; Fontana Press, London, 1992).
21	  Julia Kristeva, Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection, trans. Leon 
S. Roudiez (orig. French, 1980; New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1982).
22	  Published as Σημειωτική: Recherches pour une sémanalyse (Paris: 
Seuil, 1969).
23	  Julia Kristeva, ‘Le texte et sa science’, in Σημειωτική: Recherches 
pour une sémanalyse (Paris: Seuil, 1969), 7; my translation.
24	  Kristeva, ‘Le texte et sa science’, 22; my translation.
25	  Julia Kristeva, La Révolution du langage poétique: l’avant-garde à 
la fin du XIXe siècle. Lautréamont et Mallarmé (Paris: Seuil, 1974), 
published in abridged form as Revolution in Poetic Language, 
trans. Margaret Waller (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1984). See also the extract published in The Kristeva Reader, ed. 
Toril Moi, trans. Margaret Waller (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 
90–136.
26	  This chapter of Kristeva Séméiotiké appears in translation as Julia 
Kristeva, ‘Semiotics: A Critical Science and/or a Critique of Science’, 
in The Kristeva Reader, ed. Toril Moi, trans. Seán Hand (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1986). See 77.
27	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 93.
28	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 94.
29	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 94.
30	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 94.
31	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 103–4.
32	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 94.
33	  Kristeva, The Kristeva Reader, 118.

112	
NOISE MATTERS
34	  Toril Moi in her introduction to Kristeva, ‘Semiotics: A Critical 
Science and/or a Critique of Science’, in The Kristeva Reader, ed. 
Toril Moi, trans. Seán Hand (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 75.
35	  Kristeva, Powers of Horror, 2.
36	  See Kristeva, Powers of Horror, 1.
37	  Isabel Cristina Pinedo, ‘Postmodern Elements of the Contemporary 
Horror Film’, in The Horror Film, ed. Stephen Prince (Piscataway, 
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004), 95. In contrast, as Pinedo 
continues, ‘the postmodern narrative is generally unable to overcome 
the irrational, chaotic forces of disruption’.
38	  Kristeva writes that abjection ‘beseeches, worries, and fascinates 
desire [yet] does not let itself be seduced’ (Powers of Horror, 1).

PART 2


CHAPTER FOUR
On the Difficulties of 
Attending to Noise
‘Old Vintage Typewriter’. © Alexanderf, Stock Free Images & Dreamstime 
Stock Photos, http://www.stockfreeimages.com/ October 28, 2012.
* * *
On failing to see noise
There exist today numerous computer fonts already integrated into 
operating systems or available for download that, at first glance, 

116	
NOISE MATTERS
appear to be what we might call noisy, which is to say that they 
draw attention to the materiality of the communicative medium 
that brings the expression or meaning that they carry to perception. 
As an example, let us consider the font ‘Moms Typewriter’ 
by Christoph Mueller,1 itself a noisier version of ‘Typist’, the 
more common Sierra On-Line, Inc./WSI font found on many 
PCs. ‘Moms Typewriter’, as its name suggests, is an eminently 
nostalgic product, intended to emulate the print of old pre-electric 
typewriters. Its individual letters are designed to evoke in us a 
sense of pathos: the filled-in lower bowl of the ‘g’, the too-thick 
bowl of the ‘b’, and the ‘e’ which sits just above the median line 
at a slightly rakish angle all proof of the overwork to which this 
machine has been subject, like Mom. Certainly they are both past 
their retirement age, but they are somehow more endearing in their 
slight incompetence as they cannot fail to make us nostalgically 
recall what they once were. Given this, it is tempting to assume that 
this nostalgic movement takes us back to a time when things were 
somehow more real: the ink spatters around each letter’s already 
fuzzy outline seem intended to give an impression of the physicality 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
117
of the medium, of the finger strength and effort needed to depress 
each key with sufficient force for it to slam the typebar into the 
ribbon and make it relinquish some of its inky load onto the paper 
that it almost embosses in the process. But perhaps this is not the 
case, perhaps this is a lure. Perhaps this font is tied to simulacrum 
not only because no such effort is required to produce its forms on 
a modern-day computer keyboard, not only because the nostalgic 
past to which it harkens back is one that virtually no modern-day 
PC user will have lived,2 but also because the past that it seeks to 
invoke was itself only ever a simulacrum which was never imbued 
with the physical reality attributed to it by this hyper-simulacral 
recreation of it.
	
By this I mean quite simply that what is now perceived as 
different from our present, less physical and somehow less real 
technologies would not have been perceived any differently from 
how we perceive our own present technology by the original users 
of the kind of antique typewriter that would have produced the 
‘genuine’ version of a font such as ‘Moms Typewriter’. The physical 
act of typing, that is to say, would not have seemed to require almost 
superhuman finger strength for fingers trained on an Underwood, 
and the imperfections of the type produced, the noise that resists by 
both rendering transmission of the message more difficult and by 
signalling the material reconfiguration required for expression to 
come into being, would not have been attended to in this same way. 
Indeed, the ink spatters and uneven lines reproduced by Mueller 
as a nostalgic simulacrum would not have caused those reading 
the text produced by an Underwood in the early twentieth century 
to pause and reflect on the physical mechanisms that printed the 
letters on the page because, as Krapp points out, ‘it seems entirely 
intuitive for us in using any artificial channel to separate noise 
from signal, to filter the transmission’.3 Hence, precisely as is the 
case for you reading this now, the physical presence of each letter, 
the materiality of the medium and its technology, would be entirely 
effaced and subsumed by a desire to understand the text’s less 
concrete and more elusive aspect, its meaning.4
	
To put this another way, we might use an analogy proposed 
by Beatrice Warde (or, to use the pen name she adopted at the 
start of her writing career, Paul Grandjean) in 1932. At this time, 
arguably the golden age of the Underwood and its competitors, 
Warde suggested that the book typographer’s job was to aim at a 

118	
NOISE MATTERS
kind of total transparency, to create a window ‘between the reader 
inside the room and that landscape which is the author’s words’.5 
If the typographer were to create a too-elaborate font that the 
reader would contemplate for its own inherent beauty, that font 
would be not so much a plain window as ‘a stained-glass window 
or marvellous beauty, but a failure as a window’ since it would 
become ‘something to be looked at, not through’. If destined for 
a book or text whose interest would lie in the meaning behind its 
letters, such a font would thus necessarily be a failure. To believe 
that the font produced by an Underwood in 1932 was intended not 
to enable the communication of a meaning but to be contemplated 
for its own characteristics is undeniably a mistaken reaction to it, 
yet this is precisely the nostalgic reaction that the visual noise of 
‘Moms Typewriter’ elicits. In this font, then, noise is foregrounded 
in such a way as to suggest a more embodied, physical past era 
different from our own, a suggestion which is entirely misleading 
since this noise would in actuality never have been apprehended 
in this way in the past that is supposedly being reverted to. Put 
simply, the promise of ‘Moms Typewriter’ (for all nostalgia implies 
a promise, the promise of a return to a longed-for past) is a lie since 
it emulates as noisy (or opaque) a font that was only ever intended 
to be silent and transparent.
	
This is not to say, of course, that these ink spatters and other 
markers of the material system that brings this expression into 
being are not noise; it is to say that in their own time they would 
not have been recognised as such and that it is, then, only retro-
spectively, when a new representational norm has come into being, 
that this noise becomes perceptible or, rather, that it is consciously 
attended to. Indeed, if a new technology is able to take hold (and 
this is the logic of advances in high-fidelity reproduction) and 
supplant its predecessor, this (up until the advent of the MP3 or 
other download formats6) will be because of its (apparent) success 
in effacing such medial noise to a higher degree than was previously 
possible.
	
A similar mechanism that employs a more literal form of noise 
can be found in the contemporary musical realm where noises 
such as vinyl cracks and pops and tape hiss, noises that should 
theoretically have been totally eradicated by the high-fidelity 
ideals of the digital age, are added to recordings. Indeed, digital 
production suites such as Pro-Tools have patches written into them 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
119
that allow the user to degrade the sound produced with noise, to 
overlay it with vinyl cracks and pops, and the use of such devices 
can be found in the full gamut of contemporary popular music, 
from David Bowie to Biohazard, Everything But the Girl to Type 
O Negative, Janet Jackson to Jet, Incubus to XTC, Bon Jovi to 
Madonna. As is the case with ‘Moms Typewriter’, it is easy to 
interpret the addition of such counterfeit noise to clean digital 
products as a nostalgic move that is tied up with a desire to return 
to a time when the world was less virtual, more concrete and real, 
music having become as evanescent and virtual as hypertext in the 
online environment. Such is precisely what is suggested by Yochim 
and Biddinger who note that ‘Throughout both their history and 
in the contemporary moment, vinyl records have been articu-
lated with human characteristics, such as fallibility, warmth and 
mortality, which, for record enthusiasts, imbue vinyl with authen-
ticity’.7 As a result, therefore, ‘when vinyl collectors expound upon 
the aesthetic, tactile and sonic superiority of records, they are 
not simply romanticizing the past but are articulating an abstract 
relationship between technology and humanity by grounding it in 
more concrete qualities’.8
	
Something similar is suggested by Stan Link in his article ‘The 
Work of Reproduction in the Mechanical Aging of an Art: Listening 
to Noise’, where he interprets the use of such noise as an ageing 
mechanism intended to imbue music with a pseudo-authenticity.9 
The noise that Link analyses is, of course, counterfeit or simulacral 
noise, added in postproduction as opposed to produced by and in 
the generation or transmission of musical expressions, vinyl noise 
being digitally grafted onto content that required no vinyl at any 
point in its passage into perception. Indeed, if, as John Corbett 
notes, the sound of vinyl noise ‘draws attention to the record’s 
blackness, its roundness, its materiality – in short, to its visual 
presence’,10 then the grafting of such sounds onto a medium that 
looks so different and whose material processes are so radically 
different from vinyl’s creates a radical disjunct of form and content.
	
There is then a considerable irony in the fact that such noise is 
intended to imbue digital products with a certain authenticity and 
nostalgically hark back to a time when things were different. What 
is more, as was the case with ‘Moms Typewriter’, to present this 
noise as an embellishment to which we as listeners should attend 
is to forget that, in the nostalgic past this noise aims to evoke, 

120	
NOISE MATTERS
this noise was never intended to be heard. Indeed, like the viewer 
who tries not to see the glass in front of the painting she wishes to 
contemplate, the hiss, cracks and pops born of the contact between 
stylus and vinyl were, for the pre-CD era music lover, merely an 
unfortunate by-product of the available technology, something to 
be eradicated, not listened to. Thus, even though such noises might 
still be heard, they were ignored, deemed to be a mere by-product 
which listeners would, to the best of their ability, filter out in 
order to listen to the disk’s primary audio content. To believe that 
the addition of such noise imbues a digital product with a higher 
degree of authenticity, that it nostalgically casts us back to a time 
when music was more embodied, is then to wilfully misremember 
the past, to fool oneself and to posit an incommensurability 
between the analogue and the digital, to find a radical moment of 
transition where there is really continuity.
	
The nostalgia and desire for authenticity signalled by such simulacral 
noise necessarily implies a supposition that the past recalled was 
different from our present. Such is indeed what seems to be suggested 
by Baudrillard in his analysis of the contemporary era of simulation 
which itself appears to be the last possible step in a series of phases 
mapped on to a certain history of representation. Baudrillard writes:
When the real is no longer what it was, nostalgia assumes its full 
meaning. There is a plethora of myths of origin and of signs of 
reality – a plethora of truth, of secondary objectivity, and authen-
ticity. Escalation of the true, of lived experience, resurrection of 
the figurative where the object and substance have disappeared. 
Panic-stricken production of the real and of the referential, 
parallel to and greater than the panic of material production: this 
is how simulation appears in the phase that concerns us.11
In terms of noise, however, to suggest that our contemporary era 
is in actuality less noisy than the past – hence the need to simulate 
it now, as noise signals a reality and materiality that seem to have 
been lost in the evanescence and virtuality of digital code – is to 
ignore the logic of high fidelity, to forget that for past generations 
their own era appeared similarly noise-free because, in relation to 
the preceding epoch, it was less noisy.
	
As we move into the digital era, the difficulty of recognising 
the noise of expressions transmitted through digital media is 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
121
somewhat changed, then, for what we find is not so much a 
quantitative reduction in the degree of noise transmitted by the 
medium in comparison to previous technologies but, rather, a 
qualitative change in the very nature of the noise that is brought 
into being in the expression emanating from the assemblage of 
form and content. Indeed, as Aden Evens has pointed out, the 
very mechanical process employed to record and reproduce sound 
digitally can only ever simulate in binary code an approximation 
of the actual physical passage of sound.12 This is to say, then, 
that in spite of its greater capacity to eliminate noise and focus 
on signal and in spite of its ability seemingly to efface itself in the 
playback of its recorded signal as its analogue ancestors with their 
hiss and crackle never could, digital recording technology does not 
render a more faithful reproduction of the original sound that it 
has recorded than analogue technology. However, Evens goes on 
to suggest that the elimination of noise in CD technology may go 
some way towards explaining the paucity of this recording format 
in the ears of many audiophiles, since ‘noise contracted as impli-
cation is what holds a piece together, what gives it its force and 
pushes it forward’,13 or, to put this another way, it is that which 
constitutes musical expression itself. Yet whilst I agree entirely 
that noise is indeed what constitutes not just musical expression 
but all expression, I nonetheless do not believe that it is the case 
that in the CD format noise is eliminated. As Evens’ analysis of 
the sampling process shows, the technological medium through 
which sound is processed in digital recording and transmission is 
necessarily one that imbues the expression produced with artefacts, 
remnants or residues of its own material specificity. If the resulting 
expression appears to all intents and purposes noise-free, then, 
this is not because it is so but because we have not yet learned to 
recognise this digital noise as noise – although this is undoubtedly 
less the case with high compression formats such as MP3 that the 
online download revolution has brought about and that herald a 
seemingly anti-progressivist reduction of sound and image quality, 
an increase in perceptible noise produced by a new technology and 
thus a reversal of the logic of high-fidelity advances.
	
Whilst I do not agree, then, that there is less noise in the digital 
era – indeed, there may actually be more, although the qualitative 
difference we have noted would render it impossible to quantify 
this noise and thus verify this suggestion – it may well be our 

122	
NOISE MATTERS
inability to recognise this noise as such, to classify it and thus 
sublimate it that explains the sense of uncanniness or a-naturality 
that leads many audiophiles to ‘regress’ to vinyl and analogue 
technologies because of a sense that they are more real.14 Indeed, 
if all expression is contracted from noise and carries noise with it, 
then an expression whose noise cannot be recognised would, one 
imagines, appear to be somewhat unhomely until such time as 
one has become accustomed to the different nature of this noise. 
This is the situation described by Lev Manovich when he writes: 
‘Typical images produced with 3-D computer graphics still appear 
unnaturally clean, sharp, and geometric looking. Their limitations 
especially stand out when juxtaposed with a normal photograph’.15
	
Manovich goes on to recount how, in order to combat the problem 
resulting from the juxtaposition of two different technologies, the 
creators of Jurassic Park degraded this film’s computer-generated 
images, diluting their perfection ‘to match the imperfection of 
film’s graininess’.16 This was done by softening the straight edges 
of the computer-generated images with special algorithms and 
then adding ‘barely visible noise […] to the overall image to blend 
computer and film elements’.17 The noise added, of course, is 
supposed to emulate the noise of film stock granularity and is then 
no different from the addition of simulacral noise to digital fonts 
and formats already seen. What this required addition of noise 
to the computer-generated elements of the image does not imply, 
however, as Manovich infers, is that the CGI itself is noise free, 
‘too perfect’ because it is ‘free of grain – the layer of noise created 
by film stock and human perception’.18 Indeed, we might go so far 
as to suggest that computer-generated images or sounds exhibit, 
according to the definition proposed herein, an extremely high 
coefficient of noise insofar as they do not take an external object 
to form an expressive assemblage but produce their expression 
purely from the inside, from their own technological and material 
specificity.
	
This, however, is a digression – one to which we will return in 
a later chapter on the photography of Thomas Ruff. What is more 
important for the present analysis is to note that noise is particu-
larly prone to an attempted annihilation. In the first instance it is 
often, like Kristeva’s abject, rejected because of its own seemingly 
destructive properties, its ability to cut across taxonomic bound-
aries and instil in us a sense that something is not in its right place. 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
123
In the second instance, meanwhile, whilst it is true that noise can 
produce an unhomely sensation when it is perceived for the first 
time following a technological shift that alters the nature of the 
medium carrying an expression into being, we quickly acclimatise 
ourselves to the nature of this new medium and soon no longer 
notice the noise that it adds to the expressed content.19 In brief, 
noise of the kind that interests me here is easily forgotten or rejected 
for many different reasons. The danger in doing this, however, the 
reason why we should attend to noise – no matter how hard it may 
be to recognise – is because (as is hopefully becoming clear by now) 
it is not external to being, something that can be sublimated, but is 
the very condition of possibility for all matter in an expressive state 
– and the first law of thermodynamics states, indirectly, that there 
is no other state. Noise situates all expression on a continuum and 
thus guards against the false historicism of nostalgia’s misprision of 
both the present and the past. For to situate noise not only in the 
past but in the present also erases the difference between hyperreal 
and real, past, present and, indeed, future, confounding tempo-
ralities just as noise crosses categorical distinctions. Indeed, if noise 
is always present yet only recognised after the fact, then nostalgia 
becomes not so much a return to the past as a premonition of the 
future, a proclamation that today’s PC is tomorrow’s typewriter 
and, for instance, that the supposedly noise-free squeaky clean 
ultimate-fidelity CD is actually full of noise.
On failing to get rid of noise
Even though this assertion goes against the progressivist logic of 
high-fidelity reproduction which is directly responsible for the 
development of the CD, I want to suggest that the CD is full of 
noise, and not only because of the sampling technology that the 
medium relies upon. The history of the development of different 
audio formats from wax to vinyl to tape to CD (although we 
must draw a line at that point, as mentioned) is driven by a single-
minded, stubborn desire to render the communications system or 
medium entirely transparent (or inaudible, rather), to eradicate 
entirely any interference coming from the system or medium itself 
so that we can instead focus solely on the pure audio content 

124	
NOISE MATTERS
of our choice. As Jonathan Sterne notes, in discussions around 
sound-reproduction technologies, ‘Even when the sounds of sound-
reproduction technologies were explicitly discussed, it was with an 
eye toward finding new ways for the medium to erase itself’.20 The 
development of high-fidelity recording and playback equipment 
therefore works by a constant succession of failure, the failure of 
one format to produce perfect fidelity between original and copy 
leading to the creation of another format aimed at providing, this 
time, total equivalence between input and output and, therefore, a 
more complete eradication of noise.
	
In the mid-1980s, one may well have been tempted to think that, 
with the advent of digital technology and the introduction of the 
Compact Disc, such rhetoric of perfectibility and cleanliness would 
quickly become superfluous since this new format promised an 
apparently unsurpassable level of fidelity. Such, however, has patently 
not been the case. Indeed, a recent magazine advertisement for Bose® 
QuietComfort® 2 Acoustic Noise Cancelling® headphones states:
QuietComfort® 2 headphones deliver the best audio performance 
we’ve ever developed for headphones. Highs are impressively 
crisp and clean. Lows are deep and enveloping. Vocals are 
reproduced with lifelike authenticity. Whether you are looking 
for noise reduction or high-performance headphones for music, 
we think you’ll agree these headphones capture the essence of 
serenity and sound.21
	
The rhetoric at work here, with its emphasis on ‘lifelike authen-
ticity’ and ‘essence’ may well suggest to us that the high-fidelity 
reproduction ideal is still striving to regain that loss inimical to all 
recorded sound for Walter Benjamin, namely aura,22 or to mend 
the pathological, ‘schizophonic’ split between sound and its source 
lamented by R. Murray Schafer.23 Such, however, is a lure, for if 
we examine this rhetoric more closely, we will again see something 
more complex at play. Firstly, there is an explicit recognition that 
the authenticity produced here is only ‘lifelike’, which is to say that 
it does not equate to the recapture of a lost aura which comes, 
for Benjamin, only in the live, physical, embodied presence of the 
performer.24 Secondly, we are told (as we are consistently when 
referring to literature on hi-fi systems) that these lifelike, authentic 
vocals are reproduced, which is to say that they are a self-avowed 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
125
reconstruction that has been mediated by technology and not 
a direct analogue of the ‘real’ embodied, authentic and auratic 
original. This, interestingly, seems to signal a shift away from the 
early days of domestic high-fidelity phonograph advertisements 
(wonderfully analysed by Jonathan Sterne in The Audible Past) – 
or even the advertisements seen at the time of the introduction of 
either the cassette tape or the Compact Disc onto the domestic hi-fi 
market. A 1908 Victor Talking Machine advertisement asks, for 
instance, ‘Which is Which?’ and proclaims: ‘You think you can tell 
the difference between hearing grand-opera artists sing and hearing 
their beautiful voices on the Victor. But can you?’ – and the answer 
given is obviously that you cannot.25 Similarly, a 1927 adver-
tisement for Victor Victrola boldly states that ‘The human voice 
is human on the New Orthophonic Victrola’.26 And this tendency 
continued right through the 1970s and 1980s, as Mark Katz notes 
when he writes:
for more than a century, what I would call a discourse of realism 
has reinforced the idea of recorded sound as the mirror of sonic 
reality, while at the same time obscuring the true impact of 
the technology. Consider the series of television and print ads 
from the 1970s and 1980s in which the voice of jazz great Ella 
Fitzgerald was shown shattering glass. While a feat in itself, 
more remarkable was that it was Fitzgerald’s recorded voice 
that had such awesome power. Though the purpose of the ad 
campaign was to sell cassettes, it also espoused the ideal of 
realism. ‘Is it live, or is it Memorex?’ consumers were asked. 
The implicit answer was that the two were indistinguishable.27
	
Yet in the 2005 Bose advertisement there seems to be an implicit 
recognition that music is mediated by technology, and there is then 
an implicit recognition of the failure of the system intended as a high-
fidelity communications channel since to acknowledge mediation is 
to acknowledge the system, and to acknowledge the system in its 
non-transparency is to acknowledge that the system contains noise.
	
This is perhaps not surprising, since the more one examines the 
very premise implied by the term ‘high-fidelity reproduction’, the 
more it seems to undo itself and expose the term’s inherent bad 
faith.28 Michel Chion has actually qualified the very idea of high-
fidelity as a myth, a purely ‘commercial concept’ with no interest 

126	
NOISE MATTERS
from the point of view of acoustics. In order to show how this notion 
undoes itself concretely, one could, as does Eliot Bates, examine the 
actual recording process used today for digital production and 
surmise that noise of many kinds will always be an unavoidable part 
of a recording and that ‘the true enemy of mastering is the entire 
recording process’.29 One could put a similar argument in a slightly 
different way and suggest, like Rick Altman, that, 
Recorded sound […] always carries some record of the recording 
process, superimposed on the sound event itself. Added to the 
story of sound production we always find the traces of sound 
recording as well, including information on the location, type, 
orientation, and movement of the sound collection devices, not 
to mention the many variables intervening between collection 
and recording of sound (amplification, filtering, equalization, 
noise reduction, and so forth).30
Or one may suggest, like Sterne, that regardless of whether one 
operates in an analogue or digital environment, the very fact of 
producing music for a recorded medium means that,
we can no longer argue that copies are debased versions of a more 
authentic original that exists either outside or prior to the process of 
reproduction. Both copy and original are products of the process of 
reproducibility. The original requires as much artifice as the copy.31
This is to say, as Sterne notes earlier, that, 
the medium does not mediate the relation between singer and 
listener, original and copy. It is the nature of their connection. 
Without the medium, there would be no connection, no copy, 
but also no original, or at least no original in the same form. 
The performance is for the medium itself.32
If one wanted, one could even take this argument – according to 
which all originals whose fate is to be recorded are always already 
mediated – one step further and claim, as did Rick Altman in 1984, 
that ‘The real can never be represented; representation alone can be 
represented. For in order to be represented, the real must be known, 
and knowledge is always already a form of representation’.33

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
127
	
For the moment, however, let us stay with Sterne’s logic. The 
importance of Sterne’s argument in regards to sound fidelity is that 
this narrative of original and debased copy which seems to drive 
both the production and reception of hi-fi equipment can only ever 
be, as he says,
a story that we tell ourselves to staple separate pieces of 
sonic reality together. The efficacy of sound reproduction as a 
technology or as a cultural practice is not in its keeping faith 
with a world wholly external to itself. On the contrary, sound 
reproduction – from its very beginnings – always implied social 
relations among people, machines, practices, and sounds.34
For Sterne, any philosophy of sound reproduction (or mediation 
more generally) that does not insert its analyses into such a relational 
matrix, ‘ontologizes sound reproduction too quickly. […] In empha-
sizing the products of reproduction, it effaces the process’.35
	
Sterne’s analysis is very important in its ramifications for all 
communications theory and, indeed, interpretative systems that set 
out to analyse a product which deploys itself in a relational matrix 
– and my contention that everything is expressive means necessarily 
that everything does precisely this.36 Its implications are especially 
important for any analysis that sets out to attend to the noise 
of expression, for noise, as suggested, is always mobile, always 
resistant, only ever arising in the relation of form and content in the 
contraction of expression into actuality and, oftentimes, perceptible 
form. What the parts of Sterne’s analysis cited above ultimately 
show, however, is quite how difficult it has been for commentators 
on analogue sound reproduction technologies to talk about noise, 
and, as we will see, many commentaries on such matters in the 
digital era seem to suggest that this task is not becoming any easier. 
On the contrary, if my initial assertion in this section that the CD 
is full of noise seems so counterintuitive, this is not because (or not 
only because) it is so hard to leave such discourses behind, but, 
rather, (also) because of the differences that the CD presents in 
relation to its analogue forebears. For if we do not generally hear 
the noise of the CD, this may well be because either, like our prede-
cessors listening to vinyl, we automatically erase its noise in order 
to concentrate on the primary desired content; or else because it is 
beyond the realm of human perception; or else because we have not 

128	
NOISE MATTERS
yet learned to recognise it; or, as we will see, because this very noise-
reduction function is now performed for us, what was previously 
a cognitive process having been displaced into the technological 
system in the digital sphere – a displacement given its most blatant 
and concrete embodiment in the noise-reducing headphones already 
discussed. Given these multiple sets of conditions that would seem 
to render it impossible to attend to noise, one might then ask how 
it is possible to suggest that the CD is full of noise.
	
The answer, of course, is that the noise of the CD is effaced 
under normal conditions; an artistic movement commonly known 
as glitch, however, forces the CD to operate outside of this 
normative framework, and it is then perhaps through this music 
that we can begin to attend to this noise. But only perhaps.
On failing to identify noise
Glitch, as Kelly points out, is ‘the digital tick caused by lost or 
incorrect binary code’;37 when the sound of this failure is integrated 
into music either as a generative compositional principle or as a 
sample inserted into a composition determined by other factors, the 
result is known as glitch (or sometimes click) music. The history and 
antecedents of this movement have been ably chronicled elsewhere 
and do not need repeating here. Kelly in particular inserts glitch 
into a larger historical survey of what he terms ‘cracked media’ – 
although glitch is in many respects his primary concern, ‘both the 
end point and the starting point’ for his book.38 Limited attention 
has also been paid to the specific styles of certain glitch artists or the 
philosophical and aesthetic questions that their music raises.39 In his 
paper ‘Glitch – The Beauty of Malfunction’, Torben Sangild traces 
the etymological origins of the term glitch before defining three 
distinct categories or subgenres of glitch: conceptual glitch, oceanic 
glitch and minimal click. Sangild then goes on to argue that these 
artists use dysfunction or the failure of a system in a productive and 
positive manner, drawing analogies to both evolutionary processes 
in which genetic mutations are found to be beneficial and which are 
thus integrated into a new genetic blueprint via natural selection, 
and also a grain of sand which enters an oyster shell and is turned 
into a pearl – a ‘biological metaphor for glitch music’, according 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
129
to Sangild.40 Eliot Bates, meanwhile, grounds his analysis far more 
firmly in relation to the discourses of fidelity that I have analysed 
herein. He states, for instance, ‘A glitch is that which betrays 
the fidelity of the musical work – the skipping CD or record, the 
mangling cassette tape, the distorting PA system’.41 And he later 
posits that, ‘if […] we define “high fidelity” in recording as the 
pursuit of truth, then in this context the glitch is the betrayal of 
the simulation’.42 For Bates, then, ‘glitch composition is a meta-
discursive practice: rather than writing new music inspired by older 
recordings, it constructs new music inspired by the technological 
conditions and limitations in which those recordings emerged’.43
	
For both Sangild and Bates, the promise, beauty or importance of 
glitch lies in its almost redemptive capacity to deploy positively the 
failures and shortcomings of the system in which it is born. Or, as 
Peter Krapp would have it, ‘This reminder of the imperfect, noisy, 
lossy nature of the machine [in glitch music] counters our contem-
porary digital culture’s positivistic faith in technology as providing 
order’.44 If one were lazy one would merely reiterate a similar thesis 
for the present volume, showing how, through a close and detailed 
analysis of the modus operandi of [insert name of preferred glitch-
meister], his/her music averts the catastrophe that is foretold by the 
tarnishing of the apparently infallible sheen of digital technology 
through a positivistic aesthetic act that finds beauty in apparent 
horror and thus requires invocation of the Kantian sublime. One 
could even take solace in the fact that one’s analysis had not 
ontologised its objects of analysis too quickly and thus emulated 
the mistakes of those philosophies of mediation critiqued by 
Sterne precisely because one had at all times been careful to stress 
the processual nature of glitch, both its meta-discursivity and its 
evolutionary ontology when crafted by an artist such as Oval who, 
according to Sangild, ‘more or less invented glitch as a constructive 
musical technique’,45 and who, as Bates points out, ‘doesn’t directly 
control the generation of musical material himself, but instead 
designs systems and processes in which technology drives the 
sounds’.46 This indeed would seem to be the logical way to continue 
the line of argumentation that I have followed thus far, and yet once 
again I can only find it lacking in some important respects and can 
only conclude that this line of reasoning fails when applied to the 
actual ontology of glitch, and that it must then be succeeded by 
another attempt at a successful analysis.

130	
NOISE MATTERS
	
For all of their apparent care in pointing up the process involved 
in glitch music, analyses such as Sangild’s and Bates’ still, ultimately, 
end up ontologising their objects of study too quickly and thus 
effacing the process in play in glitch music. (And lest this critique 
seem unnecessarily unjust to these scholars in particular, let me 
just add that the line they propose to analyse glitch is now almost 
universally accepted as a given, so much so that some have long 
proclaimed the movement to be dead since it is just rehashing the 
same old (and according to this common line, restrictive) principle 
again and again.) For even though both Sangild and Bates are 
absolutely correct in their detailing of the processes used to prepare 
or (in Yasunao Tone’s case) ‘wound’ the CDs these artists use for 
source material, in both of these analyses the material ontology of 
glitch is frozen at this point. So whilst they seem to have described 
the creation of a material artefact which is imbued with the power 
to create music which will necessarily be generative, and whilst they 
acknowledge that this music thus problematizes the high fidelity ideal 
by exploiting bugs, glitches and failures which will cause a system to 
react in unpredictable ways, by curtailing their ontological material 
analysis at the stage of disc preparation, they both imbue the disc 
itself with an agency that it can never have and, furthermore, bypass 
the process which actually creates the sound that is termed glitch 
and which is dependent primarily on the hardware of the system’s 
decoder that reads the data and corrupted data on the disc: the CD 
player itself. Whilst it is perhaps not a serious error, then, to state 
that in a glitch piece we hear the sound of a CD skipping, this is 
much the same as saying (again) that the sun rises in the morning: 
in both cases the expression serves as shorthand to talk of a process 
that would require more words to explain fully, but the expression 
is resolutely false. What is odd in the case of critics talking about 
glitch is not only that such shorthand should stand in for in-depth 
analysis, but that this falsehood does not actually appear to be 
recognised as such most of the time. Rather than dealing in material 
and ontological givens, then, by stopping their analyses short of the 
material ontology of the system used to decode the prepared CD, 
such critics indulge in a self-perpetuating mythology in which the 
CD itself seems to be imbued with a magical and wondrous power.
	
One notable exception to this trend can be found in Caleb 
Stuart’s article published in the Leonardo Music Journal, ‘Damaged 
Sound: Glitching and Skipping Compact Discs in the Audio of 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
131
Yasunao Tone, Nicolas Collins and Oval’.47 Like Sangild, Stuart 
begins his article with a familiar scenario, introducing the concept 
of glitch through an imaginary scene in a café at the moment when 
one’s attention is drawn away from the banal and unattended 
everyday by the sound of a skipping CD heard over the establish-
ment’s speakers.48 Stuart also traces a brief genealogy of glitch, but 
draws a much finer line than many, invoking only Cage’s Cartridge 
Music and Knizak’s Destroyed Music.49 The majority of Stuart’s 
paper, however, is taken up with a very thorough and detailed 
analysis of the techniques employed by Tone, Collins and Oval 
to extract sounds from the ‘broken’ media that they employ, and 
crucial to the genesis of these works (as becomes clear in Stuart’s 
documentation) is not only the preparation of the Compact Disc 
itself but also the technological specificities of the player hardware 
in either a prepared or unprepared state.
	
Before analysing the work of any of his chosen artists, Stuart 
does something that is very rare amongst commentators on glitch: 
he actually explains the mechanics behind the sound that we hear 
as glitch. He writes,
	
The glitches heard from a CD player – the skips and stutters 
– are not caused by actual skips; the CD player’s laser does not 
actually ‘stick’ in the way a phonograph needle becomes physi-
cally locked in a groove. Instead, the skips and stutters that 
we hear when playing a CD are errors being emitted from the 
system as audio. The ticks and pops are due to binary values 
being read incorrectly – if the level of the error is so great that 
the error-correction software driving the digital system is not 
able to cope, it emits false sounds. For a CD to do this it needs 
to have been handled very badly. Dust and small scratches, 
especially across the disc, do not normally affect the audio 
output, as errors are covered by the system’s error-correction 
software, which corrects misreadings and information losses.50
Stuart then goes on to detail the experiments carried out on the 
Compact Disc medium at the time of its commercial inception 
by David Ranada of Stereo Review magazine, which consisted of 
affixing a thin wedge of laser-opaque tape to the data surface of the 
CD and exploring the internal circuitry of the player to read the 
error correction data. As Stuart notes of Ranada’s findings:

132	
NOISE MATTERS
	
CD manufacturers and developers had created a new form of 
technology that was said to be able to correct errors and damage 
done to discs. While Ranada did not see his process of manipu-
lating CDs as anything more than what a conscientious reviewer 
would do to provide his readers all possible information about the 
medium, his testing system would be very close to the technique 
used by Yasunao Tone to produce his indeterminate compositions.51
	
What is vital here for the purpose of the present analysis is 
that the production of what is perceived to be noise is merely the 
result of an intensification of an inherent capacity of the decoding 
technology that overrides that function when too much strain is 
placed upon it. It is, then, absolutely not the case that a CD skips, 
nor could it, for it is not within the capacity of the CD as artefact to 
exhibit any agency, it is merely a passive carrier of information. As 
Tone states in a discussion with experimental turntablist Christian 
Marclay organised by Music magazine:
	
It’s not really skipping. It’s distorting information. A CD 
consists of a series of samples. You know bytes and bits, right? 
One byte contains sixteen bits of information. So, if I block one 
or two bits, information still exists – one byte of information – but 
the numbers are altered so it becomes totally different information. 
That’s the idea. It’s not skipping sound. […] Scotch tape enables me 
to make burst errors without significantly affecting the system and 
stopping the machine. The error-correcting software constantly 
interpolates between individual bits of misread information, but if 
adjacent bits are misread, a burst occurs and the software mutes 
the output. If a significant number of bursts occur in one frame, 
the error increases until it eventually overrides the system.52
What this means, then, is that the digital technology which is 
supposedly super clean and noise free is, in fact, merely better 
at disguising its noise and errors which still, as with analogue 
technology, always and necessarily form a part of its message.
	
Whilst Tone is especially interesting for the present analysis since 
his method consists in manipulating the CD in such a way that 
digital noise is extracted from the decoding or playback system, 
thus drawing attention (when analysed fully) to the resistance of the 
technological system that reads and transmits the audio content of the 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
133
CD, Nicolas Collins’ modus operandi is of interest because of the light 
he sheds on the precise reasons behind our inability to hear this noise 
under normal conditions. Collins’ approach, as Stuart notes, ‘differs 
in that his approach involves tampering with the CD player’s internal 
mechanism rather than a corruption of the disc’.53 As Stuart explains:
	
Without any real knowledge of the workings of the technology, 
Collins assumed correctly that the CD player’s laser never left the 
disc’s surface, reading not only audio information but ‘hidden’ 
information such as error-detection and information-coverage 
data, as well as data defining track locations, lengths and so on. 
Locating the player’s control chip, Collins came across a ‘mute’ pin, 
which he removed, resulting in a constantly chattering playback. 
He states: ‘With this pin removed, the CD player never shuts up, 
and one can hear the sound as the laser “scratches” (a magnificent, 
cartoonish ripping noise) or “pauses” (fast looping rhythms, 
possessed of a peculiar stutter and swing). Further modifications to 
the control system, done in collaboration with engineer Sukandar 
Kartadinata, opened up more extreme aberrations of digital misbe-
haviour’. Thus, with no muting, the CD player reads all of the 
disc’s encoded information as audio – even the information that 
keeps the disc in place while in ‘pause’ mode.54
There are then two particularly significant elements in Collins’ 
work as described here. Firstly, his work shows that the successful 
reproductive operation of this technology relies on a discrete 
compartmentalisation of different pockets of encoded data and 
that it is the hardware that performs this selection in which only 
certain data content is read as audio. Secondly, Collins’ experi-
ments show the extent to which even a CD with no apparent data 
corruption – be it deliberate or otherwise – is always full of noise 
since it has errors encoded into it that produce noise when what we 
might term the noise reduction or error suppression mechanism is 
itself suppressed or muted, for burst errors which would normally 
be corrected by the muting function here become audible, avowing 
the presence of encoding errors on an apparently ‘clean’ disk.
	
Rather than being a genre in which the noise of the system (or 
its failure as a high-fidelity system for communication) is turned to 
positivistic ends or made to ‘succeed’ through integration into an 
aesthetic construct as primary content, it is then rather the case that, 

134	
NOISE MATTERS
through the failure that it foregrounds, glitch shows us the extent 
to which digital technology always relies on a successful integration 
of noise and failure into its systems. This is of great importance for 
any historiography of digital audio technologies (and indeed other 
digital technologies) for it suggests that there is a certain continuum 
between analogue and digital technologies as opposed to a radical 
paradigm shift.55 Thus, Jonathan Sterne’s critique of histories of 
sound fidelity still holds true even in the digital era, and to claim 
that digital technology represents the apex of high-fidelity repro-
duction is to practice a kind of inverted historiography in which,
narratives of technological change and the transformation 
of technical specifications are folded back into an aesthetic 
and technological telos: the latest technological innovation 
equals the ‘best-sounding’ or ‘perfect’ sound reproduction. The 
progress narrative is ultimately untenable: the transformation of 
practices and technologies stands in for a narrative of vanishing 
mediation, where sources and copies move ever closer together 
until they are identical. The nature of what is heard and the very 
conditions of reproducibility are thereby presented as if they 
spring forth from the technology.56
	
However, whilst Sterne’s analysis here is faultless in respect of 
the analogue technologies he sets out to analyse and whilst, as I 
have suggested above, these comments are equally applicable to the 
digital realm – as is attested to by the development of formats such 
as SACD and DVD audio which, although they have not yet super-
seded the humble CD, are still presented as advances in high-fidelity 
reproduction57 – there is nonetheless an important difference as we 
move into the digital era that is pointed up by the analyses carried 
out above. Sterne’s final assertion in the above quotation suggests 
that the technology itself is attributed with an excessive agency in 
many histories of sound fidelity, just as I have suggested that many 
analyses of glitch imbue the carrier of information with an agency 
that should in fact be attributed to the entire communications 
system. The difference in the two cases is that, whereas in Sterne’s 
analysis of analogue systems it is human agency that is falsely 
attributed to the system, in my analysis of studies of glitch, it has 
become clear that it is technological agency that is falsely attributed 
to a specific component of the technological system. The reason why 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
135
this is important becomes clear when we examine Sterne’s comments 
on the members of the Volta Laboratory who ‘were some of the few 
people in this early period focusing on the sound of sound-repro-
duction technologies’,58 and particularly his comments on Charles 
Sumner Tainter’s attempts to improve the phonograph. Sterne writes:
Tainter had sought a kind of acoustic transparency in sound 
reproduction: ideally, the medium would disappear and 
original and copy would be identical for listeners. In practice, 
however, this would require listeners to separate foreground 
and background sounds, to treat the apparatus of sound repro-
duction as merely incidental to the sounds thereby perceived. 
In other words, listeners were helping the machines reproduce 
sound ‘perfectly’.59
In Tainter’s experiments, the listening subject integrates noise into a 
successful and seemingly noise-free, high-fidelity sonic expression. 
The listening subject, that is to say, becomes a kind of agent of 
noise reduction or an error correction mechanism, a function 
which, as my analysis of glitch has shown, is now carried out by 
digital playback technology itself. To take the case of Collins once 
again, for instance, one could suggest that his experiments provide 
an example of this displacement of agency since it is now the CD 
player which selects only certain data to be interpreted as the 
desired audio content and not other data which, whilst essential for 
the operation of the entire system, needs to be elided or sublimated 
in some way.
	
The implications of this sound distinctly cyborgian and, indeed, 
one could perhaps pursue such an analysis. For instance, it is inter-
esting to note that, when talking of their external noise-reducing 
function, the Bose® QuietComfort® 2 Acoustic Noise Cancelling® 
headphones advertisement mentioned earlier in this chapter paints 
a picture of a seamless man-machine coupling wherein ‘The 
QuietComfort® 2 envelopes [sic] you in blissful sound in the utmost 
comfort that [sic] it’s easy to forget they’re on your head’. Achim 
Szepanski, meanwhile, integrates an apparently cyborgian vision 
into his discussion of glitch, writing:
In the binary logic of connections, there is not only the on and 
off modus but as well the switch which transfers the connection 

136	
NOISE MATTERS
states. It is the non-representable symbol, the medium or the 
Ab-Ort [sic] which makes the one and zero state possible. Clicks 
and Cuts, everywhere connections, shifts, transfer, transduc-
tions, trans … Interface policy and music mutate to transfer 
policy and music. The concept of the ‘inter’ which maintains the 
separation between man and machine disappears in the prolif-
eration of transactions where the authority of the artist neither 
acts nor navigates interactively. It is connected with its subjected 
machine components and with the technological components of 
the machine, and so it is its duty to step into processes.60
Whilst it is doubtless a little extreme to suggest from these analyses 
that the Compact Disc or glitch music augurs the arrival of the 
cyborgian future called for by critics such as Donna Haraway,61 
what it does potentially do is return us to the existential crisis of 
Nausea which is precipitated, of course, by the breakdown of just 
such a categorical distinction.
On noise failing to remain noise
Born in the reversal or undoing of difference between the terms of 
the CD’s binary code,62 glitch perhaps reveals to us above all else 
noise’s intersistence, the way in which noise dissolves categorical 
distinctions between historical periods and media formats, form 
and content, man and machine. We might then apply Kelly’s 
assertion about the difficulty of classifying various types of noise to 
the operations of noise more generally and suggest that ‘it traverses 
the boundaries between […] categories in chaotic and insensible 
ways, remaining somehow neither/nor’.63 This suggestion, however, 
becomes somewhat fraught when applied to the binary pair of 
noise and music, for the glitch can be and often is appropriated as 
a much less resistant and much more banal compositional element, 
sampled as any other sound and used in an entirely instrumental 
manner. Indeed, this is the case with Oval who, as Kelly notes, 
‘once they have found the accidental sounds of the CD skip and 
stutter, record them to use again and again in a highly controlled 
digital sequencing environment’.64 The results of this are precisely 
as Kelly goes on to describe them:

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
137
The unknown of the accident is layered into the known of 
the pop format, the choruses and verses underpinned with the 
accidental sounds of stressed digital audio. Through repetition 
we begin to understand the mistake and aestheticize it. The 
notion of the crack and break as transgressive is undone in the 
work of Oval.65
	
However, where I do not agree with Kelly is in the implicit 
suggestion throughout his argument on Oval that the glitch as 
deployed by this group remains noise in this use of it.66 To state, as 
he does, that ‘Oval turned an annoying and distressing sound into 
something listenable, beautiful, and catchy’67 is, it seems to me, to 
recognise that the glitch no longer deploys the resistant qualities 
of noise, that it no longer intersists, that (somewhat like Russolo’s 
intonarumori and Cage’s panaurality), far from problematising the 
categorical distinction between noise and music, the glitch here 
passes over fully to the side of music, leaving noise behind – to the 
extent that this is possible.
	
Some may protest that to suggest this is to infer that one needs 
to be apprised of the compositional techniques and hardware 
manipulation required by the genesis of any piece before a 
judgement can be made as to whether or not the apparent noise 
of glitch music – or indeed any expression – is indeed noise or 
something else. I would contend that this is not the case, however, 
for the simple reason that the experience of listening to Oval is so 
markedly different from that of listening to, for instance, Yasuno 
Tone’s Solo for Wounded CD. For Oval’s glitch does (mostly) not 
plunge us into that uncanny realm where we are no longer able to 
distinguish between form and content, where we are simultane-
ously drawn towards this strange sound which gestures towards 
what we might understand as music yet seems somehow incapable 
of being contained by such an apprehension of it – as in the 
moment narrated by Sangild and Kelly when the café’s CD player’s 
servomotors fail to interpret the CD’s binary code in the proper 
manner.68 This is not to say, however, that this noise is subjective, 
nor is it to claim that a sampled and sequenced glitch could never 
remain noise and thrust us into this realm. It is rather to suggest 
that in much glitch music the entire system, including its apparent 
failure, is co-opted to the service of content, over-determined and 
therefore unable to give voice to the indetermination of its material 

138	
NOISE MATTERS
ontology as this enters into expression. To put this another way, 
just as analyses of glitch have often fixated on only one aspect of 
the technological assemblage and thus oversimplified the opera-
tions of the assemblage through which this particular expression 
comes to be, failing to read the system’s noise, so the glitch itself, 
when sampled and inserted into a composition, offers itself to us 
not as the artefact of an expression arising out of a complex set 
of semi-determined relations but, rather, as a seemingly necessary 
element of a higher order.69
	
Whilst glitch may seem to be one of the most obvious places to 
look for the kind of noise of interest here, then, doing so is fraught 
with problems. It is true that, because it exploits the failure of the 
system out of which it arises and forces that system not to behave in 
its ‘right’ manner, glitch can help us to perceive the noise of digital 
media in its own time. This, as we have seen, is often difficult to 
do because when a more advanced technological assemblage is put 
into place and functions correctly, it necessarily seems better and 
less noisy in relation to what came before it. If we are careful in our 
analyses and do not proceed too hastily, it is then true that glitch 
can alert us to the bad faith of discourses of high-fidelity and point 
up the ineradicability of noise. Yet no matter how careful we are, 
the vast majority of glitch music does not allow the glitch to express 
itself, as it were, but, rather, treats it as just another musical element. 
Something similar is suggested by Kim Cascone in his nostalgic look 
back over the early days of glitch and the subsequent birth of the 
.microsound list/community/movement/journal that was necessitated 
by the co-option of glitch. He writes: ‘Once plugins began to emulate 
the “glitch effect” we saw what was once an exploratory mode of 
inquiry and critique quickly turn into a cliché’.70 With glitch, we 
therefore find ourselves in somewhat of a double bind. As I have 
suggested, it may well be that in order to attend to the noise of digital 
media we, as citizens of the digital era, have no choice but to turn to 
those points when the media breaks down because we have not yet 
learned to recognise these media forms’ noise in its own time when 
it is cloaked in the simulated perfection of its own logic. And yet 
practitioners of glitch seem loathe to allow it to remain in that logic 
of imperfection, preferring to bring it into the order of music in such 
a way that its own operations are annulled. If we are to be able to 
attend to noise in the auditory realm, it may then be that we must 
heed our own advice and cast our ears back to a pre-digital era.

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
139
Notes
  1	  Available for download at http://www.freetypes.com/Font.
jsp?aFontId=649 [accessed 1 May 2012] or from http://www.
oldtype.8m.com [accessed 1 May 2012], a site dedicated entirely to 
old typewriter fonts that has almost 100 such fonts displaying varying 
degrees of supposed authenticity, noisiness or plain simulacra.
  2	  Except, perhaps, Christoph Mueller himself who apparently created 
this font by typing the alphabet on his mum’s old typewriter and then 
scanning the characters.
  3	  Peter Krapp, Noise Channels: Glitch and Error in Digital Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011), 68.
  4	  On the relationship of noise to handwriting and typefaces, see also 
Douglas Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 26.
  5	  Beatrice Warde / Paul Grandjean, ‘The Crystal Goblet, or Printing 
Should Be Invisible’, http://gmunch.home.pipeline.com/typo-L/misc/
ward.htm [accessed 14 July 2004]. Also available in Beatrice Warde, 
The Crystal Goblet: Sixteen Essays on Typography (Cleveland, OH: 
World Publishing Co., 1956); and in Graphic Design and Reading: 
Explorations of an Uneasy Relationship, ed. Gunnar Swanson (New 
York: Allworth Press, 2000).
  6	  For an excellent discussion of the MP3 format, see Jonathan Sterne, 
‘The MP3 as Cultural Artifact’, New Media & Society, 8, no. 5 
(2006), as well as Sterne’s recent book MP3: The Meaning of a 
Format (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2012).
  7	  Emily Chivers Yochim and Megan Biddinger, ‘“It Kind of Gives You 
That Vintage Feel”: Vinyl Records and the Trope of Death’, Media 
Culture & Society, 30, no. 2 (2008), 183.
  8	  Yochim and Biddinger, ‘It Kind of Gives You That Vintage Feel’, 183.
  9	  Stan Link, ‘The Work of Reproduction in the Mechanical Aging of an 
Art: Listening to Noise’, Computer Music Journal, 25, no. 1 (2001).
10	  John Corbett, Extended Play: Sounding Off from John Cage to Dr. 
Funkenstein (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994), 41.
11	  Jean Baudrillard, Simulacra and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria 
Glaser (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994), 6–7.
12	  Aden Evens, ‘Sound Ideas’, in A Shock to Thought: Expression 
After Deleuze and Guattari, ed. Brian Massumi (London: Routledge, 
2002), 174–5.

140	
NOISE MATTERS
13	  Evens, ‘Sound Ideas’, 184.
14	  This suggestion also leads me to qualify Will Straw’s claim that the 
demise of the CD is predestined in the ‘noiseless invisibility held up as 
one of its virtues’. For him, ‘when the materiality of music playback 
technology no longer shapes music’s meanings in recognizable ways, 
that technology becomes little more than a temporary host for music’ 
(Will Straw, ‘In Memoriam: The Music CD and its Ends’, Design 
and Culture, 1, no. 1 (2009), 85). I contend, however, that the CD 
is not noiseless and that if the demise of the CD is linked to such 
considerations, then this has to do with a perceived difference in 
the materiality of the media. Even with this qualification, however, 
it is difficult to state with any degree of certainty whether this does 
ultimately have anything to do with the apparent imminent demise of 
the CD. Indeed, reviewing the very first commercially available domestic 
CD player in 1983, John Rockwell marvelled at the materiality of this 
new medium, noting ‘The disks themselves are four and three-quarters 
inches in diameter and rather thicker than an LP. They are very pretty 
to hold and behold: gold with rainbow reflections, nestling neatly in a 
small plastic box that includes a miniature booklet with the program 
notes’ (John Rockwell, ‘How the LP and CD Sounds Compare’, New 
York Times, 31 March 1983, C13). If the CD’s demise does not result 
from a fundamental difference in its perceived materiality, therefore, it 
may well have to do with a constellation of other forces tied up with 
music distribution, commercialisation, technological distribution and 
changing patterns of musical consumption.
15	  Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2001), 201.
16	  Manovich, The Language of New Media, 202.
17	  Manovich, The Language of New Media, 202.
18	  Manovich, The Language of New Media, 202.
19	  For instance, when watching a new season of Survivor filmed with 
updated recording technology, I found it very hard to concentrate on 
the game for the first couple of episodes and could only focus on the 
difference of the image. This did not last for long, however, and I was 
soon used to the new image, to the extent that I am almost certain 
that the older seasons would now look strange to me were I to watch 
reruns of them.
20	  Jonathan Sterne, The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound 
Reproduction (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003), 283.
21	  This advertisement appeared in many different print publications 
including the Qantas in-flight magazine, The Australian Way, for 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
141
a number of months in 2005. See also: Bose® Pty Ltd., ‘Acoustic 
Noise Cancelling® Headphone Technology’, http://www.bose.com.
au/site/index.aspx?path=products&CTRL=PTCH&pfid=10&tid=6 
[accessed 28 March 2006]. It is important to note that headphones 
such as the Bose® QuietComfort® 2 Acoustic Noise Cancelling® 
headphones can serve two functions (which may or may not be 
mutually exclusive depending on which function is desired): to 
reduce background noise through a self-regulating feedback loop that 
produces sonic frequencies to counter ambient background noise (in 
which case they reproduce no musical source) or else to reproduce 
a musical source (in which case they also reduce background noise). 
Whilst one could no doubt argue that the former function further 
advances the high-fidelity aims of the latter by producing a sonically 
hermetic environment, the two functions must be considered 
separately, and it is these headphones’ reproductive function and the 
discourse surrounding that function that will primarily concern me 
here.
22	  Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction’, in Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn (orig. German, 
1936; Fontana Press, London, 1992), 222.
23	  See R. Murray Schafer, The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment 
and the Tuning of the World (New York: Knopf, 1977; rep. 
Rochester, VT: Destiny Books, 2009).
24	  It should be noted that for Andrew Goodwin, digital technology 
actually heralds the return of the notion of aura in pop- music, 
but an aura which can now be mass produced (Andrew Goodwin, 
‘Sample and Hold: Pop Music in the Digital Age of Reproduction’, 
in On Record: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word, ed. Simon Frith 
and Andrew Goodwin (New York: Pantheon Books, 1990), 258–73); 
reprinted from Critical Quarterly, 30, no. 3 (1998)).
25	  Reproduced in Sterne, The Audible Past, 217. See also Emily 
Thompson, ‘Machines, Music, and the Quest for Fidelity: Marketing 
the Edison Phonograph in America, 1877–1925’, The Musical 
Quarterly, 79, no. 1 (1995).
26	  Reproduced in Sterne, The Audible Past, 224.
27	  Mark Katz, Capturing Sound: How Technology has Changed Music 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004), 1–2.
28	  Michel Chion, Musiques, médias et technologies (Paris: Flammarion, 
1994), 74.
29	  Eliot Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs, and Hisses: The Degeneration of Musical 
Recordings and the Contemporary Musical Work’, in Bad Music: 

142	
NOISE MATTERS
The Music We Love to Hate, ed. C. J. Washburne and M. Derno 
(New York and London: Routledge, 2004), 280.
30	  Rick Altman, ‘The Material Heterogeneity of Recorded Sound’, in 
Sound Theory Sound Practice, ed. Rick Altman (London: Routledge, 
1992), 26.
31	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 241.
32	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 226. Mark Katz appears to be making a 
related point with the use of his term ‘phonograph effects’ which 
he describes as ‘the manifestations of sound recording’s influence’ 
(Capturing Sound, 3). His conceptualisation of this term and its 
implications are not nearly as wide-ranging or coherent as Sterne’s, 
however, and his case studies offer little to tighten up the concept. 
33	  Rick Altman, ‘Sound Space’, in Sound Theory Sound Practice, 
ed. Rick Altman (London: Routledge, 1992), 46. Since Altman’s 
sentiment here shows the infinitely specular and self-referential nature 
of all representation, I deliberately quote Altman quoting Altman 
here and do not provide the original citation.
34	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 219.
35	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 219.
36	  Goodwin essentially argues in favour of this kind of situated analysis 
when he asks, rhetorically, at the end of his essay: ‘do we need a 
postmodern theory of society / aesthetic in order to understand 
postmodern cultural forms?’ (‘Sample and Hold’, 272).
37	  Caleb Kelly, Cracked Media: The Sound of Malfunction (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009), 6.
38	  Kelly, Cracked Media, 6. On the history of glitch, see also: Caleb 
Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound: Glitching & Skipping Compact Discs in 
the Audio of Yasunao Tone, Nicolas Collins & Oval’, Leonardo 
Music Journal, 14, no. 1 (2004) (an earlier version of a chapter of 
Kelly, Cracked Media); Kim Cascone, ‘The Aesthetics of Failure: 
“Post-Digital” Tendencies in Contemporary Computer Music’, 
Computer Music Journal, 24, no. 4 (2000); Kim Cascone and Jeremy 
Turner, ‘The Microsound Scene: An Interview with Kim Cascone’, 
ctheory, A101 (2001), http://www.ctheory.net/text_file?pick=322 
[accessed 23 January 2003]; Kenneth Goldsmith, ‘It Was a Bug, 
Dave: The Dawn of Glitchwerks’ (1999), http://www.wfmu.
org/~kennyg/popular/articles/glitchwerks.html [accessed March 
28, 2006]; Torben Sangild, Støjens æstetik, English summary 
published as: The Aesthetics of Noise ([np]: Datanom, 2002); 
Torben Sangild, ‘Glitch: The Beauty of Malfunction’, in Bad Music, 
ed. C. Washburne and M. Derno (London: Routledge, 2004); Eliot 

	
On the Difficulties of Attending to Noise	
143
Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs, and Hisses’; Krapp, Noise Channels; Philip 
Sherburne, ‘The Art of Noise’, Frieze, 62 (October 2001); Mitchell 
Whitelaw, ‘Inframedia Audio: Glitches & Tape Hiss’, Artlink, 21, no. 
3 (September 2001); Rob Young, ‘Undercurrents #12: Worship the 
Glitch’, The Wire: Adventures in Modern Music, 190/191 (December 
1999 / January 2000).
39	  Diedrich Diederichsen, ‘Clicks’, trans. Judith Funk, in the liner 
notes to Clicks and Cuts 2 (Mille Plateaux, 2001); Achim Szepanski, 
‘Music’, trans. Judith Funk, in the liner notes to Clicks and Cuts 2 
(Mille Plateaux, 2001).
40	  Sangild, ‘Glitch’, 270. It should be noted that the same metaphor 
is used by Philip Sherburne who writes, ‘Errors and accidents 
crystallize. The pearl is an error, a glitch in response to impurity. The 
error is the aura’ (‘The Art of Noise’, 2).
41	  Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs and Hisses’, 277.
42	  Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs and Hisses’, 288.
43	  Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs and Hisses’, 289.
44	  Krapp, Noise Channels, 74. To be fair to Krapp I must note that he goes 
on to state a desire not only to cast the possibilities of this strategy ‘in 
binary terms of either a counterhegemonic art strategy or mere toying 
with the rubble of our high-tech era’ (74), and that the examples he 
gives throughout his book extend the sites in which glitch and error are 
deployed in digital culture far beyond what is normally the case.
45	  Sangild, ‘Glitch’, 262.
46	  Bates, ‘Glitches, Bugs and Hisses’, 286–7. According to this 
definition, Oval, aka Markus Popp, would actually belong to a 
lineage of process musicians such as Alvin Lucier and Steve Reich, a 
suggestion which may well be problematic for reasons I do not have 
time to elaborate here.
47	  Reworked in this same author’s book Cracked Media published 
under the name of Kelly.
48	  Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 47.
49	  Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 47–8.
50	 Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 48.
51	  Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 48.
52	  Yasunao Tone and Christian Marclay, ‘Record, CD, Analog, 
Digital’, in Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music, ed. Christoph 
Cox and Daniel Warner (New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 
341–2.

144	
NOISE MATTERS
53	  Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 49.
54	  Stuart, ‘Damaged Sound’, 49.
55	  This is in entirely in accord with the analyses of critics such as 
Oliver Grau, Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press/Leonardo Books, 2003); Manovich, The Language 
of New Media; and Sean Cubitt, Daniel Palmer and Les Walkling, 
‘Reflections on Medium Specificity Occasioned by the Symposium 
“Digital Light: Technique, Technology, Creation”, Melbourne 2011’, 
Moving Image Review and Art Journal, 1, no. 1 (2012). 
56	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 222.
57	  See Krapp, Noise Channels, 56.
58	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 256.
59	  Sterne, The Audible Past, 256.
60	  Szepanski, ‘Music’, 12–13.
61	  See Donna Haraway, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The 
Reinvention of Nature (London: Free Association Books, 1991).
62	  Kelly notes how Yasunao Tone’s compositions such as Solo for 
Wounded CD were initiated by his reading of ‘a book entitled 
Science Seminar for the Familiar, where a chapter on digital 
recording included this paragraph: “Digital recording is a wonderful 
audio technique, since it has almost no noise and produces sound 
very faithful to the original. However, when it misreads 1 with 0, it 
makes very strange sounds due to the binary code becoming a totally 
different numerical value”’ (Kelly, Cracked Media, 234–6).
63	  Kelly, Cracked Media, 69.
64	  Kelly, Cracked Media, 218.
65	  Kelly, Cracked Media, 261.
66	  See Kelly, Cracked Media, 69, 252–75.
67	  Kelly, Cracked Media, 275.
68	  It would of course be wrong of me to take recourse to the common 
sense shorthand I have critiqued and say the moment when the CD 
skips.
69	  I will discuss this notion of the sense of a transcendent higher order 
produced by the musical work more in my final chapter. 
70	  Kim Cascone, ‘Ten Years of Not Being There’, Vague Terrain 15: 
.microsound (2009), http://vagueterrain.net/journal15 [accessed 10 
April 2012].

CHAPTER FIVE
On the Difficulties of 
Listening to Noise
Chapter Five, Concrete Mix, Variations 1–5 (with apologies to Schaeffer).
* * *
Whilst there may be specific reasons why it is hard to hear the kind 
of noise of interest to us here in its own time, it is not simply by 
turning our attention back to past, pre-digital media forms that 
we will be able to do so unproblematically. Indeed, if we have, on 

146	
NOISE MATTERS
numerous occasions, seen that noise has, predictably, often been 
understood as a primarily sonorous phenomenon, we have also 
noted how this has regularly led to an abnegation of noise. Indeed, 
considered as primarily sonorous or auditory, noise is oftentimes 
doubly negated, either because it is rejected since perceived as 
undesirable, excessive or even unethical, or else because the 
common sense apprehension of noise as sonorous seems to lead 
inexorably to a common sense understanding of noise as merely 
something that is raucous, inharmonious, dissonant, discordant or 
unmusical, adjectives which are highly problematic as the basis to 
consider noise from an ontological point of view because of their 
subjective, culturally-specific and ephemeral nature.
	
In this chapter I wish to start by suggesting that the difficulties 
presented to us when we attempt to attend to the ontology of noise 
in the auditory realm are similar to those that confronted Barthes 
when he attempted to attend to the ontology of photography. I will 
show how Barthes managed to solve his own conundrum through a 
specific concept, the punctum, that allowed him to create something 
other than a strict formal ontology out of logical operations. What 
he arrived at instead was a phenomenologically-inflected ontology 
that shares many similarities with the relational and expressive 
ontology formulated here. However, as we will see, Barthes failed 
to distinguish between the separate modes of his ontology and thus 
fell into the kinds of inconsistencies and contradictions that have 
plagued many discussions of noise. This problem is found also in 
his discussion of the grain of the voice that I will go on to discuss, 
a potentially very useful concept for an analysis of noise yet which 
remains problematic for this end without some modification. It is 
not my intention here to dismiss Barthes’ ideas outright, although 
I will claim that it is because many critics of noise fall prey to the 
same kinds of pitfalls as Barthes that they end up producing such 
inconsistent conclusions. Rather, I wish to identify precisely where 
Barthes goes wrong and then (without making those same mistakes 
hopefully) take my lead from him for an analysis of two musical 
(or, perhaps better, sonorous) examples.

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
147
Punctum
In his work Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography,1 Barthes, 
like me, is explicitly concerned with ontology. ‘I was overcome by 
an “ontological” desire’, he says, ‘I wanted to learn at all costs 
what Photography was “in itself”, by what essential feature it was 
to be distinguished from the community of images’.2 When Barthes 
attempts to pin this ontology down, however, he encounters a 
number of problems, again similar to mine. Firstly, the existing 
categories within which Photography is classified are ‘external to the 
object, without relation to its essence’,3 just as I have suggested that 
oftentimes the various instantiations of what is designated as noise 
share no common ontological basis. Barthes writes, ‘The various 
distributions we impose upon [Photography] are in fact either 
empirical (Professionals/Amateurs), or rhetorical (Landscapes/
Objects/Portraits/Nudes), or else aesthetic (Realism/Pictorialism)’4 
– categories which might be mapped to the various classifications 
of noise found in disparate disciplines or the typology of different 
kinds of noise music and which, in both cases, seem often to be 
mutually incompatible, removed, therefore, from the ontology 
of noise since necessarily subjective. More importantly, however, 
because of the apparently indexical relationship of the Photograph 
to its referent (an assumption that can be deconstructed in any 
case),5 Barthes claims that, in Photography, ‘the referent adheres. 
And this singular adherence makes it very difficult to focus on 
Photography’.6 To phrase this in the terms of the present argument, 
we might then say that Photography suffers the same fate as the 
vast majority of texts or expressions in the phenomenological act 
of reception or critique, namely, that the thetic takes precedence 
over the semiotic to the extent that the latter is obliterated, 
abnegated or abjected entirely by the former, the content of the 
medium blinding us to the character of the medium (to paraphrase 
McLuhan once more).
	
Determined not to remain blind to the medium but to situate 
the essence of Photography, to talk of its ontology, Barthes realised 
that to do this his method would necessarily have to take account 
not only of the material conditions of the Photograph but also 
(although these are not his terms) its relational ontology as an 
expression entering into an assemblage in the phenomenological 

148	
NOISE MATTERS
act of spectatorship. This is to say that he wished to formulate 
an ontology that would not reduce the possible affect of the 
Photograph, which would not leave aside all of the attendant 
desires, feelings and nostalgias that Photography can elicit and that 
are then for him necessarily part of its ontology. Barthes writes:
I did not escape, or try to escape, from a paradox: on the one 
hand the desire to give a name to Photography’s essence and then 
to sketch an eidetic science of the Photograph; and on the other 
the intractable feeling that Photography is essentially (a contra-
diction in terms) only contingency, singularity, risk […]. Next, my 
phenomenology agreed to compromise with a power, affect; affect 
was what I didn’t want to reduce; being irreducible, it was thereby 
what I wanted, what I ought to reduce the Photograph to; but 
could I retain an affective intentionality, a view of the object which 
was immediately steeped in desire, repulsion, nostalgia, euphoria? 
Classical phenomenology, the kind I had known in my adoles-
cence (and there has not been any other since), had never, so far 
as I could remember, spoken of desire or of mourning. Of course 
I could make out in Photography, in a very orthodox manner, a 
whole network of essences: material essences (necessitating the 
physical, chemical, optical study of the Photography), and regional 
essences (deriving, for instance, from aesthetics, from History, 
from sociology); but at the moment of reaching the essence of 
Photography in general, I branched off; instead of following the 
path of a formal ontology (of a Logic), I stopped, keeping with 
me, like a treasure, my desire or my grief; the anticipated essence 
of the Photograph could not, in my mind, be separated from the 
‘pathos’ of which, from the first glance, it consists.7
For Barthes, the means to navigate the paradox that Photography 
embodies for him comes through a decision to explore Photography 
‘not as a question (a theme) but as a wound’,8 and it is this 
manoeuvre that in turn mobilises the figure of the punctum.
	
Analysing his own contemplation of photographs of his dead 
mother, Barthes splits his experience as a spectator into two 
parts: the studium which, as he explains, ‘doesn’t mean, at least 
not immediately, “study”, but application to a thing, taste for 
someone, a kind of general, enthusiastic commitment, of course, 
but without special acuity’.9 And then there is a second element:

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
149
	
The second element will break (or punctuate) the studium. This 
time it is not I who seek it out (as I invest the field of the studium 
with my sovereign consciousness), it is this element which rises 
from the scene, shoots out of it like an arrow, and pierces me. A 
Latin word exists to designate this wound, this prick, this mark 
made by a pointed instrument: the word suits me all the better in 
that it also refers to the notion of punctuation, and because the 
photographs I am speaking of are in effect punctuated, sometimes 
even speckled with these sensitive points; precisely, these marks, 
these wounds are so many points. This second element which will 
disturb the studium I shall therefore call punctum; for punctum is 
also: sting, speck, cut, little hole – and also a cast of the dice. A 
photograph’s punctum is that accident which pricks me (but also 
bruises me, is poignant to me).10
In this analysis, the somewhat uncanny affect that the punctum 
is able to effect in him derives from the ontology of Photography 
which, for Barthes, is situated in this medium’s specific relation 
to time, its strange conflation of different temporalities. For the 
intractable indexical relationship of the Photograph to its referent11 
combined with its immobility, its freezing of time, means that it 
embodies both a present which is eternalised and yet (hence its 
nostalgia) a past which is irrecuperable. He writes:
For the photograph’s immobility is somehow the result of a 
perverse confusion between two concepts: the Real and the 
Live: by attesting that the object has been real, the photograph 
surreptitiously induces belief that it is alive, because of that 
delusion which makes us attribute to Reality an absolutely 
superior, somehow eternal value; but by shifting this reality 
to the past (‘this-has-been’), the photograph suggests that it is 
already dead.12
	
In a later chapter on photography, I will problematise some 
aspects of Barthes’ ontology of photography and, in particular, its 
reliance on the notion of indexicality. This is not what is of concern 
to me here, however. Rather, what I want to suggest is that the 
concept of the punctum as it is formulated by Barthes might help 
us understand how to begin attending to noise. For noise, much as 
we might try to contain it, reduce it, sublimate it, eradicate it, has 

150	
NOISE MATTERS
the potential to affect us, to pierce us in this way – and this could 
well explain, of course, why it is that we try to control it. In Barthes’ 
terms, noise, like the punctum, can bring into being a similar 
phenomenological event, breaking the studium, dissolving the 
thetic, piercing the perceiving subject who is henceforth unable to 
contain it or sublimate this part of expression within an aesthetic or 
hermeneutic apprehension or appreciation. If, in Barthes’ ontology 
of Photography, this affect is produced via the commingling of 
different aspects of time in the one object, however, this is not the 
case with noise – even if, as my analyses have shown, noise has 
much to tell us about nostalgia. Rather, it is the more generalised 
problematisation of categorical distinctions that will bring about 
the punctum-like effect of noise, our inability to know whether we 
are dealing with form or content, the thetic or semiotic. It is this 
moment that instils in the perceiving subject a sense of the abject 
or uncanny that reveals her own existence to be an expression, that 
pierces her, precipitating feelings of nausea (or, as in Barthes, ‘desire, 
repulsion, nostalgia, euphoria’13) as her sovereign consciousness 
fails to contain Being.
	
Barthes’ concept of the punctum, then, may help us to theorise 
the peculiar affect of noise as an integral part of its ontology. Unlike 
Barthes, however, I am not convinced that it is necessary to conflate 
all aspects of this ontology together into a single moment (as fitting 
as this might seem when dealing with the ontology of Photography 
whose affect, for Barthes, comes precisely from this temporal 
conflation). Indeed, if we posit all ontology as relational, arising 
only in various expressive assemblages, then the specific attributes 
of the various partial objects that are carried into expression (as 
noise) will be expressed differently in different modes. Thus, it may 
well be that something resembling the punctum can be conceptu-
alised as an integral part of the ontology of noise; however, that 
particular aspect of the ontology of noise might only be expressed in 
a secondary mode, as noise arises in the in-between of the expressive 
assemblage formed between the emitter and the receiver. All noise, 
though, is firstly produced in the very contraction of expression into 
actuality, in a primary ontological mode, prior to reception. The 
dangers of not positing such a distinction and attempting to conflate 
all aspects or modes of such a phenomenologically inflected ontology 
together are that one can end up making primary ontological claims 
that are undermined by secondary, more subjective ones. This, I 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
151
want to suggest eventually, goes some way towards explaining why 
it is that analyses of noise are subject to the kinds of inconsistencies 
and contradictions that I have highlighted. But for a specific instan-
tiation of the problem, let us remain with Barthes for a moment 
and examine another concept in his work that will also be of use to 
the present investigation of the ontology of noise, albeit indirectly 
because, precisely, it falls prey to the inconsistency that comes from 
the failure to make a modal distinction.
Grain
In a very famous essay written in 1970, Barthes sets out to analyse 
what he calls ‘The Grain of the Voice’.14 In his most basic formu-
lation, Barthes describes this ‘grain’ as being ‘the body in the voice 
as it sings, the hand as it writes, the limb as it performs’.15 More 
than this, though, borrowing from Kristeva (Barthes’ pupil at one 
point) Barthes links the ‘grain’ of the voice to a different economy 
of meaning. Rather than drawing on Kristeva’s categories of the 
symbolic and the semiotic, however, Barthes instead reformulates 
two corollary terms from her vocabulary, the pheno-text and the 
geno-text (terms that Barthes hyphenates) which he transposes into 
the terms pheno-song and geno-song for the purpose of his analysis 
of the singing voices of Fischer-Dieskau and Panzera. He writes,
The pheno-song (if the transposition be allowed) covers all the 
phenomena, all the features which belong to the structure of the 
language being sung, the rules of the genre, the coded form of 
the melisma, the composer’s idiolect, the style of the interpre-
tation: in short, everything in the performance which is in the 
service of communication, representation, expression, every-
thing which it is customary to talk about, which forms the tissue 
of cultural values […], which takes its bearing directly on the 
ideological alibis of a period […]. The geno-song is the volume 
of the singing and speaking voice, the space where significations 
germinate ‘from within language and in its very materiality’; it 
forms a signifying play having nothing to do with communi-
cation, representation (of feelings), expression; it is that apex 
(or that depth) of production where the melody really works 

152	
NOISE MATTERS
at the language – not at what it says, but the voluptuousness of 
its sounds-signifiers, of its letters – where melody explores how 
the language works and identifies with that work. It is, in a very 
simple word but which must be taken seriously, the diction of 
the language.16
	
Whilst one might imagine that in talking about the ‘grain’ of 
the voice Barthes would be talking about something akin to what 
we have termed noise, it is apparent from the above that this is 
not necessarily, or not solely the case. For whilst the grain of the 
voice could indeed be a noisy element, insofar as it might be said 
to describe the ways in which the materiality of the body is carried 
into vocal expression via a resistant operation, the ‘grain’ of the 
voice for Barthes in fact only arises when certain other conditions 
are fulfilled that have more to do with a receptive mode. Indeed, 
somewhat like the punctum in his analysis of photography, the 
‘grain’ of the voice brings into focus the possibility of a different 
receptive mode, one that does not concentrate on the thetic content 
of the song (the symbolic level or phenotext) but, rather, is drawn 
to the specificity of the expression that comes from its material (or, 
in the case of photography, temporal) composition. As with the 
punctum, the experience that comes from an encounter with this 
‘grain’ is both outside of the control of a sovereign consciousness 
and, concomitantly, seemingly ineffable – indeed Barthes describes 
his own article as ‘the impossible account of an individual thrill 
that I constantly experience in listening to singing’.17
	
In this respect also, then, the ‘grain’ of the voice shares many of 
the characteristics that I have imputed to noise in regards to its effect 
upon the receiver. However, in conflating these two distinct modes 
of the relational ontology of the grain, Barthes is forced to make a 
categorical distinction as to what actually constitutes grain on what 
are essentially subjective criteria arising only in the secondary phase, 
a conflation which in turn leads him to negate the liminal aspect of 
the grain (or, indeed, punctum), its ability to dissolve the thetic. For 
whilst he does indeed talk of the experience of the grain as a ‘thrill’, 
as some kind of affective response that would then be situated 
outside of the economy of the sign, he nonetheless seems to make 
of the ‘grain’ or geno-song a slave or corollary of the phenotext, of 
signification. Thus, even though he states that the grain of the voice 
‘cannot better be defined […] than by the very friction between the 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
153
music and something else, which something else is the particular 
language (and nowise the message)’,18 in the exemplifications of 
the appearance of the genotext (or its failure to appear) that can be 
found in his analyses of Panzera (and Fischer-Dieskau respectively), 
the grain of the voice seems to complement the meaning of the 
phenotext, reinforcing it rather than piercing it. That this is the case 
can be seen in his assertion that ‘All of Panzera’s art […] was in the 
letters, not in the bellows (simple technical feature: you never heard 
him breathe but only divide up the phrase)’,19 and this becomes 
clearer still in Dunsby’s attempt to exhibit (and not merely evoke 
rhetorically) the grain of the voice through a musicological analysis 
of ‘the contextualized musical evidence presented by Barthes before 
the general idea rapidly outgrew its particular origins’.20 Indeed, 
commenting on this same assertion that ‘you never heard [Panzera] 
breathe’, Dunsby remarks:
One would think that breathing can in itself be part of the 
‘grain’. Yet this inflection seems to reinforce how meticulous 
a theorist Barthes was in demanding a corporality in which 
breathing is heard only when assimilated in the poetic diction.21
	
As with Kristeva and the abject, then, in spite of the usefulness 
of the idea of the punctum, despite the similarities that can be 
found between Barthes’ idea of the grain of the voice and noise and 
in spite of the fact that we can find in his ideas much resistance (as 
this term has been defined here) when he talks of ‘friction between 
the music and something else’ – that something else being langue 
or, if you will, the specific assemblage out of which expression 
arises –, the potential obsistence of these concepts is lost in Barthes’ 
specific deployments of them and everything is brought back 
into the realm of signifiance. It may of course be objected that 
this is not a problem, that Barthes is quite simply talking about 
something different, yet this does not always seem to be the case 
as I have intimated. Indeed, the receptive mode that the grain or 
genotext brings into play (like noise) would seem to be fundamen-
tally anathema to signifiance. Barthes himself suggests that in the 
throat, that part of the body which brings grain into expression 
in full force, ‘signifiance explodes, bringing not the soul but jouis-
sance’.22 Ultimately, however, his analysis of grain as it stands is 
deeply problematic for a study such as this because, in spite of 

154	
NOISE MATTERS
points of close contact, Barthes – in a similar manner to the critics 
of high-fidelity technologies already observed and, indeed, those 
scholars of noise who make ontological claims that are muddied 
by subjective judgements – does not take enough care when ontolo-
gising his object of study, conflating the specific operations and 
different expressive assemblages he is looking at into one object. 
This can but lead to internal contradictions in his work, the most 
heinous of which, for the purposes of this analysis, is the suggestion 
that the grain can be contained within the economy of the sign, for 
this makes of it something other than noise.
	
It should not be thought from this that I am here guilty of 
the mistake that Dunsby (to my mind falsely) accuses Barthes 
of and suggesting that the phenotext and genotext are mutually 
exclusive. Indeed, Dunsby is absolutely right to point out that ‘the 
genotext and the phenotext in human communication are aspects, 
not separable entities’.23 What I am suggesting is that whilst they 
always (and not only sometimes, as Barthes’ politics of taste forces 
him to claim) accompany each other (noise always coexisting let us 
remember), the genotext is at one and the same time the expression 
of the material conditions of possibility of the text or communi-
cation and yet, concurrently, in excess of the phenotext, thus acting 
against the possibility of its hermeneutic closure. The grain of the 
voice, this is to say, might indeed be said to constitute its noise, but 
only if it is not slaved to the phenotext, if it is allowed not so much 
to ‘[shift] something in the chain of the signifier’24 but, rather, to 
subsist within that chain as a break.
	
The problem is perhaps greater than this, however, for it is not 
simply the case that Barthes misconstrues the relation between the 
grain and the phenotext, he explicitly claims that some singers have 
no grain on the basis of a subjective perception of the sound they 
produce. With Fischer-Dieskau, for instance, he writes, ‘I seem 
only to hear the lungs, never the tongue, the glottis, the teeth, the 
mucous membranes, the nose’,25 which is to say all of those body 
parts which for him generate grain. All vocal expression, however, 
necessarily and unavoidably contracts all of these body parts and 
more together in an assemblage, and they are all then unavoidably 
present in the expression in some form. Barthes’ claim that he does 
not hear them is, then, not necessarily disingenuous but certainly 
subjective. And the very same thing can be seen in his analysis 
of Mélisande’s death in which he explicitly links the ideas he has 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
155
been talking about to the term noise and claims not only that this 
expression is noise-free, but also, astoundingly, that it is entirely 
unmediated. He writes:
Mélisande dies without any noise (understanding the term in its 
cybernetic sense): nothing occurs to interfere with the signifier and 
there is thus no compulsion to redundance; simply, the production 
of a music-language with the function of preventing the singer 
from being expressive. As with the Russian bass, the symbolic 
(the death) is thrown immediately (without mediation) before us.26
	
Barthes’ contention here is no doubt possible because in his 
aesthetic theory one can effect a separation between art and life on 
an ontological level, because art is indeed capable of entertaining a 
transcendent relation to the world into which it is released. Indeed, 
in a separate article, ‘Introduction to the Structural Analysis of 
Narratives’, Barthes explicitly states that the artwork is an entirely 
hermetic entity, fully present to itself on its own terms, meaning, 
effectively, that art is free of noise. He writes:
	
Is everything in a narrative functional? Does everything, 
down to the slightest detail, have a meaning? Can narrative 
be divided up entirely into functional units? We shall see in a 
moment that there are several kinds of functions, there being 
several kinds of correlations, but this does not alter the fact that 
a narrative is never made up of anything other than functions: 
in differing degrees, everything in it signifies. This is not a matter 
of art (on the part of the narrator), but of structure; in the 
realm of discourse, what is noted is by definition notable. Even 
were a detail to appear irretrievably insignificant, resistant to 
all functionality, it would nonetheless end up with precisely the 
meaning of absurdity or uselessness: everything has a meaning, 
or nothing has. To put it another way, one could say that art is 
without noise (as that term is employed in information theory): 
art is a system which is pure, no unit ever goes wasted.27
And in a footnote to this proclamation about noise he states:
This is what separates art from ‘life’, the latter knowing only 
‘fuzzy’ or ‘blurred’ communications. ‘Fuzziness’ (that beyond 

156	
NOISE MATTERS
which it is impossible to see) can exist in art, but it does so 
as a coded element (in Watteau for example). Even then, such 
‘fuzziness’ is unknown to the written code: writing is inescapably 
distinct.28
This, of course, is the very same ontological division effected by 
Roquentin in Nausea, although there is no sense in Barthes’ text 
that the transcendence of the work of art is erected as a defence 
against the terrifying contingency, or ‘fuzziness’ of life. In Barthes’ 
text, on the contrary, this claim seems instead to be a necessary 
artefact of the strict structural stance that he advocates the critic 
adopt in relation to the texts or works of art under consideration. 
Regardless, it should be clear by now that claims such as this are, 
to my mind, untenable. It is simply not possible for an expression 
to reach us in its immediacy, hermetic and pure, unmediated, noise-
free, just as it is not possible for a vocal expression to be produced 
without the tongue, the glottis, the teeth or the nose. The problem 
in both cases, to phrase it in the terminology of information theory, 
is that in pretending that this is the case, an ontological claim is 
made about the expression emitted on the sole basis of the signal 
received, as though these things were necessarily coterminous with 
each other or else independent of the systemic relations through 
which any act of expression and communication takes place. In 
other words, whilst we have seen again and again that noise does 
not avail itself to us easily, whilst it can be extremely hard to hear 
or attend to, this does not mean that it is not present in those 
expressions where we do not recognise it, and the belief that it is 
not present arises out of the failure to make a modal distinction 
between different ontological phases, the failure to realise that if 
expression is relational then its nature will necessarily be unstable. 
In other words, to use the same vocabulary as before, whilst a 
communicative act contracts together emitter, signal, channel 
and receiver in one assemblage, the particular qualities of the 
expression produced out of that assemblage, being relational, will 
differ in the very expressive act itself.29
	
In his analysis of ‘grain’, as with his analysis of the ‘punctum’ 
in photography, Barthes thus conflates all moments of a relational 
ontology into a single perspective. The problem with this, to an 
even greater extent than in his analyses of photography, is that 
this leads him to confuse a subjective and aesthetic claim with an 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
157
ontological one. This is a shame, for as should hopefully be clear 
by now, there are elements of his discussion of the genotext and the 
relationship between ‘grain’ and signifiance that are very pertinent 
to some of the claims made here in relation to noise. Barthes’ glitch, 
however, opens up a space in which the potential of his ideas can be 
explored. Indeed, in what remains of this chapter I want to argue 
that many of the grainy and noisy aspects of the voice talked of by 
Barthes can more usefully be thought of as noise if we do not fall 
prey to the same lure. However, lest this train of thought become 
too abstract (and ironically so since ‘grain’ must, after all, always 
be grounded in some kind of embodiment), I will not continue this 
reflection in the same vein. Instead, I want to think through the 
questions of noise that Barthes’ concept of ‘grain’ (and, indeed, the 
‘punctum’) elicit via two different examples. These examples have 
the advantage of making more obvious than is normally the case the 
genetic construction and systematic elements of their expression, 
meaning that they actively resist the possibility of conflating their 
various modes and qualities into a single moment or aspect. The 
examples I will proffer are Alvin Lucier’s I am Sitting in a Room 
from 1969, three years before the publication of Barthes’ text, 
and musique concrète. The reason why I turn to these examples is 
because in both of them, albeit in different ways, there is a tension 
between the genotext and the phenotext, similar in certain respects 
to that found in Barthes’ concept of grain, that might enable us 
to see how noise exists in the relation between these aspects of a 
song, sound, text, or any other expression for that matter, and that 
becomes more perceptible the higher the coefficient of genotext. 
To put it more succinctly, whilst both of these musical expressions 
might easily be said to be ‘noisy’ in the common sense definition of 
the term, I want to see if in them we can hear noise as it is under-
stood here.
V/Nois/ce
I am Sitting in a Room is, quite literally, self-explanatory, for 
the process that is used to generate the text forms the basis of 
the sound material of the text, Lucier reading and recording the 
following text:

158	
NOISE MATTERS
I am sitting in a room different from the one you are in now. 
I am recording the sound of my speaking voice and I am 
going to play it back into the room again and again until the 
resonant frequencies of the room reinforce themselves so that 
any semblance of my speech, with perhaps the exception of 
rhythm, is destroyed. What you will hear, then, are the natural 
resonant frequencies of the room articulated by speech. I regard 
this activity not so much as a demonstration of a physical fact, 
but, more as a way to smooth out any irregularities my speech 
might have.
Lest this not be abundantly clear from this explanation alone, it 
should be specified that every time this recorded text is played back 
into the room, that version is recorded, subsequently played back 
into this same space, this latest version then being recorded, played 
back, etc.
	
Whilst the methodology of the piece is then very clearly mapped 
out by Lucier, what is perhaps not so certain is the extent to which 
his interpretation of what happens as this piece is performed 
accounts for what the listener actually hears. For whilst it is indeed 
the case that ‘the natural resonant frequencies of the room [are] 
articulated by speech’ – since it is through the recording and subse-
quent playback of the contents of speech that the natural resonant 
frequencies of the room are gradually intensified to the exclusion of 
those resonant frequencies that are absorbed by and not reflected 
by the architectural and material qualities of the space in which the 
piece is performed – this is not all that is going on. Indeed, listening 
to the piece, what becomes clear as the various iterations roll by 
is that it is not only the resonant frequencies of the room that are 
intensified in the heterogenetic production of this work, but the 
material qualities of both the recording and playback apparatus 
and the voice itself. Indeed, it does not take many generations 
before the listener realises that if the voice soon sounds muffled 
and somewhat distant, then this is in large part because of the loss 
of high-fidelity reproduction that occurs as we move further and 
further away from the original expression or, rather, the interpo-
lation of the recording and playback technology’s mediality. This 
is to say, then, that much like those compilation tapes from the 
1980s made up of recorded versions of friends’ copies of songs 
originally recorded from the radio, the extra volume (by which we 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
159
mean substance as opposed to intensity) that the piece accrues as 
it progresses is, and is recognised as, an unavoidable consequence 
of the impossibility of fidelity.30 With regard to the materiality of 
the body in the voice, meanwhile, as the piece progresses what is 
remarkable is that, whilst it does indeed seem to be the case that 
the quasi-periodic vibrations of phonation are filtered out in such 
a way as to express the resonant frequencies of the room, for 
quite some time the sibilance, pops and clicks produced by frica-
tives, plosives and other articulations that implicate the body’s 
musculature (as well as, of course, the tongue, the glottis and the 
teeth) to a greater degree than most vocal sounds are retained and 
highlighted through isolation. Abstracted from the meaning or 
context that would be provided by the intelligible text as originally 
read, the sounds of these articulations do indeed become rhythmic 
elements as Lucier suggests, but they are also a perceptible signifier 
of the body’s materiality and the physiological effort required by 
complex speech.
	
For this reason it cannot really be said much of the time that 
Lucier’s piece does as he suggests, namely, ‘to smooth out any 
irregularities [his] speech might have’ – at least, not if we interpret 
this literally.31 And it is because of the long transformation required 
to arrive at this final stage in which all of the voice’s ‘irregularities’ 
have returned to what we might call a plane of consistency that 
we can apprehend what is happening in this piece. For what we 
hear across the various iterations is the intensification of all aspects 
of the mediality of the various systems or expressive assemblages 
responsible for the production and transport of his speech (his 
body, the recording and playback technologies, and the material 
and acoustic qualities of the architectural space in which the piece 
is performed) such that the manifest content of the phenotext (the 
meaning) is obliterated, it becoming increasingly hard and, in the 
end, impossible to reconstitute enough of any word’s phonemes for 
it to be recognisable within a linguistic system. Something similar is 
suggested by Aden Evens who describes the process at work in this 
piece as follows:
The text-speech slowly slides from articulate words to a 
continuous hum of pitch, and eventually – even where there 
was a silent pause in the original, say, between two sentences 
– the noise of the tape and the room is selectively reinforced to 

160	
NOISE MATTERS
produce an unbroken and perpetually evolving chord from an 
exhausted organ.32
Or, as he puts it later,
The most articulate sound is washed into the hum of noise. […] 
His piece explodes the transition from inflection into innuendo, 
the dissolve at which sound melds into noise, inviting its close 
observation.33
	
In Lucier’s piece, then, the noise of many different aspects of the 
expressive assemblage deployed in space and time is gradually inten-
sified, its mediality, genotext or semiotic level growing in inverse 
proportion to the eradication of its content, phenotext or symbolic 
level. Lucier’s piece, this is to say, instigates an expression based 
on resistance as the material reconfiguration that is the precon-
dition for the coming into being of any expression is foregrounded 
through repetition.34 What we hear as Lucier’s piece progresses is 
the intensification of the noise that always already subsisted in his 
piece, that necessarily coexisted alongside the utterance that consti-
tutes the start of the piece, that persists and remains noise (or, in 
this case, becomes ever noisier), and that obsists by pulling apart 
meaning and signification as its own power increases.
	
Nor is it only the meaning of the text that is pulled away from 
a closed hermeneutics in I am Sitting in a Room. For, in spite of its 
title, this is a text in which sovereign subjectivity is pulled beyond 
itself, in which the self-present expression of the speaking ‘I’ is 
revealed to be entirely dependent on and shaped by the outside 
into which that expression is released.35 In I am Sitting in a Room, 
then, what we hear in the noise emanating from the assemblage 
of speaking subject–recording technology–room is the death knoll 
of Cartesian interiority and the intersistence of phenomenological 
or relational subjectivity. For if, as Sartre and many others have 
claimed, my own self and being are necessarily tied up with and 
dependent on those of others, I am Sitting in a Room extends this 
dissolution of ontological boundaries out so that it encompasses 
apparently inanimate matter. Far from constituting a site of fear as 
it is for Roquentin, however, something to be sublimated through 
the reassertion of the primacy of the individual through artistic 
expression, Lucier’s work is born of the pursuit and creation of 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
161
this noise that links together subject, space and technology in a 
singular (hence non-reductive) ontology. However, what his work 
makes us attend to are the modal distinctions between the different 
kinds of noise that arise across the various relations that the piece 
conjugates together. Whilst these noises are ontologically linked in 
regards to the principles and operations according to which they 
come into being and the secondary effects that they deploy, they 
are not, nor could they be in a relational ontology, identical to each 
other. This is not to say that any of them need to be disqualified 
as noise (as they might be if we were to follow Barthes’ method-
ology). It is to say that we need to be careful about the claims that 
we make about Lucier’s piece. For if noise can be talked of from an 
ontological perspective, it also inevitably speaks to us of ontology.
	
Noise, this is to say, arising out of the specific relations of 
expressive assemblages, tells us something specific about the 
ontology of those assemblages. In Lucier’s piece, the noise that 
we hear is almost without exception produced by and in-between 
the technological assemblage and the physical properties of its 
spatial context rather than by something specific to the sonorous 
expression itself. What this means (for reasons that will become 
clear later) is that Lucier’s piece tells us little if anything about 
the relationship between noise and music;36 it is, rather, a prime 
example of what Brandon LaBelle would classify as sound art. 
LaBelle writes: ‘Sound art as a practice harnesses, describes, 
analyzes, performs, and interrogates the condition of sound and 
the processes by which it operates’.37 Indeed, this ‘activation of the 
existing relation between sound and space’ stands, for him, ‘at the 
core of the very practice of sound art’.38
	
That Lucier’s piece does not tell us anything of the relationship 
between music and noise is, of course, of little matter. Noise, as 
we have seen and will see in subsequent chapters, arises in many 
places other than in music, indeed, it is my contention that it arises 
everywhere, unavoidably. Nonetheless, if we are finally discovering 
ways to listen to noise, it makes sense to try to listen for it in the 
musical realm because so many of the debates surrounding noise 
have been fought on this battlefield. So whilst the going is good, 
let us consider another kind of sonorous assemblage that actually 
qualifies itself as music and that, somewhat although not too 
surprisingly, has much in common with Lucier’s piece, to see if it is 
as full of noise.

162	
NOISE MATTERS
Concrete
Intensifying the latent material qualities of both the voice, archi-
tecture and recording technologies that are necessary for Lucier’s 
piece to come into expression until the link between signifier 
and signified or content and meaning is lost, there is arguably a 
deep filiation between Lucier’s I am Sitting in a Room and the 
mechanical period of early musique concrète.39 This is perhaps 
only the case, though, if we understand precisely why this music 
takes the appellation concrète, for some confusion appears to reign 
on this point. Thom Holmes, for instance, suggests that this was a 
term coined by Schaeffer ‘to denote the use of sound objects from 
nature, ‘concrete’ sounds of the real world’.40 Such, however, goes 
against the grain of the widely known fundamental premise of 
musique concrète, which is to say its desire to apprehend sounds in 
isolation from the source of that sound. Indeed, as Teruggi notes, 
the primary objective of the early practitioners of musique concrète 
was to use the tools at their disposal or to create new tools to 
‘strongly affect the essential parameters of sound in order to create 
a “distorted” perception of them’ and, as a result, ‘to “erase” 
from recorded sounds any referential allusion’.41 In so doing, they 
wished to present the sounds in their limitless palette as objets 
sonores, sounds to be heard, analysed or studied for their own 
intrinsic qualities and properties and not, therefore, relegated to the 
inferior status of signifier always deferring to the more important 
and essential signified. To claim that the term concrète refers to 
this music’s use of ‘real’, ‘concrete’ sounds is then to disregard 
Schaeffer’s own pronouncements on the matter. Schaeffer states:
The word ‘concrete’ did not designate a source. It meant that we 
were apprehending all of the characteristics of sound, sound in 
its totality. Thus, a concrete sound might be thought of as the 
sound of a violin, but considered in such a way as to account 
for all of its sensory qualities [dans toutes ses qualités sensibles], 
and not only its abstract qualities, those that are marked down 
on the score.42
	
If musique concrète is called concrète, then, it is so firstly 
because it allows us to apprehend sound as though it were an 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
163
object, as if it possessed, that is to say, an opaque materiality which 
enabled the listener to consider it in itself as a being-in-itself (to 
use the Sartrean concept), divorced from the relational world of 
language and consciousness. Apprehended ‘dans toutes ses qualités 
sensibles’, the objets sonores produced by this music were able 
to act upon the listener in a way that music produced through 
cerebral and abstract composition techniques did not. It is in this 
relation to its effect upon the listener that we can grasp the second 
dimension of the term concrète. For if Schaeffer qualified his music 
with this adjective, it is also because the effect produced by this 
music was experienced as a bodily, sensual (as opposed to emotive) 
event whose transmission to the listener was direct and material as 
opposed to cerebral and abstract. As Abraham Moles writes:
In an article written for the French musical journal Polyphonie, 
Schaeffer proposed to use the term ‘musique concrète’ to 
designate this particular kind of music. This was the word 
used by the Surrealist poet, Antonin Artaud, in his text The 
Theatre of Cruelty which proposed the ideal of a new music for 
a new theatre – a new music which would be received directly 
(concretely) by the spectator’s sensorium.43
	
If musique concrète was called concrète, however, this was also, 
and perhaps primordially, because it was to an unprecedented 
degree dependent in its conception, composition and performance 
or elaboration upon a material support. As Holmes rightly notes, 
‘Composing a work of musique concrète began with the sound 
material itself rather than with a mental schema laid out by the 
composer beforehand, such as a score. The material preceded the 
structure’.44 But it is not only in this respect that the creation of 
musique concrète is more material than that of other musics; for 
Schaeffer, the manual work involved in tape manipulation was an 
integral part of the process, since it allowed the composer to work 
directly on the matter out of which the work of art was forged – 
sound – without a visual interface (such as that which is integral 
to computer music composition) interfering with or ‘colouring’ the 
sound with a sensibility that ultimately had nothing to do with the 
specificity of the medium in which the composer was working.45
	
Like Lucier’s piece, musique concrète would thus appear to be a 
form of expression in which noise is intensified, for it is reliant on 

164	
NOISE MATTERS
the very materiality of the technology which enables it to come into 
being, and the foregrounding of that material specificity removes 
the expression’s recorded content from an abstract, relational 
or linguistic structure, pulling the genotext into perception. The 
extent to which this happens in musique concrète as opposed to 
Lucier’s piece is very different, however, for musique concrète 
does not implicate the entire assemblage required for the perfor-
mance of its expression as a heterogenerative technique of (auto-) 
composition as does the latter. This is to say that, true to its name, 
musique concrète remains predominantly music insofar as the 
majority of its content is indeed produced through a deliberate 
compositional act and not as the unintended by-product of an 
expressive assemblage over which the composer can exercise no 
ultimate control.46 This is not to say, as should hopefully be clear 
by now, that I am positing a dichotomous and mutually exclusive 
relationship between noise and music and suggesting that noise is 
here absent because the piece is musical for, as I have suggested, 
every expression, whether musical or otherwise, is born of and 
carries noise within it. This is to say that, in spite of the massively 
technologized nature of musique concrète, the coefficient of noise 
coming from the technological assemblage and deployment of that 
assemblage for the production of the work in space and time is 
not sufficient to overwhelm the music’s content as it is presented 
to perception (unlike Lucier’s piece therefore). It is for this very 
reason that musique concrète ultimately falls foul of Sean Higgins 
who writes:
As a result of his occupation with music, though the sonic event 
becomes the basis of his artistic vocabulary, musique concrète 
enacted its own noise suppression. Though this music greatly 
expanded the timbral, structural, and formal vocabulary of 
music it failed to fully account for the noise that haunts it, the 
purely sensory noise of sound’s empirical mediation that stands 
in excess of the musical model of recognition. That is, it opened 
music to the noise of sonic events but it did so only in the terms 
of irregular sonic events that could be repeated via phonog-
raphy, and thus eventually structured and recognized. Noise as 
the difference of each sonic event had been compromised in the 
name of music, an opportunity was missed to instruct a new sort 
of listening.47

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
165
	
For Higgins, the privileging of Schaeffer’s objets sonores that 
makes of them ‘an absolutely repeatable, authoritatively stand-
ardized, sensible sonic event’ means that the transcendental ideal of 
the musical score is merely replaced by ‘the transcendental ideal of 
the sonorous object profaned by the irregularity of its resounding 
through concrete media’. For Higgins, then, musique concrète 
presents ‘a standardized idea of listening that still suppresses the 
empirical difference of sound’s resounding through media’.48 This 
is true up until a point, and what is certain is that the coefficient 
of noise of this kind in musique concrète is far smaller than in 
Lucier’s piece which finds favour with Higgins. It is important to 
note, however, that such noise is not entirely absent from musique 
concrète, although it is perhaps fairly minimal. Given the nature of 
this music, however, there is necessarily some noise that emanates 
from the technological hardware used for the production of this 
music (such as tape hiss and the technology’s material and acoustic 
impedance, regardless of whether these are actually perceptible 
as noise or not) in much the same way that there is always 
some material noise present in the signal emitted by any musical 
instrument. As Teruggi points out, the very fact that in musique 
concrète ‘sounds have to be modelled before being combined’ 
means, invariably, that the tools used to model sound will ‘leave 
“traces” on the sounds that they affect’.49 More importantly, 
however, there is in tape-based musique concrète a very specific 
form of noise which, whilst almost imperceptible, is nonetheless, 
I would contend, extremely significant for a consideration of the 
noise of musique concrète. This noise is an artefact that comes 
from the primary technique used in tape-based musique concrète, 
namely the splice, this being the specific action employed to enact 
what is the key principle of musique concrète: montage.50
	
Very early experiments in musique concrète used shellac records 
and various performative techniques such as speed transposition, 
filtering and sound-sample extraction in order to present sound in 
a different way and to rend the bond between acoustic signifier and 
signified. Such techniques cannot really be qualified as noise per se, 
however, for their deliberate deployment in a performative setting 
ultimately draws them close to Russolo’s intonarumori, which is to 
say that the turntable here becomes but one more variation on a 
new breed of musical instruments designed to sound ‘noisy’ in the 
common sense definition of the term, yet that remain firmly rooted 

166	
NOISE MATTERS
in the paradigms of conventional musicality and performativity. 
What is more, early experiments in musique concrète were not, as 
it turned out, very noisy since they were not all that successful in 
their avowed aim of a bringing about a denaturalisation of sound, 
a dissolution of the phenotext through the destruction of the 
denotative and connotative aspects of sound – as Schaeffer himself 
admitted when looking back on his career.
	
According to most accounts of musique concrète, however, 
the advent of magnetic tape technology would change this and 
allow the practitioners of musique concrète to wrest sound from 
its reference and thus achieve this aim far more successfully 
thanks to the technique of micro-editing that this new medium 
made possible. As Teruggi explains, ‘Tape editing brought a new 
technique called “micro-editing”, in which very tiny fragments of 
sound, representing milliseconds of time, were edited together, thus 
creating completely new sounds or structures’.51 Whilst the content 
of magnetic tape may be rearranged radically such that its source 
is no longer recognisable, the technique that renders this possible, 
the splice or cut, indelibly leaves its own sonic imprint that is (just) 
perceptible to the ear and that, like the glitch already examined, 
draws our attention to it as a marker of the technological system’s 
own mediality and also, I would contend, of the mediality of 
musical expression. This is not a point, however, that I wish to 
argue further at the present time because it goes so much against the 
grain that more preparation is needed for the argument to stand up.
Against the grain
In talking about Lucier’s I am Sitting in a Room and musique 
concrète, we have been dealing with another two examples that 
reappear almost obsessively in studies that tackle the question of the 
relationship between noise and music or sound art more generally. 
The conclusions arrived at here in each case, however, differ quite 
significantly from much of what has been said on these subjects 
before (with the exception, of course, of Evens). If ultimately I have 
contended, for instance, that Lucier’s piece ends up awash in noise, 
this is the very opposite of how most commentators have talked 
of this piece. Indeed, many see the work progressing further and 

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
167
further towards a musical expression that transmogrifies the noisy 
elements of the work into something quite strangely beautiful (and 
thus, in a common sense appreciation, not-noisy). In the entry for 
Lucier that appears in the volume Music of the Twentieth-Century 
Avant-Garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook, for instance, Warren Burt 
describes the progression of I am Sitting in a Room as follows:
Over the course of the forty minutes of the piece, the sound of 
the voice is gradually replaced by a series of glowing resonant 
tones and chords, purely the effect of the specific frequencies 
favoured by the room the piece is performed in. By the end of 
the piece, a gorgeous series of changing sounds occurs, moving, 
as stated, in the rhythms of the original speech.52
Salomé Voegelin, meanwhile, suggests that by the end of the piece 
Lucier ‘is not sitting in a room at all anymore. Instead he is sitting 
in pure sound’,53 a description that seems to remove us from the 
realm of noise, at least noise as it is generally understood.
	
Whilst it may seem an impossible task to reconcile the position 
adopted here which has much in common with that of Evens and 
in which I am Sitting in a Room ends up awash in noise with that 
of Burt or Voegelin where it is eminently musical or absolutely 
sonorous, I believe it is in fact possible to do precisely this and that 
in doing so we are able to intuit something very important about 
noise.
	
The key to this reconciliation comes, for me, as Voegelin 
unpacks her own statement a little further and describes, in a far 
more poetic manner, something similar to what has been said here 
about the operations of Lucier’s piece. She writes:
	
The place of performance becomes the place of listening, 
the timespace of production coinciding with the timespace of 
perception and yet a multiplicity of places are thus produced 
that erode the notion of an authentic room while offering me 
the experience of my own temporality. Sound shatters spatial 
certainty and builds time of fluid rooms. Lucier’s voice builds a 
room that knows no outside and yet it has no boundary. I am in 
it or it does not exist. It belongs not in language and architecture 
but in the body of the listener, who takes up the extension of 
Lucier’s body to extend his own. Lucier’s voice does not extend 

168	
NOISE MATTERS
into a space that is already there, realizing the inner necessity 
of his body, but builds the space of his voice in the time of my 
perception.54
What Voegelin’s comments here remind us is that I am Sitting 
in a Room is predominantly a piece that enacts and reiterates or 
repeats-with-difference a performative act that becomes simul-
taneously a perceptive and receptive act. To this we can add, 
of course, that it is also the repeated event of a recording, as 
noted above. In both cases, however, again somewhat counter-
intuitively, what is important is to realise that the noise that is 
described in my account and that of Evens is not really auditory 
noise, even if it is expressed in sound; it is, rather, the noise of the 
deployment of an expression in space and time, of a performative 
and receptive event as well as of a technological assemblage or, 
as Higgins would have it, there is a deliberate focus here on the 
noise of the ‘particular empirical mediation of sound’.55 To put 
this another way, what we are hearing is not so much the noise 
of the signal but, rather, the noise of the channel in operation 
and its recording mechanism. This is to say that the noise of the 
piece indicates that this piece is more about the interrelationship 
of a subject or, if you will, expression in the world (precisely as 
its title indicates) than it is about a particular sonic phenomenon 
(as Lucier’s spoken text seems to imply). This is to say, again, 
that noise can arise in many different kinds of assemblages and in 
many different modalities or modes, which may or may not relate 
to noise as a sonic phenomenon. Given that, there is no reason 
why noise should sound how we might normally expect noise to 
sound.
	
Which leads us back to musique concrète, which perhaps often 
seems noisy precisely because, oftentimes, it does indeed sound 
precisely how people expect noise to sound. Indeed, musique 
concrète, like Cage’s 4’33” and Russolo’s intonarumori, is often 
thought of as being noisy because, as we have seen Higgins 
comment, ‘this music greatly expanded the timbral, structural, and 
formal vocabulary of music’.56 Cox and Warner suggest something 
similar and place Schaeffer in a lineage that also includes Cage 
and Russolo in the introduction to ‘Music and Its Others: Noise, 
Sound, Silence’, the first section of their edited volume Audio 
Culture: Readings in Modern Music. They write:

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
169
In 1948, Pierre Schaeffer broadcast over French radio a ‘Concert 
of Noises,’ a set of pieces composed entirely from recordings 
of train whistles, spinning tops, pots and pans, canal boats, 
percussion instruments, and the occasional piano. Schaeffer 
called his new music ‘musique concrète’, in contrast with tradi-
tional ‘musique abstraite’, which passed through the detours of 
notation, instrumentation, and performance.57
	
What this reminds us, of course, is that it is not surprising that 
people have often thought of musique concrète as little more than 
a collection of noises attempting to pass for music since Schaeffer 
himself titled the works performed at the concert Cox and Warner 
mention Cinq études de bruits (Five Studies of Noises). The attri-
bution of this common sense definition of noise does not really 
stand up to scrutiny, however, for the very reasons that Higgins 
gives. It is precisely for this reason that he kicks against musique 
concrète, wishing that it were able, like Lucier’s piece, ‘to fully 
account for the noise that haunts it, the purely sensory noise of 
sound’s empirical mediation that stands in excess of the musical 
model of recognition’.58 In Higgins’ critique, however, is an (admit-
tedly very common) assumption that music and noise are opposed 
to each other, indeed he claims that noise is here ‘compromised in 
the name of music’.59 Whilst representing an inverse position both 
ideologically and philosophically, this contention actually shares 
some common ground with Schafer who riles against Schaeffer 
(and Russolo) because of their sacrilegious integration of noise 
into the realm of music such that the soundscape of the world is 
no longer ‘divisible into musical and nonmusical kingdoms’.60 So 
whilst Schafer hates that Schaeffer has cast a pox on music with 
noise whilst Higgins hates that Schaeffer has cast a pox on noise 
with music, both consider these realms or kingdoms to be neces-
sarily in opposition to each other. As should be clear by now, 
however, and as the tension between Higgins and Schafer shows all 
by itself, the idea that music and noise are fundamentally opposed 
to each other, that noise is one of music’s ‘Others’ (to use the term 
of Cox and Warner’s title) is a highly problematic concept given 
the necessarily arbitrary and subjective nature of the dividing line 
between the two. Noise and music are, I would suggest, by no 
means opposed to each other: music is born of noise and carries 
noise within it just as does any expression. Indeed, what I will 

170	
NOISE MATTERS
suggest in this book’s final chapter is that whilst musique concrète 
may have a relatively low coefficient of noise of the kind that is 
deployed in Lucier’s piece (and which has nothing to do with music 
per se), it has an extremely high coefficient of noise pertaining to 
musical expression.
	
This though, as we have seen repeatedly, is a hard point to argue 
because there seems to be so much at stake in this struggle between 
noise and music for each of the opposing sides. To put this another 
way, precisely because the common sense definitions of noise relate 
predominantly to noise as a sonic or auditory concept, this kind of 
noise is subject to an enormous amount of overcoding that comes 
from beliefs or positions held for so long and with such conviction 
that they are imbued with a seemingly incontrovertible rightness or 
even naturalness. To put it another way still, it is indeed incredibly 
difficult to listen to noise. And so, for now, let us leave music aside 
to consider noise as it appears in some other kingdoms, let us move 
outside of music and sound to pay heed to other kinds of noise, to 
other moments when the perfect surface sheen of narrative content, 
hermeneutic closure and high-fidelity are tarnished or punctured by 
something that troubles the expected reception of expression, when 
things do not seem quite right.
Notes
  1	  Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, trans. 
Richard Howard (orig. French, 1980; New York: Hill and Wang, 
1981).
  2	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 3.
  3	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 4.
  4	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 4.
  5	  See Greg Hainge, ‘Unfixing the Photographic Image: Photography, 
Indexicality, Fidelity and Normativity’, Continuum: Journal of Media 
& Cultural Studies, 22, no. 5 (2008). 
  6	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 6.
  7	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 20–1.
  8	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 21.
  9	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 26.

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
171
10	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 26–7.
11	  See Barthes, Camera Lucida, 5. 
12	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 79.
13	  Barthes, Camera Lucida, 21.
14	  Roland Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, in Image – Music – Text, 
trans. Stephen Heath (orig. French, 1972; New York: The Noonday 
Press, 1988).
15	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 188. 
16	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 182–3.
17	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 181.
18	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 185.
19	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 183.
20	  Jonathan Dunsby, ‘Roland Barthes and the Grain of Panzéra’s Voice’, 
Journal of the Royal Musical Association, 134, no. 1 (2009), 128.
21	  Dunsby, ‘Roland Barthes and the Grain of Panzéra’s Voice’, 126.
22	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 183.
23	  Dunsby, ‘Roland Barthes and the Grain of Panzéra’s Voice’, 129.
24	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 187.
25	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 183.
26	  Barthes, ‘The Grain of the Voice’, 187.
27	  Roland Barthes, ‘Introduction to the Structural Analysis of 
Narratives’, in Image – Music – Text, trans. Stephen Heath (orig. 
French, 1966; New York: The Noonday Press, 1988), 89; my italics.
28	  Barthes, ‘Introduction to the Structural Analysis of Narratives’, 
89.
29	  And, of course, the receptive act, if a distinction needs to be 
drawn, which should serve as salutary warning against the kind 
of rigid structuralist stance adopted by Barthes in his earlier text, 
‘Introduction to the Structural Analysis of Narratives’, which has 
none of the subtlety of his later work on the punctum examined 
above. 
30	  In light of this assertion, the very term ‘high-fidelity’ could be taken 
to be an optimistic avowal of technology’s valiant yet ultimately 
futile attempts at reproduction, the most it can aim for being a 
high-degree of fidelity.
31	  It should of course be noted that his statement, in all probability, is a 
comment on his stuttering.

172	
NOISE MATTERS
32	  Aden Evens, Sound Ideas: Music Machines and Experience 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2005), 53–4.
33	  Evens, Sound Ideas, 55.
34	  And whilst it should go without saying, let me specify that it is 
not a banal Platonic form of repetition (which, as we have seen, is 
impossible within discourses of high-fidelity technological reproduction 
in any case) but the kind of repetition favoured by Deleuze which 
is based upon difference in itself. See Gilles Deleuze, Difference and 
Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (orig. French, 1968; London: The 
Athlone Press, 1994; New York: Columbia University Press, 1994).
35	  We are here close to the similarly Kristevan-inflected analysis of 
Brandon LaBelle who writes, ‘Lucier’s I am Sitting in a Room 
accentuates subjective experience as inherently in process’ (Brandon 
LaBelle, Background Noise: Perspectives on Sound Art (New York 
and London: Continuum, 2006), 145).
36	  Whilst I am in complete agreement with Kim-Cohen’s comments 
on this piece in many respects, to my mind his analysis does not 
account for the complexity of the piece and restricts it precisely to 
a metareflexive commentary on the generative processes of music, 
the score, for instance, ‘normally thought to precede the work’s 
materialization, [being] imbricated in the act of materialization’ (Seth 
Kim-Cohen, In the Blink of an Ear: Toward a Non-Cochlear Sonic 
Art (New York and London: Continuum, 2009), 188).
37	  Brandon LaBelle, Acoustic Territories: Sound Culture and Everyday 
Life (New York and London: Continuum, 2010), ix.
38	  LaBelle, Acoustic Territories, ix.
39	  For a discussion of the various phases of musique concrète and 
the technological differences between them, see Daniel Teruggi, 
‘Technology and Musique Concrète: The Technical Developments of 
the Groupe de Recherches Musicales and their Implication in Musical 
Composition’, Organised Sound, 12, no. 3 (2007).
40	  Thom Holmes, Electronic and Experimental Music: Pioneers in 
Technology and Composition (New York and London: Routledge, 
2002), 91.
41	  Teruggi, ‘Technology and Musique Concrète’, 214.
42	  Pierre Schaeffer quoted in Michel Chion, L’Art des sons fixés ou La 
Musique Concrètement (Fontaine: Éditions Metamkine / Nota-Bene / 
Sono-Concept, 1991), 13–14; my translation. 
43	  Abraham A. Moles, Les Musiques expérimentales, trans. Daniel 
Charles (Paris: Éditions du Cercle d’Art Contemporain, 1960), 32; 
my translation.

	
On the Difficulties of Listening to Noise	
173
44	  Holmes, Electronic and Experimental Music, 93. Something similar 
is suggested by Jean-Claude Risset who suggests that in musique 
concrète the work is realised ‘as a concrete recording rather than an 
abstract score’ (Jean-Claude Risset, ‘Foreword’, in Electroacoustic 
Music: Analytical Perspectives, ed. Thomas Licata (Westport, CT and 
London: Greenwood Press, 2002), xiv.
45	  Schaeffer has said on this point: ‘digital techniques colour sounds 
far too much to my mind, and they interpolate a visual step, which 
bothers me enormously, because during my work in the studio I use 
scores or graphic memory aids as little as possible’. Quoted in Chion, 
L’Art des sons fixes, 86.
46	  We should remember that it was Schaeffer’s desire to produce music. 
Commenting on one of the fundamental techniques of musique 
concrète, he writes, ‘Repeat the same sound fragment twice: you 
no longer have an event but music’ (Pierre Schaeffer, À la recherche 
d’une musique concrète (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1952), 230; my 
translation). 
47	  Sean Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise/Excavating the Body of Abstract 
Sound’, in Sounding the Virtual: Gilles Deleuze and the Theory and 
Philosophy of Music, ed. Brian Hulse and Nick Nesbitt (Farnham: 
Ashgate, 2010), 70.
48	  Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise’, 70.
49	  Teruggi, ‘Technology and Musique Concrète’, 214.
50	  See Paul Hegarty, Noise / Music: A History (New York and London: 
Continuum, 2007), 33.
51	  Teruggi, ‘Technology and Musique Concrète’, 217.
52	  Warren Burt, ‘Alvin Lucier (1931–)’, in Music of the Twentieth-
Century Avant-Garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook, ed. Larry Sitsky 
(Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002), 269.
53	  Salomé Voegelin, Listening to Noise and Silence: Towards a Philosophy 
of Sound Art (New York and London: Continuum, 2010), 127.
54	  Voegelin, Listening to Noise and Silence, 127.
55	  Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise’, 70. See also Higgins’ somewhat elusive 
comment that ‘[Lucier] forcefully shifts listening from sonorous 
object, or identity, to sonic event, or noise, as if recording the sound 
of the room’s timbre without a note rather than an abstract musical 
ghost’ (72). Whilst there are some similarities between the line taken 
here and that of Higgins, to my mind he ends up placing too much 
emphasis on the technological apparatus upon which Lucier’s piece 
depends. Indeed, in Lucier and more generally, what is important 

174	
NOISE MATTERS
for Higgins is that there is a ‘creative use of sound technology [that] 
allows one to shift the frame of attention from its own delivery of a 
sonorous object to the resonance of the medium itself, to bring the 
medium to its transcendental exercise, to make the listener aware 
of its status as producer of sonic events’ (73). Thus, in his view, 
it is only when the medium which acts as a ‘prosthetic faculty of 
sensibility, enters its transcendental exercise and finds itself in the 
realm which is uniquely its own, producing rather than reproducing, 
[that] it becomes opaque, a noise’ (76).
56	  Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise’, 70.
57	  Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner, ‘Music and Its Others: Noise, 
Sound, Silence: Introduction’, in Audio Culture: Readings in Modern 
Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (New York and 
London: Continuum, 2004), 5.
58	  Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise’, 70.
59	  Higgins, ‘A Deleuzian Noise’, 70.
60	  R. Murray Schafer, The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the 
Tuning of the World (New York: Knopf, 1977; rep. Rochester, VT: 
Destiny Books, 2009), 111.

PART 3


CHAPTER SIX
On Noise and Film. Planet, 
Rabbit, Lynch
We start in noise. A faint roar, hum, drone, rumble, a sound that 
seems to have no beginning, end or source but to be only the 
backdrop out of which other forms are formed. We start with half 
of Henry’s head, horizontal, and half a planet, superimposed on 
top of each other, fading into each other, the great distance between 
them reduced to nothing in an impossibly flat depth of field. The 
head levitates, semi-transparent, an X-ray of Henry’s planet brain, 
until he floats past it and up and around and left out of frame as 
the planet comes nearer and the noise grows and grows, oblivious 
to the cut, to our transport to the planet’s surface over which we 
are suspended. Oblivious to every cut or change from this point on, 
ever-present yet modulating and phasing according to the rhythms 
of the film, more or less intense, accompanied by screams, cries, 
static, clanking, banging, grinding, squelching, gurgling, whistling, 
fizzing, cracking, or not, but always there. A theatre of eternal 
noise (re)sounding even after the climactic crescendo up to white, 
present even behind the credits’ music as Fats’ organ bathes in a sea 
of vinyl noise on Lenox Avenue.
	
Twenty-nine years later we pick up where we left off, not that 
we ever really left, in noise once again, with a clunk and a rumble, 
drones and vinyl noise. This is what we hear and all we see is light, 
strobing slightly, in darkness, sound and light, son et lumière, 
cinema stripped back to its base elements, waiting to be organised 

178	
NOISE MATTERS
and thus to be born from noise, with noise. An assemblage of 
different elements meeting in order to express something, something 
out of noise, with noise. A mechanics poetically embodied in the 
purest simplicity by the sight and sound of a gramophone, in which 
expression arises as stylus meets vinyl, accompanied, inexorably, 
by noise. And this we see in close-up, so close that it becomes our 
entire universe, as though we are witnessing Edouard-Léon Scott’s 
fantasy,1 as though this mechanics and this noise explained the 
world or at least this world, this INLAND EMPIRE.
* * *
What do you call the place where ideas originate? The 
subconscious?
	
No. Everything – everything – originates in the unified field. 
It’s an ocean of pure consciousness. It’s the transcendent. And 
that’s what quantum physics says now: Everything that is a thing 
has emerged from that field. New things are always emerging 
and bubbling up from it. So an idea will come, but you will 
not know the idea until it enters your conscious mind. Now, if 
you expand your consciousness you can catch ideas at deeper 
and deeper levels, and they’ll have more information and more 
energy.2
The cinematic universes created by David Lynch are places where 
things are not quite right, where categorical distinctions and 
identities are not stable, where the abject constantly threatens to 
surge forth and transgress the borders that we draw up in a futile 
attempt to contain and create meaning. These, then, are universes 
that share many of the ontological qualities of noise and it is thus 
perhaps unsurprising that they should be filled with noise. By this 
I do not only mean that their soundtrack is often populated by all 
manner of noises (in the common sense meaning of the term) – even 
if these may serve as an indication of a more generalised form of 
noise. Rather, I mean that his films seem constantly to dissolve into 
the noise from which they are constituted, both philosophically 
and formally, to erase their own form and identity or, perhaps, the 
possibility of imposing on them anything that would resemble a 
form, identity or meaning.3

	
On Noise and Film	
179
Eraserhead
If the opening composite shot of David Lynch’s debut feature-
length film, Eraserhead (1977), seems to present a dialectic of 
animate (in the form of Henry) and inanimate matter (in the form 
of the planet), we need only look more carefully to see that this is 
not the case. Indeed, the shot that superimposes Henry’s head over 
the planet is composed in such a way that the two are conflated 
in the darkness that conjoins them, the bottom half of the planet 
(in shadow) merging with Henry’s dark hair. Even if the apparent 
dialectic we may have thought to exist appears to be reinforced as 
Henry’s head floats around the screen whilst the planet remains still, 
solid, immutable, and even if it appears to be reinforced further still 
by the next shot (an aerial tracking shot over the planet’s rocky, 
barren surface), both the planet and Henry are quickly revealed 
to be governed by the same processes. For the tracking shot over 
the planet’s surface (which ends in a dissolve to black created as 
the camera slowly zooms in on the darkest depths of the cragged 
valley it has been following) is followed by an aerial shot of a house 
(that we assume to be on the planet) whose roof has a large hole 
in it. The camera again slowly zooms down towards this hole until 
blackness fills the entire screen. Now, from the inside of the house, 
we pan up to see a man, naked from the waist up and covered in 
pustules and sores, staring mournfully out of a window. We cut to 
see Henry once more who opens his mouth. Another composite 
image makes it seem as though a horrific, embryonic form still 
attached to a long umbilical cord emerges from his mouth to then 
float alongside him. We cut back to the man in the house who leans 
towards three levers in front of him. He pulls the first towards him, 
an action which, as we cut back, seems to pull the embryo off to 
another place. He pulls the second lever and we cut to a shot of 
the planet’s surface again, only this time we see a pool of liquid in 
a crater (or perhaps a mere divot, the scale is not clear). We cut 
back to the man who pulls the third lever, an action which this 
time seems to cause the embryo to fall out of the sky into the pool 
of liquid on the planet’s surface. We cut to a close-up shot of the 
liquid’s surface and follow the same path as the embryo, down into 
the dark depths of the pool, but see only the bubbles that rise from 
its wake until even these have dissipated and the screen is black 

180	
NOISE MATTERS
once more. A pan brings a brilliant circle of white light formed by 
a hole above us into the centre of the screen and a zoom takes us 
up through this hole until we emerge into a brilliant white light 
that washes out the entire screen. We fade into a shot of Henry in 
the concrete industrial setting that is his world and pass out of the 
prologue into the main body of the film.
	
This opening to Eraserhead has provoked a lot of critical 
commentary, much of which analyses it according to various 
psychoanalytic paradigms – unsurprisingly, perhaps, as this opening 
seems to lend itself so easily to interpretation as a dream sequence 
and seems ostensibly to present us with a birthing sequence 
seen from both a third and first-person perspective.4 I believe, 
however, that such psychoanalytic interpretations of this scene, 
of the whole film, indeed of Lynch’s entire filmic output do not in 
actuality account for what we are presented with on the screen.5 
Indeed, it might be suggested that the description of the opening to 
Eraserhead provided above is not merely a denotative description 
of the film’s content but already an interpretation of it, for I have 
read across the various shots that make up this opening sequence as 
though there were indeed cause and effect relations between them. 
But what if this is not the case? What if the pulling of the levers 
does not in fact trigger the actions we see subsequently? What if 
we attribute these cause and effect relations to the shots of this 
sequence only because of our familiarity with a certain dominant 
cinematic vocabulary that has trained us in the art of suturing 
together the disparate fragments of reality that are appended to 
each other in continuity editing? Indeed, does the second lever pull 
(unlike the first and third) not trouble our ability to understand the 
cinematic language and codes we assume to be on display by not 
triggering any action per se, only a change of scenery in which we 
expect something to happen?
	
For Michel Chion, this is in fact the ‘peculiar logic’ of Lynch’s 
entire cinematic output, and it requires us ‘to renounce all a priori 
interpretations of behaviour and facts, whether taken separately 
or in succession’.6 In his reading of Lynch’s early work The 
Grandmother, for instance, Chion finds ‘unusual cause and effect 
chains defying the first law of thermodynamics’7 such that ‘there 
seems to be no link between food and growth’.8 For Chion, The 
Grandmother, one of Lynch’s early shorts, is then governed by 
what he terms ‘an “electro-magical” type of logic’. He continues,

	
On Noise and Film	
181
According to this logic, everything occurs by abstract trans-
mission. Bodies are not in themselves whole entities made from 
perishable matter (itself moulded out of other bodies which have 
been absorbed and transformed) but rather wires, transducers, 
conductors of an inexplicable, abstract energy.9
	
This logic is entirely in accordance with the opening composite 
shot of Eraserhead which, as I have suggested, creates a certain 
confluence between Henry and the planet – or, perhaps better, 
a zone of indiscernibility. As with Roquentin’s existential crisis, 
what this scene may suggest is that the division between animate 
and inanimate matter no longer exists, and that both of them are 
capable of giving rise to expression. This, then, is an eminently 
machinic universe where everything is always in process, where 
matter is never fully formed but embryonic, it is a universe which 
exists only as a channel for the transduction of an energy, a noise 
field that will be temporarily contracted into semi-stable forms 
that seem recognisable whilst simultaneously always escaping 
petrification, falling away from sense and back towards the noise 
field they carry within them. This process is not governed or given 
meaning by a deity or sovereign subjectivity pulling levers that 
relinquish answers, it is simply in train, contracted (almost) into 
different forms (or not) by the actions taking place within it. Whilst 
the circular forms of Henry’s head, the planet, the pool and the 
hole may then invite us to establish serial relations across these 
forms that resonate so strongly with each other, there is no ultimate 
meaning to be extrapolated from them as a whole, no way of 
stitching these images together in such a way that they will render 
an incontrovertible truth – unless, of course, a form is imposed 
upon them from the outside.
	
In this prologue, then, the cuts do not punctuate the cinematic 
syntax at work in such a way as to make their content more 
readable, they do not have the potential to coalesce into a totality 
to be apprehended as an individuated identity. The filmic technique 
at work, this is to say, takes on a form analogous to Henry’s baby 
which, despite having had its umbilical cord cut (even if we never 
find out where the child gestated, the prologue suggesting only that 
it is an expression of Henry’s), does not take on its own individ-
uated form, remaining a site of extreme abjection, only partially 
contained by the swaddling clothes that Henry will eventually cut 

182	
NOISE MATTERS
away. There is here, then, a complementarity between content and 
form, or perhaps we might be better advised to say once again that 
there is a certain indiscernibility between them. For not only does 
the content take on the form implied by the cinematic vocabulary 
at work (or vice versa), but the cinematic punctuation of the cut 
is, in the majority of cases in this prologue, generated not (in the 
first instance) by an actual cut but, rather, by the on-screen content 
which comes to engulf the entire frame in blackness or pure white 
and thus fulfil the function of a cut as we transition to the next 
shot.
	
What I am suggesting, of course, is that Eraserhead is a very 
noisy film. This is so not because of the constant noise of machinic 
grinding, drones, whirs, thuds and clunks that occupy both the 
background and foreground of the film’s soundscape at different 
times throughout almost the entirety of the film. Nor is it because 
we are at times presented with explicit examples of noise, such 
as when Henry’s gramophone is played, a gramophone which, 
strangely but no doubt significantly, seems to produce the exact 
same vinyl hiss and rhythmic pop no matter what the sonic content 
of the vinyl platter the needle reads – noises which, in some scenes, 
also continue long after the song itself has stopped playing. These 
are merely clues, indications that this is a noisy universe. The real 
noise of Eraserhead comes precisely from all of the elements of 
the prologue examined: from the resistance that is figured by the 
cinematographic technique being pulled into the film’s perceptible 
content and from the transgression of borders that this entails. This 
transgression, as might be expected, brings about massive abjection 
in the form of miniature roasted chickens that refuse to remain 
dead and instead kick and ooze, foetuses that rain from the sky 
only to be hurled into walls or squashed underfoot and, of course, 
Henry’s baby.
	
At the end of the film, Henry, of course, kills his baby, cutting 
away its swaddling clothes-cum-bandages and poking around in its 
now exposed organs with his scissors. Whilst these actions would 
seem to imply that his child constitutes a site of abject horror for 
him, that it is something to be gotten rid of, this reading (once 
again) does not really tally with the evidence presented on screen. 
Firstly, Henry has cared for this baby, even during a sickness 
that made it even more abject and repulsive to most. Secondly, 
Henry only attacks the baby once it starts laughing at him, his 

	
On Noise and Film	
183
reaction seeming to be directed against this mockery rather than 
its abjection. Most importantly, however, Henry’s actions do not 
appear to start out as an attack. Rather, his cutting open of the 
baby’s swaddling clothes seems to be motivated by fascination, 
to come from an attraction towards the abject, and his actions 
only intensify the abjection, ever more so as he stabs the baby. 
Finally, if there is any cause and effect link to be found between 
the final scenes of the film, it is entirely feasible to suggest that, 
rather than an attack on his baby, Henry’s actions are nothing 
more than the pre-condition required for his desired union with 
the Lady in the Radiator. Indeed, it is only through an intensifi-
cation of the abject embodied by his baby, a baby whose identity 
is increasingly conflated with his own, that Henry can erase his 
own identity and fuse with the object of his desire. As the film 
reaches its climax, this is achieved once more by the passing of 
the film’s form into its content as the shots of electrical surges in 
Henry’s apartment and the Man in the Planet pulling maniacally 
on his levers, overloading the machine to the point that sparks 
fly from its grinding gears, crescendo up to Henry’s final embrace 
with the Lady in the Radiator. If the overloading of the electrical 
circuits of the apartment and operations of the Planet appear to 
be brought about by the erasure of individual identity that comes 
with the killing of the baby, the union of Henry and the Lady in 
the Radiator in which they are figured as one comes through an 
excessive intensification of the technology of the cinematic medium 
itself as the image is overexposed. Dependent on the reaction 
between light and photochemical agents, overexposure is an inten-
sification of the technological medium that brings with it a great 
deal of noise. It is this very noise, this excessive assertion of the 
photochemical ontology of the cinematic medium that dissolves the 
borders between Henry and the Lady in the Radiator, background 
and figure, content and form. This, then, is noise that obsists, that 
pulls meaning away from apparently fixed forms back towards a 
brute materiality or pure expression, which is to say an expression 
that exceeds any attempt at synthesis, suture or exegesis.
	
This kind of noise, as well as its more literal auditory correlate 
that acts as a sonic clue to this plane that always subsists beneath 
the film’s expression, is present in all of David Lynch’s work. 
What this noise suggests to the viewer is that Lynch’s work, both 
in its content and through the cinematic vocabulary he employs, 

184	
NOISE MATTERS
consistently and deliberately confounds the possibility of ascer-
taining his films’ meaning. Rather than search for meaning, the 
cinemagoer must engage with these texts as properly cinematic 
objects (or ‘pure cinema’, to use a term often applied to the work 
of directors such as Germaine Dulac and who, as we will see, is 
directly referenced by Lynch), allowing the strangeness and mystery 
inherent to the medium for Lynch to come forth. It is this kind 
of viewing experience that Lynch himself prefers his audiences to 
have. As he says in his book, Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, 
Consciousness and Creativity:
	
Cinema is a language. It can say things – big, abstract things. 
And I love that about it. […] 
	
For me, it’s so beautiful to think about these pictures and 
sounds flowing together in time and in sequence, making 
something that can be done only through cinema.10
	
Lynch’s films, then, take us back to the medium itself and figure 
that medium not simply as something that conveys a signal or 
meaning in a transparent manner, but as something which resists 
and interferes with the transmission of the message in its carriage. 
What we find in his films is a figuration of the ontological speci-
ficity of the cinematic medium that forces us to interact with the 
cinema in a different mode to that with which we are most accus-
tomed in the present era, transporting us instead to the very early 
days of cinema and what Tom Gunning has termed the cinema 
of attractions.11 Rather than pursue this line further (and rehash 
some things I have already said elsewhere), though, it will be more 
instructive in relation to noise to turn once again to the analogue–
digital divide and see what happens to Lynch’s noise as his 
production techniques shift over to digital in INLAND EMPIRE.
INLAND EMPIRE
The thing is, I don’t know what was before or after. I don’t 
know what happened first, and it’s kind of laid a mindfuck 
on me.
Nikki Grace / Susan Blue, INLAND EMPIRE

	
On Noise and Film	
185
Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me begins with a screen full of 
shimmering blues and blacks that, as the camera gradually pulls 
back, is revealed to be a static-filled television screen. Unlike in 
Poltergeist or the other horror films examined earlier, however, 
this noise-filled screen does not serve as a signifier of horror, for 
the horror here is embodied by Bob, Laura Palmer’s killer, who 
smashes a baseball bat through the TV set as he walks towards his 
victim. This action stands, obviously, as an act of violence intended 
to set the scene for the rest of the film. More than this, however, it 
is a metacommentary on this film itself which is a prequel to a long-
running popular TV series filmed after the series had run its course. 
If noise, as I have suggested and as Lynch himself suggests via his 
comments on the cinema, is medium-specific, then Bob’s gesture 
is not just an act of meaningless violence, but also an indication 
that the noise of the TV show – which is to say those elements 
of its stylistics, content and form generated by the specificities of 
the medium – must be done away with in order to make way for 
a different kind of noise.12 Whatever the reasons for Lynch’s shift 
away from 35mm film stock to consumer grade digital video for 
the shooting of INLAND EMPIRE, then, it should not surprise us 
if there is in this movie a different kind of noise.
	
The noise to be found in INLAND EMPIRE is indeed at times 
(although by no means always) necessarily different from that found 
in Lynch’s previous films precisely because of this shift away from 
analogue to digital. More often than not, however, the noise forms 
in this film have much in common with those found in Lynch’s 
previous films. Indeed, INLAND EMPIRE opens with the sound of 
a dramatic bass note which fades away to reveal a background of 
what sounds distinctly like the crackle of a stylus in the grooves of 
an old gramophone record. This is precisely what the sound is, as 
we understand from the film’s first sequence (following the title shot 
which I will get to soon) that shows an extreme close-up shot of an 
old phonograph needle on a spinning vinyl platter. This image is 
(or appears to be) shot in black and white and it is lit by a strobing 
light that recalls the flashing, electrical pulses and flickering lights 
seen at privileged moments through nearly all of Lynch’s films.13 
Another more focused and constant light is directed onto the black 
vinyl surface of the disk, turning the area it pinpoints a brilliant 
white, against which the needle appears in silhouette. Not only does 
this light bring about a reversal of the normal chromatic qualities 

186	
NOISE MATTERS
of the objects it is directed onto (just as the predominance of audio 
noise that obscures the content recorded on the disk reverses the 
normal hierarchy of auditory communications channels), it also 
enters into an associative resonance with the film’s short title 
sequence that precedes this shot and in which we see ‘a dark screen 
that is explosively ruptured by a beam of light resembling that of 
an old-fashioned film projector, which slowly illuminates the title’, 
as Martha Nochimson describes it.14 In many respects it seems 
to matter little, therefore, that INLAND EMPIRE is shot with a 
different recording technology. So whilst it is true, as Will Dodson 
writes, that ‘More than any other Lynch project, Inland Empire 
calls attention to the tools with which it is constructed, and to itself 
as a cheaply produced digital film’,15 the technologies explicitly 
figured in the film’s opening are analogue technologies and suggest, 
then, that there is a continuity between this this film and Lynch’s 
earlier work, that the cinematic noise found in his previous films 
will persist here and that, ultimately, this noise comes from a 
particular conception of what the cinema is as an artform or artistic 
expression and not what it is as a technological assemblage. The 
revelation of the film’s title in the beam of a movie theatre projector 
is nothing but a literalisation of this statement. What is more, the 
continuation of this trope into the next shot as a steady spotlight 
(that comes from the right hand side of the screen, which is to say 
the same side of the screen via which the projector beam of the 
title sequence gradually exited as a slow pan drew it to the edge 
of and then beyond the on-screen space) illuminates the surface of 
the noise-producing vinyl platter would seem to suggest that, once 
more, this film will not only be born out of noise but will concen-
trate (on) it. If this is the case, then these opening shots seem to 
imply from the outset that this will be an eminently cinematic film 
in the Lynchian sense of that term, meaning that it will not produce 
reason or meaning through any kind of standard logic, but that 
every aspect of the film will conspire to confound the transmission 
of a clear and transparent narrative content, to allow the cinema to 
stand as something else, as a place where things happen.
	
In order to test this hypothesis, let us remain with this opening 
a little longer to see what other things happen behind the static. 
For Dodson, ‘This needle image is particularly mysterious, for it 
scratches the record, suggesting that there is something hidden 
under the surface of both the image and the sound’.16 But what is 

	
On Noise and Film	
187
happening? Nochimson suggests that the audio content produced 
by the phonograph consists of ‘static, the sound of applause, and 
a difficult-to-hear voice speaking about an old hotel’.17 On the 
first two points she is of course entirely correct. But the voice 
that we hear through the vinyl’s static is not merely someone 
talking about an old hotel but, rather, a radio announcer who 
states:
Axxon N, the longest running radio play in history, tonight, 
continuing in the Baltic region, a grey winter day in an old hotel.
In many respects, this opening line of the film is itself also nothing 
but noise, for it confounds so many different things, remains so 
ambiguous, resists meaning and comprehension on so many levels. 
For whilst it does indeed seem to prefigure many of the elements 
that will come later in the film, in which we will indeed see an 
announcer (played by William H. Macy), the Baltic region, an old 
hotel, grey winter days and the name AXxoN N that will appear 
written (like this) on walls at key points throughout the film, this 
line proffers no explanation of these elements but, on the contrary, 
only confusion. The fact that the film begins with talk of a play 
in the Baltic region, for instance, might lead us to believe that 
we are dealing here with a mise-en-abîme, the film announcing 
its own content. This cannot be the case, however, for we are 
specifically told that this is a radio play, and yet in INLAND 
EMPIRE the mise-en-abîme is provided by a film – itself a remake 
of a supposedly cursed film from the Baltic region that was never 
completed (Vier Sieben [Four Seven]).18 What is more, further genre 
confusion arises from the fact that this announcer’s voice (which 
seems to precede the start of a radio play) emanates from a gramo-
phone and not a radio – a technology which is just as capable of 
producing static. We may then be tempted to think, in spite of all 
of this, that this opening bears a direct relation to the scene that 
follows, which does indeed seem to take place in an old hotel, quite 
possibly in the Baltic region judging from the language the man 
and woman we see speak and, judging from the quality of the light 
filtering through the hotel room’s net curtains, quite possibly on a 
cold grey winter’s day. Yet this scene in no way seems to be part of 
a play (even less so a radio play), for apart from the setting (which 
is obviously a real hotel room and not a stage set), the protagonists’ 

188	
NOISE MATTERS
heads are obscured by a digitally imposed blurring, a convention 
used to hide the identities of people in documentaries or news 
bulletins, which is to say supposedly real-life situations – and 
which may also be construed here, of course, as yet another noisy 
element that both foregrounds the mechanics of the technological 
system through which this scene is presented at the same time as it 
inhibits understanding and obscures identity.
	
The relation of this line to the rest of the film, then, seems to 
escape any attempt at full articulation. Indeed, listening to it again 
we realise that the phrasing used to deliver the line suspends the 
entire phrase in an absolute ambiguity. The pauses before and after 
the word ‘tonight’, for instance, as well as the delivery of that word 
itself, have none of the qualities that might be expected to be given to 
it by an announcer presenting the content of the show to come – such 
as when, for instance, Nikki Grace (Laura Dern) and Devon Berk 
(Justin Theroux) appear on the Marilyn Levens’ Starlight Celebrity 
Show – with the result that it is impossible to know whether the night 
in question is the night in which the diegesis of the production will be 
played out (in which case the ‘grey winter day in an old hotel’ would 
set the scene for the fiction to come) or whether this entire opening 
line is simply more of a statement of fact about various unrelated 
phenomena: Axxon N is the longest-running play in history. STOP. 
Tonight the cold grey days of the Baltic region continue in this hotel 
in which I [the speaker of the phrase] find myself.
	
This impossibility of extricating fact from fiction, of knowing 
in what level of reality we find ourselves at any one time is, 
arguably, the major defining characteristic of INLAND EMPIRE. 
Whilst present in many of Lynch’s previous work – and notably in 
his lesser known short work Absurda19 – this confusion is taken 
further in INLAND EMPIRE than ever before. As Matt Murray 
puts it somewhat poetically on the site Corn Pone Flicks,
Inland Empire is a mystery so many layers deep it reminds one 
of an onion wearing lots of sweaters and cold weather gear; by 
the time you’ve gotten all the clothes off, you’re left wondering 
what an onion is doing there to begin with, and peeling back any 
more layers will likely just make you cry.20
Similarly, Geoffrey Macnab qualifies INLAND EMPIRE as ‘a 
Russian doll of a film with stories inside stories inside stories’ and 

	
On Noise and Film	
189
suggests that ‘we are never quite sure whether we are watching the 
film-within-the-film (being directed by Jeremy Irons) or the film 
about the film-within-the-film’.21 Jay Weissberg in Variety finds it 
‘impossible to tell whether [Dern is] Nikki, Nikki playing Sue, or 
Sue herself’.22 And Manohla Dargis writing in The New York Times 
states that ‘Inland Empire involves an attractive blond actress who 
tumbles down rabbit holes inside rabbit holes inside rabbit holes’, 
the end result being that ‘this film-within-a-film casts an enveloping 
shadow over Nikki, leading her real and reel lives to blur’. But, as 
Dargis continues, ‘The reeler it gets the weirder it gets’.23
	
True to the film as a whole, then, every aspect of this opening 
line has the potential to wrong foot us, and this is the case even with 
the title given to the radio play, ‘Axxon N’. For within the film, 
‘AXxoN N’ is not in fact the longest-running radio play in history 
as claimed here but, rather, a name that reappears throughout the 
film written on walls and doors. For those in the know, ‘Axxon 
N’ is also the name of one of David Lynch’s website projects that 
was eventually expanded out to become INLAND EMPIRE. (The 
story goes that a long monologue by Laura Dern filmed by Lynch 
for the first episode of a new online series similar to Dumbland or 
Rabbits – which also gets integrated into INLAND EMPIRE, of 
course – and that was to be called ‘Axxon N’ got Lynch’s neurons 
firing so much that he decided to build it up incrementally into 
the mammoth project that we now know as INLAND EMPIRE.) 
This is to say, then, that ‘Axxon N’ refers to the film INLAND 
EMPIRE itself.
	
Given the noisy context in which this name appears, furthermore, 
it is not unreasonable to suggest that this name has yet further 
significance. For an axon is a transmission channel of the nervous 
system, a projection extruding from a nerve cell that conducts 
electrical impulses away from that cell via synapses. It is then 
possible to conjecture that here also, with the use of this name that 
is tied to the film we are watching, Lynch is providing yet another 
metacommentary about the mode of reception that his film will 
demand, a mode of reception that will require the cinemagoer 
to attend to noise rather than attempt to block it out in order to 
comprehend the content presented. Attending to this noise will 
necessitate different connections to be made, connections perhaps 
more akin to the structure of the synapse itself, for a synapse is a 
gap across which the electrical impulse transmitted by an axon is 

190	
NOISE MATTERS
conducted. Whilst this analogy cannot be stretched too far since 
the submicroscopic distance across which the impulse has to pass 
in most synapses leaves little margin for alternate pathways to be 
formed, it is easy to see how the idea of an electrical signal – the 
cinema being for Lynch an electrical medium – that is not delivered 
directly to the receiver through a closed channel but instead reaches 
its destination across an aporia that can be breached only via the 
molecular structure of the particular assemblage in play might 
appeal to Lynch.24 Indeed, every time the word ‘AXxoN N’ appears 
written on a wall in the film, we reach an aporia, a point at which 
we are required to relinquish our normal modes of understanding 
and find new connections that are not so obviously causal.
Noisy interlude 1
Perhaps the most striking example of this comes in a back alley of 
the movie lot where the film within the film is being shot as Nikki 
sees this name written on a wall in chalk underlined with an arrow. 
She follows this arrow into darkness. A single strobe flash (a privi-
leged trope in Lynch’s work that signals an über-cinematic space) 
illuminates her momentarily and she then emerges (from out of the 
darkness and into the focal plane) into the space where the myste-
rious person who interrupted the early rehearsals for On High in 
Blue Tomorrows had been spotted. From this position she watches 
herself, Devon, Freddie (Harry Dean Stanton) and Kingsley replay 
the scene that we have seen earlier. As Devon comes towards her to 
investigate, she turns and runs, thus explaining (purportedly!) the 
provenance of the footsteps heard in the earlier scene. Thinking that 
she sees her husband hidden in the shadows, she cries out ‘Billy, 
Billy’ (the name of Devon’s character) as though to warn him, then 
(as a spotlight fades up on her) takes refuge through the (fake) 
door that Devon had previously been unable to open. She finds 
herself in a totally different space, a suburban house, and calls out 
to Billy again (to no avail) as he peers in through the window – as 
he had previously peered through the set window – before, across a 
cut, the scene outside her window changes and becomes the actual 
setting in which this house is situated and before, obviously, Nikki 
is transported to an entirely different snow-covered streetscape 

	
On Noise and Film	
191
when, having covered her eyes over as though to snap herself out 
of a bad dream, she reopens them.
Metarabbit
If this description seems excessively confusing, this is entirely 
normal for this is an excessively noisy scene. (And it is perhaps 
then no coincidence that just after this scene we return to a shot of 
the vinyl record from the prologue.) This scene, I would suggest, 
is one in which we witness an intensification of the technological 
ontology of the cinema which, through the primary mode of 
construction it is based upon in both its analogue and digital forms, 
namely montage, forces different spatiotemporal realities to inhabit 
the same space. When this ontological specificity of the cinema is 
intensified, as here, the resulting expression is obscured by a high 
coefficient of noise, requiring our normal receptive modes to be 
rewritten, our axons to be rewired. What this suggests, of course, is 
that there are many moments throughout the film that provide the 
kind of metacommentary that we are claiming to be the primary 
function of the prologue. This may well be true, but for now let us 
return to the prologue and what follows the first explicit figuration 
of noise as embodied by the gramophone.
	
If, as I have suggested of the opening of Eraserhead, this 
prologue is a metacommentary about the film to follow and the 
receptive modes that will be required to apprehend its noise, then 
this prologue continues beyond these first two shots. It continues, 
indeed, into the first part of the hotel room scene in which a 
prostitute is ordered to strip (becoming vulnerable) and who 
declares in Polish, ‘Where am I? I’m afraid’. It would continue 
also through the transition into the second half of this scene, shot 
in colour, which begins with a composite image showing the Lost 
Girl sitting on a couch, clutching a red satin sheet to her body and, 
flickering over this image, a shot of a camera lens looking directly 
into camera, a lens, furthermore, in which we see multiple reflec-
tions of a ceiling light that form a kind of linear mise-en-abîme. 
Once this self-reflexive image of a movie camera dissipates, we 
see that the Lost Girl, now crying, is staring at a TV screen filled 
with static – just as we have been, and still are in many respects, 

192	
NOISE MATTERS
watching a screen full of noise. The camera gradually shifts from 
its original position in which the Lost Girl and TV screen are 
portrayed in a shot reverse-shot sequence, to a shot showing both 
the Lost Girl from behind and, over her shoulder, the TV screen, to 
a point of view shot on the TV screen now transmitting not static 
but speeded up scenes from later in the film that we are watching. 
The TV screen returns to broadcasting nothing but static and a 
series of ever greater close-up shots eventually fills our entire screen 
with TV static.
	
This static dissolves into one of the scenes that the Lost Girl 
had been watching, presented now not as the diegetic content of 
the programme she was watching within the film we are watching 
but, rather, one step closer to us, as the content of our own viewing 
experience – although the repeated return to close-up shots of the 
Lost Girl’s tear-filled eyes throughout this segment reveal that she is 
still watching the same thing as us, albeit on a TV and not cinema 
screen. What we all see is one of the infamous rabbit scenes of 
INLAND EMPIRE.25 In a minimalist 1950s setting, we see two 
human figures, each wearing a large rabbit head costume. A female 
rabbit sits on a leather couch, while another does the ironing at 
the back of the room. A male man-rabbit enters through a door 
to the left of the screen, his appearance accompanied by obviously 
canned applause. The man-rabbit sits down and a conversation full 
of non-sequiturs ensues with canned laughter cued at seemingly 
arbitrary points:
Sitting Rabbit: I’m going to find out one day.
Ironing Rabbit: When will you tell it?
Man Rabbit: Who could have known?
Sitting Rabbit: What time is it? [canned laughter]
Man Rabbit: [standing up] I have a secret.
	
cut to close-up of Lost Girl crying and back to Rabbits interior
Sitting Rabbit: There have been no calls today.
	
Ironing Rabbit walks to rear of couch. [followed by sound of 
footsteps from outside]
Sitting Rabbit: I hear someone.
Ironing Rabbit: [laughs] 
Sitting Rabbit: I do not think it will be much longer now.
	
Man Rabbit walks over to door through which he entered, 
opens it and walks through it, shutting it behind him.

	
On Noise and Film	
193
At this point the scene switches and we see the Man Rabbit opening 
a door and entering into a dark room which seems, even in the half 
light, to be very different from that of his rabbit companions. He 
remains standing in front of this door and a spotlight lights it up, 
showing it to be painted a brilliant gold. More light gradually 
fills the entire room and, as it does so, the rabbit fades away 
into nothingness, leaving us contemplating an over-elaborately 
decorated room filled with antique furniture, a huge Persian rug, 
mirrors, golden cornices and mouldings and a baroque painted 
ceiling.
	
We cut to a very out of focus close-up shot of a man’s face. The 
image struggles into focus and we witness a conversation between 
two men sitting on chairs in this same room, in Polish once again 
and subtitled as follows:
Janek: You are looking for something?
Phantom: Yes.
Janek: Are you looking to go in?
Phantom: Yes.
Janek: An opening?
Phantom: I look for an opening. Do you understand?
Janek: Yes, I understand.
Phantom: Do you understand I look for an opening?
Janek: Yes, I understand completely.
Phantom: Good. Good that you understand. That’s good! You 
understand!
The image dissolves once more into a shot of the same room 
plunged into darkness again, except for the rabbit who is silhou-
etted against the brilliantly illuminated door. As the image fades to 
black and the soundtrack to silence for the first time, the prologue 
ends.
	
If, as I am claiming here, the prologue to the film is a metacom-
mentary on the noise that the film as a whole will generate and an 
indication as to the kind of receptive mode or viewing position that 
we will be required to adopt as we pass into the film proper, and 
if, what is more, the prologue does indeed finish at this point, the 
first point in the film, this is to say, when there is a complete break 
in both the image and soundtrack, the question remains as to how 
the scenes involving the rabbits and Janek and the Phantom can be 

194	
NOISE MATTERS
articulated to the metareflexive commentary of the prologue. The 
answer is perhaps easier in the case of the latter, for one can indeed 
reread the above dialogue as a metareflexive commentary on the 
difficulties of understanding that this film brings into play. For we 
too are looking for a way into this film, an opening that might give 
us some traction, some way of understanding what is going on, the 
irony being, of course, as we are told here, that the only thing that 
can be understood is that we are indeed trying to understand.
	
What part the rabbits – who reappear throughout the film – might 
play in this metacommentary is not so self-evident, however. The 
rabbit scenes, indeed, seem to stand for many as one of the most 
incomprehensible aspects of the film. Yet if they are taken to be 
merely a noisy element as befits their first apparition in this prologue 
and the privileged role that they seem to occupy, able to exist both in 
their own, 1950s sitcom universe and yet, occasionally, encroaching 
into the spaces of the film’s main diegesis(/es), their function becomes 
slightly clearer. For taken as a noisy phenomenon, these scenes 
become an example of a medium whose functional and mechanical 
modus operandi is stripped so bare that it suddenly appears strange. 
This is to say that the TV sitcom is a genre in which we find über-
familiar settings (a woman ironing, the return home of the working 
male); that the TV sitcom is a genre which feeds on stereotypes to 
the extent that identities across different series are effectively inter-
changeable (so why not give them all the same heads, rabbit heads at 
that, to point up the absurdities of the genre?); that the TV sitcom is 
a genre that requires the active collusion of the audience for its jokes 
to appear funny, but when they are not all that funny the audience 
(since nobody wants to miss out on a joke) is coaxed into collusion 
by the (supposedly) infectious nature of the (canned) laughter of 
others (so why not cue the canned laughter at points when there is 
absolutely no humour to be found?). This is not to say that INLAND 
EMPIRE is a film in which these responses are provoked throughout; 
it is to suggest that these vignettes intensify the very essence of sitcom 
to such an extent that a strange, incomprehensible result is rendered, 
just as the film as a whole will intensify those elements that constitute 
the very essence of cinema for Lynch – namely, electricity, light and 
noise – up until the point that the viewer is unable to suture these 
almost elemental forces into any kind of coherent narrative and must 
instead surrender to a different kind of viewing experience in which 
the vocabularies of the everyday are rendered strange.

	
On Noise and Film	
195
Digital noise
And yet, what the prologue and other aspects of INLAND 
EMPIRE examined here signal to us is perhaps not so much a 
making strange of the cinema as a return to the origins of cinema. 
And ironically, the specifically digital noise of INLAND EMPIRE 
that constitutes a major point of difference in relation to Lynch’s 
prior cinematic output can also be seen to return us to the origins 
of cinema when, oftentimes, things were left to the imagination and 
not delivered wholesale to the spectator-cum-popcorn-munching 
consumer. For INLAND EMPIRE is shot not on high-definition 
digital video but, rather, consumer grade digital video. Lynch says 
of this choice:
	
The DV camera I currently use is a Sony PD-150, which is a 
lower quality than HD. And I love this lower quality. I love the 
small camera.
	
The quality reminds me of the films of the 1930s. In the 
early days, the emulsion wasn’t so good, so there was less infor-
mation on the screen. The Sony PD result is a bit like that; it’s 
nowhere near high-def. And sometimes, in a frame, if there’s 
some question about what you’re seeing, or some dark corner, 
the mind can go dreaming. If everything is crystal clear in that 
frame, that’s what it is – that’s all it is.26
	
The specific qualities of the image in INLAND EMPIRE arising 
from the artefacts of the digital technology that Lynch decided to 
use for this film have not been considered in such a positive light 
by many spectators of the film, however. On the contrary, the lack 
of clarity or fidelity of this digital image, its opacity as opposed to 
absolute clarity and thus transparency, is the aspect of the film that 
has caused even long-time Lynch devotees much consternation. 
Indeed, for many, the material artefacts of this technology seem to 
have taken on the intrusive and unwelcome aspects of noise as a 
non-intentional by-product. For Jay Weissberg, for instance, ‘The 
visual Lynch trademarks […] are all here, but noticeably missing 
are the deep, rich colors and sharp images. Instead, they’re replaced 
by murky, shadowy DV, which may give him more freedom but 
robs the pic of any visual pleasure’.27 Lee Marshall laments ‘the 

196	
NOISE MATTERS
director’s conversion to digital film-making’, complaining that 
‘though the format has undoubtedly allowed Lynch greater creative 
freedom, the result for much of the film is a poor TV-quality image 
that bleeds color, and lighting that even a Dogme director would 
blush at’.28 And Joshua Rothkopf, for his part, qualifies these same 
aspects of the film as ‘an overall fugliness’, claiming that ‘the film 
will prove burdensome even to the director’s biggest fans’.29
	
For me, though, what the very noticeable qualities of digital 
video bring to INLAND EMPIRE is yet more noise. By this I mean 
two things. Firstly, the artefacts of the digital technology bring 
about a recognition of the technological specificity and materiality 
of the system that is being used to deliver content to us, the viewer. 
In other words, as is the case with the rabbits in relation to sitcom 
in the prologue (and their other appearances throughout the film), 
the use of digital video performs a laying bare of the technological 
apparatus through which this film is presented to us. More than 
this, however, this noise is articulated to the broader noisy principle 
at work in the film as a whole, for it troubles our ability to engage 
with the content being presented according to the normative modes 
to which we are accustomed, to reify the work in an act of aesthetic 
fetishisation. This is to say that whilst Lynch’s previous output may 
also have confounded the possibility of total hermeneutic closure, 
the possibility of a different kind of totalising receptivity was made 
possible by the opulence of the image which could be fetishized as 
an object of desire in itself (as attested to by many of the nostalgic 
and disappointed comments above). The ‘fugliness’ of INLAND 
EMPIRE prevents this from happening and requires the viewer to 
articulate the strangeness of the image quality to the strangeness 
of the narrative. Exemplary in this regard is the critique of Drew 
McWeeny who writes:
My biggest fear before I saw the film was that I would hate 
the look of the DV cinematography. This isn’t like Michael 
Mann’s MIAMI VICE or Singer’s SUPERMAN LIFTS THINGS. 
This wasn’t shot on a high-end piece of equipment. All of this 
appears to be regular consumer-grade DV, and for the first 
ten or fifteen minutes, I was disconcerted by just how cheap 
it looks. But gradually, as I became engrossed in what I was 
watching, something happened. Not only did I not mind the 
aesthetic, but it actually started to grow on me. There are things 

	
On Noise and Film	
197
about video that are completely different than film, and Lynch 
is canny enough to play to DV’s strengths. He seems obsessed 
with textures and light in the film, like in the very first few shots 
of the film, with a needle on a record in extreme close-up, and 
when he pushes things into near-total darkness in the last hour 
of the film, it becomes much stranger and dreamier than I would 
have expected. Laura Dern doesn’t just step into shadows; she 
merges with them, bleeds into them. It’s like she steps into 
something tangible, something she can’t quite scrape off.30
	
Frustrated by their inability to contain the noise of Lynch’s 
narratives within a coherent scenario – although it must be said 
that many valiant attempts have been made with all of his films, 
including INLAND EMPIRE –, up until this film, Lynch fans 
unable or unwilling to relinquish a quest for closure could still 
entertain a privileged relation to their object of desire, retaining 
some illusion of mastery over that object through the machina-
tions of fetishism made possible by the film’s aesthetic qualities. 
INLAND EMPIRE strips us even of this possibility, however, for 
Lynch plays to the particularities of this new medium not only in 
those sections shot in low light where the image quality is markedly 
different from that rendered by 35mm film, but also in the fully lit 
sequences of the film through an almost excessive use of extreme 
close-up shots. For it is in close-quarters that the particularities of 
the digital image of the PD50 are most apparent.
	
This difference found in the digital images of INLAND EMPIRE 
in comparison to Lynch’s previous 35mm work is perhaps most 
apparent in the early scenes taking place in Nikki’s mansion, 
especially during her conversation with Visitor #1 (Grace Zabriskie). 
For not only are we struck by this technology’s different treatment of 
light compared to the 35mm technology we are accustomed to seeing 
in the cinema, but the focal planes of the image strike us as uncanny, 
the faces shot in extreme close-up not being rendered in the fine grain 
detail we expect, seeming almost out of focus – an effect compounded 
further throughout the film by Lynch’s use (already seen in films such 
as Lost Highway) of extremely out of focus images that are gradually 
pulled into focus – whilst the background remains in tight focus, its 
definition being more as expected given the focal distance yet still 
uncanny since the image as a whole presents none of the shallow 
depth of field blurring that we might expect of shots such as this.

198	
NOISE MATTERS
Plus ça change …
Whilst there is then a certain aspect of INLAND EMPIRE’s noise 
that is generated by the medium-specific content of digital video, 
even this is articulated to a more general noisy principle that is 
explicitly signposted in the film’s opening shots. This noise, as 
we see throughout the prologue, is intimately tied to the specifi-
cities of the cinematic medium when this is conceived of not as 
a vehicle for a story but, rather, an assemblage of sound and 
image generated through electrical means and structured by the 
cut – which is always and necessarily a breach across which there 
flows a differential relation that is, in Lynch’s films, irreducible. 
Indeed, if, following the prologue, the main body of the film seems 
primarily concerned with eradicating the boundaries between the 
film’s supposed reality and the film-within-the-film and conflating 
all of the film’s various geographies, spaces and temporalities into 
one space of incommensurable multiplicity (in which, across cuts, 
doors lead to entirely different spaces or countries and different 
temporal strata coexist within the same frame), in the latter stages 
of the film we nonetheless return to the prologue’s assertion that 
what we are dealing with is quite simply cinema, not so much 
a film-within-a-film as a film about film, a film whose medium 
is conflated with its content, which is to say then a film with a 
high coefficient of noise. This transition – if indeed it is really a 
transition – takes place at the exact moment when the viewer is 
given a key that would appear to allow him31 to separate out some 
of the film’s various layers again so as to be able, retrospectively, 
to piece together precisely what has happened.32
Noisy interlude 2
After Nikki/Susan has been stabbed in the stomach, collapsed 
and died on Hollywood Boulevard, leaving us entirely unsure 
as to whether or not this is fiction or part of (the film’s) reality, 
whether she is actually dead or not, the camera presenting the 
on-screen diegesis to us pulls away from the tragic scene that we 
contemplate so that we see a Panavision movie camera on a crane 
filming this same scene. We hear Kingsley Stewart (Jeremy Irons) 

	
On Noise and Film	
199
say through a megaphone ‘cut it, and print it’, and order seems 
to be restored as we realise that we are only witnessing a staged 
death in the film-within-the-film. But this assumption is troubled 
somewhat when Nikki does not move as the other actors get up 
and walk away from the scene but instead continues to lie on the 
sidewalk, motionless. She does eventually rise to the applause of 
the cast and crew, but even at this point order is not restored. 
For whilst we might expect Nikki to come out of character and 
receive the praise of her colleagues, she instead wanders off in a 
daze, rejecting the attention of her entourage and the praise of her 
director. She leaves the sound stage where they have been filming 
and looks across to the sound stages opposite, stages 5 and 6, 
which is to say the numbers in between 4 and 7 which (as Stewart 
informed Nikki at the start of the film) are the two numbers that 
make up the title of the original film of which On High in Blue 
Tomorrows (the film-within-the-film) is a remake. Nikki looks 
straight into the camera and we cut to a profile shot of the Lost 
Girl from the prologue. A reverse-shot shows us the TV this girl 
is still watching and on which we now see the image that we have 
just been contemplating on our cinema screen as Nikki stares out 
from the TV straight at us. We return to the diegetic space of the 
film and see Nikki wander off again, passing in front of a red velvet 
curtain. She enters into a movie palace from the rear and stops 
in the aisles, a puzzled look on her face. A reverse-shot shows us 
the cinema screen in this movie palace on which is projected an 
extreme close-up shot of Nikki in the movie palace, this appearing 
to be, then, a live image feed. We cut back to a shot of Nikki and 
then back again to the cinema screen, now shot from behind Nikki 
and over her shoulder so as to emphasise the subjective nature of 
the point-of-view shot. On the movie palace screen this time we see 
one of Nikki’s monologues from earlier on in INLAND EMPIRE, 
specifically the one where she talks of her son’s death and how 
she experienced the aftermath of this event, ‘watching it, like in a 
dark theatre, before they bring the lights up’. The on-screen scene 
continues then switches to a shot of a silhouetted figure walking 
quickly through the arches that flank the movie palace in which 
Nikki is standing. Nikki looks off to the side and sees this figure 
directly. It is her interrogator from the scene she has just been 
watching on screen and he stops and looks directly at her. Nikki 
looks back at the cinema screen, as if for verification, and sees this 

200	
NOISE MATTERS
same man who, still on screen, then turns to walk up the same 
staircase that Nikki had used to access the room in which these 
interview scenes were played out. The movie palace cinema screen 
fills our screen, a mise-en-abîme that increases the image’s noise, as 
does the blurring of the image as the shot is pulled rapidly in and 
out of focus, and on it we see Nikki follow this same path up the 
stairs. She wanders slowly through a corridor, passing a ticking 
clock that reads 12:15 (recalling Visitor #1’s pronouncements 
on the confusion of time from earlier in the film) and a door on 
which is written AXxoN N. Nikki opens this door, goes into a room 
where she sees a red lamp that has figured repeatedly in the film, 
and pulls a gun from the chest of drawers in which it is sitting. 
She follows another corridor and faint vinyl crackles reappear in 
the soundtrack. The Phantom emerges into this corridor, stalking 
Nikki stealthily as though in a cat and mouse game. Nikki arrives 
at a door and turns towards it to see the numbers 4 and 7, numbers 
that we see in extreme close-up. She turns to see the Phantom 
walking straight towards her and instinctively she raises her firearm 
and shoots at him repeatedly. The frame rate is slowed down as 
the Phantom fills the screen in an extreme close-up shot, the image 
almost entirely washed out by a brilliant white spotlight trained on 
his face. He sways gently, refusing to fall, his face an indescribable 
mixture of pleasure and pain. A reverse-shot shows a much less 
ambiguous look of horror on Nikki’s face but, as we cut back to 
the space where the Phantom should be, we see instead a hideously 
morphed image of Nikki’s own face. We cut to an extreme close-up 
and extreme slow-motion shot of the gun discharging again and 
again and cut to a nightmarish composite shot of a face. This face 
seems to embody the erasure of identity witnessed throughout the 
film, for it has had all defining characteristics removed: its eyes are 
but black blurs on a white screen, its mouth a red fringed black 
hole from which blood spews out. And then we cut to the rabbits 
who all look towards the door in their room as it flies open and a 
flickering white light is projected through it into their space. We cut 
to a shot of Nikki backing into the room behind door 47 and see 
that it is painted the same green as the rabbits’ lounge. The editing 
of this sequence suggests that this room is indeed the rabbits’ room 
and, as the camera turns to follow Nikki, we see that it is indeed 
one and the same space. The rabbits appear to have left now, 
however, and Nikki turns stage front to see instead a brilliant blue 

	
On Noise and Film	
201
light (that turns out to emanate from, as we find out later, a cinema 
projector).
	
It is at this point that we enter the final calming and joyous 
resolution of the film. The music changes from the threatening 
menace of Penderecki to the soothing, haunting beauty of Lynch 
and Chrysta Bell’s ‘Polish Poem’ as we see (on her TV screen) 
the Lost Girl embrace Nikki before the latter fades away into 
nothingness. The Lost Girl leaves the room she has been in this 
whole time (room 205 not 47) and runs through corridors into 
a room where she is reunited with her husband (who played the 
various incarnations of Nikki’s husband) and son (who is very 
much alive). This joyous scene dissolves into the brilliant blue-
white light of the projector that radiates across our entire screen, 
diffracted into its separate components as we zoom in towards it 
until its white heart washes out our entire screen and transitions us 
back to Nikki.
	
Nikki, for her part, is still in the rabbits’ lounge/room 47 where 
she stands in the glare of a spotlight, staring straight ahead of her, 
seemingly dazed by the highly mediated, noised-up canned applause 
that we hear. Overlaid on this extreme close-up shot of her we see 
a pirouetting ballet dancer, then a reverse-shot thrusts us into the 
glare of this spotlight once again, a light that we now recognise for 
the first time as the light of a cinema projector beamed out into an 
auditorium. We dissolve back to the reunion of the Lost Girl and 
her family before we are transported back to the start of the main 
body of the film as we see Visitor #1 and then Nikki back in her 
mansion where she turns to look at another, more at peace version 
of herself sitting on a couch staring back at herself.
Resolution?
From this account of the final 20 minutes of INLAND EMPIRE, 
two things should hopefully be abundantly clear. Firstly, at the very 
moment when it seems that we will be able to integrate the film’s 
various levels into a logical construct and understand the inter-
relations of its parts, the very opposite happens and the various 
levels of reality in the film and the films within the film, be they 
infratextual or paratextual – Axxon N, Four Seven, On High in 

202	
NOISE MATTERS
Blue Tomorrows, INLAND EMPIRE33 – are conflated to a greater 
degree than ever before. Secondly, if the revelation of the artifice 
provided by the Panavision camera in our perspective on the final 
shot of On High in Blue Tomorrows does not allow us to under-
stand what is going on in INLAND EMPIRE, it is nonetheless 
only by attending closely to other über-medial and metacinematic 
moments of this film that we can apprehend what is happening 
(‘something is happening’ sings Chrysta Bell in the closing moments 
of the film, before the final credit sequence). This is to say, then, 
that all of the film’s trickery, not only the slow-motion and face 
morphing, but also the more general principle of confusion of time, 
place and identity at work throughout every aspect of the film, is 
only possible within the cinema. Indeed, this is in essence what the 
cinema is: actors change identities to be filmed and editors splice 
together various scenes from disparate filmed realities to form a 
whole in which are juxtaposed different times and places in such a 
way as to confound Euclidian geometry.34 By intensifying this logic 
to the point that the strangeness inherent in the medium surges 
forth, INLAND EMPIRE then obeys that more general principle 
identified by Eric Dufour in all of Lynch’s cinema according 
to which ‘the everyday becomes strange and, in a symmetrical 
manner, the strange becomes everyday’.35 To put this in terms more 
suited to my argument here, Lynch’s films are excessively noisy, 
constantly intensifying the base elements of the expressive assem-
blage through which cinema comes to be. This noise, like the sonic 
backdrop in Eraserhead, is ever-present and never allows us to 
remove the narrative content from this background and make of it 
an autonomous object of understanding (or an autonomous fetish 
object). This noise is the noise of cinema, the perceptible trace of 
the material and structural conditions of cinema conceived of as an 
electrical composition of sound and light assembled via montage.
	
If this is the case, then Lynch’s cinema would seem to hark back 
not only to the cinema of attractions but more generally to the 
cinema of Eisenstein, Alexandrov and Pudovkin. Indeed, for them 
too montage is the primordial element of the cinema which is able 
to account for the effects that the cinema can have on an audience, 
effects which they feared could easily be compromised by the advent 
of synchronous sound in the cinema if this were to bring about a 
more theatrical form of cinema in which sound would be simply 
adhered to the image and not constructed according to separate, 

	
On Noise and Film	
203
and thus contrapuntal, principles of montage.36 This is not in the 
slightest to suggest, of course, that Lynch’s is a barren, cold intel-
lectual exercise or a kind of formal archaeology of the cinema, for 
the very opposite is true as INLAND EMPIRE’s closing credit 
sequence shows. Indeed, this choreographed sequence – danced to 
the ecstatic strains of Nina Simone’s ‘Sinnerman’ – is a self-reflexive 
celebration of Lynch’s universe that cheekily gestures towards 
many of his other works. I do not then agree with Nochimson 
that this scene is a ‘carnival vision of a radiant inner unity Nikki 
has achieved’,37 for to my mind this scene is resolutely not about 
Nikki and all about Lynch and his cinema. This closing sequence 
is indeed a carnivalesque celebration, but it is a celebration of 
cinema and cinema’s role as a medium for entertainment. As should 
be expected by now, this is explicitly signalled to us by a noisy 
element, for as the music plays and the revellers dance and sing, we 
notice that this scene is lit by the strobing light that reappears at 
key, privileged moments throughout INLAND EMPIRE as well as 
Lynch’s entire œuvre and that returns us to the most basic matter 
of cinema’s noisy (im)material ontology.
Notes
  1	  See Douglas Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the 
Arts (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 75.
  2	  Jesse Pearson, ‘Interview with David Lynch’, Vice, 7, no. 9 (2009), 
80.
  3	  As we will see here repeatedly.
  4	  For psychoanalytic readings of the film, see, amongst others, 
Martha Nochimson, The Passion of David Lynch: Wild at Heart 
in Hollywood (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1997); Todd 
McGowan, The Impossible David Lynch (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007); Steven Jay Schneider, ‘The Essential Evil in/
of Eraserhead (or, Lynch to the contrary)’, in The Cinema of David 
Lynch: American Dreams, Nightmare Visions, ed. Erica Sheen and 
Annette Davison (London and New York: Wallflower Press, 2004).
  5	  As I have argued elsewhere. See Greg Hainge, ‘Red Velvet: Lynch’s 
Cinemat(ograph)ic Ontology’, in David Lynch in Theory, ed. 
François-Xavier Gleyzon (Prague: Litteraria Pragensia, 2010); Greg 

204	
NOISE MATTERS
Hainge, ‘Weird or Loopy? Specular Spaces, Feedback and Artifice 
in Lost Highway’s Aesthetics of Sensation’, in The Cinema of David 
Lynch: American Dreams, Nightmare Visions, ed. Annette Davison 
and Erica Sheen (London: Wallflower Press, 2004).
  6	  Michel Chion, David Lynch, trans. Robert Julian (orig. French, 
2001; London: British Film Institute, 2006), 20.
  7	  Chion, David Lynch, 20.
  8	  Chion, David Lynch, 21.
  9	  Chion, David Lynch, 21.
10	  David Lynch, Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, Consciousness, and 
Creativity (New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin, 2006), 17.
11	  See Tom Gunning, ‘The Cinema of Attractions: Early Film, its 
Spectator and the Avant-Garde’, in The Cinema of Attractions 
Reloaded, ed. Wanda Strauven (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University 
Press, 2006) [first published in Wide Angle, 8, nos. 3/4 (1986): 
63–70]. For more on the link between Lynch and the cinema of the 
attractions, see Hainge, ‘Red Velvet’. It might also be suggested that 
the receptive mode his films elicit is more akin to that found in the 
reception of music, as Lynch himself also suggests in Catching the Big 
Fish when he writes: ‘Someone might say, I don’t understand music; 
but most people experience music emotionally and would agree that 
music is an abstraction. You don’t need to put music into words right 
away – you just listen. Cinema is a lot like music’ (20).
12	  This may go some way towards explaining the largely hostile 
reception that the film received from fans of the TV series, although 
it should be added that many aficionados of Lynch’s cinematic œuvre 
were not overly impressed by this film either.
13	  Given the close aesthetic proximity, this shot is very likely, as 
Randolph Jordan suggests, an intertextual reference to Germaine 
Dulac’s 1928 Disque 957: Impressions visuelles. Jordan suggested 
this in a roundtable discussion transcribed in Offscreen, 13, no. 9, 
http://www.offscreen.com/biblio/pages/essays/roundtable_inland_
empire_pt2/ [accessed 19 October 2009]. Such a suggestion is fully 
in accordance with Robert Sinnerbrink’s suggestion that ‘The subject 
matter of INLAND EMPIRE, were one to risk such a claim, is 
something like the contemporary crisis of film that Lynch acutely 
diagnoses as a “putrefaction” (to use his term) of Hollywood; a failure 
to acknowledge or renew its creative relationship with the tradition of 
European cinema to which Lynch, like other Hollywood auteurs, owes 
a profound debt’ (Robert Sinnerbrink, New Philosophies of Film: 
Thinking Images (New York and London: Continuum, 2011), 152).

	
On Noise and Film	
205
14	  Martha Nochimson, ‘Inland Empire’, Film Quarterly, 60, no. 4 
(2007), 10. It is possible to assert that this principle of resonance 
characterises the construction of the entire film, different lines of 
dialogue, details and events being repeated in identical or subtly 
different forms throughout the film, such as, for instance, the 
Rabbits scene in the prologue in which the characters hear footsteps 
coming from offstage, an event that resonates strongly with the 
scene depicting the first rehearsals for On High in Blue Tomorrows 
when Nikki, Devon, Kingsley and Freddie also hear some mysterious 
footsteps. 
15	  Will Dodson, ‘Review of David Lynch in Theory’, Screen, 52, no. 3 
(2011), 418.
16	  Dodson, ‘Review of David Lynch in Theory’, 415.
17	  Nochimson, ‘Inland Empire’, 10.
18	  Whilst this may be a little too contrived, it is worth at least 
speculating, given the abyssal series of infratextual references set 
up here, that the title Vier Sieben may resonate not only with the 
number of a particular room that will appear throughout the film but 
also provide another coded intertextual reference to Dulac’s Disque 
957 (9 – 5 = 4; 7).
19	  For a commentary on this work, see Hainge, ‘Red Velvet’.
20	  Matt Murray, ‘Inland Empire’, http://www.cornponeflicks.com/
inland.html [accessed 15 October 2009].
21	  Geoffrey Macnab, ‘Inspired and Incomprehensible, a Russian 
Doll of a Film’, The Guardian, 7 September 2006, http://www.
guardian.co.uk/world/2006/sep/07/filmfestivals.film [accessed 11 
May 2012. 
22	  Jay Weissberg, ‘Inland Empire’, Variety, 6 September 2006, http://
www.variety.com/review/VE1117931480/ [accessed 11 May 2012].
23	  Manohla Dargis, ‘The Trippy Dream Factory of David Lynch’, 
New York Times, 6 December 2006, http://movies.nytimes.
com/2006/12/06/movies/06empi.html [accessed 15 October 2009].
24	 To spell out the analogy, the communication channel in the 
physiology of the body would be: axon–synapse–dendrite; and 
in Lynch’s text’s relation to the audience: Axxon N / INLAND 
EMPIRE aporia viewing/auditory subject.
25	  Note that the ‘Rabbits’ scenes inserted into the film also come from a 
series originally made for the internet, the difference with ‘Axxon N’ 
being that the ‘Rabbits’ series was actually released on http://www.
lynch.com.

206	
NOISE MATTERS
26	  Lynch, Catching the Big Fish, 153. In a question and answer session, 
Lynch has similarly said that having upped the resolution of the 
PD-150 digital image and transferred it to film, he found that the end 
result, as he says, ‘had its own feel, not film but a thing that I kind of 
love. And it reminds me of old 35, where you don’t see everything so 
sharp, and it sort of strangely makes room to dream’, https://www.
greencine.com/central/node/22 [accessed 19 October 2009].
27	  Weissberg, ‘Inland Empire’.
28	  Lee Marshall, ‘The Inland Empire’, Screen Daily, 6 September 
2006, http://www.screendaily.com/the-inland-empire/4028545.article 
[accessed 11 May 2012].
29	  Joshua Rothkopf, ‘Inland Empire’, Time Out, http://newyork.
timeout.com/articles/film/3423/inland-empire [accessed 19 October 
2009].
30	  Drew McWeeny, ‘Moriarty Visits David Lynch’s INLAND EMPIRE 
and Lives To Tell About It!!’, Ain’t It Cool News, 29 October 2006, 
http://www.aintitcool.com/node/30544. See also Glen Kenny who 
writes: ‘The visual texture Lynch creates in a new medium isn’t as 
immediately beautiful as what he’s done in film, but it has its own 
(sometimes quite ugly) integrity’ (‘Inland Empire’, Premiere, 6 
December 2006, http://www.premiere.com/Review/Movies/INLAND-
EMPIRE [accessed 19 October 2009]).
31	  I use this term advisedly because of the kind of viewer that it 
imputes.
32	  Note, however, that even though this transition takes place here, 
it is foreshadowed earlier in the film in the scene examined in this 
chapter’s ‘Noisy Interlude 1’ in which Nikki sees AXXON N written on 
a wall in chalk.
33	  In this regard it should be remembered that On High in Blue 
Tomorrows is a remake of Four Seven, a film that was never finished, 
just as INLAND EMPIRE is, in a way, a remake of Axxon N which 
itself was never finished either.
34	  This is a common feature of Lynch’s films. As Marina Warner 
has written on another Lynch film, for instance, ‘the plot of Lost 
Highway binds time’s arrow into time’s loop, forcing Euclidian space 
into Einsteinian curves where events lapse and pulse at different rates 
and everything might return eternally’ (Marina Warner, ‘Voodoo 
Road: Lost Highway by David Lynch’, Sight and Sound, 7, no. 8 
(August 1997), 6).
35	  Eric Dufour, David Lynch: Matière, temps, et image (Paris: Vrin, 
2008), 8; my translation.

	
On Noise and Film	
207
36	  See Eisenstein, Vsevolod Pudovkin and Grigori Alexandrov, 
‘Statement on Sound’, in The Eisenstein Reader, ed. Richard Taylor, 
trans. Richard Taylor and William Powell (London: BFI Publishing, 
1998).
37	  Nochimson, ‘Inland Empire’, 14.


CHAPTER SEVEN
On Noise and Photography. 
Forest, Fuzz, Ruff
One Sunday stroll through the spaces of an art gallery filled with 
the usual fare, there came a break. I had seen many images of trees, 
painted with increasing levels of technical prowess and thus, one 
supposed, indexical veracity, and many photographs of trees also 
whose veracity as faithful documents of an external reality could 
not, of course, be contested, given their photochemical nature (or 
so they say). Here though was an image of another kind, one in 
which I couldn’t see the trees for the image, let alone the forest. 
The image was large, very large, of a size generally reserved for the 
Great Masters, or Gursky perhaps. But this was neither of them, 
obviously, lacking the optical clarity of the latter and metaphysical 
certainty of the former. An Impressionist painting, perhaps, albeit 
one with a greater degree of realism than any other I had seen 
before? Intrigued, I approached (proximity generally bringing 
greater understanding, as we know from the zero distance viewing 
habits of the gallery expert so easily picked out from the less 
attentive viewing practices of the hordes who rush past each image 
so as to visit the space without actually seeing anything), but as I 
did so the cognitive dissonance only increased. What I was seeing 
was not a painting but a photograph, not impasto but pixels, and 
my failure to seize the image and class it in my well-habituated 
taxonomic categories for gallery viewing was thus doubled: not 
only had I mistaken the medium, but now I was faced with a 

210	
NOISE MATTERS
low-resolution image normally found not in the art gallery but, 
rather, on the internet, and never in these proportions.
* * *
nm 07.1
For a very long time, photography has been considered, and perhaps 
still is by many, to be the indexical form of visual communication 
par excellence. This has been the case for the viewing public, 
practitioners and theorists alike, and it is a belief founded on the 
apparently incontrovertible photochemical material ontology of 
analogue photographic processes. As André Rouillé has written:
The theory of the index has given rise to meticulous studies of the 
‘medium’ and the photographic act, but it has spawned a theory 
which is global, abstract and indifferent to singular practices 
and productions, to concrete circumstances and conditions. 
According to this theory, ‘photography’ is primarily a category 
whose general laws must be uncovered; it is neither an ensemble 
of practices that vary according to specific determinations, nor 
a corpus of singular works. This refusal of singularities and 
contexts, this exclusive focus on the essence of photography leads 
this ontological theory to reduce ‘photography’ to the elementary 
functioning of its mechanics, to its most basic expression as a 
luminous imprint, an index, a recording mechanism.1
For Rouillé, it is quite simply not possible to talk of photography 
in relation to ontology since ‘photographic practices, on the one 
hand, and artistic practices on the other, constantly change and 
exceed ontological principles’.2 In this chapter, however, I want 
to suggest that it is possible to talk of the ontology of photog-
raphy in such a way that the expressive nature of photography 
endorsed by Rouillé (and that for him is lost in ontological 
discussions) is retained.3 What is more, I want to suggest, again 
contra Rouillé, that when considered through such an expressive 
ontological framework, ‘photography’ becomes sufficiently 

	
On Noise and Photography	
211
polymorphous as to no longer require an ontological separation 
between photochemical silver-gelatin and digital photography. 
This would no doubt be abhorrent for Rouillé for whom the 
split between photography and digital photography is so great 
that he is loathe even to allow the term photography to be 
applied to digital image production. He writes, ‘the term “digital 
photography” is a misnomer, since it is by no means a digital 
declension of photography. A radical break separates them: they 
are differentiated not by degree but by nature’.4 I will contend, 
however, that this is possible and, as might be expected, that 
such an ontological theory of photography can be arrived at by 
examining its noise.
	
It should not be inferred from this that I am myself defending 
those theories of the index that Rouillé rejects. On the contrary, 
I reject them also but I do so for reasons related to my previous 
rejection of many theories of glitch music. This is to say that the 
problem with many theories of the photographic index is not a 
problem with ontology per se but, rather, that those theories again 
ontologise their objects of study too quickly. Indeed, when one 
examines the photochemical ontology of (traditional film-based) 
photography, it quickly becomes apparent that there is in fact no 
direct, immediate and simple analogue relation between the object 
in the world and the photographic image produced. Rather, the 
photographic process via which an image is captured and then 
rendered in a visible form is just that, a process, and as such is 
subject to a whole host of differential contexts, operations and 
configurations that complicate the common sense idea that the 
photographic image entertains an analogous relationship with a 
radiant reality since light is directly imprinted on a photochemical 
material or support. This seemingly common sense understanding 
of photography is reinforced linguistically in French by the fact that 
the word for the camera lens is ‘objectif’, a designation that arises 
precisely because of the supposed objectivity of this technology. 
This fact is key for André Bazin who writes that with photography:
For the first time, between the originating object and its repro-
duction there intervenes only the instrumentality of a nonliving 
agent. For the first time an image of the world is formed 
automatically, without the creative intervention of man.5

212	
NOISE MATTERS
Whilst such a view entirely bypasses the complex negotiations that 
are required for the production of a photographic image, Bazin’s 
views on photography are far from being anomalous. On the 
contrary, Bazin is in good company for similar views have been 
expressed by many eminent critics, most notably, perhaps, Roland 
Barthes who writes:
the noeme ‘that-has-been’ was possible only on the day when a 
scientific circumstance (the discovery that silver halogens were 
sensitive to light) made it possible to recover and print directly 
the luminous rays emitted by a variously lighted object. The 
photograph is literally an emanation of the referent.6
	
Whilst this may seem to make perfect sense, it does so only if 
one elides the many intermediary steps of photochemical photog-
raphy and imagines that the image magically appears on a plate 
or piece of paper without minute regulation of exposure time 
and light aperture, and without a multistep chemical immersion 
process during which the latent image produced by the exposure 
of a photosensitive surface is amplified or developed in order to 
become visible, then fixed at an arbitrary point, this whole process 
being repeated a second time in order to convert the negative into 
a positive image that might stand some chance of resembling the 
noeme Barthes talks of.
	
Some critics have of course pointed out the problematic nature 
of this assumption regarding photography that is based in either 
an insufficiently detailed understanding of photography’s material 
ontology or else a willed displacement of it.7 Altman and Manovich, 
for instance, have commented on some examples of the disruption 
of the indexicality of the photographic image in various avant-garde 
artistic practices.8 More in line with the analysis herein, Hubert 
Damisch has noted how the fundamental problem for the early 
pioneers of photography – and, I would contend, the fundamental 
concept for an understanding of this photochemical ontology of 
photography – was not in fact the projection of the image via the 
technological apparatus of the camera obscura but, rather, the 
means to fix or retain that image on a material support.9 Despite 
this, however, Damisch maintains that the public and practitioners’ 
‘long familiarity’ with the technology of the camera obscura led to 
a continued misprision of the nature of photography, to a persistent 

	
On Noise and Photography	
213
belief that its apparently automated (and thus preordained) basis 
meant that all of its processes could be elided into the apparently 
indexical moment of projection. As he writes:
This long familiarity with an image so produced, and the 
completely objective, that is to say automatic or in any case 
strictly mechanical, appearance of the recording process, explains 
how the photographic representation generally appeared as a 
matter of course, and why one ignores its highly elaborated, 
arbitrary character.10
	
For Vilém Flusser, any such posture adopted towards photog-
raphy and that believes that photographs signify ‘states of things 
that have been reflected onto surfaces’ such that ‘photographs 
represent the world itself’ is a naïve one.11 For him, this is because 
of a much simpler fact than anything to do with the photochemical 
multistep process of film-based photography; it is because, firstly, 
‘in the photographic universe one is faced with both black-and-
white and coloured states of things’, whilst such states of things 
simply do not exist in the world out there.12 But secondly, and 
even more fundamentally, because photography, indeed all images, 
signify ‘something “out there” in space and time that they have 
to make comprehensible to us as abstractions (as reductions of 
the four dimensions of space and time to the two surface dimen-
sions)’.13 What I think is important about these insights is that 
they enable a reflection on photography as a particular way of 
producing the image that is able to bridge the divide between film-
based and digital photography in a way that cannot be done if one 
fixates on the photochemical aspects of traditional photography or, 
on the flipside, the transcoding that takes place in the digitisation 
of the image. Indeed, what Flusser’s points indicate to us, I feel, 
is that photography, far from being a manifestation of the real, 
is merely the art of image composition, of arranging colours or 
tones in two-dimensional space. As such, photography is always 
concerned with its own status and being as a visual medium, even 
when it tries to be a document and struggles to efface itself in order 
to tell us something transparent about the world.14

214	
NOISE MATTERS
nm 07.2
Photography is, and always has been manipulative. The realism 
of photography and its claims to tell the truth have always been 
manipulation, not just my interventions, which made it more 
obvious. But these are of course constantly intertwined. There is 
the manipulation in what I depict and the manipulation in the 
photographic technique.15
Around 1998, so the story goes, Thomas Ruff was researching nude 
photography on the internet and stumbled across some internet 
pornography sites. What he found on these sites was of interest to 
him not, it would appear, because of the sexual nature of what was 
depicted in these images’ content but, rather, their low-resolution 
pixel structure which resembled that of images he had produced 
whilst experimenting with image manipulation software on his 
computer. Ruff decided to apply the same techniques to these 
pictures that he had applied to the abstract compositions of pixels 
that he had been experimenting with, ‘processing them so that the 
pixel structure was only just barely visible [using] fuzziness and 
other blurring techniques, occasionally modifying the coloring and 
removing intrusive details’.16 The results of this manipulation are 
manifold, as it gives the images a painterly as opposed to photo-
graphic quality – an aspect of his images commented on by Carolyn 
Christov-Bakargiev and which for her is intimately bound up with 
Ruff’s scepticism towards photography and its indexical promise.17 
In addition, however, by ‘noising up’ the images and obscuring 
their explicit content to a certain degree, he emphasises not so 
much the medium through which photographs are distributed in 
the internet age (and indeed to allow oneself to fall into this trap 
would be to imagine that there were a relation of equivalence 
between a small, on-screen image and a 122 × 155 cm image 
printed on high-quality photographic stock and displayed on an art 
gallery wall) but, rather, the way in which all images are necessarily 
at some level about the distribution of light and colour, about the 
process of composition.
	
This is made abundantly clear in all of the images in this series 
(nudes) in different ways. Very often, for instance, the images 
are framed in such a way that bodies and limbs bisect the entire 

	
On Noise and Photography	
215
image space, sometimes vertically (as in nudes ga 08 in which 
an outstretched male nude becomes a white stripe across a dark 
background), at other times horizontally (as in nudes noe 09 or 
nudes gu 06 where a dildo inserted into a vagina or arsehole at 
the very centre of the image traces a line out to the left of the 
frame with a stroke of brilliant red or translucent blue), or even 
diagonally (such as nudes ez 14 where the dark space between the 
profiles of two women about to kiss cuts the image in half from 
top left to bottom right, through the centre point where their lips 
and tongues form a yin-yang symbol). At other times geometric 
arrangements take centre stage, akin to the forms of Kandinsky 
or Mondrian, lines, colours and forms being exquisitely placed in 
relation to each other within the frame constituting the whole. In 
nudes fee 14, for instance, the legs of the copulating couple draw 
the same geometric form as the freemason’s square and compasses 
symbol, and with no less mathematical precision. Meanwhile, 
nudes pte 21 and nudes pei 01 turn mid-female torso shots, 
underwear and cloth into white, pink and red triangles, rectangles, 
diamonds and trapezia. This, of course, is something with which 
we are familiar, for a work such as Gustave Courbet’s The Origin 
of the World can be seen to do the very same thing, abstracting the 
body through truncation and placement within the frame such that 
it becomes a means to compose the image and foreground a specific 
form (in Courbet’s painting, a black triangle).18 Other images seem 
to reference classical studies of form: the figure in nudes em 05 
adopting the same posture as Delacroix’s Odalisque Reclining on 
a Divan; the male on the left of nudes mn 23 holding his arms 
in a manner similar to that seen in classical representations of 
discus throwers (even though he could by no means be construed 
as actually throwing a discus); and to my eye I cannot help but 
think that the disposition of the two male figures in nudes an 40 
is remarkably similar to that of Adam and God in Michelangelo’s 
Sistine Chapel, even if Ruff reduces the distance between them to 
nothing and changes the point of bodily contact.
	
Other images in this series, meanwhile, seem to be studies in 
colour and contrast, such as nudes fn 06 where white stockinged 
legs and panties appear against a vivid bright green couch, nudes 
fn 07 which employs the same principle with an orange couch, or 
nudes kü 12 where a floating female form, half black half white, 
is suspended against a fluorescent thulian pink backdrop, the tonal 

216	
NOISE MATTERS
contrast adding to the sense of separation between figure and 
world, form and background. Other studies take the very opposite 
approach, subtle gradations of colour and lesser contrast making it 
hard to separate out figures from each other or to pick out bodies 
from backdrop (see nudes tr 08, nudes lk 01, nudes hm 02).
	
In nudes, then, we see the beginnings of a particular operation 
that is to become commonplace in Ruff’s work and that takes 
place within the realm of digital photography but that is about the 
construction of an image and the severing of representational or 
indexical ties that takes place as the dimensions of the world are 
transduced and reduced into those of the photographic image. It is 
the noise of the image that indicates this to us and suggests what 
it is that is important in these images, that leads us away from the 
manifest content of the image to the expressive operations through 
which the image comes to be. As Matthias Winzen remarks:
	
The blurring veil alters the desire of the gaze in a barely 
discernible but decisive way. The desire of the pornography 
consumer’s gaze is naïve to the extent that it is not visual as it 
gazes, but graphically imagines depicted contents (enclosed and 
inaccessible in the depiction). By contrast, when confronted with 
Ruff’s nudes the desire of our gaze is challenged, because the 
fuzziness indicates that there is something here that cannot be 
precisely grasped. It moves, withdraws, making our gaze even 
more intense, more curious at the same pre-rational level at 
which we become aware of pictorial content in the first place.19
Or as Ruff puts it somewhat more simply: ‘A lot of people look 
through the photographs at what they want to see. They simply 
don’t see that they are photographic images’.20
	
This operation is seen again most obviously in his series jpegs 
in which Ruff again borrowed images from the internet or other 
banal sources. The images that he chose for this series depict the 
aftermath of the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the natural landscapes 
of the Black Forest in Bavaria, natural and man-made disasters, 
satellite photos said to prove the existence of weapons of mass 
destruction in Iraq and burning oil fields during the Second Gulf 
War. For Bennett Simpson, in a comment that could equally be 
applied to nudes, this series ‘is about the way photographs have 
become most widely experienced today, as digital images on the 

	
On Noise and Photography	
217
web, compressed and hyperfunctionalised to the degree that, like 
the leaves, clouds, and debris these particular images depict, they 
become ambient and groundless’.21 However, to believe that this is 
the case is to fall prey to a materially specific form of ontological 
determinism that, I would contend, is not present in Ruff since 
the same operations can be found in all of his work, both film-
based and digital, and, what is more, to choose to forget the very 
different phenomenological and material conditions in which his 
photographic renderings of internet images operate. To believe that 
Ruff’s jpegs series is above all a comment on the hypercirculation 
of images in the internet age, indeed, is to conflate photography 
as image production with its means of distribution, these being 
separate facets of the art of photography as a mode of visual 
communication. As Vilém Flusser writes:
The process of manipulating information – called ‘communi-
cation’ – is divided into two phases: In the first, information is 
created; in the second, it is distributed to memories in order to 
be stored there. The first phase is called ‘dialogue’, the second 
‘discourse’.22
Like nudes, and indeed all of Ruff’s photographs, the photographs 
in the jpegs series perform an explicit reflection on both aspects 
of the communicative function of photography. However, I would 
suggest, contra Simpson once again, that what we are witness to 
here is not a reflection on the distribution of images via a techno-
logically-specific means of electronic distribution but, rather, on the 
general distribution of the image in a communicative assemblage 
with the spectator, regardless of the medium through which the 
image’s semiotic content is transmitted, which is to say the image 
as expression.
	
This suggestion may seem entirely counterintuitive; after all, the 
very name given to the series is derived from the file name extension 
given to images that have been compressed with algorithms devised 
by the Joint Photographic Experts Group with the specific goal of 
reducing file size for faster online download. It would be tempting 
to believe, therefore, that the primary interest of these images for 
Ruff would lie precisely in this functional aspect. Were this the 
case, however, he would not need to enact the complex opera-
tions on these images that he does, for Ruff is not content merely 

218	
NOISE MATTERS
to download images and blow them up to the oversized propor-
tions they are enlarged to for gallery exhibition (most of the series 
measuring 252 × 199 cm or thereabouts, depending on the stock 
available). Indeed, before printing these images they are subjected 
to a great deal of post-capture manipulation, pixels being moved 
in such a way that each pixel is itself regridded and thus expanded, 
emphasising the structural properties of the image, and some 
colours are altered also. The characteristics of the image that are 
emphasised by Ruff’s manipulations are then indeed artefacts of an 
image compression standard and thus a functional imperative, but 
his interest lies not with this functional aspect but, precisely, with 
the artefact in and of itself, which is to say that he explicitly sets 
out to interrogate the material residues or incidental artefacts of 
the expressive assemblage in which these images are born and that 
resist the transparent and noise-free transmission of the (normally 
desired) expressed content. As he himself says in an interview with 
Max Dax,
The fact that jpegs possess characteristics that give them a 
specific ‘aesthetic’ or ‘look’ is a ‘collateral phenomenon’ – a 
side effect. To me, these characteristics definitely have their own 
appeal. In this sense, my series of jpegs explores this collateral 
phenomenon, the aesthetics of an invention that has made it 
possible for images to be widely distributed via the internet.23
Ruff then uses his chosen software here in a similar way to that 
seen in his much later series Zycles, ‘for the opposite purpose to 
which it was intended […] in the sense that [he uses] it to build 
something non-functional’.24
	
Once more, if we consider the jpegs series in this way, it 
quickly becomes apparent that the non-functional end to which his 
manipulations are put to service is an interrogation of the coming 
into existence of the two-dimensional image. Indeed, across all of 
the images presented in the jpegs series, it becomes apparent that 
the geometric gridding effect produced by the high-level pixelation 
divides the image into zones in an even more formal manner than 
the most geometric of his nudes. The image becomes, indeed, 
nothing more than a two-dimensional grid in which colour can be 
deployed in various zones regimented by a horizontal and a vertical 
axis. The heightened two-dimensionality of these images, of course, 

	
On Noise and Photography	
219
reduces the sense of depth that any of the images might have if 
presented in a different aspect, revealing to us that depth perception 
is a result not only of stereoscopic vision but also of relative zones 
of clarity and distortion and the relations and contrast between 
different shades of the same colour. If these images seem exces-
sively flat, then, it is because there is here no relative difference 
between any area of the grid, the heightened pixilation rendering 
each molecule of the image as clear (or unclear) as the next, relative 
clarity or distortion only coming through the physical movement 
of the viewer in the gallery space, which means, of course, that this 
differential relation exists only in relation to the discursive aspect of 
photography – albeit only when the viewer relinquishes her fixation 
on content in order to focus on the image itself. What is more, 
Ruff accentuates the jpegs’ artefacts or alters the relative colour 
tone of his images’ pixels in such a way as to create differential 
relations amongst sectors of the grid, creating in effect a secondary 
grid at a higher level of organisation on top of the original grid, 
the individual pixels being grouped together by tonal contrast in 
8 × 8 pixel blocks, drawing the false illusion of depth created by 
shading into the surface of the image and returning it to the strict 
two-dimensionality that is the preserve of the photographic image.
	
This process is most apparent in those series of images where 
the artefacts of the technology being used are brought to the fore 
such that they become visible, which is to say in those works that 
are most obviously ‘noisy’. However, as has been suggested, this 
noise is simply a more obvious and explicit manifestation of a more 
general principle in Ruff’s photography, it is indicative of a noisy 
operation that expresses the coming into being of the image that 
is present in all of his work and not only in series such as nudes 
or jpegs – or other explicitly ‘noisy’ series such as Zeitungsfotos in 
which Ruff selected images from an archive of newspaper clippings, 
abstracted the image from its informational context and enlarged 
them at a ratio of 2:1, rendering the dot matrix of the image much 
more apparent. This is to say then, again contra McLuhan, that 
the noise of Ruff’s photographs may become more perceptible 
when the technological artefacts of the medium are apparent, but 
the same principles operate in all of his works. There is then no 
technological specificity to this noise but, rather, a photographic 
specificity, when photography is conceived of not as a technologi-
cally-determined material practice, as it is for Flusser,25 but, rather, 

220	
NOISE MATTERS
as the event in which the image passes into actuality in two-dimen-
sional space.
nm 07.3
A striking example of the very same processes we have observed in 
the jpegs series can be found in Winzen’s description of Haus Nr. 
7 I. Winzen writes:
Two street lamps, one on the left in the front middle ground, 
the other on the right in the background, arch up over the street 
from the pathway, yet fail to introduce any real dynamism into 
the strictly vertical-horizontal composition of the scene as it 
tapers diagonally along the empty street to the right.26
Looking at the images in the Haus series as a whole, one is struck 
by the extent to which this same principle is deployed across all 
of the photographs, whether the buildings are shot at an angle as 
is the case with Haus Nr.7 I (and 7 II, 8 I, 8 III, 5 III, 2 I, 9 II, 
etc.) or straight on, the camera angle being perpendicular to the 
front of the building (as in 1 I, 3 I, 3 II, 5 I, 12 I, 1 II, 6 I, 12 II, 
etc.). What is more, almost every building in this series belongs to 
a specific kind of post-war to 1970s architecture, remarkable in 
most cases precisely for its architectural unremarkability. However, 
as the subject for a study of the translation of volumetric forms 
into a flat plane in such a way that those forms are disabused of 
the illusory depth that would shore up their indexical links to the 
outside world, these buildings are exquisite. Indeed, all of them 
display a strict geometric rigour, their contours, doors, windows, 
(minimalist) details and angles all performing a gridding of the 
image space in a similar way to the pixel grids of the jpegs series. 
Haus Nr. 8 III, for instance, presents a brick building built around 
a steel frame that forms a grid inside of which each brick forms 
part of a matrix, in exactly the same manner as the pixels of the 
jpegs are gridded together in 8 × 8 blocks through the operations 
of tone and contrast and the peculiar artefacts of the compression 
software. What is more, even though this building is shot at an 
angle, such that we are able to see three walls of this L-shaped 

	
On Noise and Photography	
221
building and two corner angles,27 the absolute neutrality of the 
background and foreground and the flat light that provides no 
sense of shading robs this building of any sense of depth or volume. 
Indeed, the lines of the steel frame do not draw our eyes into an 
illusory volumetric form, since the spatial depth is not sufficient to 
bring about a perspectival convergence of parallel lines. Instead, 
our eyes follow these lines across and up and down the image in a 
ziz-zag shape, the line between the top of the building and the light 
grey sky bisecting the upper half of the image into two different 
zones, two different geometric shapes. 
	
The extreme flatness of these images and the architectural 
unremarkability of the buildings depicted have led many critics 
to see in them a socio-political commentary on the conditions of 
life in certain areas of post-war Germany, or else to describe the 
images as banal. In both cases, however, such commentaries rely on 
the retention of an indexical relation that simply no longer exists. 
These are precisely not photographs of something, but photo-
graphs. The image here is not subordinated to the referent – as 
one might at first suspect given the nature of these images which 
do not appear in the slightest abstract – but vice versa, which is 
to say that what is of interest here is not the architecture of the 
building but the architecture of the image, the way in which lines, 
light and colour are deployed within a frame on a two-dimensional 
plane. This, for Ruff, is the essence of photography, the material, 
expressive elements of it common to all of its manifestations 
to which we attend through its noise. Indeed, it is by thinking 
of photography in this way that we can see the continuum in 
operation across all of his photographic works.28 For having been 
made to attend to this aspect of his works by an intensification of 
their noise, what one realises looking over Ruff’s career, from jpegs 
back and indeed forwards, is that his photography has always been 
about the architectural composition of the image and the frame, 
about the distribution of light and colour, about the lines of force 
and relation that draw the viewers’ eyes over the surface of his 
works.
	
In his Interieurs series, for instance, which turns its attention 
to the interior design and living spaces of various German people 
(for the most part known to Ruff personally), doorjambs that 
would generally indicate a threshold leading into a different spatial 
volume are pushed to the very edge of the image in such a way that 

222	
NOISE MATTERS
they frame one side of the pictorial plane rather than leading into a 
separate space in the image’s content (see, for instance, Interieur 4C 
and 2D). This same technique can be found with mirrors also, as in 
Interieur 3A where a full-length mirror to the far left of the image 
is shot in such a way as to enable us to see only its frame at the 
edge of the image, denying it the ability to double the impression of 
volumetric space, a function that mirrors are often made to serve. 
The dressing table mirror shot head on towards the upper right 
quadrant of the photograph, meanwhile, reflects nothing other 
than a white surface little different from the white wall on which 
it is hung, this again denying spatial volume and flattening both 
object and reflection into a single plane. Through techniques such 
as these, every element of these interiors, like the bodies, limbs, 
genitals, sex toys and underwear of nudes, is similarly robbed of 
its functional or utilitarian index to the real space in which it is 
situated to become instead a geometric shape, a line or a colour 
bisecting the plane and composing the image. The decorative 
motifs of tiled surfaces and wallpapers, for instance, are intensified 
through selective presentation, becoming abstract visual motifs, 
and all of the objects set against these backgrounds enter into the 
same logic and visual economy, making of them but a motif, a 
shape bisecting a plane and not a volume extended in space.
	
This same principle governs Ruff’s Porträts also, but extends it 
out to encompass and suppress the psychology of much portraiture. 
If good portraits are generally said to tell us something about the 
personality of the sitter, this link to the ‘real’ person is consciously 
rejected by Ruff who shoots his sitters mostly face on, against a 
plain background (in the early shots against a colour chosen by 
the sitter, in the later shots a neutral tone), instructing them to 
retain a blank expression and shooting with a flat light once again 
to remove any sense of depth from the image such that what we 
are presented with is not a picture of a person but, rather, a photo-
graph that uses a face to construct its image. As André Rouillé has 
written of this series:
	
Thomas Ruff photographs […] his models – generally young 
people – in the most neutral and direct way possible, without 
diversions or effects. His photographs are always shot head 
on, with extreme precision, with no shadows or blemishes 
on the faces so that they appear without depth or contours. 

	
On Noise and Photography	
223
Smooth and transparent, they are lacking in human consistency. 
Empty, emptied out of their substance, they are the non-faces of 
individuals who have been reduced to the present of their mere 
appearance, they are sur-faces [visages-surfaces]. Their mute 
expression betrays a kind of exhaustion, a deaf and fatal erosion 
of the human.29
	
More surprisingly, perhaps, this noisy analysis of Ruff also 
enables us to find the same operations at work in his astronomic 
works, Sterne and Cassini. In Sterne, Ruff used original negatives 
from the European Southern Observatory archives to produce 
large scale (260 × 188 cm) images of sections of these negatives. 
The ambition of Ruff’s project is perhaps at its greatest here 
because the resulting images in effect reduce an infinitesimally large 
volumetric space measured in light years to a flat plane, making 
of the universe nothing more than points of light and the absence 
of light, zones on a plane that enter into relation with each other 
due to their differential reflective qualities. These photographs no 
longer refer to the universe or the stars that produced the light they 
supposedly record, then, but only to the expressive act of (black 
and white) photography conceptualised in these very same terms, 
as a distribution of differential reflective qualities. And whilst there 
may indeed be no reason to restrict this commentary to black and 
white photography, it is perhaps more apt to make the same claim 
in relation to colour photography via Ruff’s recent series Cassini.
	
In this series, Ruff takes satellite images of Saturn, its moons and 
its rings from a NASA archive on the internet, and manipulates 
the colours and framing of the satellite images in such a way as to 
make of them, once more, merely images, two-dimensional lines, 
shapes and zones of colour. Technically speaking, Cassini 04 may 
then depict one of Saturn’s moons, but in actuality it does not for 
it is merely a black circle containing zones of grey against an olive 
green background, all of which is bisected horizontally through 
the centre of the image by a bright light green line, whilst Cassini 
02 is simpler still, presenting a curved line that bisects the image 
plane vertically into two zones, one of which is black and occupies 
one-sixth of the plane, the other of which is a light bile yellow and 
is itself bisected by a horizontal straight line one-sixth of the way 
up from the bottom of the image.

224	
NOISE MATTERS
nm 07.4
More surprisingly still, analysing Ruff’s photographs through 
their noise enables us to include his abstract series Substrat and 
Zycles within this same logic and contend that they also display a 
high coefficient of photographic noise. If this seems so surprising, 
it is because Substrat and Zycles are generally considered to 
be somewhat separate projects to Ruff’s photographic œuvre, 
presumably because they contain no apparent indexical links to 
any kind of external real object in the world. In Substrat, Ruff 
takes images from Manga comics found on the internet and layers 
them over each other, intensifying the colours until all that remain 
are two-dimensional planes filled with zones of brilliant colour that 
enter into dynamic relations with each other, each zone bordered 
by colour gradations that enable it to morph into the neighbouring 
zone as our eye follows the diaphanous lines that resemble contour 
lines on a map more than any actual recognisable form – and let 
us note that, in the light of the present analysis, this is perhaps 
not surprising since contour lines are a cartographic convention 
for rendering three-dimensional forms in two-dimensional space 
through the deployment of a mathematical differential between the 
lines. Manga comics are particularly suited to this kind of usage 
since they are themselves one of the most dynamic visual forms 
imaginable, both in terms of imagined movement projected in the 
frame and across frames through the dynamic interrelation of lines 
and forms, as well as in the colour palette and contrasts employed. 
This is not to say, of course, that I wish to contend that Mangas are 
somehow photographic nor, conversely, that Ruff’s Substrat series 
is in reality a Manga. What I am suggesting is that that Ruff’s use of 
the material provided by Manga comics to produce a photographic 
image is ultimately no different from his practice in any of the other 
series examined, even if his tools and techniques may differ.
	
What is more, if Ruff’s photography is extremely true to this 
term’s etymology which designates this art as nothing other than 
writing with light, and if photography’s expressive essence is consti-
tuted not by any technological, photochemical specificity, nor by a 
direct relation of indexicality to the real which one often imagines 
it must represent, and if indeed its expressive specificity is merely to 
reduce the dimensions of Euclidean space into the two-dimensional 

	
On Noise and Photography	
225
plane of a flat image and to compose an image with lines, forms 
and colours, in other words to arrange differently reflective zones, 
then Zycles is also a photographic work in the same way as his 
others. The work is described in Thomas Ruff: Surfaces, Depths in 
the following way:
the ZYCLES are inspired by drawings found in 19th-century 
literature on electromagnetism. Three dimensional tangles of 
lines constructed entirely by means of mathematical calculations 
were processed by the artist using a computer program and then 
transferred to a two-dimensional virtual image space by means 
of ink-jet printing. The finished canvasses present detailed views 
of the linear structures produced by the imaging software.30
This same entry notes that this series, in a sense, ‘most repre-
sents his epistemological interests in representation and mediation 
techniques’, yet nonetheless suggests that it ‘seems less photo-
graphic than much of Ruff’s other work’.31 Yet, as Douglas Fogle 
points out, the historical relations between Ruff’s Zycles and 
photography run deep. Writing of James Clerk Maxwell, whose 
book on electromagnetism was fundamental to Ruff’s conceptuali-
sation of this series, Fogle explains:
While Maxwell is often credited for laying the foundation for 
the emergence of the field of quantum mechanics in the early 
20th century, he was also credited, not insignificantly for our 
purposes, with discovering the process of colour photography in 
1861. That he was as preoccupied with the processes of imaging 
as he was with physics is not surprising as photography itself is 
nothing more than a visual index of one part of the electromag-
netic spectrum.32
	
Fogle’s point here is close to mine, for although he reinstates an 
indexical relation to a phenomenon situated in the real world, it is 
only to that phenomenon which is fundamental to photography’s 
expressive capacities, namely light. Some may object, of course, 
that both I and Fogle are at this point no longer talking about 
photography at all and that, indeed, if photography is nothing 
other than a composition of light reflecting surfaces in two dimen-
sions that does not need to bear an indexical relation to objects 

226	
NOISE MATTERS
in the outside world, then abstract painting could also qualify as 
photographic in this definition. The accusation would perhaps be 
fair, and indeed whilst there is no need I think to be overly techno-
logically deterministic about what qualifies as photography and 
what does not, a move that enables us to talk about film-based 
and digital photography as different deployments of the same 
fundamental expressive practice, what we must not lose sight of is 
precisely the fact that there is always a technological mediation in 
a photographic work. One could contend, of course, that a paint-
brush is also a specific kind of technology, but I would suggest that 
photography is a different kind of technology with a much higher 
coefficient of objectivity encoded into it. This is not to say that it 
harbours an absolute objectivity, as we have seen Bazin suggest 
or, indeed, as Bernd and Hilla Becher and many others from the 
Düsseldorf school where Ruff trained might contend.33 Nor is this 
to say, as Flusser suggests, that ‘we are manipulated by photo-
graphs and programmed to act in a ritual fashion in the service 
of a feedback mechanism for the benefit of cameras’.34 Rather, 
photography, I would suggest, is an eminently noisy technology 
that places human subjectivity and technological objectivity into 
an expressive relation with each other such that human subjec-
tivity is always necessarily machinic and quasi-objective, whilst the 
objective machinic apparatus of photography is only ever semi-
autonomous, always subject to the subjectivity of the photographer 
(even when the camera is automated).
	
The point here is no doubt related to Flusser’s when he writes,
Every single photograph is the result, at one and the same time, 
of co-operation and of conflict between camera and photog-
rapher. Consequently, a photograph can be considered to have 
been decoded when one has succeeded in establishing how 
co-operation and conflict act on one another within it.35
For Flusser, the question put to photographs by critics of photog-
raphy can therefore be formulated as: ‘How far have photographers 
succeeded in subordinating the camera’s program to their own 
intentions, and by what means?’ And, vice versa:
How far has the camera succeeded in redirecting photographers’ 
intentions back to the interests of the camera’s program, and 

	
On Noise and Photography	
227
by what means? On the basis of these criteria, the ‘best’ photo-
graphs are those in which photographers win out against the 
camera’s program in the sense of their human intentions, i.e. 
they subordinate the camera to human intention.36
	
Flusser’s stance here, however, is far too combative; photography 
is not a fight. What Flusser is talking about here is the nature of the 
relation in the machinic assemblage that constitutes the first phase 
of production of the photographic act, and it is somewhat arbitrary 
to make value judgements as to the aesthetic or philosophical 
worth of an image according to where on the continuum between 
human and machine any particular photograph is situated. Rather 
than the image’s worth, what does change as we move along this 
line is the nature and coefficient of the image’s noise, either subjec-
tivity or objectivity being more or less resistant to the passage 
of the photographic expression. This is perhaps close to what 
Fogle means when he states that ‘[Ruff] enthusiastically embraces 
paradox by veering away from the center of visual photographic 
certitude in order to embrace the shadowy world of photography’s 
dark matter where the collision between subjectivity and objec-
tivity creates a complex explosion of photographic expressivity’.37 
What Fogle refers to as dark matter, however, I term noise.
nm 07.5
Up until this point, I have of course only really talked about half of 
photography, what Flusser calls the dialogic element, its production 
of the image, and I have almost entirely left aside the discursive 
aspect of photography, its distribution. Again, I would contend 
that in this aspect of photography it is possible to have different 
coefficients of noise in the assemblages instigated between certain 
kinds of images with certain kinds of publics and spectators, and 
that Ruff’s work produces a particularly high coefficient of noise 
in these relations since his photographs often force a recognition 
of the assemblage in operation for the transmission of the image, 
which is to say that they are very resistant.
	
This aspect makes itself manifest in some of his works via their 
invocation to the viewer that leads to a physical displacement of 

228	
NOISE MATTERS
the viewer in space. As in the narrative beginning this chapter, 
then, the jpegs disrupt our normal viewing practices, and invert 
the habitual logic of vision in which looking at something closely 
generally brings about a better understanding and greater clarity. 
The nudes perform this same resistant disruption in regards to the 
spectatorial practices of the gallery exhibition space, but also invert 
the logic of the pornographic gaze.38
	
Many of Ruff’s series, however, contain a different form of 
noise that makes us attend to the relationality or expressivity of 
an object or assemblage that we would generally take to be static, 
either through a misprision of its ontology or else simply because 
the expressivity of the relation is generally always elided in order to 
focus on the assemblage’s content and not its expression. And if the 
production of the image very often intensifies the expressivity of 
the transduction of the image from a four-dimensional space into 
a two-dimensional plane through a resistant operation, in Ruff’s 
work it is oftentimes the retranslation of the image back into an 
illusorily three-dimensional form as a mental image through the 
operations of stereoscopic vision that becomes noisy and seeks out 
our attention.
	
That this should be of concern to Ruff is perhaps not surprising 
if we accept Christov-Bakargiev’s suggestion that,
The sheer abundance of culturally produced flat visual imagery 
has become so great in the age of mechanical photographic 
representation that we no longer link the right and the left eye 
stereoscopically, but constantly exercise our ability to create a 
purely mental image of depth, due to the double move from 
reality.39
For Christov-Bakargiev, the preponderance of the two-dimensional 
image produced by photography or generalised dissemination of infor-
mation via the computer screen has become so great that ‘our brains 
have adapted to the flat agglomeration of bits of information and 
pixels as if they were forms of volume and depth’.40 Whilst this claim 
is somewhat exaggerated, what is no doubt true is that our ability to 
perceive depth thanks to the mechanics of stereoscopic vision is not 
something that generally gives us pause for reflection. When we do 
stop to think about it, however, what we realise is that all impression 
of depth in vision, whether of two- or three-dimensional objects, is 

	
On Noise and Photography	
229
necessarily just that, an impression or illusion since it is produced 
only through the neurocognitive processing of the difference between 
two images projected onto the flat screens of the retina. This is a 
process that seems to be of great interest to Ruff who has created 
series of stereograms, sets of two almost identical photographs 
which, when viewed through a stereoscope that presents each image 
to only one of the viewer’s eyes, enhances the illusion of depth and 
three-dimensionality. This technology, originally invented by Charles 
Wheatstone in 1838, might itself then be considered to increase the 
noise of vision, making us aware of that which is generally taken for 
granted and heightening the artefacts of the very process of vision 
as an expressive act. For stereograms seem strangely artificial when 
viewed with the correct technology, and whilst it is undoubtedly 
true that this unhomeliness is an artefact of that particular techno-
logical assemblage, what it is important to remember is that that 
assemblage itself is an externalised form of the process by which 
stereoscopic vision itself operates, a doubling up and therefore 
intensification of the expressive relation between three-dimensional 
form and two-dimensional shapes, as well as the differential relation 
between the images produced by our eyes.41 As Ruff himself says of 
this technology: ‘You have two flat photos, and if you look at them 
properly you see the one extra dimension. And it is not the eyes that 
do that; the images are created in the brain’.42 This is to say, then, 
that stereoscopic vision results from a neurocognitive interpretation 
of the differential relation between two flat images. It is then not the 
case, as Tammer El-Sheikh suggests, that Ruff’s Stereofotos exploit 
‘the viewer’s perceptual mechanism of reconciling differences’,43 for 
there is no reconciliation; stereoscopic vision is produced only by 
the retention of difference such that a differential flow is instigated 
between the two images in relation with each other. Ruff is aware of 
this and once again increases the artefacts of this expressive relation 
not only by this technological doubling, but also by increasing the 
differential relation between each of the images in his stereograms. 
As El-Sheikh goes on to explain in his notes on this series, Ruff’s 
innovation in this work
consists in breaching the technique’s prescriptions for realistic 
effect. Instead of separating the photos by the average distance 
between a viewer’s eyes (6.5cm), he takes the photos at a 
distance between 1.5 and 150m. This hypothetical giant thereby 

230	
NOISE MATTERS
surveys the Alps from eyes lodged in a 200 metre-wide head 
atop a body that would stand 1,000 metres high.44
	
As is clear from this description of these works, Ruff here breaks 
the reality effect that these works were intended to create for early 
viewers of stereograms who could be magically transported to 
the three-dimensional space of a place they had never visited and 
feel like they were actually standing before monuments or scenes 
from faraway lands. However, rather than breaking this reality 
effect and thrusting us into the body of a giant as is suggested here, 
Ruff rather intensifies merely the unreality effect of normal vision 
by increasing the differential relation that produces stereoscopic 
images in the brain. The differential relation between these images is 
then not reconciled in such a way as to enable us to effect a synthetic 
operation that would provide us with a new stable identity from 
which to survey the world; rather, the differential is increased so that 
we are all the more unable to effect that work of synthesis, unable 
to separate out perception from its objects, unable to maintain the 
fiction that there is any such thing as an inanimate, external reality 
that would be somehow separate from us as opposed to always 
necessarily in a relation of ontological interdependence with us.
	
A similar operation can be found also in Ruff’s series andere 
Porträts for which he used a Minolta Montage Unit photo 
composite machine to combine two portraits from his previous 
series in a composite image that has been referred to as a 
‘phantom image’.45 Terms such as this, of course, express once 
again something of the fear occasioned by the dissolution of fixed 
identity put into operation by noise. But they also speak to the 
unreality of the image, the extent to which ‘the work portrays a 
person who does not actually exist’.46 Yet whilst it is undoubtedly 
the case that Ruff’s use of the composite image is far removed 
from Francis Galton’s deployment of a similar photographic effect 
through different means for a specific end – namely to create a 
typology of the human based on shared physiognomic features47 
– the unreality effect of these works may again not lie quite where 
one might expect. For like the Stereofotos, Ruff’s andere Porträts 
also combine two different images into one to produce a noisy 
image in which we can almost see the composite image being 
produced out of the relation between the images from which it is 
formed. Once more, then, if these images are indeed ‘unreal’ in the 

	
On Noise and Photography	
231
sense that they portray something that does not exist in the real 
world, they are so only insofar as they constitute a noisier or more 
intensified version of the world as it is represented in vision (in this 
instance) or through our senses more generally, which is to say the 
world as it can only ever be for us.
nm 07.6
If we wish to examine the ontology of photography in and of itself 
as a mode of material production that takes place through a specific 
technological assemblage, then photography is necessarily split in 
two across the silver-gelatin/digital divide, since even though there 
is a certain amount of consistency in regards to, for instance, the 
reproducibility of the image that is so important for Benjamin, 
Flusser and others,48 the technological and material means through 
which the photograph comes to be are very different in each case. 
What is more, if we analyse photography in this way then photog-
raphy is split once more into two different ontological phases, firstly 
as the image is produced and secondly as the image is disseminated. 
If one considers photography in this way, it is perhaps easy to see 
how one might arrive at the kinds of conclusions drawn by Flusser. 
For him, technological advances in image production technologies 
(cameras) and distributions technologies (that have proliferated at 
an even more exponential rate since Flusser’s death in 1991) have 
led to a complete devaluing or emptying out of the photographic 
image, such that ‘as an object, as a thing, the photograph is practi-
cally without value; a flyer and no more’.49 Or, as he puts it later,
Photographs are silent flyers that are distributed by means of 
reproduction, in fact by means of the massifying channels of 
gigantic, programmed distribution apparatuses. As objects, their 
value is negligible; their value lies in the information that they 
carry loose and open for distribution on their surface. They 
are the harbingers of post-industrial society in general: Interest 
has shifted in their case from the object to the information, 
and ownership is a category that has become untenable for 
them. The distribution channels, the ‘media’, encode their latest 
significance. This encoding represents a struggle between the 

232	
NOISE MATTERS
distribution apparatus and the photographer. By concealing 
this struggle, photographic criticism makes the ‘media’ totally 
invisible for the receiver of the photograph.50
Ultimately for Flusser, then, this leads to a situation in which 
‘Photographs suppress our critical awareness in order to make us 
forget the mindless absurdity of the process of functionality’,51 and 
our job as critics should be to break out of this circular logic.
	
If we examine these statements more carefully, Flusser’s 
arguments soon seem somewhat counterintuitive, however. It 
would seem, for instance, that the more successful photography 
becomes (which is to say the more the technology becomes 
available to the individual user and the more its products become 
available to the consumer) the more photography is itself effaced, 
becoming banal through over production at the same time as 
photography’s own medium is usurped and displaced by the media 
through which it is distributed. Flusser’s invocation to break out 
of this pattern seems then to suggest that the mediality of photog-
raphy must be brought back into the fray, highlighting the medium 
and specificity of photography once more so that the ontological 
status of photography is reinstated. It is here that we find the crux 
of the problem in Flusser’s analysis, for in actuality, none of the 
objections that he raises alter the ontological status of the image, 
which is to say that there is no reason to suppose that an intensifi-
cation or quantitative increase of one of the technological qualities 
of photography – its iterability – brings about a fundamental 
qualitative change in photography. This is not to say that Flusser’s 
comments are entirely without merit, for it would indeed seem 
to be the case that the speed and volume of photographic images 
today oftentimes prevent them from being considered in such a 
way that their noise or (relational) ontological specificity might be 
apprehended. According to Christov-Bakargiev, Ruff is well aware 
of this and deliberately produces his works in such a way as to 
ensure that they are not invisibilised by this speed. She writes,
Far from being passive, pessimistic and negative, Ruff’s art has 
actually acted systematically and emblematically as a form of 
resistance to the flood of images that characterize the digital 
age. He programmatically suspends them out of the speed of this 
flow, in a way not dissimilar to Marcel Duchamp’s strategy when 

	
On Noise and Photography	
233
he created the ready-made, suspending the flow of consumer 
goods in the new arcades (or early shopping malls) of modernity 
by removing them from that system of circulation and time, and 
from their functionality as objects for exchange. If photography 
became a flood and triumphed in large advertising images, 
airport posters and back-lit images, which are churned out, put 
up and substituted at incredible speed as this year’s fashion gives 
way to next year’s, Ruff has carefully controlled the number of 
his images within a relatively small number of series.52
Whilst it may then be the case that Ruff’s extraction of the photo-
graphic image from the blur created by the hyperspeeds of our 
contemporary mediasphere enable us better to apprehend something 
about the photographic image itself, it does not necessarily follow 
from this, as Flusser would have it, that images that do not do this 
are ontologically different. Rather, the resistant operations of Ruff’s 
photographs (of which this abstraction from the flood of images 
constitute one – to my mind minor – element) increase his works’ 
coefficient of noise such that this becomes apparent and tells us 
something about photography (in both its dialogic and discursive 
modes) that extends far beyond his own work.
	
The noise generated by Ruff’s photographs, however, does not 
look like what we might expect; it has nothing to do with the grain 
of the image produced by the size of the silver halide crystals of the 
film, indeed it has nothing to do with the ‘medium’ of photography 
at all and tells us little about the specific material and technological 
configurations that bring the image into being, even if series such 
as his jpegs may trick us into believing that this is the case. As he 
says of his Porträts, ‘The minimalist detail in the photo should 
not be the grain of the photographic layer, but a pore of the skin 
or one single hair’.53 What Ruff’s photographs make us attend to, 
on the contrary, is the way in which the image comes to be as an 
image, the way in which the image presents information, and how 
that image is perceived within the medium of photography when 
this is conceived of precisely not in a technologically reductive 
manner but merely, true to its etymology, as a means to write an 
image. To view photography in this way is to attend to its noise, 
the ontological specificity not of the medium but of the middle 
or in-between, the way in which photography can only ever be 
a particular kind of expressive assemblage in which light, tone 

234	
NOISE MATTERS
and colour are distributed in differential relations within a certain 
kind of technological apparatus, this image entering in turn into 
an expressive relation with a different kind of image-producing 
apparatus in order to pass into the realm of perception.
	
Conceived of in this way, there is no reason to posit a necessarily 
indexical relation between an external reality and the photographic 
image of that reality, nor an ontological divide between silver-
gelatin and digital photography, nor any reason to imagine that 
a photograph viewed on a computer screen is (in the dialogic or 
production phase) ontologically distinct from a C-type print viewed 
in a gallery, nor to imagine that the banal snapshot of the photo-
graphically illiterate amateur photographer so reviled by Flusser54 
is ontologically different from the art photography of a Cartier-
Bresson or Weston or Henson, no justification for the belief that a 
massification of the production or reception of photography will 
bring about its demise. Photography in this formulation describes, 
on the contrary, the ways in which an image is expressed in 
two-dimensions in a certain kind of (non-prescriptive) technological 
assemblage characterised by iterability and two-dimensionality, 
and as such there cannot be an ontological distinction between 
different kinds of photographs.55
	
This is not to say that all photographic images are equivalent, 
of course, and if this analysis of photography is made possible 
through an examination of what we are suggesting might be 
termed the noise of photographic expression, then we might even 
go so far as to suggest that the ontological difference between 
snapshots and art photography that exists for Flusser is in fact a 
qualitative difference that can be explained by the coefficient of 
noise expressed by any particular photograph. Noise, of course, is 
expressed in every photograph, if noise is taken to be the expression 
specific to the operation by which the image comes to be as a distri-
bution of differential zones. But not every photograph makes us 
attend to this expressive aspect of the image to the same degree. It 
has been my contention of course that Ruff’s photographs contain 
a high coefficient of noise that makes us attend to this aspect and 
that (counterintuitively) enables us to see more clearly the ways in 
which, for instance, the photographic image necessarily reduces the 
dimensionality of the world into a flat plane. In Ruff’s photography 
this effect is generated by the excessive flatness of the image and 
rigorous sense of the two-dimensional architectural composition 

	
On Noise and Photography	
235
of the image, but there is no reason why this heightened noise 
could not come, for instance, from the technologically enhanced 
depth or shallowness of field in the photographs of, respectively, 
Cartier-Bresson or Doisneau, both of which similarly point to the 
two-dimensionality of photography by emphasising the illusion 
of depth through different means. In all cases, what seems likely 
is that such a high coefficient of noise would not be found in an 
average snapshot where the interest comes predominantly if not 
solely from the captured content.
	
It might seem, from all of this, that what is being suggested is an 
equivalence between a high coefficient of noise and the definition of 
what qualifies as art. Whilst this hypothesis may indeed stand up 
to some scrutiny, I am nevertheless loathe to claim it as a general 
principle for all art. What is being suggested, however, is that this 
high coefficient of noise makes us attend to photography (and 
indeed other forms of expression) differently, in such a way as to be 
more aware not of the informational content of the medium, nor of 
the medium as a particular material or technological configuration, 
but, rather, of the ways in which that content is expressed through a 
particular medium and, subsequently, of how that impacts upon the 
secondary expression of the image in a perceptual assemblage. Thus, 
as with the other examples of noise examined herein, noise reveals 
to us the necessarily relational nature of photography’s ontology 
at the point of both production and distribution/perception. Far 
from attenuating our sensory perception, noise here, through the 
intensification of this relational aspect, becomes that which renders 
our awareness of the world all the more acute, that insists upon us 
and calls us to attention – as indeed it does in its common sense 
definition, which is precisely why it is a problem for many people. 
As has been written in the catalogue notes to a 1991 touring 
exhibition of Ruff’s work in Germany, ‘Art is here intended as a 
means of intensifying our perception and reflecting on our reality; it 
is a medium of sensory awareness which can only be wholly realized 
through the active “collaboration” of the message’.56
	
To say this is not, of course, to mount a defence of the kinds 
of industrial or other nuisance noises decried by the anti-noisists, 
as Schwarz likes to refer to the anti-noise lobby. It is, however, 
to suggest that we should be careful not to apply the same kinds 
of logics to all forms of noise, precisely because the heightened 
perception of the unavoidably connected nature of our existence 

236	
NOISE MATTERS
in the world that noise occasions can prevent us from making the 
kinds of false ontological claims that have haunted philosophies of 
(in this case) photography for far too long.
Notes
  1	  André Rouillé, La Photographie (Paris: Gallimard, 2005), 248–9; my 
translation.
  2	  Rouillé, La Photographie, 308; my translation.
  3	  See Rouillé, La Photographie, 610.
  4	  Rouillé, La Photographie, 12; my translation. See also the following 
passage: ‘The passage from a silver-gelatin universe to a digital 
one does not only change a technique, it affects the very nature 
of photography. This is so to the extent it is not even certain that 
“digital photography” is still photography’ (614; my translation).
  5	  André Bazin, ‘The Ontology of the Photographic Image’, trans. Hugh 
Gray, Film Quarterly, 13 no. 4 (1960), 7.
  6	  Roland Barthes, Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, trans. 
R. Howard (orig. French 1980; New York: Hill and Wang, 1981), 80.
  7	  See, for instance, Greg Hainge, ‘Unfixing the Photographic Image: 
Photography, Indexicality, Fidelity and Normativity’, Continuum: 
Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 22, no. 5 (2008). The notion of 
the indexicality of the photograph has of course been problematised 
even further and much more obviously since the dawning of the 
digital age.
  8	  Rick Altman, ‘Introduction: Four and a Half Film Fallacies’, in 
Sound Theory Sound Practice, ed. R. Altman (London: Routledge, 
1992); Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2001).
  9	  Hubert Damisch, ‘Five Notes for a Phenomenology of the 
Photographic Image’, October, 5 (1978); reprinted in The 
Photography Reader, ed. L. Wells (London: Routledge, 2003), 88.
10	  Damisch, ‘Five Notes’, 88. 
11	  Vilém Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, trans. 
Anthony Matthews (orig. German, 1983; London: Reaktion Books, 
2000), 44.
12	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 41.
13	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 8.

	
On Noise and Photography	
237
14	  The tension between what he terms the ‘photograph-document’ and 
the ‘photograph-expression’ is present throughout Rouillé’s work La          
Photographie.
15	  Thomas Ruff quoted in Matthias Winzen, ‘A Credible Invention 
of Reality: Thomas Ruff’s Precise Reproductions of our Fantasies 
of Reality’, in Thomas Ruff: Photography 1979 to the Present, ed. 
Matthias Winzen (New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 2003), 156. 
16	  Winzen, Thomas Ruff: Photography 1979 to the Present, ed. 
Matthias Winzen (New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 2003), 236.
17	  Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev, ‘Thomas Ruff at the End of the 
Photographic Dream’, in Thomas Ruff, ed. Carolyn Christov-
Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 14.
18	  The resonance with Courbet’s painting is noted by Winzen who 
includes an image of The Origin of the World in the middle of his 
essay on Ruff (‘A Credible Invention of Reality’, 146). Note also that 
ironically, perhaps, the image from Ruff’s series that most resembles 
Courbet’s in its composition is nudes re 07 which reinstates the 
model’s modesty by keeping her underwear on. 
19	  Winzen, ‘A Credible Invention of Reality’, 149.
20	  Ruff quoted in Winzen, ‘A Credible Invention of Reality’, 147.
21	  Bennett Simpson, ‘Ruins: Thomas Ruff’s jpegs’, in Thomas Ruff, 
jpegs (New York: Aperture, 2009), np.
22	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 49.
23	  Max Dax, ‘An Interview with Thomas Ruff’, in Thomas Ruff, ed. 
Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 72.
24	 Dax, ‘An Interview with Thomas Ruff’, 75.
25	 Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 46-4–8.
26	 Winzen, ‘A Credible Invention of Reality’, 135.
27	  The corner angles at either extremity of the building cannot be seen 
since the image is framed in such a way that these lie outside of the 
image boundaries.
28	  The one exception to this is, I feel, his posters which are precisely 
posters that express a specifically posterly as opposed to purely 
photographic noise.
29	  Rouillé, La Photographie, 491; my translation.
30	  Tammer El-Sheikh, ‘Zycles’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen 
/ Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: Kunsthalle / 
Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 80.
31	  El-Sheikh, ‘Zycles’, 80.

238	
NOISE MATTERS
32	  Douglas Fogle, ‘Dark Matter’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, 
Tiefen / Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: Kunsthalle / 
Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 196.
33	  On the abolition of self and absence of composition in the Bechers’ 
work, see Rouillé, La Photographie, 494.
34	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 64.
35	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 46–7.
36	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 47.
37	  Fogle, ‘Dark Matter’, 194.
38	  We have already seen Winzen comment on this phenomenon and the 
way in which these photographs make us aware of a genetic process 
inimical to a practice generally thought of as a relatively static given.
39	  Christov-Bakargiev, ‘Thomas Ruff at the End of the Photographic 
Dream’, 17–18.
40	  Christov-Bakargiev, ‘Thomas Ruff at the End of the Photographic 
Dream’, 18.
41	  Or we might say, conversely, like Maximilian Geymüller, that 
the photographic medium itself expresses a ‘retinal nature’ 
(Maximilian Geymüller, ‘Interieurs’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, 
Tiefen / Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug, trans. Nelson Wattie 
(Vienna: Kunsthalle / Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 
2009), 184). 
42	  Ruff quoted in Christiane Grathwohl-Scheffel, ‘Cosmos of Images’, 
in Thomas Ruff, Schwarzwald.Landschaft, ed. Christiane Grathwohl-
Scheffel and Jochen Ludwig (Freiburg: Museum für Neue Kunst, 
2009), 29.
43	  Tammer El-Sheikh, ‘Stereo Photographs’, in Thomas Ruff, 
Oberflächen, Tiefen / Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: 
Kunsthalle / Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 144.
44	  El-Sheikh, ‘Stereo Photographs’, 144. See also Cathérine Hug’s 
description of the production and reception of these photographs: 
‘Using a camera with two lenses – at the same distance from each 
other as our own eyes – two images of the same scene are taken and 
then shown side by side, so that our eyes automatically combine 
them to create a single image. However Ruff has so radically altered 
the relative dimensions of the images that we would theoretically 
have to be a thousand metres tall to visually unite the images, and 
yet our eyes, or rather our brains, nevertheless are able to implement 
the necessary corrections’ (Cathérine Hug, ‘Surfaces, Depths’, in 
Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen / Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine 

	
On Noise and Photography	
239
Hug, trans. Fiona Elliott (Vienna: Kunsthalle / Nuremberg: Verlag für 
moderne Kunst, 2009), 60).
45	  Geymüller, ‘Interieurs’, 102.
46	  Geymüller, ‘Interieurs’, 102.
47	  The catalogue entry for the anderes Porträt suggests that these 
photos ‘refer to […] and radically reject the composite portrait 
developed by Francis Galton in 1878, which aimed at a psychological 
and moral typology of the human’ (Geymüller, ‘Interieurs’, 102).
48	  See Walter Benjamin, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction’, in Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn (orig. German, 
1936; Fontana Press, London, 1992), 211–44; Flusser, Towards a 
Philosophy of Photography, 51.
49	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 51.
50	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 56.
51	  Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 64.
52	  Christov-Bakargiev, ‘Thomas Ruff at the End of the Photographic 
Dream’, 19–20. It should be noted that the temporal resistance 
alluded to here is resolutely not a freezing of time such as that found 
in those early studies of photographic indexicality examined at the 
start of this chapter; photography for Ruff is always necessarily 
inscribed with a temporal dimension, even though this expression 
takes place within two-dimensions.
53	  Ruff quoted in Winzen, ‘A Credible Invention of Reality’, 139.
54	  See Flusser, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, 57–8.
55	  This definition of photography is in line with Rouillé’s who is keen 
to stress the different practices of photography as it is deployed 
in specific contexts (see Rouillé, La Photographie, 16). Rouillé, 
however, would vehemently reject the idea, as has been suggested 
above, that the ultimate ramification of this is that there can no 
longer be an ontological separation between analogue and digital 
photography.
56	  Reinhold Happel, ‘Thomas Ruff’, in Thomas Ruff (Sindelfingen: 
Kunst + Projekte Sindelfingen, 1991), 61–5; reprinted in Thomas 
Ruff, ed. Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 202.


CHAPTER EIGHT
On Noise and Music. 
Concrete (reprise), Woolly 
Mammoth
Noise
exploratory sonic surgery by Doctor Merzbow … sounds elicited 
from the junk and detritus of his own life, wrapped in cast-off porn 
… cut-ups, loops, scavenged sounds and confusion – like a good 
cathartic brainwashing by your local cult … a soundtrack for 
canoodling by a crackling mid-winter fire, sipping a premium shiraz 
and gazing deep into the eyes of … Jim Jones … a compositional 
ecology employed in the glorious glitches and stuttering synth 
chatter … loosing the tethers of studio improv and finding pleasure 
in the upper reaches of human auditory perception … impenetrable 
edifices of white noise and resounding low end drones … fluttering, 
flapping puffs of synthesiser flatulence gust over descending whistles 
and chirps … a bed rock of factory mumbles and malevolent pulses 
… amidst the gyrations of overdriven circuits arises a breathless 
gargle. growling and gasping, interpretive vocals, a combination of 
shamanistic grunts, hoarse, impassioned whispers and expressive 
huffs … artificially generated jungle drums interspersed with what is 
possibly an abused baboon with a rumbling ambience … a clang-
ourous tone fracturing into even more disturbed strings and fervid, 
jittery electronics … a single stuttering hum or crackle fizzles to 
nothing and is promptly replaced by a quizzical string passage or 
raging pink noise … spectral keyboard notes, seething with 
foreboding, dodge pealing effects and the continual percussive 

242	
NOISE MATTERS
pounding … the clangourous trituration is soothing, tranquil – in a 
mildly terrifying way … damp, airless, inky dark, utterly silent … 
the sound of tectonic shift and geological groan … exhaustion, 
skinned knuckles and the residual claustrophobia … seething, 
tempered steel stylings, cold as chrome, and with a similar dazzling 
finish, circle slamming metallic percussion … a vocal loop shredded 
to gibberish floats over a lowered, but insistent and threatening, 
electronic gale … the locomotive energy of the rhythmic elements 
attack and recede between the droop and thrust of a motley 
collection of quarrelling instruments … misused microphones creep 
up on trashy, freaking and periodically startling electrotones … 
from amidst a scattershot, improvised drum-roll, a squalling buzz 
emerges that staggers between something akin to a Theremin solo 
and a feedback inebriated guitar lead break … a rounded metro-
nomic pulse in the foreground draws attention away from a 
background soundscape of what may be strutting peacocks … an 
archaic synthesiser whining like a disoriented mosquito … a sound 
menagerie … crunch of percussion panning across channels … 
sound-spikes of reverberating metal from a junk glockenspiel 
intrude arbitrarily … a disjointed bongo solo … heralded by a 
stentorian honk, like the air-horn of some gargantuan conveyance 
… electronics accompanied by sparse string plunking … clipped 
off-key blurts … hiccups and gasps … windy tape loops, breathy 
snatches of discharging diodes, warped cartoony fusillades and 
disruptive violin undergo moodswings in the midst of accelerated 
and braked tape fragments … selective, spare percussive investi-
gation versus the tinkle and peal of prepared and treated piano 
strings … Masami, tearing at his violin, clipped, clangorous cut-ups 
to punctuate rumbling loops and an electronic grind … the drum/
scrape interplay moves aside for hollering discordance, an orches-
tration of protesting brake pads and uncooperative strings immersed 
in a sound-bath of high-end electronics … every aural nuance, every 
clunk, plink and clatter … the strings struggling to keep pace with 
the metallic cloudburst … high-pitched wind instrumentation and 
tambourine head north for a spot of Morris dancing, spin thrice 
‘round the Maypole and then bug out upon the arrival of the Nasty 
Mr Akita … unadorned generator chatter, portending grief, 
ultimately accompanied by grating machinic interjections … 
Masami is a flurry of fingers, reaching to adjust here, tweak there, 
scrape, whack, pluck and poke … the sound of the very incremental 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
243
demise of an ailing piece of equipment, from the initial protestations 
of overload to the final violent sputters and sparks … trotting, then 
trickling synth-blorps … watery effects, scratched and scraped 
debris and heavily treated generator refuse … misused wah creeps 
up on trash percussion and freakish, terrifying electro-tones … this 
hail of spent technology set to a score augmented by strings 
mirroring the accelerated whine of an earthward descent through 
the upper atmosphere … someone is loose in the studio with a 
power drill … utilised to establish a herky jerky rhythm before 
being sent back to maintenance in something less than working 
order … now to be added to the cartload of similarly decrepit metal 
items being tipped back and forth between two gigantic hoppers to 
fashion the smash/crash/bash elements … the brittle skin snaps of a 
snare drum repeat a call to arms … the sound of steel shod rats 
attacking some poor soul’s voice-box while complaining about 
tough times … tumbling, churning electrohowl butted up against 
recurrent sound riots and diode distemper … great destructive 
symphonies of minimalist electronics and antiseptic sound 
reordering … unpredictable aural abrasion that seems bent on 
planetary obliteration … the tumult gathers momentum and lumbers 
forward … minute space junk. cosmic debris, the flotsam and 
jetsam of the satellite belt, rained down in the proximity of Casa del 
Merzbow … the clamour and tumult inside Hell’s garbage disposal 
… a cranial catastrophe in danger of consuming your consciousness 
… teetering on the brink of the abyss of deconstruction, swirling 
aural secretions, brain-pulsing vistas of sound eternal … the disor-
dered wail of the machinic microcosm … bellicose discharges 
issuing from left and right … a pitched battle … a fierce volley 
marks the climax and decides the victor … a sonic battlefield. 
crunching cannonade fusillades bludgeon with a near metronomic 
consistency … subsumed by the blare of impact … an elongated 
electronic charge interrupts … an angle grinder raking the surface 
of rusted flaking steel … tumbling junk-cussion cycles … the whistle 
of shells and muffled faraway thud of cannon fire … strenuous 
metal fatigue trials … terroriser electronics and heavy histrionics … 
the Noise offensive is less an incendiary barrage and more a surgical 
strike … a nagging radio interference storm, eruptions of pronounced 
static and controlled, bleating distortion announce randomly 
acquired voice clips inundated in the shudder and chafe of a few 
more layers of airwave hum, squeal, twist and shout … the 

244	
NOISE MATTERS
enervating heat and fumes from primitive diesel engines, the 
deafening roar of both motor and cannon debilitate the armoured 
division grunts before battle had even commenced … the horrendous 
clang of white hot bullets and shells against tracks and turret and 
the shower of sparks that covered those on the receiving end and the 
simultaneous colossal report as high velocity projectile meets 
stationary tank … tentative then terrifying, scratches and scrapes 
exchange fire from opposite channels. white noise aftershocks cause 
further havoc … elements attack and recede between the lull and 
thrust of chattering cartridges … shouts, gunfire, confusion … an 
utterly destructive beam of concentrated energy … allow the rushing 
wind, harbinger of apocalypse, to gust around you, buffet you 
relentlessly and finally sweep you away to an unknown and 
unwelcome fate … just keep your head down … a revolving cast of 
experimental sonics … staccato burps and jet-propelled menace, 
actuating a tainted euphoria; stream of consciousness composition, 
kitchen sink – possibly quite literally – instrumentation … patented 
junk extractions … curt and muffled surges of sound … unstruc-
tured, nihilistic musical monstrosities … howling breakers of static 
… monstrous discharges of electricity conspire to deflect the atten-
tions of abominable jolts of garish, discordant thwackery … a 
squealing, playful, nonsense vibe … the soothing strains of chugging, 
yowling, all-conquering electronics … grabs of ruptured announce-
ments … collisions and wails … tepid, quivering chirrups and 
whistles … moments of jolting catharsis … daunting waves of 
malevolence … pulse-pounding electro-acoustic … wisps of sound 
… the fading embers of this Promethean conflagration … withering 
jets of white, pink and grey-green noise, the electronic slush that 
engulfs it and the positioning of slab after titanic slab of lo-tech 
sound fusion … formidable distortion and synthetic obstructions … 
unpredictable high-end flatulence … malignant, dizzying, bleak-
black Noise … shrill formless masses of sound … jazzed-out, 
spazzed-out sticksmanship … strident, scrambled, disorienting, 
compelling … a curious, discreet shooshing intrudes … intermittent, 
clanking, percussive taps flesh out a constant machinic buzz and 
whirr … the soothing pulse and hum of loops tracking in reverse … 
cascades of junk percussion …foreground metal abuse and 
background loop wash … tinkling struck metal, eddies of electronic 
interference and the occasional blast of treated voice … bristling, 
unexpectedly, with the crackle and yammer of tape fragments and 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
245
modulated feedback … speaker cone warping, sputtering sound, 
sub-frequencies … oddly timed interjections of a type of locomotive 
clickety-clack … low static and multi-layered voices, junked and 
reshaped into a persistent chirp of disembodied intonations – 
admonitions from the ether … distorting feedback and feedback 
distortion … a post-traumatic Martin Denny: foreground exotica 
matched with background curios … incandescent squeals and 
chirps shot through with quivering electronics, cheesy organ and 
drafts of interference … querulous voices, snare snaps and rim-shots 
interrupted by anomalous time figures … rioting barnyard animals 
smacking four kinds of brick-dust out of Bugs Bunny as their 
schtick … auditory turbulence … brass and bells, broadcast detritus 
alongside whimsical grunts and growls … sci-fi soundtrack squeals 
… blasts of randomly accessed shortwave … an electronically 
manipulated mumble of what could be religious chant or opera … 
a mellifluous but giddy whirl … incoherent female voice uttering 
unintelligible phrases … the barely audible tick, tick, tick of a genius 
at work … boffin rock is dead … my Pye 3-in-1 stereo never 
sounded like this when I was a youngster.1
* * *
I have, up until this point, taken what is perhaps the least obvious 
and most counterintuitive route in order to examine noise as it 
is manifested in various sites by deciding not to look for noise in 
musical works. This is because, as has been suggested (and perhaps 
precisely because music is the most obvious place to start thinking 
about the operations of noise in a cultural context), there are many 
weighty assumptions and preconceptions about precisely what noise 
is in relation to music. Many of these assumptions, as we have seen in 
the early chapters of this book, have led to various mutually incom-
patible assertions about what noise in the musical realm sounds like 
or does, to accounts that either contradict each other or else are, in 
and of themselves, deeply problematic. These assumptions are hard 
to shrug off for a number of reasons, as we have also suggested, due 
to the various difficulties involved in attending to noise, especially in 
the musical realm. Nonetheless, having suggested what the operations 
of noise as figured here might look like in some other, less overcoded 
contexts, I really have no choice but to conclude this study by turning 
my attention to music, to tackle the elephant in the room head on.

246	
NOISE MATTERS
	
In order to do this I wish to return, firstly, to tape-based musique 
concrète. This is something that I have touched upon already 
in Chapter Five; however I did not proceed further at that time 
because of a perceived need to prepare the ground a little further. 
To have launched straight into an argument that musique concrète 
is both eminently musical and eminently noisy would have been 
hard without first providing some other examples of the opera-
tions of noise outside of the musical realm. For to talk about noise 
and music in relation to musique concrète, one has to struggle to 
be heard in a very crowded room. This is a heavily territorialised 
battlefield, on which one side contends that musique concrète is 
noisy primarily because of its use of recorded ‘noises’ – such as the 
sounds of trains, creaking doors and whistles – whilst the other 
claims, as we have seen, that it is in fact not noisy at all but, rather, 
eminently and resolutely musical. In what follows, I wish therefore 
to stand the middle ground of this debate and argue that musique 
concrète is both eminently musical and eminently noisy (albeit for 
very different reasons), to unpack what has already been hinted at 
and suggest how it is possible to make a claim such as this. In doing 
so, of course, I will necessarily be reconsidering the relation between 
noise and music and arguing that these terms are not opposed to 
each other. By this I do not only mean, as Henry Cowell suggested 
in 1929, that all music carries noise within it since ‘there is a noise 
element in the very tone itself of all our musical instruments’, some 
of the vibrations issuing from musical instruments being necessarily 
non-periodic,2 although this is undoubtedly significant and part 
of the reason why music is always noisy. Rather, and hopefully 
somewhat predictably by this point, I want to suggest that noise is 
the correlate of musical expression just as it has been seen to be the 
correlate of other forms of expression. Thus, the operations of noise 
in musique concrète will be seen to share many similarities with the 
way in which noise has been seen to operate in other contexts, its 
heightened coefficient of noise revealing the nature of the expressive 
assemblage that brings expression into being, unveiling the organi-
sational principle of expression and, in doing so, showing it to 
be but an (essentially arbitrary) infolding or actualisation of an 
expressive field or plane of noise. If musique concrète is to be used 
as a paradigmatic example of where noise is to be found in music 
and what this tells us about music, however, we must first make a 
case for it to be considered music in the first place.

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
247
Musique
In many accounts, musique concrète, in spite of its name, simply 
cannot qualify as music since it is one of those artistic practices 
within the sonic realm that desire to integrate ‘non-musical’ 
elements into their structure. We have seen examples of this before 
in the protestations of critics such as R. Murray Schafer, of course, 
but we can find a similar line taken also in recent works in the 
philosophy or aesthetics of music. Andy Hamilton, for instance, 
would seem to prefer that works that integrate ‘unpitched or 
not discretely pitched’ sounds be called sound-art as opposed 
to music.3 Tracing a familiar lineage from Russolo to Varèse to 
Schaeffer, Hamilton seems to wish that the latter had considered 
the possibility of calling his practice sound-art, creating thereby a 
categorical distinction that would not muddy the waters of the very 
definition of music so much.
	
This summary is perhaps a little unfair to Hamilton whose 
position is more complex and nuanced than these comments might 
suggest, and he himself critiques what he terms ‘the universalist 
position that music is the only art of sound’, a position that ‘tradi-
tionally goes with the assumption that music exploits as material 
a particular range of sounds, namely tones’.4 Nonetheless, he 
goes on to assert, paradoxically by his own admission, that the 
rejection of instrumental puritanism and incorporation of ‘noise 
elements’ into the field of cultural production has actually clarified 
the tonal basis of music. In doing so, he essentially reasserts the 
universalist position that he claims to reject, imagining that the 
creation of a distinct category in which to classify non-tonal works 
means that his attitude vis-à-vis music is somehow different from 
that of the universalists for whom music is exclusively tonal. He 
writes:
	
Thus I assert that music is the art of tones, while rejecting 
universalism and recognizing an emergent non-musical sound-art 
which takes non-tonal sounds as its material. To allow that any 
sounds can be incorporated into music is not, I argue, to say 
that any sounds can constitute music – thus, room is left for my 
conclusion that music makes predominant use of tonal sounds 
and that there is also a non-musical sound-art.5

248	
NOISE MATTERS
Given this conclusion, once he turns his attention to specific musical 
examples, Hamilton can but make what are to my mind deeply 
problematic categorical distinctions, suggesting, for instance, that 
‘The so-called drone musics of Eliane Radigue and Sachiko M are 
so non-rhythmic that they should be regarded as sound-art rather 
than music’6 – and to this list we would surely need to add also 
Phil Niblock, Sunn 0))), La Monte Young, Tony Conrad, Marian 
Zazeela …
	
For many readers of this book, precisely why a statement 
such as this is problematic will not need further explanation. For 
others who are not of the same opinion, let me suggest that the 
unproblematic assertion of the tonal basis of music is an example 
of what Ridley terms an autonomanic tendency in much musical 
scholarship, an intellectual position that begins with an (unfounded 
or at least unproven or untested) assumption and then carries on 
to investigate this assumption ‘in accordance with a method which 
reinforces that assumption’.7 Ridley locates this tendency in the 
work of those academics or philosophers of music who state that 
music is essentially autonomous (a position I will turn to later), 
but it can apply equally to critics who, like Hamilton, mistake a 
certain (admittedly dominant in many musical traditions) quality 
of music with its substance, who, on the basis of purely subjective 
criteria and matters of taste, make ontological claims. There is, 
this is to say, no reason why non-tonal sounds cannot be organised 
into forms that would qualify as music, just as, conversely, there 
is no reason to accept that certain sounds must be excluded from 
the realm of music simply because some may, on the basis of a 
common sense assumption, consider them to be noise and thus 
diametrically opposed to music. A similar problem can be found 
in the work of Roger Scruton who, in response to the question 
as to what distinguishes the sound of music, suggests, as I will 
here, that ‘The simple answer is “organization” ’.8 In spite of this, 
however, he goes on to specify that a qualification is required to 
distinguish music from other sounds such as, for instance, poetry, 
and the qualification he provides is that the central instances of the 
art of music ‘each achieve, though not necessarily in the same way, 
a transformation of sounds into tones’.9 Whilst the definition of a 
‘tone’ that Scruton provides is perhaps broader than that of many 
others, it nonetheless imbues music with an internal necessity, an 
order arising out of the total system that is akin to a grammar or, as 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
249
he also refers to it, ‘a virtual causality of its own’.10 As he explains 
later, in a comment that could almost be considered a reversal of 
Roquentin’s stance where instead of the internal necessity of the 
musical refrain serving to justify his life, the internal necessity of 
life provides the means to explain the perceived internal coherence 
of the musical expression,
This virtual causality is sometimes perceived as physical 
relations are perceived: namely, as law-like and inevitable. 
More often, however, the order that we hear in tones is an 
order of action: one tone does not merely give rise to its 
successor; it creates the conditions which make the successor 
a right or appropriate response to it. The order that we hear 
in music is one that is familiar to us from our own lives: the 
order of intention, in which one thing serves as the reason for 
another.11
	
If, from amongst this field of philosophers of music, I appear to 
side with Ridley more than the others discussed here, however, it 
should not be inferred from this that I wish to follow his line of 
reasoning and suggest that we must reject the (for Ridley) auton-
omanic assumption ‘that music is, essentially, pure sound’.12 This 
is problematic for him because what this means, for critics such as 
Pater, is that music ‘doesn’t trouble with the world outside itself; 
it doesn’t depict or say things or bother itself with psychology; 
its proper subject matter is, simply, itself – and its glories are the 
glories of form, design and structure, unsullied by any content not 
wholly its own. Thus for Pater’, Ridley continues,
music is sui generis, self-sufficient – in a word autonomous. And 
not only for Pater. The view that music is essentially autonomous 
has been popular for more than a hundred and fifty years.13
Clarifying his own position, Ridley later goes on to state that his 
point
is not that it is wrong to think of music as sound structure. 
Music no doubt is that, among other things. The mistake is 
to assume that music is essentially sound-structure, that its 
character as structured sound is its true, real, ultimate nature.14

250	
NOISE MATTERS
	
Whilst it should hopefully be obvious by now that I do not 
wish to claim in the context of this study in which all ontology is 
claimed to be relational that music is autonomous, I do wish to 
suggest that ontologically speaking (for it is a matter of ontology 
in Ridley’s book also), music’s true nature is indeed nothing other 
than structured sound. This is not to say, of course, that it cannot 
express certain qualities that Ridley feels to be excluded by such 
an absolutist view, it is to say quite simply that all music is neces-
sarily united by this common ontological base condition. Just as 
it does not follow from this, however, that music is autonomous, 
this, in and of itself, is not sufficient to account for the ontological 
singularity of music. If the sole ontological condition of music were 
that it is structured sound, we would of course not be able to draw 
a distinction between music and speech. In order to separate out 
these different categories it is then necessary to suggest in addition 
that music entertains a different relationship with the world in 
which it is expressed than speech, that it does not carry meaning 
in the same way nor relate back to the world as does speech in 
the relation between signifier and signified. As Hamilton says in 
relation to the first point,
Music and speech both impose a structure on sounds, but the 
structure of speech is semantic while that of music is at most 
syntactic. […] A sequence of sounds becomes speech if they 
are meaningful, and it is not essential, and indeed may be a 
distraction or barrier to understanding, to appreciate them ‘as 
sounds’. With music, in contrast, it is essential to appreciate the 
sounds as sounds, in the sense that one does not attend to them 
for the information that they yield about the world, whether 
through their natural or non-natural meaning.15
With regard to the (non-)representational nature of music, 
meanwhile, I would suggest, like Hanslick, that the peculiarity of 
music is ‘that it possesses form and content inseparably’, and that 
this
opposes it absolutely to the literary and visual arts, which can 
represent […] thoughts and events in a variety of forms […]. In 
music there is no content as opposed to form, because music has 
no form other than the content.16

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
251
Again, this is not to say that music is autonomous as Ridley 
would claim in rejecting such positions, but it is to suggest that 
the relational aspect of music’s ontology arises in the expressive 
act itself as opposed to arising retrospectively. The latter is what 
we find in Ridley’s analysis in which music is related back to the 
world via the receptive or interpretive agency of the listener, a facet 
of music that I do not wish to reject, only to suggest that this is a 
secondary ontology belonging to a different assemblage that does 
not then inform an understanding of the ontology of music per se.17 
In other words, musical expression is not separate from the world, 
far from it; on the contrary, it is ontologically conditioned by the 
expressive assemblage through which it comes into being and thus 
necessarily expresses the qualities of that assemblage alongside its 
own musical content.18
	
In brief, the ontology of music as conceptualised here might be 
characterised by the following conditions:
(i) music is sound that is
(ii) structured,
(iii) eminently expressive since its only form is its expressed 
content, and hence
(iv) irreducible to a secondary function (such as representation),
(v) conditioned by an assemblage in the real world (and therefore 
not transcendent or ahistorical).19
	
Having sketched the conditions of this possible ontology of 
music, I will now turn my attention back to musique concrète to see 
whether it can be qualified as music. Perhaps unsurprisingly, I will 
surmise that it can and that, what is more, true to the operations 
of noise which always speaks of ontology, the noisy operations 
of musique concrète make of it a paradigmatic example of this 
ontological taxonomy. In doing this, I am not simply attempting 
to ascertain whether musique concrète ‘is a piece of music rather 
than mere noise’ which, for Dodd, is not an ontological question 
at all but, rather, a conceptual one20 – although I have to admit to 
relishing the irony of tackling the ontological question through the 
problematic that he raises. What I am suggesting is that musique 
concrète, and, indeed, Merzbow whose music I will go on to 
consider in the last section of this chapter, can serve as limit cases 
that severely test the claims made in regards to the ontology of 

252	
NOISE MATTERS
music. What is more, they render deeply problematic not only the 
type/token theory used by Dodd (due to the exclusivity that arises 
from the necessary retention of the musical score) but also the 
whole theory that he critiques (since, as the name implies, whole 
theory – albeit somewhat synecdochically – infers the possibility 
of an apprehension of the musical work in its entirety, abstracted 
off from the world and expression, therefore).21 These examples, in 
part because they are so noisy in the common sense definition of 
the term, enable us to apprehend the philosophical or operational 
noise of music and to consider music from the perspective of a 
relational ontology.
Concrete (reprise)
The most common assertion made about musique concrète is 
that it is the musical form which, more than any other, expanded 
the vocabulary of musical expression, allowing any sound to be 
integrated into the realm of music.22 Whilst, as we now know full 
well, this very fact serves as proof for many of the non-musical 
status of musique concrète and as evidence of the desecration or 
total destruction of music that this musical form signals, I wish to 
contend that, on the contrary, the possible integration of all sounds 
into a structured composition serves in fact to test the limits of 
music that others would place upon it.23 To limit music to a set 
of sonic expressions containing only sounds of a certain quality – 
whether this be defined in terms of tone, pitch, rhythm, timbre or 
even mode of production (analogue vs. electronic) – leads one to 
the kinds of incompossible situations and impasses that similarly 
subjective definitions of noise have condemned this term to. Quite 
simply, if one conducts as broad a survey as possible in both 
space and time of expressions which have, at different times and 
in different places, been considered ‘musical’, it quickly becomes 
impossible to maintain that any one particular subset of sounds 
holds exclusive rights to the term ‘music’. Rather, any such claims 
are revealed to be merely matters of culture, history or taste and 
resolutely not matters of musical ontology. Musique concrète, 
due to its ability to integrate quite literally any sound that can be 
expressed into a musical composition, takes this logic to its most 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
253
extreme point (although this is a dangerous and ultimately false 
claim, as we will see later, but one that is perhaps true if projected 
back into the historical context when Schaeffer’s pieces were first 
being made), reconnecting music with the virtual plane of noise or 
absolute outside of noise from which any sonic expression is neces-
sarily born and that it carries within it.24
	
As we have noted previously, however, musique concrète does 
not content itself only with recording all possible sounds in the 
interests of some kind of anthropological or documentary function, 
it also arranges these sounds in (non-natural or non-realistic) 
relation to each other. This, indeed, is what converts sound into 
music, for again, in all music from all times and traditions, the 
common denominator that unites all musical expression is that 
sound is organised via a particular kind of expressive event, a 
musical act. This is the case whether we are dealing with scored 
music or improvisation, songs or sonatas, jazz or pop, Bach or 
Bathory, drones or Debussy.
	
What is particularly significant with musique concrète, however, 
as I started to suggest in Chapter Five, is that a particular noise or 
artefact of the technological apparatus used to arrange sounds in 
musique concrète reveals this organisational imperative to us and 
shows it to be essentially arbitrary. Very often, and this is certainly 
the case with Roquentin listening to ‘Some of these days’ as we 
have seen, a subjective response to a particular musical line can 
lead one to believe that music is not merely organised sound but, 
rather, that there is an internal necessity and unity that accounts 
for that organisation whilst simultaneously imbuing music with 
a higher purpose or transcendent essence. Andy Hamilton, for 
instance, suggests that
the alleged inseparability of rhythm, melody and harmony 
poses an aesthetic puzzle. Their fusion seems not to be a merely 
contingent feature of music but flows from the guiding ideal 
of the artwork’s organic unity – the sense of inevitability and 
necessity of construction that one experiences with great art.25
There is, though, no reason to suppose that this secondary effect 
that music can at times produce in certain listeners is an ontological 
characteristic of music, for not all music will produce such a 
sensation in all listeners all of the time. All music does always, 

254	
NOISE MATTERS
however, obey some kind of organisational principle, it is struc-
tured in an expressive and creative act. This is no less the case 
in musique concrète, as Hegarty points out when he notes that 
Schaeffer was quick to point out that the non-traditional aspects 
of it did not mean ‘that you can string any old sounds together; 
this new music would still need organization’.26 What is more, this 
organisational principle is made perceptible in musique concrète by 
the splice which, whilst it cannot always be heard in and of itself 
– because its duration is too short – nonetheless always stands at 
the threshold of a moment of transition from one sound to another 
that rarely, if ever, seems to obey the same kind of transcendent law 
that the purple passages of some other musics can trick people into 
imagining. This is to say that the moments of change and transition 
across the splice appear to us as precisely that, moments of 
transition, they are not sublimated underneath a sense of seeming 
perfect and necessary harmony between the separate elements of a 
melodic line that fools us into believing that the relations between 
different elements could only ever be precisely as they stand.
	
In suggesting both of these things, however, that music is essen-
tially just sound and that that sound is structured in some way, 
let me stress again that I am not merely espousing what Ridley 
would consider an autonomanic position and claiming that music 
is entirely divorced from the world. I do wish, however, to distance 
myself from his formulation of how music relates to the world, 
since what the expanded sonic possibilities of tape-based musique 
concrète and its primary mode of structuration show us is that 
all music is necessarily tied to and constrained by the material, 
real-world expressive assemblage that brings it into being. Music, 
in other words, is always already conditioned in advance by the 
technological or corporeal assemblage through which it passes and 
it therefore carries that assemblage with it in its very expression.27 
The point here is similar to that made by Jonathan Sterne, already 
examined in Chapter Four, where he suggests that any music made 
for a recorded medium is altered by that very fact in advance and 
thus can no longer be considered a ‘pure’ original but, we might 
suggest, necessarily a noised-up version of the original. And this 
point is made explicitly by Michel Chion who writes: 
	
It should not be forgotten either, that with electroacoustic 
music, the notion of the sound’s faithfulness to ‘the real’ is not 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
255
even a consideration. The recording conditions (the type and 
position of the microphone in relation to the recorded source, 
the possible movement of the source in relation to the micro-
phone, etc.) can themselves create the sound just as much as the 
actions of the sonorous body itself. The interaction between the 
recording and the thing recorded is even more radical here than 
is the case with the photographic image. And there is an entire 
universe of infinitesimal vibration, unknown to our everyday 
ears, that can be literally created anew by close-micing or the use 
of a contact microphone (in contact with the vibrating source).28
	
The importance of this for an analysis of musique concrète is 
not only that the sounds it uses are necessarily changed by the 
technological artefacts of the equipment being used (although this 
is undoubtedly true, whilst being a slightly different point from that 
made by Sterne) but, rather, that musique concrète provides us with 
a very clear example of how music is not a transcendent, uncon-
strained expression that exists in its own self-enclosed autonomous 
universe but is constrained by the world and its objects in various 
ways across time. If musique concrète is the first musical form 
to be able truly to integrate all possible sounds into the realm of 
music, this is to say, then this is because the technology that makes 
this possible only becomes available at a certain point in time. 
Similarly, if vocal music is only ever scored in the range of E2 to 
C6 (or 80Hz–1100Hz) this is because this range corresponds to 
the range that can be expressed by the human singing voice. Music 
is then resolutely not autonomous and is necessarily connected to 
the outside from which it is born, it necessarily carries within it 
something of the material specificity of its expressive assemblage, 
via which it comes into being in a resistant process. Music, this is 
to say, is always noisy.
	
This, though, is a very different point from that made by Ridley 
when he suggests that music is related to the world, and whilst it 
may be possible to contend that the stance adopted here would 
allow for music to be tied to emotions and psychology at the 
point of enunciation (as Ridley feels music must be), he is more 
interested in looking at this question at the point of reception and 
contending that music is representational. Once again, however, 
the material specificity of musique concrète clearly indicates to us 
that this is not the case. For whilst the sounds used by musique 

256	
NOISE MATTERS
concrète are sounds that emanate directly from the real world, 
the whole modus operandi of the early practitioners of musique 
concrète consisted, as we have seen, of manipulating, arranging 
or mixing those sounds in such a way that they were placed at a 
point of remove from their original sound source, rendered almost 
unrecognisable and hence able to be apprehended as a musical 
as opposed to documentary element. As Hegarty puts it, ‘Each 
sound, in manipulation, remains open, potential’.29 Of course, the 
question as to whether or not any recording can in fact perform 
a true documentary function is already a vexed one. As we have 
seen in Chapter Seven, even in photography, the supposedly most 
indexical of all of the arts, there is a necessary transduction of 
the object photographed into a specific, technologically-mediated 
realm that necessarily makes of a photograph a noisy reproduction 
more than a representation.30 The transduction of any object used 
to form the content of a work of art only intensifies this process 
and necessarily furnishes us with a new object entirely, for art 
necessarily produces a creative expression that results in something 
new and not a thing that existed before it – a principle that can 
be extrapolated out well beyond the realm of art in a relational 
ontology. Or, we might say, in more Deleuzean terms, art is always 
a becoming, it is never simply imitative.31
	
What this means, of course, is that music is eminently expressive, 
its only form is its expressed content as I have suggested, as has 
Hanslick before me, and as Hegarty argues with specific reference 
to musique concrète, writing:
Paying attention to the stuff of music – sounds as themselves 
– would reconcile material and form, not, as Adorno saw in 
Beethoven, in terms of a dialectical coming together, but as a 
new immanent body. Form and material would no longer be 
distinguishable, at least in traditional terms.32
Musique concrète specifically and music generally, then, are 
irreducible to a secondary function that would close them off and 
make of them a self-contained, autonomous entity existing in a 
defined relation to a stable reality. Music, rather, is heterogenetic, 
always relational, constantly differing from itself as it is conjugated 
in new assemblages whether at the point of production/perfor-
mance or reception. Music, then, is always noisy and this noise, 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
257
in all of these different ways, is intensified and made manifest by 
musique concrète.
Bridge
There is of course a great deal of irony in what I am claiming here, 
not only because I am suggesting that music, like all expression, is 
necessarily noisy and thus resolutely not diametrically opposed to 
noise as it has often been considered to be. In addition, I am claiming 
that since noise always speaks of ontology, the examination of an 
excessively noisy (in the common sense definition) form (musique 
concrète), that many consider not to be music precisely because it 
is so noisy (even though it is noisy to them for different reasons 
than those suggested here) can in fact tell us more about music than 
other more traditionally ‘musical’ works – whatever that might 
mean.33 As I have suggested, the reason why music does not yield 
its noisy, messy, material, open self to us, oftentimes, is perhaps 
because it is easy to adopt Roquentin’s stance towards it, to enter 
into a reverie induced by a seemingly perfect musical line that 
makes one imagine the essence of music to exist on a higher plane 
than the messy, base, nauseous and noisy worldly, material and 
corporeal ontology in which we are unavoidably immersed. If we 
do not adopt this stance towards music, however, and eviscerate it 
of its ‘aesthetic connotation’, as Achim Szepanski writes, it reveals 
itself to be something else entirely, ‘purely operative’ and able to 
grow only ‘metastatically’.34
	
In the final section of this chapter, I wish therefore to extend 
my perverse logic out even further and see whether there are even 
more extreme examples of works that are universally acclaimed 
to be ‘noisy’ in a common sense definition of the term and that, 
firstly, can be considered noisy in the way that this term is figured 
here; that, secondly, can confirm the hypotheses I have formu-
lated about musical ontology; and that, finally, might also tell us 
something about the secondary ontology of music in the discursive 
phase when it enters into a new assemblage with a listener, about 
its relational ontology not at the moment of conceptualisation or 
composition but, rather, performance and reception. I want to see, 
in other words, whether noise music can leave us not in the reverie 

258	
NOISE MATTERS
of Roquentin as he listens to jazz but, rather, a state that has more 
in common with his nausea, whether music, this is to say, can 
transmit its noise to us.
	
In order to do this, I feel that I have little choice but to turn my 
attention to the behemoth of noise music, ‘the paragon of noise, 
its “godfather”, its master’, as Hegarty would have it:35 Masami 
Akita, aka Merzbow.
The woolly mammoth in the room
There comes a problem when one tries to write about Merzbow, 
for such is the nature of this music that the difficulties of writing 
descriptively about music generally are multiplied a million-fold. 
As Hegarty writes, even though ‘Merzbow’s position is as the 
ultimate example, the reference point, for Japanese noise music 
and for the consumption of and writing on noise’, for any who 
wish to take up the challenge of doing precisely this and write on 
Merzbow, ‘It is impossible to avoid a vocabulary based on exces-
siveness, extremity and harshness’.36 Or, as Brett Woodward puts 
it, both framing the problem and proving the point simultaneously,
It’s almost the inability to definitively describe Merzbow’s music 
with the limitations of the written word that is the testament to 
its thrill and power, intricacy and convolution. Music as a densely 
layered hermetic and alchemic exegesis, a seminal text meant to 
be combed for clues – often misinterpreted – and argued over. A 
sound scripture both infuriating, vexing and liberating.37
Despite his own pronouncements, Woodward, of course, blithely 
ignores his own warning and does an absolutely magisterial job 
of trying to encapsulate something of Merzbow’s music in words 
for the descriptions that he writes of the fifty compact disks in the 
Merzbox retrospective. It is excerpts from these descriptions, heavily 
‘remixed’, that form the prologue to this chapter, and I will at no 
point from here on either repeat any of these descriptions nor try to 
outdo them – in part because there is no way that I could. What I 
wanted to do in that prologue was to provide the reader unfamiliar 
with Merzbow’s music some glimpse into how one might try and 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
259
describe this music and do justice to its density and volume – in all 
senses of the term; I recognise, however, as would Woodward, that 
any attempt to render Merzbow’s music in words will necessarily be 
insufficient, and I would therefore exhort any reader who has not 
heard a Merzbow CD or track to do so before proceeding further.
	
If it is ultimately a futile exercise to try and account for music 
like this in words, to describe it, this means also that I will not be 
able here to analyse in depth any particular work, piece or track. 
Rather, I will be responding to what I consider to be some general 
characteristics and principles of Merzbow’s music, which is not to 
say by any means that I am suggesting – as some do – that all of his 
releases sound the same, for this is absolutely not the case. Rather, 
I want to respond here to this body of work as an (open) whole, 
following to a certain extent Hegarty when he suggests that ‘the 
openness of the work encourages thought’.38 Like Hegarty, then, I 
wish to understand how Merzbow’s ‘noise’ (in the common sense 
definition) relates to music, whether, as he suggests, ‘its extremity 
suggest[s] the limits of all music and all that defines music’.39 Or 
whether, in fact, as Thacker suggests (and many others albeit for 
different reasons), it is rather the case that
	
The music of Merzbow is of course not music at all, but 
rather the intensive expenditure of sound and silence in a 
whirlpool of electronic catharsis.40
the pieces of Merzbow can only insufficiently be analysed 
or legitimised on the basis of method or traditional musical 
language – there is only the experience of and in music itself. 
[…] as the name implies, noise music is just that – intensive, 
outpouring noise; in many ways anything but music.41
	
Unsurprisingly perhaps, I want to suggest something different 
from both Thacker and Hegarty and argue that if one perseveres 
with a common sense definition of noise when thinking about 
Merzbow, one can but end up in the kind of double binds, logical 
impasses and apparent contradictions that reappear consistently in 
their writing on this subject. This is not to suggest, of course, that 
I believe the ‘meaning’ of Merzbow needs to be tied down to one 
particular thing, it is to suggest that the openness of the work can 
be retained within a critical discourse that is nonetheless consistent 

260	
NOISE MATTERS
in the kinds of claims that it makes about the work. As excellent 
as they are in many ways, this is not something that can be said 
of Hegarty and Thacker’s writings on this subject. Whilst Hegarty, 
for instance, suggests that ‘the openness of the work encourages 
thought’, for him the work simultaneously stands as ‘a negation of 
thought’.42 And for Thacker, meanwhile, whilst Merzbow’s noise 
is ‘not music at all’, it nonetheless returns as ‘exactly this display 
of the excess of music, or the overflowing disintegration of music’s 
forms and contours’,43 which is to say that it does unavoidably 
form part of something that is called music but that its operations 
are such that it is concomitantly the disavowal of that very thing.
	
The problem in both cases, I would suggest, is not only the 
unproblematic retention of a common sense definition of the term 
noise, but a similar problem in regards to the term music. Indeed, 
music seems to be linked for both Thacker and Hegarty to musicality. 
For the former, ‘the extreme, excessive fullness and density of the 
sound, its total flow of uneven pulses, and its delirium of juxtaposi-
tions and transitions from one sound-world to the next [denies] the 
language and technique of musicality and rhythm’.44 And Hegarty, 
for his part, suggests that ‘[Merzbow’s] releases make something 
out of noise that approximates music, while refusing most ideas 
of musicality’.45 As we have seen with noise, then, an ontological 
category (music) is here confused or conflated with a subjective 
value (musicality). If we do not do this, if we hold music apart from 
musicality or what might generally be considered ‘musical’, I would 
suggest that we can claim that Merzbow absolutely is music and 
not, as Hegarty has suggested, the ‘destruction of music’.46 More 
than this, if we also release noise from its common sense definition 
and figure it once again as the residue of an expressive act, I believe 
we are able to contend that Merzbow contains an extremely 
high coefficient of this kind of noise also and that this noise, far 
from proving that Merzbow is not music, proves in fact quite the 
opposite, that it is, if you will, a kind of über-music.
Noise music
Thus far, I have gone about the analysis in this chapter in a slightly 
different way to previously, for rather than looking at the noise of 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
261
the particular expressive assemblage in order to see what it might 
tell us about the ontological specificity of that assemblage, I have 
instead tackled the question of the ontology of music head on. 
Now, however, as I have done with musique concrète, it will be 
necessary to see if indeed there are in Merzbow extreme, or noisy 
examples of the kind of relational attributes that I have suggested 
might be used to draw up a taxonomy of music, whether there is 
indeed here a higher coefficient of the kind of noise that would 
point towards the contraction of the different elements of a musical 
assemblage into expression. So let us recap to see precisely what it 
is that we are looking for. I have suggested that:
(i) music is sound that is
(ii) structured,
(iii) eminently expressive since its only form is its expressed 
content, and hence
(iv) irreducible to a secondary function (such as representation),
(v) conditioned by an assemblage in the real world (and therefore 
not transcendent or ahistorical).
	
In relation to point i), it hardly seems necessary to point out 
that there is in Merzbow a great deal of sound. His work seems 
to spring, indeed, from a desire not only to make a great deal of 
sound, but to make so much sound that the physical properties of 
sound are physicalized, to increase the decibel volume to such an 
extent that his music is able to create a volumetric space whose 
physical properties are tangibly different to what exists in time and 
space outside of the music’s particular duration. This is to say that 
the expressive aspects of sound as a physical process are inten-
sified to the point that those processes are revealed to the listener, 
made noisy, in a way that they are often not – for good reason, no 
doubt, for during a live Merzbow concert one is sometimes made 
to attend to these physical properties of sound via pain or even 
nausea, as sub-frequencies act directly on the audience’s internal 
organs in a far more literal staging of Roquentin’s existential crisis, 
the inanimate (or, here, immaterial) being able not only to touch 
but to massage or pummel. This extremity of sound in such ‘sonic 
dominance’, to use Julian Henriques’ term, intensifies the always 
already noisy operations of sound, the way that sound erases 
binary divisions. As Henriques suggests, ‘As emphasized by sonic 

262	
NOISE MATTERS
dominance, sound is everywhere, hardly even making the dualistic 
division between here and there’.47
	
From this first point, of course, one might be tempted to 
think that Merzbow’s music contravenes the second point of 
our taxonomy, that there is no organisation or principle of 
structuration and that it is simply a uniform wall of something 
approaching pure white noise.48 This, of course, for any who 
have listened to Merzbow, is blatantly not the case, and yet, at 
times, it is almost the case. In nearly every phase of Merzbow’s 
career, much of his music has been based upon or circled around 
this kind of absolute sonic plenitude, a seemingly impossibly 
full sonic expression. Whenever this happens, though, the sound 
is never uniform. Whilst there are often more discrete sounds 
working on top of this foundational core, that core itself shifts and 
modulates, constantly transmogrifying and never remaining still.49 
It is in relation to these aspects of Merzbow’s music, I would like 
to suggest, that we are able to attend to the organisational principle 
of music in such a way that it is that very organisational principle 
in itself that is made apparent to us and not an illusory sense of 
an internal and necessary transcendent order – as can be the case 
(as we have seen repeatedly) when the sounds are pitched and 
relate to each other in such a way as to form a line or melody. The 
organisational principle of music can have no such transcendent 
order and internal necessity, even though generic conventions 
and tradition at different times and in different cultures may lead 
us to believe that it can. Musical expression comes only through 
what is essentially an arbitrary infolding of a plane of noise, the 
sum total of all possible sonic frequencies, that seems to become 
less arbitrary through a secondary overcoding that takes place on 
top of music. By ignoring entirely any such kind of overcoding or 
‘musicality’ and allowing his music always to remain at the very 
edge of the absolutely arbitrary, the plenitude of the plane of noise, 
Merzbow enables us to hear how music is nothing other than this 
contraction of sound into different forms via an operation taking 
place in relation to the absolute outside of music, or all-sound. 
This absolute outside, though (and this is what becomes apparent 
in listening to Merzbow), must never (indeed, cannot, even if 
many think it can) be able to pass over to the inside of music, to 
inhabit one of the discrete infoldings of the outside, imbuing that 
particular musical expression with an identity that will be mistaken 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
263
for that of all music. For music can have no such identity, there can 
be no such ultimate piece of music, and if Merzbow is said here to 
be über-musical then this is only because what it reveals to us is 
not the discrete forms and lines of much music (indeed, there are 
no melodies in Merzbow), but simply the organisational principle 
that gives rise to music.
	
Something similar is suggested by Hegarty when he writes of 
Merzbow:
this is a form that undoes itself, that acts as form, while in fact 
offering something else where form is supposed to be. Arguably 
it attains something of the essence of music, as, like repetition, it 
reveals that music is a structuring of time, and that this appears 
in or through the perception of the listener. The disruptiveness 
of this ‘form’ or formless, as Bataille would have it, through 
volume, unpredictability and relentless change, makes settling 
or dwelling difficult. This ecstatic non-music continually struc-
tures and destructures both the listening subject and music, or, 
in another theoretical register, it deterritorializes and reterrito-
rializes them.50
At the end of this quotation, Hegarty is of course referencing 
Deleuze and Guatttari’s ideas on the nature of music. For them, 
the operations of music are indeed similar to what I am suggesting 
here. Indeed, they write:
Music is a creative, active operation that consists in deterritori-
alizing the refrain. Whereas the refrain is essentially territorial, 
territorializing, or reterritorializing, music makes it a deterritori-
alized content for a deterritorializing form of expression.51
However, whilst I am absolutely in agreement with the opera-
tional aspect of music posited here, what I believe apprehending 
Merzbow as an eminently musical expression allows us to intuit, 
through its noise, is that Deleuze and Guattari’s assumptions 
in regards to the content of music are erroneous or, rather, 
culturally conditioned.52 For if in this quotation there is great 
emphasis placed on the notion of the refrain, this is because, 
for them, ‘the refrain is properly musical content, the block of 
content proper to music’.53 This, though, is a historically and 

264	
NOISE MATTERS
culturally situated definition of what the content of music is, as 
Deleuze and Guattari actually allow when they qualify their own 
assertion by saying,
We are not saying that the refrain is the origin of music, or that 
music begins with it. It is not really known when music begins. 
The refrain is rather a means of preventing music, warding it off, 
or forgoing it.54
So whilst the operations of music consist of rendering musical 
what is both properly musical content and at the same time the 
antithesis of music, the refrain itself (the content upon which music 
works) is a strangely closed entity, a fixed identity with a reassuring 
internal necessity. It is this aspect of it, of course, that makes it into 
a dwelling in which we can take refuge, a song that the child can 
sing in the dark for comfort55 – or even, perhaps, an earworm that 
inhabits us. There is no reason to believe, though, that the content 
of music need be this or even resemble this, if indeed we wish to 
examine music in the absence of pre-formed notions of musicality. 
And Merzbow provides the opportunity to do precisely this, for it 
is resolutely not music that one can hum along to as Woodward 
points out;56 rather, it is like a kind of anti-refrain that ‘makes 
settling or dwelling difficult’.57 As such, of course, it wards off the 
bad faith of Roquentin, preventing the listener from imagining that 
the transcendent unity of the work of art might be transferred onto 
his own identity which would then become justified and necessary, 
and thus favours the kind of post-identitarian politics espoused 
by Deleuze and Guattari. As Woodward suggests, this is music 
‘designed to disorient the listener, break apart existing notions and 
leave them in a state of suggestibility, more willing to accept and 
respond to queer leanings’.58 And it is for this very reason that we 
must reject even Scruton’s more subtle definition of the tonal base 
of music, because there also a necessary order existing within the 
musical object itself needs to be extrapolated by the listener for 
sound to exist as music. He writes: ‘When we hear music, we do not 
hear sound only; we hear something in the sound, something which 
moves with a force of its own. This intentional object of the musical 
perception is what I refer to by the word “tone” ’.59
	
It is then precisely by not building its expression from anything 
that could take on a stable identity that Merzbow’s music is able 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
265
to intensify the incommensurability between form and content that 
many have insisted is the preserve of music. So whilst it is indeed 
the case, as Hegarty writes, that ‘this is a form that undoes itself, 
that acts as a form, while in fact offering something else where 
form is supposed to be’,60 it is also the case that the content of 
Merzbow’s music (for all of its sonic solidity) is such that it never 
petrifies into a block of content with definable contours, it is only 
ever a content that arises in expression, expression itself then 
coming to occupy the place where content should be.
	
Merzbow’s music is then eminently expressive and, as such, 
absolutely irreducible and resolutely anti-representational. If, as 
we have seen, many have contended that this also is an essential 
quality of music, with Merzbow the point is made deafeningly 
obvious. For whilst scholars such as Ridley may contend that 
music can be considered representational in a similar way to other 
art forms, that, for instance, it can represent cathedral bells, it 
is impossible to imagine what referents in the real world might 
lie behind Merzbow’s music if ever it could be imbued with an 
indexical function.61 There are no objects that are represented here; 
if anything – and this itself is doubtful – this music refers only to 
events, to haecceities that have no identity as a thing or substance 
but only as a relation between different elements at conflict with 
each other yet somehow miraculated around an indeterminate 
centre in such a way as to appear as though a thing that might be 
apprehended as a unity: fog, war, apocalypse. Yet even this may 
venture too close to something resembling a representational mode, 
and it may be better to suggest simply that Merzbow’s music is 
interested above all in a principle, the principle according to which 
anything comes to be. I wish, then, to modulate Hegarty’s comment 
that ‘Noise music is intervention to keep material material […]. It is 
interested in material being stuff, not a source’,62 and suggest that 
noise music is intervention to keep material mobile, it is interested 
in matter being expression, and expression becoming material. Or, 
as Masami Akita himself puts it perhaps, ‘Noise is the nomadic 
producer of differences’.63
	
And yet, even if music like this cannot be tied to objects in the 
real world via the mechanics of representation, it is nonetheless 
dependent on objects in the real world for its expression. For 
music must indeed, I would contend, be expressible in sonic form 
if its essence is sound. This, of course, brings us to the last point 

266	
NOISE MATTERS
of my taxonomy, and once again Merzbow’s music displays a very 
high coefficient of noise in revealing to us the extent to which 
music is necessarily conditioned by the technological and material 
assemblage through which it is expressed. Indeed, if I have already 
suggested something similar in relation to musique concrète’s 
ability to, for the first time, open music up to all possible sounds 
thanks to a technological advance, Merzbow shows that there is 
an entire sound world that was not available even to the early 
composers of musique concrète. This newly expanded sound world 
again becomes available only through new technological advances 
or, indeed, practices – a necessary qualification since Merzbow 
was creating noisescapes with analogue-based equipment not 
entirely dissimilar to the equipment used by Schaeffer et al. long 
before he expanded his palette even further via a move to laptop 
composition.64 Just as the message in any communications channel 
is dependent on the technological and material specificities of that 
assemblage and is conditioned by it whilst expressing it in the 
carriage of its semantic (or other) content which is only transmitted 
via a resistant operation, so Merzbow takes this logic to its most 
logic-confounding extreme and consistently begs the question 
‘what is that noise?’. In saying this, I am not, of course, ventrilo-
quising the imagined response of a Brahms-loving Merzbow 
virgin’s first time with the woolly mammoth, but suggesting, rather, 
that Merzbow asks us this question in the way that it has been 
posed throughout this study. Which is to say, where does noise 
come from, what does it do, what is noise? 
Notes
  1	  This is a remix of Brett Woodward’s cover versions of Merzbow. 
Or, to put it another way, this text consists solely of excerpts of 
descriptions of the 50 compact disks in the Merzbow retrospective, 
Merzbox, written by Brett Woodward and published in the book 
that accompanied these CDs in the Merzbox, namely Merzbook: The 
Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards (Melbourne: Extreme, 
1987), 82–132.
  2	  Henry Cowell, ‘The Joys of Noise’, in Audio Culture: Readings in 
Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (orig. 1929; 
New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 23. Cowell goes on 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
267
to suggest that even though it would be theoretically possible to 
produce a pure and noise-free tone in an acoustical laboratory, ‘even 
there it is doubtful whether, by the time the tone has reached our 
ear, it has not been corrupted by resonances picked up on the way’ 
(23). The impossibility of pure tones is commented on also by Russo 
and Warner. See Mary Russo and Daniel Warner, ‘Rough Music, 
Futurism, and Postpunk Industrial Noise Bands’, in Audio Culture: 
Readings in Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner 
(New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 49.
  3	  Andy Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music (New York and London: 
Continuum, 2007), 41–2.
  4	  Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music, 45.
  5	  Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music, 45. Scruton’s point is slightly 
different. For him, musical expression is necessarily tied to meaning 
and understanding and, as such, it is exclusively tonal or perceived 
as such even when a conscious decision has been made to avoid the 
tonal system. He writes: ‘The possibility remains that tonal music is 
the only music that will ever really mean anything to us, and that, 
if atonal music sometimes gains a hearing, it is because we can elicit 
within it a latent tonal order’ (Roger Scruton, The Aesthetics of 
Music (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999), 296).
  6	  Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music, 122. For an alternate take on such 
musical expressions and an attempt to consider them precisely from 
an aesthetic and musical perspective, see Joanna Demers, Listening 
Through the Noise: The Aesthetics of Experimental Electronic Music 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010); Robert Fink, Repeating 
Ourselves: American Minimal Music as Cultural Practice (Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 2005).
  7	  Aaron Ridley, The Philosophy of Music: Theme and Variations 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2004), 11.
  8	  Roger Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 16.
  9	  Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 17.
10	  See Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 17–18, 39. It should be noted 
that the linguistic analogy used by Scruton imbues music with a cultural 
specificity that the pretensions of his work would seem to reject, in spite 
of occasional statements that are tantamount to an admission that he 
is not talking about music but, rather, a culturally determined idea of 
music. He writes, for instance: ‘Pitch, rhythm, melody, and harmony are 
not the only forms of musical organization; but they provide the core 
musical experience in our culture, and perhaps in any culture that is 
recognizably engaged in music-making’ (20).

268	
NOISE MATTERS
11	  Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 79. Scruton rehearses 
similar arguments in his Understanding Music: Philosophy and 
Interpretation (New York and London: Continuum, 2009).
12	  Ridley, The Philosophy of Music, 11.
13	  Ridley, The Philosophy of Music, 8.
14	  Ridley, The Philosophy of Music, 13.
15	  Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music, 57. Note also that for Scruton too, 
music is a resolutely non-representational artform. See The Aesthetics 
of Music, 118–39.
16	  Eduard Hanslick, On the Musically Beautiful, trans. G. Payzant 
(orig. German, 1854; Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1986), 80.
17	  In order to clarify this point, it may be useful to think back to 
Flusser’s distinction, in relation to photography or communication 
more broadly, between the dialogic and discursive phases in his 
conception of such informational objects.
18	  Whilst it should hopefully be clear, it is worth stating nonetheless 
that all derivatives of the term ‘express’ used here are in line with 
the meaning given to this term throughout this book. This is to 
say, then, that ‘expression’ points to an ontological deployment 
and as such there is no reason to suppose, as does Scruton, that 
there is a necessary relation between ‘expression’ and ‘feeling’, 
‘emotion’ or ‘understanding’. See Scruton, The Aesthetics of 
Music, 140–70.
19	  It is important to note that whilst attendant to the historical and 
technological conditions in which music comes into being, this 
typology has the particular advantage of being able to account 
for music across all musical traditions, be they defined in terms 
of a cultural distinction (East vs. West) or a generic one (song vs. 
symphony, scored music vs. improvisation).
20	  Julian Dodd, Works of Music: An Essay in Ontology (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2007), 1.
21	  For an excellent brief discussion of some of the different arguments 
concerning musical ontology, see Ben Caplan and Carl Matheson, 
‘Ontology of Music’, in Aesthetics: A Reader in Philosophy of the 
Arts, 3rd edn, ed. David Goldblatt and Lee Brown (Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010).
22	  See Chapter One for some examples.
23	  It should be noted that Paul Hegarty suggests the very opposite 
to this, suggesting that ‘Schaeffer is making the world musical, 
performing a noise reduction’ (Noise / Music: A History (New York 

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
269
and London: Continuum, 2007), 34). Whilst I agree with many 
points that Hegarty makes in regards to musique concrète, I disagree 
with this suggestion entirely because, of course, the definition of noise 
being used here is a very different one that does not allow noise to be 
recoded as it is in Hegarty’s analysis in which ‘in bringing noise into 
music, [noise] becomes musical, therefore losing noisiness’ (34).
24	  See the discussion of white noise in the introduction.
25	  Hamilton, Aesthetics and Music, 125.
26	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 33. 
27	  Joel Chadabe gives many fascinating accounts of the specific ways 
that this has been so throughout the history of electronic music. See 
Joel Chadabe, Electric Sound: The Past and Promise of Electronic 
Music (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997). In relation to 
laptop music see also Rolf Grossman, ‘The Tip of the Iceberg: Laptop 
Music and the Information-Technological Transformation of Music’, 
Organised Sound, 13, no. 1 (2008).
28	  Michel Chion, La musique électroacoustique (Paris: PUF, 1982), 33; 
my translation.
29	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 33.
30	  The documentary possibilities of recordings are vehemently rejected 
by Francisco López who often makes field recordings and releases 
them with little or no further manipulation but insists that his only 
interest is with the sound in and of itself and not its source. For an 
excellent discussion of López’s work, see Thomas Bey William Bailey, 
Microbionic: Radical Electronic Music and Sound Art in the 21st 
Century (Clerkenwell: Creation Books, 2009), 131–41.
31	  For a discussion of this point in relation to Messiaen’s use of 
birdsong, see Ronald Bogue, Deleuze on Music, Painting and the Arts 
(London: Routledge, 2003), 28–31. Bogue’s discussion here renders 
very problematic the kinds of analyses proffered by Ridley in relation 
to musical representation, such as Debussy’s attempts to reproduce 
cathedral bells, for instance. See Ridley, The Philosophy of Music, 
52–6.
32	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 33.
33	  Within the context of this study, the logic here is of course not in the 
slightest surprising, for noise here is claimed always to be a matter 
of ontology and to make more apparent the relational aspect of 
ontology as it comes to pass in expressive assemblages.
34	  Achim Szepanski, ‘A Mille Plateaux Manifesto’, trans. Judith Funk, 
Organised Sound, 7, no. 1 (2002), 226. Having said this, it should 

270	
NOISE MATTERS
be noted that I believe this principle must be applied to ALL music 
and not only the clicks and cuts music that Szepanski releases on his 
label, that, this is to say, music has always been purely operative and 
that this does not only arise at a specific technologically-determined 
moment in recent history.
35	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 155.
36	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 155.
37	  Brett Woodward, ‘The Nomadic Producer of Differences’, in Merzbook: 
The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards (Melbourne: Extreme, 
1987), 9.
38	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 156.
39	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 156.
40	  Eugene Thacker, ‘Bataille / Body / Noise: Notes Towards a Techno-
Erotics’, in Merzbook: The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger 
Richards (Melbourne: Extreme, 1987), 63.
41	  Thacker, ‘Bataille / Body / Noise’, 64.
42	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 156.
43	  Thacker, ‘Bataille / Body / Noise’, 64.
44	  Thacker, ‘Bataille / Body / Noise’, 64.
45	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 155.
46	  Paul Hegarty, ‘Full With Noise: Theory and Japanese Noise Music’, 
ctheory, a097 (2001), http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=314 
[accessed 15 May 2001]. Hegarty’s position is more nuanced in a later 
paper where, working against Adorno, he suggests that with Merzbow, 
‘We are not left with a spurious empiricism of pure sound or noise, but 
with something like an absence signalling the absent presence of music: 
music is not here, not possible here, but can take its coming into being 
from this impossibility’ (Paul Hegarty, ‘Noise Threshold: Merzbow and 
the End of Natural Sound’, Organised Sound, 7, no. 1 (2002), 198). In 
spite of this, this paper still ends up suggesting that, ‘In the end, though, 
Merzbow is not the superseding of Adorno, but the noise, the exterior, 
the distortion, the excess, the death, the catastrophe of – [sic]’ (200).
47	  Julian Henriques, ‘Sonic Dominance and the Reggae Sound System 
Session’, in The Auditory Culture Reader, ed. Michael Bull and Les 
Back (Oxford and New York: Berg, 2003), 459. As his title indicates, 
Henriques is not talking about Merzbow but, rather, reggae sound 
systems in Jamaica; nonetheless, the same principles apply here.
48	  It is necessary to say ‘approaching’ of course because, as we have 
seen, pure white noise can only ever be a mathematical abstraction.

	
ON NOISE AND MUSIC	
271
49	  Analysing Merzbow’s Venereology, Paul Hegarty describes a specific 
example of this kind of operation, writing: ‘There is emergence 
at play here, of the simplest kind, where some order is formed 
chaotically, but this forming is no sooner established than it unforms’ 
(Noise / Music, 159).
50	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 139.
51	  Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism 
and Schizophrenia 2, trans. Brian Massumi (orig. French, 1980; 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987), 300.
52	  Whilst I will not draw on it here, readers may wish to refer to an 
alternative take on the relationship between Deleuze and Guattari 
and musical ontology, namely, Michael Szekely, ‘Becoming-Still: 
Perspectives on Musical Ontology After Deleuze and Guattari’, Social 
Semiotics, 13, no. 2 (2003).
53	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 299.
54	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 300.
55	  Deleuze and Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus, 299.
56	  Brett Woodward, ‘SCUM Scissors for Cutting Merzbow VOL. 1’,  
in Merzbook: The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards 
(Melbourne: Extreme, 1987), 113.
57	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 139.
58	  Woodward, ‘SCUM’, 113.
59	  Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 19–20.
60	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 139.
61	  Roger Scruton notes how sound is not in fact a secondary quality 
or property of objects in the world in the same way as a colour, 
for example, but, rather, something that is emitted by (and thereby 
separated from) objects in the world, a ‘“secondary object” heard as 
a pure event’ (Scruton, The Aesthetics of Music, 2, 39).
62	  Hegarty, Noise / Music, 140.
63	  Masami Akita, ‘NOISE*BEING*NOW’, Silver Star Club Magazine, 
7 July 1987.
64	  Since the example of Merzbow has shown how dangerous it is to 
make absolutist claims about the possible range of possible sounds 
that can be expressed by various kinds of technological assemblages, 
I will not suggest that he now provides us with a new limit that will 
not be surpassed.


CONCLUSION
It is fitting that the last chapter of this book should have finished 
with a question, for even if I have attempted here to sketch an 
ontology of noise, I have, from the outset and as indicated by my 
title, always been aware that noise would remain out of reach in 
some way, that we would only ever be able to move towards it. 
Indeed, if the ontology of noise is relational, as has been suggested, 
then it can never be pinned down to one definitive thing, its points 
and coordinates will never remain fixed, able to be mapped, but 
will always only ever arise in different sites, with different charac-
teristics according to the specificities of the expressive assemblage 
in which it is born again. Noise, then, requires us to keep asking 
questions of it and will never allow us to believe that we have 
definitively, once and for all, contained it. Nonetheless, I do not 
believe that this gives us an excuse, as critics, scholars or philoso-
phers, to throw up our hands in surrender and not attempt to talk 
about noise in a consistent manner because the task seems so hard 
or even impossible. If we cannot talk about noise as though it is a 
thing with a core, definable essence, we can nonetheless talk about 
what it does, about its operations, and attempt to find in the multi-
farious sites, subjects, objects, texts, expressions and channels in 
which it arises some commonality or shared principles that allow 
us to talk about it in terms of an ontology. This book has been an 
attempt to do precisely this.
	
In talking about something so open, something that can perhaps 
only be talked of in terms of a set of operations that arise in an 
immanent situation, this book is, of course, necessarily incom-
plete; indeed, it could never be complete. If I have suggested in 
my introduction that the attitude adopted towards noise in the 
twentieth century has often been akin to that of a dog who, having 
discovered its tail, tries to run away from it, it seems only fair 
that I should subject myself to such treatment and admit that my 

274	
CONCLUSION
endeavours in this book resemble rather the actions of the dog in 
the more common cliché who tries, unsuccessfully, to catch his own 
tail.1 Thus, if I have proffered examples of the operations of noise 
in film, photography and music, suggesting how attending to noise 
in the way it has been figured here enables us to think differently 
about certain texts or modes of production/expression, I am fully 
aware that there are many other kinds of expression that could 
have helped me to formulate my argument just as well as those 
I have chosen, or perhaps even better. In all cases, of course, the 
choice as to what has been included here comes down to a matter 
of personal taste and experience, factors which are themselves, one 
might say, noisy elements insofar as they partially determine and 
are expressed in every work of this kind.
	
It should be noted also, however, that the potential work that 
remains to be done on this subject is far greater than this, and it 
should not be thought that this work would be complete were it 
to include, for example, chapters on literature, painting and new 
media art. Far from it. In saying this, I am not glibly suggesting 
that the potential objects of this study are almost infinite since, as 
I suggested in the introduction, when ontology is conceptualised 
relationally there can be no ultimate distinction drawn between 
animate and inanimate matter, between different kinds of objects 
in the world – as there necessarily must be for the tenets of most 
philosophies of music to be upheld.2 In admitting the necessarily 
incomplete nature of this study, I wish also to point out that I have 
chosen to examine here only works in which noise is foregrounded 
or intensified in such a way that we are forced to, or at least 
invited to attend to it. I have done this though in the context of 
a theoretical assertion that all expression carries noise within it, 
and there is thus no reason to believe that we would not be able 
to carry out the kind of noise archaeology undertaken here on any 
text or form of cultural (or other) expression3 – and this, of course, 
contra Kittler who contends that noise, considered as a Lacanian 
‘[signature] of the real’, only emerges in our media with the advent 
of photography and phonography, toppling the ‘writing monopoly’ 
of noise-reductive print technologies which were confined to the 
realm of the symbolic.4 It is thus my hope that this book might 
serve as an invitation or, perhaps, provocation for others to 
continue this work and to attend to noise of this kind in other sites 
and expressions, to extend the ‘idea of noise’ proposed here which, 

	
CONCLUSION	
275
in line with Douglas Kahn’s view of all such ideas, is intended to 
be ‘tetchy, abusive, transgressive, resistive, hyperbolic, scientistic, 
generative, and cosmological’.5
	
In saying this, I am fully aware that this may not be to everyone’s 
taste and that the very different figuration of noise proposed here, 
as well as the very different analyses of specific texts proffered, may 
well be simply rejected by some. Let me stress, then, that I do not 
pretend to be offering, for instance, the definitive reading of Lynch 
that disproves any psychoanalytic analysis of his œuvre. What I 
want to suggest is that if we attend to the noise of a text as opposed 
to what would generally be considered its manifest semiotic 
content, we will necessarily arrive at very different conclusions 
that, hopefully, should entertain a more direct relation with the 
actual specific operations of that expression, its matter. This is not 
to say that other approaches are debunked, merely that they will 
necessarily, precisely because they insert texts into different kinds 
of assemblages, produce different results that express the noise that 
arises in the specific conjunction of that text with a specific critical 
apparatus. To return to the terminology used earlier, we might say 
that approaches such as these interrogate the discursive phase of 
their objects of study, whereas what I have attempted to do here is 
to remain within the dialogic phase.
	
Finally, just as I do not wish to pretend that noisy analysis neces-
sarily yields a better result, merely a different kind of result, I hope 
that no reader will leave this book with the impression that I am 
advocating an abandonment of all common sense definitions of 
noise or suggesting that its meaning should be altered. Apart from 
the impossibility of such a task, to do so would also be undesirable. 
The common sense definitions of noise that are in common usage 
may be subject to massive subjective variation, contradiction and 
inconsistency, like any anthropological code they can nonetheless 
allow certain people in certain contexts talking about certain things 
access to a shared understanding. (And let it not be thought that 
I am unaware of the fact that I myself, at various points in this 
book, have had to waiver between a common sense usage of this 
term and the ontological definition proposed, oftentimes relying on 
the former as a possible point of entry into the latter.) With noise 
perhaps more than most other phenomena, however, the lack of 
consensus on what actually does constitute noise can also lead to 
massive misunderstanding and disagreement – not only amongst 

276	
CONCLUSION
scholars, as we have seen, but also neighbours, engineers, musicians 
and so on. It is in part because of this that I believe an inquiry such 
as this one is not only justified but necessary. However, this book is 
born also and primarily out of a (not uncommon) deep conviction 
that the work of scholarship and philosophy must consist in large 
part of kicking against the assumptions, metaphysical certainties 
and unquestioned Truth of common sense perspectives on the 
world.6 And whilst some might say that in going against the grain 
of common sense one can only end up producing nonsense, I 
would prefer to think that, in fact, this kind of critical approach 
introduces into our understanding of the world nothing other than 
noise.
Notes
1	
 Whilst it may seem ridiculous to extract from such an absurd image 
a serious point, I would like to point out that the figure of a dog 
chasing its tail does in fact come close to describing well the critical 
methodology adopted here which consists precisely of circling 
round an indeterminate centre in such a way as to draw a sphere of 
reference that is only partially defined since the circle can never be 
closed. (For this to work it is of course essential that the dog, unlike 
the Ourobouros, never actually catch its tail in its mouth.) There is a 
difference, however, for whilst the movement followed may resemble 
that of a dog chasing its tail, the object that I have been chasing is 
not in fact the tail itself, but rather that which lies at the centre of the 
path my investigations have traced.
2	
 See, for instance, Andrew Bowie who writes: ‘It is the possession of 
intentional content of the kind that makes a noise a linguistic sign or 
a note that distinguishes both music and language. This means that 
they have to be understood in terms of their world-disclosive nature, 
which is not the case for objects in general, and this depends on how 
the elements of music and language are related to other linguistic 
and musical elements, and to contexts in the world’ (Andrew Bowie, 
Music, Philosophy and Modernity (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2007), 120; my italics).
3	
 Including, of course, all of those texts that I have suggested, in the 
opening chapters of this book, are not really all that noisy, for they 
have only been said to be so because the ways in which they are 
generally said to be noisy draw on common sense definitions of the 

	
CONCLUSION	
277
term ‘noise’, meaning that the kind of noise figured here and that 
necessarily exists in these texts also has not been probed.
4	
 Friedrich A. Kittler, Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. Geoffrey 
Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz (orig. German, 1986; Palo Alto, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1999), 188, 16.
5	
 Douglas Kahn, Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1999), 20. These are adjectives that 
some might apply to the work of Giorgio Agamben (and I mean that 
as a compliment) whose notion of the exception can, according to 
Crocker, be usefully elaborated through a consideration of mediality 
and noise and whose project may then already be an example of the 
kind of analysis proposed here. See Stephen Crocker, ‘Noises and 
Exceptions: Pure Mediality in Serres and Agamben’ ctheory, td053 
(2007), http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=574 [accessed 29 
August 2007].
6	
 Or indeed, disciplinary norms. Something similar is suggested by 
Paulson, for instance, in relation to literary studies when he writes, 
‘If literature assumes its noise, and consequently its unreliability, as 
a constitutive factor of itself, then as readers and critics we are called 
to construct a kind of knowledge radically different from that of any 
discipline, one that may be described as the creation of meaning out 
of noise and disorder’ (William R. Paulson, The Noise of Culture: 
Literary Texts in a World of Information (Ithaca, NY and London: 
Cornell University Press, 1988), 142). I would of course contend that 
it is important to do this whilst not bringing noise into the order of 
meaning and allowing noise to remain irrecuperable and operational, 
therefore.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
Akita, Masami, ‘NOISE*BEING*NOW’, Silver Star Club Magazine, 7 
July 1987.
Altman, Rick, ed., Sound Theory Sound Practice (London: Routledge, 
1992).
—‘The Material Heterogeneity of Recorded Sound’, in Sound Theory 
Sound Practice (London: Routledge, 1992), 15–31.
—‘Introduction: Four and a Half Film Fallacies’, in Sound Theory Sound 
Practice (London: Routledge, 1992), 35–45.
—‘Sound Space’, in Sound Theory Sound Practice (London: Routledge, 
1992), 46–64.
Arnold, James, ‘La Nausée Revisited’, The French Review, 39, no. 2 
(1965): 199–213.
Attali, Jacques, Noise: The Political Economy of Music, trans. Brian 
Massumi (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1985).
Bailey, Thomas Bey William, Microbionic: Radical Electronic Music 
and Sound Art in the 21st Century (Clerkenwell: Creation Books, 
2009).
Banks, Joe, ‘Rorschach Audio: Ghost Voices and Perceptual Creativity’, 
Leonardo Music Journal, 11 (2001): 77–83.
Barad, Karen, ‘Posthumanist Performativity: Toward an Understanding 
of How Matter Comes to Matter’, in Belief, Bodies, and Being: 
Feminist Reflections on Embodiment, ed. Deborah Orr, Linda Lopez 
McAlister, Eileen Kahl and Kathleen Earle (Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 2006), 11–36.
Barthes, Roland, Camera Lucida: Reflections on Photography, trans. 
Richard Howard (orig. French 1980; New York: Hill and Wang, 1981).
—‘The Grain of the Voice’, in Image Music Text, trans. Stephen Heath 
(orig. French 1972; New York: The Noonday Press, 1988), 179–89.
—‘Introduction to the Structural Analysis of Narratives’, in Image 
Music Text, trans. Stephen Heath (orig. French 1966; New York: The 
Noonday Press, 1988), 79–124.
Bates, Eliot, ‘Glitches, Bugs, and Hisses: The Degeneration of Musical 
Recordings and the Contemporary Musical Work’, in Bad Music: The 

280	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Music We Love to Hate, ed. C. J. Washburne and M. Derno (New 
York and London: Routledge, 2004), 275–93.
Baudrillard, Jean, Simulacra and Simulation, trans. Sheila Faria Glaser 
(orig. French 1981; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994).
Bazin, André, ‘The Ontology of the Photographic Image’, trans. Hugh 
Gray, Film Quarterly, 13, no. 4 (1960): 4–9.
Benjamin, Andrew, ‘Porosity at the Edge: Working Through Walter 
Benjamin’s “Naples” ’, Architectural Theory Review, 10, no. 1 (2005): 
33-43.
Benjamin, Walter, ‘The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical 
Reproduction’, in Illuminations, trans. H. Zohn (orig. German, 1936; 
Fontana Press, London, 1992), 211–44.
Bergson, Henri, Matter and Memory, trans. N. M. Paul and W. S. Palmer 
(orig. French, 1896; New York: Zone Books, 1994).
Bijsterveld, Karin, ‘The Diabolical Symphony of the Mechanical Age: 
Technology and Symbolism of Sound in European and North 
American Noise Abatement Campaigns, 1900–40’, in The Auditory 
Culture Reader, ed. Michael Bull and Les Back (Oxford and New 
York: Berg, 2003), 165–89 [abridged from original published in Social 
Studies of Science, 31, no. 1: 37–70].
Blesser, Barry and Lind-Ruth Salter, Spaces Speak, Are You Listening? 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2007).
Bogue, Ronald, Deleuze on Music, Painting and the Arts (London: 
Routledge, 2003).
Bois, Yve-Alain and Rosalind Krauss, Formless: A User’s Guide 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997).
Bose® Pty Ltd, ‘Acoustic Noise Cancelling® Headphone Technology’, 
http://www.bose.com.au/site/index.aspx?path=products&CTRL=PTC
H&pfid=10&tid=6 [accessed 28 March 2006].
Botte, Marie-Claire and René Chocholle, Le Bruit, 4th edn (Paris: PUF, 
1984).
Bowie, Andrew, Music, Philosophy and Modernity (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007).
Brophy, Phil, ‘Collapsing Image Into Noise Part 2: Noise, Noise, Noise’, 
The Wire: Adventures in Modern Music, 165 (November 1997).
Bull, Michael and Les Back, eds, The Auditory Culture Reader (Oxford 
and New York: Berg, 2003).
—‘Introduction: Into Sound’, in The Auditory Culture Reader, ed. 
Michael Bull and Les Back (Oxford and New York: Berg, 2003), 1–18.
Burns, William, Noise and Man (London: John Murray, 1968).
Burt, Warren, ‘Alvin Lucier (1931–)’, in Music of the Twentieth-Century 
Avant-Garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook, ed. Larry Sitsky (Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press, 2002), 269–74.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
281
Caplan, Ben and Carl Matheson, ‘Ontology of Music’, in Aesthetics: A 
Reader in Philosophy of the Arts, 3rd edn, ed. David Goldblatt and 
Lee Brown (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2010), 171–6.
Cascone, Kim, ‘The Aesthetics of Failure: “Post-Digital” Tendencies in 
Contemporary Computer Music’, Computer Music Journal, 24, no. 4 
(2000): 12–18.
—‘Ten Years of Not Being There’, Vague Terrain 15: .microsound 
(2009), http://vagueterrain.net/journal15 [accessed 10 April 2012].
Cascone, Kim and Jeremy Turner, ‘The Microsound Scene: An Interview 
with Kim Cascone’, ctheory, A101 (2001), http://www.ctheory.net/
text_file?pick=322 [accessed 23 January 2003].
Chadabe, Joel, Electric Sound: The Past and Promise of Electronic Music 
(Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1997).
Chanan, Michael, Musica Practica: The Social Practice of Western Music 
From Gregorian Chant to Postmodernism (London: Verso, 1994).
—Repeated Takes: A Short History of Recording and its Effects on Music 
(London: Verso, 1995).
Chion, Michel, La musique électroacoustique (Paris: PUF, 1982).
—L’Art des sons fixés ou La Musique Concrètement (Fontaine: Éditions 
Metamkine/Nota-Bene/Sono-Concept, 1991).
—Musiques, médias et technologies (Paris: Flammarion, 1994).
—David Lynch, trans. Robert Julian (orig. French, 2001; London: British 
Film Institute, 2006).
Christov-Bakargiev, Carolyn, ‘Thomas Ruff at the End of the 
Photographic Dream’, in Thomas Ruff, ed. Carolyn Christov-
Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 12–23.
Chua, Eu Jin, ‘The Film-Work Recomposed into Nature: From Art to 
Noise in Four Minutes and Thirty-Three Seconds’, Moving Image 
Review & Art Journal, 1, no. 1 (2012): 89–96.
Cobussen, Marcel, ‘Noise as Undifferentiated Sound’, http://
deconstruction-in-music.com/proefschrift/300_john_cage/313_noise_
undifferentiated/noise_undifferentiated.html [accessed 18 April 2012].
Cohen, Leon, ‘The History of Noise (On the 100th Anniversary of 
its Birth)’, Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 22, no. 6 (2005): 
20–45.
Corbett, John, Extended Play: Sounding Off from John Cage to Dr 
Funkenstein (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1994).
Cowell, Henry, ‘The Joys of Noise’, in Audio Culture: Readings in 
Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (orig. 1929; 
New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 22–4.
Cox, Christoph and Daniel Warner, eds, Audio Culture: Readings in 
Modern Music (New York and London: Continuum, 2004).
—‘Music and Its Others: Noise, Sound, Silence: Introduction’, in Audio 

282	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Culture: Readings in Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel 
Warner (New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 5–6.
Critchley, Simon, Very Little … Almost Nothing: Death, Philosophy, 
Literature (London and New York: Routledge, 1997).
Crocker, Stephen, ‘Noises and Exceptions: Pure Mediality in Serres and 
Agamben’ ctheory, td053 (2007), http://www.ctheory.net/articles.
aspx?id=574 [accessed 29 August 2007].
Cubitt, Sean, Daniel Palmer and Les Walkling, ‘Reflections on Medium 
Specificity Occasioned by the Symposium “Digital Light: Technique, 
Technology, Creation”, Melbourne 2011’, Moving Image Review and 
Art Journal, 1, no. 1 (2012): 37–49.
Damisch, Hubert, ‘Five Notes for a Phenomenology of the Photographic 
Image’, October, 5 (1978); reprinted in The Photography Reader, ed. 
L. Wells (London: Routledge, 2003), 87–9.
Dargis, Manohla, ‘The Trippy Dream Factory of David Lynch’, 
New York Times, 6 December 2006, http://movies.nytimes.
com/2006/12/06/movies/06empi.html [accessed 15 October 2009].
Davison, Annette and Erica Sheen, eds, The Cinema of David Lynch: 
American Dreams, Nightmare Visions (London: Wallflower Press, 
2004).
Dax, Max, ‘An Interview with Thomas Ruff’, in Thomas Ruff, ed. 
Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 70–5.
Deleuze, Gilles, Expressionism in Philosophy: Spinoza, trans. Martin 
Joughin (orig. French, 1968; New York: Zone Books, 1990).
—The Logic of Sense, trans. Mark Lester with Charles Stivale (orig. 
French, 1969; New York: Columbia University Press, 1990).
—Difference and Repetition, trans. Paul Patton (orig. French, 1968; 
London: The Athlone Press, 1994; New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1994).
Deleuze, Gilles and Félix Guattari, A Thousand Plateaus: Capitalism 
and Schizophrenia 2, trans. Brian Massumi (orig. French, 1980; 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1987).
Demers, Joanna, Listening Through the Noise: The Aesthetics of 
Experimental Electronic Music (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2010).
Diederichsen, Diedrich, ‘Clicks’, trans. Judith Funk, in the liner notes to 
Clicks and Cuts 2 (Mille Plateaux, 2001), 6–9.
Dodd, Julian, Works of Music: An Essay in Ontology (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2007).
Dodson, Will, ‘Review of David Lynch in Theory’, Screen, 52, no. 3 
(2011): 415–19.
Dufour, Eric, David Lynch: Matière, temps, et image (Paris: Vrin, 2008).

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
283
Dunsby, Jonathan, ‘Roland Barthes and the Grain of Panzéra’s Voice’, 
Journal of the Royal Musical Association, 134, no. 1 (2009): 113–32.
Dyson, Frances, ‘The Ear That Would Hear Sounds in Themselves: John 
Cage 1935–1965’, in Wireless Imagination: Sound, Radio, and the 
Avant-Garde, ed. Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1992), 373–407.
—Sounding New Media: Immersion and Embodiment in the Arts and 
Culture (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2009).
Eisenstein, Vsevolod Pudovkin and Grigori Alexandrov, ‘Statement on 
Sound’, in The Eisenstein Reader, ed. Richard Taylor, trans. Richard 
Taylor and William Powell (orig. Russian, 1928; London: BFI 
Publishing, 1998), 80–1.
El-Sheikh, Tammer, ‘Zycles’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen/
Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: Kunsthalle/Nuremberg: 
Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 80.
—‘Stereo Photographs’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen/Surfaces, 
Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: Kunsthalle/Nuremberg: Verlag 
für moderne Kunst, 2009), 144.
Emmerson, Simon, ed., The Language of Electroacoustic Music (New 
York: Harwood Academic Publishers, 1986).
Enns, Anthony, ‘Voices of the Dead: Transmission/Translation/
Transgression’, Culture, Theory and Critique, 46, no. 1 (2005): 11–27.
Evens, Aden, ‘Sound Ideas’, in A Shock to Thought: Expression After 
Deleuze and Guattari, ed. Brian Massumi (London: Routledge, 2002), 
171–87.
—Sound Ideas: Music Machines and Experience (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 2005).
Fink, Robert, Repeating Ourselves: American Minimal Music as Cultural 
Practice (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005).
Flint, R. W., ed., Marinetti: Selected Writings, trans. R. W. Flint and 
Arthur A. Coppotelli (London: Secker & Warburg, 1972).
Flusser, Vilém, Towards a Philosophy of Photography, trans. Anthony 
Matthews (orig. German, 1983; London: Reaktion Books, 2000).
Fogle, Douglas, ‘Dark Matter’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen/
Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug (Vienna: Kunsthalle/Nuremberg: 
Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 188–204.
Galster, I, ed., La Naissance du phénomène Sartre, raisons d’un succès 
1938–1945 (Paris: Seuil, 2001).
Gann, Kyle, No Such Thing as Silence: John Cage’s 4’33” (New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 2010).
Geymüller, Maximilian, ‘Interieurs’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen/
Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug, trans. Nelson Wattie (Vienna: 
Kunsthalle/ Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 184.

284	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Gleyzon, François-Xavier, ed., David Lynch in Theory (Prague: Litteraria 
Pragensia, 2010).
Goldblatt, David and Lee Brown, eds, Aesthetics: A Reader in 
Philosophy of the Arts, 3rd edn. (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2010).
Goldsmith, Kenneth, ‘It Was a Bug, Dave: The Dawn of Glitchwerks’ 
(1999), http://www.wfmu.org/~kennyg/popular/articles/glitchwerks.
html [accessed 28 March 2006].
Goodman, Steve, Sonic Warfare: Sound, Affect, and the Ecology of Fear 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2010).
Goodwin, Andrew, ‘Sample and Hold: Pop Music in the Digital Age of 
Reproduction’, in On Record: Rock, Pop, and the Written Word, ed. 
Simon Frith and Andrew Goodwin (New York: Pantheon Books, 1990), 
258–73 [reprinted from Critical Quarterly, 30, no. 3 (1998): 34–49].
Grathwohl-Scheffel, Christiane, ‘Cosmos of Images’, in Thomas Ruff, 
Schwarzwald.Landschaft, ed. Christiane Grathwohl-Scheffel and 
Jochen Ludwig (Freiburg: Museum für Neue Kunst, 2009), 23–31.
Grau, Oliver, Virtual Art: From Illusion to Immersion (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press/Leonardo Books, 2003).
Grossman, Rolf, ‘The Tip of the Iceberg: Laptop Music and the 
Information-Technological Transformation of Music’, Organised 
Sound, 13, no. 1 (2008): 5–11.
Gunning, Tom, ‘The Cinema of Attractions: Early Film, its Spectator and 
the Avant-Garde’, in The Cinema of Attractions Reloaded, ed. Wanda 
Strauven (Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2006), 56–62 
[first published in Wide Angle, 8, nos. 3/4 (1986): 63–70].
Gutton, Jean-Pierre, Bruits et sons dans notre histoire: essai sur la 
reconstitution du paysage sonore (Paris: Presses Universitaires de 
France, 2000).
Hainge, Greg, ‘Weird or Loopy? Specular Spaces, Feedback and Artifice 
in Lost Highway’s Aesthetics of Sensation’, in The Cinema of David 
Lynch: American Dreams, Nightmare Visions, ed. Annette Davison 
and Erica Sheen (London: Wallflower Press, 2004), 136–50.
—‘Unfixing the Photographic Image: Photography, Indexicality, Fidelity 
and Normativity’, Continuum: Journal of Media & Cultural Studies, 
22, no. 5 (2008): 715–30.
—‘Red Velvet: Lynch’s Cinemat(ograph)ic Ontology’, in David Lynch in 
Theory, ed. François-Xavier Gleyzon (Prague: Litteraria Pragensia: 
2010), 24–39.
Hamilton, Andy, Aesthetics and Music (New York and London: 
Continuum, 2007).
Hanslick, Eduard, On the Musically Beautiful, trans. G. Payzant (orig. 
German, 1854; Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1986).

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
285
Happel, Reinhold, ‘Thomas Ruff’, in Thomas Ruff (Sindelfingen: Kunst 
+ Projekte Sindelfingen, 1991), 61–5; reprinted in Thomas Ruff, ed. 
Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009), 198–202.
Haraway, Donna, Simians, Cyborgs, and Women: The Reinvention of 
Nature (London: Free Association Books, 1991).
Hegarty, Paul, ‘Full With Noise: Theory and Japanese Noise Music’, 
ctheory, a097 (2001), http://www.ctheory.net/articles.aspx?id=314 
[accessed 15 May 2012].
—‘Noise Threshold: Merzbow and the End of Natural Sound’, 
Organised Sound, 7, no. 1 (2002): 193–200.
—Noise/Music: A History (New York and London: Continuum, 2007).
Henriques, Julian, ‘Sonic Dominance and the Reggae Sound System 
Session’, in The Auditory Culture Reader, ed. M. Bull and Les Back 
(Oxford: Berg, 2003), 451–80.
Higgins, Sean, ‘A Deleuzian Noise/Excavating the Body of Abstract 
Sound’, in Sounding the Virtual: Gilles Deleuze and the Theory and 
Philosophy of Music, ed. Brian Hulse and Nick Nesbitt (Farnham: 
Ashgate, 2010), 51–76.
Hinant, Guy Marc, liner notes to Folds and Rhizomes for Gilles Deleuze 
(sub rosa, 1995).
—liner notes to An Anthology of Noise & Electronic Music/First 
a-chronology 1921–2001 (sub rosa, 2004).
Hollier, Denis, ‘La Nausée, en attendant’, in La Naissance du phénomène 
Sartre, raisons d’un succès 1938–1945, ed. I Galster (Paris, Seuil, 
2001), 86–100.
Holmes, Thom, Electronic and Experimental Music: Pioneers in 
Technology and Composition (New York and London: Routledge, 
2002).
Huelsenbeck, Richard, ‘En Avant Dada: A History of Dadaism’, in The 
Dada Painters and Poets: An Anthology, ed. Robert Motherwell (orig. 
German, 1920; New York: Wittenborn, 1951; reprint, New York: G. 
K. Hall, 1981), 21–48.
Hug, Cathérine, ‘Surfaces, Depths’, in Thomas Ruff, Oberflächen, Tiefen / 
Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug, trans. Fiona Elliott (Vienna: 
Kunsthalle/Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 2009), 48–66.
Hulse, Brian and Nick Nesbitt, eds, Sounding the Virtual: Gilles 
Deleuze and the Theory and Philosophy of Music (Farnham: 
Ashgate, 2010).
Huxley, Aldous, The Perennial Philosophy (New York: Harper and Row 
Perennial Library, 1970).
Janus, Adrienne, ‘Listening: Jean-Luc Nancy and the “Anti-Ocular” 
Turn in Continental Philosophy and Critical Theory’, Comparative 
Literature, 63, no. 2 (2011): 182–202.

286	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Jordan, Randolph, in the transcription of a roundtable discussion 
transcribed in Offscreen, 13, no. 9, http://www.offscreen.com/biblio/
pages/essays/roundtable_inland_empire_pt2/ [accessed 19 October 2009].
Kahn, Douglas, ‘Introduction’, in Wireless Imagination: Sound, Radio, 
and the Avant-Garde, ed. Douglas Kahn and Gregory Whitehead 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 1–29.
—Noise, Water, Meat: A History of Sound in the Arts (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1999).
Katz, Mark, Capturing Sound: How Technology has Changed Music 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 2004).
Keane, David, ‘At the Threshold of an Aesthetic’, in The Language of 
Electroacoustic Music, ed. Simon Emmerson (New York: Harwood 
Academic Publishers, 1986), 97–118.
Keizer, Garret, The Unwanted Sound of Everything We Want: A Book 
About Noise (New York: Public Affairs, 2010).
Kelly, Caleb, Cracked Media: The Sound of Malfunction (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 2009).
Kenny, Glen, ‘Inland Empire’, Premiere, 6 December 2006, http://
www.premiere.com/Review/Movies/INLAND-EMPIRE [accessed 19 
October 2009].
Kim-Cohen, Seth, In the Blink of an Ear: Toward a Non-Cochlear Sonic 
Art (New York and London: Continuum, 2009).
Kittler, Friedrich A., Gramophone, Film, Typewriter, trans. Geoffrey 
Winthrop-Young and Michael Wutz (orig. German, 1986; Palo Alto, 
CA: Stanford University Press, 1999).
Kohl, Paul R., ‘Reading Between the Lines: Music and Noise in Hegemony 
and Resistance’, Popular Music and Society, 21, no. 3 (1997): 3–17.
Kojève, Alexandre, Introduction to the Reading of Hegel: Lectures on 
the Phenomenology of Spirit, ed. Allan Bloom, trans. James Nichols 
(orig. French, 1947; Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1980).
Kosko, Bart, Noise (London: Viking Penguin, 2006).
Krapp, Peter, Noise Channels: Glitch and Error in Digital Culture 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2011).
Kristeva, Julia, Σημειωτική: Recherches pour une sémanalyse (Paris: Seuil, 
1969).
—‘Le texte et sa science’, in Σημειωτική: Recherches pour une sémanalyse 
(Paris: Seuil, 1969), 7–26.
—La Révolution du langage poétique: l’avant-garde à la fin du XIXe 
siècle. Lautréamont et Mallarmé (Paris: Seuil, 1974), published in 
abridged form as Revolution in Poetic Language, trans. Margaret 
Waller (New York: Columbia University Press, 1984).
—Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection, trans. Leon S. Roudiez 
(orig. French, 1980; New York: Columbia University Press, 1982).

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
287
—‘Semiotics: A Critical Science and/or a Critique of Science’, in The 
Kristeva Reader, ed. Toril Moi, trans. Seán Hand (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1986), 75–88.
LaBelle, Brandon, Background Noise: Perspectives on Sound Art (New 
York and London: Continuum, 2006).
—Acoustic Territories: Sound Culture and Everyday Life (New York and 
London: Continuum, 2010).
Licata, Thomas, ed., Electroacoustic Music: Analytical Perspectives 
(Westport, CT and London: Greenwood Press, 2002).
Lingis, Alphonso, ‘Contact and Communication’, in The Obsessions of 
Georges Bataille: Community and Communication, ed. Andrew J. 
Mitchell and Jason Kemp Winfree (New York: State University of 
New York Press, 2009), 119–32.
Link, Stan, ‘The Work of Reproduction in the Mechanical Aging of an 
Art: Listening to Noise’, Computer Music Journal, 25, no. 1 (2001): 
34–47.
Lynch, David, Catching the Big Fish: Meditation, Consciousness, and 
Creativity (New York: Jeremy P. Tarcher/Penguin, 2006).
Macnab, Geoffrey, ‘Inspired and Incomprehensible, a Russian Doll of a 
Film’, The Guardian, 7 September 2006, http://www.guardian.co.uk/
world/2006/sep/07/filmfestivals.film [accessed 11 May 2012].
Manovich, Lev, The Language of New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2001).
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso, ‘The Founding and Manifesto of Futurism’, 
originally published in Le Figaro, 20 February 1909, reprinted in 
Marinetti: Selected Writings, ed. R. W. Flint, trans. R. W. Flint and 
Arthur A. Coppotelli (London: Secker & Warburg, 1972), 39–44.
—‘The Birth of a Futurist Aesthetic’, from War, the World’s Only Hygiene, 
orig. 1915, reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, 80–3.
—‘Technical Manifesto of Futurist Literature’, orig. 1912, reprinted in 
Marinetti: Selected Writings, 84–9.
—‘Geometric and Mechanical Splendor and the Numerical Sensibility’, 
orig. 1914, reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, 97–103.
—‘Tactilism’, orig. 1924, reprinted in Marinetti: Selected Writings, 
109–12.
—‘Manifesto of the Futurist Dance’, orig. 1917, reprinted in Marinetti: 
Selected Writings, 136–41.
Marshall, Lee, ‘The Inland Empire’, Screen Daily, 6 September 2006, 
http://www.screendaily.com/the-inland-empire/4028545.article 
[accessed 11 May 2012].
Massumi, Brian, A User’s Guide to Capitalism and Schizophrenia: 
Deviations from Deleuze and Guattari (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1992).

288	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
McGowan, Todd, The Impossible David Lynch (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 2007).
McLuhan, Marshall, Understanding Media: The Extensions of Man, 
2nd ed. (New York: McGraw Hill, 1964; New York: New American 
Library, 1964).
McWeeny, Drew, ‘Moriarty Visits David Lynch’s INLAND EMPIRE and 
Lives to Tell About It!!’, Ain’t It Cool News, 29 October 2006, http://
www.aintitcool.com/node/30544 [accessed 19 October 2009].
Mitchell, Andrew J. and Jason Kemp Winfree, eds, The Obsessions of 
Georges Bataille: Community and Communication (New York: State 
University of New York Press, 2009).
Moi, Toril, ed., The Kristeva Reader, trans. Seán Hand (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1986).
—Introduction to Kristeva, ‘Semiotics: A Critical Science and/or a 
Critique of Science’, in The Kristeva Reader, ed. Toril Moi, trans. 
Seán Hand (Oxford: Blackwell, 1986), 75.
Moles, Abraham A., Les Musiques expérimentales, trans. Daniel Charles 
(Paris: Éditions du Cercle d’Art Contemporain, 1960).
Moliné, Keith, ‘Review of Hegarty Noise/Music: A History’, The Wire: 
Adventures in Modern Music, 285 (November 2007), 74.
Murray, Matt, ‘Inland Empire’, http://www.cornponeflicks.com/inland.
html [accessed 15 October 2009].
Nancy, Jean-Luc, Listening, trans. Charlotte Mandell (orig. French, 
2002; Bronx, NY: Fordham University Press, 2007).
Nochimson, Martha, The Passion of David Lynch: Wild at Heart in 
Hollywood (Austin, TX: University of Texas Press, 1997).
—‘Inland Empire’, Film Quarterly, 60, no. 4 (2007): 10–14.
Paulson, William R., The Noise of Culture: Literary Texts in a World of 
Information (Ithaca, NY and London: Cornell University Press, 1988).
Pearson, Jesse, ‘Interview with David Lynch’, Vice, 7, no. 9 (2009): 
78–81.
Pierce, J. R., Symbols, Signals and Noise: The Nature and Process of 
Communication (London: Hutchinson, 1962).
Pinedo, Isabel Cristina, ‘Postmodern Elements of the Contemporary 
Horror Film’, in The Horror Film, ed. Stephen Prince (Piscataway, 
NJ: Rutgers University Press, 2004), 85–117.
Prince, Stephen, ed., The Horror Film (Piscataway, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press, 2004).
Prochnik, George, In Pursuit of Silence: Listening for Meaning in a 
World of Noise (New York and London: Doubleday, 2010).
Reynolds, Simon, Blissed Out (London: Serpent’s Tail, 1990).
Richards, Roger, ed., Merzbook: The Pleasuredome of Noise 
(Melbourne: Extreme, 1987).

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
289
Ridley, Aaron, The Philosophy of Music: Theme and Variations 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2004).
Risset, Jean-Claude, ‘Foreword’, in Electroacoustic Music: Analytical 
Perspectives, ed. Thomas Licata (Westport, CT and London: 
Greenwood Press, 2002), xiii–xviii.
Rockwell, John, ‘How the LP and CD Sounds Compare’, New York 
Times, 31 March 1983, C13.
Ronell, Avital, The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric 
Speech (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1989).
Ross, Alex, The Rest is Noise: Listening to the Twentieth Century 
(London: Harper Perennial, 2009).
Rothkopf, Joshua, ‘Inland Empire’, Time Out, http://newyork.timeout.
com/articles/film/3423/inland-empire [accessed 19 October 2009].
Rouillé, André, La Photographie (Paris: Gallimard, 2005).
Ruff, Thomas, Thomas Ruff: Photography 1979 to the Present, ed. 
Matthias Winzen (New York: Distributed Art Publishers, 2003).
—jpegs (New York: Aperture, 2009).
—Oberflächen, Tiefen/Surfaces, Depths, ed. Cathérine Hug, trans. Fiona 
Elliott (Vienna: Kunsthalle/Nuremberg: Verlag für moderne Kunst, 
2009).
—Schwarzwald.Landschaft, ed. Christiane Grathwohl-Scheffel and 
Jochen Ludwig (Freiburg: Museum für Neue Kunst, 2009).
—Thomas Ruff, ed. Carolyn Christov-Bakargiev (Milan: Skira, 2009).
Russo, Mary and Daniel Warner, ‘Rough Music, Futurism, and Postpunk 
Industrial Noise Bands’, in Audio Culture: Readings in Modern 
Music, ed. Christoph Cox and Daniel Warner (New York and 
London: Continuum, 2004), 47–54.
Russolo, Luigi, The Art of Noises, trans. Barclay Brown (orig. Italian, 
1913; New York: Pendragon Press, 1986).
Sangild, Torben, Støjens æstetik, English summary published as: The 
Aesthetics of Noise ([np]: Datanom, 2002).
—‘Glitch: The Beauty of Malfunction’, in Bad Music, ed. C. Washburne 
and M. Derno (London: Routledge, 2004), 198–211.
Sartre, Jean-Paul, Nausea, trans. Robert Baldick (orig. French, 1938; 
London: Penguin Books, 1965). 
—Les Mots (Paris: Gallimard, 1964).
—The Imaginary: A Phenomenological Psychology of the Imagination, 
trans. Jonathan Webber (orig. French, 1940; London and New York: 
Routledge, 2004).
Scarry, Elaine, The Body in Pain: The Making and Unmaking of the 
World (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1985).
Schaeffer, Pierre, À la recherche d’une musique concrète (Paris: Éditions 
du Seuil, 1952).

290	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Schafer, R. Murray, The Soundscape: Our Sonic Environment and the 
Tuning of the World (New York: Knopf, 1977; reprint, Rochester, VT: 
Destiny Books, 2009).
Schneider, Steven Jay, ‘The Essential Evil in/of Eraserhead (or, Lynch to 
the Contrary)’, in The Cinema of David Lynch: American Dreams, 
Nightmare Visions, ed. Erica Sheen and Annette Davison (London 
and New York: Wallflower Press, 2004), 5–18.
Schwartz, Hillel, Making Noise: From Babel to the Big Bang and Beyond 
(New York: Zone Books, 2011).
Scruton, Roger, The Aesthetics of Music (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1999).
—Understanding Music: Philosophy and Interpretation (New York and 
London: Continuum, 2009).
Serres, Michel, Genesis, trans. Geneviève James and James Nielson (orig. 
French, 1982; Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1995).
—The Parasite, trans. Lawrence R. Schehr (orig. French, 1980; 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2007).
Shannon, Claude and Warren Weaver, The Mathematical Theory of 
Communication (Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1949).
Sherburne, Philip, ‘The Art of Noise’, Frieze, 62 (October 2001): 48–9.
Simpson, Bennett, ‘Ruins: Thomas Ruff’s jpegs’, in Thomas Ruff, jpegs 
(New York: Aperture, 2009).
Sinnerbrink, Robert, New Philosophies of Film: Thinking Images (New 
York and London: Continuum, 2011).
Sitsky, Larry, ed., Music of the Twentieth-Century Avant-Garde: A 
Biocritical Sourcebook (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002).
Sterne, Jonathan, The Audible Past: Cultural Origins of Sound 
Reproduction (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003).
—‘The MP3 as Cultural Artifact’, New Media & Society, 8, no. 5 
(2006): 825–42.
—MP3: The Meaning of a Format (Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 
2012).
Straw, Will, ‘In Memoriam: The Music CD and its Ends’, Design and 
Culture, 1, no. 1 (2009): 79–92.
Stuart, Caleb, ‘Damaged Sound: Glitching & Skipping Compact Discs 
in the Audio of Yasunao Tone, Nicolas Collins & Oval’, Leonardo 
Music Journal, 14, no. 1 (2004): 47–52.
Szekely, Michael, ‘Becoming-Still: Perspectives on Musical Ontology After 
Deleuze and Guattari’, Social Semiotics, 13, no. 2 (2003): 113–28.
Szepanski, Achim, ‘Music’, trans. Judith Funk, in the liner notes to 
Clicks and Cuts 2 (Mille Plateaux, 2001), 10–15.
—‘A Mille Plateaux Manifesto’, trans. Judith Funk, Organised Sound, 7, 
no. 1 (2002): 225–8.

	
BIBLIOGRAPHY	
291
Taylor, Richard, ed., The Eisenstein Reader, trans. Richard Taylor and 
William Powell (London: BFI Publishing, 1998).
Teruggi, Daniel, ‘Technology and Musique Concrète: The Technical 
Developments of the Groupe de Recherches Musicales and their 
Implication in Musical Composition’, Organised Sound, 12, no. 3 
(2007): 213–31.
Thacker, Eugene, ‘Bataille/Body/Noise: Notes Towards a Techno-Erotics’, 
in Merzbook: The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards 
(Melbourne: Extreme, 1987), 57–65.
Thompson, Emily, ‘Machines, Music, and the Quest for Fidelity: 
Marketing the Edison Phonograph in America, 1877–1925’, The 
Musical Quarterly, 79, no. 1 (1995): 131–71.
—The Soundscape of Modernity: Architectural Acoustics and the Culture 
of Listening in America, 1900–1933 (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2002).
Thorn, Benjamin, ‘Luigi Russolo (1885–1947)’, in Music of the 
Twentieth-Century Avant-Garde: A Biocritical Sourcebook, ed. Larry 
Sitsky (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 2002), 415–19.
Tone, Yasunao and Christian Marclay, ‘Record, CD, Analog, Digital’, in 
Audio Culture: Readings in Modern Music, ed. Christoph Cox and 
Daniel Warner (New York and London: Continuum, 2004), 341–7.
Van Leeuwen, Theo, Speech, Music, Sound (London: Macmillan, 1999).
Van Nort, Doug, ‘Noise/Music and Representation Systems’, Organised 
Sound, 11, no. 2 (2006): 173–8.
Voegelin, Salomé, Listening to Noise and Silence: Towards a Philosophy 
of Sound Art (New York and London: Continuum, 2010).
Warde, Beatrice/Paul Grandjean, ‘The Crystal Goblet, or Printing Should 
be Invisible’, http://gmunch.home.pipeline.com/typo-L/misc/ward.htm 
[accessed 14 July 2004]. Also available in Beatrice Warde, The Crystal 
Goblet: Sixteen Essays on Typography (Cleveland, OH: World Pub. 
Co., 1956); and in Graphic Design and Reading: Explorations of 
an Uneasy Relationship, ed. Gunnar Swanson (New York: Allworth 
Press, 2000), 91–6.
Warner, Marina, ‘Voodoo Road: Lost Highway by David Lynch’, Sight 
and Sound, 7, no. 8 (August 1997): 6–10.
Washburne, C. and M. Derno, eds, Bad Music (London: Routledge, 
2004).
Weaver, Warren, ‘Recent Contributions to the Mathematical Theory 
of Communication’, in Claude Shannon and Warren Weaver, The 
Mathematical Theory of Communication (Urbana: University of 
Illinois Press, 1949), 95–117.
Weissberg, Jay, ‘Inland Empire’, Variety, 6 September 2006, http://www.
variety.com/review/VE1117931480/ [accessed 11 May 2012].

292	
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Wells, L., ed., The Photography Reader (London: Routledge, 2003).
Whitelaw, Mitchell, ‘Inframedia Audio: Glitches & Tape Hiss’, Artlink, 
21, no. 3 (September 2001): 49–52.
Winzen, Matthias, ‘A Credible Invention of Reality: Thomas Ruff’s 
Precise Reproductions of our Fantasies of Reality’, in Thomas Ruff: 
Photography 1979 to the Present, ed. Matthias Winzen (New York: 
Distributed Art Publishers, 2003), 131–59.
Wolfe, Cary, ‘Introduction to the New Edition’, in Michel Serres, The 
Parasite, trans. Lawrence R. Schehr (orig. French, 1980; Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2007), xi–xxviii.
Woodward, Brett, ‘The Nomadic Producer of Differences’, in Merzbook: 
The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards (Melbourne: 
Extreme, 1987), 1.
—CD descriptions, in Merzbook: The Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger 
Richards (Melbourne: Extreme, 1987), 82–132.
—‘SCUM Scissors for Cutting Merzbow VOL. 1’, in Merzbook: The 
Pleasuredome of Noise, ed. Roger Richards (Melbourne: Extreme, 
1987), 113.
Woods, G., ‘ “Sounds, Smells, Degrees of Light”: Art and Illumination 
in Nausea’, in Sartre’s Nausea: Text, Context, Intertext, ed. Alistair 
Rolls and Elizabeth Rechniewski (Amsterdam and New York: Rodopi, 
2006),
Worby, Robert, ‘Cacophony’, in Music, Electronic Media and Culture, 
ed. Simon Emmerson (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000), 138–65.
Yochim, Emily Chivers and Megan Biddinger, ‘ “It Kind of Gives You 
That Vintage Feel”: Vinyl Records and the Trope of Death’, Media 
Culture & Society, 30, no. 2 (2008): 183–95.
Young, Rob, ‘Undercurrents #12: Worship the Glitch’, The Wire: 
Adventures in Modern Music, 190/191 (December 1999/January 
2000), 52–6.

INDEX
4’33” (song) 52–4, 55, 56, 57, 58
Agamben, Giorgio 277n. 5
Akita, Masami see Merzbow
Altman, Rick 126, 212
andere Porträts (image series) 230
Antheil, George 43
Arnold, James 70, 82n. 29
Art of Noises, The (book) 49–50, 
51
Attali, Jacques 10, 11, 56
Back, Les 12
Banks, Joe 93–5
Barthes, Roland 26, 146, 147–9, 
150, 151–7, 171n. 29, 212
Bates, Eliot 126, 129, 130
Baudrillard, Jean 120
Bazin, André 211–12
Beethoven, Ludwig van 76
Benjamin, Walter 72, 103
Blanchot, Maurice 92
Bogue, Ronald 269n. 31
Bois, Yve-Alain 62–3n. 49
Bose® (company) 124–5, 135, 
140–1n. 21
Botte, Marie-Claire 3
Bowie, Andrew 55, 276n. 2
Bull, Michael 12
Burt, Warren 167
Busoni, Ferruccio 43
Cage, John 25, 42, 52, 53, 57, 
59–60, 63–4n. 53, 65n. 69
Cascone, Kim 138
Cassini (image series) 223
Céline, Louis-Ferdinand 69, 80n. 6
Chion, Michel 125–6, 180–1, 
254–5
Chocholle, René 3
Christov-Bakargiev, Carolyn 214, 
228, 232–3
Chua, Eu Jin 56
Cixous, Hélène 109
Collins, Nicolas 133, 135
Corbett, John 119
Courbet, Gustave 215, 237n.
Cowell, Henry 43, 246, 266–7n. 2
Cox, Christoph 168–9
Critchley, Simon 79–80
Crocker, Stephen 277n. 5
Damisch, Hubert 212–13
Dargis, Manohla 189
Davidson, Donald 55
Deleuze, Gilles 8, 14, 20–1, 22, 
77–8, 83n. 30, 109, 263, 
264
Derrida, Jacques 109
Dodd, Julian 251, 252
Dodson, Will 186
Duchamp, Marcel 64n. 65
Dulac, Germaine 184, 204n. 13, 
205n. 18
Dunsby, Jonathan 153, 154
Dyson, Frances 8, 12, 13, 56
Edison, Thomas 92
Einsturzende Neubäten (group) 9
Electronic Voice Phenomenon 
(EVP) (phenomenon) 93–7, 
110n. 13

294	
Index
El-Sheikh, Tammer 229–30
Enns, Anthony 93–4
Eraserhead (film) 179–80, 181–3
Etherophone (object) 43
Evens, Aden 121, 159–60, 167
Flusser, Vilém 213, 217, 226–7, 
231–2, 268
Fogle, Douglas 225, 227
Futurists, The 25, 45, 46, 47, 48, 
49, 50, 51, 98
Galton, Francis 230, 239n. 47
Gann, Kyle 54, 57
Geymüller, Maximilian 238n. 41
Goodwin, Andrew 141n. 24, 
142n. 36
Grandjean, Paul see Warde, 
Beatrice
Grandmother, The (film) 180
Guattari, Félix 8, 20–1, 22, 77–8, 
109, 263, 264
Gunning, Tom 184
Hamilton, Andy 247–8, 250, 253
Hanslick, Eduard 250
Haraway, Donna 136
Haus (image series) 220–1
Hegarty, Paul 11, 15–16, 254, 
256, 258, 259, 260, 263, 
265, 268–9n. 23, 270n. 46, 
271n. 49
Henriques, Julian 261–2, 270n. 47
Higgins, Sean 164–5, 168, 169, 
173–4n. 55
Hollier, Denis 70
Hollywood 85–6
Holmes, Thom 162, 163
Hug, Cathérine 238n. 44
I am Sitting in a Room (music) 27, 
157–8, 159, 160, 162, 166, 
167, 168, 172n. 35
INLAND EMPIRE (film) 185, 
186, 187, 188, 189, 190–2, 
193, 194, 195, 196, 197, 
198–202, 203, 205n. 24, 
206nn. 30, 33
Interieurs (image series) 221–2, 
238n. 41
Ives, Charles 43
Janus, Adrienne 12
Joint Photographic Experts Group 
217
jpegs (image series) 216, 217, 
218–19, 228, 233
Jürgenson, Friedrich 92–3
Kahn, Douglas 52–3, 59, 64n. 60
Katz, Mark 125, 142n. 32
Kean, David 63–4n. 53
Keizer, Garret 3, 6, 9
Kelly, Caleb 8, 128, 136–7, 144n. 
62
Kim-Cohen, Seth 58, 172n. 36
Kittler, Friedrich A. 10, 274
Kojève, Alexandre 10
Kosko, Bart 6, 10, 17–18, 68
Krapp, Peter 117, 129, 143n. 44
Krauss, Rosalind 62–3n. 49
Kristeva, Julia 104–7, 151
LaBelle, Brandon 16, 161
Link, Stan 119
López, Francisco 269n. 30
Lost Highway (film) 206n. 34
Lucier, Alvin 157–8, 159, 160–1, 
162, 164, 165, 166, 167, 
169, 170, 172n. 35, 173–4n. 
55
Lynch, David 27, 178, 179, 180, 
183–4, 185, 186, 189, 190, 
195, 196, 197, 198, 202, 
203, 204nn. 11–13, 206n. 
26, 34

	
Index	
295
Macnab, Geoffrey 188–9
Manovich, Lev 122, 212
Marinetti, Filippo Tommaso 46, 
47–8, 49, 51
Marshall, Lee 195–6
Massumi, Brian 20
Maxwell, James Clerk 225
McLuhan, Marshall 17
McWeeny, Drew 196–7
Merzbow 258, 259, 260, 261, 
262, 263, 264, 265, 266
Moi, Toril 107
Moles, Abraham 163
Mueller, Christoph 116, 117
Murray, Matt 188
musique concrète 27, 39, 50, 63n. 
53, 157, 162–6, 168–9, 
172n. 39, 173–4n. 55
Nancy, Jean-Luc 12
Nausea (book) 25, 68, 69, 70, 74, 
81n. 15, 82n. 28, 82–3n. 29, 
136, 156
Nochimson, Martha 186, 187, 203
Oval 129, 136, 137, 143n. 46
Paulson, William R. 277n. 6
Pierce, J. R. 22
Pinedo, Isabel Cristina 108, 112n. 
37
Poltergeist (film) 88–91, 92, 94, 
95, 98, 110n. 16
Porträts (image series) 222, 233
Prochnik, George 5, 14–15
Ranada, David 131–2
Raudive, Konstantin 92–3
Reynolds, Simon 86–7
Ridley, Aaron 248, 249, 250, 251, 
255, 265
Ring, The (film) 99–103, 111n. 18
Risset, Jean-Claude 173nn. 12, 13
Rolling Stones, The 56
Ronell, Avital 94–5, 110n.
Rosenfeld, Paul 44
Rothkopf, Joshua 196
Rouillé, André 210, 211, 222–3, 
236n. 4, 237n. 14, 239n. 55
Ruff, Thomas 27–8, 214, 215, 
216, 217–18, 219, 221, 222, 
223, 224, 225, 227, 228, 
229, 230, 232, 233, 234, 
235, 237n. 15, 239n. 52
Russolo, Antonio 50
Russolo, Luigi 42, 43, 45–7, 48, 
49–51, 52, 61nn. 27, 28, 
165–6
Sanglid, Torben 128–9, 130
Sartre, Jean-Paul 25, 70, 76–7, 
78–9
Schaeffer, Pierre 63n. 53, 162, 163, 
165, 166, 168–9, 173nn. 
45, 46
Schafer, R. Murray 41–3, 169
Schlegel, Karl Wilhelm Friedrich 
von 92
Schwartz, Hillel 6, 82n. 28, 86
Scruton, Roger 248–9, 264, 267n. 
5, 268n. 18, 271n. 61
Serres, Michel 12, 18–20, 22, 68, 
69, 74
Shannon, Claude E. 3–4, 5, 10
Simpson, Bennett 216–17
Sinnerbrink, Robert 204n. 13
Spinoza, Baruch 14
Stereofotos (image series) 229, 230
Sterne, Jonathan 124, 126, 127, 
134, 135, 254
Sterne (image series) 223
Straw, Will 140n. 14
Stuart, Caleb 130–2, 133
Substrat (image series) 224
Survivor (TV series) 140n. 19
Szepanski, Achim 135–6, 257

296	
Index
Tainter, Charles Sumner 135
Termen, Lev see Theremin, Leon
Teruggi, Daniel 162, 165, 166, 
172n. 39
Thacker, Eugene 259, 260
Theremin, Leon 43, 44–5
Theremin (object) 43
Theremin Vox (object) 43
Thompson, Emily 43–4, 45
Thorn, Benjamin 61n. 27
Tone, Yasunao 16, 132, 144n. 62
Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me 
(film) 185
Varèse, Edgar 43
Voegelin, Salomé 167–8
Warde, Beatrice 117–18
Warner, Daniel 168–9
Warner, Marina 206n. 34
Weaver, Warren 3–4
Weissberg, Jay 189, 195
White Noise (film) 95–8
Williams, William Carlos 44
Winzen, Matthias 216, 220
Woods, George 81n. 15
Woodward, Brett 258–9, 264
Zycles (image series) 224, 225

